Antiandrogen therapy (ADT) has been used for 30 years to treat pedophilic patients. The aim of the treatment is a reduction in sexual drive
and, in consequence, a reduced risk of recidivism. Yet the therapeutic success of antiandrogens is uncertain especially regarding
recidivism. Meta-analyses and reviews report only moderate and often mutually inconsistent effects. Based on the case of a 47 year old
exclusively pedophilic forensic inpatient, we examined the effectiveness of a new eye tracking method and a new functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI)-design in regard to the evaluation of ADT in pedophiles. We analyzed the potential of these methods in exploring
the impact of ADT on automatic and controlled attentional processes in pedophiles. Eye tracking and fMRI measures were conducted before the
initial ADT as well as four months after the onset of ADT. The patient simultaneously viewed an image of a child and an image of an adult
while eye movements were measured. During the fMRI-measure the same stimuli were presented subliminally. Eye movements demonstrated that
controlled attentional processes change under ADT, whereas automatic processes remained mostly unchanged. We assume that these results
reflect either the increased ability of the patient to control his eye movements while viewing prepubertal stimuli or his better ability to
manipulate his answer in a socially desirable manner. Unchanged automatic attentional processes could reflect the stable pedophilic
preference of the patient. Using fMRI, the subliminal presentation of sexually relevant stimuli led to changed activation patterns under the
influence of ADT in occipital and parietal brain regions, the hippocampus, and also in the orbitofrontal cortex. We suggest that even at an
unconscious level ADT can lead to changed processing of sexually relevant stimuli, reflecting changes of cognitive and perceptive automatic
processes. We are convinced that our experimental designs using eye tracking and fMRI could prospectively add additional and valuable
information in the evaluation of ADT in paraphilic patients and sex offenders. But with respect to the limited significance of this single
case study, these first results are preliminary and further studies have to be conducted with healthy subjects and patients. Following the
American Psychiatric Association (APA), pedophilia (a subtype of paraphilia) is defined as a recurrent sexual interest in prepubescent
children, characterized by persistent thoughts, fantasies, urges, sexual arousal or behavior . Current therapeutic approaches include
psychotherapy as well as pharmacological treatment, among which the androgen-lowering therapy . Antiandrogen drugs, such as cyproterone
acetate, medroxyprogesterone acetate or the more recently introduced gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (GnRH agonist), are utilized to
drastically decrease the testosterone concentration in patients. ADT is also known as "chemical castration" due to the fact that serum
testosterone concentration can drop rapidly and even reach castration levels after several weeks. The aim of the treatment is a reduction in
sexual drive and, in consequence, a reduced risk of recidivism in paraphilic patients and sexual offenders. It has been demonstrated that
testosterone modulates not only autonomic sexual functions such as erection and ejaculation, but also motivational, cognitive and emotional
aspects of sexual functions, such as sexual interest, thoughts and fantasies. Accordingly, a decrease of sexual motivation, intensity and
frequency of deviant sexual fantasies as well as a decrease of the masturbation rate has been described in paraphilic patients and sex
offenders treated with antiandrogens . Despite a large number of studies, the efficiency of ADT aiming at a reduction of the sex drive and a
reduced risk of recidivism is still under debate. Meta-analyses and reviews report only moderate and often mutually inconsistent effects .
Only a few placebo-controlled double blind studies have been performed with inconsistent results concerning treatment effects . Furthermore,
outcome measures differ between these studies and do not seem to be ideally suited to their purpose. Most studies measured the concentration
of testosterone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone and other physiological parameters, or used self-reports about sexual
activity and interest or recidivism rate . But Schober, Kuhn, Kovacs, Earle, Byrne and Fries have pointed out that self-reporting by
patients does not seem to be reliable. Self-reports about sexual interest are the diagnostic standard in Western Europe, irrespective of its
insufficient validity and reliability due to the tendency of participants to answer in a socially desirable manner . But the strongest
single predictor for sexual offence recidivism is the existence of deviant sexual preferences . Penis plethysmography (PPG) is the gold
standard in assessing pedophilic interest in North America and has demonstrated good classification accuracy . Nevertheless, the application
of PPG is limited by certain factors and still controversially discussed . Recent methods try to assess pedophilic sexual interest applying
cognitive approaches , e.g. the implicit association test (IAT) , the viewing time (VT) , the choice-reaction-time task (CRT); , the rapid
serial visual presentation test (RSVP); or an adaption of the emotional stroop task for sexual offenders . Recently, Fromberger et al.
introduced another assessment method by measuring automatic and controlled attentional processes while viewing pedophilic stimuli. Based on
the assumption of Spiering et al. that sexually relevant features of a stimulus are preattentively selected and automatically trigger focal
attention to these sexual aspects, the authors illustrated that the eye tracking method provides the possibility to measure the assumed bias
in initial orienting and the maintenance of attention to pedophilic stimuli in pedophiles . For healthy subjects it has been shown that the
supraliminal presentation of visual sexual stimuli evokes hemodynamic responses in a complex neural network. Based on the results of more
than 70 functional imaging studies a descriptive four-component model of sexual arousal was proposed implicating four excitatory components:
a cognitive, an emotional, a motivational and an autonomic/endocrinological component . The model and the associated brain regions are
presented in detail in Additional file 1: Figure S1 (see 1. Introduction: The four-component model). Although, not all studies report brain
activation in the above mentioned regions consistently, the four-component model reveals the complexity of the neural network linked with
sexual arousal. Several studies examined brain activation in pedophilic subjects while presenting sexually relevant visual stimuli (for
overview: ). Most of them used a passive stimulation design, presenting visual sexual stimuli for several seconds, e.g. at a supraliminal
level. Comparing the brain regions described in the four-component model with the results of the studies in pedophilic patients it can be
summarized that functional changes in pedophilia seem to occur predominantly in brain regions involved in sexual functions, such as the
frontal, temporal, parietal or occipital cortical regions, the limbic circuits, and subcortical areas such as the hypothalamus, the insula,
or the basal ganglia . It can be concluded that the presentation of sexually relevant stimuli, i.e. images of girls or boys in pedophilic
patients evoke similar brain activation like sexually relevant stimuli in healthy non-pedophilic subjects (i.e. images of women and men).
However, restrictively it has to be mentioned that these functional imaging studies applied different paradigms, compared different patient
groups, and used different comparisons between experimental conditions or groups, impeding direct comparison between these studies. As
mentioned above, testosterone modulates not only autonomic sexual functions but also motivational, cognitive and emotional aspects of sexual
functions. Considering the distribution of androgen receptors (AR) in the brain this becomes comprehensible. Amongst others AR’s have been
found in the hypothalamus, the amygdala, the hippocampus and in several cortical regions in animals and partially in humans. Furthermore, a
correlation between testosterone and hemodynamic responses or rCBF has been shown in frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital regions as
well as in the limbic system in healthy and in hypogonadal men (for an overview see: ). Most brain regions were implemented in the four-
component model (see Additional file 1: Figure S1, ). It has been assumed that testosterone modulates sexual functions through the
stimulation of dopamine release in brain regions associated with sexual arousal . Thus, if testosterone concentration declines during ADT,
the activity in those brain regions should decrease in correspondence with the decrease of cognitive/attentional, emotional, motivational
and autonomic reactions in response to sexual stimuli. To our knowledge, only three single case studies are published which examined the
effect of an ADT by using fMRI . All three studies used similar experimental passive designs, presenting sexually relevant stimuli at a
supraliminal level. Sexually relevant stimuli were images of girls or boys for the pedophilic patients and images of women or men for
healthy controls. Schiffer et al. compared a heterosexual pedophilic patient, treated with a GnRH agonist, with a group of unmedicated
heterosexual pedophiles . The patient showed lower or no activation in brain regions associated with the emotional or autonomic component of
sexual arousal. In the second study a homosexual pedophilic patient was compared before and five months after the onset of the GnRH agonist
treatment with an age-matched heterosexual healthy man . Only the pedophile showed a decrease of hemodynamic responses under GnRH therapy in
the left calcarine fissure, left insula, ACC and left cerebellar vermis. The authors suggest that GnRH treatment decreased the activation in
regions known to mediate the perceptual, motivational and affective responses to visual sexual stimuli . Finally, Habermeyer et al. examined
a homosexual pedophilic patient before and 10 months after the onset of a GnRH treatment . The patient showed a decrease of hemodynamic
responses under treatment in the right amygdala, the right superior frontal gyrus, the right precentral gyrus and the right superior
temporal gyrus. Besides the limitations of these three case studies it can be assumed that an ADT can lead to a decreased activation in
brain regions linked with sexual functions, esp. with the autonomic, the emotional and the motivational component of sexual arousal while
viewing supraliminally presented pedophilic stimuli. But a differentiation between automatic and controlled attentional processes while
viewing sexual stimuli is not possible based on these experimental designs. This could be accomplished by presenting pedophilic stimuli
subliminally, since the subject will not consciously know the pedophilic content. Until now it is unclear if subliminally presented
pedophilic stimuli elicit similar brain activation such as the above described supraliminally presented stimuli. Moreover, it is not clear
if ADT has an impact on subliminally elicited brain responses while viewing sexually relevant stimuli. According to recent definitions
stimuli are considered as subliminal if they are processed by the brain, but not consciously perceived . Subliminal perception can be
achieved by presenting stimuli usually no longer than 50 ms, followed by a masking procedure. Subliminal stimuli are also used as primers,
in which primers influence the future conscious action without awareness of the prime . Supporting the model of Spiering and Everaerd it was
shown that subliminally presented sexual primes elicit erectile responses and also facilitate the identification of sexual targets in men .
Thus, subliminally presented sexual stimuli can trigger the automatic cognitive process inducing implicit memory processes and subsequent
physiological arousal. Similarly, conscious cognitive elaboration of sexual stimuli is essential to experience subjective arousal given the
result that subliminally presented primes did not elicit subjective sexual arousal . Recently, Brooks et al. published a meta-analysis of
functional imaging studies investigating the processing of subliminally presented arousing stimuli (faces, physiological, lexical and audio
stimuli). They found a network involving primary visual brain areas, somatosensory regions as well as implicit memory areas and conflict
monitoring brain regions, representing a state which is at first independent of conscious processing. To our knowledge only three studies
examined the hemodynamic responses of subliminally presented visual sexual stimuli. None of these studies were included in the meta-analysis
of Brooks, Savov, Allzén, Benedict, Fredriksson and Schiöth . These studies showed that subliminally presented sexual stimuli can evoke
brain activation in regions known to be activated in response to other subliminally presented arousing stimuli, e.g. in the occipital
cortex, amygdala, insula and also in the cingulate cortex. Furthermore, activation in the OFC and in frontal, temporal, parahippocampal and
parietal regions was reported . Including the results of psychological priming studies, the results of the imaging studies using subliminal
stimuli and the four-component model of sexual arousal, we suppose that subliminally presented visual sexual stimuli can elicit hemodynamic
responses in brain regions associated with the autonomic component (insula, ACC), the emotional component (amygdala), the motivational
component (ACC, parietal cortex), and supposedly the cognitive component (right lateral OFC, parietal cortex). The latter point is of
special interest considering the nature of subliminal stimuli, which are processed by the brain, but not consciously perceived. Thus, we
assume that automatic cognitive processes could be evoked, e.g. attentional, appraisal and implicit memory processes. Based on the case of a
heterosexual exclusively pedophilic forensic inpatient, we want to examine the potential of the eye tracking method and the fMRI measure to
explore the impact of testosterone suppression to castration level on automatic and controlled attentional processes. According to the above
discussed aspects we expected the following: (1) Eye tracking: (a) Based on the results of earlier studies we expected that the patient will
show shorter fixation latency and longer relative fixation times to images of girls compared to images of women. (b) If ADT lowers the
sexual motivation, longer fixation latencies and shorter relative fixation time to images of girls are presumed. (2) fMRI: (a) ADT should
decrease hemodynamic responses to the subliminally presented sexual stimuli in brain regions which are associated with all four components
of sexual arousal. But according to the characteristics of this kind of treatment the mentioned decrease should be rather unspecific to all
kind of sexual stimuli than stimulus-specific. If subliminally presented arousal inducing stimuli activate (implicit) memory processes, as
proposed by Brooks, Savov, Allzén, Benedict, Fredriksson and Schiöth , activation in hippocampal regions should be seen as well. (b)
Furthermore, we questioned if the antiandrogen treatment leads to an increased activation in brain regions associated with inhibitory
aspects of sexual arousal, representing a devaluation of sexual stimuli and inhibitory control processes. This should be seen in stronger
hemodynamic responses in the left lateral and medial orbitofrontal cortex and in the lateral temporal cortex. The 47 year old patient was
born as the youngest of five children. His father died shortly after his birth. He reported to be no victim of physical or sexual abuse in
childhood or adolescence. He attended a school for mentally handicapped children without graduation. First criminal offences (burglary and
sexual child abuse) occurred at the age of 14. Until now he was repeatedly convicted, mainly for burglary (at least 11 cases in the criminal
records). Furthermore, he sexually abused at least 17 female child victims. Only the age of one victim (five years) is documented in the
forensic records, but the patient himself reported victims aged between six – nine years. The criminal offences and his sexual deviance and
dissocial personality disorder lead to several incarcerations in forensic high-security hospitals with rather short periods of probation
since his 18th year of life. The patient fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for pedophilia [exclusive type, sexually attracted to females;
DSM-IV 302.2; 1] and for a antisocial personality disorder (DSM-IV 301.7). The Psychopathy Checklist (PCL-R); revealed a score of 29. Thus,
he reached a cut-off value for psychopathy, which is common in European countries . According to a recently conducted intelligence test he
reached an Intelligence Quotient (IQ) of 98 (Wechsler Abbreviate Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) in the German version); . Structural
magnetic resonance imaging revealed no pathological findings. Sexual orientation assessed with the Kinsey Scale showed in accordance with
exclusively female child victims an exclusively heterosexual orientation. On the Screening Scale for Pedophilic Interests (SSPI) the patient
reached a Md = 3, which identified a moderately high risk for recidivism . The german version of the Bumby Molest Scale counted a sum score
of 114, revealing strong cognitive distortions in regard to sexual abuse of children. (about 2 SD over the mean of a control sample of
pedophilic child molesters, ). The patient is at moderate risk for sexual recidivism according to the prognostic instrument Sexual Violence
Risk - 20 in the German version . Forensic hospital facilities have provided psychotherapy during the patient’s detention implementing
treatment as usual. Many years ago, he received specific psychological group therapy according to standardized manuals addressing the
treatment of sexual offenders. Based on the patient´s perspective, sexual fantasies and sexually deviant behavior was described excessively
and in detail. Despite this long-term cognitive-behavioral treatment no victim empathy was noticeable. He did not realize the severity of
harm he has done to the victims and was not able to eliminate any possibility of committing another sexual abuse. His diagnosed antisocial
personality disorder entailing a lack of empathy for victims, incapability to conform to social norms as well as the ineffective therapeutic
treatment and the persistent pedophilic interest facilitate a high risk for recidivism. According to ADT recommendations of at least one
forensic psychiatric evaluation, the antiandrogen medication with triptorelin (gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist, Salvacyl®, 11.25 mg
every 3 months) was initiated. Additionally, vitamin D (Calcivit D forte®) was given once on a daily basis in order to decrease the possible
risk of osteoporosis. He did not receive any antiandrogens before the current treatment. According to respective recommendations the patient
receives weekly supportive psychotherapy. The serum testosterone was measured before, four weeks later and five months after the onset of
the antiandrogen medication. Serum testosterone levels were constantly suppressed during the treatment (before treatment: 5.89 μg/l, four
weeks after start of treatment: 0.19 μg/l, five months after start of treatment: 0.23 μg/l). Before treatment onset the patient stated that
he masturbated once a month with pedophilic sexual fantasies. Thereby, he reported an increase in masturbation frequency after the onset of
the treatment in order to test his physical functioning. After three months of treatment, the patient was not able to masturbate anymore due
to loss of physical functioning. He reported sexual and deviant fantasies as absent. But, considering his detention in a locked forensic
psychiatry unit, the patient might have realized the consequences of having and reporting intensive sexual fantasies and needs during
therapy which could have been interpreted as an indicator for higher risk of relapse committing sexual abuse from the perspective of a
therapist. Eye tracking measures were conducted three weeks before initial antiandrogen medication and 4 months after the onset of ADT.
Figure 1 displays the experimental design for the eye tracking measurements. Throughout the experiment (64 trials) eye movements were
recorded. Before each trial, a fixation cross (approximately 1° x 1°) appeared at the center of the screen. Subsequently, two images
appeared and remained for 5000 ms. After each stimulus presentation a question appeared (“Was one of these persons sexually more
attractive?”) and the participant had to respond using the computer mouse. This task was introduced to distract the participant from eye
movement measures and had no content related meaning. Illustration of the experimental design in the eye-tracking experiment. Note that
these sample images were not among the experimental stimuli. Each stimulus display showed two images that were presented in two opposing
corners of the computer screen (see Figure 1 for an example). The locations of the images were randomly balanced across trials. Two
different stimulus-combinations existed: either the image of a girl combined with the image of a woman or the image of a boy combined with
the image of a man. All stimuli were derived from the Not-Real-People (NRP) picture set . The NRP-set is a stimulus set that does not
display images of real people and meets contemporary legal and ethical requirements . The images were non-pornographic, depicting solely
non-explicitly sexual poses or sexual activities. In this study, only male and female nude persons from the Tanner stages 1 and 2 (as
category “child”), 4 and 5 (as category “adult”) were used, four from each stage . Eye movements were measured using a SMI iView X™ RED eye
tracker (SensoMotoric Instruments GmBH, Berlin, Germany) in combination with an iView X™ workstation by measuring the corneal reflection and
dark pupil with a video-based infrared eye camera. The participants were seated in a quiet room facing the monitor at eye level at a viewing
distance of 27.6 inches in front of the monitor. In order to identify fixations and saccades, the raw eye movement data were basically
analyzed with BeGaze™3 (SensoMotoric Instruments GmbH, Berlin, Germany). Statistical analysis was performed with SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute
Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Further details of data analysis are described in Additional file 1 (see 2. Eye tracking: Data analysis). FMRI
measures were conducted two months before initial antiandrogen medication and four months after the onset of ADT. The patient was told that
different images will be presented and he will be asked afterwards to rate the presented images according to different qualities (sexual
arousal, valence). Stimuli were presented in a block-design (Figure 2) with experimental blocks presenting the stimuli of one category and
baseline blocks presenting a fixation cross. Each block lasted 24 sec. One experimental block consisted of 48 trials, each lasting 500 ms.
One trial matches to a backward-masking design containing one target stimulus immediately followed by one mask stimulus. Target stimuli were
subliminally presented for 16.7 ms, the mask stimulus was shown for 483.3 ms, followed by the next target stimulus. Target stimuli were the
same stimuli as used in the eye tracking task: the NRP-picture set with the categories girl, boy, woman and man, but in the colored version.
Neutral masking stimuli (with low arousal and average valence score) were selected from the IAPS-set (International Affective Picture Set .
A detailed list of all IAPS-images including valence and arousal values can be found in the Additional file 1 (see 3. IAPS-stimuli, Table
S1). Overall, 16 target stimuli of each category were presented in a randomized order, each thrice. Illustration of the experimental design
in the fMRI-experiment. Presented is an example for one experimental block containing subliminal presented sexual images and mask images and
the baseline condition with a duration of 24 sec. After the experiment the patient had to solve a recognition task. All presented target and
mask stimuli as well as the same number of new target and mask stimuli were shown. He was asked to determine if he had seen the presented
images during the fMRI-session or not. The MRI scans were acquired at 3 Tesla (Siemens Magnetom TIM Trio, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen,
Germany) with an 8-channel phased-array head coil. For anatomical reference, a three-dimensional (3D) T1-weighted dataset was acquired
(MPRAGE: Magnetization Prepared Rapid Acquisition Gradient Echo; echo time: 3.26 ms; repetition time: 2250 ms; inversion time: 900 ms, flip
angle 12°; 176 slices; isotropic resolution of 1 × 1 × 1 mm3). The functional datasets were acquired using 2D gradient-echo echo-planar
imaging (echo time: 30 ms, repetition time: 2000 ms, flip angle: 70°, voxel size: 3 × 3 × 3.0 mm3, 33 slices). Two sessions were conducted
with duration of about 15 min each. A total of 433 whole brain volumes were recorded within one session. Identical MRI-protocols were
applied in the pre- and the post-measurement. Image analysis was performed using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Trust Center
for Neuroimaging, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). Further details of data analysis are described in the Additional file 1 (see 4. fMRI:
Data analysis). Subsequent to the experimental phase, the patient rated all target and all masking stimuli in respect to valence and sexual
arousal on a 9-point Likert scale (1 = unpleasant/not arousing, 9 = pleasant/arousing). In order to additionally assess viewing time, the
interval between the stimulus onset and the completion of the second rating (sexual arousal rating) was measured, without patient´s
knowledge. The patient viewed images of girls longer than images of women before and after four months of ADT. This difference was
significant in the pretest (girl: 4822.11 ms ± 1944.40 (mean ± standard deviation), woman: 2514.44 ms ± 1170.34, t(24.6) = 4.07, p < .0001).
In the posttest the difference was smaller and non-significant, due to a decrease of viewing time to girls and a slight increase of viewing
time to women (girl: 3925.04 ms ± 2997.61, woman: 2931.49 ms ± 1366.40, t(20.98) = 1.21, p = .241). The viewing time data was also analyzed
separately for the images of girls and women (comparing pre- and posttest). No significant changes were detectable during ADT (girl:
t(15) = 1.02, p = .32, woman: t(15) = -1.08, p = .3). The viewing time for the masking stimuli was 1884.59 ms ± 508.86 before and
3359.42 ms ± 2776.10 after four months of treatment. The patient rated all stimuli for valence and sexual arousal between 1 and 2 (median)
of the 9-point Likert scale, except the images of women in the posttest (5 at the 9-point Likert scale for the valence). Before ADT, the
patient showed a significantly higher relative fixation time for images of girls compared to the images of women (t(62) = 4.76, p < .0001).
After four months of ADT, this result was reversed (t(62) = -22.74, p < .0001). The statistical analysis separately for images of girls
yielded a significant decrease of the relative fixation time after four months of ADT (t(31) = 8.99, p < .0001). In contrast, the relative
fixation time for images of women showed a significant increase after four months of ADT (t(31) = -14.18, p < .0001) (see Figure 3a). Eye
tracking measures. Mean of relative fixation time and fixation latency for the patient before and after 4 months antiandrogen treatment. In
regard to automatic attentional processes, before treatment the patient showed a significantly lower fixation latency for images of girls
compared to images of women (t(49,64) = -3.83, p < .0001). After treatment, the fixation latency was likewise lower for girls than for
women, but this difference was not significant (t(55) = -1.43, p = .157). This should be attributed to a decrease of the fixation latency
for images of women. The direct comparison of the fixation latency for girls before and after treatment demonstrated no significant changes
of fixation latency after four months of ADT (t(24) = -.046, p = .96). On the contrary, the analysis revealed a significant decrease of
fixation latency for women after four months of ADT (t(31) = 3.36, p < .01) (see Figure 3b). After the fMRI sessions, a recognition test was
applied in order to assure the subliminal presentation of the target stimuli. The patient did not recognize any of the subliminally
presented target stimuli whether before nor after four months of ADT (correct recognition rate: 0%) and correctly rejected all of the new
presented images as new (correct rejection rate: 100%). In contrast, he correctly recognized 83.3% of the supraliminally presented masking
stimuli in the pre- and the posttest. The correct rejection rate for newly presented mask stimuli was 94.4% in the pretest and 100% in the
posttest. Thus, the recognition test demonstrated the successful subliminal presentation of target stimuli. The subliminal presentation of
girls during the pretest revealed stronger activation in the following brain regions compared to the posttest: bilateral cerebellum,
bilateral fusiform, lingual and calcarine gyrus and the left inferior temporal gyrus. Given this specific case of a pedophilic patient we
were especially interested in the changes of hemodynamic responses to the images of girls. Therefore, we additionally used a more liberal
significance threshold in order to screen if other brain regions showed changes after four months of ADT. Lowering the threshold to p < .05
(uncorr.) additional activation in the left amygdala/hippocampus region and in the right hippocampus was detectable. According to the
probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps these activation clusters originated from the hippocampus. For the opposite comparison, i.e. which
brain regions were more activated in the post- compared to the pretest, we found stronger activation in the posttest in the bilateral
superior and middle occipital gyrus, the superior parietal lobule, and in the right lingual gyrus and precuneus. Lowering the threshold to
p < .05 the bilateral superior and right middle orbital gyri were found to be activated (see Figures 4 and 5, and Additional file 1: Table
S3). fMRI measures. Areas of significant hemodynamic responses obtained for the contrast comparing images of girls between the pre- and the
posttest (A) and images of women between the pre- and the posttest (B). The activation is superimposed on the individual brain of the
patient. Statistical significance threshold: p ≤ .01 (uncorr.), spatial extend: 5 voxel. A masking procedure was applied, masking each
comparison with the appropriate baseline contrast at p ≤ .05 (uncorr.) (for details see Additional file 1, 4. fMRI: data analysis). Red:
Pretest > Posttest. Green: Posttest > Pretest. fMRI measures. Areas of significant hemodynamic responses obtained for the contrast comparing
images of girls between the pre- and the posttest. The activation is superimposed on the individual brain of the patient. Statistical
significance threshold: p ≤ .05 (uncorr.), spatial extend: 5 voxel. A masking procedure was applied, masking each comparison with the
appropriate baseline contrast at p ≤ .05 (uncorr.) (for details see Additional file 1, 4. fMRI: data analysis). (A) Activation cluster in
the right Hippocampus (entorhinal cortex), cytoarchitectonic probability: 90%, MNI-coordinates of the local maximum: x = 24 mm, y = 3 mm,
z = -37 mm. (B) Activation cluster in the right middle orbital gyrus, MNI-coordinates of the local maximum: x = 16 mm, y = 64 mm,
z = -12 mm. Red: Pretest > Posttest. Green: Posttest > Pretest. The subliminal presentation of women during the pretest compared to the
posttest revealed widespread stronger activation in the pretest in bilateral frontal, orbital, temporal, parietal and occipital regions, the
cingulate cortex, the cerebellum, thalamus and insula. The posttest showed stronger activation in the bilateral middle and superior
occipital gyrus, bilateral calcarine gyrus, the right cuneus, right fusiform gyrus and right medial orbital gyrus. Lowering the threshold to
p < .05 additional activation was detectable in the left anterior cingulate cortex (see Figure 4, and Additional file 1: Table S4). In this
study we compared the data of a heterosexual exclusively pedophilic patient before and after four months of antiandrogen treatment. Before
discussing the results we want to point out that this is a single case study. The accomplished results and interpretations cannot be
generalized. But they can serve as a first impression of what we could expect in further studies with larger groups of subjects. Based on
the eye tracking results it seems that ADT affects only controlled but not automatic attentional processes while viewing sexually relevant
stimuli. The subliminal presentation of sexually relevant stimuli measured with fMRI showed that ADT leads to changed activation patterns in
occipital and parietal brain regions, the hippocampus and in the orbitofrontal cortex. A decrease of activation in regions associated with
the perceptual and implicit memory processes is accompanied by an increase in brain areas linked with attentional processes, inhibition and
the devaluation of the stimuli. Our suggestion is that ADT induces changes in the processing of sexually relevant stimuli, also at an
unconscious level, reflecting additional changes of perceptive and cognitive automatic processes. In regard to controlled attentional
processes, the results differed between pre- and posttest. Before treatment, the patient was more attracted to images of girls compared to
images of women. After treatment, he was more attracted to women than to girls. In contrast, concerning automatic attentional processes, the
eye-tracking method demonstrated that the ADT did not affect the initial orienting reaction on sexually deviant stimuli: Before and after
treatment the patient showed lower fixation latency for images of girls than for images of women. Our previous studies demonstrated fixation
latency as a parameter for automatic attentional processes representing the individual sexual preference . We conclude that the antiandrogen
medication had no impact on the pedophilic preference of the patient. Therefore, the eye tracking method might uncover variables which are
stable under ADT and variables which are influenced by the ADT. The relative fixation time reflects controlled attentional processes and
showed changes between the first and second eye tracking assessment. One possible explanation for this finding is that the changes in
relative fixation time are an effect of the antiandrogen medication: the ADT may have enhanced the ability of the patient to avoid deviant
sexual stimuli or lowered the need to look at the deviant but preferred sexual stimuli. Based on the assumption that the antiandrogen
medication decreased the (overall) sexual drive of the patient , it could be speculated, that under medication he was able to consciously
control the time that he was looking at the sexual images, i.e. the fixation time. Another possible explanation is that the patient actively
tried to manipulate the test result by responding in a socially desirable manner. Given his well-known dissocial personality disorder, his
familiarity with the experimental design and his willingness to leave the hospital as soon as possible (and by himself), the mentioned
reasons seem quite conceivable. Moreover, it seems to be obvious for the patient to assume that the goal of the eye tracking is to explore
where the subjects are looking at. Since the patient has five seconds to control his eye movements, the relative fixation time is
consciously influenceable . At first glance these changes in relative fixation time seem to be in contrast to the unchanged viewing time.
But it has to be taken into account that in contrast to the relative fixation time, viewing time is measured without the knowledge of the
subject while rating stimuli . Thus, the chance to manipulate the viewing time variable is relatively low. On the contrary, the fixation
latency reflects early automatic attentional processes. Thus, it should be difficult to manipulate this variable . The results for this
variable before and after the treatment remained stable, i.e. the shorter fixation latency for the images of girls compared to the images of
women. But this difference was smaller in the posttest. This could be an indication of the patient trying to manipulate his eye movements in
the very beginning of the trial, but failed in contrast to the putative manipulations of the relative fixation time. Nevertheless, the
results concerning the fixation latency demonstrated that lowering the testosterone level to castration level has no impact on the deviant
sexual orientation. Furthermore, the unchanged fixation latency demonstrated that even under antiandrogen medication an initial orienting
reaction to pedophilic stimuli can occur. Nevertheless, our hypothesis suggesting an overall increase of the fixation latency due to
decreased sexual motivation does not match with the achieved results after all. Here it could be argued that the parameter is resistant
against the influence of sexual motivation. According to us, fixation latency is rather modulated by the sexual preference of the subject.
In summary, risk assessment and prognosis could benefit from this acquired information pointing out the importance of concomitant
psychotherapy which itself entails risk management. ADT lead to decreased hemodynamic responses to the subliminally presented images of
girls in brain regions mostly associated with visual perception, i.e. the calcarine and lingual gyrus, the fusiform gyrus and the inferior
temporal gyrus. On the one hand the decreased brain activation after four months of ADT could reflect unspecific habituation processes in
those areas, as it has been described for the repeated presentations of subliminal stimuli . On the other hand it has also been discussed
that lateral brain areas, i.e. the fusiform gyrus and the inferior temporal gyrus do not only respond to low level features of the visually
presented stimuli such as color or luminance but also to the general emotional salience and more specifically to the sexually arousing
character of the presented images . Therefore, the decreased activation in the fusiform gyrus and the inferior temporal gyrus could reflect
the decreased sexually arousing character of the girls for the patient after four months of ADT. A positive association was found between
the testosterone concentration and hemodynamic responses in the inferior temporal cortex in healthy subjects while they viewed erotic
stimuli which confirms our results. At a more liberal significance threshold a decrease of hemodynamic responses in the bilateral
hippocampal region was observed. This might result from decreased implicit memory processes indicating a decreased reactivity of the patient
while viewing the images of girls during ADT. As mentioned above, the hippocampus is one of the brain regions containing androgen receptors.
After castration a significant decrease of the CA1 (cornu ammonis) spine synapse density in the hippocampus of male nonhuman primates has
been described . In summary, our study partially supports the results of the three single case fMRI-studies, examining the effect of ADT in
pedophilic patients. Similar to Moulier et al. and Schiffer et al. we found a decrease of hemodynamic responses in brain regions linked with
perceptual processes and in the hippocampal region . Another interesting point concerns the amygdala. The above discussed activation was
assigned to the hippocampal region. But the cluster probably also comprised parts of the amygdala. The amygdala, as a region associated with
emotional valuation, arousal and valence, has often been examined with respect to a pedophilic sexual interest. A reduced right amygdalar
volume was found in pedophiles compared to controls . In another study pedophilic patients exhibited a stronger response to sexually
relevant stimuli in the amygdala compared to controls . As already mentioned in the introduction, a decrease of amygdala activation was seen
under ADT in a single case study with a pedophilic patient . Further research has to be done to examine if changes under ADT occur in
hippocampal and/or amygdalar regions. To our knowledge none of the studies examined which brain regions showed stronger activation under ADT
compared to the pre-treatment condition. In contrast to our hypotheses, under ADT the patient showed stronger hemodynamic responses to
images of girls in the bilateral superior and middle occipital gyrus, in the superior parietal lobule, and in the precuneus. According to
the four-component model of sexual arousal parietal regions are associated with cognitive/attentional processes. Linking this activation
pattern with the expected increased activation in the bilateral superior and right middle orbital gyri, it could be assumed that under ADT
the patient’s attentional processing of the images of girls is associated with more intensive appraisal processes as well as with inhibitory
control processes – even under unconscious conditions. Taking these results together with the accomplished eye tracking data, it could be
speculated that the activated brain regions associated with attentional processes and appraisal, represent the stable pedophilic interest of
the patient, demonstrated with the invariant fixation latency as an indicator of automatic processes. Likewise, the stronger activation in
brain regions associated with inhibitory control could be associated with the decreased relative fixation time in response to images of
girls. This might indicate a more serious attempt on the part of the patient in order to control his own behavior. The subliminally
presented images of women elicited a rather unspecific decrease in hemodynamic responses in various brain regions under the influence of
ADT. Besides the above mentioned unspecific habituation processes to repeatedly presented subliminal stimuli, the decreased hemodynamic
responses could be a reflection of lower common reactivity of the patient to sexually salient stimuli. Considered the effect of ADT, i.e.
lowering the testosterone concentration to castration level it is comprehensible that not only the deviant sexual interest but rather the
general sexual drive of the patient should be diminished. The increased activation in higher visual areas and the medial orbital gyrus
similarly to the evoked responses to images of girls could reflect attentional processes and the devaluation of the stimuli. This
corresponds to the eye tracking results demonstrating that the patient looked longer at images of women after ADT and, as already discussed
above, could imply a better ability to control the own behavior and to answer in a socially desirable manner. In contrast, the stronger
activation in the fusiform gyrus (and also in primary visual regions) could be associated either with the processing of low level features
of the visually presented stimuli such as color or luminance or with the general emotional salience and more specifically with the sexually
arousing character of the presented images. Furthermore, under ADT the patient reported not having any sexual or deviant fantasies. This
corresponds to the stronger activation in brain regions linked with inhibitory processes and the devaluation of the stimuli. In the case of
a pedophilic forensic inpatient we explored the potential of the eye tracking method and a new fMRI-design for the evaluation of the
therapeutic outcome of ADT. With the eye tracking method we showed that controlled attentional processes could change under antiandrogen
medication, whereas automatic processes remained mostly stable. We assume that these results reflect either the increased ability of the
patient to control his eye movements while viewing sexually preferred stimuli or his competence to answer in a socially desirable manner.
Furthermore, unchanged automatic attentional processes might reflect the stable pedophilic preference of the patient. In the fMRI-study the
subliminal presentation of visual sexual stimuli showed that even at an unconscious level ADT leads to changes in processing sexually
relevant stimuli in the patient, supposedly reflecting changes in cognitive and perceptive automatic processes. A decrease of activation in
regions associated with perceptual processing and implicit memory processes was accompanied by an increase in brain areas linked with
attentional processes, inhibition and the devaluation of the stimuli. Thus, while the eye tracking study revealed a stable pedophilic
preference of the patient under ADT based on automatic attentional processes, the results of the fMRI-study indicate that the automatic
processing of pedophilic stimuli might change under ADT as well. Taking the restricted significance of a single case study into
consideration, these first results are preliminary and further research is necessary to differentiate these automatic processes in more
detail. However, it is important to note, that eye tracking and fMRI alone are not able to show all relevant therapeutic effects of an
antiandrogen treatment. According to current knowledge about the effects of testosterone and ADT a lot of aspects should be considered, e.g.
physiological, endocrinological, sexual, neurophysiological and psychological aspects . Moreover, further studies with larger groups of
healthy subjects and patients have to be conducted to verify or falsify the results of our single case study. If these measures can reliably
deliver additional and significant information, they could be integrated into evaluation studies of ADT prospectively. The study was
approved by the ethics committee of the medical faculty of the Georg-August-University of Göttingen. The patient was carefully informed of
the possible effects and side effects of the antiandrogen medication as well as possible consequences of the eye tracking method and the
fMRI measures. We paid special attention to the potentially problematic situation of his status as an inpatient. The patient was briefed in
detail orally as well as in written form about the fact that neither his agreement nor his denial to participate in the study would lead to
positive or negative consequences, sanctions, advantages or disadvantages for him. Furthermore, he was informed that anytime he could end
his participation in the study without any justification and negative consequences or disadvantages. The study information sheet and
informed consent contained a paragraph with these remarks. He gave his written informed consent to participate in the study, for the
publication of his data and further clinical details. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. KJ has been involved in the
development of the design, data analysis and the preparation of the manuscript. PF has made important contributions to the development and
programming of the design, data collection, data analysis and the intensive revision of the manuscript. HL gave substantial clinical
support, supervised the clinical tests and was involved in drafting and revision of the manuscript. PD supervised the fMRI-measurement and
was involved in drafting and revision of the manuscript. JLM supervised and supported the development of the idea and the design and was
involved in the drafting and revision of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication
history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-244X/14/142/prepub The four-component model of sexual
arousal. Table S1. presents the neutral masking stimuli selected from the IAPS-set (International Affective Picture Set). Table S2.
Statistical analysis of the fMRI-data. Table S3. Brain areas and stereotaxic coordinates for the subliminally presented images of girls.
Table S4. Brain areas and stereotaxic coordinates for the subliminally presented images of women. Click here for file We would like to thank
the patient for his agreement to participate in the study and for his agreement to publish the data. Further thanks go to Sarah Jung for
careful linguistic reading.
