Pseudoaneurysms are caused by trauma, tumors, infections, vasculitis, atherosclerosis and iatrogenic complications. In this paper, we report
about a patient with rupture of an external iliac artery pseudoaneurysm, which lead to hemorrhagic shock, after undergoing laparoscopic
radical cystectomy and extended pelvic lymphadenectomy. The patient was a 68-year-old Japanese male diagnosed with invasive bladder cancer.
Laparoscopic radical cystectomy and extended pelvic lymphadenectomy were performed. On postoperative day 12, he developed a high fever and
an acute inflammatory response with redness and swelling in the right inguinal region. He was diagnosed with necrotizing fasciitis and
underwent debridement. On postoperative day 42, a sudden hemorrhage developed from the open wound in the right inguinal region. He was
diagnosed with external iliac artery pseudoaneurysm rupture by computed tomography. These complications occur extremely rarely after
cystectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy. There are no reports to date on these complications following laparoscopic cystectomy with pelvic
lymphadenectomy. It is extremely rare for formation and rupture of an iliac artery pseudoaneurysm after pelvic surgery. Usually,
pseudoaneurysms are caused by trauma, tumors, infections, vasculitis, atherosclerosis and iatrogenic complications . In this paper, we
report about a patient with rupture of an external iliac artery pseudoaneurysm, which lead to hemorrhagic shock, after undergoing
laparoscopic radical cystectomy, extended pelvic lymphadenectomy and ileal conduit diversion. The patient was a 68-year-old Japanese male
diagnosed with invasive bladder cancer with clinical stage T3a N0 M0 (Figure 1). His body mass index (BMI) was 17.4 kg/m2 and he had a
history of alcoholic hepatitis. Liver function before the surgery was good. Laparoscopic radical cystectomy, extended pelvic lymphadenectomy
and ileal conduit diversion were performed. No intraoperative complications were observed, the surgery time was 679minutes, and the
estimated blood loss was 340 ml. Pathological stage was pT3a pN0. Although the early postoperative course was favorable, the patient
developed a high fever and an acute inflammatory response with redness and swelling in the right inguinal region on postoperative day (POD)
12 (Figure 2). Intravenous antibiotics were initiated but skin necrosis ensued. The patient was diagnosed with necrotizing fasciitis and
retroperitoneal abscess by computed tomography (CT) (Figure 3). Then the patient underwent debridement on POD 13 (Figure 4). At this time
the external iliac artery could not be identified. After debridement, even though the local inflammatory findings were improved, the levels
of C-reactive protein (CRP) remained elevated (3–4 mg/dl). Six weeks after initial surgery, there was noted to be excessive spontaneous
bleeding from the right inguinal wound, resulting in hemorrhagic shock. The patient was diagnosed with external iliac artery pseudoaneurysm
rupture by CT (Figure 5). Bypass graft surgery was performed using the great saphenous vein (Figure 6). Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) was cultured from the wound, and the patient’s condition slowly improved on intravenous daptomycin. A pedunculated femoral
flap and split-thickness skin graft were performed to cover the inguinal wound, and the patient was discharged home 12weeks after initial
surgery. At twelve months follow up, there was no evidence of aneurysm recurrence and no prolonged limb deficit. Preoperative CT findings of
the pelvis; CT showed the invasive bladder cancer (clinical stage T3a) and the normal external iliac artery. Appearance of right inguinal
region; redness and swelling were recognized. CT findings before the debridement; A) showed the retroperitoneal abscess. B) showed the
normal external iliac artery. Postoperative appearance; debridement for retroperitoneal abscess. CT findings of the pelvis; CT showed the
pseudoaneurysm of external iliac artery. Postoperative appearance (bypass surgery); the arrow showed the great saphenous vein.
Pseudoaneurysms are a result of damage to the vascular wall due to factors such as trauma, tumor, infection, vasculitis, atherosclerosis, or
iatrogenic injury . The iliac artery is a rare site of the onset, accounting for 3 to 18% of all cases. Pelvic surgery rarely results in
formation or rupture of iliac artery pseudoaneurysms, and the frequency is unknown . Simon et al. have only reported one case of
pseudoaneurysm formation in the common iliac artery associated with open radical cystectomy . Vascular injury is rare in laparoscopic
cystectomy, with a rate of 0 to 3.7% . Rapid revascularization is usually required since pseudoaneurysm rupture causes shock due to heavy
bleeding. Endovascular interventions include surgical revascularization (vascular grafts and autologous vessels), and more recently, stent
grafts. Ricciardi et al. reported a case of external iliac artery pseudoaneurysm rupture following pelvic lymphadenectomy for cervical
cancer . They performed endovascular intervention using a covered stent, and advocate their use as first-line treatment in these kinds of
cases, as it is possible to achieve faster control of bleeding than with surgical techniques. The present case was an infectious
pseudoaneurysm that spread from a retroperitoneal abscess, and thus foreign objects should not be left within the body. At the time of
debridement, Staphylococcus epidermides was detected in a subcutaneous pus swab and MRSA was detected from a retroperitoneal pus swab.
Therefore, we conducted revascularization using an autologous graft from the great saphenous vein without a covered stent or vascular graft.
In this case, the factors leading to pseudoaneurysm rupture were thought to be the spread of infection from the retroperitoneal abscess and
the weakening of the vascular wall associated with the lymphadenectomy. The factors that triggered the formation of the retroperitoneal
abscess are unclear. We suggest that the cause of pseudoaneurysm formation was microscopic injury of the external iliac artery which was not
detected during surgery. Furthermore, the vascular wall became brittle due to MRSA infection, ultimately leading to rupture. External iliac
artery pseudoaneurysms are rare complications of laparoscopic radical cystectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy. When recognized and treated
promptly, good long-term functional outcomes can be achieved. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. POD:
Postoperative days; CT: Computed tomography; BMI: Body mass index; MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. SH performed the majority of this study and drafted the manuscript. RS and TS surveyed the
literature. KM and HM critically revised the manuscript. YS, FS, and HM participated in the design and interpretation of this study under
supervision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We are grateful to Hiromitsu Mimata for his dedicated work in the patient
management.
