Popliteal lymph node dissection is performed when grossly metastatic nodal disease is encountered in the popliteal fossa or after
microscopic metastasis is found in interval sentinel nodes during clinical staging of cutaneous malignant melanoma. Initially, an S-shaped
incision is made to gain access to the popliteal fossa. A careful en bloc removal of fat tissue and lymph nodes is made to preserve and
avoid the injury of peroneal and tibial nerves as well as popliteal vessels, following the previous recommendations. This rare surgical
procedure was successfully employed in a patient with cutaneous malignant melanoma and nodal metastases at the popliteal fossa. The
technique described by Karakousis was reproduced in a step-by-step fashion to allow anatomical identification of the neurovascular
structures and radical resection with no post-operative morbidity and prompt recovery. Popliteal lymph node dissection is a rarely performed
operative procedure. Following a lymphoscintigraphic examination of the popliteal nodal station, surgeons can be asked to explore the
popliteal fossa. Detailed familiarity of the operative procedure is necessary, however, to avoid complications. Metastasis to the lymph
nodes represents the most important predictor of disease outcome among patients with malignant melanoma (MM) of the skin . Usually,
metastasis from MM in the distal leg and foot primarily affect the lymph nodes in the inguinal nodal basins. In some patients, however,
there is direct drainage to popliteal lymph nodes, although this is an infrequent event and rarely reported in the literature . When
metastatic disease is identified in the popliteal fossa, surgeons are called on to explore the popliteal nodal station and perform radical
lymphadenectomy. This necessitates a profound familiarity of the surgical anatomy and the technique of this uncommon operative procedure. In
our clinic, this procedure was recently performed in a patient with MM of the heel, presented with concomitant popliteal and inguinal lymph
node metastases. In this communication, a detailed description of the surgical anatomy is provided and the technique of the popliteal lymph
node dissection is described. The patient (JRS), a 58-year-old man was subjected to an excisional biopsy of a dark skin lesion in the left
foot. On light microscopy, an acral melanoma was diagnosed, with a Breslow thickness of 1.5 mm. Clinical staging was T2 N0 M0, with a normal
LDH (355 mg/dL) and normal chest and abdomen CT findings. Based on the clinical stage and Breslow thickness, a sentinel node biopsy and a
wide-margin excision were carried out. On lymphoscintigraphic examination, a major uptake of radionuclide was localized in the popliteal and
groin lymph nodes, which were excised and submitted to histopathological examination. These lymph nodes were deemed positive for metastatic
melanoma and, consequently, a lymphadenectomy of the deep and superficial groin as well as popliteal regions was indicated. After this
procedure, histopathological examination disclosed seven popliteal lymph nodes, all being disease-free. Normally, there are 2 to 9 lymph
nodes localized within the fat tissue surrounding the nerves and major vessels of the popliteal fossa. Popliteal lymph nodes are deep
structures encountered under the investing fascia of the leg, and they receive the lymphatic drainage of the deep structures of the distal
leg and foot. Although infrequent, the lymphatic drainage from the skin is direct to these lymph nodes in some individuals. The surgical
procedure of popliteal lymph node dissection involves en bloc removal of all fibrous, fatty, and lymphatic tissue in the popliteal fossa,
with careful preservation of the nerves and vessels. The patient is placed in the prone position with the knee slightly flexed. To gain
access to the popliteal fossa, an S-shaped incision is performed (Figure 1). The lateral flap is raised first to the surface of the biceps
femoris muscle proximally, and the lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle distally and superficial to the level of Scarpa’s fascia. The
medial flap is raised until the semitendinosus and semimembranosus muscle proximally and the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle
distally. Skin hooks or autostatic retractors are used to maintain raised flap traction. ‘S’ shape incision for lymphadenectomy of the
popliteal fossa. The upper angle of the popliteal fossa is formed by the biceps and semimembranosus muscle. Medially to the edge of the
biceps femoris muscle, the common peroneal nerve is identified through a layer of fat tissue. An ascending sharp dissection is made
superficially to the nerve until the level of its origin from the sciatic nerve. This careful dissection continues distally until the
surface of the peroneus longus muscle. At this point, the tibial nerve is also dissected in the popliteal space superficially to the
popliteal vessels and both nerves are hooked with vessel loops to allow gentile lateral traction (Figure 2). Bifurcation of sciatic nerve
into common peroneal nerve and tibial nerve. Emerging from the lateral surface of the peroneal nerve, we can identify the lateral sural
cutaneous nerve (Figure 3). This nerve is responsible for the sensory innervation to the posterolateral surface of the leg. The sural nerve
is formed from the fusion between a communicating ramus of the lateral sural cutaneous nerve and the medial sural cutaneous nerve in the
middle of the leg. If possible, this superficial communicating ramus should be preserved during the dissection over the lateral head of the
gastrocnemius. In case of tumor involvement of the lateral cutaneous sural nerve or its communicating ramus, their sacrifice does not cause
significant sensory deficit, if the medial cutaneous sural nerve is preserved. The medial cutaneous sural nerve has its origin from the
tibial nerve and emerges from the popliteal space to run superficially in the groove between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle near
to the small saphena vein in the middle of the back of the leg. Division of the medial cutaneous sural nerve results in cutaneous
anesthesia. Descending dissection of the major nervous trunks and proper identification of cutaneous sural nerve rami from their origins.
The deep fascia is stripped off the surface of the gastrocnemius muscle, and the medial cutaneous sural nerve is hooked with vessel loops,
like the lateral sural cutaneous nerve, both being held laterally. The popliteal vessels are now approached. The popliteal artery is medial
to the popliteal vein and lies deeper. Both are located between the heads of the gastrocnemius muscle (Figure 4). Panoramic view of the
popliteal fossa and identification of the major anatomic structures after removal of the surgical specimen. The descendent dissection
continues and the small saphenous vein is ligated close to its insertion in the popliteal vein (Figure 5). All fibrous fatty tissue around
the popliteal vessels is removed and some lymph nodes can be identified at this stage. A single lymph node can also be found between the
back of the knee and the popliteal artery. Occasionally, there are two popliteal veins and the artery lies between them. The popliteal
artery is divided into two major branches: the anterior and posterior tibial artery and a variable number of genicular branches. The
surgical specimen is removed in continuity, with a proper identification of the nerves and vessels. As the final step, a closed suction
drain is placed in the popliteal fossa. Close view of the popliteal vessels in situ. Note the popliteal artery lying deeper than the vein in
the upper bound of the popliteal fossa. The superficial lymphatics localized on the calf may accompany the short saphenous vein towards the
popliteal fossa draining to popliteal lymph nodes. In a series from the Sidney Cancer Database , there were 6.9% direct drainages to one or
more popliteal lymph nodes among 236 lymphoscintigrams performed in patients with primary MM at or distal to the knee. Data from these
lymphoscintigraphy studies revealed that lymphatic drainage to popliteal lymph nodes can take place anywhere on the leg and foot. However,
metastatic disease in popliteal lymph nodes was clinically detectable in 0.31% of the cases only . In a series of Menes et al., popliteal
lymph nodes were identified by lymphoscintigraphy in 9% of the 106 patients with MM below the knee or at more distal sites, and metastatic
lymph nodes in the popliteal fossa were found in 2.8% of patients . There are two basic indications to perform popliteal lymph node
dissection: i) grossly metastatic disease detected on clinical examination or ii) microscopic disease identified in sentinel node
lymphadenectomy specimens . Popliteal node dissection is an uncommon procedure but adequately indicated according to data available in
current literature . A thorough familiarity of the anatomical landmarks and technical details of the dissection procedure of the popliteal
fossa is mandatory. In 1980, Karakousis published an elegant description of this infrequent operative procedure with detailed information
about the surgical anatomy and the technique . Since then, however, there is a paucity of published data on the technical aspects of
popliteal lymphadenectomy. To choose the kind of incision, one must consider the optimal exposure necessary to reduce the risk of developing
contracture scars. The most frequently used approach of the popliteal fossa by a medial route (described in vascular surgery textbooks to
correct popliteal aneurysms or perform femoro-popliteal bypass), does not allow a proper exposure of the structures to accomplish radical
lymphadenectomy . The long S-shaped incision used to access the popliteal fossa is designed to offer generous exposure and avoid deforming
joint contracture. Other authors prefer a Z-plasty incision for the same purposes . To guarantee sufficient exposure, a progressive
dissection, initiated by the confection of the lateral flap, was continued throughout removal of all soft tissue. The subsequent surgical
steps are followed according to the same principle of removing all fibrous and fatty tissue around, beneath, and alongside the popliteal
vessels and nerves. After retraction of the flaps, an easy identification of the peroneal nerve and its ascending dissection until its
origin in the sciatic nerve offers prompt identification of the tibial nerve. Subsequent recognition of the sural cutaneous nerves and their
branches makes the dissection secure. The next crucial step involves the resection of all fat pad tissue close to the popliteal vessels.
Meticulous inspection and palpation of the popliteal fossa must be performed not to leave any lymph node undetected. When a surgeon faces a
rare surgical problem of regional nodal disease outside the common nodal stations, such as popliteal or epitrochlear chains, the knowledge
of anatomy and surgical technique is crucial to guarantee preservation of the key functional structures to avoid permanent disability.
Inappropriate dissection can also result in a suboptimal radical lymphadenectomy. The technique of popliteal lymph node dissection described
here was successfully performed in a patient with metastatic acral MM, without any post-operative complications or morbidity. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. FT and EA
designed and operated on the case reported. VM and SC made substantial contributions to conception, design, and acquisition of data. ML, TL,
GM, and AP wrote the manuscript and edited photographs. SR and EU finally reviewed and actively edited the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We thank all residents from General Surgery Department at University of Sao Paulo, specially those in PGY3-4.
This study had no funding support from any institution.
