Biliary papillomatosis is a condition characterized by multiple papillary tumors of variable distribution and extent within the biliary
tract. Papillary carcinoma can develop in these lesions. It is a rare biliary pathological entity and its clinical features and outcome are
not well known. We experienced a case of biliary papillomatosis in a 51-year-old North African man who presented with obstructive jaundice.
Laboratory tests showed elevated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase levels. Imaging (ultrasound and magnetic
resonance imaging) was suggestive of Klatskin tumor associated to common bile duct stones. After endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography, a balloon sweep retrieved friable tissue from his bile ducts. Histology demonstrated papillary adenomatous
proliferation showing high-grade dysplasia and he was referred for surgical management. Although biliary papillomatosis is rare, it is a
premalignant condition that should be well known and considered in all diagnoses of obstructive jaundice. We report a new case of biliary
papillomatosis and highlight the contribution of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography in the diagnosis of this condition. Biliary
papillomatosis (BP) is a rare condition of unknown etiology characterized by multiple papillary tumors within the intrahepatic and/or
extrahepatic biliary tree that can cause biliary obstruction . It is a low-grade neoplasm with high malignant potential and should be
regarded as a premalignant lesion. BP commonly affects adults in their sixth to seventh decade of life and is twice as common in males as
females . It presents with recurrent episodes of abdominal colic, jaundice, acute cholangitis and the presence of biliary stones and/or
infection. We describe a case of BP in which endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) played an important role in the diagnosis
of this condition. A 51-year-old North African man presented with a 1-month history of fluctuating jaundice with pale stools and dark urine,
right upper quadrant pain, and intermittent vomiting. His past medical history included neurosyphilis for approximately 8 years. A physical
examination revealed little upper abdominal quadrant tenderness. Biochemistry demonstrated elevated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and
γ-glutamyl transpeptidase levels, and leukocytosis. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging showed a complete stop at the biliary
bifurcation compatible with a Klatskin tumor associated to common bile duct stones (Figure 1). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography
revealed dilated intrahepatic ducts and common bile duct above multiple polylobed filling defects. These findings were mainly suggestive of
multiple impacted stones of his common bile duct, cholangiocarcinoma, or hemobilia. After an endoscopic sphincterotomy, a balloon sweep
retrieved friable, polypoid soft tissue from his bile ducts (Figure 2). Two biliary plastic stents were placed. Histology of the tissue
demonstrated papillary adenomatous proliferation showing high-grade dysplasia; the patient was referred for surgical management.
Laparoscopic exploration demonstrated a dilated common biliary duct. A transversal choledochotomy revealed a papillary polylobed mass
(Figures 3 and 4). Common bile duct resection was performed with macroscopically safe margins and biliary reconstruction was achieved by
Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. Magnetic resonance image showing a complete stop at the biliary bifurcation compatible with a Klatskin tumor
associated to common bile duct stones. After endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, balloon sweep retrieved friable, polypoid soft
tissue from bile ducts. Post operative view of common bile duct containing papillary material. Surgical specimen showing polylobed papillary
mass within the common bile duct. BP is papillary adenomatosis within the biliary tree. It is a very rare disorder that typically presents
with fluctuant obstructive jaundice. BP can be thought of as a collection of benign papillary adenomas within which adenocarcinoma can
develop and spread along the bile duct mucosa . Recent literature suggests BP has a rate of malignant transformation between 41%, and 83% .
Since the first case described by Chappet in 1894, almost 100 cases have been reported. BP pathogenesis is unclear and appears related to
irritation and inflammation of the biliary tree. The roles of bile stasis and recurrent infections are also underlined . Some associations
were described: chronic stone irritation, clonorchis infestation, reactive hyperplasia in Caroli’s disease, ectopic pancreatic tissue,
anomalous biliary tree and primitive sclerosing cholangitis . Our patient had neurosyphilis and, to the best of knowledge, this is the first
report of this association. Clinical features are obstructive jaundice and recurrent cholangitic episodes. These features are due to partial
or intermittent obstruction of the bile duct secondary to mucus production, tumor enlargement or tumor fragments . The most common imaging
finding is intrahepatic ducts and/or common bile duct dilatation (polypoid filling defects, mural irregularities) . Other features such as
the presence of multiple intraductal masses within the lumen or attached to the wall of bile ducts are typically visualized on magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography . Computed tomography scan may reveal soft tissue densities in the dilated bile ducts or thickened and
enhanced bile duct walls . During ERCP, typical characteristics include: amorphous filling defects, irregularity of the bile duct wall,
reduced motility on irrigation and mucus discharge from the papilla. BP may then be classified as either mucin-hypersecreting BP or non-
mucin-producing BP depending on the presence or absence of mucobilia. These morphological features are mainly suggestive of hilar
cholangiocarcinoma, and we aim here to draw readers’ attention to consider BP in all diagnosis of hilar tumors, which avoids condemning
patients with palliative therapy systematically. During a contrast cholangiogram, it is important to obtain opacification of the entire
biliary tract to determine precisely the ductal extension of the disease, which helps to guide the treatment plan, including surgery .
Curative treatment can be achieved through surgical resection in localized disease . However, local resection is characterized by a high
rate of recurrence due to either positive resection margins or recurrence due to the multifocality of the disease. In the case of diffuse or
recurrent BP, resection of the biliary tree by liver transplantation and pancreaticoduodenectomy can be curative . Endoscopic therapy
through ERCP was initially used for palliation in patients who were poor surgical candidates. Argon plasma coagulation has been attempted
for the treatment of premalignant mucosal diseases of the digestive tract, due to its low depth and satisfactory local effects, and its use
in the biliary tree has been scarcely described . Palliative procedures also include percutaneous management with drainage and stenting, and
intraluminal brachytherapy with iridium-192. Untreated BP that does not undergo malignant transformation eventually leads to chronic
cholestasis due to mechanical obstruction resulting in septic cholangitis and hepatic failure . BP is a rare condition characterized by
multiple papillary adenomas involving the biliary tract which leads to recurrent cholangitis. It is considered a rare benign disease with a
high malignancy potential and tendency to spread superficially. Definitive treatment is by means of radical surgical resection and/or liver
transplantation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. BP: Biliary papillomatosis; ERCP: Endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AT and SH evaluated the patient and were
major contributors in writing the manuscript. SB analyzed MRI data. SH and FZE realized the ERCP. BH, AA, and ZA performed the surgical
management. BA and ZA reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
