Natural killer (NK)/T cell lymphoma of the female genital tract is extremely rare. We here report a case of ‘nasal type’ NK/T cell lymphoma
arising in the uterus with adenomyosis in a 41-year-old woman with fever and hypogastralgia. The histologic analysis demonstrated a highly
aggressive tumor with characteristic angiocentric/angiodestructive growth pattern and focal necrosis. The lymphoma cells displayed a
CD3ϵ/CD56/TIA-1/granzyme-B/Perforin-positive and CD20/CD79a/CD4/CD8-negative immunophenotype and positive for Epstein-Barr virus by EBER in
situ hybridization. Clinically, the disease was limited to the uterus at the initial diagnosis, but progressed rapidly. The patient died on
day 54 after hysterectomy, irrespective of intensive chemotherapy. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1323474831125945 Primary lymphoma of the female genital tract is uncommon with a frequency of
only 0.002% in all patients with extranodal lymphomas . The majority of these cases represent aggressive B-cell lymphomas. Involvement of
the gynecological tract by NK/T cell lymphomas is considered to be extremely rare and only 5 cases with primary NK/T cell lymphoma involving
the endometrium of the uterus has been reported in the English literature . There was no report of such case in uterus associated with
adenomyosis. Here, we report the first case of primary NK/T cell lymphoma arising in the uterus with adenomyosis. A 41 year-old woman,
without relevant previous anamnesis, presented with fever and hypogastralgia for 2 months. Computer tomography and ultrasonography revealed
enlargement of the uterus and multinodular intrauterine mass. A hysterectomy was performed. She was diagnosed as extranodal NK/T cell
lymphoma, nasal-type. After surgical resection, the patient was treated with CHOP chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, daunorubicin
and dexamethasone). Despite extensive chemotherapy, the disease progressed rapidly; shortly follow-up radiological imaging showed the
retroperitoneal involvement. The patient died on day 54 after surgical resection of the tumor. Macroscopic examination displayed a yellow,
soft, poorly circumscribed mass that invaded about 4 cm in uterine wall (Figure 1). Histopathological evaluation revealed lymphomatous
infiltrate the endometrial gland (Figure 2A) and myometrium with well demarcated large areas of coagulative necrosis containing apoptotic
nuclear debris (Figure 2B). The tumor cells demonstrated a prominent angioinfiltrative growth pattern with concentric arrangement around
small arteries (Figure 2C). The lymphoma cells were densely packed, with an abundant cytoplasm and enlarged nuclei with open chromatin and
several large nucleoli. Mitotic figures were frequently seen. There was adenomyosis in myometrium without tumour involvement (Figure 2D).
Macroscopic view. Macroscopic examination displayed a yellow, soft, poorly circumscribed mass. Histological features of this case. A, Dense
lymphomatous cells infiltrate endometrium,partially covered by intact columnar epithelium (HE, ×40 magnification). B, The lymphomatous
proliferation was interrupted by coagulative necrotic areas (HE, ×200 magnification). C, Angiocentric and angiodestructive growth pattern is
frequently present (HE, ×100 magnification). D, Adenomyosis in myometrium without lymphomatous infiltrate (HE, ×40 magnification). The tumor
cells were positive for cytoplasmic CD3 and membranous CD56 (Figiures 3A and Figure 3B) but negative for CD4, CD5, CD8, CD20, CD79α, CD30.
Cytotoxic proteins TIA-1 (Figure 3C), granzyme-B and Perforin displayed strong cytoplasmic granular staining pattern. EBER in situ
hybridization demonstrated strong positivities for all tumor cells (Figure 3D). Based on the overall morphological, immunophenotypical and
EBV characteristics, the diagnosis of extranodal (uterine) NK-cell lymphoma, nasal-type was made. Phenotypic characteristics of tumor cells.
A, The lymphoma cells showed cytoplasmic CD3ϵ B and C, Membranous CD56 and cytoplasmic granular TIA-1 positivity by immunohistochemistry
(×200 magnification). D, In situ hybridization for EBER sequences clearly supported EBV infection of the lymphoma cells (×200
magnification). Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas characteristically involve the upper aerodigestive tract, with the nasal cavity being the
prototypic site . Rarely, the tumour occurs in prostate, adrenal glands and lung . Thus far, only a few cases of T- or NK/T-cell neoplasms
involved uterus have been reported . Like most of NK/T cell lymphoma in other anatomic sites, these lymphomas in the uterus usually are
highly aggressive, and conventional prognostic factors usually fail to predict their outcome . While clinical presentation of NK/T cell
lymphoma involving the uterus may include vaginal bleeding, and abdominal or pelvic pain , our patient presented with fever and
hypogastralgia with no evidence of vaginal bleeding. As the common pathological features of NK/T cell lymphoma defined by WHO
classification, the current case demonstrated a highly aggressive tumor with characteristic angiocentric/angiodestructive growth pattern and
associated focal necrosis. Interestingly, there is uterus adenomyosis present nearby the lymphoma in the current case; perhaps it might be
an important factor contributing to the onset and process of the tumor. Occurrence of T cells and CD56+ NK cells within the normal
endometrium has been described . It seems to be established that uterine NK cells form a dynamic lymphoid pool in each menstruation cycle.
One could expect that these cells may frequently undergo genetic and regulatory errors leading to malignant transformation . For this reason
it is difficult to understand, why uterine NK-cells transform to malignant lymphoma with such a low frequency. As one possible explanation,
the relatively short duration of a menstrual cycle and the regular shed of the endometrium may prevent the expansion and malignant
transformation of NK cells . In the presented case, the presence of adenomyosis may prevent the normal NK cell duration and cycling in the
uterus, perhaps provide the evidence that NK cells frequently remained in uterine corps undergo genetic and regulatory errors leading to
malignant transformation. The association of adenomyosis with NK/T-cell lymphoma was largely not mentioned previously, because that the
majority of cases reported with NK/T cell lymphoma in uterus often diagnosed by curettage, the way impossible to find adenomyosis. According
the WHO criterion, the neoplastic lymphoid cells usually coexpress NK cell markers such as CD56 and T cell-associated antigens like CD3, CD2
with expression of cytotoxic markers such as TIA-1, Perforin and Granzyme-B . The current case demonstrated the immuno characteristics of
tumor cells are typical nasal-type NK/T cell lymphoma: CD3+, CD56+, TIA1+, Perforin+, Granzyme B+. As a hallmark of nasal type NK/T cell
lymphoma, EBV in situ hybridization clearly supported EBV infection of the lymphoma cells. TIA-1 and EBER were the two most sensitive
markers of the disease. However PCR-based TCR gene rearrangement analysis might not be a useful technique for making diagnosis of NK/T cell
lymphoma . Latent membrane protein (LMP) 1 and LMP2A encoded by Epstein-Barr virus were associated with the development of malignancies.
High expression of the two proteins could independently predict poor overall survival . NK/T cell lymphomas were reported to have a median
survival of only 0.28 years . One case of NK/T cell lymphomas involved prostate was reported recently, the patient died within 4 months
after diagnosis . In another case of the lymphomas occurred in bilateral adrenal glands, the patient died only 33 days after initial
presentation . In the present case, the patient died 54 days (0.15 year) after hysterectomy. Unfortunately, treatment experience is mostly
limited to the upper aerodigestive tract disease. Extranodal NK/T cell lymphomas of other sites are extremely rare and very limited data for
optimal treatment strategies are currently available. This case demonstrated a rare NK/T cell lymphoma primarily in the uterus, providing a
diagnostic pitfall: pathologists and gynecologists should be aware of its existence and need to consider NK/T cell lymphomas within the
spectrum of differential diagnosis of neoplastic tumor in the uterus. Because of the clinical aggressiveness and dismal prognosis of the
tumor, more effective therapeutic regimens should be actively looked. Written informed consent was obtained from the family of the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JC F analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript as a major
contributor. ZX X, Z L helped to perform the immunochemical staining. J Z helped to revise the discussion section of this manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Professor Qin Huang for checking and editing the manuscript for English.
