The gut-derived incretin hormones, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide-1, are released in response to
ingestion of nutrients. Both hormones are highly insulinotropic in strictly glucose-dependent fashions and glucagon-like peptide-1 is often
referred to as one of the most insulinotropic substances known. Plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations were measured in a healthy
Caucasian male (age: 53 years; body mass index: 28.6 kg/m2; fasting plasma glucose: 5.7 mM; 2 h plasma glucose value following 75 g-oral
glucose tolerance test: 3.5 mM; glycated haemoglobin A1c: 5.5%) during glucagon (1 mg) and meal (2,370 kJ) tests, and during two 2 h 15 mM-
hyperglycaemic clamps with continuous intravenous infusion of glucagon-like peptide-1 (1 pmol/kg/min) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (4 pmol/kg/min), respectively. Normal insulin and C-peptide responses were observed during meal test (peak concentrations: 300
and 3,278 pM) and glucagon test (peak concentrations: 250 and 2,483 pM). During the hyperglycaemic clamp with continuous intravenous
infusion of GLP-1 the subject exhibited plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations of 13,770 and 22,380 pM, respectively. To our knowledge
insulin and C-peptide concentrations of these magnitudes have never been reported. Thus, the present data support the view that glucagon-
like peptide-1 is one of the most insulinotropic substances known. The two incretin hormones, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
(GIP) and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), are secreted from endocrine mucosal cells in the gastrointestinal tract (K and L cells,
respectively) in response to ingestion of nutrients. Both hormones are insulinotropic in strictly glucose-dependent fashions . A priori, the
insulinotropic actions of GIP and GLP-1 would be expected to be similar: The receptors of the two incretin hormones are closely related and
belong to the same branch of the superfamily of type 2 G protein-coupled receptors , and, furthermore, both receptors couple to adenylate
cyclase and their insulinotropic actions depend to a large extent on the intracellular accumulation of cyclic AMP (cAMP). Additionally,
exogenously delivered GIP and GLP-1 have been found to be equally insulinotropic at physiological plasma concentrations and to contribute
equally to the incretin effect in healthy subjects . However, physiological plasma concentrations of GIP are 2 to 5 fold higher compared to
GLP-1 concentrations (during fasting conditions and in the postprandial state). Therefore, GLP-1 has often been cited as one of the most
insulinotropic substances known . Here we present a case of unprecedented high insulin and C-peptide responses in a healthy subject
following intravenous (iv) administration of GLP-1 and discuss the existing literature on maximal beta cell secretory response tests and on
mechanisms underlying the insulinotropic effects of the incretin hormones. A healthy male Caucasian (age: 53 years; body weight: 90.7 kg;
body mass index: 28.6 kg/m2) with normal glucose homeostasis (fasting plasma glucose: 5.9 mM; 2 h plasma glucose value following 75 g-oral
glucose tolerance test: 3.5 mM; glycated haemoglobin A1c: 5.5%) and without any family history of diabetes was examined. Insulin resistance
according to the homeostasis model assessment was 1.65. He had no significant past medical history, took no medication and clinical
examination was normal. All standard investigations including blood pressure and standard biochemical parameters in urine and blood were
normal. He agreed to participate (verbal and written consent) after receiving oral and written information. The examinations were approved
by the Scientific-Ethical Committee of the County of Copenhagen (journal no.: KA 97196 m) and conducted according to the principles of the
Helsinki Declaration II. The subject participated in a study evaluating the insulinotropic power of supra-physiological doses of GLP-1 as
compared to glucagon, GIP, and physiological conditions in healthy subjects . He was examined on 4 different days (day 1 through 4)
separated by minimum 48 hours. On each occasion the subject was studied after a 10 h-fast, including liquids, with a cannula inserted in a
dorsal hand vein for collection of blood samples. On day 2, 3 and 4, another cannula was inserted into the contra-lateral cubital vein for
infusion of glucagon (day 2) and glucose plus incretin hormones (day 3 and 4). Blood was drawn regularly after a standard breakfast meal
ingested during 15 min. The meal comprised 2,370 kJ (566 kcal) and was composed of 34% fat, 47% carbohydrate, and 19% protein. Blood was
sampled 15, 10 and 0 min before and 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, 30, 45 min after iv bolus of 1 mg (=287 nmol) biosynthetic glucagon
(GlucaGen, Novo Nordisk, Bagsværd, Denmark) in 1 ml of sterile water. At time 0 min, a bolus of 50% glucose (w/v) was infused during 1 min
to increase plasma glucose to 15 mM. Plasma glucose was kept at 15 mM by continuous infusion of glucose, which was adjusted every 5 min
according to bedside measurements of plasma glucose. After 3 min, a continuous infusion of 1 pmol GLP-1/kg/min (day 3) or 4 pmol GIP/kg/min
(day 4) was initiated. Blood was sampled 15, 10 and 0 min before and 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105 and 120 min after elevation
of plasma glucose. An additional experimental day consisting of a 2 h 15 mM-hyperglycaemic clamp with continuous infusion of saline was
designed in order to evaluate the insulin response to hyperglycaemia without incretin hormone infusion. However, the subject withdrew his
consent due to the symptoms of hypoglycaemia experienced following termination of the hyperglycaemic clamp with infusion of GLP-1 (see
below). Thus, we found it unethical to utilize the present design in further evaluations of beta cell function in healthy subjects . On all
experimental days, blood was sampled into tubes containing heparin or EDTA (6 mM) plus aprotinin (500 KIU/ml blood; Trasylol, Bayer,
Leverkusen, Germany) and a specific dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitor (valine-pyrrolidide; 0.01 mM, final concentration; a gift from
Novo Nordisk A/S Bagsværd, Denmark) for hormone analyses. These tubes were immediately cooled on ice and centrifuged for 20 min at 1,200 g
and 4°C. Plasma was stored at -20°C until analysis. For bedside measurements of plasma glucose, blood was distributed into fluoride tubes
and centrifuged immediately for 2 min at 7,400 g and room temperature. Plasma glucose concentrations were measured during the experiments by
the glucose oxidase method (Yellow Springs Instrument Model YSI 2300 STAT plus analyzer; YSI Inc., Yellow Springs, Ohio, USA). Plasma
samples were assayed for total GLP-1 immunoreactivity using antiserum no. 89390, which is specific for the C-terminal of the GLP-1 molecule
and reacts equally with intact GLP-1 and the primary (N-terminally truncated) metabolite. Total GIP was measured using the C-terminally
directed antiserum R65, which reacts fully with intact GIP and the N-terminally truncated metabolite. Plasma insulin concentrations were
measured using commercial ELISA kits (Dako, Copenhagen, Denmark). Plasma C-peptide concentrations were determined as described by Heding et
al. employing the polyclonal antibody M1230. Area under the curve (AUC) values were calculated using the trapezoidal rule and data is
presented using standard descriptive statistics. No difference in fasting plasma glucose between the 4 experimental days was observed
(average fasting plasma glucose: 5.7 mM). Time courses for plasma glucose during day 1 and 2 are shown in Figure 1. During the meal test
plasma glucose increased to a peak value of 7.6 mM 45 min following meal ingestion. On day 2 a peak value of 8.6 mM was observed 20 min
after injection of glucagon. During the two 2 h hyperglycaemic clamps plasma glucose was elevated to 16.4 mM (GLP-1 clamp) and 14.8 mM (GIP
clamp) using 60 ml 50% (w/v) glucose and maintained at mean concentrations of 14.8 mM (range: 12.2-17.6 mM) and 14.6 mM (range:
13.3-17.2 mM), respectively, using a total of 287 g and 287 g of glucose. Following termination of the GLP-1 clamp, plasma glucose
concentrations dropped to below 3 mM within minutes and remained here for approximately 1 h in spite of juice and food ingestion. In this
period the subject experienced typical symptoms of hypoglycaemia. Meal test and glucagon test. Plasma glucose (upper panels), insulin (mid
panels) and C-peptide (lower panels) concentrations during meal test and glucagon test in a healthy subject with normal glucose tolerance.
During the meal test basal levels of plasma GLP-1 (9 pM) rose to a peak concentration of 19 pM 90 min following initiation of ingestion and
returned to basal levels at the end of the meal test (180 min). Basal levels of plasma GIP (6 pM) exhibited a more brisk rise in response to
meal ingestion and peak concentration of 145 pM was attained after 30 min (data not shown). Time courses of plasma insulin and plasma
C-peptide responses during day 1 and 2 are presented in Figure 1. No difference in fasting plasma concentrations between day 1 and 2 was
observed. As illustrated in Figure 1 the subject responded with normal insulin and C-peptide responses during day 1 (meal test) and day 2
(glucagon test); during day 1, peak concentrations (insulin: 300 pM; C-peptide: 3,278 pM) were attained 45 min following initiation of meal
ingestion. During day 2, peak concentrations of 250 pM and 2,483 pM for insulin and C-peptide, respectively, were observed 6 and 3 min
following iv injection of glucagon. During the 15 mM-hyperglycaemic clamp with continuous iv infusion of GIP, plasma insulin concentrations
increased from a baseline level of 48 pM to a plateau level of 1,163 pM (range: 1,080-1,432 pM (60–120 min)) (AUC0–120 min: 104; AUC0–10
min: 2.8; and AUC10–120 min: 101 nM × min) (Figure 2). Hyperglycaemic clamps with GLP-1/GIP. Plasma glucose (upper panel) and insulin (lower
panel) concentrations in a healthy subject with normal glucose tolerance during hyperglycaemic clamps with continuous infusion of glucagon-
like peptide-1 (filled triangles) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (open triangles), respectively. The insert in the lower
panel illustrates plasma insulin concentrations during the initial 15 min of the two clamps. During the hyperglycaemic clamp with continuous
iv infusion of GLP-1, plasma insulin concentrations increased almost exponentially from a baseline level of 35 pM to 13,770 pM at the
termination of the 2 h clamp (AUC0–120 min: 580; AUC0–10 min: 2.5; and AUC10–120 min: 577 nM × min) (Figure 2). Plasma C-peptide
concentrations increased from a baseline of 700 pM to 22,380 pM. Basal plasma proinsulin (8 pM) increased to 602 (at time point 105 min) and
721 pM (at time point 120 min) during this clamp. With the present case we report, to our knowledge, unprecedented high plasma insulin
(13,770 pM) and C-peptide concentrations (22,380 pM) in a healthy subject. Maximum beta cell secretory capacity has been investigated
intensively with the aim of describing beta cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. Several tests have been designed to evaluate this parameter
including meal tests, the glucagon test , the hyperglycaemic clamp test (with or without arginine) and tests combining glucose and non-
glucose stimuli such as arginine and GLP-1 . The highest insulin and C-peptide concentrations in healthy subjects reported hitherto were
elicited by a test designed to evaluate distinct patterns of insulin secretion including maximal beta cell secretory capacity . This design
by Fritsche et al. involved a 200 min 10 mM-hyperglycaemic clamp with continuous iv infusion of GLP-1 (1.5 pmol/kg/min) starting at 120 min
and an arginine bolus of 5 g at 180 min performed in 7 healthy volunteers. Following the arginine bolus mean peak concentrations of insulin
and C-peptide amounted to 8,495 pM (±1499 pM, standard error of the mean) and 14,729 ± 1863 pM, respectively. These responses exceeded those
seen following arginine given as a bolus during hyperglycaemic conditions (>25 mM glucose) - a test often considered to provoke the maximal
insulin response - by more than 100%. Interestingly, the immense beta cell secretory responses in this report and the responses reported by
Fritsche et al. occurred with a continuous GLP-1 stimulus during hyperglycaemic conditions. Furthermore, there were no signs indicating that
the beta cell response in our subject or the responses in the study by Fritsche et al. were about to level off towards the end of the
hyperglycaemic clamps. Actually, at that point, the insulin curves increased steadily (almost exponentially in the present case). There is
no doubt that among the tests used in the present case the 15 mM-hyperglycaemic clamp with concomitant infusion of GLP-1 is the strongest
stimulus of beta cell secretion. What is GLP-1 and how come it is so potent a stimulator of glucose-induced insulin secretion? GLP-1 is a
product of the proglucagon gene that, when expressed in mucosal enteroendocrine L cells is processed by prohormone convertase 1/3 to GLP-1,
glucagon-like peptide-2 (a key regulator of small intestinal growth) and glicentin. The other incretin hormone GIP is a 42 amino acid-
peptide processed (also by prohormone convertase 1/3) from a precursor of 153 amino acids in mucosal enteroendocrine K cells. GLP-1 and GIP
are secreted in response to ingestion of nutrients, with lipids and simple carbohydrates being potent stimulators of secretion . In the
present case the endogenous incretin hormone responses were evaluated during a meal test (day 1) and the subject exhibited postprandial
responses within the normal range. Specific receptors of GLP-1 and GIP, both belonging to the glucagon subfamily of type 2 G protein-coupled
receptors, are found in the pancreatic beta cell plasma membrane . Following binding and subsequent activation of adenylate cyclase,
intracellular accumulation of cAMP, closure of ATP sensitive K+-channels (K-ATP channels) and elevation of cytosolic Ca++ concentrations,
mobilisation and exocytosis of insulin containing granules occur . These molecular signalling mechanisms are very similar for the two
receptors. In the present design the doses of incretin hormones used during the hyperglycaemic clamp experiments (1 pmol GLP-1/kg/min and 4
pmol GIP/kg/min) were chosen to obtain maximum beta cell stimulation without causing side effects such as nausea. As illustrated in the
insert of Figure 2 these two supraphysiological stimuli resulted in similar first-phase insulin responses (AUC0–10 min) whereas the second-
phase insulin response (AUC10–120 min) with concomitant GLP-1 infusion was almost 6 times greater as compared to the response during
concomitant GIP infusion, which did not induce the same exponential rise in insulin secretion as GLP-1. Thus, it seems likely that the
mechanistic differences in the insulinotropic power of the two incretin hormones take place during the second-phase insulin response. The
mechanisms underlying the second-phase insulin response have been suggested to be due to a signal generated by the K-ATP channel-independent
pathway (amplifying pathway) and requires that the beta cell replaces released docked granulas from a reserve pool followed by preparation
for exocytosis . The present results suggest that GLP-1 and GIP differ in relation to the effect on the insulin secretory machinery in the
beta cell. It is well-established that both GIP and GLP-1 stimulate insulin biosynthesis , and thereby provides supplies of insulin for
secretion. Additionally GLP-1 may also stimulate second-phase insulin secretion by other means. The abovementioned accumulation of cAMP and
closure of K-ATP channels upon stimulation of the GLP-1 receptor and the GIP receptor, respectively, is related to the activation of protein
kinase A, which decreases the stimulatory action of ADP at the K-ATP channels. Also, cAMP may act via Epac2 to increase the inhibitory
action of ATP at the channel , and furthermore, some evidence suggests that cAMP affects K-ATP channel function by up-regulating glucose-
dependent mitochondrial ATP production and thereby closing the K-ATP channels . If the GLP-1 receptor is coupled to all of these three
pathways, and the GIP receptor is coupled to only one or two, it would explain the superior insulinotropic potency of GLP-1 despite the fact
that both incretin hormones are cAMP-elevating agents. Obviously these are speculations that need to be tested mechanistically. Here we
report unprecedented high plasma insulin and C-peptide responses (elicited by iv infusion of GLP-1 during hyperglycaemia) in a healthy
subject, and propose potential mechanistic differences underlying the differential insulinotropic effects of the two incretins. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. FKK and
AL wrote the manuscript. TV carried out the experiments and reviewed the manuscript. SM, JJH and TK supervised the experiments and reviewed
the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. We are grateful to our volunteer whose availability
made this work possible and to Jytte Purtoft, Lone B. Thielsen and Susanne Reimer for technical assistance. The study was funded by Gentofte
Hospital and University of Copenhagen (Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences).
