A few cases of a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) of the small intestine presenting as rupture have been reported in the medical
literature. We report an unusual case of a large GIST of the jejunum that presented as a spontaneous rupture. A 70-year-old man was referred
to our hospital because of fever and abdominal pain. An abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan detected a 10-cm tumor with
heterogeneous staining, suggesting necrosis or abscess inside the tumor. The patient was treated with antibiotics but inflammation persisted
and an operation was performed. Intraoperative findings showed an outgrowing 10-cm mass in the jejunum near Treitz's ligament. The tumor had
ruptured with peritoneal metastasis. The solid parenchyma contained a focal area of necrosis within and the small ulcer located in the wall
of the jejunum presented a communication with the large tumor cavity. H&E staining showed spindle-shaped cell proliferation, and
immunohistochemical staining showed results positive for c-kit and CD34. The patient received a diagnosis of a GIST (high-risk group) of the
jejunum and was treated with imatinib mesylate. The patient has remained in good health without recurrence or metastasis one year after the
surgical procedure. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumor of the gastrointestinal tract . Most GISTs
are > 5 cm in diameter at the time of diagnosis, with a diameter of 10 cm being associated with a higher risk of local or distant
metastasis. In addition to tumor size, mitotic rate and tumor location, tumor rupture is thought to be a prognostic factor for the outcome
of patients with a GIST. Gastrointestinal bleeding is the most common presentation (50%) of GISTs and is usually associated with ulceration
of the tumor into the lumen . We report an unusual case of a large GIST of the jejunum that presented as spontaneous rupture. A 70-year-old
man presented with symptoms of fever and abdominal pain. There were no episodes of gastrointestinal bleeding. The blood pressure was
117/86 mmHg, the pulse 80 beats per minute, and the temperature 38.2°C. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness and muscular defense in
the left upper quadrant, and rectal examination revealed an empty ampulla. Blood tests showed a hemoglobin level of 7.2 g/dL, white blood
cell count of 25,490/mm3, and C-reactive protein of 19 mg/dL. An abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 10 × 10-cm
solid tumor with a low-density area within, suggesting necrosis or abscess; additionally, a liver metastasis was suspected (Figure 1). Upper
GI endoscopy revealed no aberrations up to the third portion of the duodenum. Examination of small bowel x-ray series revealed no tumor
penetration. The mass was suspected as a GIST of the jejunum accompanied by a giant abscess. The patient was treated with intravenous
administration of antibiotics and blood transfusion. Subsequent to improvement in his clinical condition and laboratory tests, laparotomy
was performed. Intraoperative findings showed mild ascites but there was no blood in the abdominal cavity. We also found an outgrowing 10-cm
mass in the jejunum near Treitz’s ligament. The tumor was ruptured and peritoneal metastasis was detected around the tumor. Segmental
resection of the jejunum with the tumor was performed. The resected mass was a well-circumscribed tumor measuring 10 × 10 cm and penetrating
the jejunum. The solid parenchyma contained central necrosis with a fistula to the lumen of the jejunum (Figure 2). H&E staining showed
spindle-shaped cell proliferation (Figure 3), and immunohistochemical staining showed positive results for c-kit (Figure 4) and CD34
(Figure 5), and a nuclear expression of the proliferation-associated Ki-67-antigen in approximately 26% of the tumor cells (Figure 6). GIST
(high-risk group) of the jejunum was diagnosed and treated with imatinib mesylate, 400 mg daily, after the 21st post-operative day. The
patient was discharged after endoscopic dilation for an anastomotic stricture. Medical treatment was continued and the patient was followed
up with an abdominal CT scan 12 months after the surgical procedure without any signs of recurrence. An abdominal enhanced computed
tomography scan, revealing a 10 × 10-cm solid tumor with low-density area within, suggesting necrosis or abscess. The solid parenchyma
contained central necrosis with a fistula to the lumen of the jejunum. H&E staining showed spindle-shaped cell proliferation.
Immunohistochemical staining showed positive results for c-kit. Immunohistochemical staining showed positive results for CD34. Nuclear
expression of the proliferation-associated Ki-67-antigen in approximately 26% of the tumor cells. GISTs are visceral tumors arising from any
site of the gastrointestinal tract. Approximately 60 to 70% of cases occur in the stomach, 25 to 35% in the small intestine, and 10% in the
jejunum, whereas the esophagus, colon, rectum, and appendix, are rarely affected . Bleeding (30 to 40% of cases) comprises the most common
symptom after vague abdominal discomfort. Patients with GIST of the jejunum usually suffer from abdominal pain or have a palpable mass, and
also complain of early satiety and abdominal fullness. Pressure necrosis and ulceration of the overlying mucosa may cause gastrointestinal
bleeding, and patients who experience a significant blood loss may suffer from malaise and fatigue. Bleeding into the lumen of the GI tract,
causing hematemesis, melena, or anemia, is usually more chronic on presentation . Obstruction may result from intraluminal growth of the
tumor or luminal compression from an exophytic lesion. Fever, anorexia, and weight loss are rarely observed, and GISTs originating in the
jejunum seldom cause perforation and acute diffuse peritonitis. A few cases have been reported in the English medical literature associated
with perforation or rupture of GIST in the small intestine (Table 1). Bleeding into the peritoneal cavity due to a ruptured GIST can lead to
acute abdominal pain presenting as a surgical emergency . In addition, only a few cases of GIST of the small intestine accompanied with
abscess formation have been reported . In this case, GIST originating in the jejunum was invaded via a fistula, leading to central necrosis
and spontaneous rupture into the peritoneal cavity. For GISTs, prognostic markers that include tumor size > 5 cm, mitotic rate > 5/50 high-
power fields (HPF), tumor necrosis, and a Ki-67(MIB-1) index of > 10% are all associated with malignancy of the tumor and high mortality .
GISTs can be categorized as low or high risk tumors by taking into account the possibility of metastasis or recurrence. However, the main
prognostic factor is the mitotic count. A prognostic classification was defined by Fletcher et al. and is widely accepted and used today
(Table 2). In contrast, the MIB-1 index (>22% in the most active area) was the most powerful predictor of poor survival . The prognosis is
dismal when the tumor presents with symptoms or signs such as perforation or rupture, multifocal location, or metastatic lesions. Patients
with localized or locally advanced tumors have 46% 5-year survival, except for patients with a metastatic or multifocal tumor. Those
patients have 5-year survival at 24%, probably because of peritoneal dissemination . Summary of spontaneous ruptured gastrointestinal
stromal tumor (GIST) of small intestine in the english medical literature Abbreviations: ANED alive with no evidence of disease, N/A not
available, SR segmental resection of small intestine. Prognostic classification of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) by Fletcher et
al. The introduction of imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting KIT has provided a much needed chemotherapeutic option for
patients with both resectable and unresectable GISTs. Despite the noted success of imatinib, surgical resection is the main treatment
modality for primary GIST of any localization . Imatinib treatment of GISTs is a dynamic process with the permanent risk of
pharmacoresistance and maximal response within the first six months of therapy . Futhermore, the patients with a primary GIST treated for
spontaneous rupture or with rupture occurring during resection have a very high risk of tumor recurrence. These patients are candidates for
adjuvant treatment with imatinib . Our case is classified as high-risk GIST with poor prognosis and medical treatment was continued with
imatinib; however, no signs of recurrence were observed with abdominal CT scan 12 months after the surgery. In conclusion, spontaneous
rupture is a rare presentation of GIST and preoperative diagnosis is difficult because of the absence of pathognomonic signs or symptoms.
The diagnosis should be suspected whenever there is a presentation of fever and abdominal pain in patients with an intraabdominal mass. In
this case, GIST originating in the jejunum led to central necrosis and spontaneous rupture in the peritoneal cavity; however, local excision
of the tumor associated with adjuvant therapy with imatinib mesylate was effective and these treatments remain the main modality of
treatment of high-risk GISTs. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying
images. CT: computed tomography; GIST: gastrointestinal stromal tumor; H&E: hematoxylin and eosin. The authors declare that they have no
compating interests. SM was responsible for the writing. MT, HS, YK and HT participated in the clinical management of the patient. HO
carried out the pathological examination. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
