The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/5168343391150859 A 56-year-old woman
with a history of disposable soft contact lens wear was referred to our university eye center for a corneal ulcer. Based on the microbial
culture, the initial diagnosis was bacterial keratitis, which was unresponsive to topical fortified antibiotics. The patient was then
examined using in vivo confocal microscopy, which revealed Acanthamoeba infection. This case emphasizes the need to suspect Acanthamoeba
infection in soft contact lens wearers who present with progressive ulcerative keratitis or progressively worsening corneal ulcers that are
not responsive to the usual antimicrobial therapy. It is also important to consider the possibility of a coinfection with bacterial and
Acanthamoeba species. Acanthamoeba keratitis (AK) is a destructive disease characterized by significant visual morbidity, and prompt
diagnosis is important for a good visual outcome. Like AK, Pseudomonas aeruginosa keratitis usually progresses rapidly and presents with
suppurative stromal infiltrate and marked mucopurulent exudate. It should be noted that there is a possibility, in theory, that AK can
develop in eyes with advanced bacterial keratitis. Coinfections with other microorganisms have been reported in patients with culture-proven
AK . However, the exact clinical characteristics of such mixed infections remain unknown. Few publications have addressed this issue.
Herein, we report an unusual case of coinfection with Acanthamoeba polyphaga and Pseudomonas aeruginosa as causes of corneal keratitis in a
contact lens wearer in Shanghai. A 56-year-old female teacher presented with a two-week history of increasing pain and redness in the left
eye. The patient had a five-year history of disposable soft contact lens wear and was sometimes careless with the disinfecting routine.
Occasionally, she would rinse her contact lenses and case in tap water instead of a sterile saline solution. The patient stated that she had
no history of ocular trauma, overnight contact lens wear, hypertension, or diabetes. She had no known drug allergies and no systemic
infections at the time of her presentation. She had been treated one week previously for a P. aeruginosa corneal ulcer and had received
topical fortified tobramycin and levofloxacin, to which the organism had shown sensitivity in the laboratory (Figures 1A and D). She denied
any significant improvement of her symptoms and signs. On examination, her best-corrected visual acuities were counting fingers in the left
eye and 20/20 in the right. She had a large central corneal ulcer with an underlying grayish-white, paracentral, ring-shaped stromal
infiltrate (Figure 1B). The hypopyon in the anterior chamber had improved significantly after the initial treatment with the topical
antibiotics. The right eye was normal. The patient was examined using an in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM). Interestingly, the IVCM images
showed the presence of oval to round, double-walled, highly refractile structures with a polygonal inner wall, varying 12–25 μm in size. The
morphology was consistent with that of Acanthamoeba cysts reported in other articles . The structures were surrounded by inflammatory cells
(Figure 1E). An unusual keratitis case of coinfection with Acanthamoeba polyphaga and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. (A) Slit-lamp microscopic
image of the left eye showed severe central corneal infiltrate (blue arrow) with intensive conjunctival injection. The anterior chamber had
20% hypopyon (black arrow). (B) After 1 week of treatment with topical antibiotics, a large central corneal ulcer with an underlying
grayish-white, paracentral, ring-shaped stromal infiltrate was identified. (C) After 12 months of treatment with topical antibiotics, the
left eye displayed no signs of inflammation, but there were some superficial blood vessels in the peripheral cornea and a large, central
corneal scar obscuring the visual axis. (D) Microbiological cultures obtained from a superficial corneal swab showed the presence of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.I. (E)In vivo confocal microscopy examination showed the presence of oval to round, double-walled, highly refractile
structures with a polygonal inner wall, varying 12–25 μm in size (red arrow), with infiltration of inflammatory cells (blue arrow). (F) The
Acanthamoeba cysts could not be detected by IVCM examination after 12 months of treatment. Upon confirmation of the presence of the
Acanthamoeba species via the IVCM examination, an additional treatment regimen of topical 0.2% metronidazole and 0.02% polyhexamethylene
biguanide drops given hourly was begun. Over the next two weeks, the stromal infiltrate showed slight improvement, and after 3-months
treatment, the Acanthamoeba cysts could not be detected by IVCM examination. Five months after that, the patient underwent combined
phacoemulsification and viscogoniosynechialysis due to the presence of peripheral synechiae and a cataract. The topical treatment was
continued for a prolonged period, tapering off over 12 months. At present, the patient’s best-corrected vision is 1/20. The left eye shows
no signs of inflammation (Figure 1C) or Acanthamoeba infection (Figure 1F) using IVCM but there are a few superficial blood vessels in the
peripheral cornea. There is also a large, central corneal scar obscuring the visual axis. The intraocular appearance is normal, and
ultrasonography indicates a normal posterior segment. The patient is currently awaiting a corneal transplantation. This case emphasizes the
need to suspect Acanthamoeba infection in soft contact lens wearers who present with progressive ulcerative keratitis and in progressively
worsening corneal ulcers that are unresponsive to the usual antimicrobial therapy. It is also important to consider the possibility of a
bacterial coinfection with the Acanthamoeba species. The exact reason why this combined inflammation occurred in our patient is still
unknown. However, inquiries should be made regarding the patient’s contact lens cleaning history and the potential contamination of the
contact lenses. Previous reports have revealed the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acanthamoeba in the microbiological cultures
obtained from contact lenses . In addition, previous studies have shown that almost 50% of Acanthamoeba-positive eyes had cultures that were
positive for bacteria as well . A bacterial infection capable of supporting amoebic growth might play an important role in the pathogenesis
of AK . In light of these observations, it is advisable to use real-time polymerase chain reaction or IVCM in the early detection and
treatment of AK. This case emphasizes the importance of suspecting Acanthamoeba infection in at-risk patients. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JH and JJ contributed to the conception and
design, and the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of the data. ZL, JX, and XS have been involved in the drafting and critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. All the authors have given final approval of the version to be published. The
authors were supported by grants from the Key Clinic Medicine Research Program, the Ministry of Health, China (2010–2012); the National
Science and Technology Research Program, the Ministry of Science and Technology, China (2012BAI08B01); the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (81170817, 81200658); and the Scientific Research Program, Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality,
Shanghai (13430720400, 134119a8800, 13430710500). The sponsor or funding organization had no role in the design or conduct of this research.
