Various autosomal recessive retinal dystrophies are reported to be associated with mutations in nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group E,
member 3 (NR2E3, also called PNR) gene. The present study proposed to understand the clinical and genetic characteristics of the family of a
patient with an ocular phenotype consistent with Goldmann-Favre syndrome (GFS) and vasoproliferative tumors of the retina (VPTRs). Twelve
family members of the proband from three generations underwent complete ophthalmic examination, including best-corrected visual acuity with
Snellen optotypes, tonometry, biomicroscopic examination, indirect ophthalmoscopy after pupillary dilatation, computerized perimetry,
optical coherence tomography, fundus photography, intravenous fluorescein angiography, and electroretinography (ERG). All the study subjects
underwent genetic analysis of the entire coding region of the NR2E3 gene with the bidirectional DNA sequencing approach. Hundred healthy
individuals were screened for the variant. The phenotype of the proband had features of GFS with VPTRs. The tumors showed complete
resolution with cryotherapy and transpupillary thermotherapy (TTT). Sequencing of the entire coding region of the NR2E3 gene in the proband
revealed a novel homozygous c.1117 A>G variant that led to the amino acid change from aspartic acid to glycine at position 406 (p.D406G).
This change was present in the homozygous state in affected family members and in the heterozygous state in unaffected family members, and
was undetectable in the control subjects. The identified novel p.D406G homozygous mutation was at an evolutionarily highly conserved region
and may possibly affect the protein function (Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant score = 0.00). Patients with GFS may present with retinal
VPTRs that respond to therapy with cryotherapy and TTT. Molecular genetic studies helped to identify a novel p.D406G mutation in the
affected members, which will aid in confirming the diagnosis, for genetic counseling of family members and potentially provide some form of
therapy for the affected patients. Goldmann-Favre syndrome (GFS) is a vitreoretinal dystrophy that manifests with early onset of night
blindness, atypical pigmentary dystrophy of the retina, degenerative changes in the vitreous humor, peripheral and, less often, central
retinoschisis, lens opacities, and an enhanced S-cone response on electroretinography (ERG) . Various autosomal recessive retinal
dystrophies including enhanced S-cone syndrome (ESCS), GFS, and clumped pigmentary retinal degeneration have been described as associated
with mutations in nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group E, member 3 (NR2E3 also called PNR [NCBI Reference Sequence: NM_014249.3]) gene . The
NR2E3 gene codes for a nuclear receptor that is specific to photoreceptors . A common feature of these syndromes is a unique abnormality on
ERG of absent rod activity and large S cone–mediated responses under photopic and scotopic conditions, known as the enhanced S-cone response
. Vasoproliferative tumors of the retina (VPTRs) are benign tumors of retinal vascular origin. These masses may be idiopathic or secondary
to predisposing conditions such as intermediate uveitis, retinitis pigmentosa, ocular toxocariasis, Coats disease, chronic retinal
detachment, and other traumatic or inflammatory diseases . We report a patient with clinical features of GFS with secondary VPTRs
successfully treated with a combination of transpupillary thermotherapy (TTT) and cryotherapy. The molecular genetic evaluation of the
family revealed a novel mutation in the NR2E3 gene. To our knowledge, this is the first report of VPTRs in association with GFS, and the
VPTRs successfully resolved with TTT and cryotherapy. The study was performed after receiving approval from the institutional ethics review
board and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The nature of the study was conveyed, and informed consent was obtained from all
study subjects. We certify that all applicable institutional and government regulations concerning the ethical use of human volunteers were
followed during this research. The proband along with 11 family members from three generations were included in the study (Figure 1).
Pedigree of the family in this study. The asterisk symbol represents the sequenced individuals in this study. The genotyping of alleles were
shown below the individuals. All study subjects underwent a complete ophthalmic examination that included evaluation of best-corrected
visual acuity (BCVA) with Snellen optotypes, Goldman applanation tonometry, biomicroscopic examination, indirect ophthalmoscopy after
pupillary dilatation, computerized perimetry, optical coherence tomography (OCT; Zeiss Cirrus HD OCT –4000, Carl Zeiss meditec, Inc. Dublin,
CA), fundus photography (TOPCON TRC 50 DX), and intravenous fluorescein angiography (IVFA; TOPCON TRC 50 DX, Tokyo, Japan). ERG (LKC
Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD) was performed according to standard testing protocols recommended by the International Society for Clinical
Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV). A detailed family history and pedigree was constructed. One hundred unrelated ethnic- and age-matched
control subjects were recruited for this study. Approximately 5 ml intravenous blood was collected in a anticoagulant (EDTA) coated tubes
from all 12 study subjects and 100 Indian controls. Genomic DNA was prepared from peripheral blood leukocytes with salting-out method , by
dehydration and precipitation of cellular proteins in a saturated sodium chloride solution. The isolated DNA will be dissolved in TE buffer
(1 M Tris-pH 8.0; 0.5 M EDTA-pH 8.0) and stored at -20 °C until use. Eight sets of primers were used to amplify the entire coding region of
NR2E3 gene . The PCR products were gel eluted and column purified using an EZ-10 spin-column DNA gel extraction kit (Bio Basic, East
Markham, Canada). A total of 20 μl master mix was prepared using 50–100 ng of genomic DNA, 1×PCR buffer, 200 μM of dNTPs (Medox Biotech
India Pvt. Ltd, Chennai, India), 50% dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO; Merck, Mumbai, India), 0.25 picomoles of each primer, and 1 unit of Taq DNA
polymerase (Sigma, Saint Louis, MO), to perform PCR. The conditions followed were initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 32
cycles (95 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 1 min) and final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. Bidirectional sequencing was performed
using the ABI 3130 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with dye- termination chemistry. The evolutionary conservation of
the identified NR2E3 mutation was checked using the clustalW multiple sequence alignment tool. Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) was
used to assess the likely phenotypic effect of the identified missense mutation. PolyPhen analysis was performed to calculate the
probability of the identified mutation being deleterious toward disease pathogenesis. The proband on presentation had a BCVA of perception
of light in the right eye (RE) and 6/12 in the left eye (LE). Anterior segment examination of the RE showed severe corneal edema,
neovascularization of the iris, posterior subcapsular cataract, and intraocular pressure (IOP) of 50 mmHg suggestive of neovascular
glaucoma, and the LE showed a clear cornea and mild lens opacities due to posterior subcapsular cataract. The RE fundus details were not
clearly visible through the hazy media due to corneal edema and lenticular opacity. However, peripheral retinal exudation and mass lesions
similar to those in the LE could be seen hazily. The LE fundus examination showed vitreous degenerative changes, a healthy optic disc, and
nummular pigment clumps at the level of the RPE in the midperiphery and along the vascular arcades, associated with diffuse RPE atrophy. The
opaque, white dendritic appearance of the peripheral vessels was present throughout the midperiphery with mild arterial attenuation (Figure
2A). Three raised dome-shaped, yellowish-pink, vascular masses 4 DD in extent were noted in the peripheral retina in the superior,
superotemporal, and inferotemporal quadrants. These masses were associated with subretinal exudation (Figure 2B,C). No dilated or tortuous
feeder vessels were noted. IVFA showed rapid filling of the dye in the early phase, with the lesions becoming increasingly hyperfluorescent
and leaking diffusely in the late phase. Telangiectatic and dilated vessels were observed within the tumor masses (Figure3). Full-field ERG
showed a severe decrease in the rod and cone responses in both eyes (BE). Based on the clinical, angiographic, and electrophysiological
findings, a diagnosis of secondary VPTRs associated with retinal dystrophy was made. All the tumors were treated with transpupillary
thermotherapy (TTT) in two sittings. Peripheral tumors were treated with cryotherapy with the triple freeze thaw technique. Complete
regression of the vascular masses was noted over 6 months (Figure 2D), and the final BCVA was 6/9 in the LE. Notably, there was an absence
of macular or peripheral retinal schisis in this patient. Pre and Post treatment LE color fundus photograph of the proband A: Pre-treatment
montage fundus photograph of left eye. LE Fundus shows a healthy appearing optic nerve head with diffuse RPE degeneration with nummular
pigment clumps and white dentritic peripheral vessels in mid peripheral region . Vascularized tumor mass with exudation and absent feeder
vessels is seen in the supro-temporal periphery. B: Vascularized peripheral tumor with profuse exudation. C: 9 Up fundus photograph of LE
showing vasoproliferative tumors with exudation in superior, suprotemporal, inferotemporal and inferior quadrants. D: Post-treatment fundus
photograph. LE fundus showing complete regression of the tumor masses with treatment. (6 month post treatment). Fundus fluorescein
angiography of vasoproliferative tumor. FFA shows rapid filling of the dye in the early phase, with the lesion becoming increasingly
hyperfluorescent, and profuse and diffuse leakage of dye in the late phase of angiogram. The 43-year-old healthy elder brother of our
proband had complained of defective night vision since childhood. His BCVA was 6/6 BE. Anterior segment examination was normal. Dilated
fundus examination showed a healthy optic disc and normal caliber of the retinal vessels. There was a mild diffuse RPE change with few
pigment deposits in the midperipheral and peripheral retina. ERG showed decreased rod-specific responses, the response to a standard flash
was delayed with low amplitude waveform under photopic and scotopic conditions, and the 30 Hz flicker response was delayed and of decreased
amplitude. The responses to long duration stimulus using a blue flash with orange background (S-cone ERG response) showed an abnormally
large delayed waveform typical of the enhanced S-cone response (Figure 4A,B). Ocular history and examination of the other ten members of the
family were unremarkable. Electroretinography and S-Cone ERG findings in case 2. A: ERG findings in case 2. ERG shows severely reduced rod
specific responses, response to standard flash was delayed with low amplitude waveform under photopic and scotopic conditions, the 30 Hz
flicker was delayed and of lower amplitude. B: S-Cone ERG with blue flash and orange background showing abnormally large, delayed,
simplified waveform as enhanced S cone ERG responses. The findings of the clinical, angiographic, and electrophysiological examinations
suggested a possible diagnosis of GFS. Thus, full sequencing of the NR2E3 gene was undertaken in the proband. This revealed a novel,
homozygous c.1117 A>G variant in exon 8 of the gene, a substitution mutation. This change leads to an amino acid change (aspartic acid to
glycine) at position 406 of the gene. The p.D406G change was detected in the homozygous state in the proband’s brother (affected) and in the
heterozygous state in eight unaffected family members (Figure 5; Table 1). Chromatogram representing the p.Asp406Gly mutation in the NR2E3
gene. A: p.Asp406Gly mutation in the homozygous state. B: p.Asp406Gly mutation in the heterozygous state. C: Wild type. The underline marks
the mutated codon. The arrow indicates the position of the mutation. The p.D406G change is detected in the homozygous state in the proband
and proband’s brother and in the heterozygous state in eight unaffected family members. Screening of the NR2E3 gene in 100 unrelated Indian
control samples of the same ethnic background did not show the p.D406G variant. The identified novel p.D406G homozygous mutation was
evolutionarily highly conserved in different species (Figure 6). The SIFT score was 0.00, and the PolyPhen score was 0.998. These features
suggest the pathologic nature of the identified genetic variation. Evolutionary conservation of p.Asp406Gly (D406G) mutation in different
species. Amino acid residues highly conserved in all species are indicated by asterisk, and lower identity are shown using colon. Red color
box indicate NR2E3 mutations analyzed in this study. Patients with GFS typically present with early onset night blindness, atypical
pigmentary retinal dystrophy, degenerative changes of the vitreous, peripheral or macular retinoschisis, lens opacities, and characteristic
ERG abnormalities . The presenting features and findings of the ophthalmic examination in the proband in this study led to the clinical
diagnosis of GFS. Although ERG responses were severely reduced in the proband due to advanced disease, the proband’s brother displayed a
hypersensitive response to blue light. The maximal response to short wavelengths, virtually no change in the response waveform to light and
dark adaptation, some long- and middle-wavelength–sensitive cone dysfunction, and high subjective S-cone spectral sensitivity has been
demonstrated in patients with GFS, and is termed the enhanced S-cone response . The NR2E3 gene responsible for causing ESCS is located on
chromosome 15q23 . The gene coding region contains eight exons and spans a 7 kb region . The gene contains the DNA-binding domain (DBD) at
the N-terminus end and ligand-binding domain (LBD) at the C-terminus end. Most of the human NR2E3 variants and mutations are identified in
these two domains . In the present study, we identified a novel mutation in the LBD of the C-terminus end. Thus far, nearly 50 NR2E3 gene
variations and mutations have been reported in patients with various retinal degenerative disorders. Gerber et al. identified a p.R311Q
mutation in the NR2E3 gene in the patients who may have ESCS . Later, Haider et al. reported the same p.R311Q mutation with 44.8% frequency
in patients with ESCS . This same p.R311Q mutation in the NR2E3 gene was also reported with homozygosity in a patient with GFS . In our
study, we identified a novel p.D406G (c.1117A>G) mutation with homozygous state in the patient and in the affected sibling. The variability
of clinical features and the severity of retinal degeneration produced by NR2E3 mutations may often complicate the diagnosis. Patients with
NR2E3 mutations may show characteristic features of GFS, as in our patient, or may have the ERG pattern typically seen in ESCS or clumped
pigmentary retinal degeneration. To our knowledge, the p.D406G homozygous mutation is novel. It was not seen in any of the control samples
screened. The p.D406G homozygous mutation was also observed in the proband’s brother who has clinical features in a less severe form and did
not show the presence of VPTRs. Both parents of the proband were heterozygous for the p.D406G mutation, which indicates that the parents
were carriers for the disease and transferred the risk allele (G) to the proband. Out of the 12 family members who participated in this
study, only two carry the normal allele (A). The remaining family members carry the risk allele with heterozygosity (A/G) that indicated
they are carriers for the disease. A similar condition was reported by Haider et al., in the ESCS case. The p.M407K mutation was observed
with the homozygous condition in the patient, whereas two unaffected siblings carry the risk allele with heterozygous condition in their
study . Atsuhiro Kanda et al. showed that the NR2E3 sequence is highly conserved during evolution and the residue p.M407K was conserved in
all NR2E3 orthologs . The identified p.D406G mutation in the proband was also highly conserved during evolution (Figure 6).The SIFT score
(0.00) showed that this mutation affected the protein function. The PolyPhen analysis also predicted that this mutation probably damaging
the protein function with a score of 0.998. The amino acid aspartic acid/aspartate that is acidic polar and has been changed by the
substitution of a nonpolar amino acid glycine at the 406 conserved position might have altered the NR2E3 protein structure and led to the
disease occurrence in this case. The SIFT and PolyPhen scores support the deleterious nature of the p.D406G mutation. Further functional
studies are required to confirm the pathogenesis of the p.D406G mutation. VPTRs may be primary or secondary. In the largest review of 295
patients with 334 VPTRs by Shields et al. in 2012, 80% were idiopathic, and 20% were secondary. The most common preexisting ocular disease
included retinitis pigmentosa (22%), pars planitis (21%), Coats disease (16%), previous retinal detachment surgery (12%), idiopathic
peripheral retinal vasculitis (6%), and familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (4%). Other retinal lesions that might predispose to the
development of VPTRs include toxoplasmic retinitis, toxocariasis, and traumatic choroidopathy . A literature review showed no previous
documentation of VPTRs in patients with GFS. Primary tumors tend to be solitary, small, and located near the inferotemporal portion of the
fundus. Secondary VPTRs are more often multifocal, bilateral, and believed to be a reactive vascular response to various ocular insults. The
vascularized retinal nodules may threaten vision due to retinal exudation, macular edema, intraretinal or vitreous hemorrhage, and formation
of epiretinal membranes . These benign but vision-threatening tumors have been shown to respond to various treatment modalities such as
cryotherapy, TTT, brachytherapy, and tumor resection . The proband lost vision in her RE due to neovascular glaucoma (NVG) secondary to
VPTRs, a described complication of VPTRs . The tumors in the LE were treated with TTT (posterior tumors) and cryotherapy with the triple
freeze thaw technique (extreme peripheral tumors). Complete regression of the vascular masses in our patient was observed within 6 months.
Retinoschisis, a feature of GFS, was not seen in our patient. However, the distinctive ophthalmoscopic feature is nummular pigmentary
deposition at the level of the RPE, usually located in the midperiphery and often associated with RPE atrophy. This characteristic
pigmentary clumping was noted in our proband, along with degenerative vitreous changes, lenticular opacity, and the abnormal ERG pattern. In
our patient, opaque white dentritic retinal vessel changes were present throughout the midperiphery extending anteriorly between the equator
and ora serrata. Since the fundus features vary among patients, Fishman et al. concluded that a diagnosis of GFS should be considered in
patients presenting with an early history of poor night vision, bilateral atypical pigmentary changes in the retina, and degenerative
changes in the vitreous humor. Additional diagnostic findings include retinoschisis, opaque dentritic retinal vessels, diffuse leakage from
retinal capillaries, and cystoid macular edema . Molecular genetic testing is essential for establishing the correct diagnosis in patients
with NR2E3 mutations because of the variable phenotype associated with these degenerations. Further research may shed light on the
association between the genetic mutation seen in our family with the observed phenotype. In conclusion, we have described a heretofore
unreported association of retinal VPTRs in GFS. The tumors regressed with standard treatment modalities. Detection of a novel p.D406G
mutation in the NR2E3 gene helped to confirm the diagnosis. Genetic testing also helped in detecting the presymptomatic carrier and thus
proved to be of immense value in informed genetic counseling of the family members and would potentially provide some form of therapy for
the affected patients. We sincerely thank Dr. Rodney John Morris, for helping with the electrophysiological analysis of the patients
involved in this study.
