Physicians treating patients in the vegetative state (VS) must deal with uncertainty in diagnosis and prognosis, as well as ethical issues.
We examined whether physicians’ attitudes toward medical and ethical challenges vary across two national medical practice settings. A
comparative survey was conducted among German and Canadian specialty physicians, based on a case vignette about the VS. Similarities and
differences of participants’ attitudes toward medical and ethical challenges between the two samples were analyzed with non-parametric tests
(Mann-Whitney-U-Test). The overall response rate was 13.4%. Eighty percent of all participants correctly applied the diagnostic category of
VS with no significant differences between countries. Many of the participants who chose the correct diagnosis of VS attributed capabilities
to the patient, particularly the ability to feel pain (70%), touch (51%) and to experience hunger and thirst (35%). A large majority of
participants (94%) considered the limitation of life-sustaining treatment (LST) under certain circumstances, but more Canadian participants
were in favor of always limiting LST (32% vs. 12%; Chi-square: p < 0.001). Finding long-term care placement was considered more challenging
by Canadian participants whereas discontinuing LST was much more challenging for German participants. Differences were found between two
national medical practice settings with respect to physicians’ experiences and attitudes about treatment limitation about VS in spite of
comparable diagnostic knowledge. In the last decade the development of diagnostic criteria for disorders of consciousness, particularly the
vegetative state (VS, or UWS: unresponsive wakefulness syndrome ) and the minimally conscious state (MCS) , has reflected a more advanced
understanding of impaired responsiveness and awareness following brain injury. Diagnostic guidelines remain largely based on the observation
of the patient’s behavior: a patient in a VS shows wakefulness without behavioral signs of awareness, such as meaningful reaction to
stimuli, whereas a patient in a MCS shows intermittent behavioral signs for awareness, but is incapable of reliable communication .
Disorders of consciousness are often misdiagnosed and cases of “miraculous” late recovery have questioned timelines for determining the
irreversibility of the VS . Surveys of physicians’ attitudes toward end-of-life decisions and publically discussed legal cases of decisions
about withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration have shown considerable diversity in attitudes among different healthcare professions
and countries . To further our understanding of the nature and causes of this diversity with respect to attitudes towards VS and decisions
about the limitation of life-sustaining treatment (LST), we undertook a bilateral survey among physicians in Canada and Germany. The survey
assessed physicians’ understanding of the VS and elicited their attitudes towards end-of-life issues in two different national medical
practice settings. Parts of the survey completed by German neurologists have been previously reported . In this paper, we focus on the
comparison between the attitudes of German and Canadian physicians. A self-administered questionnaire survey enabled us to target large
groups of physicians. In Germany the questionnaire was distributed by e-mail. In Canada, it was converted into a paper-based questionnaire
because the emailed survey did not generate sufficient participation (n = 27). The data were gathered anonymously and participants gave
their informed consent. To encourage participation the participants of the German survey were offered an opportunity to take part in a
lottery, consisting of six prizes with a total value of € 1500. After three weeks, we sent a reminder and prolonged the participation
eligibility period for an additional week. To encourage participation in the Canadian survey, two postcard reminders were sent following the
initial invitation. The study was approved in Canada by the research ethics board of the Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, and
in Germany by the research ethics committee of the medical faculty at the University of Munich. To include a representative cohort of German
neurologists, we contacted the German Society for Neurology, which facilitated the distribution of the survey link. Out of 6673 members, we
contacted all 3073 members for whom the society had valid e-mail addresses and invited only physicians to participate. In the Canadian
survey, questionnaires were mailed to participants in their preferred language of correspondence (French or English) as listed in Scott’s
Medical Directory. Neurologists, neurosurgeons, emergency medicine and critical care physicians, and physical medicine and rehabilitation
specialists registered with the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada were included in the cohort. We mailed surveys to 2085
participants. We developed a 37-item questionnaire that was informed by the literature and a previous qualitative study and our study goals
. The first part was a case vignette about a patient in the VS (1). A 33-year-old man had a cardiac arrest with delayed resuscitation 4
months ago. Currently, he shows brainstem and spinal reflex movements, but no sign of purposeful movement. His eyes are open for several
hours a day, but do not fixate objects or follow them when they move. He does not react consistently* to verbal commands or questions.
Sometimes a delayed stiffening of the legs and grimacing can be observed in reaction to sounds. He can breathe on his own. In response to
the results and comments from the German online survey, the wording of the case was slightly modified in the Canadian print survey. To
reduce ambiguity, the sentence “He does not react consistently to verbal commands or questions” was changed to “He does not react to verbal
commands or questions”. For detailed information on the questionnaire development and content see our previous publication . The
questionnaire was translated from English into German and French using backward-forward-translation by native speakers. The German data were
gathered within a four-week period from July to August 2011, the Canadian data were gathered within a four-month period from January to May
2012 for the postal survey. Data from the paper version of the survey were imported into IBM SPSS 19 statistics software. Pearson’s chi-
square test was performed to assess differences between categories. For numerical or ordinal data the Mann-Whitney-U-Test was applied to
compare two groups. Results were considered significant if p < 0.05. P-values are descriptive and were not adjusted for multiple
comparisons. The study was powered to detect a 15% difference in the attitudes towards limiting LST between the two countries with a
probability of 80%. Participants who failed to correctly diagnose the patient in the case vignette were excluded from further analysis of
their attitudes, as it was unclear whether they answered the remaining questions according to the vignette description or according to their
inaccurate diagnosis. The demographic and professional characteristics of the participants in both samples are presented in Table 1. Of the
3073 professionals who were contacted in the German survey, one third (n = 1024) was randomly assigned to receive the VS case. Out of these,
168 participants (16.4%) completed a questionnaire according to the VS case. The cohort of 3073 members of the German Society for Neurology
was representative for all members (N = 6673) according to age (members: mean 44, standard deviation (SD) 10, range 25–94, and cohort: mean
45, SD 9, range 25–87) and region of practice, but not gender. A lower percentage of women was invited to participate (28%) than the actual
percentage of women in the Society (38%). The sample was representative for the Society according to age (mean 43, SD 9, range 27–80).
Demographic and professional characteristics of participants (n = 417) *Multiple answers permitted. Of the 2085 physicians contacted in the
Canadian survey, 249 physicians (11.9%) completed and returned the questionnaire. Twelve declined to participate, 10 of them indicating that
they were not working with patients in the VS. The sample was representative for the cohort according to gender and language. Almost the
same percentage of women contacted (n = 564, 27%) responded to the survey (n = 63, 25%). The majority of participants filled out the English
version of the questionnaire (n = 192, 77%), while one fifth returned the French version (n = 57, 23%), which matched the distribution of
English and French questionnaires (English: n = 1659, 80%; French: n = 426, 20%). Among neurologists, the response rate was slightly higher
than in the cohort (46% compared to 39%). A comparable percentage of physical medicine and rehabilitation specialists and neurosurgeons
responded (specific response rate 17% compared to 18% in the cohort; and 16% compared to 13% in the cohort respectively). A lower percentage
of critical care and emergency medicine specialists (specific response rate 14% compared to 30% in the cohort) returned the survey. Overall
80% (n = 332) of all participants (n = 417) correctly chose the diagnostic category of VS for the patient in the case vignette. In both
samples a similar proportion chose the correct diagnostic category (80% in Canada, 79% in Germany; p = 0.66). A comparison between the
neurologists in both samples showed analogous results: 82% of the Canadian neurologists (n = 115) compared to 79% of the German neurologists
(n = 161) who assigned the correct diagnostic category to the case vignette (Chi-square-test: p = 0.56). The Canadian participants who
received the original case vignette in the online survey (n = 27) and those who received the slightly edited case vignette in the paper and
pencil survey (n = 222) did not differ significantly in their accuracy rate (81% vs. 78%, Chi-square test: p = 0.73). In both countries a
comparable proportion suggested an erroneous diagnosis of MCS for the patient (18% in German and 15% in the Canadian sample). Only a few
respondents chose the diagnoses of locked-in-syndrome (2% vs. 1% in the Canadian sample), coma (1% vs. 2% in the Canadian sample), brain
death (none vs. 1% in the Canadian sample), or others (e.g., 1% suggesting the patient is in different conditions at the same time). Most
participants expressed a high degree of certainty of their diagnosis (median = 8; 1st quartile = 6; 3rd quartile = 9 on a NRS (0-10)),
regardless of correct (87%) or incorrect (70%) diagnosis. Canadian and German participants did not differ significantly in their level of
certainty (p = 0.71). We continued our data analysis with the participants who accurately applied the diagnostic knowledge to the case
(hereafter referred to as “all groups” = all participants who applied the correct diagnostic knowledge; “Canadian group” = all participants
in the Canadian sample who applied the correct knowledge; and “German group” = all participants in the German sample who applied the correct
diagnostic knowledge). Most of the participants estimated the prognosis of the patient’s survival under continuous medical support during
the next 6 months to be favorable with a majority predicting good or very good chances for survival (See Table 2) but opinions of Canadian
and German physicians showed a different distribution. Assessments of quality of life also differed between the two groups of physicians.
Canadian physicians formulated bleaker assessments of quality of life than their German counterpart who also more frequently responded not
being able to rate quality of life. Prognosis of survival and estimation of the patient’s quality of life QoL = Quality of life. Although
having diagnosed the patient in the case vignette as VS, participants attributed residual capabilities to VS patients such as feeling pain,
feeling touch, experiencing hunger/thirst, smelling odors, and tasting flavors of food/drinks (see Table 3). More German than Canadian
participants attributed such capabilities to VS patients. Attribution of capabilities of the patient in the vegetative state 1 Those who
correctly diagnosed the patient; when expected frequencies in the respective cells were <5 the chi-square-test was not conducted; *D
(%) = Difference (% German group –% Canadian group). The Canadian participants were more likely to favor limiting LST than the German
participants (see Figure 1). The willingness to limit LST in specific circumstances (e.g., patient’s will is opposed to LST; patient suffers
from fatal disease; surrogate refuses consent to LST; no chance of recovery of consciousness; no improvement > 1 year) varied considerably
(see Additional file 1: Table S1). However, there was a trend: Canadian participants were more likely than German participants to favor the
limitation of LST in almost all circumstances. Attitudes towards the limitation of LST. Attitudes of participants who assigned the correct
diagnosis to the vignette towards the question: “In the prior case life-sustaining treatment should be limited…?” Overall the differences
between the two groups were significant (Chi-square test: p < 0.001). N = 332, Canadian group (N = 195), German group (N = 131); Missing
data: 6; numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding. The willingness to limit specific life-sustaining treatment measures showed a
similar pattern in both samples. Overall, 86% would limit cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and the same percentage would do so with regard to
intubation and mechanical ventilation. The limitation of hemodialysis and hemofiltration was considered by 80%; the performance of a surgery
by 65%. Antibiotic treatment would be limited by 44%, artificial nutrition by 37% and artificial hydration by 30%. Although there were
several differences between the Canadian and the German group in the participants’ attitudes towards treatment limitation, there was only
one statistically significant difference in their attitudes towards the limitation of specific treatment measures: 36% of Canadian
participants, compared to 23% of German participants (p < 0.05) were willing to limit artificial hydration. The appraisal of previously
identified ethical challenges is displayed in Table 4 (e.g., determining patient’s wishes; accompanying family members in decisions; finding
long-term care; making prognosis and predicting recovery). All such challenges were ranked differently in the two samples. Appraisal of
ethical challenges in the decision-making process for VS patients *Those who assigned the correct diagnosis to the patient in the case;
Mann-Whitney-U test; average rank order according to Median, 1st and 3rd quartile on NRS (0-10). This study aimed to assess similarities and
differences in Canadian and German specialty physicians’ medical knowledge of the VS and attitudes toward ethical challenges in this
disorder. This was the first such survey involving Canadian physicians. We found nearly identical rates of 80% for diagnostic accuracy in
both samples and the subsamples of neurologists did not show greater accuracy rates than other physicians. Participants in both countries
attributed a range of capabilities to patients in VS. The majority considered acceptable to limit life-sustaining treatment under certain
circumstances. However, participants’ appraisals of ethical challenges differed between the countries. Our findings indicate lower
inaccuracy rates than the study by Schnakers and colleagues, who showed that 40% of the VS patients were misdiagnosed by doctors who had not
used validated behavioral test instruments . That the majority of physicians who provided a wrong diagnosis were certain of their answer in
our study, raises the question of whether this group would perceive a need for further training in this area as previously recommended . One
of the most surprising findings of our study is the high proportion of participants in Canada and Germany who attributed capabilities to a
patient in the VS akin to misattribution of capabilities observed in the public domain (but contra Kickman and Wegner ). The key assumption
underlying the traditional diagnosis of VS is the absence of awareness . However, a majority of participants disagreed over whether the
patient could perceive pain, and a majority of German participants and a large proportion of Canadian participants disagreed over whether
the patient could feel touch. These results are not unprecedented , even if they sharply contrast to the medical understanding of the VS
that is supported by fMRI research . The differences between the two samples could be explained by the higher proportion of participants
with religious or spiritual beliefs in the German sample given studies that have reported effects of religious beliefs in the care of
patients with disorders of consciousness . Another explanation might be that more German participants provide long-term care in the out-
patient care setting and therefor might be able to observe more body expressions by patients in the VS in a rehabilitation process that
could let them assume that such patients display capabilities inconsistent with common understandings of the diagnosis. The higher
attribution of capabilities might lead to a higher reluctance to withdraw LST for patients in the VS. Most Canadian participants identified
long-term care placement as the most ethically challenging issue, perhaps because such facilities are rare in Canada. In a qualitative
study, this issue and resource allocation were found to be important challenges in Canada . Finding long-term-care placement and evaluating
resource allocation were not perceived as challenging by German participants and a potential explanation lies in a system in which patients
have greater access to long-term care facilities such as nursing homes, specialized centers for patients with disorders of consciousness
(rehabilitation phase F, long term care to maintain function, delivered in specialized units), and nursing homes for patients who require
artificial respiration . These results are consistent with practice variations on different treatment measures reported previously . They
also suggest the potential impact of institutional medical practice, health care system, legal regulations and religion, as factors
influencing participants’ attitudes toward treatment limitation and ethical challenges for patients in the VS as found, for example, in
large-scale studies of LST decisions in Europe . Although we can only speculate on the reasons for such variation (e.g., different
culturally held moral traditions in either country) more Canadian participants favored always ceasing LST. One hypothesis, in line with
recent research on the duality of moral theories , is that the attitudes of German participants, more reluctant to withdrawal of LST, may
stem from a deontological philosophical tradition, where duties, rights and categorical principles of action have greater influence. The
more rationalistic, utilitarian responses of Canadian participants may have led them to be more in favor of treatment limitation when the
prognosis is unfavorable and chances for recovery are low. More specific data (e.g., on the preferred ethical theories of physicians in both
countries) would be needed to test this hypothesis. A different explanation might link the history of serious ethical faults of the German
medical profession under the Nazi regime to the expression of prudental attitudes towards withdrawal of treatment for patients with severe
disabilities. Acknowledging the existence of variation and seeking a clearer understanding of its causes are important steps to offer more
coherent messages to family members and the public and to ensure a fair provision of treatment for patients with disorders of consciousness.
There was a small discrepancy in the case vignette (modification of one word, “consistently”, in the paper version of the Canadian
questionnaire) for the sake of improved clarity. Our analysis of the Canadian data showed that it had no significant influence on the
accuracy rate. Generalizability of the results of this long survey is limited by a focus on a single clinical condition and by a low
response rate, especially in Canada, but we were able to gather representative samples of both German neurologists and Canadian physicians
based on demographic variables. Individuals most likely excluded themselves from participation when they did not provide care for patients
in the VS. The composition of the initial two samples differed in age, specialties represented, experience and physicians work setting, but
the distributions of the experience with patients in the VS and gender were similar. These constitutive differences in the two cohorts could
have influenced the described differences in the results. However, we compared subsamples of neurologists and found no differences in their
accuracy rates. The original study design (e.g., recruitment strategy) was the same in both countries. Differences reported occurred because
of adaptation to specific regulatory and institutional environments in the countries, such as policies of professional societies,
availability of physicians’ addresses and willingness to respond. This survey of German and Canadian specialty physicians compared their
understanding of and attitudes toward the VS. We found striking similarities in the participants’ medical knowledge with high diagnostic
accuracy rates. However, we found important differences in the attribution of capabilities to the patients and attitudes toward limiting
LST. Different hypotheses could explain this difference such as societal and medical practice contexts (e.g., distribution of resources for
the long-term-care for these patients), religiosity, and underlying moral theories. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. The final manuscript has been read and approved by all the authors and the requirements for authorship have been met by all
authors, and each author believes that the manuscript represents honest work. All co-authors contributed to the original conception and
design as well as the interpretation of the data. Acquisition of the data was handled by P, K, R, and J. K and R drafted the paper and all
co-authors revised it critically for important intellectual content and gave final approval for submission to BMC Neurology. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/14/119/prepub Circumstances justifying the
limitation of life-sustaining treatment. Click here for file This work was supported by grants from the CIHR (Tri-lateral neuroethics
initiative; New Investigator Award, Eric Racine) and the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, FKZ 01GP0801). We would like to
thank members of the Neuroethics Research Unit and of the Institute of Ethics, History and Medicine for early feedback on this paper as well
as members of the tri-lateral neuroethics research group and participants to the annual meetings of this group. We express our sincere
thanks to Allison Yan and John Aspler for editorial assistance in preparing this manuscript and to Catherine Rodrigue and Hannah Burley for
research assistance.
