A 7-year-old Caucasian female resident of the southern coast of Brazil presented dark spots on the left palm that converged to a unique
macule with speckled pattern at about 1 month. The mycological exam and the fungi culture were typical of Hortaea werneckii, the agent of
the superficial mycosis Tinea nigra. The patient received butenafine hydrochloride 1% for 30 days, resulting in a complete remission of the
lesion. At a follow-up visit 12 months after treatment, there was no lesion recurrence. We describe a form of rare geographical Tinea nigra
with a speckled pattern. The “salt and pepper” aspect should be taken into consideration when the mycosis was suspected. A 7-year-old
Caucasian female child, who was a resident of Itapema town on the northern coast of Santa Catarina State, Brazil, presented dark spots on
the left palm about 1 month before the exam; they converged to a unique macule with speckled pattern, with a 1.5 × 2.0-cm diameter and
geographic shape (Figure 1). Black macule with geographic shape and speckled pattern on the left palm of the Caucasian patient. The
mycological exam revealed septate, dematiaceous hyphae, and presence of yeast-like cells with spores. The fungi culture in Sabouraud's agar
showed a moist, shiny, rough, and black colony. The fungi in the culture were identified as Hortaea werneckii (Figure 2). Presence of
annelloconidia with pigmented filaments (Magnification: 400×). The topical treatment with butenafine hydrochloride 1% for 4 weeks caused
complete remission of lesions, with no recurrence during follow-up for 1 year. Reports of Tinea nigra have been rare since the first
publication by Cerqueira in 1916.1,2 This cosmopolitan dermatomycosis usually affects Caucasian patients, such as in the present report. We
describe a form of rare geographic Tinea nigra with a speckled pattern. The “salt and pepper” aspect should be taken into consideration when
the mycosis is suspected. Authors' addresses: André Luiz Rossetto, Department of Dermatology, University of Vale do Itajaí (Univali),
Itajaí, SC, Brazil, E-mail: rossettovida@terra.com.br. Rosana Cé Bella Cruz, Department of Pharmaceuticals-Biochemistry, Universidade do
Vale do Itajaí (Univali), Itajaí, Santa Catarina, Brazil, E-mail: rcbcruz@univali.br. Vidal Haddad Junior, Department of Dermatology,
Universidade Estadual Paulista “Júlio de Mesquita Filho,” Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil, E-mail: haddadjr@fmb.unesp.br.
