Fusobacterium nucleatum is a strict anaerobic microorganism that causes disease entities such as periodontal and soft tissue abscesses,
pulmonary and intraabdominal infections and very rarely intracerebral infections. Here, we report the rare case of a previously healthy
25-year-old German man with a cerebellar abscess caused by Fusobacterium nucleatum that resulted in rapid brain death. Toxicological
screening showed positivity for amphetamines and cannabis. The diagnosis was obtained by polymerase chain reaction amplification of
bacterial deoxyribonucleic acid in cerebrospinal fluid. In drug users clinicians should think about rare causes of brain
abscesses/meningitis. Early diagnosis is necessary and justifies the use of molecular techniques. Fusobacterium nucleatum is a strictly
anaerobic microorganism that is indigenous to the human oral cavity, where it coexists with more than 500 other species . It can also be
found in the gastrointestinal, urogenital and upper respiratory tracts. It belongs to the family of Bacteroidaceae. Fusobacteria have a
proteolytic metabolism with only low-level glucose acid-formation. Cells are gram negative rod-shaped with pointed ends. Fusobacterium
nucleatum has been reported to play a causative role in infections such as sinusitis, periodontal disease, pulmonary infections,
intraabdominal infections, i.e. appendicitis and liver abscesses, and it was detected in a psoas abscess, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis
and endocarditis . Severe clinical courses, predominantly in adolescents, have been described. Clinical syndromes caused by Fusobacterium
spp. are collectively referred to as necrobacillosis . The literature documents that brain affection is, however, extremely rare . Here we
report the case of a 25-year-old German man, with no prior history of chronic illness or substance abuse. Nevertheless, toxicological
screening was positive for cannabis and amphetamines. After a 72 h period of progressively increasing headache and psychiatric alteration he
was admitted to a community hospital in a delirant state with somnolent phases. The patient was in good physical condition with aggressive
fits, co-operative and orientated when awake and conscious and showed no signs of acute infection apart from an elevated C-reactive protein
(61.6 mg/l) and leukocytes (21.6 G/l). Additional signs as fever, tachycardia or tachypnoe to diagnose severe inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS) were not seen. Upon physical examination there were no signs of meningism or impairment of motor or sensory function. Cranial nerve
examination was discreet, pupils reactive to light and isocore. Clinical examination showed multiple scratches and infected pustules on both
outer upper legs and arms. According to the family this situation had been longstanding and was not acute. The dermatologists classified
these lesions as Prurigo subacuta. Six h after hospitalization the patient deteriorated rapidly to Glascow coma scale (GCS) 3, was intubated
and put on mechanical ventilation. Pupils were dilated. A native computer tomography (CT) brain scan showed massive brain swelling with
brain stem compression and a space occupying lesion (SOL) in the left cerebella hemisphere causing an occlusive hydrocephalus (Figure 1).
Computer tomography (CT) scan of the brain. CT scan of the cerebrum (left). White arrow indicates space occupying lesion. Cerebrum with
widening of the side ventricles compatible with a hydrocephalus (middle) of the cerebrum after placement of an extraventricular drainage
(EVD) (right). Black arrow indicates EVD in the side ventricle. An external ventricular drainage (EVD) was inserted immediately and produced
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) under very high pressure. Cell counts and laboratory analysis of CSF showed increased polymorphic granulocytes
(1116/mm3), lymphocytes (115/mm3) and red blood cells (3000/mm3). The lactate and protein concentration was markedly elevated (17 mmol/l and
12967.1 mg/dl, respectively) and glucose levels were low (<1 mg/dl). Despite these findings antibiotic therapy with flucloxacillin,
ceftazidime and metronidazole had no clinical effect. Microscopy of gram stained CSF specimen showed a massive number of leucocytes but no
bacteria. Aerobic and anaerobic cultures were performed but remained negative. Specific polymerase chain reactions (PCR) excluded typical
pathogens causing meningitis, e.g. Neisseria meningitides and Streptococcus pneumoniae. However, a PCR product was detected with 16S
ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) primers as previously described in . PCR product sequencing detected genomic deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) from Fusobacterium nucleatum with 98% homology.After the positioning of an EVD a CT brain scan with contrast agent was performed
revealing no enhancement of the SOL but suspected occlusion of the basilar artery. The digital subtraction angiography (DSA) performed
afterwards showed absence of perfusion compatible with brain death. Subsequently, an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to
complete the diagnostic imaging. Figure 2 documents abscess formation in the left cerebellum hemisphere. Despite maximal therapeutical
effort to lower the intracerebral pressure reactivity of pupils could not be restored and brain stem reflexes vanished within hours. Brain
death was declared within 12 hours after the initial drop in GCS. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain. T1 images with
contrast medium (left and middle) and T2 images (right). White arrows indicate cerebellar abscess formation. Pathological examination
revealed an abscess in the left cerebella hemisphere with cerebellar oedema and brain stem herniation. There were signs of embolism of both
main trunks of the pulmonary arteries. Microscopic analysis of the heart muscle showed hypereosinophilia as seen in necrosis and apoptosis.
In the majority of cases aerobic pathogens are thought to be responsible for meningitis or brain abscesses. Nevertheless, over the last
decades an increase in the detection of anaerobic pathogens causing meningitis has been observed. It is, however, unclear whether this is
due to better processing of the specimen and increased sensitivity of detection methods. In the literature there are many reports about
meningitis caused by anaerobes, but only about 30 reports on meningitis caused by Fusobacterium spp.. Overall, the incidence of brain
infections caused by strictly anaerobic bacteria may have been underestimated in the past, and this neglect might account for delays in
diagnosis or failure to identify the causative pathogen. Albeit several reports about brain abscesses caused by Fusobacterium nucleatum
report successful recovery under conservative management, delay of effective antibiotic treatment can increase the severity of disease and
lethality . Notably, one difficulty in our case was that the patient showed no typical signs for meningitis. Pathological examination
confirmed this revealing only few immune cells infiltrating the meninges. Moreover, the patient showed symptoms that were well-compatible
with drug intoxication. This might have contributed to the delay in the performance of the CT scan and the diagnosis. Next to the increased
risk for abscess formation associated with intravenous drug abuse drug-induced immune suppression (described for both amphetamine and
cannaboids) might predispose for infections with unusual clinical course and symptoms . Moreover, skin eruptions classified as Prurigo
subacuta could originate from amphetamine abuse . Radiological examination showed yet no classical enhancement pattern of contrast agent in
the abscess border but a rather atypical abscess formation, thus making the differential diagnosis between abscess, tumor or hematoma
difficult. Previous studies report that only 6% of brain abscesses caused by bacteria arise from infection with Fusobacterium spp. . A
review of the literature showed that there are only few descriptions of Fusobacterium nucleatum brain abscesses with only seven papers and a
total number of 16 patients documented in the MEDLINE. Table 1 summarizes the available reports about meningitis caused by Fusobacterium
nucleatum. In contrast to the case presented here all other patients survived. The majority of patients received both surgery and antibiotic
treatment. An interesting observation is that 87.5% of the patients reported were of male gender, but the reasons remain obscure. Diagnosis
of Fusobacterium nucleatum infection in most cases was based on culture (81.25%) and in only 18.75% on nucleic acid amplification techniques
(NAT) . Fourteen out of 16 culture positive specimens were derived from tissue samples or pus, which shows that an optimal culture result
depends on the provision of an optimal specimen, such as tissue probes or pus obtained with invasive methods. Summary of published reports
on meningitis and brain abscesses caused by Fusobacterium nucleatum Abbreviations: M (male), F (female), PCR (polymerase chain reaction). As
PCR is not performed routinely in many laboratories it is likely that a certain percentage of cases remain undetected. PCR-mediated
amplification and sequencing of 16S ribosomal DNA might be of special usefulness in cases that remain negative in culture, possible due to
prior antibiotic treatment or only low bacterial load such as that in the CSF of our patient. Notably, a biopsy of the brain abscess was not
available during the short clinical course. As evidenced by the case presented in the absence of a suitable biopsy the use of NAT can
enforce the diagnosis. Until today many acute cases of inflammatory brain pathologies lead to death very rapidly. This case and the review
of the literature show that - albeit rare - anaerobic microorganisms should not be disregarded in the differential diagnosis of intracranial
infection and inflammation. Antibiotic therapy in brain inflammation should, therefore, cover anaerobic microorganisms. Drug abuse,
including amphetamines and cannabinoids, predisposes for infections by suppressing immune function. Drug intoxication additionally obscures
clinical symptoms relevant for diagnosis. The widespread use of narcotic substances should, therefore, make us suspect of brain abscesses
with rare pathogens in patients with unusual neurological symptoms. Severe cases, such as the one described in this study, justify early
invasive procedures to obtain adequate specimen and rapid molecular approaches to obtain the diagnosis and initiate adequate treatment.
Clinicians should stay in close contact with microbiologists to receive rapid results and therefore to launch sufficient therapy. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient’s father for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
GH and IBD wrote the manuscript. KG was involved in PCR diagnostic, VK and AB have been involved in clinical treatment of the patient and KK
has been involved in post mortem pathological examination. KG, VK, AB and KK have been involved in critically revising the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors received no funding from external sources. We thank the family of the patient
for agreeing to publish the case. GH is resident physician in the Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology at the
University Hospital Bonn, Germany. In his former career he acted as consultant for orthopaedic surgery. He is currently specializing in
microbiology and combines these two main interests. He is investigating foreign body associated infections, especially orthopaedic
prosthetic joint infections.
