A 77 year-old male patient presented to the Dermatology clinic, Elazig Education and Research Hospital, Turkey, in November 2010 with
complaints of redness and itching his penis. The patient was circumcised at prepubertal period and he underwent radical cystectomy and
uretero-ileal loop procedure 10 years ago for bladder cancer. In the dermatologic examination, bright red plaques in the glans penis and
also in the coronal sulcus of the circumcised patient with patches of uninvolved skin were observed (Fig. 1). The scar related to the
previous operation was observed in the abdominal wall and the outlet of the uretero-ileal loop anatomosis and the connected urine bag (Fig.
2). KOH test was negative, and no growth was observed in the wound culture and fungal culture. In the histopathologic examination of the
biopsy material collected from the penile coronal sulcus area, large parakeratotic cells were seen with hyperchromatic nuclei within the
thick keratin layer on the surface. Acanthosis of the multi-layer epithelium and elongation of the rete were noted. In addition, there were
dyskeratotic cells with large eosinophilic cytoplasms and hyperchromatic nuclei. The histopathologic findings were consistent with Queyrat
erythroplasia (EQ) (Figs. 3 and 4). Bright red plaques in the glans penis and also in the coronal sulcus of the circumcised patient with
patches of uninvolved skin. The scar related to the previous operation was observed in the examination of the abdominal wall and the outlet
of the uretero-ileal loop anatomosis and the connected urine bag. Histopathology of the biopsy material collected from the penile coronal
sulcus area. Large parakeratotic cells with hyperchromatic nuclei (shown by arrow) within the thick keratin layer on the surface. In
addition, there were dyskeratotic cells with large eosinophilic cytoplasms and hyperchromatic nuclei. H&E stain at magnification 400x. EQ
can clinically resemble the other benign dermatoses involving the penis1. Histopathologic examination must be performed for differential
diagnosis. Differentiation is important in determining the treatment approach and the risk of transformation into invasive carcinoma2.
Successful treatment results have been reported with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), electro-desiccation, curettage, deep fulguration, cryotherapy,
radiotherapy, laser, partial or total penectomy, and micro surgery1, as also with imiquimod and photodynamic therapies34. The patient was
asked to apply topical 5-fluorouracil cream 5 per cent and dexpanthenol pomade (twice a day). The patient was followed up in the dermatology
unit for about one year, six months later regression of lesions was seen. The patient died of cardiologic problems unrelated to the EQ and
bladder cancer.
