Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a life-saving bridging procedure in patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS). Official indications for ECMO are unclear for immunocompromised and HIV-positive patients affected by severe hypoxemia.
Uncertainties are related to prognosis and efficacy of treatment of the underlying disease. However, the care of patients with HIV infection
has advanced since the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), with increased life expectancy and decreased mortality.
Three HIV-infected patients with AIDS were admitted to ICU and were treated with ECMO: a 21 years old Caucasian female with congenital HIV
infection presented with Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP); a 38 years old Caucasian female with HIV-HCV infection and L. pneumophila
pneumonia; a 24 years old Caucasian male with fever, cough weight loss and PJP pneumonia. Two patients were alive, with a good
immunovirological profile and they went back to their previous quality of life. The last patient died with septic shock after three months
of ICU stay. ECMO was effective in three HIV-positive patients with an otherwise fatal respiratory failure. All patients had severe
immunosuppression and/or limited antiretroviral options. A multidisciplinary critical team is needed to individualize the use of ECMO in
immunocompromised patients, including those with HIV infection. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a feasible life-saving support
therapy for patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) that is refractory to conventional mechanical ventilation (MV) .
Key factors for the indication of ECMO are represented by prognosis of the underlying disease, timing, quality of life of survivors and the
possibility of being lung transplant candidate . Occurrence of ARDS in immunocompromised HIV-positive in HIV-positive patients is associated
to an extremely high mortality especially before the introduction of highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) . Under these
circumstances, ECMO is usually not recommended in immunocompromised HIV-positive patients that develop ARDS . However, nowadays, HIV-
positive patients have variable levels of immune function (T-CD4+ lymphocytes/microL) or viral suppression (levels of plasma HIV-RNA) and
ARDS may be due to opportunistic infections in antiretroviral-naïve patients or to a bacterial pneumonia during HAART, with considerable
differences on the definition of immunocompromised status . We report three cases of successful ECMO support in patients with HIV infection
and pneumonia by Pneumocystis jirovecii (two cases) and Legionella pneumophila. The first patient (female, 21 years old, BMI 15.6 Kg/m2, PBW
52.4 kg) had a congenital HIV infection and presented with Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) after a 2-year HAART discontinuation
(Table 1). This patient was admitted to the emergency ward with fever, cough, dyspnea and weight loss. Chest CT scan showed diffuse and
bilateral ground glass opacities. P. jirovecii (PJP) was identified by immunofluorescence (IF), performed on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
and other virus, bacterial and fungal infections were excluded with appropriate microscopic, cultural or molecular methods on BAL.
Galactomannan test was performed on BAL and blood samples. Two days after the beginning of treatment with steroids and cotrimoxazole, the
patient developed mild ARDS that was initially treated with non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU).
Later, ARDS evolved to the severe stage and a significant pneumo-mediastinum with subcutaneous emphysema occurred. For this reason, eight
days after the onset of respiratory failure, the patient was referred to the regional ECMO center. Main clinical characteristics of patients
cp= copies; * dose based on trimethoprim component. Upon arrival at the referral ICU, the patient was intubated, tension pneumothorax was
treated and veno-venous ECMO was initiated (19 and 20 F cannulas were inserted into left and right femoral veins, respectively). The by-pass
was established with a blood flow of 3 L/min, corresponding to 60% of cardiac output and sweep gas of 5.5 L/min. This setting allowed a
super-protective ventilatory strategy that consisted in a tidal volume of 5 ml/kg and a respiratory rate of 5 breaths/min (Table 2). This
strategy offered the advantage to rest the lung minimizing the risk of ventilator-induced lung injury . At the third day of ECMO, the
patient was successfully extubated and ventilated with non-invasive ventilation (NIV) by facemask. Details of HAART, antibiotic and
antifungal treatments are shown in Table 1. After 20 days, ECMO was stopped when arterial blood gases were satisfactory for at least eight
hours with a blood flow of 1.5 L/min and a sweep gas of 0.5 L/min (Table 3). After 10 days, the patient was discharged to a step down ICU
and then at home. After 1 year of follow-up the plasma HIV-RNA was negative (<20 copies/ml) and the T-CD4+ cell count was 90 cells/microL.
Ventilator settings before and after institution of ECMO Respiratory and ventilator variables before stopping ECMO Values were obtained
after 6–8 hours of sweep gas 0.5 L/min and blood flow 1.5 L/min with gas flow oxygen concentration 0.21. List of Abbreviations: VT (tidal
volume), PIP (Peak inspiratory Pressure), SB (spontaneous breathing), RR (respiratory rate), Pplat (plateau pressure), PEEP (positive end
expiratory pressure), PaO2/FiO2 (arterial pressure/inspired fraction of oxygen), CRS (Compliance of respiratory system). The second patient
was a 38 years old female (BMI 20.3 Kg/m2, PBW 52 Kg) that had a HIV-HCV infection treated with different HAART regimens, achieving
virological suppression (negative plasma HIV-RNA) with T-CD4+ lymphocytes count of 200 cells/microL. After five days of flu-like respiratory
symptoms and fever, the patient developed severe respiratory distress and was admitted to a peripheral hospital. Severe ARDS due to
pneumonia caused by L. pneumophila (urinary antigens) was diagnosed. After two days, the patient was centralized to the ECMO center since
refractory to conventional protective MV. A veno-venous ECMO (21 and 22 F cannulas were inserted into left and right femoral veins,
respectively) was established, with a blood flow of 4 L/min (equal to 70% of cardiac output) and sweep gas of 7 L/min with FiO2 of 100%
(Table 2). After six days of treatment, compliance of respiratory system (28 ml/cmH2O) improved as a consequence of resolution of ARDS.
Accordingly, the patient was shifted to assisted breathing and seven days later the patient was disconnected from the by-pass when arterial
blood gases were satisfactory for at least eight hours with a blood flow of 1.5 L/min and a sweep gas of 0.5 L/min, and the compliance of
the respiratory system was 33 ml/cmH2O) (Table 3). Details on HAART and antibiotic treatment are given in Table 1. Eight days after
centralization to the ECMO center, the patient developed signs of liver toxicity with jaundice (total bilirubin 28 mg/dl), ascites and
elevated liver enzymes (AST/ALT 185/50 UI/mL) requiring interruption of HAART; only levofloxacin monotherapy was continued. On day 22 the
patient was transferred to the medical ward and after 6 months of follow-up, she was alive with a good immunovirological profile. The third
patient was a 24 years old male (BMI 23.5 Kg/m2, PBW 61 Kg) that was admitted to a peripheral hospital with fever, cough and weight loss
(30 kg in the last three months). Chest CT scan showed diffuse and bilateral ground glass opacities and BAL was positive for P. jirovecii
(PJP). Diagnosis of HIV infection was made and there were no plasma CD4+ lymphocytes detectable. Four days after the beginning of treatment
with steroids and cotrimoxazole for PJP, the patient developed hypoxemic acute respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical
ventilation. Ten days after admission, the patient developed severe ARDS and he was centralized to the regional ECMO center. A veno-venous
ECMO (21 and 22 F cannulas were inserted into left and right femoral veins, respectively) was established, with a blood flow of 3.5 L/min
and sweep gas of 6 L/min with FiO2 of 100% (see Table 2). On the second day of ECMO, HAART was started and was associated with virological
response but without immune recovery (after 1 month on HAART: HIV-RNA 600 cp/ml; 3 CD4+ lymphocytes/microL). During the ICU stay, he also
had a bloodstream infections by K. pneumoniae carbapenemase producing (KPC-Kp). Details on HAART and antibiotic treatment are given in
Table 1. Full ECMO support remained unchanged for three weeks and it was discontinued only after 24 days when arterial blood gases were
satisfactory for at least eight hours with a blood flow of 1.5 L/min and a sweep gas of 0.5 L/min (Table 3). However, the development of
lung fibrosis, typically associated with the late phase of ARDS left a severely impaired compliance of the respiratory system. On day 81 the
patient was transferred to the ICU where he was initially admitted. After three months by the initial ICU admission the patient died for
septic shock. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on successful extracorporeal life support in patients with HIV
infection. There are clinical and ethical considerations about ECMO support in patients with HIV infection and AIDS. Evidence supporting
ECMO as life saving treatment for adults with respiratory failure are growing However, ECMO is a costly intervention that may carry the risk
of futility and serious side effects such as major bleeding and infection. Under these circumstances, indication and selection criteria need
to be better defined, especially for the immune-compromised patients. In our reports, ECMO was used in severe, life threatening respiratory
failure with etiological diagnosis and knowledge of the full potential of HAART, especially in the first patient who had discontinued
treatment in the previous two years. Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO) guidelines suggest ECMO when the risk for mortality is
at least 50% (as identified by PaO2/FiO2 < 150 and or Murray score of 2–3) . For immunocompromised patients, the guidelines do not propose
absolute contraindications but suggest to consider the individual risks/benefits balance. Only leukopenia with absolute neutrophil count
<500/mm3 and recent or expanding central nervous system hemorrhages are considered relative contraindications. In patients with HIV
infection, ECMO may erroneously be considered futile because of the patient’s prognosis and of the uncertainties regarding the efficacy of
HAART. Our reports show that ECMO is not futile when clinicians consider the immune-virological parameters with the full potential of HAART
success. In the first patient there were critical considerations, mainly represented by the concern for barotrauma after failure of NIV;
there were HIV-related considerations such as the long history of HIV infection and HAART along with extensive multiclass drug resistance.
However, in the last years the availability of new drugs and new classes of anti-retroviral allowed to achieve a high probability of
virological success even in patients harboring multi-resistant virus . Moreover, the individual level of compliance has been showed to be
highly variable over a long history of HAART . In our case, although a complex 6-drug based HAART was started, an adequate counseling after
the discharge from ICU along with rapid clinical improvement reinforced patient’s adherence, with treatment efficacy at 48-week. L.
pneumophila is the second most common cause of ICU admission amongst severe community acquired pneumonia (CAP) and PJP pneumonia is a
frequent clinical presentation in antiretroviral-naïve patients . Under these circumstances, the issue of ECMO in the last two patients may
be more frequently encountered in daily practice. In particular, our second patient, in whom the ongoing HAART resulted in stable
immunovirological parameters, may perhaps suggest the inclusion of ECMO into a treatment algorithm for HIV-positive patients undergoing
HAART. Special considerations are needed for the third patients where the futility of ECMO support was confuted by the excellent virological
response to HAART, even if the absence of immune function recovery in the short term may not be easily predicted. Predefined criteria to
wean patients from ECMO are still lacking. In our center, satisfactory blood gases, obtained with sweep gas 0.5 L/min and blood flow of
1.5 L/min (gas flow oxygen concentration 0.21) for 6–8 hours, is the main criteria. Moreover, the improvement of respiratory system
compliance (Crs >30) is an additional criteria that we consider. In particular, we did not report the value of compliance of the first
patient because she was breathing spontaneously when ECMO was stopped. In conclusion, ECMO was effective in three HIV-positive patients with
an otherwise fatal respiratory failure, even with severe immunosuppression or limited antiretroviral options. Two patients went back to
their previous quality of life. Unfortunately, the third patient needed a prolonged ICU stay and did not have any recovery of immune
function and died after three months by the hospital admission. This case series suggest that a multidisciplinary team, involving critical
care and infectious diseases experts, is mandatory to define whether ECMO is an adequate therapeutic option also in immunocompromised
patients, including those with HIV infection and AIDS. The collection of data was approved by the local Ethical Committee regarding the use
and collection of patients data within the ECMO support program, Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Molinette S. Giovanni
Battista Hospital, Turin, Italy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients or next of kin for publication of these case
reports. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. ECMO: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; MV:
Mechanical ventilation; ARDS: Severe acute respiratory failure; HAART: Highly active antiretroviral treatment; PJP: Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia; NIV: Non-invasive mechanical ventilation; ICU: Intensive care unit; VILI: Ventilator induced lung injury; CAP: Community acquired
pneumonia. The authors declare that they have no competing interests and no specific funding was received. FDR, VF and VMR contributed to
study design, data collection, drafting and writing the manuscript, including revision. SC contributed to data collection and drafting the
manuscript. SB, GDP, RU, CB, DR and MR contributed to study design, supervision and critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual
content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. FDR and VF equally contributed to this work. The pre-publication history for
this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2253/14/37/prepub
