A case of abscess resulting from Mycobacterium kansasii, in the left thigh of a 53-year-old woman infected with the Human Immunodeficiency
virus, is reported. Curiously, there was no pulmonary or systemic involvement as is usual with these Mycobacterium infections. The patient
had CD4 T lymphocyte count of 257 cells/µL and a viral load of 60,154 copies. Despite presenting a relatively preserved immunity, the
patient also presented Criptococcic meningoencephalitis and Esophageal candidiasis. The patient responded satisfactorily to treatment for
infections and after 51 days was discharged. Mycobacterium kansasii is an acid-fast bacillus, of slow growth, photochromogenic, yellow
pigment producer when exposed to light.1 Described in 1953 by Buhler and Pollack, it is considered the most virulent of the non-tuberculous
mycobacteria.2 They are widely distributed in water, biofilms, in the soil and in a great variety of animals. The asymptomatic infections
are very common in human beings and may be acquired through cutaneous, respiratory, gastrointestinal and more rarely parenteral exposure.
Infection by M. kansasii in patients affected by the Human Immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is associated with advanced immunodeficiency, with
CD4 T lymphocyte count below 100 cells/uL and is usually manifested by pulmonary lesions or disseminated disease. 3 It is the second most
frequent non-tuberculous mycobacteria in patients with AIDS, being surpassed only by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare Complex.4 We
describe the first case in national literature of M. kansasii infection with extrapulmonary involvement exclusively. A 53-year-old female
patient was hospitalized in the infirmary at the teaching hospital of the Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, presenting a tumor in the left
thigh (15x7cm), painful to the touch and increased temperature (Figure 1). She reported the onset of symptoms 4 months before, associated
with weight loss (8 kg) and odynophagia. She denied fever. At the physical exam, she was conscious, oriented, with no visceromegalies. She
presented white plaques in the oropharyngeal mucosa. Upper digestive endoscopy revealed esophagitis by Candida spp. A rapid HIV test was
performed, which resulted positive. Treatment for esophageal candidiasis was then started with fluconazole 200mg/day. The initial CD4 T
lymphocyte count was 257 cells/µL and the viral load was 60,154 (log 4.779). Abscess in thigh An ultrasound of the left thigh lesion was
performed which revealed a voluminous heterogeneous collection of thickened and irregular walls with anechoic content, measuring 14.9 x 7.0
x 5.1 cm, located in the subcutaneous cellular plane of anterior face of distal 1/3 of thigh (Figure 2). The magnetic resonance exam of the
same lesion showed expansive formations on lateral and anterior faces of left thigh with liquid content and thickened walls (Figures 3 and
4). USG of abscess MRI of lesion MRI of lesion A study of the liquid in the abscess was negative for neoplastic cells, but the Ziehl-Neelsen
bacilloscopy method was positive(+++/4+) and Gram was negative. Treatment for M. tuberculosis was started with rifampicin, isoniazid and
pyrazinamide (RIP). The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the M. tuberculosis complex in the liquid in the abscess was negative. Chest
radiography and tomography were normal. During hospitalization, the patient evolved with headache and disorientation. The cerebrospinal
fluid demonstrated 192 cells with predominance of lymphomononuclear ones. The Crypto-LA test resulted positive. Treatment for cryptococcal
meningoencephalitis was started with amphotericin B deoxycholate. Fourteen days after treatment was started following a RIP scheme with a
cumulative dose of 850g of amphotericin B, antiretroviral therapy (ART) was initiated with zidovudine, lamivudine and efavirenz. ART was
initiated two weeks later, with the goal of diminishing the development of Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). Mycobacteria
culture in a Lowestein-Jensen medium demonstrated growth of non-tuberculous bacteria, with bright yellow colonies (chromogenic) - M.
Kansasii. The isolated mycobacterium resistance profile demonstrated sensitivity to rifampicin and ethambutol and resistance to isoniazid
and streptomycin. The scheme was changed to rifampicin, ethambutol, moxifloxacin and clarithromycin. The patient progressed to clinical
improvement, being discharged at the 51st day of hospitalization with a TCD4 lymphocyte count of 350 cells/µl and undetectable viral load.
Generally speaking, the infection by M. kansasii in patients with AIDS results in pulmonary or disseminated involvement, for the lungs are
the main route of entry for this bacterium. It usually occurs in patients with CD4 lower than 100 cells / µl.5,6 The patient described did
not present clinical-radiological evidence of pulmonary involvement. Cutaneous involvement is rare and usually occurs in patients with
advanced immunodepression with disseminated disease.7,8 In the referred literature, we found a single report of cutaneous abscess by M.
kansasii secondary to IRIS in a patient with AIDS, which demonstrates the rarity of this report.3 The direct research of the material found
in the abscess demonstrated acid-fast bacilli, suggesting infection by M. tuberculosis, which is one of the most frequent infections in
patients with AIDS in Brazil.1 For this reason, in spite of negative PCR for the M. tuberculosis complex, we initiated treatment using the
RIP scheme. The culture of the material found in the abscess confirmed the presence of non-tuberculous mycobacterium M. kansasii.
Antibiogram demonstrated resistance of the microorganism to pyrazinamide and isoniazid, a resistance profile commonly observed in M.
kansasii(1). Although the patient had undergone treatment with only one effective drug (rifampicin) against M. kansasii, she presented
clinical improvement. At the time, ethambutol was not part of the tuberculosis treatment scheme in Brazil.1 We associated ethambutol,
clarithromycin and moxifloxacin to the scheme. Clarithromycin and quinolones have demonstrated efficacy against M. kansasii.9,10 Treatment
is recommended for a period of 18 months.1 In Brazil, in spite of high prevalence of infection by M. tuberculosis, the spread of infections
caused by non-tuberculous mycobacteria is increasing. The importance of etiological diagnosis obtained from the culture, as well as the role
of antibiogram for the correct treatment of these infections is emphasized. Conflict of Interests: none Financial Support: none Work
performed at Hospital das Clínicas - Universidade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE) - Recife (PE), Brazil. How to cite this article: Lima CT,
Magalhães V. Abscess resulting from Mycobacterium kansasii in the left thigh of AIDS patient. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):478-80.
