We report the case of an 11-year-old male patient with a histopathological and immunohistochemical diagnosis of dermatofibroma with an
atypical clinical presentation on the right forearm. Although dermatofibroma is considered a benign skin tumor, some of its differential
diagnoses, such as dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and malignant fibrous histiocytoma, are truly aggressive. Lesions with atypical clinical
aspects and topology associated with specific histopathological variants are some of the criteria for complete tumor excision. An 11-year-
old brown male presented with a single, reddish-brown nodule, 2.5 cm in diameter, with raised edges and an exudative, ulcerated center, on
the distal third of the anterior surface of the right forearm (Figure 1). The lesion was asymptomatic and had been present for 2 years, with
no history of local trauma. The patient was in good overall condition, with no palpable lymph nodes. Mass lesion on right forearm
Histological examination of an excisional biopsy specimen stained with hematoxylin and eosin showed epidermal hyperplasia and a nodular,
symmetrical proliferation of fusiform (spindled) and histiocytic cells in the dermis, with rounded, poorly defined borders, as well as young
collagen fibers entrapping pre-existing mature collagen bundles and sparing the fat lobules (Figure 2). In the central portion, there was
proliferation of spindled and histiocytic cells arranged in fascicles, with relatively large, vesicular nuclei, but no pleomorphism or
evidence of mitosis. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for factor XIIIa and negative for CD34 (Figure 3). Overlying epidermal
hyperplasia and dimpling of the central portion of the lesion. Nodular, symmetrical proliferation of spindled and histiocytic cells in the
dermis, with rounded, poorly defined borders, sparing the fat lobules (H&E, original magnification 20x) Interstitial reactivity on
immunohistochemical staining for factor XIIIa Dermatofibromas (DFs), or benign fibrous histiocytomas, constitute a group of predominantly
benign neoplasms, of unclear etiology and cell lineage, which exhibit fibroblastic and histiocytic features on histopathology.1,2 Although
widespread, the etiological hypothesis of reactive cell proliferation in response to local microtrauma remains unproven. Clinically, DFs
present as single or multiple well-circumscribed, reddish-brown papules, usually asymptomatic and slow-growing, 0.5-1.0 cm in diameter, and
occurring on the lower limbs and trunk in young adults.1,3,4,5 DFs arising in childhood may grow larger and affect unusual locations, such
as the head, neck, and upper extremities. Extracutaneous involvement is rare, but has been reported in the long bones.6 On histopathological
examination, DFs are characterized by proliferation of fibroblast-like cells, arranged in a storiform pattern in the papillary and reticular
dermis, interwoven with mono- or multinuclear histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm. Perivascular lymphocytic infiltration may be present, as may
increased vascularity and areas of hemorrhage, which explains the origin of the hemosiderin that is partially responsible for the tan or
black aspect of the lesion in some cases. The overlying epidermis may be normal, atrophic, or acanthotic.1 Several histological subtypes of
DF have been reported; the most common variants are the cellular, aneurysmal, atypical, and fibrocollagenous forms.1,2,4 The classical
immunohistochemical reaction pattern of DF is positive staining for factor XIIIa, vimentin, and actin, and negative staining for CD34.1,2,7
The importance of immunohistochemical examination lies in its ability to distinguish DF from dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP), which
is CD34-positive and factor XIIIa-negative. Other immunomarkers such as ST-3, CD10, and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7
(IGFBP7) can provide additional clarification in questionable cases.7 Depending on the clinical presentation, the differential diagnosis
should also include leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, melanoma, hypertrophic scar, keloid, and Kaposi's
sarcoma.1,2,8 No treatment are required. Complete resection is reserved for atypical cases, giant or locally symptomatic lesions, and at the
cellular, aneurysmal, and atypical subtypes.3,9 Local recurrence has been described with lesions larger than 1.5-2.0 cm, with greater cell
concentration, a high mitotic index, subcutaneous invasion and the presence of pleomorphism, hypervascularity or necrosis.1,2 Lymph node
metastases are rare, and whether they occur at all is controversial.1,9 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this
article: Sampaio FMS, Gualberto GV, De Cerqueira FGM, De Cerqueira AMM, Treu CM, Vargas TJS. Case for diagnosis. Dermatofibroma in
childhood. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):519-20. Work performed at Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso (HFB) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
