We report the case of a 47-year-old homeless male with a massive infestation of Pediculus humanus corporis on his entire body. Dermoscopy
helped to diagnose pediculosis by showing the involvement of scalp, beard and the genital region in this disease. A 47-year-old male patient
assisted by the Medical Emergency Assistance Service was taken to the emergency unit presenting with dehydration. He reported itching on his
entire body. Dermatological examination revealed the presence of excoriated lesions at the occipital and cervical regions, as well as lice
and several white spots adhered to beard hairs (Figure 1 and Video 1). Pubic hairs were also infested (Figure 1 and Video 2). Additionally,
the patient also presented with hyperchromic lesions on the lower limbs (Figure 2). (A) Excoriated lesions at occipital and cervical
regions; (B) Presence of lice (yellow arrows) and several white spots on the beard (red arrow); (C, D) Countless white spots and lice in
pubic hairs (A) Hyperchromic lesions on the lower limbs; (B) Scalp: presence of several nits (yellow arrows) and one louse (red arrow); (C)
Dermoscopy of one Pediculus humanus corporis louse living in the occipital region of patient’s scalp Dermoscopy showed several nits and lice
on the scalp and a great number of nits, nymphs and lice on the beard and also on the genital region (Figures 2 and 3). Lice were identified
as Pediculus humanus corporis. Hospitalization and rehydration were recommended. Dermatosis was treated with oral ivermectin and shaving of
body and head hair. (A) Dermoscopy of patient's beard showing the presence of countless nits, nymphs and lice; (B) Dermoscopy showing
several lice, nits and stinging spots (red arrows) Pediculosis is a condition that has been affecting humanity over the entire history.1
Pediculosis corporis manifests as urticarial papular and hemorrhagic lesions, mainly on the trunk, abdomen and buttocks, as well as
excoriations, lichenification, and hyperchromia, characterizing the so-called "vagabond's disease".2 Entodermoscopy or dermoscopy proved to
be an useful auxiliary tool in the diagnosis and treatment follow-up of pediculosis, because it identifies Pediculus humanus corporis in
detail on all sites infected by lice.3 Study conducted at Visiaderm clinic - Ituiutaba (MG), Brazil. How to cite this article: Martins LG,
Bernardes Filho F, Quaresma MV, Bellott TR, Botelho LN, Prata ACS. Dermoscopy applied to pediculosis corporis diagnosis. An Bras Dermatol.
2014;89(3):513-4. Financial funding: None
