Granular cell tumour is a rare tumour of neural origin usually located on the face and the neck. The biological behaviour is usually benign.
However, certain clinical and histopathological features should alert physicians to a malignant behaviour. This case report describes the
occurrence of a granular cell tumour in the inguinal area that resembled a malignant tumour. The histopathological study revealed typical
features of granular cell tumour and an extension study confirmed the absence of metastasis. This case highlights the importance of
considering this disorder in the differential diagnosis of ulcerated nodules and of managing atypical granular cell tumor appropriately. A
47-year-old woman with a 24-week history of nodule in the inguinal area. The patient reported that the nodule had grown progressively,
finally ulcerating in the centre and discharging pus. On physical examination, a firm, mildly tender, non-infiltrated nodule in the left
inguinal area was revealed (Figure 1). No loco-regional adenopathies were present. Red tender ulcerated nodule with central crust surrounded
by a peripheral yellow fibrinous area with erythematous border and purulent discharge Histological study showed a new formation located in
the thickness of the dermis and in shallow hypodermis. The epidermis presented pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia and ulceration. Tumor cells
were constituted by polygonal cells, with clear granular cytoplasm and oval or round nucleus. No mitosis or atypia was found (Figure 2).
Immunohistochemical study showed positivity for S100 protein, CD68 and inhibin, and negativity for CD1a, AE1-AE3, actin and desmin (Figure
3). Proliferative activity (Ki 67) was low (less than 5%). The tumor was completely removed by surgical excision. A body computer tomography
(body CT) was carried out in order to complete the extension study. No signs of metastases were found. Hematoxylin-eosin stain.
Magnification x400. Polygonal cells with clear granular cytoplasm and oval or round nucleus Immunohistochemical study showed positivity for
S100 protein. Magnification x200 Granular cell tumour (GCT) is a rare tumour that usually appears as painless nodules. It has an insidious
onset and slow growth rate. This condition is of neural derivation, as supported by immunophenotypic and ultrastructural evidence1 These
tumors can arise at any part of the body. However, they are far more common in the head and neck regions (45% to 65% of cases). The oral
cavity (particularly the tongue, which accounts for 25% of the cases) and the breast are also frequently affected.2 The localization on the
inguinal skin, such as the case we present here, is unusual. Biological behaviour is usually benign. However, malignant forms with distant
metastases have been reported, comprising fewer than 2% of all granular cell tumours. Those GCT larger than 3 cm, locally destructive (e.g.,
ulceration, necrosis, haemorrhage) or with infiltrative activity at the edges should be treated promptly by radical excision.3 The
histopathological findings showed in our case match with typical features of GCT. Large polyhedral cells are usually arranged in the form of
nests bounded by variable stroma. Markedly enlarged lysosomes in tumor cells may be found as eosinophilic globules surrounded by a clear
halo. Typically, the granules stain positive with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining.4 The immunohistochemical findings suggest that this
condition may have a Schwann cell origin. The tumour cells stain positively for S-100 protein, NK1-C3 and neuron-specific enolase in most
cases.5 Cases of metastases have been described despite benign histopathological appearance.6,7 Therefore an extension study and follow-up
are needed in order to assess the biological behaviour of granular cell tumours in those cases in which no concordance between macroscopic
and microscopic features is shown.8,9 Our case showed inguinal localization and ulceration, which are rare features of this per se uncommon
entity. Although generally benign and slow growing tumours, their biological behaviour is difficult to determine with accuracy. Therefore,
it is very important for both physicians and pathologists to be aware of the clinical and histopathological features of GCT in order to
establish a proper management of this condition. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Molina-Leyva
A, Husein-Elahmed H, Aneiros-Fernandez J, Almodovar-Real A, Ruiz-Carrascosa JC. Case for diagnosis. Ulcerated tumour in the inguinal area.
An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):523-4. Study conducted at the University Hospital - Granada, Spain.
