There are no previous reports of rupture of a heterologous pericardial patch after aortic annulus enlargement. Our patient, a 72-year-old
Japanese female, presented with congestive heart failure resulting from heart compression from pseudoaneurysm formation in the aortic root.
At 57 years of age the patient had undergone replacement of the ascending aorta for Stanford type A acute aortic dissection. At 66 years of
age she had undergone aortic valve replacement with a mechanical valve, accompanied by enlargement of the aortic annulus using an equine
pericardial patch, for severe aortic valve stenosis with a narrow aortic annulus. Equine pericardial patch was used in the aortic annulus
enlargement to form the aortic root from the ascending aortic vascular prosthesis to the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve. We performed
repeat median sternotomy under cardiopulmonary bypass with moderate hypothermia. The ascending aorta was balloon-occluded because of dense
adhesions around the superior vena cava and ascending aorta due to the pseudoaneurysm. A tear in the equine pericardial patch was noted at
the aortic root. The patient underwent pseudoaneurysm excision and repair of the aortic root using a double-layered, Hemashield-reinforced
bovine pericardial patch. Routine follow-up with computed tomography should be performed for early detection of complications from a
heterologous pericardial patch. Aortic annulus enlargement using a heterologous pericardial patch is performed in patients with a narrow
aortic annulus to prevent patient-prosthesis mismatch . Rupture of a heterologous pericardial patch after aortic annulus enlargement has not
previously been reported. We present a rare case of rupture of an equine pericardial patch after aortic valve replacement with aortic
annulus enlargement. A 72-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our institution for treatment of congestive heart failure with dyspnea on
exertion. At 57 years of age she had experienced Stanford type A acute aortic dissection and underwent replacement of the ascending aorta
under deep hypothermia and retrograde cerebral perfusion using a 30-mm vascular prosthesis without malperfusion. At 66 years of age she was
diagnosed with severe aortic valve stenosis with a narrow aortic annulus and underwent aortic valve replacement with a mechanical valve (ATS
Open Pivot® AP™ 18 mm; ATS Medical Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) accompanied by enlargement of the aortic annulus (Nicks procedure ). To
enlarge the aortic annulus, a glutaraldehyde-fixed equine pericardial patch was used to form the aortic root from the ascending aortic
vascular prosthesis to the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve. The patient had received warfarin therapy for atrial fibrillation after
aortic valve replacement. Six years after the aortic valve replacement with aortic annulus enlargement, she presented with congestive heart
failure. Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly with pleural effusion and pulmonary congestion. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge mass
consistent with pseudoaneurysm in front of the right atrium and aortic root (Figure 1). Magnetic resonance angiography showed a
pseudoaneurysm with blood flow from the aortic root near the sinotubular junction (Figure 2). Echocardiography revealed a pseudoaneurysm
with continuous flow from the aortic root, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and moderate mitral regurgitation. Peak velocity in the aortic
mechanical valve was 2.7 m/sec (peak pressure gradient: 27 mmHg), with normal ejection fraction and no left ventricular dilatation. No
inflammatory or infectious response was noted. Computed tomography. (A) The pseudoaneurysm (solid arrow) anterior to the aortic root and
right atrium. (A, B) Compression of the superior vena cava and right atrium (dashed arrow). Ao: ascending aortic artery, LA: left atrium.
Magnetic resonance angiography. (A) Sagittal view revealing the pseudoaneurysm (solid arrow). (B) Axial view showing the connection (dashed
arrow) between the aortic root to the pseudoaneurysm. Ao: ascending aortic artery, LA: left atrium, LCA: left coronary artery. These
findings suggested that the patient’s congestive heart failure was caused by cardiac compression from the pseudoaneurysm. Repeat median
sternotomy risked cardiac injury or rupture of the pseudoaneurysm. Therefore, we attempted median sternotomy under cardiopulmonary bypass
with moderate hypothermia. Additionally, an aortic occlusion balloon was inserted into the ascending aorta through the right femoral artery
to prevent bleeding from the pseudoaneurysm. After systemic heparinization, cardiopulmonary bypass was established with an arterial cannula
to the left femoral and right axillary arteries and a venous cannula to the right atrium through the left femoral vein. We then performed a
repeat median sternotomy with the patient under moderate hypothermia of 28°C. Because of dense adhesions around the superior vena cava and
ascending aorta caused by the pseudoaneurysm, lysis of adhesions and clamping of the ascending aorta were not possible. After circulatory
arrest, we excised the pseudoaneurysm. We identified a longitudinal tear in the equine pericardial patch near the ascending aortic vascular
prosthesis and an intact suture line (Figure 3). The ascending aorta was balloon-occluded and circulation was quickly reestablished.
Excision of the pseudoaneurysm with mural thrombus created a defect in the right atrial wall. We removed the equine pericardial patch around
the tear and performed patch repair of the aortic root using a double-layered patch consisting of an inner bovine pericardial patch layer
and an outer Hemashield patch layer (Hemashield Double Velour Fabric; MAQUET Holding B.V. & Co. KG, Rastatt, Germany) with a felt-reinforced
suture line. We then performed tricuspid annuloplasty and repair of the right atrial wall using an equine pericardial patch. Intraoperative
image. Dashed arrow showing the laceration in the equine pericardial patch; solid arrow showing the pseudoaneurysm. After the patient was
weaned uneventfully from cardiopulmonary bypass, transesophageal echocardiography showed an improvement in mitral valve regurgitation from
moderate to mild. The patient was extubated 20 hours after surgery and discharged on postoperative day 20 with improving congestive heart
failure. A year after the operation, no pseudoaneurysm-related change was detected. Enlargement of the aortic annulus using a heterologous
pericardial patch is performed extensively in patients with a narrow aortic annulus and has become a simple and reproducible technique for
many cardiac surgeons . In a long-term follow-up survey, Celiento et al. reported that in patients with a small aortic annulus, enlargement
of the aortic annulus is a safe and effective procedure that does not cause late aneurysm formation or dilatation of the aortic root .
Although it is possible for an aneurysm to form in a heterologous pericardial patch and go undetected, there have been no reports of rupture
and late aneurysm formation after heterologous pericardial patch repair of aortic annulus enlargement in adults. However, a few cases of
aneurysm formation after bovine pericardial patch repair have been reported in children . A patient who underwent a Norwood procedure with
Sano right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery shunt for hypoplastic left heart syndrome was reported to develop a pseudoaneurysm in the proximal
portion of the Sano anastomosis caused by degeneration of the bovine pericardium . Moreover, a neoaortic aneurysm constructed with native
great vessel and bovine pericardial patch after third-stage palliation for hypoplastic left heart has been reported . Histopathological
changes evident in disruptions of elastic laminae suggest an inherent defect in the patch material rather than in the method of fixation or
surgical technique. In vascular surgery, there have been sporadic reports of pseudoaneurysm formation of unclear etiology with bovine
pericardial patches . Therefore, it may be necessary to perform periodic CT scans to detect pseudoaneurysm-related changes. The bovine
glutaraldehyde-fixed pericardial patch may be responsible for the low rate of pseudoaneurysm formation; anticalcification technology and
acellular pure collagen may provide host-cell migration and proliferation, accelerated endothelialization, and tissue regeneration .
However, in our case, the tear in the equine pericardial patch with thinning developed adjacent to the ascending aortic vascular prosthesis.
This may indicate that a frictional force on the pericardial patch between the vascular prosthesis and the suture line led to degenerative
changes. Considering this possibility, we used a double-layered patch consisting of a bovine pericardial patch reinforced with a Hemashield
patch to improve the strength and durability of the repair. This was a rare case of rupture of an equine pericardial patch after aortic
annulus enlargement that was successfully treated using a double-layered bovine pericardial/Hemashield patch. If a heterologous pericardial
patch is used in this procedure, a routine follow-up CT may be necessary for early detection of complications of the patch. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-chief of this journal. CT: Computed tomography. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. AM drafted the manuscript. YK conceived the study and overall manuscript design. MM analyzed and interpreted the patient data. YT
and SN participated in manuscript writing/revisions. TS performed the final editing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
