This article reports the orthodontic diagnosis and treatment planning carried out with a 14-year and 5-month-old female patient with
esthetic and functional complaints. She presented an Angle Class I malocclusion, anterior crossbite and severe crowding in both maxillary
and mandibular arches, in addition to a lightly concave straight facial profile. Orthodontic treatment did not require extraction. Crossbite
was corrected by protrusion of upper teeth, which contributed to alignment and leveling of teeth, in addition to improving the patient's
facial profile. The case was presented to the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics (BBO) as a requirement for the BBO
certification. Esse artigo relata o diagnóstico, planejamento e execução do tratamento ortodôntico de uma paciente com 14 anos e 5 meses de
idade, cuja queixa principal era estética e funcional. A paciente portava má oclusão de Classe I de Angle, mordida cruzada anterior e falta
de espaço severo nas arcadas superior e inferior. O perfil facial era reto, com tendência a côncavo. O tratamento ortodôntico foi realizado
sem necessidade de exodontias, com a correção da mordida cruzada por meio da projeção dos dentes superiores, o que auxiliou no alinhamento e
nivelamento dentário, além de melhorar o perfil facial da paciente. Esse caso foi apresentado ao Board Brasileiro de Ortodontia e Ortopedia
Facial (BBO) como parte dos requisitos para obtenção do título de Diplomado pelo BBO. A 14-year and 5-month-old patient, in good health,
with controlled allergic rhinitis, showed up for her first appointment. Her mother reported that the patient fell when she was eight years
old, and fractured the incisal edge of tooth #41. At that point, the tooth was partially restored and remained as so with neither apical
radiolucency nor sensibility until her first orthodontic appointment. The patient avoided smiling and showing her teeth while talking. Her
major complaints comprised lack of space in both maxillary and mandibular arches and anterior crossbite. The patient reported the following:
"I am embarrassed of smiling. I want to have my teeth fixed because they are not aligned, which makes it difficult to bite." The patient was
in the descending pubertal growth spurt curve, 24 months after menarche. Her dental history included good oral hygiene, unchanged tongue
position during physiologic movements and no orthodontic treatment. The patient was an adolescent in the residual growth phase.1 She
presented an asymmetrical face, with proportional facial thirds and spontaneous lip seal (Fig 1). She avoided smiling and showing her teeth,
which hindered the assessment of spontaneous smile and the amount of tooth exposure at smile. Her forced smile revealed that her upper lip
covered the gingival margin of her upper incisors. Initial facial and intraoral photographs. The patient had a straight facial profile, with
thin, retracted lips in relation to the Nasolabial line (S-UL = -1.0 mm and S-LL = 0 mm).2 From a dental point of view, she presented Angle
Class I malocclusion (Figs 1 and 2), although her upper and lower canines were in end-to-end anteroposterior relationship. Additionally, she
presented severe crowding in the maxillary and mandibular arches (maxillary discrepancy of -10 mm and mandibular discrepancy of -6 mm), and
anterior crossbite including #11 and #22. Overjet between #21 and #31 was +3 mm, and -3 mm between #11 and #41. Tooth #41 was fractured and
partially restored, given that restoration could not be properly carried out due to lack of space resulting from the malocclusion. Oral
hygiene was good. Initial casts. Panoramic and periapical radiographs (Fig 3) revealed good root formation for all teeth, absence of apical
radiolucencies around tooth #41 as well as absence of bone or dental anomalies. She had unerupted third molars at Nolla's stage 6 (initial
root formation). Initial panoramic and periapical radiographs of incisors. Cephalometric cephalograms and tracings (Fig 4) revealed a
balanced skeletal pattern in the anteroposterior direction between the maxilla, the mandible and other facial structures (ANB= 1º and Angle
of Convexity = -0.5º), with a predominantly horizontal growth pattern and mandibular plane (SN-GoGn = 25º, FMA = 20º and Y Axis = 54º).
Upper and lower incisors were retroclined (1-NA = 20º, 1-NA = 6 mm, 1-NB = 17º, 1-NB = 4 mm and IMPA = 83.5º).The aforementioned
cephalometric data are shown in Table 1. Initial (A) lateral cephalogram and (B) cephalometric tracing. Cephalometric measurements. The
patient had a harmonious and proportional face (front view), but presented a straight profile, which is worrying for a 14-year-old, given
that one's profile tends to become more concave with time.3,4 For this reason, treatment plan avoided extractions and included protrusion of
retroclined incisors, as well as increasing lip support and volume, which resulted in a more convex profile. The patient presented Angle
Class I malocclusion, with anterior crossbite of teeth #11 and #22. Given that her central mandibular and maxillary incisors were
retroclined, treatment plan aimed at obtaining mesio-distal space by means of a fixed orthodontic appliance, providing protrusion of
anterior teeth in normal occlusion, increased arch circumference, and protrusion of maloccluded teeth in order to meet normal standards.5
Negative discrepancy was severe in both maxillary (-10 mm) and mandibular arches (-6 mm). Mandibular canines were visibly retroclined, with
reduced distance between canines. Protrusion of maxillary and mandibular incisors was able to solve such negative discrepancy and increase
the distance between canines and molars in both maxillary and mandibular arches, particularly in the mandibular canines. An alternative
treatment plan would include extraction of the four first premolars. This treatment option, however, does not allow enough protrusion of
incisors and, as a result, does not improve lip support. Moreover, after some years, it would worsen the patient's facial profile.3,4,6,7
Edgewise 0.022 x 0.028-in orthodontic brackets were placed in the maxillary arch, except for teeth #11 and 22 (maloccluded). Treatment began
with Twist-flex 0.015-in steel archwire placed for initial alignment and leveling. Subsequently, 0.012, 0.014, 0.016 and 0.018-in stainless
steel archwires were progressively installed every 30 days, with omega loops mesially adjusted to the first molars. The omega loops were
adjusted in 0.05 mm on each side on every orthodontic visit, increasing arch circumference and length, and, as a result, establishing mild
and continuous protrusion of incisors with expansion of the arches. Once the 0.018-in steel wire had been installed, open springs were
compressed between teeth #11 and 22 to create space between them. At this point, orthodontic appliance was installed on these teeth. Buccal
traction of maloccluded teeth was performed with mild-force elastomeric chains between the 0.018" arch and the bonded appliances. At this
stage, maxillary incisors were slightly protruded, thus providing enough space to correct the malocclusion (Fig 5). By the time the 0.020"
stainless steel wire was installed, the incisors had been satisfactory protruded, thus providing enough mesiodistal space for buccal
inclination of #11 and #22 (Fig 6). Intraoral photographs 8 months after treatment onset. Intraoral photographs 12 months after treatment
onset. After maloccluded teeth were corrected, the appliances of #11 e #22 were replaced and a new 0.014" stainless steel wire was installed
for teeth alignment and leveling. Subsequently, 0.016, 0.018, 0.020-in and 0.019 x 0.025-in stainless steel wires were progressively
installed for individual torque control and treatment finishing. Edgewise 0.022 x 0.028-in orthodontic brackets were placed in all teeth of
the maxillary arch. It is worth noting that on teeth #31, 33 and 43, the appliances were provisionally bonded in a more cervical direction
so as to avoid occlusal contact with antagonist teeth. The occlusal bracket wings of teeth #35, 44 and 45 had to be partially worn after
bonding due to occlusal interference. Initially, a 0.015-in Twist-flex steel alignment and leveling archwire was installed. Subsequently,
0.012, 0.014, 0.016-in and 0.018-in stainless steel archwires were progressively installed every 30 days, with omega loops mesially adjusted
to the first molars. Similarly and concurrently to the maxillary arch, the omega loops were adjusted in 0.05 mm on each side, increasing
arch circumference and length, and, as a result, establishing mild and continuous protrusion of incisors. As protrusion of upper and lower
incisors progressed, more space was created for rebonding of teeth #31, 33 and 43 which, as it has been previously mentioned, were initially
bonded in a non-ideal position. These teeth were rebonded on an average of three to four times, until their ideal position (in comparison to
the other teeth) could be reached. After the 0.019 x 0.025-in stainless steel rectangular archwire was installed, with it acting over the
torques and establishing correct intercuspation, the appliance was removed. Retention consisted of a wraparound removable appliance in the
maxillary arch, used full-time (except for meals and oral hygiene) during six months, 12 hours per day during the following six months and
while sleeping during the last six months of retention. After a retention period of a year and a half, the patient was advised to use the
maxillary retainer two nights a week while sleeping for an indefinite period of time. In the mandibular arch, a 0.020-in stainless steel
wire intercanine bar was installed to ease incisors and canines interproximal space. This retainer was used for an indefinite period of
time. Third molars were extracted six months before treatment completion. At treatment completion, patient's self-esteem had significantly
improved. Good facial proportions were observed in frontal view, with patient's profile improved due to an increase in lip volume as a
result of incisor protrusion (Fig 7). Horizontal residual mandibular growth was greater than expected, given that menarche had occurred one
year and a half before treatment onset. If incisor protrusion had not been planned, patient's profile would be clearly concave. Protrusion
allowed patient's profile to favorably develop with age.6,7 Initial facial and intraoral photographs. Molar and canine relationships were
obtained in key to occlusion (Figs 7 and 8). Anterior crossbite and discrepancy of upper and lower models were corrected by protrusion of
upper and lower incisors and mild expansion of the arches (Tab 2).The distance between lower molars increased in 2 mm, while the distance
between upper molars increased in 3 mm during treatment. As for the distance between lower canines, it increased in 5 mm, whereas between
upper canines, it increased in 1.5 mm. The greater increase in distance between lower canines was a result of accentuated lingual
inclination of teeth #33 and 43, which was corrected during treatment.8 The average distance between lower canines in untreated patients is
25 mm, whereas in the case reported herein it was of 22 mm. Normal overjet and overbite were obtained with anterior disocclusion guides on
the incisors, and lateral disocclusion guides on right and left canines. Final casts. Measurements of transversal distances of the dental
arches (mm). Final panoramic radiograph revealed root parallelism, whereas periapical radiographs revealed absence of root resorption (Fig
9). During treatment, restoration of tooth #41 was recommended. However, the dentist advised the patient to wait for treatment completion in
order to have such procedure carried out. At treatment completion, tooth #41 presented apical radiolucencies, as revealed by the final
periapical radiograph, and the patient was referred to a specialist for endodontic treatment and restoration of tooth #41, all of which were
carried out one month after the orthodontic appliance had been removed. Radiographic control taken six months afterwards revealed periapical
repair (Fig 10). Final panoramic and periapical radiographs of incisors. Control periapical radiograph of tooth #41 six months after
endodontic treatment. Final cephalometric tracings and cephalogram (Fig 11, Tab 1) highlighted that, by the end of treatment, maxillary
incisors were in increased protrusion (1-NA = 36º and 1-NA = 10 mm), although clinically appropriate, whereas mandibular incisors were well
positioned (1-NB=25º, 1-NB=6 mm and IMPA=92º). Final (A) lateral cephalogram and (B) cephalometric tracing. At treatment completion, the
mandible was more anteriorly positioned in relation to the maxilla, with ANB = -1º and angle of convexity = 0.5º, both clinically
acceptable. The mandibular plane revealed mild anticlockwise movement, observed by a reduction in the mandibular plane angles (SN-GoGn and
FMA) and Y Axis. Cephalometric tracing superimposition revealed that, during treatment, mandibular growth in the horizontal direction of the
maxilla was greater (Fig 12), which could be explained by the reduced anterior movement of point A in relation to point B, showing little
maxillary growth in relation to the maxilla as a result of the buccal inclination of maxillary incisors. An increase in the inclination of
maxillary incisors, with palatal root movement as a consequence, may have been influenced by the posterior positioning of point A, giving
the false impression of insufficient maxillary growth. Initial (black) and final (red) cephalometric tracing total (A) and partial (B)
superimposition. The results were obtained as planned: excellent facial esthetics, anterior teeth in normal occlusion and improvements in
alignment and leveling. The patient demonstrated to be satisfied with the results, which improved her self-esteem. In spite of the anterior
displacement of the mandible being greater than expected, patient's profile remained straight as a result of protrusion of incisors, which
provided lip support and volume with excellent esthetics. Key to occlusion was obtained for molars and canines with ideal occlusion guides.
» The author reports no commercial, proprietary or financial interest in the products or companies described in this article. How to cite
this article: Ritter DE. Class I malocclusion with anterior crossbite and severe crowding. Dental Press J Orthod. 2014 Mar-Apr;19(2):115-25.
doi: ttp://dx.doi.org/10.1590/2176-9451.19.2.115-125.bbo
