Colouterine fistula is a very rare condition; most cases described in the literature are secondary to complications of diverticulitis in
elderly patients. We report the case of a 34-year-old African woman who presented with a colouterine fistula secondary to polymyomectomy,
which was diagnosed in the setting of severe endometritis. She had a Hartmann procedure and abundant irrigation of her abdominal and uterine
cavities followed by placement of a double drainage in order to preserve fertility. This is the first case of a conservative management of
the uterus in such conditions. Conservative surgery in colouterine fistula should be discussed as an alternative to hysterectomy in young
infertile women. Colouterine fistula is a very rare condition; most cases described in the literature occurred secondary to complications of
diverticulitis in the elderly . Other circumstances include sigmoid malignancy , radiotherapy and iatrogenic conditions such as insertion of
intrauterine devices , endometrial curettage with uterine and bowel perforation , or obstetrical injury . We report the case of a 34-year-
old infertile African woman with no medical or surgical history. She was referred to our hospital for intense abdominal pain associated with
sepsis and fecaloid leukorrhea. She had a surgical management of a symptomatic leiomyomatous uterus 20 days earlier in another clinic:
preoperative selective uterine artery embolization (UAE) of both her uterine arteries was immediately followed by median laparotomy and
ablation of a posterior interstitial leiomyoma of 70mm and an anterior subserous leiomyoma of 45mm; two hysterotomies were made to enucleate
the leiomyomas and then sutured with absorbable thread (Vicryl®), and an anti-adhesion membrane (Seprafilm®) with epiploon interposition was
used on her uterine sutures.Emergency biological tests revealed a C-reactive protein of 300mg/L. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan
showed intrauterine hydroaeric levels, which confirmed the diagnosis of a colouterine fistula (Figure 1a and 1b). Abdominal computed
tomography scan revealing hydroaeric levels inside the uterus. a: coronal view. b: transverse view. Intravenous antibiotics were started
immediately (third generation cephalosporins, metronidazole and gentamicin) and she was counseled about the risk of hysterectomy but she
insisted on trying a conservative management. An immediate laparotomy enabled us to isolate the fistula between her sigmoid and her uterine
fundus, with feces inside her uterus associated with several lesions of myometritis but with no sign of fecal peritonitis; Hartmann’s
procedure involved resection of 15cm of her sigmoid colon with creation of a protective abdominal colostomy, and was followed by abundant
irrigation of her abdominal and uterine cavities; the uterine edge of the fistula was estimated to have a diameter of 8mm. It was not
immediately closed, but used to place an irrigation system associated with a cervical drainage of the uterus. A drainage of her abdominal
cavity was also placed. Antibiotic therapy was reinforced with Tazocilline® (piperacillin-tazobactam) and amikacin. Irrigation was stopped
at day 3 and drainage removed at day 5 after surgery. Histologic analysis did not show malignancy. She was then seen monthly for clinical
examination and pelvic ultrasound by a referent gynecologist.At 3 months a pelvic ultrasound showed a heterogeneous myometrium, endometrial
atrophy and a small uterine cavity. Her digestive continuity was reestablished at 5 months by the referent surgeon. At 12 months, she was
still amenorrheic despite combined hormonal treatment (ethinylestradiol 0.03mg + levonorgestrel 0.15mg). Operative hysteroscopy showed a
cavity length of 80mm, endometrial atrophy, and a fundal synechia that reduced her uterine cavity volume and prevented the visibility of
both tubal ostia. The synechia was removed under ultrasound guidance (Figure 2a and 2b). At latest news, menstrual cycles partially resumed
3 months later, but she did not become pregnant because of other personal problems. Postoperative hysteroscopic findings. a: right tubal
ostium. b: left tubal ostium. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of colouterine fistula after polymyomectomy,
conservatively managed in an emergency setting. The two main etiologic hypotheses could be: (i) preoperative UAE usually associated with
reduced blood supply, which could interfere with myometrial cicatrization and increase the risk of uterine fistula ; and (ii) the use of
anti-adhesion barrier (Seprafilm®) on uterine sutures with epiploon interposition could have connected the uterine suture to the bowel
leading to fistula formation. Such practice has been suspected to increase leak related events (fistula, abscess, peritonitis and sepsis) in
a multicenter randomized study comparing complications of abdominal surgery with and without the use of Seprafilm® . Most of the 24 cases of
colouterine fistulas reported in the English and French literature were due to diverticulitis. Classically, they affected older patients for
whom a concomitant subtotal or total hysterectomy was the preferred therapeutic choice . Uterine conservation in young patients was reported
in rare cases (Table 1): excision of myometrium surrounding the fistula and reparation of the uterine wall associated with restitution of
sigmoid defect with or without drainage . It is important to mention that all these cases were not managed in an emergency setting with
sepsis , except for one case of a pregnant patient who had a subtotal hysterectomy associated with bowel resection . Characteristics of
patients treated conservatively for colouterine fistulas Fertility of women treated conservatively for a colouterine fistula was never
reported. Endometrial thickness should be monitored and patients should have a regular follow up. Colouterine fistula following myomectomy
is a very rare condition in young women. The diagnosis is easily made with clinical history and abdominal CT scanning. Risk factors might
include preoperative UAE, which should be used with caution before myomectomy. Conservative surgical management is challenging in case of
severe infection, but should be discussed if fertility preservation is strongly desired. The therapeutic management combines intravenous
large spectrum antibiotics and surgery and has two objectives: treat the fistula and its gynecological consequences taking into account the
preservation of fertility. Despite a favorable outcome, fertility prognosis is still to be assessed. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CT: Computed tomography; UAE: Uterine artery embolization. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. JU and CY analyzed and interpreted the patient data regarding the emergency management and the postoperative follow up. PF and CY
performed the surgery. JU was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. MK and ALM revised the manuscript. DL recruited and supported
the management of the case. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
