Congenital cataracts occur in 3–4 per 10,000 live births and account for 5% to 20% of pediatric blindness worldwide. With more than 37 genes
known to be associated with isolated congenital cataract, whole exome sequencing (WES) was recently introduced as an efficient method for
screening all known factors. Whole exome analysis in two members of a four-generation pedigree affected with dominant congenital cataract
and glaucoma was performed by WES; co-segregation analysis of identified variants in all pedigree members was completed by Sanger
sequencing. Analysis of the WES data identified a novel pathogenic variant in EPHA2, c.2925dupC, p.(Ile976Hisfs*37), that demonstrated
complete cosegregation with the phenotype in the pedigree. The mutation occurs in the final amino acid before the stop codon of the normal
EPHA2 protein and is predicted to produce a mutant protein with an erroneous C-terminal extension of 35 amino acids. Nine other families
have been previously reported with dominant congenital/juvenile cataracts and mutations in EPHA2. Two additional likely loss-of-function
variants in genes known to cause dominant congenital cataract were considered and excluded based on control data and cosegregation analysis:
a nonsense variant in CYRBB3, c.547G>T, p.(Glu183*), and a splicing variant in CRYBA2, c.446+1G>A. Identification of a novel pathogenic
EPHA2 allele further implicates this gene in congenital cataract. This is only the second EPHA2 mutation that specifically affects the most
C-terminal PSD95/Dlg/ZO1 (PDZ)-binding motif and the third pathogenic allele associated with an erroneous C-terminal extension beyond the
normal stop codon. Congenital cataracts occur in 3–4 per 10,000 live births in the United States and account for 5% to 20% of blindness in
children worldwide . Congenital cataract can occur as an isolated condition or in association with syndromic anomalies; approximately 10% to
25% are thought to be due to genetic causes . With more than 37 genes known to be associated with nonsyndromic cataract, whole exome
sequencing (WES) was recently introduced as an efficient method for screening all known genes, as well as providing the opportunity for
novel gene identification . Although this approach offers the advantage of a comprehensive exome and genome examination to identify
causative mutations, interpretation of the large volume of identified variants may be complicated, especially for novel changes . Autosomal
dominant is the most common inheritance pattern for familial nonsyndromic cataracts; however, autosomal recessive and X-linked inheritance
has also been reported . Interestingly, eight cataract genes have been linked to dominant and recessive patterns of inheritance: CRYAB (OMIM
123590), CRYAA (OMIM 123580), CRYBB1 (OMIM 600929), CRYBB3 (OMIM 123630), GJA8 (OMIM 600897), SIL1 (OMIM 608005), HSF4 (OMIM 602438), and
EPHA2 (OMIM 176946) . Although some genes, such as CRYBB1, show a clear distinction between the two types of alleles with dominant alleles
likely having a dominant negative effect (missense, late truncating) and recessive alleles likely resulting in null alleles (early
truncating and initiation codon mutations) , for many genes, such as CRYBB3, there is no obvious distinction between the two types of
alleles . The EPHA2 protein belongs to the ephrin receptor group of the protein-tyrosine kinase family, which is important in cell–cell
interactions, including effects on neuronal cell migration, cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, and secretion . Ephrin receptors
are type-I transmembrane proteins; their primary ligand, ephrin, is also membrane bound, and the complex is unique in its ability to
generate bidirectional signals into both cells . The ephrin receptors and ephrin ligands are divided into two groups, A and B; crossover
binding between classes can occur . The EphA2 protein contains an extracellular domain and an intracellular domain. The extracellular domain
is divided into an N-terminal ligand binding domain, a cysteine-rich domain, and two fibronectin type III repeats; the intracellular domain
consists of the juxtamembrane region, a tyrosine kinase domain, a sterile-α-motif (SAM) domain, and a PSD95/Dlg/ZO1 (PDZ)-binding motif .
EPHA2 expression has been shown in the lens of wild-type mice, with highest expression in the cortical lens fiber cells . Mutations in EPHA2
have been associated with autosomal dominant congenital/juvenile cataract and autosomal recessive congenital cataract. In dominant families,
a frameshift mutation and a splicing mutation were associated with congenital cataract (four families) while the age of diagnosis in
families with missense mutations ranged from birth to 15 years of age (four families) . An additional rare heterozygous missense variant was
seen in a family with onset at 17 and 20 years of age as well as two controls with age-related cataracts . In recessive families, homozygous
missense mutations were associated with congenital cataracts (two families) . In addition, several polymorphisms in EPHA2 have been
associated with increased risk for age-related cataracts . We present the identification of a novel EPHA2 pathogenic allele along with two
rare variants in other known cataract genes through WES in a single family with dominant congenital cataract with or without glaucoma.
Thirteen members of a Caucasian family affected with congenital cataract with or without glaucoma in three generations (3 affected and 10
unaffected, 6 males and 7 females; Figure 1A) were recruited for the study through referral to the study coordinator; all individuals were
healthy other than the ocular diagnoses. Blood samples were collected in EDTA tubes and DNA extraction was performed via standard protocols
using Qiagen Puregene products (Valencia, CA). This study adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and the ARVO statement on
human subjects and was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin with written informed consent
obtained from every subject or their legal representative (minors). Cosegregation analysis of the identified alleles and schematic
representation of EPHA2 wild-type and mutant proteins. A: Pedigree with genotype data for EPHA2, CRYBB3, and CRYBA2 alleles. Individuals
affected with congenital cataract are indicated by shaded symbols. Genotyping results for the three alleles identified in the family are
shown below each individual tested: 1 = EPHA2; 2 = CRYBB3; 3 = CRYBA2. The pathogenic allele is indicated in bold. The proband is indicated
with an arrow; wt, wild-type allele at the variant position. B: Schematic drawing of the EPHA2 protein and C-terminal extension mutant
sequences. The EPHA2 domain structure is shown at the top; SP = signal peptide, FN III = fibronectin III type repeats, TM = transmembrane
domain, JMR = juxtamembrane region, SAM = sterile alpha motif, PDZ = PDZ-binding motif. C-terminal sequences of EPHA2 wild-type and
frameshift mutants are shown at the bottom with the PDZ-motif residues indicated in blue and erroneous amino acids in red. WES was completed
through Perkin Elmer (Branford, CT) using Agilent Sure Select v4 (proband) or v4 with untranslated region (UTR; daughter; Santa Clara, CA)
for exome capture and the Illumina HiSeq 2000 system (San Diego, CA) for sequencing; variants in 37 known cataract genes were reviewed as
previously described using the Geospiza GeneSifter Analysis program hosted through Perkin Elmer Bioinformatics using the GATK V2.10 pipeline
. Variants of interest were investigated for their presence or absence in the NCBI Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Database (dbSNP), 1000
Genomes project (1 kg), and frequency in the Exome Variant Server (EVS). Variants of interest were confirmed with independent Sanger
sequencing reactions, and family members were tested for cosegregation using gene-specific primers and PCR conditions as specified in Table
1 with betaine solution (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) or FailSafe Mix (Epicenter Biotechnologies, Madison, WI) added to some reactions
according to the manufacturer protocols and as described in Table 1. PCR products were sequenced in both directions using the ABI 3730XL
sequencer and protocols (Applied Biosystems/Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Sequences were reviewed manually and using Mutation Surveyor
(SoftGenetics, State College, PA). The proband (II:2) was diagnosed with bilateral congenital cataract with cataract extraction in infancy;
at age 6 she lost vision in one eye due to undetected aphakic glaucoma. Her daughter (III:4) had bilateral congenital zonular cataracts with
cataract extraction at 7 and 11 weeks of age; reextraction was required at 1.5 and 2 years of age. She subsequently developed aphakic
glaucoma at age 8 with intraocular pressure in the 40–50 mmHg range. She has been treated with eye drops, shunts, laser surgery, and corneal
transplant. The proband’s granddaughter (IV:2) had cataracts diagnosed at 10 days of age with cataract extraction at 3 and 4 weeks of age;
she is currently 7 years old and shows no signs of glaucoma. All three affected family members are aphakic and use contact lenses or glasses
to correct vision. WES was performed in the proband and her daughter. The average mean read depth for the whole exome was 78.5X and 75X with
85.6% and 90.9% of bases with a read depth >10X in the proband and her daughter, respectively. Similar to the previous report, the 37 known
cataract genes showed good coverage with the exception of MAF (OMIM 177075), FOXE3 (OMIM 601094), and PITX3 (OMIM 602669), which were
screened with Sanger sequencing . Review of the 37 known cataract genes in the proband identified a novel frameshift variant in the ephrin
receptor (EPHA2) gene (Figure 1) and two rare variants in the beta-B3 crystallin (CYRBB3) and beta-A2 crystallin (CRYBA2) genes (Figure 2).
Chromatograms of the EPHA2, CRYBB3, and CRYBA2 alleles. The variant position is indicated with a red arrow. The novel frameshift variant in
EPHA2, c.2925dupC, p.(Ile976Hisfs*37), occurs in the final amino acid before the stop codon of the normal EPHA2 protein and is predicted to
produce a mutant protein with an erroneous C-terminal extension of 35 amino acids. This variant was not seen in 8,600 European American
alleles or 4,406 African American alleles reported in EVS and is not reported in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes. A logarithm of the odds (LOD)
score of 2.71 was obtained using the available pedigree and the identified EPHA2 allele as a rare phase known marker , which provides
additional evidence to support pathogenicity. The CRYBB3 nonsense variant c.547G>T, p.(Glu183*; rs147328317) is located in the final exon of
CRYBB3 and thus would be expected to escape nonsense-mediated decay and produce a CRYBB3 protein lacking 28 C-terminal amino acids. The
CRYBA2 splicing variant c.446+1G>A (rs142969645) affects the donor splice site between exons 3 and 4. These two rare variants are present in
EVS in 0.08% (CRYBB3) and 0.07% (CRYBA2) of European Caucasian alleles (7/8,596 and 6/8,600 alleles, respectively). All three variants were
confirmed with Sanger sequencing in the proband. The novel frameshift mutation in EPHA2 was present in all three affected family members and
was not present in eight unaffected family members, including the unaffected mother, brothers, son, and granddaughters of the proband
(Figure 1A). The CRYBB3 variant was present in the proband only, and the CRYBA2 variant was seen in the proband, her affected daughter, and
an unaffected brother, but not the affected granddaughter (Figure 1A). The novel EPHA2 frameshift mutation identified in this family,
c.2925dupC, p.(Ile976Hisfs*37), affects the intracellular region of the protein, specifically the potential PDZ-binding motif that
encompasses amino acids 973–976 (Figure 1B); this motif is predicted to bind PDZ domain-containing proteins that promote the assembly of
multiprotein signaling complexes at the membrane. Other intracellular domains include the sterile alpha motif (SAM), tyrosine kinase domain,
and juxtamembrane region that are involved in interactions with signaling proteins and other important functions . The c.2925dupC,
p.(Ile976Hisfs*37) mutation disrupts the PDZ-motif and, because of the additional aberrant C-terminal sequence, might affect proper folding
and function of other EPHA2 domains as well. This is only the second EPHA2 mutation that specifically affects the potential PDZ-motif and
the third pathogenic allele associated with an erroneous C-terminal extension beyond the normal stop codon. The previously reported alleles
include frameshift mutation c.2915_2916delTG, p.(Val972Glyfs*40), located four codons upstream of the mutation reported here, which
completely removes the potential PDZ-motif sequence (Figure 1B) . In addition, the recurrent splicing mutation c.2826–9G>A, seen in three
independent families, was shown to result in an insertion of a 7 bp intronic sequence into the mRNA and, consequently, the addition of 71
novel amino acid residues at the C-terminus; this mutation affects the SAM domain and the PDZ-binding motif . Thirty-six residues of the
erroneous C-terminal tail are identical between these three mutant alleles. Previous studies demonstrated reduced protein stability and
function for the c.2915_2916delTG frameshift and c.2826–9G>A splicing mutations . Interestingly, mutations that extend the length of the
mutant protein have been reported in two other genes that cause dominant congenital cataracts, PITX3 and FOXE3 . Although the PITX3
mutations disrupt a significant portion of the protein sequence in addition to extending the length of the protein , four dominant FOXE3
mutations occur at or within five amino acids of the stop codon . Given the evidence of pathogenicity and complete cosegregation in the
pedigree, the EPHA2 variant c.2925dupC, p.(Ile976Hisfs*37) was determined to be the pathogenic allele causing the congenital cataract in the
family. The congenital cataract phenotype reported in this family is consistent with the previously reported EPHA2 mutations, but two
individuals in the family were also affected with juvenile glaucoma, which has not been reported previously in families with EPHA2 mutations
. Since glaucoma is reported in up to 30% of eyes following congenital cataract extraction , particularly when cataracts are removed early
in life, it is possible that the glaucoma seen in two family members is simply a result of the cataract surgery. Review of whole exome data
for the proband and her daughter for known congenital/juvenile glaucoma genes including CYP1B1 (OMIM 601771), MYOC (OMIM 601652), LTBP2(OMIM
602091), and TDRD7 (OMIM 611258) did not identify any rare/novel coding variants in these genes. The two other rare likely loss-of-function
variants in genes known to cause dominant congenital cataract, a nonsense variant in CRYBB3 and a splicing variant in CRYBA2, were
considered and excluded based on the control data and cosegregation analysis. Recessive and dominant missense mutations in CYRBB3 have been
reported in association with congenital cataract , and nonsense mutations in two other members of the CRYBB family, CRYBB1 and CRYBB2, as
well as CRYGC and CRYGD, are associated with autosomal dominant congenital cataracts . A missense mutation in CRYBA2 was recently reported
to cause autosomal dominant congenital cataract with reduced penetrance , and multiple splicing mutations in another crystalline gene,
CRYBA1, have been reported in association with autosomal dominant congenital cataracts . Although both alleles have some evidence providing
support for possible pathogenicity, both are present in EVS at about twice the frequency of congenital cataracts in the general population,
which suggests these alleles are not highly penetrant dominant alleles for congenital cataracts. In addition, cosegregation analysis showed
that neither variant was present in all three affected family members (Figure 1A). Based on these data, it was concluded that these variants
are either rare polymorphisms or recessive alleles that do not contribute to the cataracts in this family. In this paper, we report the
identification of a novel EPHA2 mutant C-terminal extension allele associated with dominant congenital cataracts and glaucoma. The other
identified variants in known cataract genes, a nonsense change in CRYBB3 and a splicing alteration in CRYBA2, were excluded as causative
based on their frequency in the general population and cosegregation analysis and do not appear to have any effect on the cataract phenotype
in the carriers of these additional alleles. The authors gratefully acknowledge the family for their participation in this research study.
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health awards R01EY015518, R21EY023011 and funds provided by the Children’s Hospital
of Wisconsin (EVS), and award 1UL1RR031973 from the Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) program.
