Pregnancy-related compressive myelopathy secondary to vertebral hemangioma is a rare occurrence and its treatment antepartum is rare. A
19-year-old North African woman in her 38th week of pregnancy presented with paraplegia that progressed within 2 days after a rapidly
progressive weakness of her lower limbs. Magnetic resonance imaging studies showed compression of her spinal cord in front of the fourth
thoracic vertebra for suspected tuberculous spondylitis. A Caesarean section was done followed by corpectomy with a bone graft because we
intraoperatively discovered a vertebral hemangioma. Pathology showed an aggressive hemangioma. At any term of pregnancy, extensive
neurological involvement which is rapidly progressive due to compression should be considered for immediate decompression. Vertebral
hemangiomas are among the most common benign tumors involving the spine, usually presenting as an incidental finding on imaging (magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) or even on plain radiography) . Pregnancy, because of several changes, is a recognized risk factor coinciding with
the development of a rapid onset of symptoms from these normally asymptomatic lesions. Less than 1% of vertebral hemangiomas cause
neurologic symptoms from spinal cord or nerve root compression; they can lead to serious neurologic deficits if not treated immediately .
So, prompt diagnosis is essential in planning optimal therapy and preventing morbidity for both mother and fetus. We report a case of an
aggressive vertebral hemangioma during pregnancy that was treated surgically after Cesarean delivery and we also review the current
literature on pregnancy- related vertebral hemangiomas. A 19-year-old, North African, primiparous woman presented to our emergency room in
the 38th week of gestation with a 10-day history of a rapidly progressive weakness of her lower limbs. She mentioned paraplegia progressed
within 2 days. She did not have any back pain, incontinence or constitutional symptoms. On examination she was pregnant with uterine height
corresponding to gestational age and a positive fetal cardiac activity. There was a spastic paraplegia, without decrease of sensory function
of her lower limbs. MRI studies showed compression of her spinal cord located at the T4 level suspicious for tuberculous spondylitis
(because of tuberculosis epidemic in our country) (Figure 1). Gadolinium contrast material was not administered because of the patient’s
pregnancy. Multidisciplinary discussion among obstetricians, neurosurgeons and intensivists, favored a Caesarean section action, before the
intervention for spondylitis that was to be made the day after the Cesarean section. Lateral tomography radiographs. (A) T2-weighted
magnetic resonance image and. (B) T1-weighted magnetic resonance image of the thoracic spine demonstrating the lesion in the T4 vertebra
(fourth thoracic vertebra). Thoracotomy was performed via left posterolateral incision with the excision of her left 6th rib, and
intraoperative findings suggested a vertebral hemangioma T4 with anterior spinal cord compression. T4 corpectomy as well as excision of most
of the calcified epidural mass was done. Her excised rib was put in the corpectomy site in two pieces as a bone graft. Two units of blood
were transfused during the operation. Histopathologic evaluation of the operation specimen showed typical characteristics of capillary
hemangioma (aggressive hemangioma). After the operation, the patient started to move her legs again, and after a month she began to walk
with support. Her 3-month follow-up examination revealed a normal neurological examination. Vertebral hemangiomas are the most common
primary spinal neoplasm and are present in 10 to 12% of the population. The majority of patients with vertebral hemangiomas remain
asymptomatic, and only 1% are estimated to become symptomatic. Vertebral hemangiomas were first described by Virchow. The typical
radiological appearance of vertical striations was described by Perman. The first case of pregnancy-related hemangioma was reported in 1927
by Balado, whereas half of the cases reviewed were published after 1980 . In the literature, 26 cases of symptomatic vertebral hemangioma
during pregnancy have been reported . The mean patient age at presentation was 29 years. The great majority of these cases presented during
the third trimester of pregnancy. The mean period of gestation at presentation was 7.8 months . Contrary to their usual location in the
lower thoracic and lumbar vertebrae in non-pregnant patients, pregnancy-related vertebral hemangiomas occur more frequently in the upper
thoracic levels . Our patient also had symptoms in the third trimester of her pregnancy. Physiologic changes during pregnancy may induce
rapid onset symptoms from these normally asymptomatic lesions. By the seventh month of gestation, the gravid uterus begins to compress the
vena cava causing obstruction or functional closure . Venous obstruction and increased intra-abdominal pressure cause redistribution and
increased blood flow volume through the vertebral venous plexus, resulting in the expansion and growth of previously existing vertebral
hemangiomas. This is the most important contributing factor in the clinical manifestation of a pregnancy-induced symptom . The hormonal
changes taking place during pregnancy have also been implicated for a growth-promoting effect on an already existing hemangioma of the
spine, mainly through structural changes within the vessel wall . Maternal progesterone may increase the venous distensibility. The
endothelial growth-promoting effect of estrogen may contribute to an increase in size of a preexisting hemangioma. Relaxin may have an
effect on the vessel walls as well . However, immunohistochemical analysis done on vertebral hemangiomas has not been able to demonstrate
estrogen and progesterone receptors on tumor tissue and this implicates a hemodynamic rather than a hormonal cause for disease progression.
Usually incidental, asymptomatic, and solitary, these are benign vascular lesions that can give rise to symptoms in rare circumstances. Back
pain followed by acutely or subacutely progressing paraplegia and sensory loss were the typical presenting symptoms. More than half of the
cases in the literature developed paraplegia within 1 month of onset of back pain . It is postulated that neurological symptoms may be
produced by one or more of the following mechanisms: compression fracture of involved vertebrae, sudden hemorrhage into the extradural
space, hypertrophy of the posterior cortex of the vertebral body, or enlargement of the lamina and facets as a result of the angiomatous
invasion, spinal cord ischemia caused by “steal” and subperiosteal growth of the tumor, and spinal cord compression from extradural mass .
On plain radiographs, vertebral hemangiomas exhibit a characteristic vertically striated or irregular honeycomb pattern. On axial computed
tomography, they have a “polka-dot” pattern as the vertical trabeculae are imaged in cross-section . As for diagnosis of vertebral
hemangiomas, MRI is the first diagnostic choice in pregnancy, because it saves the patient and the fetus from ionizing radiation. According
to Pomeranz , the characteristic MRI appearance of a vertebral hemangioma is a hyperintense, mottled, or “starburst” signal on T1- and
T2-weighted images. After an injection of gadolinium–diethylenetriaminepentaaceticacid, the extradural portion enhances more evidently,
compared with that of the vertebral body. The histological appearance of hemangiomas consists of benign vascular proliferation with normal
capillary and venous structure . Two types have been described: cavernous and capillary. The most common type of vertebral hemangioma is the
cavernous type, which is characterized by large sinusoidal spaces lined by a single layer of epithelium. The capillary type of vertebral
hemangioma differs from the cavernous type only by having smaller vascular channels. Surgery, radiotherapy, embolization, and various
combinations of these have been used in the treatment of symptomatic vertebral hemangiomas. More recently vertebroplasty has been used in
the treatment of symptomatic vertebral hemangiomas. Pregnancy is a relative contraindication to radiotherapy. Embolization is not risk free
especially during pregnancy, and complications include vascular injury and radiation exposure to the fetus during fluoroscopy . Although
endovascular embolization (EE) with particulate agents such as polyvinyl alcohol foam produce dramatic but usually transient remission,
Bouchez et al. reported the first case of a pregnant patient who had a vertebral hemangioma that was embolized successfully and the patient
recovered completely; long-term follow-up is needed to assess the efficacy of this procedure. The second case was reported by Kiroglu et
al., in which there was no compression fracture, so EE was performed as the first treatment choice, but at the end of 2 uneventful years
after EE treatment, the patient’s complaints and pains recurred. Various surgical approaches and techniques are available for symptomatic
vertebral hemangioma, and they need to be tailored for each patient according to the location of the tumor within the vertebra and the
patient's symptoms. Percutaneous vertebroplasty (PV), usually with the use of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), is a relatively new treatment
option for symptomatic vertebral hemangioma. Patients who present with pathologic compression fracture and intractable back pain are good
candidates for PV . However, because PV is a palliative treatment and has the risk of PMMA leakage into the spinal canal, it may be
contraindicated in patients with epidural hemangioma . Progressive neurologic deficit is the main indication for surgical decompression,
especially with rapid onset of symptoms . Anterior corpectomy is potentially curative, and adequate decompression can be achieved in
patients with a vertebral body tumor, whereas hemangioma is a highly vascular tumor and intraoperative blood loss may be substantial by
corpectomy, and blood transfusion would often be necessary. Laminectomy may afford adequate decompression in selected cases, particularly
those with an epidural tumor or with laminar involvement. Laminectomy is apparently not curative when the hemangioma involves the vertebral
body. Although laminectomy may be temporarily effective as an emergency decompression procedure, recurrence of symptoms is common,
eventually necessitating a definitive treatment for the vertebral body tumor . Although mechanical integrity of the anterior and middle
columns was partially restored by vertebroplasty, Castel et al. also advocated addition of posterior segmental fixation. The timing of
surgery in cases diagnosed antepartum is controversial, as many patients show spontaneous remission after delivery . However, the symptoms
do not disappear completely or often can recur, requiring surgery at a later time. A management algorithm based on a literature review
highlighted two main key aspects in the decision-making process of such scenarios: the week of gestation and the severity of the neurologic
impairment. Conservative management, consisting of rest and pain control, was offered to patients approaching the end of their pregnancy
(32nd week of gestation or later) or those with only mild or moderate symptoms, whereas any substantial or progressing neurologic deficit
was considered an indication for surgical decompression . Indeed, the accepted norm is to delay intervention until a viable fetus can be
delivered should premature labor occur . But in the presence of progressive neurological deficits, decompression is essential at the
earliest to achieve an optimal outcome especially in those cases that present in the second trimester or early third trimester. The
treatment algorithm proposed by Chi et al. based on the duration of pregnancy and status of neurological deficits is useful in planning
treatment in these cases. Patients at 36 weeks of gestation or later, are observed, if neurological function deteriorates, then one can
consider induction of delivery followed by appropriate management of the tumor. Between 32 and 36 weeks of gestation, expectant observation
is considered; surgery is reserved for severe cases of paraplegia. For patients in whom gestation is earlier than 32 weeks, prepartum
surgical treatment should be considered for those who are severely symptomatic . Our patient underwent a cesarean section and the day after
a corpectomy was performed. A total of 23 cases of pregnancy-related vertebral hemangioma dating back to 1927 were identified. Prepartum
surgery was performed in seven patients, postpartum surgery in 12 , and no surgery in four . Among patients treated surgically before
childbirth, four experienced preterm labor ; prepartum surgery was also associated with two maternal deaths and two fetal deaths , but all
occurred prior to 1985 (data on cases of death have not been explained in the literature). Among patients treated surgically after
childbirth, two improved following delivery , two experienced transient improvement followed by decline and persistent deficit, and five
deteriorated or had persistent deficits after delivery . Excluding deaths, all patients demonstrated excellent neurological recovery,
independent ambulation, and resolution of pain at follow-up review (range 4 months to 5 years). Mild paresthesia and weakness not
interfering with activities of daily living were found in two patients . Excluding the two perinatal deaths, there were no reports of
adverse effects on the infants, and no adverse effects were noted in the children during the follow-up periods reported. Revision surgery
for worsening symptoms after the initial surgery was performed in two patients . Pregnancy is a well-recognized condition during which
vertebral hemangiomas may become clinically significant. Extensive neurological involvement which is rapidly progressive due to compression
should be considered for immediate decompression. Despite the accumulating information on the management of symptomatic hemangiomas during
pregnancy, we found no class I data to support any specific modality of treatment, nor the preferred timing for its application. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All the
authors participated in the literature search, interpretation of the articles reviewed and analysis of the data and review of the
manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
