Laparoscopy-assisted surgery for either rectal or gastric cancer has been increasingly performed. However, simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted
resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer is rarely reported in the literature. In our study, 3 cases of patients who received
simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer were recorded. The results showed that all 3 patients
recovered well, with only 253 minutes of mean operation time, 57 mL of intraoperative blood loss, 5 cm of assisted operation incision, 4
days to resume oral intake, 12 days' postoperative hospital stay, and no complication or mortality. No recurrence or metastasis was found
within the follow-up period of 22 months. When performed by surgeons with plentiful experience in laparoscopic technology, simultaneous
laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer is safe and feasible, with the benefits of minimal trauma, fast
recovery, and better cosmetic results, compared with open surgery. The occurrence of synchronous cancer is a life-threatening condition and
remains an issue of great interest and challenge to surgeons. Although the coexistence of synchronous gastric and rectal cancer is rare, it
has been reported that the frequency of synchronous rectal and gastric cancer ranges between 1.3% and 3.9%.1,2 Surgical resection is
unequivocally essential for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer. A wide incision is required for conventional open surgery in case of
these diseases, which results in a poor cosmetic outcome and an impaired quality of postoperative life. In addition, long surgical time and
severe trauma may result in postoperative complications and a delayed recovery. Laparoscopy-assisted resection for either rectal or gastric
cancer is performed worldwide, and its advantages over conventional open surgery have been demonstrated.3–5 However, simultaneous
laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer is rarely reported. In the present study, we present 3 cases of
synchronous rectal and gastric cancer, which were resected at the same laparoscopic surgery, and we discuss its feasibility and advantages.
A 78-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in March 2010 with complaints of altering bowel habits for 1-month duration. Her past
medical history included hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, multiple cerebral infarction, and lung infection. Digital rectal
examination revealed a palpable, tough, and mobile mass 6 cm from the anal verge. Serum CA19-9 level was 76 U/mL, and the Carcinoembryonie
Antigen (CEA) level was normal. Colonoscopy demonstrated a circumferential mass 5 cm away from the anal verge, and biopsy findings showed a
moderately differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma (Figure 1). Computed tomography scan of the abdomen revealed rectal cancer invading the
serosa layer with enlargement of surrounding lymph nodes, and an unexpected duodenal diverticulum (Figure 2). To confirm the character of
the duodenal diverticulum, gastroscopy was performed, which showed no abnormalities in the duodenum but revealed an ulcerative lesion
located in the body of the stomach, and biopsy confirmed the gastric lesion to be poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma (Figure 3).
Furthermore, endoscopic ultrasonography indicated that the tumor in the stomach had invaded the serosa layer, with no obvious lymph node
enlargement. A chest radiograph and radionuclide bone scan were performed to exclude distal metastasis. The preoperative staging of gastric
cancer was T3N0M0, stage IIA, and of rectal cancer it was T4N0∼1M0, stage IIB∼IIIB (Table 1). Rectal cancer diagnosed by colonoscopy and
biopsy. Rectal cancer and duodenal diverticulum presented by computed tomography scan. Gastric cancer diagnosed by gastroscopy and biopsy.
Preoperative Clinical Data of the 3 Patients BMI, body mass index. A 75-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital in April 2010
because of intermittent left lower abdominal pain for 1 year, which had been aggravated for 2 weeks. Her past medical history was positive
for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and cerebral infarction. No abnormality was detected on her physical examination. Colonoscopy revealed a
circumferential mass 12 cm from the anal verge, and biopsy results showed moderately differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma. A computed
tomography scan of the abdomen demonstrated rectal cancer as well as thickening of the gastric antrum, with no lymph node enlargement around
the rectum or stomach. Gastroscopy was performed to identify the lesion of the gastric antrum, and the biopsy results showed moderately to
poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma. Chest radiography and a radionuclide bone scan were performed to exclude distal metastasis of
either rectal or gastric cancer. The preoperative staging of gastric cancer was T3N0M0, stage IIA, and of rectal cancer was T3N0M0, stage
IIA. A 55-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital in December 2012 because of upper abdominal pain with bloody stool for 6
months. No abnormality was detected on physical examination. Colonoscopy revealed a circumferential mass 11 cm from the anal verge, and
biopsy results showed moderately differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma. Gastroscopy revealed a lesion of the gastric antrum, and the biopsy
results showed moderately to poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography scan of the abdomen demonstrated rectal
cancer invading the serosa layer, with lymph node enlargement around the rectum, as well as gastric cancer invading the mucous layer, with
no lymph node enlargement around the stomach. Chest radiography and a radionuclide bone scan were performed to exclude distal metastasis of
either rectal or gastric cancer. The preoperative staging of gastric cancer was T1-2N0M0, stage IA–IB, and of rectal cancer was T4N0-1M0,
stage IIB–IIIB. All 3 patients were diagnosed as having synchronous rectal and distal gastric cancer. Various treatment strategies were
discussed, and simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted low anterior resection for rectal cancer and laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy with
D2 lymphadenectomy were chosen. Sufficient preoperative evaluations were performed because of age and complicated past medical history in
all patients. Relevant diagnostic examinations including Holter monitoring, echocardiography, pulmonary function tests, and brain magnetic
resonance imaging scans were performed, and subspecialties including anesthesia, surgical intensive care unit, cardiology, endocrinology,
and neurology were consulted. Informed consent was given for simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric
cancer. Details of the surgical procedures for the 3 patients were similar. The operations were performed under general anesthesia. A Veress
needle was used to establish a pneumoperitoneum, and the intra-abdominal pressure was maintained at a level of 15 mm Hg. A 10-mm trocar was
placed just below the umbilicus for a 30-degree videoscope, and another 3 trocars were placed for manipulation at McBurney point, left and
right lateral side of the rectus abdominis at the level of umbilicus, respectively. The patients were first placed in the lithotomy position
to finish the low anterior resection. The sigmoid mesocolon and mesorectum were dissected along the inner side of the ureter by harmonic
scalpel. The vessels and lymphatics were ligated at the root of the inferior mesenteric vessel with polymer clips (Figure 4), whereas the
distal rectum was transected intracorporeally with a 60-mm laparoscopic linear stapler (Figure 5). After that, the first part of the
operation was completed. Ligation of the inferior mesenteric vessel. Transection of the distal rectum intracorporeally. Then the patients
were placed in the Trendelenburg position and another trocar was placed at the crossing point of the left costal margin and the anterior
axillary line to complete the lymph node dissection and distal gastrectomy. First, the greater omentum, together with the frontal layer of
the transverse mesocolon and the pancreatic capsule, were dissected from the splenic flexure to the hepatic flexure (Figure 6). The right
gastroepiploic vessels were ligated and the No. 6 lymph nodes were dissected simultaneously. Then the hepatoduodenal ligament and the No. 12
lymph nodes were dissected. Afterward, the right gastric artery, common hepatic artery, and left gastric artery were ligated gradually,
together with the dissection of the No. 5, No. 8, and No. 7 lymph nodes, respectively (Figure 7). After the dissection of the No. 1 lymph
nodes, the stomach was totally mobilized with an adequate perigastric lymphadenectomy. The distal stomach and the first portion of the
duodenum were also transected intracorporeally with a 60-mm laparoscopic linear stapler (Figure 8). After that, the second part of the
operation was completed. Dissection of the greater omentum. Lymph node dissection of gastric cancer. Transection of the distal stomach and
the first portion of the duodenum intracorporeally. The final part of the operation was to finish the digestive reconstruction and complete
the sigmoidorectostomy. A 5-cm median epigastric incision was made to remove the proximal rectum, the distal stomach, and the surrounding
tissues of the rectum and stomach. A Billroth II reconstruction with a 25-mm intraluminal stapler was completed extracorporeally for gastric
cancer. Correspondingly, the sigmoidorectostomy was completed with a 29-mm intraluminal stapler intracorporeally (Figure 9). Finally, two
drainage tubes were placed below the liver and in the pelvic cavity, respectively. Anastomosis of rectal cancer intracorporeally. The
surgical procedures of 3 patients were performed without any intraoperative complication. Mean operation time was 253 minutes, and
intraoperative blood loss was 57 mL. The patients recovered well and resumed an oral diet in 4 days. The average postoperative hospital stay
was 12 days. Meanwhile, postoperatively complication or mortality did not occur (Table 2). A 5-cm assisted incision led to a better cosmetic
result and improved postoperative quality of life for patients (Figure 10). Perioperative and Postoperative Data of the 3 Patients LALAR =
laparoscopy-assisted low anterior resection; LADG = laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy. A short operation incision and good cosmetic
results of the surgery. The pathologic examination of case 1 showed moderately to poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma invading the
serosa layer with no lymph node metastasis and poorly differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma invading the muscular layer, with no lymph node
metastasis. In contrast, the pathologic result of case 2 showed moderately to poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma invading the
serosa layer, with 2 of the 20 lymph nodes' metastasis and moderately differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma invading the muscular layer with
no lymph node metastasis. In addition, the pathologic result of case 3 showed moderately to poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma
invading the submucosa layer with no lymph node metastasis and moderately differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma invading the serosa layer
with 1 of the 24 lymph node metastases (Figure 11). Gross specimens and microscopic results of gastric cancer and rectal cancer (Case 1). On
the basis of their pathologic reports, all 3 patients were recommended for adjuvant chemotherapy, but only the last patient (case 3)
accepted a XELOX regimen of adjuvant chemotherapy, and the other two patients declined chemotherapy because of their fear of the side
effects of chemotherapeutic agents. However, all 3 cases complied with regular follow-up and, fortunately, postoperative surveillance,
including serum tumor markers, chest radiographs, abdomen computed tomography scan, and endoscopy, revealed no recurrence or metastasis in
all patients (Table 3). Oncologic Outcomes of the 3 Patients The incidence of multiple primary cancers (MPC), especially synchronous MPC, is
rare, ranging between 0.5% and 3% in China, which is much lower than that in other countries and may be related to the difference in
diagnostic level.6 In our study, the first two patients were admitted to the hospital for rectal cancer, but they did not present with
specific symptoms of gastric cancer, which was diagnosed incidentally by computed tomography scan of the abdomen for exclusion of abdominal
metastasis of “primary tumor” rectal cancer. Therefore, complete laboratory examinations and imaging studies such as computed tomography
scan of the abdomen, endoscopy, and tumor markers should be arranged to prevent other tumors from being missed. Thus, it emphasizes the
importance of a thorough investigation and exploration before carrying out elective surgery. As a main treatment for digestive synchronous
MPC, simultaneous surgical resection indicates more difficulties and higher operation risk than surgical resection for single tumor. Today,
laparoscopy-assisted surgery has been performed worldwide and laparoscopy-assisted colorectal surgery has even been advocated as the
standard treatment for colorectal cancer because of less trauma and faster recovery, with similar oncologic outcome.7,8 However,
simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted resection for digestive synchronous MPC is rarely reported in the literature. One case report of
esophageal cancer with a sigmoid colon tumor treated by laparoscopic surgery and another case of a laparoscopic resection of sporadic
synchronous gastric and jejunal gastrointestinal stromal tumors indicated that laparoscopy-assisted resection for digestive synchronous MPC
is feasible and safe.9,10 Ten cases of simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancers have been
reported by 3 surgeons, and the results showed a fast recovery, low incidence of complication, and a good cosmetic result.11–13 In the
present study, various treatment strategies were discussed for these 3 patients and finally surgical resection was arranged, although the
operation was challenging because of the advanced ages and multiple medical diseases of these patients. A conventional open resection for
synchronous rectal and gastric cancer required a wide incision from the xiphoid to the pubic symphysis, which may lead to a poor cosmetic
result and impaired quality of postoperative life. Meanwhile, a long operation time and severe trauma may result in postoperative
complications and a delayed recovery. Our surgeons have performed numerous laparoscopy-assisted surgeries and are experienced in
laparoscopic technology, so we performed simultaneous laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer. Instead of a
wide incision, we made several small incisions for trocar placement and a 5-cm assisted incision, which led to a better cosmetic result and
improved quality of postoperative life. Meanwhile, patients had less postoperative pain and analgesic use, early mobility, quick recovery of
gastrointestinal function, and fewer postoperative complications such as pneumonia, bed sores, and thromboembolism. In addition, advanced
laparoscopic instruments containing harmonic scalpel, titanium, and polymer clips ensured a better hemostatic effect and reduced
intraoperative bleeding. All patients regained mobility on the second postoperative day, resumed oral intake on the third to fifth
postoperative day, and were discharged on the 10th to 14th postoperative day. The results were similar to those of single laparoscopy-
assisted gastrectomy and even better than those of single open gastrectomy,14,15 which supported the feasibility and advantages of this
operation. Furthermore, at least 16 lymph nodes were dissected for both rectal and gastric cancers, and no recurrence or metastasis was
found within a mean follow-up of 22 months, which suggested a similar oncologic outcome compared with open surgery. In the present study,
laparoscopic rectal resection was performed first and then laparoscopic gastric resection and reconstruction were followed, which was
different from some reports in which laparoscopic gastric resection and reconstruction were performed before laparoscopic rectal
resection.11 In theory, if laparoscopic gastric resection was performed first and in case of severe intraoperative bleeding, blood
accumulating in the pelvic cavity might affect the observation and operation of the laparoscopic rectal resection. Our surgeons, who are
specialized in laparoscopic surgery, have performed numerous laparoscopic surgeries including appendectomy, pancolectomy, radical resection
for colon and rectal caner, and radical resection for gastric cancer. Thus, compared with other 10 reported cases of simultaneous
laparoscopy-assisted resection for synchronous rectal and gastric cancers, patients in the present study were older but had less
intraoperative blood loss, shorter operation time, and shorter postoperative hospital stays. In addition, the role of multidisciplinary
physicians in a safe recovery of patients seems to be vital. The departments of cardiology, endocrinology, and neurology were consulted for
blood pressure and blood glucose control to reduce the risk of malignant hypertension, cerebral infarction, and postoperative delirium.
Blood pressure was in control, especially during anesthesia induction, to avoid cerebral accident. In addition, the surgical intensive care
unit made great contributions to help early resuscitation and hold homeostasis to create conditions for early mobility. The advanced
laparoscopic technology has become an attractive method in the treatment of digestive synchronous MPC, especially for elderly patients. If
laparoscopic surgery is performed by experienced surgeons for synchronous rectal and gastric cancer simultaneously, it is safe and feasible,
with the advantages of a better cosmetic result, faster recovery, and a lower incidence of complications, with no influence on the short-
term prognosis of cancer. In addition, closed cooperation among multidisciplinary physicians plays a crucial role in the care of the patient
perioperatively.
