Disclosure of conflicts of interest and financial support: Dr. Tam is a grant recipient from Ethicon BioSurgery. Dr. Harkins is a consultant
for Intuitive Surgical, Ethicon, and Abbott. Dr. Davies is a consultant for Boston Scientific and Gynecare. Application of oxidized
regenerated cellulose is commonly performed in laparoscopy to achieve hemostasis during surgery. The appearance of an abscess resembles
oxidized regenerated cellulose, causing imaging studies to be difficult to interpret. We describe the cases of 3 patients who underwent
oxidized regenerated cellulose placement during laparoscopic gynecologic surgery. They subsequently presented with signs and symptoms
resembling an abscess. Computed tomographic imaging can be challenging to interpret in such cases; radiologic findings can be used to
differentiate between the characteristics of oxidized regenerated cellulose and those of abscess formation on the vaginal cuff. Oxidized
regenerated cellulose has an appearance that often mimics postsurgical abscess formation. There are distinct characteristics that
distinguish both findings. It is essential that patients' records accurately describe the presence and location of regenerated oxidized
cellulose when placed intraoperatively, and this information must be relayed to the interpreting radiologist to facilitate medical diagnosis
and guide clinical management. Topical hemostatic agents are increasingly used in laparoscopic surgery to control intraoperative bleeding.
Surgicel SNoW (structured nonwoven material) is composed of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) belonging to the Surgicel family of
absorbable hemostats (Ethicon, Somerville, New Jersey). These thrombogenic agents are effective in maintaining hemostasis.1 The knit mesh
facilitates platelet adhesion and aggregation, further improving surgical visibility during surgery. The fabric material also allows easy
passage of the hemostatic agent through a laparoscopic port.2 Like other ORC products, Surgicel SNoW is a plant-based nonwoven fabric with
interlocking fibers designed to facilitate rapid hemostasis. It is an advanced product that has been reported to cause minimal tissue
reaction. Clinical data on Surgicel absorbable hemostats claim broad-spectrum bactericidal activity against gram-positive and gram-negative
organisms including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, penicillin-resistant Streptococcus
pneumoniae, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis.3 Computed tomography (CT) imaging can be challenging to interpret because
oxidized cellulose appears similar to a pelvic abscess. We present 3 case reports of patients who had placement of Surgicel SNoW during
surgery. All 3 women presented within 2 weeks after surgery with signs and symptoms concerning for pelvic abscess. We describe
distinguishing characteristics on imaging studies to differentiate abscess formation from ORC. This information facilitates proper
interpretation of CT scans and prevents the inaccurate diagnosis of abscess formation. A 50-year-old patient with menorrhagia and failed
endometrial ablation underwent a laparoscopic hysterectomy. She had extensive pelvic and abdominal adhesions and endometriosis. Laparoscopic
placement of Surgicel SNoW at the vaginal cuff was performed at case completion. The patient's immediate postoperative course was
uncomplicated, and she was discharged home the next day. The patient presented to the emergency department on postoperative day 6 with
complaints of sudden onset of right-sided abdominal and pelvic pain. She was afebrile, and her vital signs were all normal. Abdominal
examination showed normal postoperative tenderness. A complete blood count, basic metabolic profile (BMP), and urinalysis were performed,
and the findings were all within normal limits. Chest radiographs and blood and urine cultures also yielded negative findings. CT scan of
the pelvis with intravenous contrast showed expected postsurgical findings with an air-containing collection along the superior margin of
the vaginal cuff. There was a localized, punctate, irregular collection of gas without an air-fluid level (Figure 1). Mild, diffuse fat
stranding in the pelvis was noted, most likely from postoperative changes. No focal fluid collection was identified to suggest an abscess.
The interpreting radiologist reviewed the operative note with the gynecologist who performed the surgery and reported that this imaging
finding was characteristic of ORC. The patient was discharged from the emergency department and scheduled for follow-up as an outpatient.
The rest of her postoperative course was uneventful. CT shows a localized collection of gas (arrow) that is punctate and irregular with no
air-fluid levels, characteristic of ORC. A 45-year-old woman underwent robotic-assisted laparoscopic hysterectomy, left salpingo-
oophorectomy, right salpingectomy, cystoscopy, and coincidental appendectomy for endometriosis. Intraoperatively, the patient was found to
have a 14-week-size uterus and extensive endometriosis. Surgicel SNoW was placed as a single sheet over the vaginal cuff. The patient
tolerated the procedure well and was discharged the following day. Ten days later, the patient presented to the emergency department with
worsening abdominal pain, tachycardia, and brownish vaginal discharge. A complete blood count showed leukocytosis. BMP and urinalysis showed
normal findings. A CT scan with intravenous contrast showed pelvic fat stranding with a rim-enhancing 7.6 × 5.1–cm fluid collection and
small foci of air, characteristic of an abscess (Figure 2). The patient was admitted to the hospital overnight and treated with intravenous
antibiotics. She remained afebrile for the entire hospital course. Leukocytosis decreased from a white blood cell count of 16.4 × 109/L on
admission to 9.4 × 109/L. The fluid collection drained spontaneously, and the patient was discharged the following day. CT shows a rim-
enhancing fluid collection (arrow) containing a small air bubble, characteristic of an abscess. A 43-year-old patient underwent a total
laparoscopic hysterectomy, left oophorectomy, and bilateral salpingectomy for pelvic pain and endometriosis. Intraoperatively, she was found
to have endometriosis with severe pelvic adhesive disease. Surgicel SNoW was placed at the vaginal cuff. The surgery was uncomplicated. The
patient was discharged home in excellent condition after an overnight hospital stay. Four days after surgery, the patient presented to the
emergency department with malaise and reported having a fever at home. She denied any vaginal bleeding or discharge. She was afebrile on
admission and had appropriate postoperative tenderness on left lower-quadrant abdominal palpation. The initial white blood cell count was
16.52 × 103/NL and remained elevated at 14.63 × 103/NL when repeated 24 hours later. BMP and urinalysis showed normal findings. A CT scan
with intravenous contrast showed a large area of inflammatory fat stranding on the left side of the pelvis and a 6.6 × 3.7–cm irregular
fluid collection with a thin enhancing rim along the lateral margin (Figure 3). A sagittal reformatted image showed the fluid collection
with small bubbles of air anteriorly, characteristic of an abscess (Figure 4). The patient was treated with oral antibiotics, clindamycin,
and metronidazole with close outpatient follow-up. CT shows a rim-enhancing and irregular fluid collection (arrow), characteristic of an
abscess. CT sagittal view shows a rim-enhancing fluid collection (black arrow) with small bubbles of air anteriorly (white arrow),
characteristic of an abscess. Topical hemostatic agents are becoming commonly used in gynecologic surgery, especially in the setting of
laparoscopic procedures. Although the mechanism of action is not fully understood, oxidized cellulose forms a gelatinous mass when saturated
with blood. It acts as a matrix for fibrin deposition, promoting platelet plug formation and aiding surgical hemostasis. It also causes
local vasoconstriction, further controlling intraoperative bleeding.4 In addition to Surgicel SNoW, other ORC products include Surgicel
Original, Surgicel Nu-Knit, and Surgicel Fibrillar. Surgicel Original is composed of a loosely knit ORC providing a matrix for platelet
adhesion. Surgicel Nu-Knit is a densely woven knit of ORC providing a matrix for platelet adhesion and aggregation useful during heavy
bleeding. Surgicel Fibrillar is a soft layered ORC with a mechanism of action similar to Surgicel Nu-Knit.3 These absorbable hemostats are
primarily used to control bleeding during surgery when conventional methods for hemostasis fail. The ORC material gradually reabsorbs and is
bounded by granulation tissue at 14 days, surrounded by very dense suppuration at 21 days, further enclosed with fibroblastic tissue at 30
days, and then completely invisible at 45 days.5 Therefore patients with oxidized cellulose placed during surgery may present
postoperatively with the hemostatic material still present. Radiologic examinations of our 3 patients showed the imaging difference between
the bioabsorbable hemostat and an abscess. The first patient did not have an abscess, as depicted with radiologic images showing features of
a confined, punctate, irregular collection of gas without an air-fluid level. The second and third patients did have pelvic abscesses,
characterized through imaging as rim-enhancing fluid collections with scattered air bubbles. These findings are consistent with those
previously described in the literature as being distinguishing characteristics of oxidized cellulose versus an abscess. During the
degradation process, ORC can trap air, resulting in multiple imaging patterns, which can be misinterpreted as an abscess. Most of the case
reports describing oxidized cellulose imitating a postsurgical abscess6–8 and granuloma formation mimicking local tumor recurrence9–11 have
been published in the general and urologic surgery literature. Only 1 recent case report in the gynecologic literature described ORC
mimicking a pelvic abscess.12 A CT scan is typically ordered to evaluate for any postoperative abscesses. Oxidized cellulose appears as a
collection of gas at the surgical site, thus imitating the appearance of an abscess on CT scan.6 Imaging features of ORC that help
differentiate it from an abscess include a unifocal collection of gas with a linear or punctate pattern, without an air-fluid level.8 The
unusual pattern of the air collection is likely caused by air trapped within the spaces of the hemostatic gauze material. In comparison, a
postoperative abscess typically shows air-fluid levels and scattered air bubbles on CT scan.8 Imaging features of either ORC or an abscess
are nonspecific and could present a diagnostic dilemma. Magnetic resonance or sonographic imaging has been suggested as an alternative
diagnostic modality to differentiate between abscess formation and the presence of retained oxidized cellulose.13,14 Awareness of Surgicel
SNoW placement and its effects on surrounding tissues enables clinicians to accurately interpret radiologic findings. With increasing
placement of absorbable hemostatic agents in laparoscopic gynecologic surgery, it is important to discern the presence of oxidized cellulose
versus an abscess. Knowledge of imaging characteristics in addition to the patient's clinical symptoms will help differentiate between these
2 conflicting diagnoses. Although literature from Ethicon states that Surgicel SNoW absorbs in 7 to 14 days,3 histopathologic analysis in
animal research has proved otherwise. Alpaslan et al5 reported that ORC material slowly resorbed and could still be detected in a few
specimens at 30 days. It was not until day 45 that the Surgicel material was completely undetectable. Melamed et al14 reported that oxidized
cellulose (Surgicel) appeared like a complex echogenic pelvic mass mimicking an abscess up to 35 days after surgery. The concern is not one
of absolute absorption of Surgicel but of the characteristics and duration of the postsurgical changes observed at the site of the retained
topical hemostatic material. It is essential to notify the interpreting radiologist when a local hemostatic agent is used in surgical
practice. Proper communication between the gynecologic surgeon and the radiologist is crucial when ORC is placed intraoperatively on the
vaginal cuff. There is valid concern about the risk of vaginal cuff infection after a laparoscopic hysterectomy because the vagina is a
nonsterile field despite preoperative vaginal preparation. It must be taken into consideration that oxidized cellulose could be the cause of
the fluid and gas collection seen on CT scan instead of a postoperative vaginal abscess. A more accurate diagnosis is essential to properly
manage patients' postoperative complaints, thereby preventing unnecessary reoperations or further medical and/or surgical interventions.
