Localized involutional lipoatrophy of subcutaneous adipose tissue may develop due to subcutaneous injection of pharmaceutical preparations.
The pathogenesis of this adverse drug reaction is unknown. The progression of localized involutional lipoatrophy ceases and occasionally it
resolves after withdrawing the inducing agent. In case of localized involutional lipoatrophy due to subcutaneous insulin therapy, low-dose
systemic corticosteroids may be curative despite ongoing insulin administration. We report a recurrence of insulin-induced localized
involutional lipoatrophy at the abdominal wall in a 57-year-old Caucasian woman with type-1 diabetes on continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion. The first episode of insulin-induced localized involutional lipoatrophy two years previously had been cured by oral prednisone.
The recurrence was treated immediately with 10mg prednisone once daily for five months, and was cured thereafter. The insulin analog
preparation (Humalog™) and the insulin pump equipment (Accu-Chek Spirit™) applied were the same during both episodes. Both episodes were
preceded by a temporary disturbance of the immune balance (the first episode by vaccination, the second episode through shingles). This case
confirms that insulin-induced localized involutional lipoatrophy in type-1 diabetes can occur again, and can be cured by systemic
corticosteroids. We suggest that temporary disturbance of the immune balance may trigger this transitory idiosyncratic reaction in a
susceptible individual. Localized involutional lipoatrophy (LIL) of subcutaneous adipose tissue is a rare condition, characterized by
reduction of fat cells in size, and, occasionally, in number. The fat tissue involution develops without symptomatic inflammation, although
histopathology of incipient cases may reveal few inflammatory cells among the atrophic fat tissue. Muscle tissue is never involved. Lopez et
al. have obtained biopsies of lipoatrophies in three patients shortly after the last insulin injection; histopathology showed some
lymphocytic, eosinophilic, and mast cell infiltration. However, direct immunofluorescence for immunoglobulin G (IgG), for immunoglobulin A
(IgA), immunoglobulin M (IgM), complement component 3 (C3) and fibrin could not be demonstrated , in line with other authors . Adipose
tissue was atrophied, with focal fibrosis . Adipocytes were shrunk and reduced in number, consistent with previous reports . Milan et al.
provided ultrastructural analyses on chronic lipoatrophies, having existed for eight months to six years (median 26 months) in three
patients using Humalog™. They showed fat cell atrophy, deposition of amyloid, and numerous perivascular preadipocytes. Quantitative
polymerase chain reaction revealed a reduction in adipocyte-specific messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) (perilipin, adiponectin, fatty acid-
binding protein 4, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2), whereas mRNA of adipocyte enhancer-binding protein 1 was enhanced,
and of leptin was reduced to zero . There was no evidence of inflammation. Rather, the histopathologic pattern was like that of fat tissue
undergoing starvation, except for the amyloid deposition, that is conglomerates of denaturated exogenous insulin or insulin analog . The
etiopathogenesis of the LIL is unknown; it is associated with various immunological disorders (for example type-1 diabetes mellitus,
immunogenic thyreopathies) and has a female preponderance. LIL is probably idiopathic, but develops predominantly after local mechanical
trauma or subcutaneous administration of pharmaceuticals (for example insulin, antibiotics, vaccines, corticosteroids, growth hormone). The
drug-induced type of LIL stops spreading after withdrawal of the agent. In children, insulin-induced LIL may resolve spontaneously after
changing the insulin brand . We have recently reported on a patient with incipient LIL induced by external insulin pump therapy with
Humalog™ . Within 10 months of low-dose oral prednisone treatment, the LIL resolved completely. We now report another episode of LIL in the
same patient, at an insulin infusion site close to a previously lipoatrophic area. Our patient is a 57-year-old Caucasian woman born in 1956
and diagnosed with type-1 diabetes mellitus in 1969. At the time of writing this report, in March 2014, she is still free from significant
diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. She has been treated with an insulin pump since 1984, and has been using a U-100 analog
insulin lispro (Humalog™, Eli Lilly Deutschland, Bad Homburg, Germany) since 2004. The equipment applied from 2008 onward comprised an Accu-
Chek Spirit™ insulin pump and Accu-Chek FlexLink™ infusion sets with 8mm steel cannula (all from Roche Diabetes Care, Burgdorf,
Switzerland). The cannula part of the infusion set was changed every two days, and the tubing (60cm long) was changed every 10 days,
together with the insulin reservoir inside the pump. The dose of Humalog™ was around 25 to 30 units/day. Apart from Humalog™, her current
medication consists of levothyroxine 125μg once daily because of immunogenic thyroid atrophy. Her most recent glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c)
test result (normal range 4 to 6 percent of total hemoglobin) was 6.3 percent, and her body mass index was 23 to 24kg/m2. Following a
hepatitis vaccination with Twinrix™ (GlaxoSmithKline Dresden, Germany), in 2007 and 2008, our patient had experienced a first episode of LIL
at the Humalog™ infusion sites on both sides of the umbilicus. The lipoatrophic defects were cured by low-dose oral prednisone therapy from
2009 to 2010, as we published in 2011 . After a prolonged cold between December 2011 and January 2012, herpes zoster (shingles) broke out at
the left thoracolumbar region (T 10 dermatome), and healed uneventfully in February 2012. Shortly thereafter, in March 2012, a solitary spot
of subcutaneous fat atrophy was noticed at one catheter insertion site on the abdominal wall left of the umbilicus (Figure 1), and was
diagnosed as LIL recurrence. Development of localized involutional lipoatrophy at the insulin infusion site before (15 April 2012) and
during treatment with oral prednisone (10 mg/day from 15 April 2012 to 26 June 2012, 5 mg/day until 21 August 2012). No prednisone from 22
August 2012 until December 2012. Laboratory tests were limited to determinations of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) IgG-antibody titer
(3230mIU/ml; enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), normal <149mIU/ml), VZV IgM negative; herpes simplex virus IgG-antibody titer (7 IU;
normal <0.9 IU), human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-Cw7 (positive), HLA-Cw6 (negative), HLA-B27 (negative), HLA-DR4 (negative), and HLA-DRB1*03
allele (positive). Other markers of autoimmune diseases (like antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antinuclear cytoplasmatic antibodies (ANCA)) had
previously been found negative . Because of the limited information gained from biopsies during the first episode of LIL , biopsies were not
repeated on this occasion.It was decided to carry on with the insulin preparation (Humalog™) and the pump equipment unchanged, at variance
to the first LIL episode. Oral prednisone therapy was initiated by mid-April 2012, when the atrophic area was still relatively small
(approximately 3cm in diameter, see Figure 1). The starting dose was 10mg/day, which was reduced deliberately to 5mg/day after nine weeks
(the end of June 2012), and discontinued by the end of August 2012. The reasons for discontinuation were intolerable emotional disturbances
and blood glucose instability, attributed to prednisone. At that time point, the lipoatrophy had improved (see Figure 1) but the excavation
was not entirely refilled. There were no new lipoatrophic sites. By the end of December 2012, prednisone 10mg/day was resumed in order to
improve the remaining lipoatrophy (Figure 2), and was tapered off by the end of March 2013, because the lipoatrophy was almost cured. The
total duration of 10mg prednisone daily was 20 weeks (five months). In March 2014, the LIL was still in remission. Development of localized
involutional lipoatrophy at the insulin infusion site, before (2 December 2012) and after resumption of 10mg prednisone daily (the end of
December 2012 to mid-March 2013, tapered off until 24 March 2013). No prednisone from 25 March 2013 until 31 December 2013. The present case
confirms the effectiveness of 10mg prednisone orally once daily to cure an incipient insulin-induced LIL, localized at a Humalog™ infusion
site, under conditions of ongoing subcutaneous Humalog™ application elsewhere at the abdomen. In contrast to a previous LIL episode in the
same patient , prednisone treatment was required for only five months altogether, most likely because it was started early after the onset
of the LIL when the defect was relatively small. The first episode of LIL had produced lipoatrophic defects which were more than twice as
large (6×7cm) as the present one. They had existed already for up to 11 months before treatment was initiated and, hence, required
prednisone for 10 months for complete resolution. The etiopathogenesis of insulin-induced LIL is unknown. In our case, the mechanical needle
trauma or the injected agent (Humalog™) potentially could have played a role, as both had been continued since the first LIL episode. The
importance of the injected agent is emphasized by a previous placebo-controlled study of pegylated growth hormone . While 13 percent of
patients injecting pegylated growth hormone developed LIL, none of the patients injecting a placebo (containing the same components as the
verum, except for the pegylated growth hormone, that is water, sodium phosphate, mannitol and glycine) did. The LIL resolved spontaneously
within two to three months after cessation of the growth hormone preparation . Likewise, insulin-induced LIL in a type-2 diabetic patient
resolved spontaneously within six months after cessation of any insulin treatment . In our patient it was not possible to stop the
administration of insulin by subcutaneous route. Changing the insulin brand had proved ineffective previously . Hence, we resorted to drug
treatment by oral prednisone, as in the first LIL episode two years ago . The effective dose was 10mg daily; 5mg/day was presumably not
enough (see Figures 1, 2). Glucocorticoids have proved effective in other cases of incipient insulin-induced LIL ; however, the
pathophysiological basis of the effectiveness remains to be determined. Is it the anti-inflammatory effect ? In our case, the incipient LIL
did not appear inflamed (see Figures 1, 2). Is it the corticoid effect on fat cell differentiation? Hauner et al. have demonstrated in vitro
that glucocorticosteroids and insulin stimulate the differentiation of adipocytes from preadipocytes and their enlarging. Similar to the
first episode of LIL, which was preceded by a hepatitis vaccination, the second one was also preceded by an affection of the immune system,
as evidenced by a herpes zoster rash four weeks before. Parallels may be drawn to infectious mononucleosis, an infection by another herpes
virus (Epstein-Barr virus), which triggers an adverse drug reaction (exanthema) to ampicilline in susceptible patients . Unfortunately,
previous reports on insulin-induced LIL have never considered the possibility that certain intercurrent illnesses or disturbances of the
immune system may have instigated the onset of the condition. The signal for the drug reaction (fat tissue involution) in our case most
likely originated from an interaction of the subcutaneously administered insulin lispro with some unknown transient immunologic (or other)
idiosyncratic trigger. Idiosyncrasy, however, implies individual susceptibility . Consistent with this theory, four other insulin-treated
diabetic patients with herpes zoster, two of whom with significant thyroid autoimmunity , never exhibited LIL (see Table 1). They probably
lack the specific susceptibility (E.A.C., unpublished). Clinical features of four diabetic patients with known history of herpes zoster, who
never exhibited insulin-induced localized involutional lipoatrophy (LIL) 1Neuropathy, retinopathy, nephropathy; 2continuous subcutaneous
insulin infusion with external insulin pump; 3insulin lipohypertrophy: lipoma with focal fibrosis and amyloid deposition (histologically
proven); 4thyroid autoantibody positive, 5immunogenic thyroid atrophy; 6multiple allergies; *ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. CSII,
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin. Various subcutaneously
administered pharmaceuticals including hormone preparations and vaccines may be the cause of LIL. In cases of incipient insulin-induced LIL,
the idiosyncratic trigger can obviously be turned off by systemic corticosteroid application, despite ongoing subcutaneous insulin
administration. Moreover, corticosteroid treatment may help the atrophied fat tissue to regenerate. It remains to be demonstrated if
corticosteroids are of similar effectiveness in other phases and types of LIL. The present case demonstrates the favorable outcome of
insulin lispro (Humalog™) associated localized involutional lipoatrophy (LIL), which was treated early after its inception with low-dose
prednisone. Of note, the LIL was a recurrence, and the present and the previous episode had been preceded by acute disturbances of the
immune system. These observations lend support to the hypothesis that insulin-induced LIL may be a transitory idiosyncrasy. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ANA: antinuclear antibodies; ANCA: antinuclear cytoplasmatic antibodies; C3:
complement component 3; CSII: continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion; ELISA: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HbA1c: glycated
hemoglobin; HLA: human leukocyte antigen; IgA: immunoglobulin A; IgG: immunoglobulin G; IgM: immunoglobulin M; LIL: localized involutional
lipoatrophy; mRNA: messenger ribonucleic acid; VZA: varicella-zoster virus. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests. EAC
conceived the idea, compiled the data and drafted the manuscript. RP and JP contributed patient data and the photographs and co-authored the
final version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
