Terminal deletions of chromosome 4q are associated with a broad spectrum of phenotypes including cardiac, craniofacial, digital, and
cognitive impairment. The rarity of this syndrome renders genotype-phenotype correlation difficult, which is further complicated by the
widely different phenotypes observed in patients sharing similar deletion intervals. Herein, we describe a boy with congenital hearing
impairment and a variety of moderate syndromic features that prompted SNP array analysis disclosing a heterozygous 6.9 Mb deletion in the
4q35.1q35.2 region, which emerged de novo in the maternal germ line. In addition to the index patient, we review 35 cases from the
literature and DECIPHER database to attempt genotype-phenotype correlations for a syndrome with great phenotypic variability. We delineate
intervals with recurrent phenotypic overlap, particularly for cleft palate, congenital heart defect, intellectual disability, and autism
spectrum disorder. Broad phenotypic presentation of the terminal 4q deletion syndrome is consistent with incomplete penetrance of the
individual symptoms. Terminal deletions of chromosome 4q are a rare event with an approximate incidence of 1 in 100,000 . While the majority
are de novo cases, an estimated 10-20% are the unbalanced product of a parental reciprocal translocation. Furthermore, some pediatric cases
with classical phenotypes have inherited their 4q deletion from a parent described as either normal or only mildly affected . Although there
is a high degree of phenotypic variation in those presenting overlapping deletion intervals, there is a general consensus that chromosome 4q
deletion syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability (ID), craniofacial dysmorphism, rotated or low-set ears, cleft palate (CP),
micrognathia, congenital heart defects (CHD), craniofacial, skeletal and digital abnormalities, and occasionally autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), behavioural disorders, and developmental delay . Chromosome 4q deletions are divided in two different subgroups depending on the
region of 4q that is deleted: interstitial, spanning the centromere through 4q28.3 and terminal, from 4q31.1 to 4qter. Although both
deletion types each have highly variable phenotypic associations, terminal deletion cases present a broader phenotypic range including CHD,
craniofacial and skeletal abnormalities. The 4q33 region has been proposed as critical for ulnar deficiency, cleft lip and palate, and brain
development . Herein, we report on an eight year-old boy with moderate dysmorphic features and a de novo deletion in the 4q35.1q35.2 region.
By analyzing the considerable phenotypic variability of terminal 4q deletion cases from the literature and DECIPHER database, we attempt to
delineate critical intervals for common phenotypic features. The proband is the only child of two healthy unrelated parents of German
ethnicity, born at a gestational age of 38.3 weeks, after an uncomplicated pregnancy and normal spontaneous delivery. Birth weight was
3,125 g (25th centile), APGAR scores of nine and ten at one and five minutes, respectively, cord blood pH was 7.3, and an unremarkable
otoacoustic emissions newborn hearing screening test was recorded. At four months of age, he had bilateral hearing impairment in the 60 dB
range and was fitted with hearing aids. We sequenced genes commonly screened for hearing loss, including GJB2 (MIM: 121011), GJB3 (MIM:
603324), and GJB6 (MIM: 604418). Sequencing disclosed a heterozygous mutation in GJB3 c.94C > T, p.Arg32Trp (rs1805063; minor allele
frequency T = 0.015), which is a well-described autosomal recessive deafness gene requiring a second heterozygous mutation either in trans
or in compound heterozygous configuration to convey hearing loss. A targeted deafness gene next generation sequencing panel was negative for
other pathogenic mutations. In the first year of life, he was diagnosed with aortic isthmus stenosis, corrected via balloon angioplasty, and
a patent foramen ovale. He demonstrated shortened PQ intervals on an electrocardiogram indicative of an atrioventricular node irregularity.
Regular pediatric cardiology follow-up was recommended. He also presented with chronic Eustachian tube dysfunction that was treated several
times with myringotomy tubes, as well as a bifid uvula. In the fifth year of life, a submucous CP was detected. During the same year, he
underwent corrective surgery for the CP and velopharyngeal insufficiency. Additionally, he presented with bilateral cryptorchidism that
required testicular orchiopexie. An abdominal sonogram could not rule out the possibility of a left duplex kidney; urine analysis was within
normal limits. Despite a small thyroid, he had normal thyroid function on lab testing. His blood profile was unremarkable apart from mild
concurrent deficiencies of blood coagulation factors IX (56%), XI (48%) and XII (38%). He had an elevated prothrombin time of 46.5 s
(normal: 25–39 s) and an elevated lupus anticoagulant confirmatory test of 1.26 (normal: 0.91-1.07). Further coagulation testing was
negative for von Willebrand disease. Psychological developmental evaluation at the age of three to four years showed mild general
developmental delay (six months). Subsequent evaluations showed normal development. Neurological evaluation at the age five showed a lack of
age-appropriate coordination. He also had delayed speech and language development, likely secondary, at least in part, to his hearing
impairment and extensive hospitalization history. Currently, he attends regular school and does not require remedial classroom instruction.
Chromosomes of the proband and his parents were prepared from peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures and analyzed by GTG-banding at the 500
band resolution. FISH was carried out using selected BAC probes from the deleted region. BAC DNA was labelled by nick translocation with
fluorescein-12-dUTP (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) or tetramethyl-rhodamine-5-dUTP (Roche), and hybridized overnight to denatured
chromosomes. Image acquisition and analysis were performed using FISHView 2.0 software (Applied Spectral Imaging, Edingen-Neckarhausen,
Germany). Genomic DNA (gDNA) of the proband and his parents was prepared from peripheral blood by standard salt extraction method. The
Illumina Omni1-Quad v1.0 SNP array (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), with >1.1 million SNP markers, was used for whole genome genotyping and
copy number variation (CNV) detection. 200 ng gDNA were utilized in an Illumina Infinium HD Ultra Assay according to the manufacturer’s
specifications. Data were analyzed using GenomeStudio (v2011.1) software with both cnvPartition 3.2.0 (Illumina) and QuantiSNP 2.2 copy
number algorithm . Genotypes of father, mother and proband were obtained from the SNP array for parent-of-origin determination. HaploPainter
was used in combination with manual intervention to illustrate the absence of maternal genotypes in the deletion patient. The terminal 4q
monosomy was validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) of FRG1 exons 1, 8, and DUX4L6 using the SensiMix SYBR
Green kit (Bioline, Luckenwalde, Germany). This study makes use of data generated by the DECIPHER consortium, which is funded by the
Wellcome Trust (http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk). With the combined DECIPHER cases (nos. 278055, 248967, 249192, 249458, 249476, 249536,
249541, 249655, 251175, 253743, 254882, 256186, 257358, 264122, 264942, 267783, 269176, and 276704) and review of the literature ,
phenotypic and deletion overlaps among individuals with monosomies spanning different sizes were delineated. We used the UCSC Genome Browser
Custom Track (http://genome-euro.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgCustom) to map these cases and targeted the narrowest critical interval for CP, CHD, ID,
and ASD. Conventional chromosome banding analysis of the proband revealed a 46,XY karyotype without gross abnormalities. However, the distal
G-band negative region in the long arm of chromosome 4 corresponding to q35.1q35.2 appeared to be somewhat smaller in one of the homologs,
suggestive of a loss of chromosome material (Figure 1A). Both parents had normal karyotypes without evidence of deletion on chromosome 4q.
Molecular karyotyping of the patient and his parents. (A) GTG-banding and FISH analysis of homologous chromosomes 4 in proband, mother and
father. The chromosomes are counterstained with DAPI (blue). The proximal flanking BAC RP11-188P17 is labeled with fluorescein-dUTP (green)
and the deleted BAC RP11-775P18 with rhodamine-dUTP (red). An arrowhead indicates the critical band q35.1q35.2 on the patient’s derivative
chromosome. (B) Illumina SNP array analysis (B allele frequency and log R ratio) of the 4q35.1q35.2 region in the boy with terminal 4q
deletion syndrome. (C) Selected genotypes in the deletion interval from the Illumina array are depicted for proband (left), mother (middle),
and father (right). Mendelian transmission errors (absence of maternal genotypes) in the proband are indicated in gray. To validate the
deletion in the proband, SNP array analysis was performed which disclosed a 6.9 Mb heterozygous deletion on chromosome 4q35.1q35.2
(184,046,156-190,901,117 bp from rs17074417 to rs10005101, hg19) (Figure 1B). qPCR analysis of FRG1 exons 1, 8, and DUX4L6 confirmed that
the distal deletion breakpoint extends beyond 190,939,252 bp (data not shown), encompassing a total of 42 annotated genes (18 OMIM genes).
Based on these results, the proband’s karyotype could be assigned as 46,XY,del(4)(q35.1q35.2). SNP array analyses of maternal and paternal
DNA did not indicate CNV for chromosome 4q in the parental karyotypes, consistent with a de novo deletion in the child. Informative SNPs
from the terminal 4q region for which the mother and father have divergent genotypes revealed a loss of maternal genotypes in the child
(Figure 1C), compatible with maternal origin of the deleted chromosome. FISH analysis was performed with BACs from the proximal flanking
region 4q35.1 (RP11-188P17) and the deleted region 4q35.1q35.2 (RP11-775P18, RP11-118M15, and RP11-652J12). As expected, the flanking BAC
probe hybridized to both chromosomes in the proband and parental metaphase spreads. Probes from the deleted region recognized only one
chromosome 4 homolog of the patient, but were present on both chromosome 4q35.1q35.2 copies of father and mother (Figure 1A). Obviously, the
de novo deletion is not due to a cytogenetically cryptic subtelomeric translocation in a parental karyotype. We created a map of terminal 4q
deletion syndrome cases through reviewing the literature and DECIPHER database. Figure 2 (upper section) presents 36 deletion cases
(including our own) meeting our interval criteria and after controlling for normal CNV from the Database of Genomic Variants
(http://dgv.tcag.ca/dgv/app/home). Although we had to estimate best fit intervals for cases describing deletions using various low-
resolution methods, we were able to roughly map out five critical regions for four common 4q deletion syndrome phenotypes: CP, CHD, ID, and
ASD. Figure 2 (middle section) and Additional file 1: Table S1 show the gene content of the deletion region, with an emphasis on genes
implicated in the various associated phenotypes. Additional file 2: Table S2 details case summaries including approximate deletion sizes,
inheritance and phenotype information. Genotype-phenotype correlation of terminal 4q deletions. The upper part of the figure presents the
mapped deletion intervals in chromosome 4q31.1qter including the present case, marked with a box, and 35 additional cases from DECIPHER and
the literature. The red bars delineate the deletion region for each case. Highlighted intervals indicate critical regions for common
phenotypes among the cases. Depicted, from left to right, are the intervals for cleft palate (purple), congenital heart defect region 1
(light green), intellectual disability (dark green), congenital heart defect region 2 (red), and autism spectrum disorder (turquoise).
Orange indicates the mapping interval of the DFNA24 locus. The middle section shows the gene content of the 4q31.1qter region. Likely
disease-relevant genes overlapping with critical deletion intervals are boxed. The bottom diagram shows the deCODE recombination map,
highlighting male and female recombination hotspots in the terminal 4q deletion syndrome region. A locus (chr. 4:
155,600,001-158,373,133 bp) for CP (Figure 2, purple) was mapped with two out of three cases spanning this region having CP . The gene PDGFC
is important for development of the palate with implication in non-syndromic orofacial clefting . Furthermore, Pdgfc-/- knockout mice
display clefting . Thirteen cases under evaluation indicate CP, suggesting an additional critical interval involved in palate formation.
Congenital heart defects were mapped to two separate regions. The first region (Figure 2, light green) spans a large interval (chr. 4:
160,717,000-178,579,037 bp) unable to be further subdivided based on the cases presented. There are 17 cases with various cardiac
phenotypes, 13 of which overlap with the proposed interval, with three individuals unique to this first CHD locus . This interval contains
two genes of interest (Additional file 1: Table S1). TLL1 is important for mammalian heart septation . Mice with abnormalities in this gene
die from blood circulation failure . From mouse and zebrafish experiments, HAND2 is also involved in cardiac morphogenesis, angiogenesis,
and formation of the right ventricle and aortic arch arteries and, interestingly, plays a role in limb formation . Although many individuals
presented digital and forearm deficiencies, we were not able to clearly map these phenotypes to this region as well. The second CHD locus
(chr. 4: 184,046,156-186,997,806 bp) maps in a region containing 12 out of 17 overlapping cases with cardiac phenotypes (Figure 2, red), two
of whom uniquely overlap with this region. The critical interval contains two adjacent genes, PDLIM3 and SORBS2, implicated in cardiac
development. PDLIM3 is essential for right ventricular development and thought to enhance mechanical strength stability of cardiac muscle
during mouse development . SORBS2 is highly expressed in the intercalated disk in normal cardiac tissue . Additionally, SORBS2 could have
implication in CP formation, since case #20 with CP has a small deletion (chr. 4: 186,533,075-186,997,806 bp) exclusively affecting SORBS2
and TLR3 (Figure 2, upper and middle section). Ten out of 13 total individuals with CP overlapped with this region, but the proximal border
was too large to map an informative locus. A smaller region (chr. 4: 171,144,641-175,897,427 bp) within the first CHD interval may account
for ID, with eight of 15 individuals having ID (Figure 2, dark green). While no gene is presently linked to ID in this region, the gene
SCRG1 is highly expressed in the brain and has differential regulation in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Additional file 1: Table S1).
Lack of genomic variation among healthy individuals in the Database of Genomic Variants and strong evolutionary conservation (data not
shown) further emphasize the importance of normal copy number of this ID region. A number of reports implicate chromosome 4q35.2 in ASD .
While only four cases reviewed here have ASD (Additional file 2: Table S2), all four overlap one narrow interval (chr. 4:
187,234,067-188,424,639 bp) (Figure 2, turquoise) with only three genes (MTNR1A, FAT1 and F11), that was first reported in a boy with ASD .
FAT1 has been associated with bipolar affective disorder and ASD , and is essential for controlling developmental cell proliferation . Mild
factor XI deficiency and elevated prothrombin time in our proband are presumably explained through deletion of F11 and an adjacent
coagulation gene, KLKB1. Surprisingly, the mild bleeding tendencies that can be associated with F11 and KLKB1 deletions have not been
discussed in great detail yet, although many children with terminal 4q deletion syndrome require multiple surgeries. The first clinical
symptom of our patient with a 6.9 Mb deletion (chr. 4: 184,046,156-190,901,117 bp) was mild to severe bilateral hearing loss. Two additional
cases with larger deletions, DECIPHER case 256186 and the case from Calabrese et al., 1997 , also reported hearing impairment. In a Swiss-
German kindred with autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss, an autosomal dominant deafness locus, DFNA24 (MIM: 606282) was mapped to
an 8.1 Mb region (chr. 4: 183,200,000-191,154,276 bp) (Figure 2, orange) on chromosome 4q35qter . However, in this context it is important
to emphasize that 11 normal hearing terminal 4q deletion cases overlap completely and nine normal hearing cases overlap partially with the
DFNA24 interval. Thus, loss of one locus copy is not sufficient to cause DFNA24. A cumulative effect of rare, pathogenic variants in
different deafness genes scattered across the genome (i.e. haploinsufficiency for DFNA24) could contribute to hearing impairment . Mouse
knockout experiments suggest that Casp3, which is contained in the critical region, is required for proper functioning of the cochlea .
Casp3 -/- mice indicated sensorineural hearing loss, whereas Casp3 +/- mice displayed intermediate vestibular dysfunction, as well as
marginally increased hair cell counts. Since its first description , the genotype-phenotype delineation of chromosome 4q deletion syndrome
has been complicated by extensive inconsistencies reported among individuals with similar deletion intervals. With >170 genes residing in
the terminal 4q region, delineation of the phenotypes associated with such deletions presents a tremendous task toward understanding the
complete spectral presentation of a syndrome with excessive phenotypic variability. The patient we present was analyzed with a high
resolution SNP array to delineate the deletion interval and the parental origin of the de novo rearrangement. We found it especially
challenging to finely map disease-relevant intervals with the various low-resolution techniques that used GTG banding , FISH , and the
different resolution arrays, including BAC aCGH , 1 Mb aCGH , 44 K aCGH , 105 K aCGH , and 300 K SNP array . Another limitation includes
possible variations in the depth of clinical descriptions listed, especially those from the DECIPHER database, which were not as detailed as
the published cases. Collectively, case-supported critical regions for several distinct phenotypes such as CP, CHD, ID, and ASD were
defined. In this context, it is important to emphasize that most phenotypic features that are associated with terminal 4q deletion syndrome
show incomplete penetrance and/or are rather unspecific, which renders genotype-phenotype correlations difficult. The overwhelming majority
of cases are de novo possibly due to errors during meiotic recombination leading to a loss of chromosomal material from one parental allele.
Meiotic crossovers preferentially occur at non-random hotspots which have been mapped according to frequency and spatial distribution in
both males and females . The deCODE recombination map of the 4q31.1qter region illustrates an enrichment of both male and female hotspots
along the major part of this interval (Figure 2, bottom section). However, it is also possible that deletions arise in mitotically dividing
spermatogonial and oogonial stem cells, respectively. The resulting germ-cell mosaicism would increase the likelihood of having another
child with the same deletion. In summary, the case presented here is the first to use a SNP array to determine the parent-of-origin of the
large deletion. Assuming that the same gene(s) is underlying hearing impairment in terminal 4q deletion and DFNA24 patients, it may help
further narrow the DFNA24 locus. Our case, in combination with the cases described in the literature and DECIPHER, accommodate a proposal of
critical phenotypic intervals with possible genes of interest. This review is not intended as a holistic description of terminal chromosome
4q deletion syndrome. However, the ongoing reporting of precisely defined deletion intervals with higher resolution technologies will
support eventual refinement and possible clarification of the genes and pathways responsible for the broad phenotypic presentation of
deletions in this interval of chromosome 4q. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Würzburg. Full informed
parental consent was obtained prior to initiating our investigation. ASD: Autism spectrum disorder; BAC: Bacterial artificial chromosome;
CHD: Congenital heart defect; CNV: Copy number variation; CP: Cleft palate; FISH: Fluorescence in situ hybridization; ID: Intellectual
disability; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction. No potential competing interest as well as commercial interests were disclosed. BV, IN and CN
carried out the molecular cytogenetic and data analyses. JS and WSD performed a clinical analysis of the patient. VK provided materials. BV
and TH researched the literature and wrote the manuscript. All authors have critically reviewed and approved the manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2350/15/72/prepub Summary of disease-relevant
genes in the deletion region with functions, phenotypes and cases with agreeable phenotypes. Click here for file Summary of our proband and
cases from DECIPHER and the literature with deletions exclusively residing in the 4q31.1qter region. Click here for file The authors are
grateful for the participation of the family for their willingness to engage in this study. We also thank Prof. Dr. Holger Thiele from the
Cologne Center for Genomics for constructive dialogue about HaploPainter, Dr. Christopher Riley at Phoenix Children’s Hospital for clinical
assessment, and Andrea Hörning for assistance with karyotype analysis. This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (grant no.
HA 1374/7-2) and the University of Würzburg in the funding programme Open Access Publishing.
