Intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia is a rare injury. We present a case of an intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia from blunt trauma. In
this report we will review the current literature and also describe the first report of a primary laparoscopic repair of the defect. A
38-year-old unrestrained male passenger had blunt chest and abdominal trauma from a motor vehicle collision. Two months later, on a computed
tomography scan, he was found to have an intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia. The defect was repaired primarily through a laparoscopic
approach. Symptoms of intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia are chest pain, upper abdominal pain, dysphagia, and dyspnea. Chest computed
tomography is the most useful diagnostic test to define the defect. Even when the injury is diagnosed late, laparoscopy can be used for
primary and patch repair. The diaphragm is a dome-shaped septum, composed of muscular portions surrounding the central tendon, which is a
clover leaf–shaped fascial aponeurosis with one anterior leaf and two lateral leaves.1 The 3 components of the muscular portions of the
diaphragm (costal, sternal, and lumbar components) attach to the circumference of the thoracic inlet (lower 6 ribs, sternum and xiphoid
process, and upper 3 lumbar vertebrae) and attach to the central tendon.2 The central tendon is attached to the pericardial sac and lies
anterior to the esophageal hiatus. In an animal model, the central tendon is subject to higher tension than the other muscles of the
diaphragm.3 Intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernias occur when this central tendon of the diaphragm ruptures with herniation of abdominal
viscera into the pericardium from blunt trauma. This is opposed to a tear of the pericardium into the thorax, which has also been described.
The literature on this rare injury was last reviewed in 2001 by Reina et al.4 We present an additional case of an intrapericardial
diaphragmatic injury along with an updated review of the published English-language literature focusing on diagnosis, treatment, and
outcome. A 38-year-old male unrestrained passenger was involved in a motor vehicle collision and had blunt chest and abdominal trauma. His
initial imaging included radiographs of the chest and pelvis and computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head, cervical spine, abdomen, and
pelvis. He was found to have a left grade 4 renal laceration, multiple bilateral rib fractures, bilateral pulmonary contusions, and 2 tiny
foci of pneumoperitoneum that were not attributable to any hollow viscous injury (Figure 1). He was initially resuscitated in the surgical
intensive care unit and then underwent selective renal angioembolization on hospital day 1. On hospital day 4, the patient had a CT urogram
that showed a urine leak and subsequently underwent placement of a left ureteral stent. On hospital day 6, he was discharged home with a
Foley catheter. He was then seen in the trauma surgery clinic on postinjury day 19 for follow-up and was having regular bowel movements
without nausea or vomiting, but he was noted to be eating small meals because of abdominal bloating. He was seen by his primary care
provider 1 month later with complaints of worsening epigastric pain, lower chest discomfort, and abdominal cramps but was again noted to be
having regular bowel movements. An abdominal radiograph was obtained at the time and showed a moderate stool burden but no other apparent
abnormalities. The patient subsequently started taking a proton pump inhibitor for presumed reflux. His next visit was to our urology clinic
2 months after injury for removal of his ureteral stents. His CT urogram showed no evidence of urinary extravasation, but we visualized an
intrapericardial diaphragmatic defect with herniation of the abdominal viscera into the pericardial sac (Figure 2). A retrospective review
of the CT scan from the patient's initial presentation showed an intrapericardial defect in the anterior diaphragm (Figure 1). CT scan of
abdomen and pelvis on day of injury. CT scan of chest 2 months after injury. We elected to repair the intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia
through a laparoscopic abdominal approach. The patient was positioned in the supine reverse Trendelenburg position. A total of 3 trocars
were used (a camera port above the umbilicus and 2 working ports at the epigastrium and left subcostal margin). Pneumoperitoneum was
maintained at 10 to 12 cm H2O to avoid any potential tamponade effect on the heart. The transverse colon and omentum were reduced from the
pericardial sac through the diaphragmatic defect, with adhesiolysis of attachments of the omentum at the rim of the pericardium and
diaphragm (Figures 3 and 4). The intrapericardial diaphragm defect measured 8 cm long × 4.5 cm wide. The heart was directly visualized
through the intrapericardial diaphragmatic defect. The defect was closed primarily with horizontal mattress stitches with No. 0 Prolene
suture (Ethicon, Somerville, New Jersey) (Figure 5). The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged home on
postoperative day 2. Intraoperative image of intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia. Intraoperative image of intrapericardial diaphragmatic
hernia reduced. Intraoperative image of intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia repaired. van Loenhout et al5 were the first authors to review
the literature on traumatic intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia. They found 58 cases in addition to reporting a case. Reina et al4
reviewed the literature from 1986 through 1999 and found 22 cases in addition to the case they reported. Rodriguez-Morales et al6 described
an additional two cases in 1986 that were not described by Reina et al. Since 1999, there have been 11 additional cases of traumatic
intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernias reported in the English-language literature.7–14 Including our case, there are 96 published
occurrences of traumatic intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernias. Table 1 summarizes the 12 recent cases from 1999 through 2012. A blunt
mechanism is most common, including car crashes, pedestrians being struck by cars, or falls, with one case in which the exact mechanism was
unknown. There are a variety of associated injuries that are common in blunt trauma without any one being specifically associated with
intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia. Four of the patients were immediately taken to the operating room on presentation. The longest time
interval to presentation was 38 years, and the defect length ranged from 6 to 16 cm. Reina et al reported an average interval between injury
and diagnosis of 4.8 years and average defect length of 10.3 cm. Intrapericardial Diaphragmatic Hernia Case Reports, 1999–2012 CXR = Chest
X-ray. ePTFE = expanded polytetraflouroethylene. PTFE = polytetraflouroethylene. TBI = Traumatic Brain Injury. Half of the cases of blunt
traumatic intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernias (6 of 12) were diagnosed remotely (>30 days) from the initial trauma injury. The most
common presenting complaint is chest and upper abdomen symptoms. Diaphragmatic hernia in general should be maintained in the differential of
a patient with blunt trauma who does not progress appropriately and in whom dysphagia, dyspnea, new-onset gastroesophageal reflux disease
symptoms, or abdominal or chest discomfort persists without an adequate explanation from another abdominal or thoracic process. Chest
radiography was a common initial imaging study followed by CT to confirm the diagnosis. The initial trauma imaging workup missed the
diagnosis of intrapericardial diaphragmatic injury in all cases described in the past decade, including our case. Interestingly, our patient
had a chest CT scan on initial presentation that was read as normal, but in retrospect, there was a small defect present. As the quality of
CT imaging improves, there is potential that these rare injuries will be more commonly diagnosed on initial imaging. The principles of the
operation are to reduce the herniated organs (most commonly the transverse colon, omentum, and stomach), define the edges of the diaphragm,
and close the diaphragmatic defect either primarily or with a patch. A variety of surgical approaches are described for repair of
intrapericardial hernias, including thoracotomy with either primary or patch repair, laparotomy with primary or patch repair, and abdominal
laparoscopy with patch repair. One theoretical concern associated with laparoscopic repair is cardiac tamponade due to gas insufflation.7
The laparoscopic approach using a patch was described by McCutcheon et al11 as a safe and feasible repair method. We describe the first case
of an intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia successfully repaired primarily through an abdominal laparoscopic approach. Although the central
tendon portion of the diaphragm may seem to be less compliant than the dome of the diaphragm, our case—along with most of the
literature—suggests that primary repair can be performed. Just as in the repair of diaphragmatic hernias, both absorbable and nonabsorbable
sutures have been described, as has a running versus interrupted suture technique.5,7 We advocate that a blunt traumatic intrapericardial
diaphragmatic defect can be fixed primarily, similar to most other blunt diaphragmatic injuries. If primary repair is not feasible, use of
an expanded Polytetraflouroethylene patch as a bridge seems appropriate because it presents a smooth surface for both the cardiac and intra-
abdominal sides. A biologic patch may also have a role in repairing this injury but has not yet been described. A laparoscopic approach
should be considered because avoiding an upper abdominal incision may translate into a significantly shorter hospital stay as has been shown
with laparoscopic cholecystectomy.15 Although successful reports of primary and patch repair are present in the literature, long-term
outcomes are lacking. Only 3 reports have any follow-up, which ranged from 6 to 48 months. Recurrence rates within these reports were 0%.
Our patient has been followed up for 8 months postoperatively and has no signs of recurrence either clinically or on chest and abdominal
radiographs. In conclusion, half of the cases of blunt traumatic intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernias present remote from the initial
traumatic injury, with the most common symptoms being chest pain, upper abdominal pain, dysphagia, and dyspnea. Chest CT is the most useful
diagnostic test to define the defect. Even when the injury is diagnosed late, laparoscopy can be used for primary and patch repair and
should be attempted first before an immediate open approach.
