To describe the spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) findings of a patient who developed pigmentary retinopathy following
high-dose deferoxamine administration. A 34-year-old man with thalassemia major complained of nyctalopia and decreased vision following
high-dose intravenous deferoxamine to treat systemic iron overload. Fundus examination revealed multiple discrete hypo-pigmented lesions at
the posterior pole and mid-peripheral retina. Recovery was partial following cessation of desferrioxamine six weeks later. A follow-up SD-
OCT showed multiple accumulated hyper-reflective deposits primarily in the choroid, retina pigment epithelium (RPE), and inner segment and
outer segment (IS/OS) junction. Deferoxamine retinopathy primarily targets the RPE–Bruch membrane–photoreceptor complex, extending from the
peri-fovea to the peripheral retina with foveola sparing. An SD-OCT examination can serve as a simple, noninvasive tool for early detection
and long-term follow-up. Deferoxamine is an iron-chelating agent used to treat chronic iron overload in patients with thalassemia major and
other hematologic conditions requiring routine blood transfusion . The incidence of deferoxamine-related ocular toxicity is approximately
1.2% based on a prior study . The clinical presentations may include night blindness, centrocaecal scotoma, constricted peripheral visual
field, pigmentary retinopathy, and optic neuropathy . Retinal pigmentary change was most frequently reported . This case report
pathologically characterizes the spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT, SPECTRALIS SD-OCT, Heidelberg, Germany) and near-
infrared reflectance (NIR) findings in a patient with deferoxamine retinopathy. A 34-year-old Taiwanese man with beta-thalassemia major had
been administered routine blood transfusion and subcutaneous deferoxamine at 30 mg/kg/day for 20 years since youth. He was hospitalized for
a compression fracture and myelopathy of the thoracic spine. He presented with acute onset of decreased vision, impaired color vision, and
night blindness following continuous intravenous deferoxamine (98 mg/kg) for 42 days for the treatment of elevated serum ferritin level. On
ophthalmic examinations, the best-corrected vision was 20/200 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure
measurement and anterior segment examination yielded normal results for both eyes. The fundus examination revealed multiple discrete hypo-
pigmented circular lesions over the posterior pole and mid-peripheral retina in both eyes.Deferoxamine retinopathy was suspected, and the
patient was switched to oral deferasirox/deferiprone. Six weeks later, there was an improvement in the best-corrected vision (20/60 in the
right eye and 20/25 in the left eye) and color vision. Retinal pigmentary changes became confluent (Figure 1). NIR showed hyper-reflective
deposits particularly in the parafoveal and perifoveal areas (Figure 2). SD-OCT showed multiple confluent hyper-reflective deposits in the
choroid, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and IS/OS junction. Thickened RPE, Bruch’s membrane, and choroid space were also discovered. The
IS/OS junction was most severely disrupted at the perifoveal and parafoveal areas than at the foveola area (Figure 3). Dilated fundus
examination at the 6-week follow-up visit. A dilated fundus examination revealed diffuse and confluent hypo-pigmented pinpoint lesions
extending from the posterior pole (arrow) to the peripheral retina (arrowhead). Near-infrared reflectance (NIR) at the 6-week re-
examination. NIR showed hyper-reflective deposits particularly in the parafoveal and perifoveal areas. SD-OCT at the 6-week re-examination.
SD-OCT revealed a disrupted IS/OS junction (arrow) and multiple diffuse and confluent hyper-reflective deposits in the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE), IS/OS junction, and choroid (arrowhead). Thickened RPE, Bruch’s membrane, and choroidal space were also observed.
Deferoxamine is a widely used chelating agent in treating transfusional hemochromatosis . Visual symptoms included decreased visual acuity,
night blindness, and colour vision abnormalities . These ophthalmic examination findings have been reported extensively. Sumu et al.
observed speckled hyper-fluorescence with well-demarcated areas of blocked fluorescence on fluorescein angiography . Markedly reduced
photopic, scotopic, and 30-Hz flicker response amplitudes were reported on electroretinograms. Electro-oculogram typically showed reduced
light-peak to dark-trough ratios . Viola et al. reported abnormal fundus autofluorescence in 9% of 197 patients, but only 5 patients
reported visual symptoms . Viola et al. further described the pattern dystrophy–like or minimal changes of macular lesions in patients with
deferoxamine retinopathy by using NIR and SD-OCT which pointed out the disease itself affects the RPE–Bruch membrane–photoreceptor complex .
The pathophysiology of deferoxamine-related retinopathy has been investigated for several years. Rahi et al. first reported electron
microscopic findings of deferoxamine retinopathy, including patchy RPE depigmentation, abnormally thickened Bruch's membrane, and normal
photoreceptors . Previous studies also discovered that iron overload and iron-chelating agents both may be mutually confounding factors in
the causation of ocular changes of thalassemia such as RPE mottling . The SD-OCT findings in our case revealed multiple confluent hyper-
reflective deposits in the RPE, IS/OS junction and choroid (Figure 3). We hypothesized that hyper-reflective deposits detected by means of
SD-OCT may represent a primarily involvement of RPE–Bruch membrane–photoreceptor complex in deferoxamine toxicity which correlated with
previous histologic findings . Ocular deferoxamine toxicity could cause vision impairment; regular ophthalmic assessment is required in
these patients. We presented the SD-OCT findings of deferoxamine retinopathy highly correlated with previous histologic descriptions and
showed that the toxicity primarily involved the RPE–Bruch membrane–photoreceptor complex. Noninvasive SD-OCT and NIR imaging, both well
tolerated by patients, may be helpful in early detection and long-term monitoring. The patient provided written informed consent for the
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for editorial review. SD-OCT:
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography; IS/OS: Inner segment/outer segment; RPE: Retinal pigment epithelium. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. C-HW conducted the literature search and composed the manuscript. Y-HC conceived the idea for the
manuscript, conducted a literature search, and critiqued the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2415/14/88/prepub The authors thank Dr. Chao-Ping
Yang from the Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, in Taoyuan, Taiwan for her expertise in managing this patient.
