Rothia species are pleomorphic gram-positive bacteria that belong to the Micrococcaceae family . The Rothia genus presently comprises 6
named species, 2 of which are deemed clinically relevant: Rothia dentocariosa and Rothia mucilaginosa [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Another member of the
genus, Rothia aeria, a taxon group provisionally named R. dentocariosa genomovar II, is a rare cause of human infections [2, 7] To date,
only 6 cases of human infection caused by R. aeria have been reported, including bacteremia , neck abscesses , respiratory tract infection
[10, 11], septic arthritis , and infective endocarditis . Although Rothia species have rarely been reported as a causative pathogen of
infective endocarditis, no case has been reported in Korea. Moreover, the risk factors for invasive infection by R. aeria are not well
defined because of its rarity and the difficulty of correct species identification. Here, we report a case of infective endocarditis caused
by R. aeria in a patient taking tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α blocker. A 53-yr-old Korean man reported fever and chills for 7 days before he
visited a nearby clinic and was prescribed an empirical 15-day antibiotic treatment of ceftriaxone and doxycycline. The symptoms improved
after antibiotic treatment. However, 10 days after discontinuing treatment, the fever and chills recurred. The patient visited Chonnam
National University Hospital (Gwangju, Korea), a 1,000-bed referral center, for further evaluation and treatment. The patient had a history
of seropositive ankylosing spondylitis, which had been diagnosed 9 years ago, and had received weekly subcutaneous injections of 25 mg TNF-α
blocker (Enbrel; Wyeth, Madison, NJ, USA) for 8 yr. He had also taken 10 mg atorvastatin daily for dyslipidemia. He underwent aortic
valvuloplasty, tricuspid valvuloplasty, and a Maze operation owing to severe aortic valve regurgitation with atrial fibrillation 9 yr ago.
The patient had also had 4 dental implant placements 2 yr ago. On admission, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 120/80 mmHg;
pulse rate, 84 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20/min; and body temperature, 38.2℃. Conjunctival hemorrhage was observed in the right eyelid. A
grade 2 early systolic murmur was heard in the third left intercostal space. No Janeway lesions or Osler's nodes were observed. The initial
laboratory examination revealed a white blood cell count of 8.1×109/L, hemoglobin of 11.3 g/dL, platelet count of 1.1×1011/L, and C-reactive
protein level of 4.51 mg/dL. On the day of and a day after admission, 4 sets of blood culture samples were collected in BACTEC Plus
Aerobic/F and Anaerobic/F bottles (BD Diagnostics, Sparks, MD, USA) and incubated in an automated blood culture system (BACTEC 9240; BD
Diagnostics). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed vegetation measuring 1.35×0.57 cm at the anterior leaflet of the bicuspid aortic valve
and an ejection fraction of 56% (Fig. 1). Empirical antibiotic therapy with 2 g ceftriaxone every 24 hr was started on the second day of
admission. All sets of blood cultures yielded the same pleomorphic filamentous gram-positive branching bacilli, resembling the Nocardia
species on Gram staining. A pure growth of dry, coarse white and gray colonies was obtained after 48-hr incubation on blood agar plates at
35℃ and 5% CO2 (Fig. 2). The modified Ziehl-Neelsen staining was negative. Biochemical characterization of the isolates was performed using
a VITEK 2 GP card (bioMérieux, Mary-l'Etolie, France) and MicroScan Pos Breakpoint Combo panel type 28 (Siemens, Deerfield, IL, USA). The
systems identified the microorganism as Micrococcus luteus/lylae (99%) and Micrococcus spp. (98%), respectively. The microorganism was
positive for alanine-phenylalanine-proline arylamidase, L-leucine arylamidase, alanine arylamidase, proline arylamidase, tyrosine
arylamidase, L-pyroglutamic acid arylamidase, α-glucosidase, and esculin hydrolysis. For definitive identification, the 16S rRNA gene was
amplified with universal primers (forward: 5'-AGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3'; reverse: 5'-GTATTGCCGCGGCTGCTG-3') and sequenced. The 830-bp query
sequence was 100% homologous to 16S rRNA gene sequences from R. aeria (GenBank accession no. AB753461). Antibiotic susceptibility tests were
performed by using Etest (BioMérieux) and the disk diffusion method (BD diagnostics). Since no CLSI protocols exist for R. aeria, we
assessed the organism's drug susceptibility utilizing CLSI criteria for staphylococci (M100-S21) , as described previously [8, 10, 13]. The
antibiotic susceptibility test results are shown in Table 1. On the third day of admission, the patient was transferred to Asan Medical
Center (Seoul, Korea), where he underwent an aortic valve replacement with an annular reconstruction with bovine pericardium. Pathological
examination of heart valve and aorta tissues revealed bacterial valvulitis and gram-positive coccobacilli. However, no pathogen was grown
from these tissues. Direct 16S rRNA gene PCR of these surgical tissues was not performed. Owing to aortic annular destruction, a complete
atrioventricular block occurred after surgery, and a permanent pacemaker was implanted 10 days after the operation. The patient received
ceftriaxone 2 g every 24 hr for 4 weeks and was then discharged. He regularly visited Chonnam National University Hospital for 4 months
without evidence of recurrence. Up to 85% of infective endocarditis cases are attributed to staphylococci, streptococci, and enterococci.
However, clinicians must be aware of the organisms responsible for the remaining 15% of infective endocarditis [15, 16, 17]. Of Rothia
species, R. dentocariosa, a part of the normal community of microbes residing in the oral cavity, has been the most frequent cause of
infective endocarditis, with more than 15 reported cases . So far, R. aeria, a gram- and catalase-positive bacillus with its branching,
filamentous morphology, has been reported as a cause of infective endocarditis in only 1 case . The present case is the second report of R.
aeria infective endocarditis in the English literature and the first reported case in Korea. Until now, only 6 cases of invasive R. aeria
human infections have been reported (Table 2) [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Of the 6 reported cases of R. aeria infection, 4 patients were on
immunosuppressive drugs, while 1 was a neonate. These cases suggest that R. aeria is an opportunistic pathogen of immunocompromised patients
rather than of immunocompetent hosts. The current case also had predisposing risk factors: he was taking an immunosuppressive agent, TNF-α
blocker, and had an autoimmune disorder. To date, isolation of R. aeria from clinical specimens has seldom been recognized in Korea. Our
isolates were initially misidentified as Micrococcus spp. by 2 commercial identification systems. R. dentocariosa and R. aeria share the
same biochemical profiles: positive for nitrate reduction, α-glucosidase, alanine-phenylalanine-proline arylamidase, and esculin hydrolysis
and negative for urease [2, 7, 19]. The strain in this case also shared common biochemical characteristics with R. dentocariosa and R.
aeria: positive for alanine-phenylalanine-proline arylamidase, α-glucosidase, and esculin hydrolysis and negative for urease. However, the
strain was negative for nitrate reduction. The morphological findings were unlike Micrococcus species, which are characterized by gram-
positive cocci in a tetrad arrangement; therefore, molecular identification was performed. Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene enabled an
accurate species-level identification of R. aeria, which may resemble the Nocardia species in Gram staining. These findings suggest that the
paucity of isolations of this species from clinical specimens may reflect, in part, the difficulty in identifying this species. In summary,
this is the first case report of infective endocarditis caused by R. aeria in Korea, and our case highlights that R. aeria should be
considered as a rare cause of infective endocarditis, particularly in patients taking immunosuppressive medication. Therefore, as a gram-
positive bacillus, R. aeria should also be considered a pathogen, and correct species identification and antibiotic susceptibility tests are
warranted to ensure the use of appropriate antibiotics. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed echoic mobile vegetation (arrowheads) on the anterior leaflet during diastole (A) and on the
bicuspid aortic valve during systole (B). Microbiological examinations. (A) Dry, coarse white and gray Rothia aeria colonies grown on blood
agar plates at 35℃ and 5% CO2. (B) Rothia aeria Gram staining (×1,000). Antibiotic susceptibility of Rothia aeria The drug susceptibility of
Rothia aeria in the present case was determined by using Etest* or the disk diffusion method† according to the 2011 Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute (M100-S21) criteria for staphylococci. Abbreviations: MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration; S, susceptible. Reported
cases of human infection by Rothia aeria Antibiotic susceptibilities, shown in parentheses as S, I, and R, were determined by using Etest*,
the disk diffusion method†, or MicroScan microdilution‡, and the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute staphylococcal standards.
Abbreviations: M, male; F, female; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; S, susceptible; I, intermediate; R, resistant.
