Academic Editor: Jubin Abutalebi Background. Bilingualism results in an added advantage with respect to cognitive control. The interaction
between bilingual language control and general purpose cognitive control systems can also be understood by studying executive control among
individuals with bilingual aphasia. Objectives. The current study examined the subcomponents of cognitive control in bilingual aphasia. A
case study approach was used to investigate whether cognitive control and language control are two separate systems and how factors related
to bilingualism interact with control processes. Methods. Four individuals with bilingual aphasia performed a language background
questionnaire, picture description task, and two experimental tasks (nonlinguistic negative priming task and linguistic and nonlinguistic
versions of flanker task). Results. A descriptive approach was used to analyse the data using reaction time and accuracy measures. The
cumulative distribution function plots were used to visualize the variations in performance across conditions. The results highlight the
distinction between general purpose cognitive control and bilingual language control mechanisms. Conclusion. All participants showed
predominant use of the reactive control mechanism to compensate for the limited resources system. Independent yet interactive systems for
bilingual language control and general purpose cognitive control were postulated based on the experimental data derived from individuals
with bilingual aphasia. Bilingualism and cognitive control are two widely studied phenomena. Numerous studies have examined the interaction
between bilingualism and cognitive control using different methodologies and paradigms . Juggling two or more languages makes our brain more
flexible . The bilingual advantage has been well established not only with respect to studies comparing monolingual and bilingual
individuals [6, 12–14] but also among different bilingual groups . Interestingly, a review by Adesope et al. suggested that different
aspects of bilingualism influence distinct levels of cognitive control mechanisms. Moreover, several cognitive outcomes may be attributed to
bilingualism, including increased attentional control, working memory, metalinguistic awareness, and abstract and symbolic representational
skills. Researchers have differentiated between bilingual language control and domain general cognitive control [2, 16]. Miller and Cohen
proposed that to provide top-down support to language control, processes such as attention, working memory, response selection, and
inhibition function as different manifestations of domain general cognitive control. Moreover, bilingual language control (bLC) may not be a
subsidiary to domain general cognitive control ; however, bLC may still show some overlap with domain general control mechanisms [2, 18].
Different frameworks have been suggested to study the interaction between bilingualism and cognitive control. A few studies have examined
the interaction between bilingualism and cognitive control in the context of bilingual aphasia . Aphasia is a language impairment caused by
brain damage. Language-related deficits are well explained in the literature targeting auditory comprehension, naming skills, spontaneous
speech, and repetition as well as reading and writing skills. There are lines of evidence supporting the presence of cognitive impairment in
individuals with aphasia [19, 21]; however, most of these studies refer to the independence of deficits in language skills and other
cognitive processes. In one such study, Helm-Estrabrooks argued that clinicians cannot predict the relative integrity of other domains of
cognition on the basis of language deficits observed in aphasic patients. Another group of researchers discussed the implications of
different aspects of cognition in language-related treatment approaches. They employed a global aphasic neuropsychological battery
(nonlinguistic tests) and a test of auditory comprehension. The battery of tests assessed attention, memory, intelligence, visual
recognition, and nonverbal auditory recognition. The authors concluded that the score on this battery was independent of spoken language
comprehension. Communicative success among individuals with aphasia may be dependent on the integrity of the executive functions that allow
us to plan, sequence, organise, and monitor goal-directed activities in a flexible manner. While emphasising the role of executive functions
in communicative processes, Helm-Estrabrooks and Ratner suggested that deficits in executive functions may result in a failure in the
generalisation of skills, which are similar to those learned in therapy sessions to those learned in everyday life situations. Similarly,
Purdy conducted a study investigating the efficiency, speed, and accuracy of individuals with aphasia while performing executive function
tasks (i.e., Porteus Maze Test, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, and Tower of London). Their deficits were predominantly related to cognitive
flexibility and, to a lesser extent, planning. Until recently, cognitive impairments in aphasia were studied in isolation; however, this can
be well explored through empirical research by examining the underlying mechanisms that manifest as cognitive impairments. A study by Penn
et al. supports this notion of bilingual advantage, in which they compared monolingual and bilingual individuals with aphasia. If
bilingualism is a cognitive advantage, then bilingual aphasics may demonstrate a faster rate of language recovery compared to monolingual
aphasics. However, bilingual aphasics exhibited pathological code switching and code mixing behaviours. In one of their studies, Abutalebi
and Green highlighted the need to investigate the performance of bilingual aphasics on a range of control tasks. They suggested that
individuals with parallel recovery may demonstrate problems with control without having problems related to language interference. In
addition to the language processing deficits evident among individuals with aphasia, there are subtle cognitive-communicative deficits,
which are not due to the faulty language processing system but may be due to general problems in resolving conflict. Green et al. reported
that there are two distinct control-related impairments, one for naming and another for control. Green and colleagues compared two bilingual
aphasics who demonstrated a parallel form of recovery to a similar extent. However, their performance on three explicit control tasks
indicated that different control mechanisms were involved in recovery. One of the patients showed an impaired verbal, but spared nonverbal
control, whereas the other patient demonstrated deficits in the selection of the manual response. Thus, two separate circuits may exist for
naming and control, and the recovery patterns may be dependent on damage to these control circuits . According to Abutalebi et al. ,
language control and cognitive control mechanisms may act as the primary determinants of cognitive-linguistic recovery in aphasia. This is
because the effect of treatment is dependent on the integrity of the naming and control pathways as previously described by Abutalebi and
Green . To understand this distinction between naming and control networks, Abutalebi et al. studied the neural correlates of selective
language therapy in a Spanish-Italian bilingual aphasic in a longitudinal study consisting of three time points. An improvement in naming
performance was evident in the naming network only. Another study emphasised the role of the dorsal anterior cingulate in both language
control and while resolving nonverbal conflict. Using a combined functional and structural neuroimaging method, a structural overlap between
the two networks (i.e., naming and control) was demonstrated. These studies demonstrated that there was a dissociation as well as an overlap
between the mechanisms that were involved while resolving verbal and nonverbal conflict. Conflict resolution tasks involve two modes of
control mechanisms, namely, proactive and reactive controls. The proactive mode of control is prospective or future-oriented, helping to
prepare the cognitive system for upcoming events via the predictive use of context. Reactive control is retrospective, responding to the
presence of salient events by engaging control only when it is needed, via the reactivation of previously stored information . In the
context of bilingualism, these two modes of control might be operating in cases of conflict and during increasing demand on the inhibitory
control system while using activation-suppression mechanisms. Thus, this study aimed to address the relationship between language control
and general purpose cognitive control with respect to the recruitment of proactive and reactive control mechanisms among bilingual aphasics.
The current study was designed to test patients on a range of executive function tasks that bear on the circuits implicated in language
control and general purpose cognitive control. The specific objective was to examine differences in performance across executive control
tasks with linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli. Flanker and negative priming paradigms were employed to show the distinction in
performances with different cognitive outcomes between the two paradigms. One way to understand how control mechanisms are recruited by
bilingual aphasics is to examine the slow and fast trials, which indicate the use of reactive and proactive control mechanisms,
respectively. Special emphasis was placed on accuracy, efficiency, and speed-related measures, unlike previous studies, which focused on one
of the three aspects of performance. Predominant involvement of reactive control compared to proactive control mechanisms in the context of
both linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli was expected. Differences in performance were expected with respect to negative priming and
flanker effects in the two paradigms, indicating variability in different control processes. Thus, the present study helps to understand the
interactive yet independent control mechanisms in the clinical population, particularly in language disorders, such as aphasia, which
provide the appropriate context to examine the relationship between bilingualism and cognitive control. In addition, such an investigation
also helps to understand the broad cognitive-linguistic mechanisms that underlie a disease process and its recovery patterns. This
questionnaire was employed to collect information on the languages in use, frequency of use, self-reported proficiency, and the linguistic
environment at home, work, and so forth. Domains assessed in the questionnaire included acquisition history (age of acquisition and at what
age the subject became fluent), contexts of acquisition (modality: oral/written/both; environment of acquisition: informal/formal/both),
language use (%), language preference (1–3 rating scale; where 1 = never, 2 = sometimes, 3 = most of the time), and the proficiency rating
on different tasks (a 0–10 rating scale was provided for each descriptive task, for example, asking for directions, counting up to 100 in
both languages, and so forth, which resulted in a composite score for proficiency). Apart from these questions, a contribution of various
other factors, such as the use of language with family, friends, extended family, and neighbours was assessed by asking the participants to
name the language predominantly used in different contexts. The participants also indicated the medium of instruction and self-reported
proficiency level in the domains of speaking, understanding, reading, and writing (1–5 point rating) (see Table 1 for language background
information for all the participants). This test is a subtest of the language proficiency test . In this task, the participants were
instructed to carefully describe a picture by focusing on the overall theme of the picture along with the individual items in that
particular picture. A grand rubric score was calculated by summing the scores on the following aspects: overall impact and achievement of
purpose (whether the participant establishes the main idea), organisation and techniques (coherence and cohesion, method of organisation),
and mechanics (focusing on grammar, pronunciation, presence of pause). Pictures were selected from the Western Aphasia Battery and Boston
Diagnostic Aphasia Examination for L1 and L2, respectively. A total score of 18 could be achieved by each participant (Table 5 presents the
scoring method). WAB is a tool used to assess language functions in adults and discerns the presence and type of aphasia. Four major
components of the aphasia quotient are spontaneous speech, auditory verbal comprehension, repetition, and naming. Table 3 presents the
scores obtained on each of the subtasks in WAB for the four participants. This is a severity rating scale that is often used in clinical
routine as well as in scientific studies. Administration of this scale takes 5–15 minutes and is very simple to perform. It is a 5-point
rating scale where the communication profile is described and based on the clinical observation that one can make a judgment about severity.
Table 2 presents the ratings indicating the severity of aphasia for each of the four participants. We report data from four male bilingual
right-handed individuals with aphasia. English was the second language for all the participants. L1 was Telugu for two participants and
Hindi for the other two participants. All four participants were considered for the current study based on the following inclusion criteria:
(a) diagnosis of aphasia based on the Western Aphasia Battery , (b) above chance level performance on the experimental tasks, (c) average
level of intellectual functions on Raven's Coloured Progressive Matrices test (as a subtask in WAB), (d) being able to perform the picture
description task from the test of language proficiency, which provides a composite rubric score , (e) similar degree of impairment in L1 and
L2, and (f) postmorbid daily usage of both languages in the speaking/understanding domain as well as in the reading/writing domain. These
criteria were met using the subjective and objective measures mentioned above as well as the clinician's report. All participants showed
parallel recovery based on their performance on the language skills tasks as well as the self-reported information on the language
background questionnaire . All four participants were highly educated and were able to perform the activities of daily living. The
experimental and language proficiency tasks were performed on the same day with many rest pauses (see Table 2 for a summary of the
demographic information of all the participants). CR was a 33-year-old, right-handed Telugu-English bilingual male, who was a banker prior
to his illness. He had resumed his work on a part-time basis a few days from the time of his current evaluation. CR reported a complaint of
a loss of speech due to a postmeningitis squeal. It had resulted in diffuse damage to the left frontal and parietal regions as per the
clinician's report. CR was initially diagnosed with Broca's aphasia and is currently diagnosed with anomic aphasia. CR had been undergoing
speech and language therapy for 15 months prior to the time of his current evaluation on a regular basis. On the WAB subtests, his language
skills were affected in all four WAB subtasks; namely, spontaneous speech, auditory verbal comprehension, repetition, and naming. His
repetition subtask score was below the 50th percentile, and his naming subtask score was at the 50th percentile level. His auditory verbal
comprehension skills were better than the rest of his skills. Performance on the picture description task in both languages showed an
impairment at the discourse level with rubric scores of 11 and 9 for L1 and L2, respectively (maximum score of 18). His spontaneous speech
showed the presence of both circumlocutions and paraphasic errors (semantic). Language switching or mixing was neither observed nor
reported. MMH was a 34-year-old right-handed male and presented with a history of cerebrovascular disease. He was diagnosed with aphasia and
was undergoing therapy. He was initially diagnosed with global aphasia and is currently diagnosed with anomic aphasia. He had a lesion in
the left cerebral hemisphere involving the insular cortex, frontal, and frontoparietal region, which was suggestive of an infarct in the
left middle cerebral artery territory. MMH had been undergoing speech and language therapy for 17 months prior to the time of his current
evaluation. He was unemployed at the time of his current evaluation and had been undergoing speech and language therapy as well as
physiotherapy and occupational therapy due to right hemiparesis. On the WAB, his spontaneous speech was greatly affected, with a score in
the 70th percentile, whereas his scores were greater than the 80th percentile on rest of the tasks, namely, the auditory verbal
comprehension, repetition, and naming subtasks. His spontaneous speech showed problems in fluency as well as in speech initiation.
Performance on the picture description task in both languages resulted in a composite rubric score of 14 and 12 in Hindi and English,
respectively. No significant problems were observed in language selection. SC was a 35-year-old right-handed male who presented with a
history of head trauma, which resulted in a subdural hematoma in the left hemisphere involving the frontal regions. At the time of the
current evaluation, SC was actively participating in the family business. His initial diagnosis was global aphasia, and his current
diagnosis was Broca's aphasia. He had been regularly attending speech and language therapy sessions for three months since the injury. He
demonstrated difficulties in the naming (26%) and repetition (13%) subtasks on the WAB, similar to Participant 1. Circumlocution and
paraphasia were also observed more in English than Telugu. His auditory comprehension skills were better than the rest of the subtasks on
the WAB with 94% accuracy. There was a difference in his performance between L1 and L2 on the picture description task. He showed a greater
impairment in L2 compared to L1 with composite rubric scores of 11 and 6 for L1 and L2, respectively. MU, a 59-year-old right-handed male
was working at a higher administrative position at an academic institution prior to his stroke. He had experienced an ischemic stroke
involving the MCA territory, which caused a typical lesion in the left frontal areas as well as white matter lesions. He presented with
hemiparesis and an inability to speak. His initial diagnosis was global aphasia, and his current diagnosis was anomic aphasia. He had
undergone therapy for a period of 20 months. On the auditory verbal comprehension subtask, his score was more than 90% similar to the scores
of Participants 2 and 3. However, his WAB profile matched more with Participant 2. He showed a similar performance in L1 and L2 on the
picture description task with scores of 14 and 12, respectively (see Table 3 for scores on the WAB for all participants). Negative priming
describes the phenomenon of a prolonged reaction time (RT) and/or a greater number of errors when the participants have to respond to a
target that was ignored in the preceding trial [32, 33]. In this task, the participants were required to process pairs of trials that were
structured according to a prime-probe schema. Two picture stimuli (line drawings of animate or inanimate objects) were displayed in the form
of overlapping pictures in shades of grey on both trials: one picture was the target in which the participants must respond and the other
was the distracter, which must be ignored. In the present experiment, the participants were required to respond to one of the shades of grey
(dark grey with the RGB coordinates 60, 60, 60, or light grey with the RGB coordinates 157, 157, 157) by suggesting the identity of the
picture as being animate or inanimate. The stimuli were presented on a 17′′ monitor in a quiet dimly lit room. The stimuli appeared at the
centre of the screen, which measured within the frame of 106 pixels ∗ 52 pixels. The horizontal and vertical resolutions were fixed at
71 dpi. The participants were seated comfortably at a distance of 60 cm from the computer monitor. The experiment was programmed using E
prime version 2.0 to record the reaction time and accuracy of each trial. Each trial began with a fixation point for a duration of 400
milliseconds (ms) followed by a prime-probe stimuli, which was presented on a white background for a duration of 500 ms. These stimuli were
each separated by a 300 ms blank screen. During the probe trial, the blank screen remained until the response or 3000 ms, whichever came
first, and then the next trial began with a fixation point. The participants were required to press the right arrow key for animate and left
arrow key for inanimate targets using the first and second fingers of their dominant hand. They were instructed to respond as quickly and as
accurately as possible. The experiment consisted of a total of 180 trials with 60 trials for the attended repetition condition, 60 trials
for the ignored repetition condition, and 60 trials for the control condition. The attended repetition measured the facilitation effect in
performance. In such a condition, the picture being attended in the prime trial was attended again on the probe trial, resulting in faster
reaction times compared to the control and ignored repetition conditions. The ignored repetition measured the inhibitory effect on
performance. In such a condition, the picture being ignored in the previous trial was attended in the probe/current trial, resulting in an
increase in reaction time (slowing of the response) compared to the other two conditions.Thecontrol condition acts as a baseline measure for
the experiment in which the pictures (two overlapping pictures) in the prime trial were different from the probe trial. Thus, there was no
effect of priming, whether positive or negative priming. The accuracy and reaction times were recorded for each condition for all four
participants. The analysis was performed based on these three conditions. A linguistic counterpart of the negative priming task with a
similar design could not be performed because it involved perceptually complex stimuli with overlapping words, and these stimuli appeared to
be difficult for individuals with aphasia during the pilot phase of the study. The flanker task is a response inhibition task that is used
to assess the ability to suppress responses that are inappropriate in a particular context. The flanker paradigm was originally introduced
as a way to study the cognitive processes involved in the detection and recognition of targets in the presence of distracting information or
noise . In the present study, Eriksen's Flanker task was employed to measure executive control to examine conflict resolution with two
comparable tasks using linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli. To introduce a conflict resolution component, the central arrow is “flanked” by
congruent or incongruent stimuli. The target is flanked on either side by two arrows in the same direction (congruent condition) or in the
opposite direction (incongruent condition). On some trials, the target is flanked by neutral flankers (neutral condition), which were
neither similar to the target nor to the flankers in the incongruent condition. The same conditions were used in the current study. Both the
target and flankers appeared simultaneously. The participants were required to respond to the direction of the central target arrow, which
could be facing in the same direction as the flankers (congruent condition) or in the opposite direction compared to the flankers
(incongruent condition). There was also a neutral condition, which consisted of a central target arrow that faced either left or right with
dashes as the flankers on either side of the target, thus resulting in a no conflict condition. Each trial began with a fixation cross for
400 ms followed by the stimuli (target and flankers), which were presented for 500 ms followed by a blank screen that stayed until the
response or 3000 ms, whichever came first. The participants were required to respond by pressing the right arrow key on the keyboard if the
target was facing towards the right, and the left arrowkeyif the target was facing towards the left. There were 180 trials in total, with 60
trials in each condition. There were approximately 30 practice trials in the beginning of the session prior to starting with the main
experimental trials. The linguistic version of the flanker task in different language pairs was designed with letters from the two languages
(L1 and L2) known to each participant (Hindi-English and Telugu-English). This task was based on the standard flanker task, but with two
flanker compatibility conditions (congruent and incongruent). It did not include the neutral condition because it would have resulted in an
unequal number of incongruent trials for both the languages (because the incongruent condition also had two levels). The number of flankers
was the same as the nonlinguistic version. The only addition was the presence of two types of incongruent trials: those with within-language
incongruence (HHSHH) and those with across language incongruence (HHHH). We determined the appropriateness of the stimuli (letters) in the
pilot study using normal healthy participants. Each trial began with a fixation cross for 400 ms followed by the target letter flanked by
congruent (flanking letters were the same as the target letter) or incongruent flankers (flanking letters were different from the target
letter). The stimuli were presented against a white background for 500 ms followed by a blank screen. The blank screen remained until the
response or 3000 ms, whichever came first, and then the next trial began with a fixation cross. The participants were required to press the
right arrow key for “H,” left arrow key for “S,” up arrow key for and down arrow key for the flanker task with stimuli in Hindi and English
languages. A similar design was used for the Telugu-English version of this task. A total of 360 trials were presented, with 120 trials in
each condition, which were congruent, incongruent within a language, and incongruent across language. These conditions were equally divided
for both the languages. The response level inhibition resulted in slowing of the responses on the incongruent trials and varied as a
function of language. Eriksen's flanker task has also been reported for linguistic stimuli, but only with one language . In both versions of
the flanker task (linguistic and nonlinguistic), the stimuli were presented on a 17′′ monitor with a refresh rate of 85 Hz in a quiet and
dimly lit room. The participants were comfortably seated at a distance of 60 cm from the computer monitor. In the linguistic version of the
task, the array of letters appeared on the centre of the screen within the frame of 140 pixels ∗ 45 pixels, whereas in the nonlinguistic
version arrows appeared within the frame of 135 pixels ∗ 25 pixels. The experiment was programmed using E prime version 2.0 to record the
reaction time and accuracy for each trial. The current study focused on the performance patterns of each participant on the cognitive
control tasks, and the subjective and objective measures of language proficiency. The data obtained with the language background
questionnaire and the composite rubric scores on the picture description task are provided in Table 1. Data based on the performance of each
participant on the respective cognitive control tasks are shown in Table 4. We discussed the results based on the variations in the
performance of each participant on the cognitive control tasks as well as their language background information. Statistical inference was
generated via visual analysis of the data (mean RT scores as well as CDF plots of different conditions) for each participant for each
specific experiment. Correlation analysis was performed to test the relationship between objective and subjective task performance. The
variability in a single case study method was controlled using experimental tasks and tools for language proficiency, which have been well
adapted for Indian conditions. Negative priming and the flanker paradigm are well established paradigms employed across populations; thus
there is a limited chance of variability because of the measurement instrument. This language history questionnaire has been employed in an
Indian population [29, 35] in both qualitative and quantitative bilingual studies. The cumulative frequency distribution was employed as an
important tool for the interpretation of individual data to examine the performance patterns of each task across the four participants. To
analyse the reaction time data, the cumulative frequency data were used to gain insight into how often a specific phenomenon was either
below or above a specific value. The RT distributions were computed using the cumulative distribution function (CDF) in MATLAB. We examined
the RT-based differences at the 5th percentile (fast trials) and 95th percentile (slow trials) across conditions for each participant. In a
few instances, a different range of percentiles was used to indicate patterns in the performance of specific experimental conditions. Slow
and fast reaction times were used as measures of the proactive and reactive modes of control. Slow trials are known to reflect the
involvement of the reactive control mechanisms and fast trials are known to reflect the involvement of proactive control mechanisms . The
results are discussed with respect to the patterns in the performance on each experimental task across the four participants. In this study,
the primary objective was not to compare the performance of the four participants but to illustrate the variations in each participant's
performance across tasks and across conditions (experimental manipulations) within a task. All four participants performed the negative
priming task with a good overall accuracy except for SC who showed a below chance level performance on one of the tasks. However, variations
in performance across participants were observed with respect to the engagement of proactive and reactive control mechanisms as revealed by
the RT distributions on the 5th and 95th percentiles. CR's performance on the negative priming task with superimposed line drawings of
objects (with reaction times as a measure of performance) suggests the presence of a facilitation effect in the absence of a negative
priming effect (see Figure 1(a)). However, error analysis showed a greater number of errors for the ignored repetition trials compared to
the control condition, suggesting the presence of a negative priming effect (see Figure 1(b)). In addition, CDF plots further supported
these results. CDF curves showed facilitation or a positive priming effect more prominently in the fast trials (i.e., 5th percentile) (see
Figure 1(c)). This effect was persistent throughout the distribution except at the 95th percentile level (i.e., slow trials) where the
distribution appeared to be very similar across conditions. These results indicated that when the time to respond to a target is less, then
the facilitation effect is greater compared to when the time available is more. These results indicated the presence of proactive control in
a minimal conflict condition (i.e., attended repetition condition). Similarly, ignored repetition reaction times were faster compared to the
control condition throughout the distribution except for the 95th percentile level. Taken together, these results indicated that although
the overall mean RTs showed an absence of a negative priming effect, the negative priming or persistent inhibitory effect surfaced only on
the slow trials, when the time available was more, indicating a dependence on the reactive control mechanism. The proactive control
mechanisms appeared to be compromised. However, because the error analysis showed a negative priming effect with a greater number of errors
on the ignored repetition trials compared to the control trials, this in itself may be the reason why fast trials did not show a negative
priming effect. Thus, when the participant takes less time during a more demanding condition (i.e., ignored repetition), it may result in a
greater number of errors. MMH's performance on the negative priming task showed facilitation or a positive priming effect, and a negative
priming effect was not observed (see Figure 2(a)). CDF analysis only showed the presence of a facilitation effect and the absence of a
negative priming effect based on the observation that there was no difference between the RT distributions for the ignored repetition
condition and control condition (see Figure 2(b)). Furthermore, the facilitation effect was greater on the slow trials compared to the fast
trials. An absence of an inhibitory effect was observed in both the fast and slow trials. The results based on MMH's performance indicated a
potential dependence on reactive control mechanisms and showed a partial correspondence with the RT distributions observed on the
nonlinguistic flanker task, as discussed later in this section. The third participant, SC, performed at a below chance level on the negative
priming task. However, interestingly, his performance (RTs) indicated both facilitation and inhibitory effects (see Figure 3(a)). Error
analysis suggested the presence of an inhibitory effect with a greater number of errors on the ignored repetition condition compared to the
control and attended repetition conditions, and an absence of the facilitation effect (no difference in errors between the attended
repetition condition and control condition) (see Figure 3(b)). CDF plots also showed a uniform distribution for all three conditions
(attended repetition < control < ignored repetition) showing no variations in performance with respect to the fast and slow trials across
conditions (see Figure 3(c)). However, visual inspection of the CDF plots suggested a greater inhibition on the slow trials compared to the
fast trials. MU's performance on the negative priming task with nonlinguistic stimuli, similar to CR and MMH, showed the presence of a
facilitation effect and the absence of a persisting inhibitory effect (see Figure 4(a)), which was translated in the same manner in the CDF
analysis. However, for the ignored repetition condition, there were variations in performance throughout the distribution compared to the
control condition. CDF plots indicated that the inhibitory or negative priming effect only appeared on the slow trials, indicating the
involvement of reactive control mechanisms (see Figure 4(b)). Thus, the performance of all the participants on the negative priming task
primarily reflected the involvement of reactive control mechanisms. Proactive control mechanisms appear to be affected with respect to the
persistent inhibitory effects as indicated by the subjects' performance on the negative priming task. All of the participants performed the
flanker task with nonlinguistic stimuli with good accuracy except for SC, who showed less accuracy but at an above chance level. CR's
performance on the nonlinguistic flanker task showed a congruency effect (i.e., mean reaction times on the congruent trials were faster than
incongruent trials) (see Figure 5(a)). Unlike the usual effects observed on flanker tasks, neutral trials were slower compared to the
incongruent trials. Error analysis showed a greater number of errors on the incongruent condition compared to the congruent and neutral
conditions as expected in a flanker task (see Figure 5(b)). Cumulative distribution function plots were derived and showed differences
across the three conditions only in the range of the 60th to 90th percentile, which was not consistent with the mean RT performance, and
showed less congruent RTs compared to neutral RTs and less neutral RTs compared to incongruent RT conditions (see Figure 5(c)). The trend of
slower incongruent trials compared to congruent trials was also observed at the 5th percentile (fast trials) level. MMH showed a 98.8%
accuracy on the standard flanker task, demonstrating the expected congruency effect with faster RTs on congruent trials compared to the
incongruent trials. According to the CDF analysis, a congruency effect was observed with respect to the neutral condition only on slow
trials, indicating the involvement of reactive control (see Figures 6(a) and 6(b)). The CDF plots indicated that RTs for the neutral
condition were faster than the incongruent condition throughout the distribution, which is suggestive of the presence of an interactive and
efficient inhibitory control mechanism. SC demonstrated a 67.2% accuracy on the nonlinguistic flanker task. However, all the errors were
made on the incongruent trials. Thus, the flankers' identity was influencing judgment more than the target's identity on the incongruent
trials (see Figure 7(a)). The flanker effect was observed with slower RTs on incongruent trials compared to the congruent trials. RTs on
incongruent trials were also compared with congruent and neutral conditions. And the RT distributions showed a uniform difference across
conditions throughout the distribution (see Figure 7(b)). These results indicated that SC showed no difference between the slow versus fast
trials on any of the conditions, demonstrating that both the proactive and reactive control mechanisms contributed to the flanker effects.
MU's performance on the nonlinguistic flanker task showed a congruency effect with respect to the mean RTs, although his performance on the
neutral condition was exceptionally slow compared to the incongruent trials (see Figure 8(a)). CDF analysis showed that the congruency
effect was absent (showing no difference between congruent and incongruent trials) on slow trials (i.e., 95th percentile and above),
suggesting the involvement of proactive control mechanisms in the efficient performance, which was also highlighted by a high accuracy
throughout the distribution (see Figure 8(b)). Uniformity was also observed in the distribution, which changed only in the slow trials,
where the distribution shifted to its usual trend of differences across conditions. Thus, performance on the flanker task with nonlinguistic
stimuli showed a similar involvement of the reactive and proactive control mechanisms, contributing to the flanker effects for all four
participants. All of the participants similarly showed conflict resolution and executive control effects on slow and fast trials, indicating
the efficiency of the control processes in current trial inhibitory effects with nonlinguistic stimuli. All of the participants performed
the flanker task with linguistic stimuli with a fair amount of accuracy. Flanker effects with respect to the reaction times and accuracy on
congruent and incongruent trials for L1 and L2 were observed, and the patterns of these effects on slow and fast trials were examined based
on the CDF plots. CR's performance on the linguistic flanker task showed a congruency effect for L2, whereas there was an absence of the
congruency effect for L1 (see Figure 9(a)). The overall errors across all the conditions were greater for L1 compared to L2. L1 showed
errors mostly on the congruent trials, whereas L2 showed a greater number of errors on the incongruent trials (see Figure 9(b)). For the
language incongruent condition, the congruency effect was observed only for L2 throughout the distribution (see Figure 9(c)). Both L1 and L2
showed a flanker effect on the language incongruent condition on the fast (5th–20th percentile) and slow (70th–95th percentile) trials.
Interestingly, similar patterns for the congruency effect for both L1 and L2 on the cross language incongruent condition were observed. The
discrepancy in the mean scores for L1 versus L2 with respect to the congruency effect is suggestive of different underlying processes
operating for L1 compared to L2. However, this difference was not explained by the CDF plots, which showed similar patterns of performance
on the slow and fast trials for both languages (see Figures 9(c) and 9(d)). MMH's performance on the linguistic flanker task showed a
congruency effect for both types of incongruent conditions (i.e., IC within and IC across) for L2, whereas for L1, the flanker effect was
absent in the within language condition (see Figure 10(a)). The CDF plots showed no difference in the pattern of RT distributions across the
three conditions for L2, whereas for L1, the across language incongruent trials showed a congruency effect between the 20th and 70th
percentile, which was not observed for the within language incongruent condition (see Figure 10(b)). The congruency effect for the within
language incongruent trials was observed only on the slow trials (see Figure 10(c)). Unlike his performance on the flanker task with
nonlinguistic stimuli, SC demonstrated a higher overall accuracy on the linguistic flanker task (92.69%), which supports our assumption with
respect to his performance on the previous task; that is, the errors were not due to difficulties in the response selection. Although the
differences in the mean reaction times were very small (see Table 4), there was a congruency effect for L1 only on the across language
incongruent trials. However, the RT distributions of L1 showed an absence of a congruency effect on the fast trials for the across language
incongruent condition (see Figure 11(b)). These results indicated that the interference caused by the flankers in L2 while attending to the
target in L1 was resolved using proactive control mechanisms because the effect was not sustained throughout the distribution and was only
present for the fast trials. For L2, CDF analysis showed a congruency effect on the within language incongruent condition, but only at the
5th percentile level (fast trials) and was not observed throughout the distribution (see Figure 11(c)). These results indicated a greater
dependence on proactive control mechanisms because the difference between the congruent and incongruent trials within a particular language
(L2) surfaced only on the fast trials. MU's performance on this task showed a congruency effect for L1 and not for L2 with respect to the
mean reaction time data (see Figure 12(a)). The flanker effect was present for L1 for the across language incongruent condition and not for
the within language incongruent condition. These results indicated that the interference experienced was less when the flankers and the
target were from the same language compared to the bilingual trials. Visual inspection of the CDF plots showed the presence of a congruency
effect on the slow and fast trials, and these effects were absent only in the range of the 15th–50th percentile. CDF analysis of the across
language congruency effect in L1 showed the presence of a flanker effect throughout the distribution. CDF plots showed slowing on the across
language incongruent condition compared to the congruent condition for L2 with RTs ranging from 75th to 95th percentiles (see Figure 12(b)).
These results indicated an involvement of reactive control mechanisms in a more demanding situation where one needs to inhibit the flankers
in L1 to attend to the targets in L2. Thus, results based on the linguistic flanker task with respect to the within language and across
language flanker effects for L1 and L2 indicated a greater variability in performance across the four participants as well as for each
participant for L1 versus L2. Our results clearly show that in the case of bilingual language control, bilingual individuals with aphasia
appear to show differences in the patterns of performance for L1 versus L2 as well as the recruitment of control mechanisms in resolving
conflicts with linguistic stimuli. In addition, the flankers also greatly influenced inhibitory control processes compared to target
processing of linguistic stimuli. Thus, it would be equally important to examine suppression-related mechanisms among individuals with
bilingual aphasia to investigate the activation-related mechanisms for languages affected in an individual with bilingual aphasia.
Correlations were determined to examine the relationship between bilingualism-related factors, such as language use and self-rated language
proficiency with the experimental task performance across the four participants.A bivariate correlation analysis was performed using two
sets of variables: those related to the language background information (language use in L1 and L2, overall language proficiency in L1 and
L2, proficiency in speaking, and understanding domain) and those pertaining to the control tasks (flanker effect for L1/L2 in the within
language incongruent condition, flanker effect for L1/L2 in the across language incongruent condition, flanker effect for nonlinguistic
stimuli, and a positive priming effect and negative priming effect on the negative priming task). Language use did not show a significant
correlation with performance on any of the control tasks. However, interesting trends were observed with respect to the relationship between
L1 and L2 proficiency and control tasks, and specifically with linguistic stimuli. Language proficiency in L1 was negatively correlated with
the flanker effect of L2 in the within language incongruent condition (r = −.970, p = .03), whereas it was positively correlated with the
flanker effect of L2 in the across language incongruent condition (r = .979, p = .02). L2 proficiency showed a negative correlation with the
flanker effect of L1 and L2 across language incongruent condition (r = −.986, p = .01 and r = .964, p = .03, resp.). However, L2 proficiency
was positively correlated with L2 within language incongruent condition (r = .977, p = .02). The observed correlations indicated that the
relationship between proficiency and the control task performance among aphasic individuals emerged mostly in bilingual competition on the
across language incongruent condition on the linguistic flanker task. When L1 proficiency is low or when L1 is the affected language in
aphasia, the flanker effect would also be less on the across language incongruent condition in L2 because the competition/conflict from the
weaker L1 flankers would be less. Second language proficiency has been reported to be enhanced compared to L1 by all participants. The
negative correlation between L2 proficiency and the flanker effect for L1 and L2 on bilingual trials manifested differently across
participants based on individual data. For instance, CR showed a negative correlation in terms of a better L2 proficiency and reduced
flanker effect for L1 on the L1 across language incongruent condition. However, for SC and MU, a lower L2 proficiency was correlated with
greater flanker effects for L1 in the L1 across language incongruent condition. There was a near significant negative correlation between
proficiency in the speaking/understanding domain in L1 and an inhibitory effect (r = −.919, p = .08) on the nonlinguistic negative priming
task. These results suggested that the inhibitory effects on a nonlinguistic negative priming task might increase in lower L1 proficiency.
This suggested a potential relationship between L1 proficiency and domain general inhibitory control. Thus, results based on the correlation
analysis suggested that a weaker or affected language in bilingual individuals with aphasia was not correlated with flanker effects in the
weaker language compared to the L2 proficiency, which showed a significant relationship with flanker effects in L1 and L2. Inhibitory
effects in L1 and L2 surfaced in bilingual competition and are more closely related to proficiency, particularly in the less affected
language, which is L2 in most of the participants in the current study. These interesting trends in the current data should be further
tested using a larger number of bilingual individuals with aphasia. To summarise our results, all participants showed the presence of a
facilitation effect, in the absence of an inhibitory effect (except for SC) on the negative priming task. CDF analysis showed the presence
of an inhibitory effect only on the slow trials for CR, SC, and MU. SC also demonstrated inhibitory effects on fast trials. The flanker task
with linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli showed varying effects across the four participants. A congruency effect was evident on the
nonlinguistic flanker task for all the participants with respect to the mean reaction times. CDF analysis revealed interesting patterns of
performance. CR and SC showed a congruency effect throughout the distribution, whereas MMH showed a congruency effect only on the slow
trials. Conversely, MU showed a congruency effect only on the fast trials. Thus, a rather complex picture emerged from the linguistic
version of the flanker task, based on the mean reaction time data. A congruency effect was observed for L2 (i.e., while comparing the
congruent condition with the incongruent within language and incongruent across language conditions) only for CR and MMH. However, SC and MU
showed a congruency effect only for L1 compared to the congruent condition with the incongruent across language condition. CDF plots also
showed varying patterns of performance across participants on the cross linguistic flanker task. CDF plots for L1 (compared to the congruent
condition with the within language incongruent condition) showed an absence of a congruency effect except for MMH who showed a congruency
effect on slow trials. Interestingly, the congruency effects for L1 (i.e., congruent condition versus incongruent across language condition)
throughout the RT distribution of CR and MU on slow trials were observed. All participants showed different patterns of performance in their
L2. Error analysis helped to understand the within subject variability in reaction times. However, the highly accurate performance of all
the participants in different tasks limited our ability to draw any commonality among them. The findings of the current study are consistent
with the view that the acquisition of another language involves an adaptation to an existing network. Different languages are represented in
shared brain regions with common organising principles . Specific patterns of deficits reflect problems of control rather than deficits of
pure linguistic origin. Inferences drawn from deficits involve reverse extrapolation to a premorbid state of functioning. An influential
aspect of this approach is that patterns of performance (both intact and impaired) suggest selective damage to one or more components or
processing pathways. The results of the current study suggest that although inhibitory control underlying selective attention may be
impaired in participants with anterior aphasia. The ability to differentiate the target from the distracter may be preserved; thus, the
presence of flanker effects in the flanker task. The flanker task and negative priming task are dependent on different processing
mechanisms. The presence of positive priming in the absence of negative priming with respect to the RT data observed in our participants is
suggestive of the dual route involved in the negative priming task. It has been postulated that positive priming is strongly affected by
perception in contrast to negative priming, which emerges during selection . We have found that such dissociations between positive and
negative priming effects in the current study suggest difficulties with respect to selection as a component of control processes among
bilingual individuals with aphasia. Reactive and proactive control mechanisms underlying the performance on each task for each participant
were explored using CDF analysis. All four participants showed a dependence on the reactive control mechanisms with specific variations
observed between the two languages that were known by each of the four participants. For example, CR's congruency effect on the linguistic
flanker task showed an interesting language specific variation. L2 (English) showed the involvement of reactive control, whereas L1 showed a
reliance on proactive control mechanisms. MMH showed an L1 congruency effect only when L1 was flanked by L2 on slow trials, suggesting the
involvement of reactive control. These effects were similar to those observed in CR's performance. An interesting observation was that MU
showed greater interference from the same language (when flankers were in the same language as the target) compared to the condition that
involved across language competition. However, this effect was only observed for L2, whereas L1 showed the congruency effect in across
language conflict. The nonlinguistic flanker task showed the involvement of both proactive and reactive control mechanisms, except for MMH
and MU. MMH showed an involvement of the reactive control mechanism and MU showed a reliance on proactive control. These two mechanisms are
not mutually exclusive. Thus, it is possible that CR and SC showed the involvement of both mechanisms to resolve the conflict for efficient
performance. CDF plots suggested that the magnitude of the effects was larger for facilitation or the positive priming effect on slow
trials, and differences between the control condition and ignored repetition condition were more prominent on fast trials for MMH and MU on
the negative priming task. In both cases, it is probable that the sustained activation of all four items (2 pictures from the prime trial
and 2 from the probe trial) resulted in the slowing of the response in the control condition, due to a greater interference from unattended
stimuli. There was an interesting dissociation observed in CR's performance, demonstrating an involvement of proactive control during
facilitation and reactive control for inhibition. Such a tradeoff may be due to dual mechanisms involved in facilitation versus inhibition.
The distinction between proactive and reactive control is useful in elucidating the variations in cognitive control mechanisms due to the
influences from bilingualism-related factors, which need to be explicitly manipulated and examined in future research. As a result of their
limited processing resources, the effective engagement of proactive control may be problematic for individuals with aphasia and may thus
engage the reactive control mechanisms, which do not require the individual to sustain control over an extensive period of time . Another
interesting area to explore is the interaction of bilingual language control and general purpose cognitive control and thus, we compared the
performance on linguistic and nonlinguistic flanker tasks. Performance-based differences were evident on flanker tasks with nonlinguistic
versus linguistic stimuli. Interestingly, the variations in the performance of each participant surfaced to a greater degree in the
linguistic stimuli for both L1 and L2. Except for CR, all of the other participants showed differences in their performance between the two
tasks. For example, more reliance on reactive control mechanism in the performance of MMH on the nonlinguistic flanker task was observed,
whereas the proactive control was predominant in the across language incongruent condition on the linguistic flanker task. This trend was
reversed for MU. Results obtained from the current study helped to form the stage for further studies to enhance our understanding of
language control and cognitive control in bilingual aphasia as well as to improvise the rehabilitation process. This is supported by the
fact that therapy in L2 was related to a better performance in L2 on the linguistic flanker task (in the case of CR and MMH), while therapy
focusing predominantly on L1 resulted in a better performance in L1. Such a domain specific effect of therapy was also reported in a study
by Abutalebi et al. , where improvement in the naming performance resulted in an improvement in the naming network only. Abutalebi and
colleagues also discussed the dissociation between the naming and control pathways, which was consistent with the observations of the
present study with respect to the variations in performance between linguistic and nonlinguistic control tasks. We also observed that
individuals with better scores on the WAB did not show an involvement of the proactive control mechanism with the data based on the negative
priming task. Thus, there is a need to perform both linguistic and nonlinguistic control tasks while profiling individuals with bilingual
aphasia. It is possible that individuals with bilingual aphasia may respond to speech and language therapy and show an improvement in
language skills in the affected language, but may still demonstrate problems with executive control. Another interesting relationship
between subjective information (see Tables 1, 2, and 3) and task performance was via premorbid language use (in percentage) and the
linguistic flanker task. Premorbid language use was the same for SC and MU, whereas for CR and MMH, L1 was the dominant language. This was
translated to the performance on linguistic flanker task, where language was dominant premorbidly and was affected compared to the other
language (in these cases L2). SC and MU with a similar dominance of language use premorbidly, showed an absence of the flanker effect in
both languages. In contrast to CR and MMH, their L1 performance was better than L2. Although such links between language use and task
performance are interesting, the extrapolation of such findings via only single case studies should be carefully performed. However, the
descriptive account of language use and task performance shows a relationship between the two variables, but the correlation analysis did
not show a statistically significant correlation with the performance on any of the control tasks, which could be due to the variance across
participants with respect to language use. Studies investigating the interaction between bilingualism and control processes have theoretical
and clinical implications. The case study approach employed in the current study provided an individually specific profile of bilingual
individuals with aphasia with respect to cognitive control processes and the nature of control mechanisms, which may influence the recovery
patterns and could thus be considered during the rehabilitation process. This study also highlighted that the performance of no two
bilingual aphasics was the same and thus required a detailed assessment of both language control and cognitive control processes
particularly relevant for individuals with bilingual aphasia. It has been reported by Abutalebi and Green that the effect of treatment in
bilingual aphasia was dependent on the integrity of naming and control pathways, indicating the need to address both linguistic and control
systems. Apart from providing insight into language control and cognitive control mechanisms, such a profile of individuals with aphasia may
help to decide the language for therapy in bilingual aphasia. Although, the current data are limited in establishing such a claim, they open
new avenues of research. Performance on the flanker task and negative priming task may indicate the use of selective language therapy or
bilingual language therapy based on the level of interference. Apart from the treatment decisions, clinical implications of language control
and cognitive control mechanisms may act as a main determinant of cognitive-linguistic recovery in aphasia . Taken together, the variations
observed in the performance of each participant across tasks and stimuli strongly suggested that there is dissociation between bilingual
language control and general purpose cognitive control mechanisms. These observations were further strengthened by the findings based on the
correlation analysis between bilingualism-related factors (language use and proficiency) and performance on control tasks, which showed that
the relationship between proficiency and inhibitory effects in L1 and L2 surfaced primarily in case of bilingual competition. L1 proficiency
with respect to the speaking/understanding domain was correlated with a sustained inhibitory control (negative priming effect with
nonlinguistic stimuli) and L2 proficiency was correlated with cross-linguistic flanker effects for both L1 and L2, indicating a dissociation
between the role of L1 versus L2 proficiency in domain general cognitive control and bilingual language control, respectively. These
interesting trends in the current data need to be empirically tested further with explicit manipulations related to L1 and L2 proficiency
using a larger group of individuals with bilingual aphasia and their performance on a range of control tasks. The present study was designed
to examine the performance of bilingual aphasics on executive control tasks that test the circuits implicated in language control and
cognitive control. CDF analysis was a promising tool used to examine the variations in performance within and across individuals, tasks and
stimuli. Current trial inhibitory effects were observed among individuals with bilingual aphasia, whereas a sustained inhibitory control (as
assessed on the negative priming task with nonlinguistic stimuli) was found to be compromised. Interestingly, sustained inhibitory control
was correlated with L1 proficiency. All the participants demonstrated the use of reactive control mechanisms to compensate for the limited
resource system. We also found differences in the involvement of control mechanisms for linguistic stimuli between L1 and L2 with L1
depending more on proactive control and L2 depending more on the reactive control mechanisms. Importantly, these mechanisms were not
mutually exclusive but interacted for efficient inhibitory control. The observations of the current investigation involved a series of four
case studies, which provided valuable insight into the nature of the control mechanisms and were not limited to the task performance and
deficits in cognitive abilities. A longitudinal study on individuals with bilingual aphasia helped to monitor the changes in cognitive
control (which also appeared to be affected among bilingual aphasics). Control processes, such as selection, inhibition, and monitoring
particularly sustained inhibitory control, appear to serve as the underlying resource systems for bilingual language control. The authors
are thankful to the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, for funding this study as it is a part of their project on
“Bilingualism and cognitive control” funded under the multi-institutional project on “Language and brain organization in normative
multilingualism” under the Cognitive Science Research Initiative of the DST. They gratefully acknowledge their participants for their
cooperation in the study. The authors would also like to thank All India Institute of Speech and Hearing and Sweekaar Academy of
Rehabilitation Sciences for their support in the study. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication
of this paper. (a–c): Reaction time data, error analysis, and CDF plot based on the performance of CR on the negative priming task. (a-b):
Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the performance of MMH on the negative priming task. (a–c): Reaction time data, error analysis, and
CDF plot based on the performance of SC on the negative priming task. (a-b): Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the performance of MU
on the negative priming task. (a–c): Reaction time data, error analysis, and CDF plot based on the performance of CR on the flanker task
with nonlinguistic stimuli. (a-b): Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the performance of MMH on the flanker task with nonlinguistic
stimuli. (a-b): Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the performance of SC on the flanker task with nonlinguistic stimuli. (a-b):
Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the performance of MU on the flanker task with nonlinguistic stimuli. (a–d): Reaction time data,
error analysis, and CDF plot based on the performance of CR on the flanker task with linguistic stimuli. (a–c): Reaction time data and CDF
plot based on the performance of MMH on the flanker task with linguistic stimuli. (a–c): Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the
performance of SC on the flanker task with linguistic stimuli. (a–c): Reaction time data and CDF plot based on the performance of MU on the
flanker task with linguistic stimuli. Language background information based on current state (poststroke aphasia data). Demographic
information. Scores on the Western Aphasia battery. Mean reaction time and standard deviations on control tasks. Rubric for picture
description: for spoken discourse analysis. Note: a composite score on the picture description task is the sum of ratings across the three
aspects of discourse analysis.
