Schwannomas are benign encapsulated tumors of Schwan cells that grow slowly along the peripheral myelin nerve fibers. Sacral spinal
schwannomas are very rare, and the incidence of sacral schwannoma ranges from 1-5% of all spinal schwannomas, and only around 50 cases are
reported in the literature. There are 3 defined types of sacral schwannomas. These are retroperitoneal or presacral, intra osseous, and
spinal schwannomas. Patients commonly present with complaints of pain and paresthesia due to the spinal schwannoma extending to extra spinal
tissues. Direct x-ray, CT, MRI, and scintigraphy are used for preoperative diagnosis and treatment planning. Local recurrence and
transformation to malignancy is very rare. For this reason, the frequently preferred treatments are subtotal removal of the mass or simple
enucleation. In our article, we discuss the clinical features and the surgical treatment we performed without the need for stabilization in
an incidentally determined giant invasive schwannoma case. Primitive sacral and presacral tumors are very rare. Spinal schwannomas
constitute approximately 25% of vertebral tumors. They most commonly tend to settle in the thoracic region. They are very rarely seen in the
sacral region and constitute 1-5% of all spinal schwannomas, and only around 50 cases are reported in the literature.1-3 Schwannomas are
mostly benign lesions. Malignant ones are either malignant from the beginning or become malignant due to degeneration of benign schwannomas,
such as is the case in neurofibromatosis type II patients. There are 3 defined types of sacral schwannomas; retroperitoneal or presacral,
intra osseous, or spinal schwannomas. According to the definition by Sridhar et al,2 giant invasive spinal schwannomas are masses that
invade more than 2 vertebral levels, invade vertebral bodies, and by extending posteriorly, reach the myofascial regions. For this reason,
the clinical and surgical results of giant invasive type spinal schwannomas (GISS) differ slightly from typical schwannomas. The clinical
diagnoses of these tumors are made by direct x-ray, CT, and MRI. The ideal treatment of GISS would be to totally remove the tumor by
decompression and surgery without creating any neural complications or spinal instability, which would relieve the pressure on neural organs
created by the mass and regress symptoms.3-5 Our objective in presenting this particular case is to highlight an interesting and rare
presentation for incidentally diagnosed giant invasive schwannoma of the sacrum. A 42-year-old male patient presented to the general surgery
polyclinic with the complaint of left upper quadrant pain that had been present for 3 months. On the incidental detection of a mass in his
abdominal ultrasonography, and as he had been pre diagnosed with cholelithiasis, abdominal CT, and pelvic MRI were requested. A hyper dense
sclerotic lobular contoured mass lesion that was destructing the left half of the sacrum was detected on x-ray and CT (Figure 1). On MRI,
there was a heterogeneous, hypo-intense mass lesion found at the level of the S1-2 vertebra in T2 sequence of bone marrow in the
heterogeneous hyper-intense T1 weighted images that originated from the left lateral side, and that had grown into the extraperitoneal area
of the abdomen. The mass was visualized up to the left lateral aspect of the L5-S1 vertebra, and its widest axial diameter was 138 × 91 mm.
There was post contrast intensive opaque agent uptake and no calcification or necrosis was observed in the lesion. The lesion progressed
inside the left lateral sacral spinal canal and was narrowing the canal diameter (Figure 2). The complaints of abdominal pain, paresthesia,
and motor weakness, which are very common in these patients, were not present in our patient. He had no history of trauma. There were no
defecation and urinary system complaints. There was sensorial loss in the S1-3 regions. Bilateral deep tendon reflexes at both knees and
ankles were normal. There were no signs of fasciculation, muscle atrophy, and upper extremity motor neuron dysfunction on his physical
examination. There were no dermatologic signs of neurofibromatosis. The mass was palpable on rectal examination since the tumor was creating
a pressure effect and was pushing the rectum. Since the Tru-cut biopsy result was spindle cell mesenchymal neoplasm (nerve sheath origin),
he was scheduled for surgery. Preoperative images showing: A) Patient x-ray showing a sclerotic margined, smooth contoured cavity lesion
invading the left half of the sacrum. B) Axial CT showing lobulated contoured hypo dense heterogeneous mass that has destructed the neural
foramens, filling the pelvis and displacing the bladder anteriorly. C) Coronal CT cross section showing a hyperdense sclerotic lobulated
contoured mass, from the left half of the sacrum and filling the pelvis. Preoperative MRI sections showing: A) T2 weighted coronal MRI
showing hyperintense lobulated mass filling the pelvis. B) T2 weighted axial MRI showing hyperintense mass with its largest diameter 138 ×
91 mm. C) T2 weighted sagittal MRI showing a dense heterogeneous opaque mass with agent uptake, sagittal 146 × 114 mm sized mass invading
the left sacral spinal canal. D) T1 weighted sagittal MRI showing opaque involvement belonging to calcified and necrotic areas inside the
lesion. Surgery was performed with an anterior and posterior combined approach. During the operation, first we entered the abdomen with an
anterior longitudinal midline incision. With the aid of a general surgeon, the mass was reached by advancing with a retroperitoneal
dissection. The rectum was separated from the tumor. During the operation, while the tumor was separated from the surrounding tissues with
dissection, the left sacral nerve roots were preserved as much as possible with the assistance of a neuro-monitor system. The left internal
iliac artery and vein were tied. The mass was partially removed, with preserving the capsule, up to the anterior area of bone involvement.
In the same session, he was turned to the prone position, and with a posterior approach, by passing through the posterior sacrum cortex; the
intraosseous part was removed piece by piece. The walls were cleaned with a curette. Since the sacroiliac joint was stable and the tumor was
benign, the intraosseous space was filled with 80 grams (2 boxes) of bone cement. The duration of the operation was approximately 210
minutes. Bleeding was approximately 850 ml. He had no signs of postoperative wound site infection and was mobilized on the fourth day.
Histopathological examination revealed schwannoma. On microscopic examination, there was a spindle cell neoplasm that was morphologically
consistent with classical schwannoma. Focal nuclear palisading was observed. The nuclei were oval blunt-ended or elongated, and focally
epithelioid morphology was observed. There were hyalinized thick walled blood vessels (Figure 3). He had no prominent neurologic deficits,
and had no complaints of stool and urine incontinence. Although he had no problems with penile erection, he had developed insensitivity on
the penile skin surface that recovered 4 months postoperatively. Following the surgery, weakness of the left thigh and leg muscles, loss of
strength, numbness, and motor deficit of the foot plantar flexors developed. These complaints were observed to continue during the
postoperative first year follow up examination. There was no recurrence detected in the MRI performed one year after surgery (Figure 4).
Histopathological examination of specimens: A) Irregular fascicles of spindle cells, nuclear palisading, Hematoxylin & Eosin (HE) × 100. B)
Cellular detail. Oval blunt-ended or elongated nuclei, HE × 400. C) Hyalinized blood vessels and relatively myxoid stroma, HE × 200. D)
Diffuse S100 protein positivity, HE × 400. There was no recurrence detected on MRI in the postoperative first year. A) Axial CT, B) Axial
MRI, C) Sagittal MRI. A - anterior, P - posterior, H - head, F - foot Sacral region tumors are diverse, including chordomas,
chondrosarcomas, giant cell tumors, plasmacytomas, lymphomas, aneurysmal bone cyst, inflammatory, and congenital lesions.1,3,4 Schwannomas
are benign encapsulated tumors of Schwann cells that grow slowly through the peripheral myelin nerve fibers. Schwannomas are seen at very
small percentages in the sacrum. Most of the spinal schwannomas are intradural. However, 30% of them extend out from the dural roots and
also include extradural components.6,7 Usually, the patients present with pain or paresthesia, with complaints caused by the extension of
spinal schwannomas into extra spinal tissues. These tumors are large, heterogeneous in character, slow growing, and can display a combined
abdominal and posterior extension. The term giant invasive schwannoma has not been completely clarified. Sridhar et al2 defined GISS as a
tumor that invades 2 or more vertebral levels, extends more than 2.5 cm extraspinally, causes erosion of the spinal body, and tends to
displace to the posterior or lateral myofascial plane.2,8 They are usually asymptomatic until they reach a large size. Lumbar radicular pain
is the most common symptom. Frequently, there is sacral paresthesia and dysesthesia. There may be urinary retention or incontinence
complaints. There may be constipation, rectal fullness, motor weakness, and decrease of the deep tendon reflexes. In our case, there were no
prominent complaints except for mild pain in the left upper abdominal quadrant.1,4,6 Direct x-ray, CT, MRI, and scintigraphy are used for
preoperative diagnosis and treatment planning. In pelvic CT, while it defines the densities of present fluid or fat, it also visualizes the
relationship of anatomic structures (sacrum-coccyx-rectum) and calcification content (chordoma). Benign schwannomas are isointense with
muscle on MRI T1 weighed sequences, and give a hyperintense image in T2 weighed sequences. Cyst formation calcifications can also be seen.
Whereas in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, there is heterogeneous contrast uptake accompanied with a pseudo capsule. Pelvic MRI is
important because it demonstrates tumor type with size, the actual localization, and its relationship with other vital intrapelvic organs.
The MRI is also important for the demonstration of tumor capsule with high sensitivity.1,6,8 The tumor was classified by its localization
according to the modified Sridhar classification (Table 1).5 Klimo et al6 divided sacral nerve sheath tumors into 3 groups according to
their localizations. Type 1 tumors are limited to the sacrum and can be removed by the posterior approach. Type 2 tumors extend to the
anterior and posterior bone limits of the sacrum and a combined approach (anterior and posterior) is required for its removal. In type 3,
the tumors are localized to the presacral region and the anterior approach is sufficient for its removal.6,7 Our case was compatible with
type 5, according to the modified Sridhar classification, and type 2 according to the Klimo classification. Modified Sridhar classification
of benign nerve sheath tumors.5 Even if there is only a suspicion of schwannoma with imaging methods, biopsy should be performed to
distinguish between malignant and benign lesions. Many authors disagree on the need for biopsy since it can cause bleeding and infection.
However, a diagnosis such as lymphoma would completely change the whole treatment modality. Although fine needle biopsy is the golden
standard, caution should be taken according to the tumors location. In pre sacral lesions, biopsy can be performed from the sciatic
notch.1,3,7 During surgical treatments, spinal schwannomas should be removed without damaging the surrounding major neurovascular organs.
However, it is almost always difficult, particularly in giant invasive spinal schwannomas because of the invasive structure of the tumor,
compressive effects, and its invasion to surrounding neurovascular organs. In the literature, although total resection is advocated for
surgical treatment, because of the varying size of the mass, this is not always successful. Other than surgical treatment; embolization,
chemotherapy, and hyperthermia with chemotherapy, or cryotherapy in elective cases are the other possible adjuvant treatments.2,5,8 The
treatment plan of surgical approaches can vary depending on the intrasacral and retroperitoneal extension of the mass. The posterior
approach is used in cases where the tumor extends into the spinal canal or sacrum, and its presacral component is small. An anterior
transabdominal or retroperitoneal approach is usually required to protect the vascular plexus and intrapelvic organs and to liberate the
tumor. The postoperative reconstruction planning of bone structures depends on the destruction of the sacral bone and invasion of the
sacroiliac joint. A CT is highly useful for evaluating this situation. Local recurrence and malign transformation is very rare. For this
reason, piece by piece subtotal removal, or simple enucleation of the mass is a frequently preferred treatment choice. Also, there are
authors that defend complete resection with an aggressive approach because spinal schwannomas can grow again, and if removed inadequately,
the reoperations in these situations have higher complication risks. Although there has been no complete consensus developed regarding the
benefits of total resection, some authors advocate the fact that although there is the risk of developing neurologic deficits following
total resection, it can prevent recurrence.4-6 On the other hand, Pongsthorn et al8 reported that subtotal removal of the tumor piece by
piece gives good results and neurological complications are thereby avoided.1,7,8 In our case, since the schwannoma was a benign and slow
growing tumor with a late and low risk of recurrence; due to the existence of S1-2 invasion and prominent destruction of bone, in order not
to cause severe neurologic complications that can result from total resection, we removed the tumor piece by piece with an anterior and
posterior combined approach. Thinking that the sacroiliac joint was stable, we did not use instrumentation. By filling the formed space with
bone cement at the same time, we aimed to benefit from the hyperthermia effect of the cement. Following the surgery, weakness of the left
thigh and leg muscles, loss of strength, numbness, motor deficit of the foot plantar flexors developed. There was no severe neurologic
deficit in our patient, and no recurrence was detected in the postoperative first year. In conclusion, giant sacral schwannomas are slow
growing benign tumors that frequently do not cause any complaints, until they reach a certain mass. An MRI is very helpful in diagnosis and
in demonstrating the relationship of the tumor with visceral organs. A CT should be used to demonstrate the osseous damage and postoperative
planning. The subtotal removal of tumors, piece by piece, with anterior, posterior or combined approaches results in good outcomes, and thus
unnecessary neurologic complications can be avoided. We would like to thank Dr. Bilgin K. Aribas for the radiological images, and Dr. Fusun
Ardic Yukruk for pathological examinations. DisclosureNo benefits in any form have been or will be received from a commercial party related
directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript. No benefits in any form have been or will be received from a commercial party
related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript. Hsieh CT, Tsai WC, Liu MY. Intradural lumbar cystic schwannoma.
Neurosciences 2011; 16: 366-368. Lingawi SS. How often is low back pain or sciatica not due to lumbar disc disease? Neurosciences 2004; 9:
94-97.
