A full-term male neonate with anorectal anomaly and external perineal anomalies was referred to our service. Physical examination showed an
epithelized perineal mass with cutaneous orifices, which had urine fistulization, hipotrofic perineal musculature, bilateral congenital
clubfoot, hipospadic urethra, criptorquidy bilateral with nonpalpable testis and imperforate anus. A colostomy was constructed immediately
after birth. The child underwent excision of perineal mass, bilateral orchidopexy, Duplay neourethroplasty and coloanal anastomosis at 3
months of age. The histopathological examination of the perineal mass revealed a hamartoma. Recém-nascido a termo do sexo masculino
encaminhado ao nosso serviço por anomalia anorretal e anomalias perineais externas. O exame físico revelou massa perineal epitelizada, com
orifícios cutâneos que apresentavam saída de urina, musculatura perineal hipotrófica, pé torto congênito bilateral, uretra hipospádica,
criptorquidia bilateral com testículos não palpáveis e ânus imperfurado. Logo após o nascimento, o paciente foi submetido à colostomia. Aos
3 meses de idade, a criança foi submetida à excisão da massa perineal, orquidopexia bilateral, neouretroplastia a Duplay e anastomose
coloanal. A análise anatomopatológica da massa perineal indicou hamartoma. Neonates presenting perineal masses are uncommon. When
encountered, most perineal masses are anorectal malformations, sacrococcygeal teratomas, rectal prolapse, or duplication cysts.(1) We report
here a case of an otherwise healthy newborn with anorectal anomaly and a perineal mass. Initially, the mass was believed to be a
sacrococcygeal teratoma. The patient underwent mass excision and the histopathologic evaluation revealed a benign hamartoma. This case is
presented because of its rarity. A full-term male neonate with anorectal anomaly and external perineal anomalies was referred to our
service. Antenatal ultrasound at a gestational age of 20 weeks detected a perineal mass, but other parameters were normal. He was born via
spontaneous vaginal delivery after an uncomplicated pregnancy, at a gestational age of 38 weeks and his birth weight was 3,280g. The mother
was healthy and did not use any medication during pregnancy nor in the year before pregnancy. The child's physical examination revealed an
epithelized perineal mass with cutaneous orifices which had urine fistulization, hipotrofic perineal musculature, bilateral congenital
clubfoot, ambiguity of genitalia with a hipospadic urethra, criptorquidy bilateral with nonpalpable testis and imperforate anus (Figure 1).
After birth, he presented fecal and urine content trough an urethral orifice and a colostomy was constructed. Subsequent laboratorial
investigation showed karyotype 46 XY and normal ultrasound of urinary upper tract. The investigation with magnetic resonance showed a
volumous perineal sac extending superiorly to the right obturator, with very thick walls and heterogeneous content with neurovascular
pedicle from the right sacral region. In addition, we observed a slightly dilated rectosigmoid communicating with hernia sac, bladder with
small repletion and elongated morphology with proeminent urachus. The urethra was poorly characterized, apparently continuing to a
micropenis externalized outside of the hernia sac. Ureters had normal caliber. No structure was characterized as follows with their usual
morphologies: uterus, ovaries, prostate and testicles (Figure 2). When the patient was 3 years old, he underwent perineal exploration
through a midline perineal incision. The mass presented a lobulated aspect and was excised. Intraoperative finding was posterior bladder
wall fistulization to a colon segment that was sutured (Figure 3). Both testicles were located at the inguinal canal and the orquidopexy was
performed straightfoward. A Duplay neourethroplasty and a coloanal anastomosis were performed. The histopathological examination of the
perineal mass revealed a hamartoma composed of fibrous connective tissue with proliferation of capilares and blood vessels, nerve bundles,
fibroblasts, epithelium, smooth muscle and irregular ductal formations, covered by urothelial. No complications were seen in the surgery.
After 16 months of follow-up, the patient was in fairly good condition. His lower limb neurological function was normal. However, the
patient has a continuous urinary leakage and his bowel reconstruction must occur in the future. Association of a perineal hamartoma with
anorectal anomaly is uncommon, and the additional presence of criptorquidy and congenital clubfoot turns our case extremely rare. Masses of
the perineum in infants primarily consist of accessory or ectopic scrotum or perineal lipomas.(2–4) Surgical excision of these lesions is
generally straightforward. However, when the lesion occurs in a patient with an anorectal malformation and it is at the site where the
future anus will be, surgical management may be more complex. Accurate pathological interpretation of the excised specimen is also of great
importance. A review with 2,000 cases of anorectal malformations revealed 22 cases with association to unusual perineal masses divided into
3 categories of lesions characterized as lipomas, vascular anomalies, and hamartomas/choristomas.(1) In this review, eight cases of
hamartomas were mentioned. All patients were girls and had a variety of different anorectal malformations. The typical lesion was a polypoid
protuberance from the perineum at the site where the neoanus was reconstructed. A variety of unusual tissues such as nephrogenic rests,
ectopic bone, and endocervical type mucosa were found in these lesions. One patient had initial treatment at a community hospital where the
pathologist found perineal glandular tissue (endoderm). In the present case, sacrococcygeal teratoma was a differential diagnosis. In the
radiological study, sacrococcygeal teratomas present with soft tissue density and calcifications in 50% of cases (divided into amorphous,
punctate and spiculated), all suggestive of benign tissue. On magnetic resonance imaging these tumors are characterized by hypointense
signal on T1 and hyperintense in T2. Magnetic resonance image is considered the method of choice during the preoperative evaluation and it
provides exact boundaries, topographic location, relationship to other pelvic organs and spine. The association of hamartoma perineal with
anorectal malformations is uncommon, and with genital abnormalities is extremely rare. Various hypotheses have been developed to explain the
association between these pathologies.(5) Stephens attempted to explain the embryogenesis of these anomalies including perineal anorectal
malformations through a deformation by an abnormal pressure on the developing fetus. This pressure occurs in complicated pregnancies by
oligohydramnios. The results of this pressure are skin dimples or joint contractures.(6) The presentation of perineal mass with anorectal
malformations, scrotal abnormalities and genital malformations, suggests possible growth of embryonic tissue structures of the phallus, from
the urethral fold and genital, anal and perineal region that develop these events.(6,7) It has been postulated that the normal development
of the urogenital system and anorectum in human embryos may depend on the integrity of the mesenchymally-derived urorectal septum.(5) Once
the patient has an hipotrofic perineal musculature, both urinary and bowel continence may be affected. Because of the complexity of the case
we report, long term results are difficult to predict.
