Hypervitaminosis D is a rarely reported condition. In general it is only perceived when hypercalcemia is not resolved. The use of vitamin D
has increased in recent years because of its benefits, but as a result, intoxication cases have occurred more frequently. This report
describes a patient who presented worsening of renal function and hypercalcemia. After investigation, vitamin D intoxication was confirmed
and it was due to an error in compounding. A hipervitaminose D é pouco relatada. Geralmente, só é percebida quando o quadro de hipercalcemia
não se resolve. Em razão de seus benefícios, o uso de vitamina D aumentou nos últimos anos; consequentemente, os casos de intoxicação também
tiveram aumento. Este relato destacou um caso em que o paciente apresentava piora da função renal e hipercalcemia. Após investigação, ficou
confirmada a intoxicação por vitamina D devido a um erro de manipulação da droga. Clinical conditions associated to vitamin D intoxication
have been scarcely reported since hypercalcemia suggests other presumptive diagnoses.(1) The number of cases has recently increased because
of more prescriptions of vitamin D to treat hypovitaminosis D. There are few of these products traded by the pharmaceutical industries,
leading to increased demand for compounded medications, which may lead to compounding errors, such as the case herein reported. The patient
developed hypercalcemia and worsening of renal failure due to ingestion of a dose 2,000-fold higher than what was prescribed. A 53-year old
male patient, with history diabetes mellitus, hypertension, non-dialysis chronic renal failure and smoking. He was admitted to hospital in
September 2011 to investigate worsening of the renal function, pruritus, muscle weakness, lack of appetite and weight lost. Table 1 displays
the results of the biochemical tests before hospitalization. On the initial physical examination, the following were measured: weight 86kg,
height 1.93cm, blood pressure 140x70mmHg and heart rate 80bpm. The biochemical test results were creatinine 67mg/dL, calcium 13.4mg/dL,
ionized calcium 1.88mmol/L, parathyroid hormone (PTH) 15.3pg/mL. The ultrasound showed renal calculi, one was obstructing and the urinary
tract was dilated. He was operated on for double-J catheter implanting and ureterolithotripsy. A 3-cm-long colon neoplasm was observed in
colonoscopy. Parathyroid scintigraphy, myelogram and positron- emission tomography (PET) scan presented normal results. The following
management was prescribed: hyperhydration; administration of furosemide, corticosteroid and iron; and replacing erythropoietin by methoxy
polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta due to suspected skin allergy. Intranasal and subcutaneous calcitonin was also introduced. Hypercalcemia
persisted even after exeresis of colorectal adenocarcinoma. Investigating parathyroid adenoma by ultrasound, scintigraphy and biopsy ruled
out primary hyperparathyroidism. Biochemical test results were creatinine 2.69mg/dL, calcium 13.0mg/dL, ionized calcium 1.67mmol/L, PTH
17.5pg/mL, vitamin D >100ng/mL. The laboratory tests for bone metabolism were inconclusive, and PTH inappropriately persisted with “normal”
levels even with hypercalcemia. The laboratory diagnosis was probably influenced by renal failure or possible vitamin D intoxication,
considering the patient took the vitamin for some months before admission to hospital, at 2,000IU per day. Since hypervitaminosis was
suspected, renal function, as well as serum calcium and vitamin D levels were monitored, and ibandronate sodium was introduced and later
replaced by cinacalcet. The drug capsules were submitted to laboratory analysis due to suspected intoxication. The analytical methodology
and specification used were based on the United States Pharmacopea (USP 34) Oil-soluble vitamins capsules, by means of high-performance
liquid chromatography. The amount of vitamin D found was two-thousand-fold higher than expected for each capsule. As shown in table 2, the
laboratory results dropped and vitamin D levels decreased slowly as expected, because of its elimination profile.(1,2) 25(OH)D: vitamin D.
Vitamin D supplementation has currently been more often used for increasing calcium absorption in the body and reducing the risk of
diseases, such as rickets and osteoporosis. Some recent studies have shown that vitamin D deficiency is associated to an increased risk of
developing cardiovascular diseases, some types of cancer, in addition to inflammatory and autoimmune diseases.(3–5) The body can produce
vitamin D only after sunlight exposure. When regular sunlight exposure is not frequent, only foods are not enough to keep appropriate levels
of the vitamin. Hence supplementation with medications is necessary. The recommended dose varies from 800 to 4,000IU per day according to
age.(5,6) Vitamin D supplements can be easily purchased over the counter, in the form of ergocalciferol or cholecalciferol, in diverse
formulations and dosages. The cases of hypervitaminosis D usually occur in excessive supplementation.(3,7,8) The upper limit of daily
vitamin D intake needed to cause toxicity is unknown; however, up to 10,000IU per day was considered safe in a healthy population.(3) The
estimated toxic dose of vitamin D should be greater than 100,000IU per day for, at least, one month.(9) In the present case, the dose used
was 40-fold higher than that recommended. There are reports of clinical conditions in which the amount was 8- and 18-fold the maximum
recommended dose.(9) The initial tests showed increased calcium levels and undetectable PTH. Later the intoxication was confirmed since the
serum vitamin D level was over 1,000ng/mL. In another report, a patient was diagnosed as acute renal failure secondary to hypercalcemia, and
had normal PTH and increased vitamin D levels.(3) Investigating the medications the patient was taking, it was observed that the vitamin D3
vial contained 50,000IU per capsule instead of 1,000IU. Moreover, to aggravate the situation, the patient took two more supplements
containing vitamin D3; thus, he was taking approximately 50,400IU per day. The diagnosis of vitamin D intoxication is not common in cases of
hypercalcemia, and it was less often made before availability of the vitamin for supplementation. This condition is likely to be associated
to primary hyperparathyroidism, multiple myeloma or other neoplasms. The patient reported was paradoxical because in case of hypercalcemia,
PTH levels would tend to be low or, in typical hyperparathyroidism, they would be high. However, the patient's PTH levels were normal and
hindered diagnosis; hence it was necessary to investigate all possible causes of hypercalcemia. The patient took a compounded
cholecalciferol supplement. Overdose was found by laboratory analysis of the capsules that contained 4,000,000IU instead of 2,000IU per
capsule. This kind of compounding error may occur mainly when dealing with very-low dose products; in such cases, the pure input is not
weighed, it is just diluted. Vitamin D is particularly produced at a high potency – 1mg is equal to 40,000IU. Therefore, the pharmacist must
take care as required to perform correct dilution, weighing and conversion procedures. The compounding pharmacies should encourage good
practices, establish quality criteria and strictly supervise all stages of the production process. The pharmacy seriously failed and was
notified as a preventive measure to avoid new events Vitamin D supplementation should be appropriately monitored due to potential risk of
intoxication, especially when made by compounding.
