A 70-year-old female patient presented with proptosis of right eye for the past 15 days and defective vision in both eyes since birth. She
was found to have eccentric painful proptosis of right eye along with features of oculocutaneous albinism. Eccentric proptosis was due to an
orbital mass which proved to be a plexiform neurofibroma by histopathological examination. The case is presented for its rarity, as an
isolated orbital plexiform neurofibroma without the systemic features of neurofibromatosis is rare and its coincidental presentation with
oculocutaneous albinism is yet rare and has not been reported so far. Neurofibromas are benign nerve sheath tumors consisting of Schwann
cells, fibroblasts and embedded axons. The most common location of neurofibromas is the lower limb followed by the upper limbs, trunk, the
head and neck. Neurofibromas of the orbit are rare. Orbital neurofibromas associated with neurofibromatosis 1 or Von Recklinghausen's
disease have been reported. Isolated orbital neurofibroma unassociated with systemic neurofibromatosis is relatively rare. Albinism consists
of a group of inherited abnormalities of melanin synthesis and is typically characterized by a congenital reduction or absence of melanin
pigment. These disorders are generally sub-classified as oculocutaneous albinism or ocular albinism based on the extent of pigmentation of
the skin, hair and eye. Oculocutaneous albinism is a group of 4 autosomal recessive disorders; whereas ocular albinism is X-linked or
uncommonly autosomal recessive. The coincidental presentation of oculocutaneous albinism with isolated plexiform orbital neurofibroma
without any systemic manifestations of neurofibromatosis is very rare. A 70-year-old female with oculocutaneous albinism, presented with
proptosis of the right eye for 15 days and defective vision of both eyes since birth, which got worsened in the right eye for the past 15
days. There was no similar history among family members. Ophthalmological examination revealed visual acuity of HM and 20/400 in RE and LE,
respectively. Eccentric proptosis of right eye was seen (27 mm Hertel in RE and 15 mm Hertel in LE) with fullness in the superotemporal
quadrant of the right orbit [Fig. 1]. Extra ocular movements were restricted in all directions. Anterior segment of both eyes showed iris
transillumination defects, a normal pupillary reaction and nuclear sclerosis. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal. Hypopigmentation of
fundus with foveal hypoplasia was seen in both eyes. Proptosis of right eye in oculocutaneous albinism Ultrasound of right eye showed low to
moderate echogenic mass in the superotemporal quadrant of the orbit. [Fig. 2] Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of orbit showed a well-defined lobulated, elongated mass of mixed intensity, measuring 7.1 × 3.6 × 2.8 cm with well-enhancing solid and non-
enhancing cystic areas in the superior part of the right orbit. The mass extended posteriorly through the superior orbital fissure into the
right cavernous sinus. Invasion of the lesser wing of sphenoid was also noted. Superiorly there was erosion of roof of the orbit with
intracranial and extra dural extension. Optic nerve was displaced inferiorly by the mass. There was erosion of medial wall of the orbit with
extension into the posterior ethmoidal sinus [Figs. 3 and 4]. Imaging features were in favor of orbital neurofibroma, so radiologist
suggested fine needle aspiration cytology or biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. Excision biospy was performed under general anesthesia (GA).
Histopathological examination (HPE) showed features suggestive of plexiform neurofibroma. [Fig. 5] Neurosurgeon's opinion was obtained.
However, they could not guarantee a total extirpation of the intracranial part of the plexiform neurofibroma. Malignant transformation of
intraorbital neurofibroma during radiation therapy has been reported. Hence, radiotherapy was not advised. The patient was advised periodic
follow up but she did not turn up. B-scan shows orbital mass indenting the eye ball CT orbit shows cystic mass with peripheral enhancement
extending into cavernous sinus with eroding lesser wing of sphenoid bone MRI orbit shows mass with cystic space extending into cavernous
sinus Histopathological study reveals plexiform neurofibroma H and E, ×10) Neurofibromas of the orbit are rare and account for 0.6-2.4% of
all orbital tumors. They may be of three subtypes namely, plexiform, diffuse and localized neurofibromas. Plexiform neurofibromas, the most
common orbital subtype, occur exclusively in neurofibromatosis type 1. Diffuse neurofibromas are usually the dermal variants; they rarely
affect the orbit and are clinically indistinguishable from the plexiform subtype. Histologically, diffuse neurofibromas show greater
cellularity, less collagen deposition, and lack the cellular peri-neural sheathing characteristic of plexiform neurofibromas. Both the
plexiform and diffuse subtypes lack clear margination and tend to be highly vascular. Localized neurofibromas of the orbit are uncommon.
They are relatively well circumscribed and much less vascular. Though this patient was diagnosed to have plexiform neurofibroma of the
orbit, other clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis 1 were absent. Isolated plexiform neurofibromas without the systemic features of
neurofibromatosis 1 have been reported at other anatomical sites; however, their location in orbit is relatively rare. Similar cases of
orbital plexiform neurofibromas without the systemic features of neurofibromatosis 1 have been reported in literature. Oculocutaneous
albinism is associated with syndromes such as Prader willi syndrome, Angelmann syndrome, Hermansky Pudlack syndrome and Chediak-Higashi
syndrome. Oculocutaneous albinism has also been associated with other ocular disorders like Axenfield's anomaly. A very rare case has been
reported showing the genetic associations between partial albinism and neurofibromatosis in two daughters of a family along with Axenfield's
defect, congenital deafness and peroneal muscular dystrophy. However, isolated orbital plexiform neurofibroma in association with albinism
has not been reported so far. This rare case is reported for the coincidental presentation of oculocutaneous albinism and isolated orbital
plexiform neurofibroma without any systemic features of neurofibromatosis 1 in the same patient and probably the first case to be reported.
Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
