Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors (IMTs) mainly occur in children and young adults, usually in the first two decades of life. IMT-type
tumors belong to neoplasms of an intermediate biologic potential with considerable rate of local recurrence and in some cases that able to
create metastases. Presented case is the first IMT coexisting with the other neoplasm. In our paper we are going to present a peculiar case
of an IMT of the bladder coexisting with an ovarian teratoma, and to discuss its pathogenesis, histological picture and differential
diagnosis. A 19-year-old female was admitted to the Gynecological Department and during the surgery, two independent, non-adjacent tumors
were found. To settle the diagnosis, a FISH examination with the ALK1 break apart probe was carried out. It confirmed the rearrangement of
the chromosome 2p23. Morphologic and immunophenotypic similarities between an IMT and other malignant tumors of the bladder may lead to
diagnostic errors and an unnecessary radical cystectomy as a result. The therapy of choice is only total excision of the tumor. The virtual
slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1937487606122622 Inflammatory myofibroblastic
tumors (IMTs) mainly occur in children and young adults, usually in the first two decades of life. The most frequent sites of these tumors
are the lungs, the peritoneum and the mesentery . IMTs are very rarely localized in the bladder, so they need to be differentiated from
other bladder tumors , mainly rhabdomyosarcomas and leiomyosarcomas. Tumors of non-epithelial origin account for about 2-5% of all
neoplasmatic tumors of the bladder: rhabdomyosarcomas appear most frequently in children under the age of ten, while leiomyosarcomas are
most frequent in adults . In our paper we are going to present a peculiar case of an IMT coexisting with an ovarian teratoma, and discuss
its pathogenesis, histological picture and differential diagnosis. A 19-year-old female was admitted to the Gynecological Department of the
Municipal Hospital due to 3-month-long pain in the hypogastrium. An ultrasonographic study revealed a tumor on the left ovary corresponding
to a teratoma with hypoechogenic structure; it just seemed that the tumor infiltrated the wall of the bladder and grew into its lumen.
However, during the surgery, two independent, non-adjacent tumors were found. One of these was a tumor on the left ovary, 45 mm in diameter.
The tumor had a well-defined capsule, and macroscopically was diagnosed as a teratoma. The second lesion was a hard tumor 30 × 40 mm, well
circumscribed, which was deforming the anterior wall of the bladder, and growing into its lumen. The left appendices and the uterus were
normal. An insignificant amount of transudate fluid was found on the pelvic floor. The affected ovary was excised, and then, the anterior
wall of the bladder was incised and a solid tumor of 40 × 30 mm was removed. Histologically, the bladder tumor was well circumscribed and
built of bundles of spindle cells divided by abundant amounts of myxoid extracellular matrix. The tumor cells featured long cytoplasmatic
processes and vesicular or elongated nuclei with one or several delicate nucleoli (Figure 1). They present a moderate proliferative activity
that means up to three mitoses per one high power field, the Ki-67 index was about 15%, and S-phase fraction about 19.9%. The bladder
transitional epithelium, bordering the tumor, was normal. Immunochemically, the tumor’s cells were positive for cytokeratins (AE1/AE3)
(Table 1), smooth muscle actin, calponin (Figure 2), smooth muscle actin, Alk-1 antigen (Figure 3), and focally also for desmin. The
immunohistochemical reactions against MyoD1, CD30, CD34 and miogenin (Myf-4) were negative. To settle the diagnosis, a FISH examination with
the ALK1 break apart probe was carried out. It confirmed the rearrangement of the chromosome 2p23 (Figure 4). Flow cytometry analysis
revealed that 67% of cells were aneuploid (DI index was 1.12). The neoplasmatic cells were accompanied by an abundant infiltrate of
lymphocytes, plasmocytes and polynuclear granulocytes. HE staining. IHC staining (type of cytokeratines) IMT presented in article Calponine
staining. Alk-1 staining. FISH analysis. An IMT is a relatively rare tumor. In the past, it was described as a plasma cell granuloma, an
inflammatory proliferation of myofibroblasts or an inflammatory pseudotumor – IPT. An IMT is usually found in children and young adults,
slightly more often in female (F:M = 4:3) and localized mainly in the lungs, however it may arise in almost every location. IMTs situated in
the bladder are very rare . To our knowledge, the presented case is the first IMT coexisting with the other neoplasm. The only exception was
a case of an IMT in a patient with Recklinghausen disease, another with systemic lupus erythematous, and the next one with Wolf- Hirschhorn
syndrome (Table 2). Cases of urinary bladder IMT Nd- no date available. The first case of an IMT in the bladder was described by Roth in
1980 . The origin of this tumor was a matter of a long debate; some authors maintained that an IMT is a consequence of an inflammation in
the bladder, while others regarded it as a neoplastic lesion. The Epsten-Barr virus, the human herpes virus HHV8, bacteria such as
Campylobacter equi, Campylobacter jejuni, Escherichia coli, trauma, radio- and steroidotherapy were considered to be causative factors . In
some articles, Hepatitis C, HIV and TB infections prior to the development of pseudotumors have been documented . Fangusaro at al. described
two cases of IMT following hematopoetic stem cell transplantation. Both patients received total body irradiation in preparation for the
transplant. These two cases suggest radiation as a possible underlying cause of IMT . However, more recent research has showed that an IMT
is most probably a neoplasm rather than an inflammatory pseudotumor; both rearrangement of 2p23 chromosome as well as sporadic local
invasion or metastases speak in favor of neoplasmatic origin of the tumor . Teratomas are neoplasms that arise from pluripotent cells and
can differentiate along one or more embryonic germ lines . Mature teratomas of the ovary are one of the most common benign ovarian
neoplasms, accounting for approximately 10-20% of all ovarian tumors. Teratoma may occur at any age in women, but predominantly occurs in
younger patients (20–40 years old) . Mature ovarian teratomas are benign ovarian germ cell tumors that usually occur with a normal
karyotype. There are very few reports describing chromosomal abnormalities in these tumors, none of which are recurrent. The Ding Y study in
2011 was the first to demonstrate the differential profile of 16 miRNAs in mature ovarian teratomas. An aberrant expression of miRNAs may be
essential for the pathogenesis of mature ovarian teratomas . An IMT may occur in the bladder at any age (from childhood to old age) . This
rare disease does not usually cause pain; the most frequent symptoms are severe hematuria, sometimes anuria and a palpable tumor. The tumor
may be localized in any region of the bladder, however the trigone of the bladder has never been affected, apart of the cases where the
tumor arose in the posterior wall of the bladder and secondarily infiltrated the trigone . The size of the tumor is variable – from several
centimeters up to 37.5 cm . Obviously, it is not possible to distinguish an IMT from malignant tumors of the bladder with diagnostic methods
such as an RTG or endoscopy. Macroscopically, these tumors are well circumscribed, light and soft; the cut surface is smooth, occasionally
opalescent, without hemorrhagic foci or necrosis . Histologically, it is possible to distinguish three types of these tumors: the vascular-
myxoidal type, which can resemble nodular fasciitis or granulomatous tissue; the solid, spindle-cell type, which resembles a fibrous
histiocytoma or tumor originating from smooth muscle or a low-cellular-fibrous, which imitates desmoids or a scar . The key criteria in IMT
diagnostics are: proliferation of myoepithelial spindle cells accompanied by lymphocytic infiltration of tumor stroma, the positive
immunohistochemical reaction to ALK-1, vimentin and cytokeratin , and finally ALK1 gene rearrangement confirmed cytogenetically or by FISH
method. It shows the rearrangement of the ALK gene in the population of spindle cells in an IMT . The ALK gene is located on the 2p23
chromosome; it encodes the ALK protein, the tyrosine kinase receptor. This method is a very sensitive tool used to differentiate an IMT from
other spindle-cell tumors of the bladder. In IMT tumors, the positive immunohistochemical reaction with an antibody against ALK-1 is
observed in more than 60% cases, while in the FISH method it is observed in almost 70% of the cases. Overexpression of this gene is also
observed in anaplastic large cell lymphoma . Some IMTs show an expression of cytokeratins, SMA or desmin . Myogenin, a rhabdomyosarcoma
marker, allows this tumor to be excluded . Morphologic and immunophenotypic similarities between an IMT and other malignant tumors of the
bladder may lead to diagnostic errors and an unnecessary radical cystectomy as a result. The misdiagnosis of an IMT as a rhabdomyosarcoma, a
leiomyosarcoma or a sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma, and as a result, unnecessary radical surgery, adjuvant therapy and its complications,
is a major problem of contemporary IMT diagnostics. IMT-type tumors belong to neoplasms of an intermediate biologic potential with a
considerable rate of local recurrence and in some cases they are able to create metastases . In the case described in this paper, the
presence of a large necrosis in the central portion of the tumor, mitotic activity and the presence of aneuploidal cells (seen in
cytofluorometry) suggest a more aggressive type of IMT. The therapy of choice is the total excision of the tumor, a radical cystectomy is
not necessary . The study (No 1340143-46) was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the protocol was approved by the
local Human Research Ethics Committee. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. ZD: main author, author diagnosis and preparing of the
manuscript. JR: carried out the molecular genetic studies. PW: participated in the sequence alignment and drafted the manuscript. PP:
collecting literature. MC: medical history and clinical course of the case.
