A 80 year old diabetic male presented to the General Medicine department at Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Cochin, Kerala, India in
January 2013 with complaints of severe weight loss. Despite extensive haematological tests, Mantoux test and chest X-ray, cause of weight
loss was uncertain. A whole body 18F FDG PET/CT (18Fluorine labelled Flurodeoxyglucose Positron emission computed tomography/computed
tomography, Fig. 1) was done to look for occult malignancy or infection. PET/CT images showed abnormal FDG uptake in bilateral adrenal
glands. CT guided biopsy confirmed minimal active adrenal inflammation. Histopathologically special staining methods [PAS (Periodic acid-
Schiff) and Geimsa stains] revealed fungal spores and organisms, thus confirming bilateral adrenal histoplasmosis as the underlying cause of
weight loss (Fig. 2). Patient received itraconazole 200 mg twice daily oral doses and showed clinical improvement within 6 weeks of therapy.
Eight millicurie of 18F FDg was injected in the patient in euglycaemic status and whole body PET/CT imaging commenced 60 min after the
injection. Fig. 1A represents CT transaxial image, Fig. 1B depicts PET transaxial image, Fig. 1C shows Fused PET/CT image and Fig. 1D shows
MIP (maximum intensity projection) image showing abnormal FDg uptake in bilateral adrenal glands with no other focus of abnormal FDg uptake
elsewhere in rest of PET/CT survey. Arrows depict isolated FDg avid bilateral enlarged adrenal glands (right adrenal measures 4.4 × 1.8 cm
while left adrenal measures about 4.5 × 2.4 cm). Metabolic activity was measured by a semiquantitative index known as standard uptake value
(sUV) Maximum and was found to be 14.3 g/ml in both adrenal glands. In Fig 1 A - L depicts liver. Microscopic sections of adrenal glands
show a tiny fragment of adrenal tissue with focal neutrophilic infiltration. No granuloma or histiocytes were noted. Mild vascular
proliferation was seen. No atypical cells were noted. (A) Hematoxylin-eosin stain × 400 showing Histoplasma arranged in sheets, both inside
the macrophages and extracellulary. (B) PAS stain (periodic acid Schiff stain) × 400: shows focal ovoid bodies with a clear halo which
represents the fungal spores and organisms (arrow). Histoplasmosis, a fungal infection caused by Histoplasma capsulatum affects the
reticulo-endothelial system1. Disseminated cases show involvement of liver, spleen, lymph nodes, marrow, and adrenal glands12.
