Lymphomatoid granulomatosis (LYG) is a rare Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorder. It most often occurs in patients
with immunodeficiency and the clinical course ranges from indolent behavior to that of an aggressive malignancy. Pulmonary, central nervous
system and dermatological manifestations are most common. To our knowledge this is the first reported case of LYG related to azathioprine
therapy in Crohn disease. A twenty-six year old Caucasian woman with colonic Crohn disease on maintenance azathioprine therapy presented
with right upper quadrant pain and fever. Diagnostic imaging revealed extensive liver, pulmonary and cerebral lesions. A diagnosis of LYG
was made based on the pattern of organ involvement and the immunohistochemical features on liver and lung biopsy. Thiopurine therapy for
inflammatory bowel disease is associated with an increased incidence of lymphoproliferative disorders. This report highlights the diagnostic
challenges associated with LYG. As long-term thiopurine therapy remains central to the management of inflammatory bowel diseases it is
essential that both patients and clinicians are aware of this potential adverse outcome. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis (LYG), first described
by Liebow et al. in 1972 , is a rare Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)-associated lymphoproliferative disorder. LYG is classically described as
primarily extranodal in nature involving the lungs, skin, central nervous system and liver. It is an incompletely understood clinical entity
with a median survival of 14 months from the time of diagnosis. Age at first presentation is typically between the fourth and sixth decade
with a male to female ratio of two to one. Although it may occur in immunocompetent hosts, there is a strong association with immune
deficiency, both humoral and cell mediated. Clinical presentation is often non-specific with pulmonary involvement being most common and
manifesting as cough, shortness of breath or chest pain . Histopathologically, LYG is characterized as a mixed mononuclear cell infiltrate
with atypical large CD20+ B-lymphocytes on the background of reactive CD3+ T- lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasma cells. The infiltrate is
angiocentric and typically invades the microvasculature. It is graded from I to III based on both the number of large B-cells and the
proportion that stain positively for EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER) by in situ hybridization (ISH) . The presence of these EBER-positive large
B-cells and vascular invasion are keys to the diagnosis of LYG. Grade I and II LYG are slowly progressive while grade III LYG is aggressive
with poor prognosis and requires treatment with multi-agent immunochemotherapy. Here we present a case of LYG in a 26-year-old Caucasian
female receiving azathioprine maintenance therapy for Crohn disease (CD) who presented with primary gastrointestinal complaints and fever.
This report will highlight the diagnostic challenges associated with LYG and describe what we believe to be the first documented case of
this rare disease in the setting of azathioprine treatment for CD. A 26-year-old Caucasian woman presented with three days of right upper
quadrant pain, fever, and malaise. She had a six-year history of Crohn colitis initially treated with high dose mesalamine (4 g daily) then
transitioned to azathioprine (2.5 mg/kg) after loss of response. She had been in clinical remission on azathioprine for the preceding
14 months. The patient had not been on any other immune modulating or biologic therapies. Physical examination revealed focal right upper
quadrant abdominal tenderness but no palpable masses, organomegaly or signs of ascites. Laboratory review revealed new onset pancytopenia
(hemoglobin = 119 g/L, neutrophils = 1.4 × 109/L, platelets = 80 x109/L), cholestatic liver enzyme elevation (GGT = 272 U/L, ALP = 342 U/L)
and hepatic synthetic impairment (bilirubin = 19 umol/L, INR = 1.8, albumin = 24 g/L). Azathioprine therapy was suspended. Investigations
failed to identify a source of infection; however, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed hepatomegaly with periportal, gastrohepatic, and
retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. A clinical diagnosis of azathioprine-associated pancytopenia with a concurrent non-A-E viral hepatitis was
favored. She was administered G-CSF and transitioned to oral antibiotics. After clinical improvement, the patient was discharged from
hospital with planned repeat MR imaging in one to two months.Six weeks later, she developed progressive abdominal pain, night sweats, and
non-positional presyncopal symptoms. The patient did not report diarrhea or GI bleeding. Endoscopic evaluation of the upper GI tract and
colon were normal with no evidence of inflammation or active Crohn disease. She had also developed her first outbreak of genital herpes
(serologically HSV-2) for which she was started on antiviral therapy. Repeat MR imaging now demonstrated extensive T2 hyperintense lesions
distributed throughout her liver and both kidneys (Figure 1A).Over the next weeks in hospital, she experienced progressive abdominal
bloating, malaise, dyspnea and night sweats without documented fevers. Computed tomography (CT) of her lungs revealed extensive,
peripherally distributed, bilateral ground-glass opacifications (Figure 1B). Bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial biopsy were negative
for infection or malignancy. A comprehensive infectious diseases work-up was negative; of note serology and PCR viral titers for EBV were
negative. HIV serology was negative. Core biopsy of the liver revealed atypical B-lymphocyte proliferation with prominent angiocentricity
(Figure 2A). The EBV encoded small RNA (EBER) staining by in situ hybridization was negative (Figure 2B). Thus the liver biopsy was
classified by hematopathologist consensus as an “atypical lymphoid infiltrate”. Further work-up with a bone marrow biopsy showed no
morphologic abnormalities and was EBER-negative. An MR of the head revealed multiple cerebellar, cortical and subcortical enhancing lesions
(Figure 3). As the lesions appeared to be infarcts of different ages across different territories, a vasculitic process was suggested but a
subsequent serological work-up was negative. Diagnostic imaging features of lymphomatoid granulomatosis in our case. A) T2 weighted axial
magnetic resonance (MR) image showing hyperintense lesions in the liver. B) CT axial image showing irregular bilateral pulmonary opacities
with peripheral predominance and areas of ground-glass changes classic for lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Histopathology features of
lymphomatoid granulomatosis in our case. A) H&E stain of liver core biopsy with a periportal polymorphous infiltrate composed of small
lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells. B) EBV in situ hybridization (EBER) of liver showing no positively stained cells. C) H&E stain
of lung wedge biopsy showing an extensive, focally angiocentric, polymorphic infiltrate with geographic tissue necrosis. D) EBER of lung
showing scattered positive nuclear staining in the distribution of B-cells (CD20 immunostain not shown). Central nervous system lesion in
our case. T2 weighted MR image showing a large hyperintense lesion in A) right frontal cerebral cortex and B) right cerebellar cortex. The
patient opted to leave hospital pending consultation opinions on her liver biopsy and one month later returned to hospital with worsening
dyspnea, cough and fevers. She underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) during which a wedge biopsy of her lung was obtained.
In the days prior to surgery she had developed right pleural effusion and lower lobe pneumonia. Cultures from her pleural fluid grew
Streptococcus milleri and Prevotella species, therefore she received a six-week course of parenteral antibiotics.Now four months after her
initial presentation, the VATS-acquired lung wedge biopsy demonstrated EBER positivity in an atypical CD20+ lymphocyte infiltrate with
vascular invasion sufficient to confirm a diagnosis of grade II LYG (Figure 2C, D). Expert pathology opinion from the National Institutes of
Health (Bethesda, MD) concurred with the diagnosis. Over this period the patient had several transient episodes of left lower face and
tongue paresthesias and repeat brain MRI revealed interval development of new enhancing lesions in both cerebral hemispheres with mild
surrounding edema and small internal foci of microhemorrhage. Treatment was initiated with subcutaneous recombinant interferon-alpha three
times weekly titrated up to 10 million units per m2 of body surface area and four weekly doses of rituximab 375 mg/m2. Her treatment course
was complicated by neutropenia requiring granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), choledocholithiasis requiring cholecystectomy and
admission to hospital with recurrent pneumonia. With therapy, all of her systemic lesions have steadily improved. This patient is alive and
tolerating ongoing therapy at 12 months follow-up. Our patient is the first reported case we are aware of with LYG in the context of CD and
azathioprine use. Her presentation is atypical for LYG due to her young age, female gender, and the predominance of hepatic involvement
preceding other pulmonary and CNS manifestations. In the larger context of LYG, only three percent of cases present with gastrointestinal
symptoms; the majority primarily manifest pulmonary symptoms . In our case, the diagnosis of LYG was suspected based on pattern recognition
on lung imaging and suggestive liver pathology. The negative EBV staining and lack of necrosis on the liver biopsy sample pointed away from
LYG as the diagnosis. After open lung biopsy, however, the classic features of LYG were revealed, namely atypical large B-cells that were
EBER-positive, vascular invasion and necrosis. These pathological findings along with the patient’s clinical presentation and pattern of
organ involvement clinched the diagnosis of LYG. This case highlights the difficulty of establishing the diagnosis of LYG in many cases due
to sampling error and histological heterogeneity in a given patient depending on the site biopsied . The current literature on LYG in
association with CD or azathioprine is limited to two case reports. The first was a 17-year-old female patient with CD who developed LYG
(stage III) with nasopharyngeal and pulmonary predominance following six years of 6-mercaptopurine therapy. She received systemic
immunochemotherapy and was in clinical remission at four years follow-up . The second was a 69-year-old female who developed LYG (stage III)
with central nervous system predominance following ten months of azathioprine therapy for autoimmune hepatitis. Despite initiation of
systemic therapy the patient died 34 days after diagnosis due to sepsis and cardio-pulmonary failure . From these two case reports an
independent association between the two major features of our case -CD and azathioprine (a thiopurine pro-drug of 6-mercaptopurine)– with
the development of LYG can be theorized. Multiple population-based studies of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) have not shown an excess
risk of lymphoproliferative disorders (LD) over baseline in part because it is difficult to rule out an effect from the disease itself in
the population of patients who require more intensive therapy . However, studies evaluating the risk of LD in the setting of CD and
thiopurine therapy, summarized in a review by Beaugerie et al, support an approximate five-fold therapy specific elevated risk. Along with
other smaller retrospective cohort analyses, the CESAME study, a nationwide French prospective observational cohort study of 19,486 patients
with IBD, showed an independent association between ongoing thiopurine therapy for IBD and the risk of LD (multivariate-adjusted hazard
ratio = 5.28, CI 2.01-13.9, p = 0.0007) . It should be noted that the CESAME Study Group concluded the absolute cumulative risk of LD after
ten years of thiopurines was less than one percent. This cohort had no patients diagnosed with LYG. Consistent with the findings in our
patient, a comprehensive review of all LYG case series by Katzenstein et al. illustrates the central role of underlying primary or secondary
immunodeficiency leading to EBV reactivation. This may result in viral binding of lymphocyte membrane proteins and subsequent viral genome
insertion facilitating oncogenesis . Iatrogenic T-cell immunosuppression secondary to thiopurines is consistent with this proposed
pathogenesis and was likely the predisposing factor in our case. Crohn disease-related lymphomas have been shown to have a higher prevalence
of EBV-related subtypes, and in some EBV-related lymphoproliferative disorders disease remission has been seen with withdrawal of
immunosuppression . Here we present the first case in the literature of lymphomatoid granulomatosis in the setting of azathioprine therapy
for Crohn disease. LYG is one of several EBV-driven conditions that should be considered when a lymphoproliferative disorder develops in an
immunocompromised patient. The atypical features in our case underscore the importance of maintaining a high degree of clinical suspicion
and diagnostic vigilance when evaluating non-specific abdominal symptoms frequently encountered in CD patients. This case highlights that
even limited exposure to such therapy may induce LYG. Future research is needed into the pathogenesis and early detection of this disease to
allow both clinicians and patients to make informed decisions and to raise awareness of this uncommon disorder. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor of this journal. ALP: Alkaline phosphatase; CD: Crohn disease; CNS: Central nervous system; CT: Computed tomography;
EBV: Epstein-Barr virus; EBER: Epstein-Barr virus encoded small RNA; GGT: Gamma glutamyl transferase; IBD: Inflammatory bowel disease; ISH:
In situ hybridization; LD: Lymphoproliferative disorder; LYG: Lymphomatoid granulomatosis; MR: Magnetic resonance. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. WC and CG wrote the manuscript and performed the literature review. JP and PJB conceived of the report,
participated in expert review and editing of the final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication
history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-230X/14/127/prepub We thank Dr. J.H. MacGregor for assistance
with case related diagnostic imaging and Dr. Michelle Geddes for clinical insight and expert opinion from a hematology-oncology perspective.
