Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 59-year-old man had been admitted to our hospital three times with tarry stool,
hematemesis, and abdominal discomfort. His medical history included no abdominal operation. Repeated upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, and
computed tomography (CT) had been negative. Gastrointestinal bleeding scintigraphy and Meckel scintigraphy had been also negative. In the
last admission, he presented abrupt and sharp abdominal pain. An abdominal radiograph showed dilations and air-fluid levels of small
intestine and colon. An abdominal CT revealed dilation of small intestine with the lack of contrasts, mesenteric and bowel wall edema, and
“clockwise” rotation of the mesentery around the mesenteric vessels (whirl sign) (Figure, arrow). The exploratory laparotomy showed a
volvulus of the small intestine at the base of the mesentery, and an edematous mesentery (Figure). The cause of the mesenteric rotation was
not identified, such as congenital malrotation, bands, and postoperative adhesion. Primary small bowel volvulus (PSBV) was diagnosed, and
the affected bowel was untwisted. Postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged home 14 days after surgery. PSBV is defined as
torsion of large segment small intestine at the basis of the mesentery without any associated underlying cause, such as congenital
malrotations, bands, postoperative adhesions, tumors, and diverticular disease. The preoperative diagnosis of PSBV is rather difficult
because of limited value of physical examination and radiograph films. However, several authors have reported the usefulness of preoperative
abdominal CT for the diagnosis of PSBV.1–3 A tightly twisted mesentery around the point of torsion (whirl sign) was described as a typical
sign of volvulus of the small intestine. In conclusion, we emphasize PSBV is an important emergency disease demanding prompt surgical
intervention, and whirl sign in CT is the key for its diagnosis. Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Abdominal computed tomography revealed dilation of small intestine with the lack of contrasts, mesenteric and
bowel wall edema, and “clockwise” rotation of the mesentery around the mesenteric vessels (whirl sign) (arrow).
