Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 55-year-old woman with a 3-month history of abdominal pain presented to the emergency
department with chief complaints of worsening abdominal pain and per os intolerance since 3 days ago. Her medical history was noteworthy for
watery diarrhea without fever, loss of appetite, weight loss, and nausea and vomiting. Examination revealed abdominal tenderness over right
and left lower quadrant (LLQ). Plain radiography and computed tomography showed round calcified mass with small areas of air in cecum and
2.5 and 4.5 cm-diameter round masses in LLQ (Figure 1–3). The intestinal obstruction caused by Phytobezoars. Bezoars are classified into 4
main types; phytobezoars, trichobezoars, pharmacobezoars, and lactobezoars. Phytobezoars, the most common types of bezoar, are composed of
vegetable matter.1 They are concretion of poorly digested fruit and vegetable fibers that usually become impacted in the narrowest portion
of the small bowel.2 Previous gastric resection or ulcer surgery predisposes to bezoar. Abnormal mastication, decreased gastric motility and
secretion, autonomic neuropathy in patients with diabetes and myotonic dystrophy are some other predisposing factors.3 The common presenting
symptoms are vague feeling of epigastric fullness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, early satiety, and weight loss.4 The masses were surgically
removed in our patient. They consisted of 25–30 foreign bodies in various size including pits, seeds, small pieces of stones, and date
kernels. Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article
submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that
could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Radiography of the abdomen revealing radio-opaque shadows
(arrowheads). Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography transverse image showing round calcified mass with areas of air (arrows).
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography transverse image showing round calcified mass with areas of air (arrow).
