Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 83-year-old man with a history of urinary stone disease presented to the emergency
department with abdominal and right-sided flank pain. Examination demonstrated distended abdomen and right costovertebral angle tenderness.
Vital signs were unremarkable, and laboratory evaluation showed a blood urea nitrogen level of 34.5 mg/dL and creatinine of 1.45 mg/dL.
Urinalysis showed red blood cell count: 37/high power field (HPF); white blood cell count: 4/HPF; yeast cells: 4/HPF. Abdominal
ultrasonography revealed a large cystic mass localized in the right side of the abdomen. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen
and pelvis were also obtained (Figure). Subsequent CT showed giant right-sided giant hydronephrosis and hydroureter with thinning of renal
parenchyma due to obstruction by a ureteral stone. Patient consulted with department of urology and a percutaneous nephrostomy tube was
placed. Approximately 4000 mL of urine was drained. Symptomatic nephrolithiasis and hydronephrosis are frequently presenting clinical
conditions, but giant hydronephrosis is an uncommon entity and a rare cause of urological emergencies. Giant hydronephrosis is defined as
the presence of over 1000 mL of fluid within the adult renal collecting system. The most common cause of giant hydronephrosis is
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, although stone disease, trauma, renal ectopy, and ureteral tumor have also been reported.1 Emergency
physicians should be aware of this clinical presentation, especially in patients with urinary stone disease. A high index of suspicion and
prompt management should avoid adverse outcomes. Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Computed
tomography of abdomen showed right ureteral stone (white arrow) in a axial view (A), right giant hydronephrosis in a coronal (B) and
sagittal (C) views. Abbreviation: H, hydronephrosis
