Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A healthy 58-year-old man presented to the emergency department with right arm weakness
first noticed while playing hockey that day. He could not recall the onset of injury, but endorsed several weeks of antecedent intermittent
right shoulder discomfort. Examination revealed a deformity of the right biceps brachii with distal bunching of the muscle (Figure).
Tenderness existed along the proximal humerus near the long head of the biceps. The patient had full range of motion with decreased elbow
flexion strength on the right. He was diagnosed clinically with an acute biceps brachii tendon rupture. Acute biceps tendon rupture most
commonly occurs at the proximal end of the long head of the biceps brachii and is usually associated with trauma. Acute biceps tendon
rupture frequently occurs in patients with underlying overuse injuries and tendinopathies—thus the actual moment of rupture may go
unnoticed.1–4 While the diagnosis can generally be made by history and physical examination, ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging can
aid in diagnosis.1–4 Most injuries are managed conservatively and the typical post-injury reductions in strength are mild to moderate and
well tolerated.2–5 Surgical management may lessen loss of elbow flexion and supination strength and may be considered in the management of
highly active patients.3,5 This patient underwent surgical open subpectoral biceps tenodesis with successful resolution of his biceps
contour and restoration of full strength and mobility. Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The views expressed are those of the
author(s) and do not reflect the official policy of the Department of the Army, the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. Appearance
of the patient’s affected right arm and normal left arm.
