Supervising Section Editor: Rick A. McPheeters, DO Rivaroxaban is a newer anticoagulant initially approved by the Food and Drug
Administration to treat nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Rivaroxaban has several characteristics that are more favorable than warfarin. One
of the characteristics is decreased risk of hemorrhage. We report one of the first case reports of severe intracranial hemorrhage associated
with rivaroxaban in an elderly patient with decreased renal function. We aim to alert emergency medicine providers regarding the likelihood
of encountering these patient as newer anticoagulants rise in popularity. Rivaroxaban (Xarelto) is an oral factor Xa inhibitor that has been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2010 to treat nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. New anticoagulants emerge as warfarin
requires frequent monitoring, and has multiple drug and food interaction. Rivaroxaban was developed with the goal of predictable
pharmacokinetics that eliminates the need for monitoring the international normalized ratio.1–5 Several characteristics have made
rivaroxaban an attractive alternative to warfarin; once daily dosing, obviate the need for monitoring the international normalized ratio,
noninferiority to warfarin in treating atrial fibrillation, and decreased risk of bleeding in comparison to warfarin.6 Although the risk of
bleeding is decreased in comparison, the risk remains. We believe this is the first case report of intracranial hemorrhage secondary to
rivaroxaban use. CJ is a 92-year-old man with a past medical history of atrial fibrillation and ischemic stroke five months prior to
emergency department (ED) presentation. He presented to the ED with left upper extremity and left lower extremity weakness, left facial
droop and slurred speech. His initial vital signs in the ED at 9:38AM were temperature 97.4°Fahrenheit, blood pressure 175/59 mmHg, heart
rate 111 beats per minutes, respiratory rate 28 times per minutes, oxygen saturation 97% on room air. On physical exam the patient was alert
and followed commands intermittently, extraocular movement was intact bilaterally, pupils were equal and reactive bilaterally. Cranial nerve
exam revealed left facial droop. Strength exam were 5/5 in right upper extremity and right lower extremities and 1/5 in left upper extremity
and left lower extremity. Patient was transported to computed tomography (CT) immediately. CT head revealed an acute 6.7 cm × 5.3 cm right
parasylvian and right basal ganglia hemorrhage with surrounding edema, as well as 7 mm leftward midline shift at the level of the septum
pellucidum. When the patient returned from CT, his eyes deviated to the right side. Fosphenytoin was initiated for likely seizure. His blood
pressure was elevated to 230/100 mmHg. Labetalol 20 mg was administered intravenously with improvement of blood pressure. The patient became
progressively lethargic while in the emergency department. He was intubated under rapid sequence intubation at 10:20AM. Since the patient
was on rivaroxaban, the plan was to administer prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC). However, PCC was not available at the facility. Two
units of fresh frozen plasma were administered intravenously at 10:58AM. Laboratory result revealed white blood cell 12.93 bil/L, hemoglobin
11.3 g/dL, hematocrit 33.4%, platelet 135 bil/L, sodium 137 mMol/L, potassium 4.2 mMol/L, chloride 101 mMol/L, CO2 22 mMol/L, BUN 30 mg/dL,
creatinine 1.3 mg/dL, protime 11.3 seconds, INR 1.1 IU, PTT 23.8 seconds, plasma rivaroxaban level 95 ng/mL. Neurosurgery service was
consulted, and recommended no surgical intervention at this time. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Two days after
ICU admission, the family withdrew care. According to the patient’s family members, the patient was on warfarin for many years. However, due
to warfarin’s interaction with food and frequent need for clinic visits to assess patient’s coagulation panel, the patient’s physician
switched him to dabagatrin nine months prior to this ED presentation. The patient had difficulty swallowing the dabagatrin’s capsule, so his
physician switched him to rivaroxaban four months prior to the ED presentation. Rivaroxaban (Xarelto) is a new anticoagulant that was
approved by the FDA in 2011 for stroke and systemic embolism prophylaxis in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Rivaroxaban is
also indicated for treatment and prevention of pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis.7,8 The Factor Xa inhibitor is a major new
anticoagulant drug class that emerged as warfarin requires frequent monitoring, and has multiple drug and food interaction. Rivaroxaban was
developed with the goal of predictable pharmacokinetics that eliminates the need for monitoring the international normalized ratio.1,2,3,4,5
Several characteristics have made rivaroxaban an attractive alternative to warfarin; once daily dosing, obviate the need for monitoring the
international normalized ratio, noninferiority to warfarin for preventing stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, lower risk of
intracranial hemorrhage compared with warfarin.6 Rivaroxaban inhibits factor Xa activity and prolonging plasma clotting time.2 Traditional
coagulation studies do not determine the degree of anticoagulation of rivaroxaban.9 Methods that measure the degree of anticoagulation of
rivaroxaban include tissue factor-activated clotting time.10 In overdose situations, rivaroxaban does increase INR. Study by Mueck et al
reveals that rivaroxaban plasma concentrations and prothrombin time (PT) correlates with a linear model.11 APTT prolongation also occurs in
dose-dependent fashion.12 The coagulation panel was within normal limit in our patient. Furthermore, the measured rivaroxaban level was 95
ng/mL, (the range of level of 0–666 ng/ml was found in patients on therapeutic dose of rivaroxaban by van Veen).13 The level was measured
from the first set of blood that was drawn when the patient presented to the ED. The rivaroxaban level was measured by time of flight (TOF)
at the University of California, San Francisco laboratory several weeks subsequent to the event. The intracranial hemorrhage in this patient
is most likely associated with therapeutic dosing. Although the study lead by Patel6 revealed statistically significant reduction in
intracranial hemorrhage with rivaroxaban versus warfarin (0.5% vs. 0.7%, p=0.02), some characteristics of rivaroxaban may prevent its wide
application. In the EINSTEIN DVT, PE, and Extension clinical studies, both thrombotic and bleeding event rates were higher in patients over
the age of 65 than in those under the age of 65.7 Furthermore, rivaroxaban is not recommended in patient with decreased creatinine clearance
as drug exposure is increased, and the risk of bleeding is elevated.14–16 Rivaroxaban is also contraindicated in patients with hepatic
disease associated with coagulopathy.17 In addition, rivaroxaban is associated with increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding compare to
warfarin.18 Our patient was 92 years old with mild renal dysfunction. The recommended dose of rivaroxaban per package insert is 20 mg once
daily for CrCl >50 mL/min, and 15 mg once daily for patient with CrCl 15 to 50 mL/min (Table 1). The patient’s CrCl was 46.15 mL/min.
Therefore, his recommended daily dose of rivaroxaban was 15 mg once daily. According to his family member, the patient was compliant with
his medications. Therefore, rivaroxaban may not be the optimal choice of anticoagulant for him. According to ISMP (Institute for Safe
Medication Practices), rivaroxaban was associated with 356 adverse event in the first quarter of 2012. Of those, 158 cases were associated
with serious thrombus, ie pulmonary embolism. One hundred and twenty one cases were associated with hemorrhage. Possible suboptimal
anticoagulation due to the predominance of thromboembolic event, in additional to the risk of bleeding, should be balanced against the
favorable characteristics of rivaroxaban in patients who plan to use this newer anticoagulant. Emergency medicine (EM) clinicians are more
likely to care for these patients as newer anticoagulants rise in popularity. Recommended reversal agents for rivaroxaban associated
hemorrhage are included in Table 2 for EM providers. Rivaroxaban is a newer anticoagulant that has several advantages to traditional
anticoagulants. However, adverse effect does occur rarely. We report the first case report documenting intracranial hemorrhage associated
with rivaroxaban. Caution should be used in selective patient populations, such as elder’s and patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction.
Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Recommended dose of rivaroxaban per package insert. Recommended reversal
agents for hemorrhage associated with rivaroxaban.
