Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 51-year-old male with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and obstructive
sleep apnea presents to the emergency department complaining of 48 hours of progressive right eye pain and swelling after he ran into his
dresser while sleep-walking. He does not know which surface of the dresser contacted his eye. He denies changes in visual acuity, flashes,
or floaters. He has no other complaints and denies recent illness, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, chest pain, or shortness of
breath. Physical exam reveals inability of the patient to close his eyelids on the right. His cranial nerves are intact. His vision exam is
unremarkable. The patient has impressive conjunctival chemosis, which is edema of the conjunctiva (Figure). This constitutes one half of the
reactions that make-up conjunctivitis. It is an inflammatory reaction mediated by the release of histamine, serotonin, and bradykinin.
Polymorphonuclear cells also migrate into the reaction site.1 Chemosis is nonspecific finding and is secondary to direct conjunctival
endothelial insult. It can result from allergic reaction, bacterial or viral infection, angioedema, or trauma.2 When it is disproportionate
to other signs of injury after a traumatic mechanism it can indicate scleral rupture, an ophthalmologic emergency. Chemosis is usually
generalized; however, in the setting of scleral rupture it may be confined to only one or two quadrants.3 If there is chronic chemosis
following a traumatic mechanism the physician must include lymphatic obstruction most likely secondary to obstructing mass on the
differential.4 Globe rupture was not detected in this patient. He could not close his right eyelid, which can lead to ocular damage. A
tarsorrhaphy (partially sewing together the eyelids) was performed to protect the eye. At follow-up the patient’s sutures were removed and
he was given a pressure patch. By one month this had resolved. Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Chemosis of right eye.
