These authors contributed equally to this work. To the Editor: Heterozygous gain-of-function mutations in signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1) have recently been identified as a cause of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC). Uzel et al1 described “STAT1
gain-of-function mutations in patients with FOXP3 wild-type immune dysregulation-polyendocrinopathy-enteropathy-X-linked syndrome.” They
briefly mentioned the presence of poor enamel in 1 patient and structural and functional gastrointestinal defects in another patient. Here
we present a patient with CMC associated with dental anomalies, diaphragmatic hernia, and esophageal dysmotility in whom the phenotype led
to a broad differential diagnosis ranging from severe combined immunodeficiency inspired by the neonatal onset of infections to humoral
immune deficiency, immune dysregulation–polyendocrinopathy–enteropathy–X-linked syndrome, nuclear factor κB essential modulator (NEMO)
deficiency, Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome, and, finally, CMC caused by gain-of-function mutation in
STAT1. We stress the early onset of respiratory tract infections, as well as the dental and gastrointestinal defects, in this patient. The
patient was born at term small for gestational age (−2 SD) as the third son of unrelated parents. He presented with recurrent lower
respiratory tract infections from birth, intractable diarrhea, failure to thrive, seborrheic dermatitis, and CMC. Small-bowel biopsy showed
villous atrophy interpreted as celiac-like disease, yet diarrhea was unresponsive to a gluten-free diet. Primary dentition showed enamel
defects. Recurrent lower respiratory tract infections with Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae led to the development of
bronchiectasis. Partial IgG2 deficiency (0.34 g/L; normal range, 0.72-3.4 g/L) was found at 3 years of age. Anti-tetanus antibody levels
were protective (1.2 mg/L; protective level, >1 mg/L), suggesting an intact anti-protein antibody response. Intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) substitution was initiated. Diaphragmatic hernia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and disturbed esophageal motility were
demonstrated and led to a Nissen fundoplication. At 13 years of age, the patient presented at the immunology clinic with severe growth
retardation (Fig 1, A), pubertal delay, bronchiectasis, atonic esophagus with multiple diverticula (Fig 1, B and C), atrophic duodenal
mucosa (Fig 1, D) corresponding to villous blunting or atrophy, joint hyperlaxity, osteopenia with recurrent fractures, delayed dental
development with retention of primary teeth necessitating dental extractions (Fig 1, E and F), severe erosive tooth wear suggestive of
enamel hypoplasia (Fig 1, E and F), seborrheic dermatitis, aphthous stomatitis, and CMC (see Table E1 in this article's Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) and caspase recruitment domain family, member 9 (CARD9), genes were sequenced, but no
mutations were found. After withdrawal of IVIG, antibody response to unconjugated pneumococcal vaccine was tested and showed protective
titers for 9 of 14 serotypes tested (see Table E2 in this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org).2 Increased IgG levels (21 g/L;
normal range, 5.76-12.65 g/L) and persistent partial IgG2 deficiency were noted (0.80 g/L; normal range, 1.06-6.10 g/L). An extended
autoantibody screening panel was performed, including thyroid-related, adrenal gland–related, and anti–IFN-α and anti–IFN-ω antibodies. Only
anti–salivary gland antibodies were demonstrated (for the entire panel, see the Methods section in this article's Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). Immunophenotyping showed a low percentage of switched memory B cells (1.3%; normal range, 5% to 10%; see Table E3 in
this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). Because withdrawal of IVIG was associated with an increased incidence of pneumonia,
treatment was optimized by restarting IVIG and initiating azithromycin (both for antibacterial prophylaxis and its anti-inflammatory
actions) and fluconazole prophylaxis, as well as overnight tube feeding. Growth hormone therapy and puberty induction led to a correction of
the growth deficit (Fig 1, A). Finally, at the age of 18 years, hypothyroidism was diagnosed almost simultaneously with the initial reports
on STAT1 coiled-coil domain gain-of-function mutations.3,4 A mutation in the DNA-binding domain of STAT1 was detected (c.1154C>T, p.T385M;
Fig 2, A; for information on the analysis, see the Results section in this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). The mutation
was not found in the parents or the 2 male siblings of the index patient. As described previously, T385M is a gain-of-function
mutation.1,5-7 Likewise, we showed increased STAT1 phosphorylation in response to IFN-α and IFN-γ in the patient compared with control
values (Fig 2, B). Also, the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed increased gamma-activated sequence (GAS) binding activity on
stimulation with IFN-γ (Fig 2, C). The mechanism that leads to gain of function in the T385M mutation is not entirely clear. Takezaki et al5
suggested an impaired dephosphorylation of STAT1. However, it is also possible that there is impaired dissociation from the DNA or a problem
with the reciprocal association of the DNA-binding domain with the coiled-coil domain. After diagnosis, extended immunophenotyping of PBMCs
was performed and showed absence of TH17 cells, as described by Liu et al.4 The dental anomalies in the patient were impressive. Both
primary and permanent teeth showed rapid loss of tooth substance, with severe caries and erosive tooth wear reminiscent of the dental
anomalies encountered in patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome or Ora1/Stromal interaction molecule 1 deficiency. Moreover, deciduous
teeth had to be extracted because of delayed shedding. The latter feature resembles autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome. Several
hypotheses to explain the dental anomalies were put forward. First, antibiotic and antimycotic therapy and acidic hypercaloric nutrition
were blamed. Second, malabsorption of calcium and vitamin D was investigated. Third, in the context of recurrent aphthous stomatitis, a
sicca syndrome was suspected. Although salivary flow was low, treatment with oral saliva analogues did not improve the dental condition.
There were no biochemical or clinical signs of hypothyroidism until age 18 years in our patient, excluding this as a cause for the delayed
shedding of deciduous teeth. Although a role for STAT1 signaling has been demonstrated in amelogenesis and dentinogenesis in rats, further
research is needed to investigate the potential causal relationship between STAT1 gain-of-function mutation and abnormal dental
development.8,9 Aside from the persistent villous blunting, diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal dysmotility are remarkable gastrointestinal
features. On computed tomographic (CT) scanning, as well as endoscopy, the esophagus appeared wide open and atonic, with multiple
diverticula present. Thus defects in the development of the upper gastrointestinal tract seem to be a noteworthy feature of this syndrome,
as hypothesized by Uzel et al.1 Whether the gastrointestinal manifestations are all secondary to CMC or a primary manifestation of disturbed
STAT1 signaling is yet to be determined.1,6 In conclusion, we report extensive dental anomalies, as well as diaphragmatic hernia and
esophageal dysmotility, in a patient with early onset of lower respiratory tract infections in the context of a gain-of-function mutation in
the DNA-binding domain of STAT1. These features add to the complexity of the phenotype observed in patients with a gain-of-function mutation
in STAT1. Salivary flow rate was measured through standardized collection of nonstimulated (resting) and stimulated (paraffin-chewing)
saliva over a time span of 5 minutes. The autoantibody panel analyzed consisted of anti–nuclear antigen, anti–neutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-
thyroglobulin, anti–thyroid peroxidase, anti–thyrotropin receptor, anti–parietal cell, anti–intrinsic factor, anti–smooth muscle, anti-
mitochondrial, anti-pancreatic, anti-insulin, anti-GAD65kDA, anti–liver kidney microsome, anti–proteinase 3, anti-myeloperoxidase, and
anti–IFN-α and anti–IFN-ω antibodies. The latter analysis was performed by Anette S. Boe Wolff and Husebye Eystein, Bergen, Norway, because
of the diagnostic value in patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.E1 Genomic DNA was extracted from EDTA blood by using the
QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The UM13F/R-tagged primers (Life Technologies, Ghent, Belgium) used for genotyping
STAT1 hotspots (gene ID 6772, ENSG00000115415) were designed with Oligo7 software (OLIGO Primer Analysis Software Version 7, assembled in
2009 by Wojciech Rychlik, Molecular Biology Insights, Cascade, Colo; http://www.oligo.net/) and were as follows, respectively:
AGTACAATAAAGTAAACATTCTGC (F1) and CTAAATCTGATTCTCCCACTT (R1); AGTCACACCCTGAAGAAAACGATG (F2) and CTGCAAAATTTTTCTTCCCAA (R2);
AGTCTAAAGTCTTTGGAAGTTGCT (F3) and CTGGCCTGGGTTATCAAGGAA (R3); AGTTCTTCTTTATATATTTACTGG (F4) and GGTGGCTATAATTTTTCCTCT (R4);
AGTTGAGAATGAAATGATATTTGC (F5) and GTGTTTATGTGGTTAGCCAGT (R5); AGTCTTCTGGACTGTTTCTCATAG (F6) and ATCATCTGAATTAACGGTAAA (R6);
AGTCCTCAACCTTAATGGAAATGC (F7) and CTCAAAAGCACCCTATATAAC (R7); AGTAAACGTTAATAGGGAATTGGC (F8) and CCTAGGGAGGCAAACTTCCAC (R8); and
AGTCTCTTATAATTTTGTTAAAGC (F9) and CCTACCAGGTGCCGAAATTCA (R9). PCR samples were prepared by using AccuPrime SuperMix II (Life Technologies,
Belgium) and run on a Veriti Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif). Purified PCR products (PCR purification kit, Qiagen)
were sequenced by BaseClear (Leiden, The Netherlands) and analyzed with Chromas 2.33 Software. Peripheral blood was left unstimulated or
stimulated with IFN-γ (2000 IU/mL) or IFN-α (10*5 IU/mL) for 15 minutes. Cells were lysed (Lyse/Fix Buffer; BD Phosflow; BD Biosciences, San
Jose, Calif) for 10 minutes at 37°C and washed with 1 mL of Stain Buffer (BD PharMingen, San Jose, Calif). Thereafter, the cells were
permeabilized (Perm Buffer III [BD Phosflow]) for 30 minutes on ice. Cells were washed, resuspended in 100 μL of stain buffer, and stained
with phycoerythrin-labeled antibody specific for phosphorylated STAT1 (pY701; BD Biosciences). Phosphorylated STAT1 was evaluated in the
lymphocyte gate. Analysis was performed on a FACSCanto II instrument (BD Biosciences). Nuclear extracts of patient- or control
subject–derived fibroblast (obtained from skin biopsy) cultures (unstimulated or stimulated with IFN-α [100 U/mL] or IFN-γ [100 U/mL] for 1
hour) were prepared, as described previously.E2 Nuclear protein lysates (5 μg per sample) were subjected to SDS-PAGE separation on 4-12%
Bis-Tris Plus gels (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, Calif), and proteins were transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (GE
Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom) and immunoblotted with primary antibodies (STAT1 p84/p91 [M-22, sc-592; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Dallas, Tex], phospho-STAT1 [Tyr701, sc-7988, Santa Cruz Biotechnology], and loading control heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein I [3H7, sc-73391, Santa Cruz Biotechnology]) and detected with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody
(sc-2317 and sc-2005, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). All Western blot images were captured and quantified with a ChemiDoc MP imager and Image
Lab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, Calif) after adding Pierce ECL Western blotting substrate (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Mass).
Relative phosphorylated STAT1 expression is normalized to the respective value for heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein I expression, and
the results are described as fold increases relative to the baseline level in the unstimulated condition of the sample. EMSA was performed,
as described previously.E2 Probe (20,000 cpm) was added to 1 μg of nuclear extract in 50 ng/μL dI-dC, 1 mmol/L dithiothreitol, and 0.05%
Triton. EMSA results with nonstimulated extracts or extracts stimulated with IFN-α or IFN-γ were compared. The GAS probe
(5′-TCGAACATTTCCCGTAAATCATG-3′, Chapgier et alE3) was labeled by a fill-in reaction with the Klenow fragment. EMSA results with
nonstimulated extracts (dimethyl sulfoxide vehicle treated) or extracts stimulated with IFN-α (100 U/mL) or IFN-γ (100 U/mL) were compared
in 2 control subjects (C1 and C2), the T385M patient (P1), and a patient with CMC with a K388E mutation in the DNA-binding domain (P2).
Intensities of GAS-binding activity were determined by using ImageJ software.E4 PBMCs were prepared from heparinized peripheral blood by
means of centrifugation through Ficoll (Lymphoprep, Axis-shield, Oslo, Norway). PBMCs were seeded at 2 × 106 cells/mL in a 96-well culture
plate and stimulated with heat-inactivated Candida albicans (2.64 × 103 colony-forming units /mL), Staphylococcus aureus (108 CFU/mL;
InvivoGen, San Diego, Calif), or PHA (0.18 mg/mL). IFN-γ levels were measured in the supernatant after 48 hours of incubation at 37°C (5%
CO2) and IL-17A levels were measured after 120 hours of incubation at 37°C (5% CO2) by means of ELISA (commercial kits by BD Biosciences and
BioLegend [San Diego, Calif], respectively). For the production of heat-inactivated C albicans, reference strain ATCC 90028 was used. This
strain was cultured on Sabouraud agar slants at 37°C. Yeast colonies were resuspended in RPMI agar and checked microscopically for the
absence of hyphae. This yeast stock suspension was adjusted to a concentration of 0.4 × 107 CFU/mL. C albicans was subsequently heat killed
by exposure to a 60°C water bath for 1.5 hours. The sterility of this suspension was checked by subculturing 50 μL of the yeast suspension
on blood agar at 37°C. Antibodies to pneumococcal polysaccharides were measured by using a mulitplex bead assay.E5 PBMC immunophenotyping
was performed, as described previously.E6 In brief, PBMCs were isolated from heparinized blood of the patient and 10 age-matched control
subjects (mean age, 22.7 years [SD, 4.62 years]) by using lymphocyte separation medium (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, Calif) and frozen in 10%
dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma, St Louis, Mo). Thawed cells were stained with eBioscience (San Diego, Calif) antibodies against CD3 (SK7), CD4
(RPA-T4), and IL-17 (eBio64DEC17). For cytokine staining, T cells were stimulated ex vivo for 5 hours in 50 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (Sigma) and 500 ng/mL ionomycin (Sigma) in the presence of GolgiStop (BD Biosciences) before staining. Before intracellular
staining, cells were first surface stained as described, fixed, and permeabilized with Cytofix/Cytoperm (BD) for IL-17 stainings. Data were
acquired on BD FACSCanto II and analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star, Ashland, Ore). The nonstimulated salivary flow rate in the index
patient was less than 0.2 mL/5 minutes; the stimulated flow rate was 3.1 mL/5 minutes. On stimulation with IFN-α and IFN-γ, higher levels of
STAT1 phosphorylation were observed by means of flow cytometry in the patient compared with those seen in a control subject (Fig 2, B).
Next, we studied STAT1-binding activity to a GAS oligonucleotide probe by using EMSA. First, we studied the STAT1 phophorylation in skin-
derived fibroblasts using Western blotting. We demonstrated an increased expression of total STAT1 in both the T385M patient (P1) and a
second patient with CMC caused by a novel mutation in the DNA-binding domain (K388E; P2), although less pronounced than that in P2, compared
with that seen in 2 healthy control subjects. Expression of phosphorylated STAT1 was increased in the nuclear extracts of both the T385M and
K388E patients, although again less pronounced in the latter, after stimulation for 1 hour with IFN-γ. The phosphorylation of STAT1 in P1
and P2 was 7 and 2.7 times more intense than in C2 (Fig 2, C). On stimulation with IFN-γ, an increase in GAS-binding activity was detected
in the T385M patient (P1; Fig 2, C), as well as in the K388E patient (P2). The intensity of STAT1-binding activity to a GAS probe was
quantified to be 16.8 and 2.4 times upregulated in P1 and P2, respectively, compared with the intensity in C2, which was set to 1 in ImageJ
software. PBMCs of the patient do not induce IL-17 after stimulation with heat-inactivated C albicans, S aureus, or PHA. IL-17 in the
supernatant was undetectable after stimulation with the above-mentioned stimuli (Fig E1, A). IFN-γ production after stimulation with PHA,
heat-inactivated C albicans, and S aureus in the patient and a control subject are also shown (Fig E1, B). Using extended immunophenotyping,
we showed that the patient has no detectable TH17 cells.Fig E1A, IL-17 production in PBMCs of the T385M patient and a healthy control
subject after stimulation with PHA, heat-inactivated C albicans, or heat-inactivated S aureus. Results shown are derived from one
representative experiment of 4 independent experiments. B, IFN-γ production in PBMCs of the T385M patient and a healthy control subject
after stimulation with PHA, heat-inactivated C albicans, or heat-inactivated S aureus. Results shown are derived from one representative
experiment of 4 independent experiments. HKCA, Heat-killed C albicans; HKSA, heat-killed S aureus.Table E1Clinical characteristicsPresent
age20 yEthnicityWhiteInitial presentationAt birthCMCOral, esophageal, skinTeethRetained primary dentition, severe caries and erosive tooth
wearSkinSevere seborrheic dermatitisPulmonary infectionsFrom birthHaemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Pseudomonas
aeruginosaAspergillus fumigatusBronchiectasis at age 3 y, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseaseOther infectionsMolluscum contagiosum,
Pseudomonas folliculitis, herpes zoster (2×)Cardiovascular−Central nervous system−EndocrineAt birth: small for gestational ageGrowth
retardationDelayed pubertyHypothyroidism (antibodies −) at age 18 yGastrointestinalOral aphthous ulcers, recurrent ulcerative gastritis,
esophagitisDuodenal atrophic mucosa, villous bluntingDiaphragmatic herniaBoneOsteopenia, multiple fracturesOtherCystic fibrosis and primary
ciliary dyskinesia were excluded.Table E2Specific anti-pneumococcal antibody concentrations (in milligrams per miter) in the patient 3 weeks
after vaccination with unconjugated pneumococcal
vaccinePS1PS3PS4PS8PS9NPS12FPS14PS19FPS23FPS6BPS7FPS18CPS19APS9VPatient0.280.372.330.201.310.386.372.715.444.111.352.520.912.81Cutoff0.530.640.491.020.630.460.570.740.240.801.450.340.960.69The
postvaccination serotype-specific fifth percentile (Cutoff) values obtained in 75 healthy subjects are provided as well. PS, Pneumococcal
serotype.Table E3Immunologic characteristicsAge 1 yAge 3 yAge 13 yAge 20 y∗Lymphocyte subsets CD19+ B cells622/μL (82-476/μL) Naive
CD19+CD27− cells94% of CD19+ (60-80) IgM memory CD27+IgM+ cells1.3% of CD19+ (1-5) Switched memory CD27+IgM− cells1% of CD19+ (>5) CD3+CD4+T
cells886/μL (455-1885 μL) CD3+CD8+ T cells459/μL (219-1124/μL) Naive CD4+ cells75% of CD3 (30% to 65%) TH17 cellsTH17 cells 0%
(0.03-0.67)Lymphocyte proliferation PHANormalNormal Concanavalin ANormalNormal TetanusNormalNormal CandidaNormalNormalImmunoglobulin levels
(g/L) IgG16.7 (4.8-11.3)21.4 (5.8-12.7)22.8 (7.51-15.60) IgG20.34 (0.72-3.40)0.80 (1.06-6.10)1.8 (1.5-6.4) IgA0.78 (0.35-1.9)1
(0.81-2.32)0.28 (0.82-4.53) IgM1.11 (0.34-1.34)1.2 (0.30-1.59)0.72 (0.43-3.04)Normal values are shown in parentheses.∗During IVIG treatment.
A, IL-17 production in PBMCs of the T385M patient and a healthy control subject after stimulation with PHA, heat-inactivated C albicans, or
heat-inactivated S aureus. Results shown are derived from one representative experiment of 4 independent experiments. B, IFN-γ production in
PBMCs of the T385M patient and a healthy control subject after stimulation with PHA, heat-inactivated C albicans, or heat-inactivated S
aureus. Results shown are derived from one representative experiment of 4 independent experiments. HKCA, Heat-killed C albicans; HKSA, heat-
killed S aureus. Clinical characteristics Specific anti-pneumococcal antibody concentrations (in milligrams per miter) in the patient 3
weeks after vaccination with unconjugated pneumococcal vaccine The postvaccination serotype-specific fifth percentile (Cutoff) values
obtained in 75 healthy subjects are provided as well. PS, Pneumococcal serotype. Immunologic characteristics Normal values are shown in
parentheses. During IVIG treatment. We thank the patient and his family for their confidence. We also thank the entire paramedical and
medical staff of UZ Leuven, as well as Dr De Koster, for their dedicated care. Finally, we thank Mrs R. Bollen and H. De Bruyn for excellent
technical assistance. Supported by a research grant from the Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek - Vlaanderen and by a research grant from the
Research Council of the Catholic University of Leuven. X.B. is a senior clinical investigator of the Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek -
Vlaanderen. I.M. is funded by a K.O.F. grant of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven and by a grant of the Jeffrey Modell Foundation. L.M., H.
S., and L.V.E. are funded by a research grant of the Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek - Vlaanderen. X.B., I.M., A.L., and G.F. are funded by
a G.O.A. grant of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. A.L. is funded by a European Research Council grant (IMMUNO). Disclosure of potential
conflict of interest: G. Frans has received research support from the Catholic University of Leuven. L. Moens, H. Schaballie, and E.
Vermeulen have received research support from Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek - Vlaanderen. L. Van Eyck has received research support from
Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek - Vlaanderen and is employed by University Hospital Leuven. J. Dooley and A. Listons have received research
support from the European Research Council. B. Grimbacher has received research support from the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research, the European Union, and Helmholtz; is employed by University College London and University Medical Center Freiburg; and has
received payment for lectures from CSL, Baxter, and Biotest. M. Renard is employed by University Hospital Leuven. K. De Boeck serves on
boards for Vertex, Aptalis, and Pharmaxix and has consultant arrangements with Ablynx, Galapagos, Gilead, and PTC. I. Meyts has received
financial support from the Jeffrey Modell Foundation. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.
Clinical characteristics. A, Growth charts showing severe growth retardation that only picks up after growth hormone therapy and puberty
induction with tube feeding overnight. Arrows indicate onset of tube feeding and growth hormone therapy, respectively. B, Computed
tomography showing an atonic esophagus (arrow) with air containing paraesophageal diverticula. C, Computed tomography of the chest showing
multiple saccular bronchiectases and bronchial wall thickening. D, Atrophy in the duodenum, as seen on endoscopy. E and F, Severe erosive
tooth wear, caries, and retained primary teeth. The mutant T385M STAT1 allele is a gain-of-phosphorylation and gain-of-function mutation.
A, Direct sequence analysis of exon 14 of STAT1 (forward sequence) in a control subject and the patient with a c.1153C>T resulting in
p.T385M. B, Intracellular staining of phosphorylated tyrosine 701 STAT1 (STAT1p) in lymphocytes after stimulation with IFN-γ (2000 IU/mL,
left panel) or IFN-α (105 IU/mL, right panel) for 15 minutes. STAT1 and STATp are shown in a control subject (red) and in the T385M patient
(blue). Unstimulated conditions are represented as dashed lines. Results shown are representative of 2 independent experiments. MFI, Mean
fluorescence intensity. C, Evaluation of STAT1, STAT1 phosphorylation, and STAT1p GAS DNA-binding capacity. Fibroblasts derived from wild-
type (WT)/WT control subjects (C1 and C2), p.T385M/WT (patient P1), and p.K388E/WT (patient P2) were stimulated with 100 U/mL IFN-α (α) or
100 U/mL IFN-γ (Υ) or left unstimulated (−) for 60 minutes. a, Western blotting was carried out for detection of STAT1 and STAT1p levels in
nuclear extracts (5 μg per sample). Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein I (hnRNP I) was used as a loading control reference. b, STAT1
GAS DNA-binding capacity was evaluated by using EMSA. One microgram of nuclear extract was preincubated with 20,000 cpm of GAS probe at room
temperature before nondenaturing PAGE separating free from STAT-bound probe.
