Schistosomiasis is best known in its visceral form but it can attack the skin, its ectopic cutaneous manifestation being rare and clinically
difficult to diagnose. It is characterized by isolated or coalescent papules, erythematous, pruritic or asymptomatic, with zosteriform
distribution, often located on the trunk. The authors report a case of a 28-year-old female patient with lesions on the abdomen, with
positive stool results for Schistosoma and absence of active symptoms of visceral disease. The case reveals rare exuberant cutaneous
manifestation and the importance of the diagnosis of this entity in patients from endemic regions. Schistosomiasis is a systemic disease
caused by a trematode of the Schistosoma genus, acquired when in contact with contaminated water. In the majority of cases, the infection is
asymptomatic and, when present, gastrointestinal manifestations are the most frequently found.1 Cutaneous lesions caused by this trematode
may be early, like cercarial dermatitis and urticaria, or late, like schistosomal chronic prurigo and cutaneous schistosomiasis (external
genital, paragenital and ectopic forms).2 The most common cutaneous form is the one located in the anogenital region and few extragenital
cases have been described, mainly because they are away from the regions irrigated by venous circuit contiguous to the usual location of the
worms.3 Thus, they can be located in any part of the tegument, being more frequent on the trunk, especially on the thorax and abdomen.4 A
28-year-old female patient, phototype II, rural worker, born and originating from Itabaianinha-SE, presented at the dermatology service with
complaints of multiple papular, erythematous and pruriginous lesions on the abdomen for 2 months. She denied other symptoms. She reported
frequent baths in rivers. At the physical examination were found round papules measuring about 3mm in diameter, erythematous, confluent,
some of them forming plaques, giving a zosteriform aspect to the lesions, affecting the abdominal region (epigastrium, mesogastrium and left
upper quadrant) (Figures 1 and 2). There were no visceromegalies. Round, erythematous, shiny papules of well-defined contours, measuring
about 3mm in diameter, confluent, some forming plaques of zosteriform aspect, affecting the abdominal region (epigastrium, mesogastrium and
left upper quadrant) Shiny erithematous papulous plaque, zoomed in, located in the mesogastrium The laboratory analysis revealed 12%
eosinophilia. She did not present other laboratory changes. Stool examination detected the presence of S. mansoni eggs. The
anatomopathological examination showed granuloma of epithelioid macrophages involving egg with viable miracidium associated with an
inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes and eosinophils, eggs in the process of degeneration with internal calcification and totally
degenerated with deposition of fibrinoid material, revealing granuloma fibrosis (Figures 3, 4 and 5). Granuloma of epithelioid macrophages
involving the egg with viable miracidium associated with inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes and eosinophils Egg with partial
degeneration and internal calcification, surrounded by granuloma Totally degenerated egg with fibrinoid material deposition showing
granuloma fibrosis The treatment was carried out with 50 mg praziquantel per kg of weight in a single dose, after which the stool
parasitological examination resulted negative. There was partial cutaneous improvement, with complete response achieved after association of
topical clobetasol dipropionate 0.05%. Schistosomiasis is one the most common diseases caused by helminths.1 The states with higher
prevalence are Minas Gerais, Bahia, Pernambuco, Alagoas and Sergipe.5 The life cycle of the Schistosoma is well established and deviation
from its usual pattern is uncommon. When it happens, usually due to inadequate treatment of a massive initial infestation, ectopic cutaneous
disorders may arise, occurring months or years after infection.2,6 The exact mechanism of deposition of Schistosoma eggs on the skin remains
unknown. Faust and cols. suggested that anastomoses between venous systems are associated with migration of eggs or adult worms to ectopic
sites.3,7 Many authors suggest that the parasites travel from pelvic veins, via the vertebral plexus to the spinal vessels, which would
explain the zosteriform distribution, with formation of coalesced irregular plaques.3,6,7 Extragenital infiltrative lesions are rarer and
produced by the presence of the egg on the back and on the abdomen and, in the case of recent lesions, they correspond to skin-colored or
erythematous papules and, in old lesions, there appear nodules of rough, granulomatous aspect.8 The patient described was originally from
Sergipe, an endemic area and presented parasitic infestation, evidenced by parasitological stool examination. She manifested dermatological
lesions of recent characteristics with zosteriform distribution on the abdomen. Serum eosinophilia had similar values to other reports and
dermatological manifestation was not associated with clinical findings of active visceral schistosomiasis.9 This apparent lack of systemic
disease in patients with cutaneous alterations was also reported by other authors.7,10 Diagnostic confirmation should be done by
histopathological examination of the lesion, which has as characteristic the granuloma around the eggs.2 Eggs can also be evidenced when
located on the dermis, many times in groups, associated with diffuse inflammatory infiltrate. With the progression of the disease there is
disintegration of the eggs, possibly associated with necrosis.6 The clinical case reported presented all spectra of histopathological
findings. The importance of the treatment is not only about curing the disease or diminishing the parasitic load of the patients, but
preventing its evolution to severe forms as well. Nowadays, praziquantel is the drug of choice, cutaneous forms included3, with a
recommended single dose of 50mg/kg for adults.5 In most published cases in the literature, ectopic cutaneous schistosomiasis lesions were
milder than the one presented in the report; however, the majority was grouped in zosteriform distribution on the trunk, possibly suggesting
this diagnostic possibility to dermatologists since this disorder might have been subdiagnosed, as very few cases have been described, even
in areas of high endemicity.4 Conflict of Interests: none Financial Support: none Work performed at Serviço de dermatologia do Hospital
Universitária da Universidade Federal de Sergipe (UFS) - Aracaju (SE), Brazil. How to cite this article: Mota LS, Silva SF, Almeida FC,
Mesquita LSU, Teixeira RDL, Soares AM. Ectopic cutaneous schistosomiasis - Case report. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(4):646-8
