We report the case of a 48-year-old, Caucasian female who presented with slowly progressing asymptomatic poikilodermatous changes of the
extensor aspects of the forearms. She also had typical Poikiloderma of Civatte on the V of the neck and erythemato-telangiectatic rosacea of
the central face. The patient had been practicing aroma-therapy for many years. Histologic examination revealed findings consistent with PC.
Patch-testing revealed positive reactions to Fragrance mix and Nickel sulphate. Based on clinical and histological findings, a diagnosis of
extracervical PC was suggested. PC with extra-cervical or extra-facial involvement is rare. In addition, this case supports the theory that
contact sensitization to fragrances may contribute to the development of PC. Acquired poikiloderma of the face and neck (Civatte, 1923) is a
rather common, chronic, disfiguring skin condition.1 It has been diagnosed in 1.4% of dermatologic consultations in Greece, but the true
prevalence is likely higher, especially among fairskinned populations living in sunny climates.2 Poikiloderma of Civatte (PC) most often
affects individuals in the 4th to 7th decade. It is more common in menopausal females, including iatrogenic menopause.3 The aetiology of PC
appears to be multifactorial. The predilection for sun-exposed areas indicates that cumulative sun exposure plays a central role.4,5 The age
and sex distribution of the patients, in addition to the well-known association with the menopause, suggest that hormonal factors, combined
with the normal ageing process, may be involved. Familial cases and the occurrence of PC in the absence of all suspected causal factors, can
lead to speculation that a genetic predisposition may exist.6 A statistically significant difference of positive patch test reactions,
especially to fragrances, was documented in PC patients, compared with age and sex-matched controls, suggesting that a contact delayed
hypersensitivity reaction may underlie PC.4,7 A 48-year-old, skin photo-type II Caucasian female presented with asymptomatic
poikilodermatous changes of the forearms that progressed slowly during the past two years. Her medical history was unremarkable. She was
pre-menopausal and reported minimal sun exposure, both intentional and unintentional. The patient was an aroma-therapist for many years, and
her arms were exposed to aromatic essential oils on a daily basis. Upon clinical examination, erythemato-telangiectatic reticular patches
with indistinct borders, symmetrically distributed over the extensor aspects of the forearms, were observed (Figure 1). She had also typical
PC on the V of the neck and rosacea of the central face, both of the erythemato-telangiectatic type (Figure 2). Erythemato-telangiectatic
poikilodermatous changes of the forearms Erythemato-telangiectatic poikiloderma of Civatte on the V of the neck Histologic examination of
the affected forearm's skin revealed a moderately thin and flattened epidermis. Dilated blood vessels were noted in the elastotic upper
dermis, with mild perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate, as well as few melanophages in the dermis. Moreover, the patient was patch-
tested with the European Standard Series and positive reactions were found to Fragrance mix and Nickel sulphate. Laboratory investigation
for other causes of acquired poikiloderma proved negative. Based on clinical and histological findings, a diagnosis of extracervical PC was
suggested. PC manifests clinically via a combination of linear telangiectasia, mottled hyperpigmentation and superficial atrophy in a
reticular pattern, symmetrically affecting the sun exposed areas of the neck, upper chest and peripheral face, invariably sparing the
anatomically shaded areas.2 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of PC affecting areas other than the face and
neck. Interestingly, in our patient, the dorsa of her hands remained unaffected, as occurs with the central face in typical PC. It appears
that PC may develop in areas intermittently exposed to ultraviolet radiation where the skin is thinner, such as the neck, or, as in our
case, the forearms. Differential diagnosis includes extra-facial rosacea and acquired brachial cutaneous dyschromatosis (ABCD). ABCD
manifests by asymptomatic, gray-brown reticular patches on the dorsal aspect of the forearms.8 It is most commonly observed in
perimenopausal women, especially those under antihypertensive drug therapy with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. PC was associated
with ABCD in 9 out of 20 patients (45%). Moreover, clinical and histological findings may link this entity more closely to a dermatosis of
sun damage, such as PC.9 In our opinion, rosacea, PC and ABCD may represent variants in the same nosological spectrum.10 Our patient may be
the first reported case of PC with extra-cervical or extra-facial involvement. In addition, this case provides further support to the theory
that contact sensitization to fragrances may contribute to the development of PC. In this context, evaluation of PC patients with patch-
testing and avoidance of documented allergens, may be beneficial. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None Work performed at the
2nd Department of Dermatology and Venereology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Attikon" General University
Hospital - Athens, Greece. How to cite this article: Katoulis A, Makris M, Gregoriou S, Rallis E, Kanelleas A, Stavrianeas N, Rigopoulos D.
Poikilodermatous changes on the forearms of a woman practicing aroma-therapy. Is it extracervical poikiloderma of Civatte? An Bras Dermatol.
2014;89(4):655-6.
