We present an interesting case report of two sarcoid-like lesions on a port-wine stain (PWS) birthmark in a Brazilian patient which on
investigation proved to be cutaneous leishmaniasis. A 30-year-old housewife who was born and lived in the state of Maranhão in the northeast
of Brazil was admitted to our dermatology department with a complaint of two painless erythematous infiltrative papules on her forehead that
had started two months previously. Her stepdaughter had been treated for cutaneous leishmaniasis on her leg. The patient presented with two
nonulcerated erythematous infiltrative papules which measured 8 and 10 mm in diameter on a Port-wine stain (nevus flammeus) on the left side
of her forehead (Figure 1). An intradermal test for leishmaniasis (Montenegro test) was positive (10mm). A cutaneous biopsy was taken and
processed for conventional optical microscopy using H&E, Fite-Faraco, PAS and Grocott-Gomori stains and for immunohistochemistry to detect
Leishmania.1-3 Histopathology revealed chronic diffuse dermatitis with a granulomatous tissue reaction and plasmacytosis (Figure 2A).
Immunohistochemistry staining to detect Leishmania antigens performed as previously described using antibodies against Leishmania chagasi
was positive (Figure 2B).4-6 Histological staining and cultures for acid-fast bacilli and fungi were negative. A. Port-wine stain birthmark
in the left frontotemporal area. Note the two sarcoid-like lesions on the hemangioma; B and C. Histopathological examination of hematoxylin-
eosin (H&E)-stained tissue revealed dermal granulomatous inflammation with a predominantly lymphoid infiltrate, several plasma cells and
dilated blood vessels with thin walls (H&E; OM 200x) A. Detail of the histopathological examination showing dermal granulomatous
inflammation with a with numerous lymphoid and plasma cells. (H&E; OM 400x); B. Immunohistochemistry with anti-Leishmania antibody (ABC
peroxidase) showing a few amastigote structures (arrow) inside the macrophage cytoplasm This is the first report of cutaneous leishmaniasis
on a hemangioma in the literature. We believe a sand fly was attracted to the lesion to feed probably because of the increased
vascularization in this area. Mann et al. suggested that the attraction of Lutzomyia spp. to colors and odors was species-specific and
demonstrated that certain colors, such as red and red-blue, exert a greater attraction on these species.7 Conflict of interest: None
Financial funding: None Study carried out at the Mycology and Leishmaniasis Outpatient Unit, Department of Dermatology, Hospital das
Clínicas, School of Medicine, University of São Paulo (HC-FMUSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. How to cite this article: Criado PR, Valente NS,
Noda A, Belda W Jr. Cutaneous New World Leishmaniasis on a Port-Wine Stain Birthmark. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(4):669-70.
