Malignant adenomyoepithelioma and adenoid cystic carcinoma are both rare malignant epithelial-myoepithelial tumors of the breast. We report
a very rare case with a malignant adenomyoepithelioma combining with adenoid cystic carcinoma in a single mass. A 61-year-old female
presented with a palpable painless mass in the right breast. Mammography revealed a large irregular dense shadow without obvious internal
calcification. A simple lumpectomy was performed, and a 1.6cm well-circumscribed pale-tan nodule was presented. Histologically, the nodule
was composed of two obscure lobules. One exhibited typical histological image of adenoid cystic carcinoma, the other one showed the image of
epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma of salivary gland, and support the diagnosis of biphasic malignant adenomyoepithelioma. Transition
between the two lobules was gradual. Immunohistochemically, CK18 and P63 highlighted the epithelial and myoepithelial cells respectively in
both lesions. CD117 was positive in the epithelial cells of adenoid cystic carcinoma, but was totally negative in malignant
adenomyoepithelioma. This report is, to our knowledge, the first case that combines these two tumors in a single mass. In addition, we
present a review of the literature. The histogenesis of these tumors is also discussed. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found
here: http://med.motic.com/MoticGallery/Slide?id=D562817E-23C2-4F72-9823-86EF6DA40005&user=2C69F0D6-A478-4A2B-ABF0-BB36763E8025 and
http://med.motic.com/MoticGallery/Slide?id=38BB7126-6FFB-4B66-A208-B8C0F528DCA8&user=2C69F0D6-A478-4A2B-ABF0-BB36763E8025 Malignant
adenomyoepithelioma (AME) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) are both rare malignant epithelial-myoepithelial lesions of the breast. There
are no more than 50 documented cases for the former , and the latter constitutes about 0.1% of all breast tumors . Difficulties are commonly
encountered in diagnosis and differential diagnosis because of the rarity and similarity of these two tumors. Composed of epithelial and
myoepithelial cells, these two salivary gland-like tumors of the breast are morphologically close. However, the relationship of them was
seldom observed. There is only one report of adenoid cystic carcinoma arising within an adenomyoepithelioma so far .To the best of our
knowledge, what we present herein is the first case that combines malignant adenomyoepithelioma and adenoid cystic carcinoma in a single
mass. The aim of this report is to analyze the histological and immunohistochemical features of the two tumors by comparing each other,
conclude the method of differential diagnosis, and most importantly, apply clue to the genesis of epithelial-myoepithelial tumors. A
61-year-old female was admitted to The First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Yunnan, China, complaining of a lump in the
right breast which had appeared 2 days earlier and had been increasing in tenderness for a week. During the physical examination, the
patient’s breasts were found to be bilaterally symmetrical, without any skin retraction. The two nipples were on the same horizontal line
without discharge nor retraction. A mass was palpable in the upper-outer quadrant about 5 cm away from the right nipple, with an approximate
size of 1.5 cm × 1 cm. The mass was tough in texture, irregular in shape, unclear in boundary and slightly adhesive to the surrounding
tissues. There were no positive findings in the left breast. The superficial lymph nodes were not palpable in the bilateral axillary and
clavicular fossa. The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption and there was no family history of any types of
tumor.Ultrasonography revealed an ill-defined mass in the right breast, and its internal echo was non-homogenous. Mammography revealed a
small irregular dense shadow in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast (Figure 1). The boundary of the shadow was unclear and the
glands around were gathered without obvious internal calcification. The emission computed tomography (ECT) of whole-body bone imaging and
the CT of brain, liver and lung imaging showed no signs of tumor metastasis. Evaluation of tumor markers showed that serum carbohydrate
antigen (CA) CA 15–3 was 37.6 U/ml (the normal range is 0–35 U/ml). Other tumor markers were within normal ranges. A simple lumpectomy was
performed in the hospital.Grossly, the well-circumscribed pale-tan nodule measured 1.6cm × 1.2cm × 0.5cm and lacked a distinct capsule.
Histologically, the nodule was composed of two obscure lobules without evidence of a capsule on low-power examination (Figure 2). One of the
lobules consisted of small tubular ducts formed by two phenotypically distinct cell layers. The inner epithelial cells exhibited
eosinophilic cytoplasm and the outer myoepithelial cells were clear. Tubular structures predominated in this lobule and formed an expansile
circumscribed, partially-encapsulated mass, although focally infiltrated into adjacent fat tissue (Figure 2). A papillary component was also
noted in some areas. In addition, atypia was obvious in both epithelial and myoepithelial cells with moderate degree of nuclear
pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio and increased mitotic figures (11/10HPF) (Figure 3). These histological
features support the diagnosis of malignant adenomyoepithelioma.The other lobule of the mass exhibited typical histological image of adenoid
cystic carcinoma which consisted of tubular and cribriform structure and had infiltrative borders. The epithelial and myoepithelial cells,
whose difference was not as obvious as in adenomyoepithelioma, were polarized around two types of spaces: true glandular spaces (contain
mucoid material) and pseudolumens (contain basement membrane material) (Figure 4). The myoepithelial cells of adenoid cystic carcinoma were
smaller, had a more hyperchromatic and basaloid character and had much less cytoplasm than those of adenomyoepithelioma, and the
invagination of stroma was frequently present. Transition from adenomyoepithelioma to adenoid cystic carcinoma was gradual. And we can also
see adenomyoepithelioma and adenoid cystic carcinoma combined in some areas.Immunohistochemistry can distinguish the two different cell
types. In both lesions, the myoepithelial cells were highlighted by CK5/6, smooth muscle actin (SMA) and p63, while the epithelial cells
were positive for CK18 (Figure 5). Immunostains for estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) were negative in AME and ACC but positive in
surrounding normal ductal epithelial, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2) were also negative in this case. Nevertheless,
CD117 expression was found in adenoid cystic carcinoma in contrast to adenomyoepithelioma, where CD117 was not expressed (Figure 5).Figure 1
Imaging inspection. Mammography revealed a small irregular dense shadow in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast.Figure 2 Low-power
examination. The nodule was composed of two obscure lobules on low-power examination. The left one was adenoid cystic carcinoma and the
right one was malignant adenomyoepithelioma. HE, ×10.Figure 3 High-power examination to the malignant adenomyoepithelioma. Atypia was
obvious in both epithelial and myoepithelial cells with moderate degree of nuclear pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, high nuclear
cytoplasmic ratio and increased mitotic figures (arrow). HE, ×200.Figure 4 High-power examination to the adenoid cystic carcinoma. The
cribriform structure in adenoid cystic carcinoma contains true glandular spaces and pseudolumens. HE, ×200.Figure 5 The immunohistochemistry
panel of malignant adenomyoepithelioma (A, B, C) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (D, E, F). CK18 was expressed in epithelial cells of malignant
adenomyoepithelioma (A) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (D). P63 was expressed in myoepithelial cells of malignant adenomyoepithelioma (B) and
adenoid cystic carcinoma (E), CD117 was negative in malignant adenomyoepithelioma (C) and positive in adenoid cystic carcinoma (F). ×100.
Imaging inspection. Mammography revealed a small irregular dense shadow in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast. Low-power
examination. The nodule was composed of two obscure lobules on low-power examination. The left one was adenoid cystic carcinoma and the
right one was malignant adenomyoepithelioma. HE, ×10. High-power examination to the malignant adenomyoepithelioma. Atypia was obvious in
both epithelial and myoepithelial cells with moderate degree of nuclear pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio and
increased mitotic figures (arrow). HE, ×200. High-power examination to the adenoid cystic carcinoma. The cribriform structure in adenoid
cystic carcinoma contains true glandular spaces and pseudolumens. HE, ×200. The immunohistochemistry panel of malignant adenomyoepithelioma
(A, B, C) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (D, E, F). CK18 was expressed in epithelial cells of malignant adenomyoepithelioma (A) and adenoid
cystic carcinoma (D). P63 was expressed in myoepithelial cells of malignant adenomyoepithelioma (B) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (E), CD117
was negative in malignant adenomyoepithelioma (C) and positive in adenoid cystic carcinoma (F). ×100. A modified radical mastectomy was
performed according to the pathology results, the patient’s economic situation and with the patient’s consent. No lymph nodes involvement
was found (0/21). The margins, basement membrane and nipple were all free of metastasis. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy were not
indicated and the patient remained in a good condition throughout the 12-month follow-up period. Adenomyoepithelioma is usually a benign
neoplasm with a low metastatic potential. However, the malignant transformation can arise from the epithelial component, the myoepithelial
component, or both. There are no well-received criteria for malignant adenomyoepithelioma because of the rarity of this lesion. According to
the growth pattern of malignant components, the cases reported in the literatures can be divided into two types: 1) an area of obvious
malignant component arising in a typical low-grade adenomyoepithelioma, which may be more appropriately named “adenomyoepithelioma with
carcinoma” as defined in the 4th edition of WHO Classification of Tumours of the Breast , or “carcinoma arising in adenomyoepithelioma”; 2)
an adenomyoepithelioma with apparent cytological atypia, increased mitotic activity (>5/10HPFs), invasive growth pattern, and/or presence of
necrosis in both epithelial and myoepithelial cells as the histological image of the current case, reminiscent of epithelial-myoepithelial
carcinoma of salivary glands [5, 6]. This type was named by Marian et al. as “atypical adenomyoepithelioma” and may be more appropriately
named “epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma of the breast” in our opinion. Base on the differentiation of the malignancy, the tumors can be
divided into monophasic and biphasic. The monophasic malignancy could be invasive ductal carcinoma not otherwise specified, metaplastic
carcinoma, low-grade adenosquamous carcinoma , invasive lobular carcinoma , and ductal carcinoma in situ [8, 9] which arising from
epithelial component, or malignant myoepithelioma which arising from myoepithelial component. Only 16 biphasic malignant
adenomyoepitheliomas in which malignancy arising from both epithelial and myoepithelial cells have been reported previously [5, 6, 10–17]
(Table 1), and our current case is another one.Table 1 Reported cases of biphasic malignant adenomyoepithelioma ReferenceNo. of casesAge
(year)Size (cm)Histologic appearance of malignancyPresence of metastasisHayes 377 ~ 933.2 ~ 14.0One epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma with
chondrosarcoma1 lungOne epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma1 lost to follow upOne epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma/ACC likeAhmed, et al.
1711.0Nests and cords of both epithelial and myoepithelial tumor cellsNoneQureshi, et al. 16513Epithelial glandular structures and
myoepithelial spindle areas.NoneHungermann, et al. 160Not reportedBiphasic malignancy with well-developed tubular structuresNot
reportedSimpson, et al. 1504.0Mixed osteogenic, spindle cell, and carcinomatous differentiationLungKiaer, et al. 1462.0Peripherally
proliferating myoepithelial cells and luminally localized eosinophilic cuboidal and columnar cells.NonePauwels, et al. 149Not reportedA
proliferation of tubules composed of epithelial cells surrounded by myoepithelial cells with high mitotic figures and focal
atypiaNonePetrozza, et al. 1602.0Focal epithelial-like component with high mitotic figures and partial myoepithelial-like component with
atypia and high mitotic figuresNoneRasbridge, et al. 539 ~ 761.3 ~ 4.5Contain areas of invasive malignant cells or foci of cellular atypia
and increased mitotic activity.1 brainTrojani, et al. 1512.0Bicellular pattern of epithelial and myoepithelial cellslungYang and Wang, et
al.(current case)1611.6Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinomaNoneACC: adenoid cystic carcinoma. Reported cases of biphasic malignant
adenomyoepithelioma ACC: adenoid cystic carcinoma. Adenoid cystic carcinoma is another neoplasm in the spectrum of hyperplastic and
neoplastic lesions characterized by dual differentiation into ductal and myoepithelial cells . There was only one report that adenoid cystic
carcinoma arising in an adenomyoepithelioma in breast , which Hayes commented that “since these neoplasms are so closely related this is an
arguable entity” . However, the difference does exist between the two entities. Adenoid cystic carcinoma has a characteristic cribriform
architecture, the formation of true glandular spaces and pseudolumens, and the histologically distinct invagination of stroma. It lacks the
papillary architecture which is frequently seen in adenomyoepithelioma. The myoepithelial cells tend to be smaller and more basaloid, and
the arrangement of epithelial and myoepithelial cells is less irregular than that of adenomyoepithelioma [5, 18]. Immunohistologically,
CD117 highlights the epithelial cells of adenoid cystic carcinoma [4, 19, 20] but is totally negative in malignant adenomyoepithelioma. The
current case and the only case reported previously with an ACC focus next to AME mass have their similarities and differences (Table 2).
Interestingly, we recently consulted a case of a 45-year-old female who received a lumpectomy three years ago with a pathological image of
adenoid cystic carcinoma. The recurrent tumor showed two components of adenoid cystic carcinoma and malignant adenomyoepithelioma. However,
we are not fortunate enough to get the pathological documentation of this case. Tumors with epithelial-myoepithelial differentiation are
rare in breast but comprise a wide spectrum of lesions ranging from benign (such as pleomorphic adenoma and adenomyoepithelioma) to low
grade malignant (such as malignant adenomyoepithelioma and adenoid cystic carcinoma). Boecker and Buerger have demonstrated the presence of
pluripotent progenitor cells which have the potential to differentiate into either glandular or myoepithelial cells . It is possible that
adenoid cystic carcinoma and malignant adenomyoepithelioma develop from the same pluripotent progenitor cells , so the separation for these
two morphologically close lesions could be somewhat arbitrary. They could coexist and even transform to each other under certain
conditions.Table 2 Comparison between the current case and the previous case SexAge (year)LocationSize (cm)Type of AMEProportion of AME to
ACCRelationship between AME and ACCVan Dorpe et al. Female36Juxta-areolar in right breast1.0Low-grade AME1.0: 0.3A focus of ACC at the edge
of AME penetrated the capsuleYang et al. (current case)Female61Upper-outer quadrant of right breast1.6Malignant AME1:1ACC as a lobule of the
mass combined with malignant AMEACC: adenoid cystic carcinoma; AME: adenomyoepithelioma. Comparison between the current case and the
previous case ACC: adenoid cystic carcinoma; AME: adenomyoepithelioma. Though ACC and AME are triple-negative breast cancers,which show a
poor prognosis when paired with basal-like transcriptome, hormone receptor negativity status is not related to poor differentiation and a
worse prognosis, as defined in invasive ductal carcinoma not otherwise specified (IDC NOS) . In addition, compared with adenoid cystic
carcinoma of salivary, although they have similar morphological and immunological phenotypes and even the same molecular genetic defect, the
t(6;9)(q22–23;p23–24) translocation , the biological behavior of breast and salivary ACC is different. The former showed indolent clinical
behavior, and the latter showed an aggressive course. Adenoid cystic carcinoma of breast presents as a localized disease with a low
frequency of axillary lymph node involvement of less than 8%, and rare distant metastases of fewer than 20% . Therefore, most clinicians
recommend a breast-conserving surgical therapy with or without radiotherapy . However, some research performed grading according to the
criteria accepted for salivary ACC and suggested that grade 3 (solid growth pattern) may have a higher propensity of recurrence and
metastasis . This result has not been confirmed by long-term follow-up data. At the same time, AME of breast has better prognosis comparing
with epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma of salivary gland .Most of the adenomyoepitheliomas of breast behave as benign though rare cases
have metastasized . The behavior of malignant adenomyoepithelioma seemed to be related to the grade of the malignant component and the tumor
size [4, 5]. In our case, the component of high grade epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma might indicate a high frequency of recurrence and
metastases. To date, there are limited published data on the biological behavior and long-term clinical outcome of adenoid cystic carcinoma
combining with malignant adenomyoepithelioma. As a result, it is necessary for the patient to be closely followed-up and periodically
examined following treatment. In this paper, we report the case of a rare biphasic malignant adenomyoepithelioma combining with adenoid
cystic carcinoma in a single mass of a 61-year-old female. The histological characters of the two tumors were typical, and the transition
from malignant AME to ACC was gradual. Immunohistochemistry was helpful in distinguishing these two types of malignant epithelial-
myoepithelial tumors. Although most ACC has a more favorable clinical outcome, the component of high grade epithelial-myoepithelial
carcinoma in this case might indicate a high frequency of recurrence and metastases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
and her family for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Adenomyoepithelioma Adenoid cystic carcinoma Emission computed tomography Carbohydrate antigen Smooth
muscle actin Estrogen Progesterone Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions YY, YMW and LB collected the data and wrote the manuscript. LB made the final diagnosis of this
disease.JSH performed the immunohistochemistry staining. YMW and AMJ were the surgeons who operated on the patient, interpreted the patient
data. GQP and XYT helped to perform the histological examination and collect imaging data. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO.81060189 to L.B), the young reserve talent of
academic and technical of Yunnan (NO.2013HB086 to L.B.) and Doctor’s Foundation of the First Affiliated Hospital (NO.2013BS04 to L.B.,
NO.2013BS05 to Y.M.W.).
