Brain metastasis from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is very rare with a reported incidence of less than 2%. It is usually associated with
a poor prognosis that is related to several factors, the most important including: single vs multiple lesions, performance status, platinum-
sensitive disease, tumor grade, extracranial disease, and multimodal approach treatment. At the time of diagnosis, an extracranial disease
is found in over half of patients. The most common histology is the serous type. The median time from primary diagnosis to development of
cerebral lesions is directly correlated to initial tumor grade and stage. Several therapeutic approaches can be proposed, including best
supportive care +/- corticosteroids, surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. A multimodal therapy approach may achieve an improved outcome
and should therefore be utilized whenever applicable. We present the case of a patient with a solitary brain metastasis which appeared
11 years after a locally advanced and aggressive EOC (FIGO stage III C) and which totally regressed after surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy.
Clinically, she showed progressive headaches, decreased visual acuity, balance and memory disorders associated with a confusional state.
Brain CT scan and MRI documented a solitary, necrotic lesion in the left central parietal region with an important cerebral surrounding
edema and initial cranial herniation. No other extracranial metastases were observed at the PET scan. Laboratory tests were in the normal
range and CA 125 was moderatly increased at 81 UI/ml. The patient underwent surgical removal of tumor lesion, post-surgical whole-brain
radiotherapy (WBRT) and systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin alone for six cycles. At a follow-up of 13 months, she is alive, in good
clinical condition and tumor progression free. The peculiarity of this case relies on the isolated brain relapse of a BRCA-1/BRCA-2 non-
mutated EOC, which is uncommon and rare, and to the very long time, of 11 years, from diagnosis of primary cancer and development of brain
metastasis. A multimodal, aggressive approach of this isolated brain metastasis led to a complete and prolonged tumor control. Approximately
20–40% of all cancer patients develop brain metastases with breast cancer, lung cancer and melanoma representing the most common primary
tumors . The reported incidence of brain metastases from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is less than 2%. Brain involvement is usually
associated with a poor prognosis . Several factors seem to have an impact on overall survival (OS), including single lesion, performance
status, platinum-sensitive disease, tumor grade, extracranial disease, and, probably, multimodal approach but all these factors have not
been evaluated and validated in prospective studies [4, 5]. The standard treatment consists of whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT), which
improves the quality of life by a reduction of neurological symptoms and prolongs OS to 3–6 months . Patients with a good performance
status, a controlled extracranial disease and a single brain lesion are generally considered for more aggressive therapeutic strategies,
including surgical resection, stereotactic radiosurgery, postoperative radiation, and chemotherapy . We report an interesting case of a
63-year-old woman presenting an isolated EOC brain metastasis, 11 years after the primary tumor treatment. In Jun 2001, a 51-year-old woman
was submitted to radical surgery followed by 6 cycles of systemic chemotherapy with a carboplatin/taxol regimen for a FIGO stage IIIC mixed,
undifferentiated and clear-cells ovarian cancer. The follow-up was uneventful until July 2012 when an increase of the tumor marker CA 125
was observed at 46 UI/ml. A chest-abdomen and pelvic CT scan was also performed and it was negative. In December 2012, the patient was
hospitalized because of progressive headaches, decreased visual acuity, balance and memory disorders associated with a confusional state.
Brain CT scan and MRI documented a solitary, necrotic lesion in the left central parietal region with an important cerebral surrounding
edema and initial cranial herniation (Figure 1A-B, red arrow). A PET scan was negative. Laboratory tests were in the normal range and CA 125
was at 81 UI/ml. The SPECT MRI revealed the absence of neurological cells in the lesion leading to the hypothesis of a late, solitary
ovarian metastasis (Figure 1C, red arrow).Figure 1 A solitary brain metastasis of epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC). A–B: A solitary,
necrotic lesion in the left central parietal region with an important cerebral surrounding edema and initial cranial herniation (brain MRI;
red arrow). C: Absence of neurological cells in the tumor lesion (SPECT MRI; red arrow). D: A metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma
(Histology). E: Cytokeratin 7 and WT1 positivity of tumor cells (Immunohistochemistry). A solitary brain metastasis of epithelial ovarian
carcinoma (EOC). A–B: A solitary, necrotic lesion in the left central parietal region with an important cerebral surrounding edema and
initial cranial herniation (brain MRI; red arrow). C: Absence of neurological cells in the tumor lesion (SPECT MRI; red arrow). D: A
metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma (Histology). E: Cytokeratin 7 and WT1 positivity of tumor cells (Immunohistochemistry). A
corticosteroid therapy was started with a progressive improvement of neurologic symptoms. In January 2013 she underwent craniotomy with
radical tumor resection. Histology showed a metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma with an immunohistochemical profile (cytokeratin
7/WT1 positive) compatible with metastasis from ovarian primary (Figure 1D-E). A post-surgery WBRT has been performed followed by a systemic
monochemotherapy by carboplatin for six cycles. A mutational analysis was also performed and it did not find any mutation of the BRCA1/BRCA2
genes. At a follow-up of 13 months, the patient is alive, asymthomatic, in good clinical conditions and tumor progression free. The CA 125
is in the normal range (29 UI/ml). Brain metastases from EOC are very uncommon with a reported incidence in the literature of 1–2.5% . This
incidence is probably underestimated because of the fact that brain imaging is not generally included in routine follow-up. However, from
its first description in 1978 by Mayer et al. , a rise in incidence has been observed probably reflecting: i) an improvement of imaging
techniques, leading to an earlier and more sensitive diagnosis of brain lesions; ii) a prolonged patients’ survival by a better therapeutic
strategy; iii) biological mechanisms involving the blood–brain barrier (BBB) that can either lead to an early brain implantation after its
potential chemotherapy-induced imparement or avoid a drug penetration into the brain acting as a safe haven. Radiologically, brain
involvement is often multiple and presents a mixed, solid-cystic form . The frontal lobe is the most frequent localisation . At time of
diagnosis, an extracranial disease is found in over half of the patients . About 80% of the patients present a FIGO stage III or IV at the
first diagnosis of EOC . The most common histology is the serous type, which is reported in over half of the cases, followed by mixed
epithelial, endometrioid, adenocarcinoma, mucinous, undifferentiated and clear cell histology, all in decreasing frequency . The reported
median time from primary diagnosis to development of cerebral lesions is variable and directly correlated to initial tumor grade and stage
[10, 11]. Only two independent prognostic factors have been shown to have a relevant clinical impact: i) the presence of extracranial
disease at the time of brain relapse and ii) the performance status . Conflicting results have been reported with other potential factors,
including "single" vs "multiple" localisations, the interval time from primary diagnosis and metastatic manifestation, tumor stage, grade,
histotype, age at diagnosis of brain relapse, site of lesion, and treatment strategy [4, 12]. However, a recent German, multicenter,
retrospective review documented, in a multivariate analysis, five negative prognostic factors, including performance status, platinum-
sentive disease, tumor grading, FIGO staging, and presence of multiple vs single lesions. Other factors, such as histology, age at primary
diagnosis, ascites, residual tumor at primary surgery, extracranial disease at time of brain relapse, presentation with or without headache
did not directly impact on OS. A trend for significatly longer survival for the multimodal therapy was also observed . Germlime mutations of
BRCA-1 and -2 genes have been reported in 10% of EOC and they seem to correlate with a more aggressive behaviour and a metastatic disease .
Recently, several reports showed a strict correlation between BRCA-1 mutations and incidence of brain metastases in EOC [14, 15]. Several
therapeutic approaches can be proposed, including best supportive care +/- corticosteroids, surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. When
applicable, conventional neurosurgery promises the best results. In case of contraindications to surgery, inaccessibility of lesions and the
presence of multiple metastases, the most commonly used individual therapy strategy is WBRT that improves neurological symptoms and prolongs
median survival up to 3–6 months [1, 6]. The role of systemic chemotherapy is controversial with a reported median OS up to 16 months even
when combined with surgery or radiation [2, 7]. These data probably reflect the impossibility to reach a high cerebrospinal fluid drug
concentration with the actual cytotoxic agents most active in EOC which are unable to cross the blood–brain barrier. Several studies have
documented an increased therapeutic potential by a multimodal, more aggressive approach. Cohen et al. reported a median OS of 5.6 months for
surgery or WBRT, when these are employed individually, and of 23.1 months after a combination of both strategies . The addition of
chemotherapy to surgery and radiotherapy seems to improve OS of 3–6 months but these data derived from retrospective, small-cohorts studies
and have not been prospectively validated [1, 16]. Recently, stereotactic radiotherapy showed promising results with a remarkable median
survival of 29 months as compared to 6 months with WBRT but it is mostly applied in selected patients with no more than 3 cerebral lesions.
It is now prospectively evaluating into a multimodal approach and also in patients with multiple lesions. A multimodal therapy approach may
achieve an improved outcome for the patients and should therefore be used whenever applicable. The evidence available to date is pointing
towards a combination of surgery and radiotherapy as the treatment modality with the best benefit to drawback ratio . An additional
chemotherapy can potentially improve clinical outcome in some patients, but this benefit has to be measured against possible side-effects.
Further research is needed to clarify the value of chemotherapeutic agents having a potential of reaching high concentrations in the
cerebrospinal fluid. In our case, the patient presented a solitary brain metastasis 11 years after a locally advanced and aggressive EOC
which totally regressed after surgery and post-surgical chemotherapy. Brain involvement was associated with a moderatly increase of tumor
marker CA125. No other extracranial metastases were observed. The patient underwent a multimodal and aggressive treatment, including
surgical resection of the tumor lesion, post-surgical WBRT and systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin alone for six cycles that led to a
complete and prolonged tumor control. The peculiarity of this case relies on the isolated brain relapse of a BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 non-mutated
EOC, which is uncommon and rare, and to the very long time, of 11 years, from diagnosis of primary cancer and development of brain
metastasis. Finally, a multimodal and aggressive approach achiewed a prolonged tumor-free survival. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. Competing interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Authors’ contributions RL has
made substantial contributions to 1) conception, acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data; 2) has been involved in drafting the
manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content; and 3) has given final approval of the version to be published. CP
carried out 1) the analysis and interpretation of data; 2) has been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for
important intellectual content; and 3) has given final approval of the version to be published. NE has been involved in 1) drafting the
manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content; and 2) has given final approval of the version to be published.
CEM has been involved in 1) drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content; and 2) has given final
approval of the version to be published. TB has been involved in 1) drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important
intellectual content; and 2) has given final approval of the version to be published. DN has been involved in 1) drafting the manuscript and
revising it critically for important intellectual content; and 2) has given final approval of the version to be published. PQ has been
involved in 1) drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content; and 2) has given final approval of the
version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Mrs. Nadia Ouamara for the English
revision.
