Granular cell tumor (GCT) is a benign tumor of the breast that can mimic, on breast imaging, invasive carcinomas. Biological evolution of
mammary GCT is unknown, especially if it is associated with an invasive carcinoma in the same or contralateral breast. This report details
the morphological features of these synchronous lesions highlighting their biological characteristics and suggesting an appropriate follow
up. Granular cell tumour (GCT) of the breast is a relatively uncommon lesion, usually benign in nature. In 1926, Abrikossoff described for
first time this lesion, proposing a possible origin from smooth muscle cells . Then, on the basis of its immunophenotypic and
ultrastructural features, it was finally determined that it derives from perineural cells . Clinically, GCT can mimic carcinoma, presenting
as a palpable mass, and for its fibrous consistency. On mammographically and sonographically examination, GCT can present as not clearly
defined lesions, similar to primary invasive carcinoma. Histologically, GCTs arise from intra-lobular breast stroma creating cords that
extend into adjacent normal breast parenchyma, a characteristic that simulates the growth pattern of invasive breast cancer carcinoma.
Moreover, the main histologic element that distinguishes GCTs from other lesions is the presence of granular cytoplasm probably caused by
accumulation of secretory granules, mitochondria, or lysosomes. Several evidences reported the presence of synchronous or independent
tumors, with different biological characteristics in contralateral breasts . However, only few cases of coexistence of a benign lesion of
the breast with invasive carcinoma was described in distinct breasts . Only one case reported the co-localization of GCT and infiltrating
ductal carcinoma in the same breast . In this report we describe the coexistence of granular cell tumor of the breast, and an invasive
ductal carcinoma in distinct breasts. The interest of this report is represented not only by rarity of this breast neoplasm and for the
diagnostic difficulties to distinguish radiologically benign and malignant lesions, but also for limited knowledge on its biological trend
especially if it was associated with other malignant tumors of the breast. A 67-year-old woman, after a mammography with suspicious
findings, was referred to our Institution. The ultrasonography revealed in the superior external quadrant of the left breast a solid
hypoechoic mass of about 1.5 cm (Figure 1, on the left), suspicious for malignancy. Ultrasonography of the left invasive ductal
carcinoma(IDC) and right granular cell tumor (GCT) breast lesions. “Plus signs” underline the presence of suspicious lesions.
Ultrasonography on contralateral breast showed, in the upper inner quadrant, a solid hypoechoic oval mass of about 2 cm (Figure 1, on the
right). The patient underwent to definitive surgery for excision of all lesions. For the left nodule, histological evaluation confirmed the
existence of an invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) of intermediate grade of malignity. Immunohistochemical antibodies panel, carried out on the
lesion, showed a strong positivity for ER (75%), and for PgR (75%), a high proliferation index ki67, a positivity for HER-2 with a 1+ score
FDA (Figure 2). Further cytogenetic analysis, using the FISH method, did not show any gene amplification of HER-2 (Figure 2).
Immunophenotype of the left breast lesion: (A) H&E morphology (40×); (B) immunopositivity for ER (40×); (C) immunopositivity for PgR (40×),
(D) immunopositivity for Ki67 (40×); (E) immunopositivity for HER-2 (40×). In the bottom right FISH analysis of HER-2 gene without
amplification signals. HER-2 probe spans the entire HER-2 gene is labeled in SpectrumOrange. The CEP 17 probe is labeled in SpectrumGreen
and hybridizes to the alpha satellite DNA located at the centromere of chromosome 17. Two HER-2 (red) and two CEP 17 (green) signals
indicate no HER-2 amplification. For the right nodule, the histological evaluation and immunohistochemical antibodies panel showed a low
proliferation index ki67, a positivity for vimentin and S100, and a negativity for pan CK and CD68 markers (Figure 3). Morphology and
immunoprofile were consistent with a diagnosis of GCT. Immunophenotype of the right breast lesion: (A) H&E morphology (40×); (B)
immunopositivity for Ki67 (40×); (C) immunonegativity for panCK (40×); (D) immunopositivity for vimentin (40×); (E) immunopositivity for
S100 (40×); (F) immunonegativity for CD68 (40×). Primary tumors that coexist at the time of diagnosis are defined “synchronous” and this
condition is quite common for malignant lesions that occur in bilaterally symmetrical organs, such as breasts , kidneys , ovaries , and
testes . However, synchronous benign and malignant lesions in separate breasts have not been reported. In literature, only one case, showing
the presence of a benign phylloides tumor and invasive ductal carcinoma in contralateral breast has been described and one case reported the
co-localization of GCT and invasive carcinoma in the same breast . In this report we present the coexistence of a very rare lesion of the
breast, a germinal cell tumor, and an invasive ductal carcinoma in distinct breasts. GCTs are usually benign neoplasms that account for less
than 1% of breast lesions. Malignant GCTs of the breast are rare in the literature . GCTs have been shown to be non-dependent on estrogen
and progesterone. For its similarities in ultrastructural features, these tumors are thought to originate from perineural cells, probably
from a Schwann-cell of origin . GCT of the breast accounts for only 6% of all GCTs reported. In contrast to most other breast tumors, which
occur predominantly in the upper outer quadrant, GCTs are most frequently found in the upper inner quadrant, but radiographically, it is
impossible to establish a definitive diagnosis of GCT of the breast without a biopsy. Microscopic characteristics of GCT typically include
aggregates of loosely infiltrating large round or polygonal cells with abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and variable amounts of
collagenous stroma. The nuclei are often small and centrally located. By immunohistochemistry, S100 can be used for diagnosis, supporting
neural origin, and distinguishing GCTs from other neoplasms with abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, and CD68. Moreover, the
negativity for cytokeratins rules out an adenocarcinoma diagnosis. A high proportion are also reactive for vimentin, which is not often
detected in carcinomas, a helpful feature that aids in distinguishing between the two. In our presented case, S100 and vimentin are strongly
expressed, while pan CK and CD68 appear negative. The morphology, associated to this immunoprofile and a low proliferative index supported
the GCT diagnosis. The case described is interesting not only for the rarity of GCT lesion, but also for their association with a malignant
lesion in contralateral breast. Genetic predisposition to develop multiple cancers is still currently the subject of numerous studies. It
was frequently reported that the coexistence of two or more tumors, synchronous or metachronous, in the same patient, may also be correlated
with hereditary syndromes . However a genetic relation between these lesions was not described, thus we can assume that their synchrony is
purely casual. GCT represents a rare lesion in the breast, and in the literature very little information is provided concerning its
biological evolution. In fact, less than 1% of all GCTs, including mammary lesions, are malignant. For this reason, particularly if this
lesion is associated with other malignant tumors in the same breast, but also in the contralateral, complete surgical excision is always
recommended. Local recurrence has been reported after incomplete excision; thus, patients must be subjected to an appropriate follow up.
M.D.B. and M.C. were responsible for the conception and design of the study. M.D.B. and T.P. were responsible for provision of study
materials or patient. F.C. collected and assembled data and samples for immunohistochemical and FISH analysis. M.D.B., R.D.C. and G.B. were
responsible for immunohistochemical evalutation. All authors were involved in manuscript writing and provided final approval of the
manuscript. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
