Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 32 Final Diagnosis: Chondroblastoma Symptoms: Pain Medication: — Clinical
Procedure: — Specialty: Oncology Unusual clinical course 1% of all bone tumors are Chondroblastomas. Chondroblastomas, initially considered
to be an osteoclastoma variant are benign, cartilaginous tumors which usually occur in the epiphysis of long bones, especially in the
humerus, tibia, and femur, most common in children and young adults between the ages of 10 and 20 years. 4% of all chondroblastomas settle
in the talus whereas cuneiform and other tarsal bones are very rare sites for the development of this benign chondroid lesion. A case of
chondroblastoma involving the medial cuneiform of the left foot of a 32-year-old woman is described. The patient presented with moderate
localized pain and tenderness over the medial aspect of her left foot. Radiographs showed a lytic expansile lesion within the right
cuneiform bone indicating a bone tumor. Biopsy demonstrated cellular areas made up of round, polygonal cells, with round-oval nucleus and
chondroblasts that appear with a thin calcification rim. Intralesional curettage and synthetic bone grafting with PRP (Platelet-Rich Plasma)
application was performed for its treatment. After 18 month follow up, osteointegration was observed with the defect completely filled and
the patient was free of disease and pain. A painful, expansile, thin, sclerotic lesion detected at the cuneiform should arise suspicion for
chondroblastoma even at age over 20 years. Meticulous curettage of the lesion from a small window with removal of the lesion followed by
injectable phosphocalcic cement application with autologous PRP can be considered as a curative and technically simple treatment method.
Chondroblastomas, also known as Codman’s tumor, are fairly uncommon bone tumors that arise from immature chondroblasts, and account for
approximately 1% of all primary bone tumors . In 1942, Jaffe and Lichenstein first described the lesion as a chondrogenic tumor developing
at the epiphysis of a long bones and was initially considered to be an osteoclastoma variant . Chondroblastomas are rare, benign,
cartilaginous tumors that usually occur in the epiphysis of long bones, especially in the humerus, tibia, and femur . Although
chondroblastomas can occur throughout life, they are most common in children and young adults between the ages of 10 and 20 years . Feet are
very uncommon sites; with only 1 case report demonstrating multiple tarsal bone involvement in a patient . Four percent of all
chondroblastomas settle in the talus, whereas cuneiform and other tarsal bones are very rare sites for the development of this benign
chondroid lesion . Our report describes a case of chondroblastoma of the left medial cuneiform bone in a 32-year-old women, which appears to
be unique in terms of anatomical localization, age of patient, and treatment method. The data collection was in conformity with the
Institutional Ethics Committee and the study was in adherence to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The aim of the study was
described and informed consent was received from the patients prior to inclusion in the study. A 32-year-old woman presented with a 6-month
history of pain in the medial aspect of her left foot. The pain had an insidious onset and had gradually worsened during the 2 months before
presentation, causing gait difficulty. The patient did not have a history of trauma or infection in that region. Upon physical examination,
she displayed tenderness and mild swelling of the medial aspect of her left foot. She had difficulty standing and was unable to bear weight
on her foot for protracted periods. The patient did not display any neurologic disability in her left lower extremity, but there was limited
ankle dorsiflexion and tenderness over the medial cuneiform bone. Conventional radiographs of the left foot showed an irregular, patchy,
lytic, radiolucent area within the cuneiform bone, suggesting a bone tumor. The affected bone showed septations and minimal calcifications
with mild expansion. The tumor occupied the entire medial cuneiform bone, with no involvement of the adjacent tarsal bones (Figure 1).
T1-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) showed a hypointense lesion (Figure 2A), whereas the lesion was hyperintense on T2-weighted
images (Figure 2B). MRI sequences showed the involvement of the entire medial cuneiform bone, sparing the navicular and first metatarsal
bone. On the basis of the clinical findings and imaging studies, the differential diagnosis initially suggested an aneurysmal bone cyst,
giant-cell tumor, or a bone cyst. A mini-incision open biopsy was performed and indicated a benign chondroid tumor. The microscopic
examination of the tissue revealed sheets of cells exhibiting oval-to-elongated nuclei in a background of chondroid matrix (Figure 3A, 3B).
The histopathological diagnosis was reported as chondroblastoma. After the patient was informed about the diagnosis, aggressive
intralesional curettage of the lesion was performed. After performing electrocauterization of the debrided cavity, we filled the defect with
15 mL of synthetic bone substitute (Cementek LV™, France) combined with autologous platelet-rich plasma (PRP). During the first 3 months of
clinical follow-up, the patient was allowed to partially bear weight on her affected foot and walked with the assistance of a crutch. By the
third week, the patient was free of pain and had a full range of motion in her ankle. A radiographic examination performed 18 months
postoperatively showed full integration and consolidation of the synthetic graft, without recurrence of the lesion (Figure 4). Although
chondroblastomas are typically identified in adolescents and young adults, with 80% of the affected patients being 10–20 years old, the
presented 32-year-old woman in this case is over the upper age limit, with an atypical localization of the tumor. Most patients complain of
localized pain on contact or motion, and the lesion typically develops in the epiphysis of a long bone. The tumor is typically located
adjacent to the growth plate, with the majority extending into the metaphysis. Calcification, present in approximately 60% of the lesions,
has an intercellular distribution and often has a “chicken wire” or “picket fence” appearance . The tumor is composed of cellular and
matrix-rich areas, with the cellular component comprised of round or polygonal chondroblasts and oval or round nuclei in an eosinophilic
cytoplasm. Although a high percentage of chondroblastomas are diagnosed with the above-described radiographic and histopathologic features,
it would very likely be excluded from the differential diagnosis in this case due to its atypical localization and the patient’s age. Fink
et al. reviewed 322 cases of chondroblastoma and reported that only 42 involved the foot. They also noted that, in the foot, chondroblastoma
was common, especially in the posterior, subchondral areas of the talus, calcaneus, and calcaneal apophysis . Zhang et al. presented a case
report with chondroblastoma of the talus and concluded that 4% of all chondroblastomas arise from the talus . Similar results were found in
a retrospective review of 82 cases of benign pedal bone tumors at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital (New York, NY, USA) where Bakotic and
Huvos indicated that chondroblastomas in the medial cuneiform bone is a very unique localization of the tumor . Although methods such as
curettage alone, endoscopic curettage, endoscopic curettage with cementation, curettage with fat implantation, resection with allograft
replacement, marginal resection radiofrequency ablation, and osteochondral autograft transfer have also been used with some success, we
preferred curettage and electrocauterization without compromising the thin cortex, followed by injectable synthetic bone substitute
(Cementek LV, France) to fill the defect and autologous PRP to enhance healing . The allograft we used is a phosphocalcic bone substitute
and is known to be a biocompatible, resorbable, osteoconductive agent and had the advantage to be easily applied via a syringe from our
biopsy window. In this case we did not prefer to use polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) bone cement, since during the exothermic free-radical
polymerization process, the cement heats up and this polymerization heat reaches temperatures of around 82–86°C in the body. This high
temperature is superior to the critical level for the protein denaturation in the PRP, whereas the polymerization process for phosphocalcic
bone substitute produces a temperature only half that of PMMA. Growth factors and antiinflammatory cytokines in PRP are known to accelerate
bone and soft tissue regeneration without any risk of transmissible diseases in selected cases. In orthopedic oncology, PRP has recently
gained popularity, especially in benign lesions such as simple bone cysts either with allografts or autografts, and in maxillofacial surgery
for the treatment of mandible tumors. Researchers have concluded that PRP enhances the treatment of bone cysts in children, with no
resulting complications, and this method combined with allogenic bone grafts appears as a promising method for the treatment of benign
solitary bone tumors . It has also been concluded that PRP application in maxillofacial tumors is a safe, biocompatible, and effective
method to enhance bone graft uptake . Although PRP application with allografts or auto-grafts has been demonstrated with favorable results
in particular bone tumors, it has not yet been used for the treatment of a benign chondroid tumor. Besides the potential to accelerate bone
healing and graft uptake, combination of PRP with a synthetic bone substitute also has the advantage of decreasing harvest site morbidity
and recurrence rates. Although chondroblastomas are benign cartilaginous lesions of long bones, usually developing from the epiphysial
region, an expansile, thin, sclerotic lesion detected at tarsal bones even after 20 years of age should create clinical suspicion. When
occurring juxtaposed to articular cartilage, treatment should be directed at removal of the tumor with preservation of the articular
cartilage. A meticulous curettage from a small window with removal of the lesion followed by injectable phosphocalcic cement application
combined with PRP can be considered as a safe and curative treatment method for chondroblastomas revealing atypical characteristics.
Conflict of interest No funds were received in support of this study. No benefits in any form have been or will be received from a
commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest. Conventional radiograph of the left foot showing an irregular, patchy, lytic lucent area within the right cuneiform bone. (A)
Magnetic resonance imaging. T1-weighted image with the lesion appearing hypointense. (B) Magnetic resonance imaging. T2-weighted image with
the lesion appearing hyperintense. (A) Microscopic examination of the lesion. Hematoxylin-eosin stained tissue showing sheets of cells with
oval to elongated nuclei on a background of chondroid matrix (×200). (B) Microscopic examination of the lesion. Reticulin stain (×200).
18-month follow-up radiograph with complete filling and osteointegration of the defect.
