AUTHORS' CONTRIBUTIONS ARMF conceived and designed the study, performed analysis and interpretation of these data, and prepared the
manuscript; DTG, SAP and ERSL participated in interpretation of data and manuscript revision; AAP, AAK and RG carried out the laboratory
tests; IR, AV and ERSL carried out the clinical assessment; all authors read and approved the final manuscript. ARMF and ERSL are guarantors
of the paper. COMPETING INTERESTS None declared. Bartonella henselae is associated with a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations,
including cat scratch disease, endocarditis and meningoencephalitis, in immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients. We report the first
molecularly confirmed case of B. henselae infection in an AIDS patient in state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Although DNA sequence of B.
henselae has been detected by polymerase chain reaction in a lymph node biopsy, acute and convalescent sera were nonreactive. Bartonella
henselae está associada a um amplo espectro de manifestações clínicas, incluindo a doença da arranhadura de gato, endocardite, e
meningoencefalite, em pacientes imunocompetentes e imunocomprometidos. Relatamos o primeiro caso confirmado por método molecular de B.
henselae em um paciente com SIDA no estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brasil. Apesar da sequência de DNA de B. henselae ser detectada pela reação em
cadeia da polimerase em uma biópsia do linfonodo, soros das fases aguda e convalescente foram não reativos. Bartonella species are small,
fastidious, Gram-negative, rod-shaped bacteria that are associated with infections in immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients. There
are more than 22 species so far described in the Bartonella genus, with Bartonella henselae, B. bacilliformis, and B. quintana accounting
for the majority of human cases. Bartonella henselae, the main agent of the cat scratch disease (CSD), is also associated with a wide
variability in clinical manifestations, including Parinaud's oculoglandular syndrome, endocarditis, meningoencephalitis, disseminated
disease, and fever of unknown origin2,9. Immunocompromised hosts, particularly severely immunocompromised patients infected with HIV, are
more susceptible to infection from B. henselae, and the clinical course may be more severe9. The transmission of B. henselae from cats to
humans frequently occurs through direct or indirect scratches, bites, or licks from infected cats and probably from the bite of an arthropod
vector, Ctenocephalides felis, the cat flea2. We report the diagnosis of B. henselae infection using molecular methods in an HIV-positive
patient who was negative to the gold standard serologic tests. A 34-year-old man infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) from the
Municipality of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, was admitted to hospital in August 2011. Upon arrival, the patient was uncomfortable and febrile
(39.5 °C) with a cluster of warm, red, enlarged, tender unilateral lymph nodes on the right epitrochanteric (> 10 cm), axillar,
supraclavicular, periauricular, and posterior cervical chain (Fig. 1). A discrete nonpruritic rash was noted on the torso and abdomen. The
patient had been scratched on the abdomen and bitten on the thumb by his 7-month-old kitten seven days before. He also mentioned numerous
fleabites prior to the start of his symptoms and that his kitten spent most of the time outdoors in contact with roaming cats. Fig. 1 -(A)
Photograph of the right epitrochlear regions showing a diffuse erythematous skin rash. (B) Total recovery from lymph node lesions after
antibiotic treatment (azithromycin). Diagnosis of HIV seropositivity had been made two years previously. The CD4 count was 244 cells/mm3
with a viral load of 215,857 copies/mm3 at admission. Other laboratory data revealed biochemical panel and blood count within the normal
range, elevated C-reactive protein, cultures from tissue biopsy and multiple blood cultures were sterile for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria,
mycobacteria and fungi. The patient was positive for toxoplasmosis (IgG), but the serology studies for viral hepatitis, cytomegalovirus, and
syphilis were negative. CSD was suspected, but serum samples collected on days 11 and 19 of the illness were nonreactive to B. henselae,
using a commercial kit of indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) for class-specific IgG antibody (Bion®, USA). In addition, the serum from
the patient's cat was submitted for IFA and was B. henselae reactive (titer of 64). Histopathological examination of the posterior cervical
node revealed a granulomatous inflammation and neutrophilic microabscesses. No organisms were observed using Gram, Ziehl-Neelson, and
Warthin-Starry silver stains. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a slightly enlarged spleen; the chest radiograph and transthoracic
echocardiography were otherwise normal. Several days later, the patient maintained moderate fever associated with an episodic dull abdominal
pain and worsening of the epitrochanteric lesion. Abdominal ultrasound and computed tomography of the abdomen on day 19 of the illness
revealed an enlarged spleen with multiple discrete nodules and intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy. A lymph node ultrasound detected a large
nonhomogeneous subcutaneous collection on the anterior epitrochlear region that was collected prior to antibiotic therapy and evaluated
using culture and molecular analysis. Intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanate (1 g) and oral azithromycin (500 mg) were started empirically to
cover bacterial infections associated with a cat bite and were stopped after eight days. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg and HAART
(tenofovir 300 mg, lamivudine 300 mg, and efavirenz 600 mg) were subsequently initiated on the 20th day of hospital stay with a progressive
and steady rise in CD4 cell count. DNA isolated from patient and cat serum and lymph node tissue/aspirates patient samples were used as
templates for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays using genus-specific primers targeting the 16S-23S rRNA intergenic region6,
riboflavin synthase C gene4, the citrate synthase gene (gltA)7, and β subunit of RNA polymerase gene (rpoB)8. A second step was performed
using species-specific primers targeting the heat shock protein gene (hrtA)1 following reported protocols. B. henselae DNA sequences were
only detected on the histological (lymph node tissue) sample, while the detection in cat serum samples was not confirmed. The amplification
products were purified, and the sequencing was performed using an ABI PRISM BigDye terminator v.3.1 cycle sequencing kit (Applied
Biosystems, CA, USA). The resulting sequences (GenBank accession no. JX028199.1) were submitted to BLASTn, and the nucleotide sequence
generated from the lymph node sample clearly demonstrated 100% identity with the homologous gene fragment of the hrtA gene from B. henselae
Houston-1 strain, complete genome. The diagnosis of B. henselae lymphadenitis and splenitis was confirmed; the patient's condition improved
with the treatment, and he was discharged after 31 days of hospitalization. Azithromycin was maintained for two months. The patient remained
asymptomatic and without evidence of recurrence of disease one year after hospital discharge. Bartonella spp. have worldwide distribution
and are zoonotic agents of public health with importance in both human and veterinary medicine2,5. Although bartonellosis are not notifiable
diseases in Brazil, the number of cases has been rising in the last two decades (National Rickettsial Reference Laboratory 2012, unpublished
data). This study presents the first report of molecular identification of B. henselae in lymph node tissue specimen from a patient who is
HIV positive and seronegative to Bartonella infection in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Although IFA assay is considered the gold standard
technique for the diagnosis Bartonella, this patient failed to develop normal antibody response to this agent. Serologic sensibility varies
from one laboratory to another ranging from nearly 100% to < 30%, depending on the antigen used, the cut-off chosen, and the test
procedures. In addition, serological assays exhibit low specificity and cross-reactivity can occur between Bartonella spp. and agents such
as Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma gondii and Streptococcus pyogenes 10. Therefore, the detection of B. henselae DNA by PCR
and nucleotide sequencing in the lymph node specimen proved to be useful in the diagnosis of infection. The possibility that the patient's
cat might have been involved in zoonotic transmission was reinforced; the patient's cat was seroreactive to B. henselae antigens. As cats
may have persistent and asymptomatic bacteremia, they represent a potential danger of exposure for people with immunosuppressive
conditions5. The suspicion of CSD and the appropriate empiric antibiotic treatment, even before the molecular diagnostics, improved the
clinical status of the patient. Although no follow-up PCR was performed, the patient remained entirely asymptomatic 14 months after the
illness. There are no controlled trials of treatment for bartonellosis in HIV-infected individuals, but antibiotic treatment for at least
three months has been recommended3. In conclusion, given the low sensitivity of the serological assays, PCR diagnosis for B. henselae should
be considered for patients with suspected CSD even after a negative result in serology test. This way, more frequent and appropriate
diagnosis will be made, leading to a better treatment and cure. We are thankful to Dr. Jairo Dias Barreira at Universidade do Rio de Janeiro
(UNIRIO) for the taxonomic identification of the cat's arthropod. We are also grateful for the technical assistance of Endiá Barros de
Almeida at Hantavirosis and Rickettsiosis Laboratory, on the serological techniques. We would like to thank CNPq for student fellowships.
FUNDING None. ETHICAL APPROVAL This study was approved by the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation/FIOCRUZ, the Comissão de Ética em Pesquisa - CEP (CEP
authorization no. 559/10).
