Adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma (ASC) is an extremely rare variant of adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC). Its relative rarity and its
characteristic histological pattern of both epithelioid and sarcomatoid components may pose diagnostic challenges which influence treatment.
Here, we report a case of ASC in a 58 year-old man presenting with increasing abdominal pain and associated abdominal bloating with a large
right adrenal mass detected by computed tomographic scan (CT). To our knowledge, only eleven prior cases of ASC have been reported in the
literature. Here, we discuss the clinical, radiological and histopathological findings in our case, review the literature on ASCs and offer
opinion on best management. Sarcomatoid carcinomas are tumours which contain both carcinomatous and sarcomatous differentiation. They have
been identified in a variety of organ and tissue sites, including kidney, bladder, lung, breast and oesophagus.1–3 Adrenocortical carcinoma
(ACC) is an uncommon, aggressive malignancy with an estimated incidence of 1-2 per million population per year and, when untreated, a mean
survival of 2.9 months.4–7 Adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma or carcinosarcoma (ASC) is a rare subgroup of ACC. To our knowledge, only
eleven cases have been previously reported in the literature. 8–17 We present the twelfth case and review the previous published literature
to identify management strategies for the treatment of this rare tumour subtype. Axial Abdominal CT scan showing large right sided adrenal
mass. Coronal Abdominal CT scan showing large right sided adrenal mass. A 58-year-old caucasian male presented with a gradual onset of right
sided loin pain over a number of months. A sudden increase in his pain prompted admission to a District General Hospital. The patient
described a constant right loin pain with radiation to his groin. Initial urinalysis showed haematuria and a CT of his urinary system was
arranged to investigate possible renal calculi. This identified an underlying adrenal mass. A further CT scan of the chest abdomen and
pelvis confirmed a 9 x 7cm right sided adrenal mass. The patient was transferred to a Regional Specialty Endocrine Surgery centre where
hormone studies were performed to determine the potential functionality of the tumour. 24 hour urinary catecholamines, a dexamethasone
suppression test, the Cortisol\Creatinine ratio and testosterone, dihydroxyepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) and aldosterone levels were all
within normal limits confirming the presence of a non-functioning adrenal mass. The patient went on to have an adrenalectomy and nephrectomy
for the underlying lesion. The initial laparoscopic procedure was converted to open due to adherence of the mass to surrounding structures
making for a difficult dissection from the inferior vena cava, inferior surface of the liver and the posterior abdominal wall musculature to
which it was attached. Despite these difficulties a complete macroscopic excision was achieved. Post operatively the patient made an
uneventful recovery. Given the extent of the primary tumour, and despite evidence of macroscopic excision, it was felt that the patient's
greatest risk of relapse was at the site of surgery from a local recurrence. The patient went on to have 25 fractions of external beam
radiotherapy at a dosage of 45 Gray (Gy). The benefits of chemotherapeutic agents were discussed with the patient and he and the oncology
team felt that, given the absence of metastatic disease, any potential benefit was outweighed by potential morbidities of the treatment. At
16 months from initial diagnosis and treatment the patient was found to have evidence of metastatic disease to lung and brain. However a
tissue diagnosis confirmed this to represent disease load from a second primary malignancy of lung origin. To date there is no evidence of
local recurrence on CT PET or MRI of the previous adrenal malignancy. The specimen weighed 573 g. The right kidney measured 12 × 7 × 5 cm
and was compressed superiorly by a 12 × 5 × 6 cm adrenal mass. On sectioning of the specimen, the mass was found to be well-circumscribed
with no macroscopic evidence of extracapsular extension. There was extensive haemorrhage and necrosis within the mass (Figure 2). The
interface between the kidney and the mass was examined carefully by close serial sectioning. No communication between the two was identified
Specimen showing necrosis within the adrenal mass with no macroscopic evidence of extracapsular extension. Histology of multiple
representative sections showed a malignant tumour composed of diffuse sheets of epithelioid and spindle cells. There was marked nuclear
atypia. No clear cell component was identified. Mitotic activity was brisk, at approximately 70 mitoses per ten high-power fields. The
epithelioid and spindled areas were equally mitotically active. Numerous atypical mitoses were present. There was extensive necrosis. Tumour
giant cells were present as well as a prominent lymphohistiocytic infiltrate (Figures 3a and 3b). No venous invasion was identified, and no
evidence of extension into the surrounding soft tissues was seen. No normal adrenal gland tissue was identified. The kidney, which was
removed en bloc, was histologically unremarkable. The area of kidney adjacent to the tumour was sampled in its entirety for histology. This
showed no involvement by tumour. Histopathology section (magnification ×25) showing extensive necrosis and a prominent lymphohistiocytic
infiltrate. Section (magnification ×200 showing a brisk mitotic activity and spindle cell components. The tumour cells showed strong,
diffuse positivity with cytokeratins AE1\3 and Cam5.2. Cytokeratin 7 and epithelial membrane antigen showed patchy positivity. Weak
positivity with synaptophysin was also present. The only other positive immunohistochemical markers were CD10, vimentin (strong), desmin and
S100 (weak). RCC marker antigen was negative. All other epithelial (including neuroendocrine) and mesenchymal markers were negative, as were
melanocytic markers. MIB1 proliferative index was approximately 40%. Summary of ASC reported in the literature to date Due to these
morphological and immunohistochemical findings, it was important to consider the possibility of sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma. There was,
however, no communication between the ipsilateral kidney and the adrenal mass. The contralateral kidney was radiologically normal. The most
likely diagnosis on the basis of the clinical, radiological and pathological findings was therefore felt to be adrenocortical sarcomatoid
carcinoma. We present the twelfth documented case of Adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma and a comprehensive summary of the previous
literature. The age of presentation of ASC ranges from 29-79 years (mean 54.3 years). Although the number of cases reported is small, there
is a female to male ratio of 1.4. Despite aggressive treatment, this variant of ACC has a poor prognosis, with the majority of patients
succumbing to the disease within 3-12 months (mean 7 months) following surgical intervention. The greatest determinants of early demise
appear to be limited surgical resection and presence of distant metastatic spread at time of presentation. All twelve cases can be defined
as being carcinosarcoma or sarcomatoid carcinoma as suggested by Strum et al.14 Carcinosarcoma combines features of conventional ACC and
areas of sarcoma which include heterologous elements such as rhabdomyosarcoma (skeletal muscle differentiation), chondrosarcoma and
osteosarcoma. Sarcomatoid carcinoma, also referred to as carcinoma with sarcoma-like component, is mostly composed of malignant spindle
cells without any identifiable heterologous differentiation and is often associated with areas of more conventional epithelial
differentiation.14 Our case represents a sarcomatoid carcinoma since there was a prominent population of malignant spindle cells which did
not show any recognizable differentiation. These findings were similar to six of the previous eleven reported cases.8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16 The
other five previously reported cases were more appropriately classified as carcinosarcoma, with rhabdomyosarcoma identified as the
sarcomatous component in three10, 11, 17, pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma in one18 and the final case showing elements of both osteosarcoma and
chondrosarcoma.12 The rarity of these subgroups of ACC presents a histopathological challenge, particularly when applying the Weiss scoring
system which has remained the most widely used means of assessing the potential for malignancy in adrenocortical neoplasms.20, 21 The
presence within a tumour of a sarcomatous or sarcomatoid component seems to be a predictor of shorter survival in ACC. Sarcomatoid histology
is not accounted for in the Weiss system, which may lead to confusion when dealing with these tumours, particularly with regards to the
proportion of diffuse architecture required.22 In this setting, Sturm and colleagues have proposed that a sarcomatoid component should be
well circumscribed and represent at least 10% of the tumour bulk in order to establish this unusual diagnosis.14, 22 Whilst this rare tumour
subtype represents a significant clinical, radiological and histopathological diagnostic challenge, its prompt identification will ensure
the best long term prognosis in a cancer that requires a maximally aggressive management approach. Given the rarity of this tumour subtype
an evidence-based consensus regarding best oncological treatment is difficult. The use, or documented use, of adjuvant treatments in the
previous cases was variable. In eight cases no additional treatments were reported 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18 the remaining three cases
opted mainly for chemotherapy with a combination of Cisplatinum and Etoposide reported by Collina9 and Fischler et al11 and Cisplatinum used
in isolation by Strum et al.14 Fischler also reported additional adjuvants with Mitotane in combination with chemotherapeutics. Only one of
the previous cases used radiotherapy but it is assumed, given the radiation doses described and the context of bony metastatic disease, that
this was for symptomatic palliation only.9 Our patient was clinically well 14 months following surgical intervention with follow up CT
imaging showing no evidence of local recurrence. Our patient has been the longest survivor when compared to previous cases however he has
unfortunately gone on to develop evidence of malignant spread from a second primary lung malignancy. We maintain that the greatest chance of
long term survival from adrenal sarcomatoid carcinoma to be early detection prior to metastatic spread, radical complete excision and
adjuvant external beam radiotherapy in an attempt to prevent local disease recurrence. Despite these findings our patient has been the
longest survivor when compared to previous cases and we therefore surmise that the greatest chance of long term survival to be early
detection prior to metastatic spread, radical complete excision and adjuvant external beam radiotherapy in an attempt to prevent local
disease recurrence. All authors have no conflict of interest
