Considering a fatal case of an aged individual, who died due to falling down stairs, the cause of the fatal fall was investigated through
experiments. A witness, who was with the victim, when the fatal accident occurred, stated that the aged individual had miss-footed, lost
balance at the top of the stairs, and fell accidently from an upper floor to a lower floor. It was very questionable whether or not this
witness’s statements were true. The true cause of the fatal fall was unclear, because of the witness’s inconsistent statements, which showed
discrepancies between the initial and later statements. The cause of a fatal fall can be presumed from external and internal damages to the
body and other circumstantial evidences. But it was difficult to prove the true cause of a fatal fall only from the results of the autopsy
and investigation of circumstantial evidences. The author was officially requested to conduct experiments to elucidate possible falling
patterns. Judging from the experimental results, deep questions about the witness’s statements arose. These experimental methods and
analyses in this paper could be applied to elucidate possible falling patterns of fatal falls from stairs where the fatal causes are
controversial. According to the mortality statistics classified by the International Classification of Diseases recommended by the WHO-World
Health Organization, 1,917 deaths due to falls on/from stairs and steps in the United States in 20071), 693 deaths in England and Wales in
20112), and 679 deaths in Japan in 20123). Many researchers have undertaken demographic or epidemiological surveys for stair related
injuries4,5,6,7). As far as the author surveyed past literatures, an experimental article for a fatal fall based on the autopsy results and
detailed configurations of stairs, where a fatal fall occurred, was not found in past research papers. Most fatal falls from stairs are
caused by serious head injuries5, 6, 8). Whenever a fatal stair-accident occurs, the actual duration time until receiving the first impact
by falling down the stairs is within a second, according to the author’s experiments9, 10). Because of the instantaneous occurrence of a
stair fall, it is very difficult to find a witness who sees the entire falling patterns down stairs. In the case of no witnesses, the cause
of a fatal fall can be sometimes determined from external injuries on the corpse and circumstantial evidence. Computer simulation can be
used to determine the possible falling patterns, nevertheless, these simulated results are likely to be largely influenced by initial input
parameters, and are not always reliable to identify the specific decisive causes of actual fatal falls. Taking one fatal case of an aged
individual, who died of severe head injuries, due to a fall down the stairs at a residential home, the cause of that fatal fall was
investigated. Only one witness was with the victim when the fatal accident occurred. It was questionable whether or not the witness’s
comments were true. The fatal fall was examined using a dummy and experimental stairs with the same configurations, such as the dimensions
of the tread rise etc. From the analyses of the experimental falls by a dummy from stairs, serious questions about the witness’s statements
arose. It was reported that one aged individual fell from the top of the stairs at victim’s home. According to the initial on-site
statements of the witness, the aged victim had accidentally miss-footed, lost balance at the top of the stairs, and fell from an upper to a
lower floor. But strong doubts arose from statements by the rescue crew members. They found broken debris scattered around the top of the
stairs just after arrival at the victim’s home. When they questioned as to what happened, the witness confessed to have had a quarrel with
the victim at the upper floor near the entrance to the stairs. The witness implied that witness slightly pushed the aged victim just before
the occurrence of fall-incident in witness’s first comments. Judging from the suspicious circumstantial appearances, the rescue crew members
speculated that some sort of skirmish had occurred and about the possibilities of violent action such as shoving the victim near the upper
stairs might have occurred. They reported this information to the regional police office. Several policemen soon came and questioned the
witness on-site. They suspected the witness’s explanation because of inconsistent statements and indications that the aged victim was shoved
at the top of stairs. After retaining attorneys, the suspect stated that the victim fell down from the top of the stairs accidentally and
completely denied the initial statements that the witness gave external forces to the aged victim, and exercised one’s own constitutional
right to remain silent during the public prosecutors’ interrogations. The public prosecutors were undermined as to the true cause of the
fatal fall. Based on a detailed search warrant of the actual stairs, an inspection was conducted by public inspectors, police officers and
the author as shown in Fig. 1Fig. 1.Survey of the actual stairs. (a) View from the upper stairs (b) Incline of the stairs.. The wooden
stairs were 177 cm long and 264 cm high. The stairs with width of 90 cm consisted of 12 steps with a tread of 16.6 cm and a rise of 22.0 cm
except for the top step, which had a tread of 23.0 cm and a rise of 25.0 cm with non-slip vinyl edge of the step. The incline of stairs was
53 degrees except for the top part of the stairs which was 47 degrees. A handrail was installed at one side wall of stairs with the height
of around 70 cm from the step edge. The heights from the landing of the 1st floor to the overhang above stairs was 207 cm. Survey of the
actual stairs. (a) View from the upper stairs (b) Incline of the stairs. The victim died two days after the fall. According to the results
of the autopsy, the occipital area of the head and the top of the left shoulder bones were severely fractured, and the author illustrated
outline drawings from the detailed results of autopsy as shown in Fig. 2Fig. 2.External injuries. ① Severe impact blow marks on the
occipital area of the head with skull fractures, ② Severe impact blow marks with fracture of left upper shoulder, ③ Fracture to the left
little finger, ④ Fractures of right frontal rim bones, ⑤ Fractures of right back rim bones, ⑥ Bruise marks on lumber area.. A clear ellipse-
shaped impact blow mark could be seen on the occipital area of the head, and bruises at the right backward side of lumber areas were
observed. It was apparent that the victim fell backward from stairs and the occipital area of the head was strongly impacted on a solid flat
surface. The major fatal causes of death were by the fracture of the skull and intracranial injuries. Several rib bones could have broken
while giving manual resuscitation. But it was inconceivable that ellipse-shaped reddish congestions in the upper front part of the left
breast would be observed, if the victim fell backwards from the stairs. External injuries. ① Severe impact blow marks on the occipital area
of the head with skull fractures, ② Severe impact blow marks with fracture of left upper shoulder, ③ Fracture to the left little finger, ④
Fractures of right frontal rim bones, ⑤ Fractures of right back rim bones, ⑥ Bruise marks on lumber area. According to the author’s previous
investigations of the actual backward fall experiments from stairs9) and by using a dummy on the level surface10), it was observed that the
first impact to the back of the head caused the most crucial injury within a second, as it kept rolling down to the lower floor. In these
experiments, the focus was placed on the head impact blows just after the backward fall. These actual falling patterns were examined to
determine the possible falling patterns to cause such fatal head injuries. Various possible falling patterns were analyzed in case of a
natural fall and intentional falls. Each falling pattern was recorded by a high speed camera at the rate of 240fps (Type: Casio EX-FH25).
Each of the following three major experiments were conducted once. 1. Natural fall assuming an unintentional fall - A backward facing dummy
was supported in an upright posture at the end of top of stairs, and was leaned backward at a very slow speed until it fell naturally by
itself without external forces. 2. Intentional fall assuming a fall from shoving at a standing-still posture - A backward facing standing
dummy was intensively shoved by an adult at the end of top of stairs. 3. Intentional fall assuming a fall from shoving during a stepping-
back posture - A backward standing dummy on a thin wheeled platform was moved at the speed of 1.6 km/h, and was intensively shoved by an
adult at the end of top of stairs. To extrapolate the possible falling patterns of the victim from stairs, a dummy, and model of a head and
mock-up stairs with the similar configuration of the actual stairs were prepared. The dummy’s weight was 64 kg, and the height was 150 cm,
approximately the same weight and dimensional configurations of the victim as shown in Fig. 3Fig. 3.Dummy.. The major structure of the dummy
was steel covered with urethane. Consequently, each arthro of a dummy was immobilized except for the shoulder joints. The center of gravity
of each limb and the whole body weight were adjusted by the insertion of lead or iron inside the dummy. A model clay head with the similar
dimensional configurations as the victims was made as shown in Fig. 4Fig. 4.Model clay head.. This model clay head was used to search for
the impact point determined from actual steep dimensional configurations of tread and rise prior to conducting the experiments. Mock-up
stairs were made of wooden materials supported by steel scaffoldings as shown in Fig. 5Fig. 5.Mock-up of the stairs. (a) View from the
anterior side of stairs, (b) View from the top of stairs. Dummy. Model clay head. Mock-up of the stairs. (a) View from the anterior side of
stairs, (b) View from the top of stairs A model clay head with the similar dimensions to the victim’s head was utilized to check the damage
points of injuries on the step. Assuming that the first blow impact to the back of the head occurred on the tread surface or at the step
edge, traced marks of external injuries on the back of the head were observed such as planar injuries at the parietal area of the head as
shown in Fig. 6aFig. 6.Predicted injuries to the head on the tread and the step edge. (a) Planar injuries at the parietal area of the back
of head, (b) Linear injuries in the occipital area of the head or linear injuries in the occipital area of the head as shown in Fig. 6b. A
dummy, whose head was covered with paper coated with pressure sensitive red-dye, was shoved over the step. Red scars were observed at the
parietal area of the head as shown in Fig. 7Fig. 7.Damage observed on the parietal area of the dummy in the case of impact on the tread..
Actual fatal impact injuries of the victim formed an ellipse-shaped blow mark in the occipital area of the head. Predicted injuries to the
head on the tread and the step edge. (a) Planar injuries at the parietal area of the back of head, (b) Linear injuries in the occipital area
of the head Damage observed on the parietal area of the dummy in the case of impact on the tread. The dummy’s head impacted on the fourth
step from the lower landing in case of natural fall without any external forces as shown in Fig. 8aFig. 8.The first impact points to the
head on the steps. (a) Natural fall, (b) Shoving a standing dummy, (c) Shoving a moving dummy.. The dummy’s head impacted on the third step
from the lower landing, in case of external force toward standing still posture as shown in Fig. 8b. The dummy’s head impacted on the second
step from the lower landing, in case of shoving a moving dummy at the constant speed of 1.6 km/h as shown in Fig. 8c. According to every
result of experimental falls using a dummy, the dummy hit its head on the step in every experiment. The aged victim fell backwards and was
clear that the occipital area of the head intensively impacted on the flat surface, such as the lower landing, judging from evidence of the
autopsy, which showed the ellipse-shaped injuries on the occipital area of the head. Analyzing these results of experiments even in the
intentional case of shoving it with moving backwards, the back of the head of the dummy did not impact on the lower landing, but on the
tread surface. The first impact points to the head on the steps. (a) Natural fall, (b) Shoving a standing dummy, (c) Shoving a moving dummy.
From the experiments and autopsy, it was apparent that the fatal victim fell backwards and struck the occipital area of the victim’s head
not on the step, but on a flat surface such as the lower flat landing, and that the victim was shoved from the top of stairs by intensive
external force in the case of the fatal fall initiated around the top of the stairs. Judging from ellipse-shaped reddish congestions in the
upper front part of the left breast were observed by the results of the autopsy, another criminal scenario can be considered to give
intensive external forces to the victim, while beginning to descend a few steps below from the top of stairs. These speculations pointed out
the fact that the upper left breast of victim was kicked strongly as shown in Fig. 9Fig. 9.Possible falling patterns from intentional
kicks.. It seems to be difficult to kick strongly on the upper breast on the first and second step as shown in Fig. 9a. The suspect could
kick the victim’s upper breast strongly on the left breast by a right foot, presumably when the victim was standing on the second or third
step from the top of stairs as shown in Fig. 9b or 9c. The victim would likely fall and impact directly near the lower landing, and hit the
occipital area of victim’s head severely as shown in Fig. 10Fig. 10.Possible head impact on the lower landing.. Possible falling patterns
from intentional kicks. Possible head impact on the lower landing. Form the experimental results, it is very unnatural that the occipital
area of the head of the fatal victim was strongly impacted on the flat surface like a lower landing without an external stronger force. The
ellipse-shaped reddish contusions on the upper front part of the left breast were considered to be caused not by drop impacts, but by an
intentionally strong kick. The only witness stated that the victim fell down from the top of the stairs without any external forces.
According to the experimental analyses of actual falls of a dummy from stairs and observations of fatal head injuries, it is very suspicious
that the victim had accidentally missteps, lost balance at the top of the stairs, and fell from an upper to a lower floor. These
experimental methods and analyses could be applied to elucidate possible falling patterns of fatal falls from stairs where the fatal causes
are controversial. The forensic and experimental investigation, which was reported to the district court, were experimentally conducted
based on an official request to the author by the Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office. I would like to acknowledge the Public Prosecutor’s
Office agreement in presenting the experimental results and scientific analyses of the fatal fall from residential stairs on the condition
that the victim can not be identified from the data in this paper.
