Cerebral cavernous malformations are relatively rare vascular disorders that may affect any part of the central nervous system. This
presentation has been associated with heterozygous mutations in CCM1/KRIT1, CCM2/malcavernin and CCM3/PDCD10. We aimed to investigate the
genetic defect underlying multiple cerebral and vertebral cavernous malformations in a multigenerational Italian family. The proband is a
49-year-old man who underwent cerebral MRI in his thirties for persistent haeadache and tingling in his left arm and leg and was diagnosed
with multiple supratentorial cavernous angiomas. A right frontal angioma with radiological evidence of a recent bleeding was surgically
removed when he was 39 years old and he was thereafter asymptomatic. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple cerebral cavernous
malformations in seven members of his familily. Four subjects were asymptomatic. Other family mambers displayed heterogeneous clinical
features including seizures and recurrent brain haemorrhages. Sequence analysis in the proband disclosed a novel heterozygous nucleotide
substitution (c.263-10A > G) in intron 5 of CCM1. This variant is predicted to create an abnormal acceptor splice site and segregated in
affected relatives available for molecular screening. The analysis of CCM1 transcript in proband’s lymphocytes confirmed the partial
retention of intron 3 resulting in a premature termination codon. Our findings demonstrate that c.263-10A > G mutation is associated with
cerebral cavernous malformations. A better knowledge of the disease-associated phenotype may lead to an early diagnosis and to an
appropriate clinical surveillance in affected patients. Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) are vascular defects consisting of clusters
of enlarged, thin-walled and leaky capillaries without intervening nervous tissue. Estimated prevalence is 0.1–0.5% in general population .
The clinical phenotype is highly variable. CCMs mainly occur in the central nervous system (CNS) where they appear as focal lesions with a
peripheral T2 hypointensity due to hemosiderin deposition which can be detected with higher sensitivity on T2* GRE sequences. The
involvement of other districts has been so far poorly investigated. Indeed, CCMs can be clinically silent (60%) or lead to recurrent
headache, focal neurological deficits, cerebral haemorrhage (41%) and seizures (45%) . Most of CCM cases are sporadic but familial forms,
showing autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, have been described . Germline mutations in three genes account for 90% of familial
cases: CCM1 (also known as KRIT1), CCM2 and PDCD10 (CCM3) . The analysis of affected tissues has often disclosed a second somatic mutation,
which is likely required to prime the pathogenetic cascade, according a two-hit mechanism . CCM1 mutations were disclosed in more than 40%
of familial cases but incomplete penetrance is not uncommon, being reported in 60–80% of mutated families. CCM1 encodes for the krev
interaction trapped 1 (KRIT1) protein, which is involved in maintaining the integrity of endothelial junctions, and may play a role in
microtubule targeting . Here we describe clinical, neuroradiological and molecular features of a novel Italian family with multiple cerebral
and vertebral cavernous malformations harbouring a novel CCM1 splicing mutation. We studied a four generations Italian pedigree in which
several subjects showed multiple cerebral cavernous malformations (Figure 1). Pedigree of the family. Black symbols indicate family members
showing neuroradiological alterations at cerebral MRI or reported as affected by available anamnestic data. The proband (III-1) is a
49-year-old man. At 39 years of age he complained headache and pins and needles in his left arm and leg. Cerebral MRI performed at that time
revealed multiple cerebral supratentorial angiomas with radiological evidence of recent bleeding in the context of a right frontal lesion,
which was surgically removed in 2004. Cerebral MRI findings were stable over time. Spinal MRI was negative for spinal lesions but revealed
multiple vertebral hemangiomas whose size and number were unexpected for his age (Figure 2D-F). The patient still complains headache, but he
is otherwise asymptomatic (last neurological examination performed in September 2013). MRI findings. Cerebral MRI in subject II-2 (A-C),
III-2 (G-I) and IV-4 and spinal MRI in subject III-1 (D-F). (A-C): axial T2-ffe showing left ponto-mesencephalic angioma (A) and multiple
supratentorial cavernous angiomas (left temporal and posterior frontal). (D-F): sagittal T1W-TSE (D-E) and sagittal T1W-TSE (F) showing
multiple vertebral hemangiomas D12, L2-L5. (G-I): axial T2-ffe showing right pontine (G) and parietal (H) angiomas. Axial SWI (I) with
abnormal right parietal and bilateral frontal venous malformations. (J-L) axial T2-ffe (J-K): multiple bilateral cerebral angiomas with
involvement of the splenium of the corpus callosum, periventricular parietal white matter, head of the caudate nucleus, bilaterally, left
cortical and subcortical white matter. Patient’s 46-year-old brother (III-2) experienced sudden onset of right facial numbness at 40 years
of age. Cerebral MRI displayed a recent bleeding within a cavernous angioma close to the right cerebellar peduncle and a further lesion in
the pons (GRE sequences not performed). Symptoms resolved and he was asymptomatic until August 2013 when he complained headache followed by
right facial numbness, vertigo, nausea and gait instability. Cerebral CT revealed acute bleeding in the context of the previously
symptomatic lesion. Cerebral MRI showed additional widespread lesions: bilateral parietal, bilateral frontal, left temporal and left
occipital lobes (Figure 2G-I). Neurological examination showed right facial weakness, absent corneal reflex and mild gait instability.
Patient’s mother (II-2) is a 74-year-old woman who was incidentally diagnosed in her sixties with multiple infra- and supratentorial CCMs on
cerebral MRI after a transient global amnesia. Cavernous malformations were observed at ponto-mesencephalic junction, left cerebellum,
bilateral temporal, right parietal and left frontal cortices (Figure 2A-C). Spinal MRI was normal, but multiple hepatic hemangiomas were
found. Last neurological examination (performed in May 2013) was unremarkable. Her father (I-1) died of cerebral haemorrhage when he was in
his sixties. Both her brother (II-1) and sister (II-2), aged 78 and 68 respectively, were found to have multiple CCMs, the former
experiencing seizures. MRI scan in the proband’s 15-year-old nephew (IV-4) also disclosed multiple infra- and supratentorial cavernous
malformations (Figure 2J-L). Conversely, spinal MRI was negative. Investigations were carried out according to the guidelines of the Ethical
Committee of Istituto Di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Foundation Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico in Milan and in
agreement with Italian and European Union laws. After obtaining written informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood
lymphocytes of proband (III-1) and two affected relatives (II-2 and III-2). CCM1/KRIT1 (NM_194454.1), CCM2 (NM_031443.3) and PDCD10/CCM3
(NM_007217.3) coding exons and their intronic boundaries were PCR-amplified using primers and conditions available on request. PCR products
underwent direct sequencing using the BigDye Terminator 3.1 protocol on a 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). A Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphism assay (PCR-RFLP) was established to detect c.263-10A > G, using restriction endonuclease DraI, which cuts wild-type DNA
molecules. Total RNA was obtained from peripheral blood of the probands (Nucleospin RNA Blood Midi Kit, Macherey Nagel) and retrotranscribed
(HiFi Transcriptor cDNA synthesis kit, Roche). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was amplified by PCR using primers encompassing exons 5 and 7. RT-
PCR amplicons were subcloned into TOPO-TA vector (Invitrogen) and 1 μl of the ligation product was transformed into the XL-10 Gold E. Coli
Competent Cells (Stratagene). After overnight growth at 37°C on ampicillin plates, twenty colonies were picked and directly sequenced as
described above. Sequence analysis of CCM2 and CCM3 did not disclose pathogenetic variants. Conversely, a novel nucleotide substitution
(c.263-10A > G) was found within intron 5 of CCM1/KRIT1 (Figure 3A). The variant was not observed in 340 ethnic-matched control chromosomes
as well as in the following public available databases: CCM mutation database
(http://www.angiomaalliance.org/pages.aspx?content=345&id=289), NCBI SNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/) and the National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project Exome Variant Server (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/). PCR-RFLP analysis confirmed
the presence of the mutation in proband’s mother and an affected brother, supporting the segregation of the defect with the phenotype
(Figure 3B). DNA samples from other members of the family were not available for molecular analysis. Molecular studies. (A) Sequence
electropherogram of proband’s (III-1) genomic DNA, showing the c.263-10A > G heterozygous substitution. (B) PCR-RFLP analysis of the
c.263-10A > G mutation in affected family members available. DraI endonuclease cuts wild type DNA molecules, leaving mutated alleles uncut.
(C) Sequence electropherograms of RT-PCR amplicons encompassing exon 5 and 7. Analysis of proband’s cDNA suggest the coexistence of normal
and altered CCM1 transcripts. (D) Direct sequencing of clones obtained from RT-PCR reactions revealed the partial retention of intron 5
within CCM1 transcript as a consequence of the abnormal acceptor splice site created by c.263-10A > G mutation at genomic level. The effects
of the novel variant were evaluated using Spliceview (http://bioinfo4.itb.cnr.it/~webgene/wwwspliceview_ex.html), Spliceport
(http://spliceport.cbcb.umd.edu), ASSP (http://wangcomputing.com/assp/index.html) and Human Splicing Finder (http://www.umd.be/HSF/). The
results showed that c.263-10A > G may create a novel acceptor site for exon 6, likely altering the physiological splicing of CCM1/KRIT1
transcript (data not shown). To address this point, we investigated the cDNA retrotranscribed from blood-extracted RNA of the proband and
his mother. Sequence analysis detected the inclusion of a short sequence (AATGATTAG) within patients’s cDNA (Figure 3C). This finding was
confirmed by sequencing clones obtained from RT-PCR fragments encompassing exons 5 and 7 (Figure 2D). The inclusion of the AATGATTAG
sequence is expected to change CCM1 reading frame, resulting in a premature stop codon (p.88insGlufsX1, NP_919436.1). The identification of
a novel CCM1 mutation in this study expands the number of molecular defects underlining familial CCM. Several elements supports the
pathogenicity of c.263-10A > G variant: i) it segregates with the disease in our pedigree; ii) it is absent in a large number of Italian
control samples; iii) it affects a nucleotide within a highly conserved region in proximity to intron-exon junction and its substitution is
predicted to create an abnormal acceptor splice site; iv) transcript analysis disclosed the inclusion of a short sequence likely altering
KRIT1 reading frame and leading to a premature stop codon. Considering the genetic forms of cerebral cavernous malformations, signs and
symptoms involving CNS are more prominent and heterogeneous . Symptomatic patients may present with recurrent headache, seizure, brain
haemorrhage or focal neurological deficits . Clinical findings in our probands are similar to previous reports about CCM1-mutated patients .
Few reports have described extra-neural presentations in CCM1-mutated subjects, mainly affecting skin and eye . Spinal MRI was performed in
three members of our family to check for the presence of spinal angiomas, a not unusual finding in familial CCM that may potentially
generate complications. Radiological studies only disclosed vertebral hemangiomas as isolated extra-neural disease manifestation in the
proband. Despite clinically silent, the number and size of these alterations were unexpected considering patient’s age. Further scans
confirmed that they were stable over time. Although vertebral hemangiomas are relatively frequent in the general population , with an
estimated incidence reanging from 10 to 12%, the co-occurrence of vertebral, cerebral and spinal malformations is rare, and it was reported
only in two families. The most common clinical symptoms in patients with evidence of vertebral disease were enuresis, back pain, paresthesia
and radicular pain due to pathological vertebral fracture . This finding was not extended to other members of the family, but hepatic
hemangiomas were observed in proband’s mother, confirming the association of extra neural hemangiomas and cerebral cavernous malformations
due to KRIT1 mutations. A better knowledge of the disease-associated phenotype may lead to an early diagnosis and to an appropriate clinical
surveillance in affected patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the proband, his brother and their mother for publication of
this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Clinical workout: SL, NA, PB. Neuroradiological studies: VC. Molecular Studies: DR.
Drafting of manuscript: SL, DR, SC. Critical revision of the manuscript: NB, GPC. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Gratitude has to be expressed to the patient for participating in this research. We wish to thank especially the ‘Associazione Amici del
Centro Dino Ferrari’ for their support.
