Inheritance of the F variant of alpha-1-antitrypsin is associated with normal circulating protein levels, but it is believed to be
dysfunctional in its ability to inhibit neutrophil elastase and therefore has been implicated as a susceptibility factor for the development
of emphysema. In this study, its functional characteristics were determined following the identification of a unique patient with the PiFF
phenotype, and the implications as a susceptibility factor for emphysema are considered both in homozygotes and heterozygotes. Second order
association rate constants were measured for M, Z, S and F variants of alpha-1-antitrypsin with neutrophil elastase and proteinase 3.
Clinical characteristics of the PiFF homozygote and six PiFZ heterozygote subjects were studied. The F variant had a reduced association
rate constant with neutrophil elastase (5.60 ± 0.83 × 106 M-1 s-1) compared to the normal M variant (1.45 ± 0.02 × 107 M-1 s-1), indicating
an increased time to inhibition that was comparable to that of the Z variant (7.34 ± 0.03 × 106 M-1 s-1). The association rate constant for
the F variant and proteinase 3 (1.06 ± 0.22 × 106 M-1 s-1) was reduced compared to that with neutrophil elastase, but was similar to that of
other alpha-1-antitrypsin variants. Of the six PiFZ heterozygotes, five had airflow obstruction and radiological evidence of emphysema. The
PiFF homozygote had airflow obstruction but no emphysema. None of the patients had clinical evidence of liver disease. The F variant may
increase susceptibility to elastase-induced lung damage but not emphysema, whereas co-inheritance with the Z deficiency allele may
predispose to emphysema despite reasonable plasma concentrations of alpha-1-antitrypsin. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) is a
recognised genetic condition that predisposes to the development of early onset basal panacinar emphysema . The pathophysiology is thought
to reflect a critically low or absent level of alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) which reduces the ability of the lung to protect itself from
neutrophil serine proteinases (NSPs) such as neutrophil elastase (NE) and proteinase 3 (PR3) . The ability of A1AT to protect tissues is
both dependent on its concentration and also the speed with which it traps and inactivates these enzymes, its association rate constant
(Kass). The third NSP inhibited by A1AT, cathepsin G, does not produce emphysema-like lesions in animal models, and has not been included in
this study. The F variant of A1AT was first described in 1965 and results from a single amino acid substitution of arginine at residue 223
by cysteine . It has been reported to have a low Kass for NE , and has thus been implicated as a susceptibility factor for emphysema in its
own right despite normal serum and hence lung levels. The F variant is relatively uncommon (reported to have an allelic frequency of
approximately 0.002 in the Caucasian population ) making clinical and epidemiological studies impractical. Even cases of heterozygotes with
the Z or other deficiency variants which have both low A1AT levels and reduced Kass for NE are infrequent , although such patients are often
considered for augmentation therapy. We report a unique case of a patient who is homozygous for the F variant that permitted us to measure
the Kass for NE and PR3 with confidence and also review the clinical features both of this patient and of those heterozygous with the Z
variant. These data provide insight into whether the F variant represents a risk factor for the development of emphysema, either alone or in
combination with the Z variant. Subjects with A1ATD including PiZZ and PiSS homozygotes and six PiFZ heterozygotes were identified from the
U.K. A1ATD national registry (based at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, U.K.) with a confirmed diagnosis by phenotyping and genotyping
(Heredilab, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA). One PiFF homozygote was identified from the Kentucky Lung Clinic (Hazard, Kentucky, USA) with a
confirmed diagnosis by phenotyping (isoelectric focusing, University of Florida laboratories, Florida, USA). All subjects had demographic
data recorded including; medical history, clinical examination, smoking history, quality of life measures (St George’s Respiratory
Questionnaire, SGRQ), pulmonary function tests (PFTs), computed tomography (CT) of the thorax, and routine clinical biochemical and
haematological parameters. Healthy controls were partners of patients with A1ATD and had a normal PiMM A1AT phenotype. All subjects provided
written informed consent for this study, and ethical approval was obtained for this project (South Birmingham Research Ethics Committee LREC
3359). Venous blood was collected from all subjects, and serum was obtained using Vacuette® serum tubes (Greiner bio-one, UK) following clot
formation. The tubes were centrifuged at 1800 × g for ten minutes at room temperature, and serum was harvested and stored in multiple
aliquots at -70°C until analysed, to minimise freeze-thaw cycles. Pure PR3 (Merck, Feltham, UK) and pure NE (Athens Research and Technology,
Athens, Georgia, USA) were active site titrated against pure M variant A1AT (Athens Research and Technology, USA), which had itself been
previously titrated against porcine pancreatic elastase (PPE; Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK). The activity of PPE was determined using
Lineweaver–Burk double-reciprocal plot analysis with N-succinyl-Ala-Ala-Ala-p-nitroanilide (SlaaapN; Sigma-Aldrich, UK) as the substrate and
published kinetic constants . In order to measure Kass for serum A1AT with NE or PR3, it was first necessary to inactivate the other major
serum inhibitor of NSPs, alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M). This was achieved by treating the serum samples with 0.1 M methylamine (Fisher
Scientific, UK) for 10 minutes at 37°C . The inactivation of A2M was confirmed indirectly by measuring NE and PR3 inhibition by serum
samples with and without treatment with methylamine. The substrate used for these experiments was N-Methoxysuccinyl-Ala-Ala-Pro-Val
p-nitroanilide (MSaapvN; Sigma-Aldrich, UK) at 0.6 mg/ml in 0.1 M Hepes, pH 7.5, 9.5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Pure NE of known activity
was diluted to an active concentration of 100nM with buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Igepal CA-630 (v/v)). Methylamine-
treated serum samples or pure M or Z variant A1AT were also diluted to an A1AT concentration of 100nM (Z variant A1AT purified from human
plasma was a kind gift from the research group of Prof. D. Lomas, University of Cambridge, UK), and these samples were titrated against NE
to determine the percentage of active A1AT. Following this initial step, the time-dependent measurements were performed by incubating
equimolar amounts of NE and active A1AT (1nM each) in a 1 ml polystyrene cuvette with a 1 cm pathlength at 23°C. Residual NE activity at 1–5
minutes was measured by the addition of 200 μL of MSaapvN and measurement of the change in absorbance (410 nm) over 10 minutes using a
spectrophotometer (Jasco V550). At each time point, the percentage of NE inhibition was determined. The Kass was calculated by plotting the
inverse of NE activity at each time point versus time. From the linear portion of the slope, the half time (t½) of the reaction was
calculated using the formula: t 1 2 = y intercept / slope Kass was calculated using the equation ; K ass = Concentration of NE × t 1 2 ‒ 1
Pure PR3 of known activity was diluted to an active concentration of 400 nM. Methylamine-treated serum samples or purified M or Z variant
A1AT were also diluted to an A1AT concentration of 400 nM and were titrated against PR3 to determine the percentage of active A1AT.
Following this initial step, the time-dependent measurements were performed by incubating equimolar amounts of PR3 and active A1AT (1nM
each) in a black opaque polypropylene low binding plate (Sigma, UK) at 23°C with a well volume of 150 μL. Residual PR3 activity at 1–5
minutes was measured by adding 3 μL of the PR3 specific Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) substrate Abz-VAD-norV-ADRQ-EDDnp (Alta
Biosciences, UK) at a concentration of 1 mM . The change in fluorescence (excitation 320 nm, emission 420 nm) was measured every 2 minutes
for 20 minutes using a Biotek Synergy 2 Multi-Mode Microplate Reader. At each time point, the percentage of PR3 inhibition was determined.
The Kass was calculated using the same method as that for NE. The second order association rate constant (Kass) values for different
variants of A1AT with NE or PR3 are shown in Table 1. The F variant of A1AT has a reduced Kass value with NE compared to the normal M
variant, suggesting that the speed with which it is able to inactivate NE is reduced, and comparable to that observed with the Z variant.
The Kass values for A1AT variants and PR3 are reduced compared to those with NE, indicating that NE would be preferentially inhibited in
circumstances where the local concentration of A1AT is insufficient to inhibit both NSPs. The results obtained using purified M or Z variant
A1AT were comparable to those obtained using methylamine-treated sera (1.47 × 107 M-1 s-1 for NE and 9.83 × 105 M-1 s-1 for PR3 with pure M
variant A1AT, and 7.39 × 106 M-1 s-1 for NE and 1.03 × 106 M-1 s-1 for PR3 with pure Z variant A1AT). K ass values for A1AT variants and NE
or PR3 The clinical characteristics of the six PiFZ heterozygote subjects identified from the U.K. A1ATD national registry are summarised in
Table 2. All subjects had A1AT concentrations above the putative “protective threshold” of 11 μM and were ex-smokers. Five of the subjects
had airflow obstruction on spirometry, as defined by a post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ratio <0.7, and these subjects also had radiological
evidence of emphysema on high resolution CT (HRCT) scanning, which was panacinar with a lower zone predominance (consistent with the
classical distribution and type in PiZZ homozygotes) in two and upper zone predominant in two. The remaining patient had widespread
emphysema with no dominant distribution. None of the subjects had biochemical evidence of liver disease, with liver enzymes within the
normal range for all subjects. Clinical characteristics of six PiFZ heterozygotes identified in the UK A 75 year old caucasian gentleman
initially presented to the respiratory clinic in 2004 with a history of increasing exertional dyspnoea over several years and occasional
cough productive of green sputum. He was diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by spirometry in 2004, but subsequently
attended for follow-up only sporadically. He reported having on average 3 pulmonary exacerbations per year. His serial spirometry values are
shown in Table 3, with the most recent values showing an obstructive defect, with a pre-bronchodilator FEV1 of 0.75 L (23% predicted), FVC
1.70 L (41% predicted) and FEV1/FVC 44%. His current gas transfer is however within normal limits with DLCO 16.6 mL/mmHg/min (81% predicted)
and KCO 2.93 mL/mmHg/min/L (87% predicted). His arterial blood gases (on room air) show pO2 10.1kPa, pCO2 5.2kPa and pH 7.46. Serial
spirometry from a PiFF homozygote He has a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, coronary artery disease, pacemaker for
second degree heart block and bradycardia, restless legs syndrome and left renal calculus. He has no history of liver disease. His
medication consists of salbutamol PRN, fluticasone/salmeterol 500mcg/50mcg bd, montelukast 10 mg od, roflumilast 500 μg od,
carbidopa/levodopa 10/100 mg tds, omeprazole 20 mg od, metoprolol 50 mg bd, hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg od, rosuvastatin 5 mg od, aspirin
81 mg od, and home oxygen therapy for 18–20 hours per day for 4 years. He is an ex-smoker having stopped 15 years previously, with a 100
pack year smoking history. There is no history of excessive alcohol intake or illicit drug use. He is retired, but previous occupations
include working in school maintenance, as a bus driver, strip coal mining for 4–5 years, and as a carpenter for 20 years. His father had
asthma and “bronchitis” and was a lifelong non-smoker. His mother was also a non-smoker and had no respiratory problems. He has no siblings
and has 3 children who are healthy and 2 grandchildren, one of whom has asthma but a normal PiM phenotype. On physical examination, his body
mass index (BMI) was 25.8 kg/m2. He had an oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, and clear lungs on auscultation with good bilateral air
entry. Cardiovascular examination was normal and there was no peripheral oedema, cyanosis or finger clubbing. His A1AT concentration was
37.7 μM by nephelometry and phenotype PiFF by isoelectric focusing. Routine haematological parameters and hepatic and renal function tests
were within normal limits. His SGRQ total score was 73.A HRCT scan of the thorax performed in 2013 showed fibrosis and pleural thickening at
the apices and bronchial wall thickening around the hilum, but no radiological evidence of emphysema or bronchiectasis (as shown in
Figure 1). An echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55-60%, and normal right ventricular function with no evidence
of pulmonary hypertension. HRCT thorax of the PiFF homozygote. There is no radiological evidence of emphysema or bronchiectasis. We have
used the unique identification of a patient with the PiFF phenotype of A1ATD to ascertain the function of F variant A1AT, and consider
whether its inheritance represents a susceptibility factor for developing emphysema, in either the homozygous or heterozygous state. The F
variant of A1AT has generally been thought not to be clinically important because of its near normal circulating levels . However, previous
reports have suggested that the F variant has abnormal function, and may therefore predispose to the development of lung or liver disease
(typical of the Z variant) when co-inherited with another deficiency gene as in the PiFZ heterozygote. In 1974, Brand et al. reported a case
of liver cirrhosis in a PiFZ heterozygote, although the subject had no evidence of emphysema. Subsequently in 1981, Cockcroft et al.
reported 3 PiFZ siblings who all had moderate to severe COPD, two of whom had radiological evidence of emphysema. Their six living siblings
(3 PiFM, 2 PiMM and 1 PiMZ) had milder abnormalities in pulmonary function despite similar smoking histories and exposure to grain dust
suggesting that the FZ combination was a susceptibility factor. In 1982, Billingsley and Cox reported that PiFM serum showed reduced
specific activity with elastase (PPE) compared to the normal PiMM variant. Subsequently, Beckman et al. in 1984 reported that in 13
individuals heterozygous for the F variant of A1AT, respiratory symptoms were present in seven out of twelve PiFM heterozygotes, of whom
five had abnormal PFTs, and one PiFZ heterozygote who had bronchitic symptoms and mild airflow obstruction on spirometry. They hypothesized
that an increased risk for pulmonary disease may be due to dysfunction of the F protein, independent of the A1AT concentration. A case
report by Kelly et al. described a 56 year old PiFZ lady with a 10 pack year smoking history and minimal alcohol intake who presented with
advanced emphysema, cor pulmonale and abnormalities on liver biopsy consistent with A1ATD. More recently, a 64 year old male with the
PiFnull phenotype has been reported . This patient had a 10 pack year smoking history and moderate COPD, with no biochemical evidence of
liver disease. This patient was commenced on A1AT augmentation therapy with no further decline in lung function or symptoms reported. The
cases described in the present study demonstrate that five of the six unrelated PiFZ heterozygotes identified from the U.K. A1ATD national
registry had COPD with radiological evidence of emphysema, although none had biochemical evidence of liver disease. The A1AT levels were
within the “normal” range and consistent with those of PiMZ heterozygotes although only two had the classical basal distribution of
emphysema typical of PiZZ homozygotes. Whether this level of A1AT predisposes to the development of COPD however, remains uncertain. The
patients were referred to the U.K. registry because of the identification of the PiFZ phenotype and may therefore reflect an acquisition
bias. The PiMZ heterozygous state has long been studied as a potential risk factor and a meta-analysis does suggest a slight increase in
susceptibility , with the heterozygous state being associated with more hospitalisations and a more severe form of COPD . An additional risk
might be conferred by the proposed reduction in Kass for NE by the F protein. The PiFF homozygote reported here enabled us to confirm the
reduction in Kass with confidence, but despite this and a significant smoking history, the patient did not have radiological evidence of
emphysema or impaired transfer factor, although he did have significant physiological impairment on spirometry. His A1AT concentration was
within the normal range of PiMM homozygotes . The absence of emphysema despite a significant smoking history suggests that homozygosity for
the F variant is not a significant risk factor for the development of emphysema. It remains possible, however, that co-inheritance of the F
variant of A1AT with another deficiency allele does increase the risk of developing emphysema, although the distribution in the PiFZ
patients reported here is more consistent with usual COPD and PiSZ heterozygotes than PiZZ homozygotes, suggesting a different mechanism. In
PiMZ heterozygotes, the increased susceptibility to developing COPD is accentuated in ever-smokers . It could therefore be postulated that
cigarette smoking in PiFZ heterozygotes could lead to a more severe form of COPD than in PiMZ heterozygotes due to the reduced Kass for NE
by the F protein. Whether A1AT augmentation therapy should be considered for PiFZ heterozygotes remains unknown since the A1AT concentration
is low and both the F and Z variants have reduced Kass for NE. Our cases have not demonstrated any association between the F variant of A1AT
and liver disease, although case reports have been described elsewhere in PiFZ heterozygotes . The loop sheet polymers formed by the Z
protein are retained within the rough endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes forming periodic acid Schiff (PAS) positive hepatic inclusions ,
and this accumulation can lead to liver disease including hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in PiZZ homozygotes. Co-
inheritance of the Z variant as a heterozygote will still form polymers and even heteropolymers , and although the susceptibility of the F
variant to polymerise has not been reported in the literature to date, it remains a possible mechanism whereby some PiFZ heterozygotes may
be at increased risk of developing liver disease. In future studies, it would be ideal to use purified F variant A1AT to measure Kass values
with the NSPs. However, the results presented here using purified M or Z variant A1AT were comparable to those obtained using methylamine-
treated sera, supporting the use of this method for the F variant of A1AT. In addition, our results are consistent with those reported
elsewhere by Cook et al. , who used partially purified F variant A1AT. A potential mechanism for the impaired function of the F variant may
relate to the position of the mutation (arginine replaced by cysteine at position 223). Examination of the structure of A1AT shows that the
mutation is in the C-sheet underlying the reactive centre loop (RCL). With the normal M variant, an arginine at position 223 forms an
electrostatic interaction with the side chain of glutamate 354 in the RCL . However, with the F variant, the cysteine at position 223 cannot
make this electrostatic interaction and the consequence is likely to be a disruption of the RCL architecture which alters the conformation
of the P1-P1’ region (the bond cleaved by target NSPs) and may explain the reduced Kass with NE observed here. The data presented here also
confirms that F A1AT has a similar Kass for PR3 to that of the normal M variant, suggesting a less significant effect of mutations in A1AT
on its ability to inhibit PR3. Therefore, inhibition of PR3 activity is likely to be more dependent on local A1AT concentrations than Kass.
Previous studies have suggested that PR3 activity is inhibited only when NE has been totally inhibited , and therefore in situations where
there is insufficient A1AT to inhibit both NSPs, NE will be preferentially inhibited. PR3 can replicate the pathological features of COPD
associated classically with NE and should be considered when evaluating the proteinase/anti-proteinase imbalance observed in A1ATD , as its
activity is likely to persist longer in the lung in the presence of neutrophilic inflammation. Whether the reduced A1AT concentration in
PiFZ heterozygotes and the reduced Kass for NE alters this relationship remains to be determined. We have demonstrated that the F variant of
A1AT has a reduced functional ability to inhibit NE (but not PR3) compared to the normal M variant. This may be of clinical significance
when the F variant is co-inherited with the Z variant or another deficiency variant, although its significance is less certain in the
homozygous state when concentrations of A1AT are normal. A1AT: Alpha-1-antitrypsin; A1ATD: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency; A2M:
Alpha-2-Macroglobulin; BMI: Body mass index; COPD: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CT: Computed tomography; DLCO: Carbon monoxide
diffusing capacity; DMSO: Dimethyl sulfoxide; FEV1: Forced expiratory volume in one second; FRET: Förster resonance energy transfer; FVC:
Forced vital capacity; HRCT: High resolution computed tomography; Kass: Second order association rate constant; KCO: Carbon monoxide
transfer coefficient; MSaapvN: N-Methoxysuccinyl-Ala-Ala-Pro-Val p-nitroanilide; NE: Neutrophil elastase; NSP: Neutrophil serine proteinase;
PFTs: Pulmonary function tests; PPE: Porcine pancreatic elastase; PR3: Proteinase 3; RCL: Reactive centre loop; SEM: Standard error of the
mean; SGRQ: St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire; SlaaapN: N-succinyl-Ala-Ala-Ala-p-nitroanilide. The A1ATD U.K. national registry was
funded by an unrestricted educational grant from Grifols Therapeutics. RS has sat on advisory boards for CSL, Kamada and Grifols; has
received lecture fees from CSL and Grifols, and has received unrestricted research grants from CSL and Grifols. FK has sat on advisory
boards for Grifols, Baxter and CSL, and received speaker's fees from Grifols and Baxter. NS performed the laboratory experiments, gathered
the data on the PiFZ heterozygotes and wrote the article. FK gathered all data from the PiFF homozygote and collected the necessary samples
for the laboratory experiments. RS runs the U.K. A1ATD national registry, designed the concept of the study and revised the article. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2466/14/132/prepub The authors wish to thank Imran Haq from the University of Cambridge, UK, for
performing the purification of Z variant A1AT from plasma for use in the Kass experiments. The authors also wish to thank Prof. Tim Dafforn
from the University of Birmingham, UK, for assistance with performing the Kass experiments. RS wishes to acknowledge funding from the
Medical Research Council.
