Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 67 Final Diagnosis: Pulmonary carcinoid tumor Symptoms: Abnormal shadow on
chest X-ray Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Pulmonology Rare disease Although pulmonary carcinoid tumors are generally
considered to represent a low-grade malignancy, atypical carcinoids are more aggressive than typical carcinoids, metastasizing more commonly
to both regional lymph nodes and distant sites. The treatment of choice for localized disease is surgery. In cases of advanced or metastatic
disease, medical treatments, including chemotherapy, have not been proven to be very successful. Therefore, providing careful follow-up is
extremely important. In general, tumor markers, such as the level of CYFLA21-1, are often useful for monitoring lung cancer. However, there
are currently no sensitive tumor markers for carcinoid tumors. We herein report a rare case of an atypical carcinoid of the lung with the
elevation of the serum ProGRP level. A 67-year-old female was referred to our hospital for an abnormal chest X-ray. CT revealed an 18×13 mm
nodule in the right middle lobe with no significant mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The serum tumor marker, the ProGRP level, was significantly
elevated (161 ng/ml). We performed a right middle lobectomy, because the pathological diagnosis of lung cancer was confirmed according to
the results of a rapid frozen section biopsy of the lesion, although the pathological type could not be precisely determined by the frozen
section alone. The final pathological diagnosis was atypical carcinoid. The level of ProGRP decreased (69 ng/ml) within 1 month after the
surgery. The ProGRP level may be useful for monitoring carcinoid tumors, although no serum tumor markers are highly specific or sensitive
for detecting recurrences and/or distant metastasis of pulmonary carcinoid tumors. In conclusion, ProGRP should be further evaluated as
biomarker in a larger series of patients to determine whether it demonstrates any significant correlation with cancer recurrence. Carcinoid
tumors are neuroendocrine tumors that arise from Kulchitsky cells. Although they may develop in many locations in the body, they are most
often found in the small intestine (26%), respiratory system (25%), and appendix (19%) . Pulmonary carcinoid tumors represent 1–2% of all
lung neoplasms . According to the current WHO classification, these lesions are currently divided into 4 subtypes characterized by
increasing aggressiveness: typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid, large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. Among these
subtypes, the most important differential criterion for typical carcinoids and atypical carcinoids is the mitotic count. The typical
carcinoids have <2 mitoses per mm2 in 10 high-power fields (HPF) without signs of necrosis, while atypical carcinoids are characterized by
the presence of 2–10 mitoses per mm2/10 HPF and/or foci of necrosis. Although carcinoid tumors are generally considered to represent a low-
grade malignancy, atypical carcinoids are more aggressive than typical carcinoids, metastasizing more commonly to both regional lymph nodes
and distant sites. The treatment of choice for localized disease is surgery. In cases of advanced or metastatic disease, medical treatments,
including chemotherapy, have not been proven to be very successful . Therefore, providing careful follow-up is extremely important. In
general, tumor markers, such as the levels of CEA, CYFLA and ProGRP, are often useful for monitoring lung cancer. However, there are
currently no sensitive tumor markers for carcinoid tumors. We herein report a rare case of an atypical carcinoid of the lung with the
elevation of the serum ProGRP level. A 67-year-old female was referred to our hospital for an abnormal shadow on a chest X-ray (Figure 1A).
She had an un-remarkable medical and family history and was a non-smoker. CT revealed an 18×13 mm nodule in the right middle lobe with no
significant mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Figure 1B). One serum tumor marker, the ProGRP level, was significantly elevated (161 ng/ml), while
all other tumor markers were within normal limits. These findings were strongly indicative of malignancy, although the pathologic diagnosis
was not confirmed on transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB). Since there were no signs of any distant metastasis, the clinical stage was
determined to be T1aN0M0, stage A based on the CT image findings. We performed a right middle lobectomy, because a pathological diagnosis of
lung cancer was confirmed according to the results of a rapid frozen section biopsy of the lesion. There were no intraoperative
complications, and the patient had an uneventful recovery. The final results of the pathologic examination showed an atypical carcinoid of
pT1aN2M0, stage A. The level of ProGRP decreased (69 ng/ml) within 1 month after the surgery. The most effective treatment for pulmonary
carcinoid tumors is surgical resection in cases of localized disease, and it is believed that chemotherapy and radiotherapy have no
therapeutic contribution in patients with unresectable carcinoid lung tumors . The long-term survival rates of patients with typical and
atypical tumors are significantly different. For example, the 5-year survival rate for neuroendocrine tumors of the lung ranges from 87% to
97% for typical carcinoids and from 56% to 77% for atypical carcinoids . Therefore, providing follow-up care after surgery is extremely
important, especially in patients with atypical carcinoids. Generally, measurements of serum tumor markers play a crucial role in detecting
the recurrences and/or distant metastasis of malignancy after surgery. However, no serum tumor markers are highly specific or sensitive for
detecting recurrences or distant metastasis of pulmonary carcinoid tumors. In the present case, the serum level of ProGRP was elevated at
161 pg/ml (normal range: <46 pg/ml) before treatment and subsequently decreased to 69 pg/ml at 1 month after the surgery. ProGRP is a
precursor form of gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), a neuropeptide hormone that was originally isolated from porcine gastric tissue . GRP is
widely distributed throughout the gastrointestinal and pulmonary tracts. In general, ProGRP is a well-known biomarker of small cell lung
cancer. However, according to Polak , typical carcinoids in which ProGRP is produced by the carcinoid cells account for 16% of lesions,
while atypical carcinoids with this characteristic account for 63% of such tumors. Therefore, the serum ProGRP level may be elevated in such
cases due to its correlation with the tissue ProGRP level. In addition, although Kamata et al. reported that the serum ProGRP level
increases with the progression of renal dysfunction , in the present case, the patient’s renal function was found to be in the normal range.
The ProGRP level also decreased due to the effects of treatment, and the level did not quickly return to the normal ranges because ProGRP
has a long half-life of 19–28 days. Consequently, measuring the ProGRP level may be useful for monitoring carcinoid tumors in cases in which
this parameter is elevated above the normal range, although more thorough scientific documentation is needed to clarify the relationship
between carcinoid tumors and ProGRP due to the limited number of cases . In conclusion, ProGRP should be further evaluated as a biomarker in
a larger series of patients to determine whether it demonstrates any significant correlation with cancer recurrence. Conflict of interest
statement Naohiro Taira and the other co-authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. (A) Chest X-ray showing an abnormal shadow in the
right middle lobe. (B) Chest CT showing a nodule measuring 13×18 mm in size in the right middle lobe.
