Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are typically solid neoplasms but in very rare cases present as cystic lesions. The diagnosis of cystic
tumors in the pancreas is extremely difficult and the use of endoscopic ultrasound and fine-needle aspiration might be helpful in the work-
up of patients with cystic neuroendocrine tumors in the pancreas. A 78-year-old Caucasian man was admitted with a history of epigastric
pain. Laboratory tests were normal. The patient underwent transabdominal ultrasound, computed tomography and magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography demonstrating an unclear cystic mass in the head of the pancreas. The patient was referred for endoscopic
ultrasound. Endoscopic ultrasound showed a hypoechoic lesion (42 × 47 mm) in the head of the pancreas with regular borders and large cystic
components. The main pancreatic duct was normal without any connection to the cystic process. The lesion underwent fine-needle aspiration
(22 Gauge). Cytological examination demonstrated cohesive groups of plasmacytoid cells staining positively for synaptophysin and
chromogranin A, which is suggestive of a neuroendocrine tumor. Differential diagnosis of cystic lesions in the pancreas is very difficult
with conventional radiology, such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. This unusual case with a pancreatic cystic
neuroendocrine tumor highlights the clinical importance of endoscopic ultrasound in the work-up of patients with unclear lesions in the
pancreas. Pancreatic cystic lesions pose a major challenge to clinicians. Due to increased use of cross-sectional abdominal imaging, cystic
lesions in the pancreas have become a common incidental finding . More than 60% of pancreatic cystic lesions are neoplastic . In fact,
neoplastic cysts constitute about 15% of all neoplasms in the pancreas . Neoplastic cysts in the pancreas include intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasm, mucinous cystic neoplasm, solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm, serous cystic neoplasm, ductal adenocarcinoma with cystic
degeneration and cystic neuroendocrine tumor . Differential diagnosis is difficult but with the help of endoscopic ultrasound and fine-
needle aspiration improved visualization and tissue sampling are possible. Herein, we describe a case with a cystic neuroendocrine tumor in
which endoscopic ultrasound facilitated final diagnosis. A 78-year-old Caucasian man presented with epigastric pain. He was otherwise
healthy except mild hypertension and asthma and laboratory tests were normal. Transabdominal ultrasound revealed a suspicious lesion in the
head of the pancreas measuring 4 cm. A subsequent abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography depicted an unclear lesion as a mass (4 ×
5 cm) with heterogeneous attenuation containing both solid and cystic components without signs of bile duct or pancreatic duct dilatation
although engagement of the superior mesenteric vein was suspected (Figure 1). A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography did not add
further diagnostic information and the patient was referred for endoscopic ultrasound. Endoscopic ultrasound demonstrated a hypoechoic
lesion measuring 42 × 47 mm in the head of the pancreas with regular borders and large cystic components (Figure 2). The diameter of the
pancreatic duct was normal and there was no morphological connection between the process and the pancreatic duct. Both the cystic and the
solid components of the process underwent fine-needle aspiration (22 Gauge) (Figure 3). The fluid from the cystic component had low
viscosity and contained normal levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (<1 μg/l) and amylase (2.5 μKat/l). Cytological examination of the
aspirate from the solid component showed cohesive groups of plasmacytoid cells (Figure 4), staining positively for synaptophysin and
chromogranin A (Figure 5), which are highly specific markers for neuroendocrine tumors . Ki-67 index was less 2% making this a G1-type tumor
but the engagement of the superior mesenteric vein made surgery non-optional and the patient received palliative chemotherapy. Abdominal
computer tomography showing the lesion in the head of the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound image revealing a cystic lesion with regular well-
demarked borders in the head of pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound image showing the fine-needle aspiration (22 Gauge) of the cystic tumor. The
tip of the needle is in the cystic component of the lesion. The lesion underwent fine-needle aspiration and cytological examination revealed
cohesive groups of plasmacytoid cells. The lesion underwent fine-needle aspiration and revealed positive immunocytological expression of
chromogranin A in the plasmacytoid cells. Neuroendocrine tumors account for only 1-2% of all pancreatic neoplasms and less than 10% of all
neuroendocrine tumors are cystic, which makes cystic neuroendocrine lesions very rare . The mean age at diagnosis is 53 years and there is
no evident gender predilection . Most cystic neuroendocrine tumors in the pancreas are non-functional and the diagnosis is usually made
incidentally or secondary to mass-dependent symptoms, such as abdominal pain, nausea or weight-loss, as was the case in our patient. Except
for neuroendocrine microadenomas, all neuroendocrine tumors are considered to have malignant potential and should be considered for surgical
resection . However, identification of cystic neuroendocrine tumors in the pancreas with conventional axial imaging, such as computed
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, is extremely difficult . Differential diagnosis includes simple cysts, other cystic neoplasms,
pseudocysts and adenocarcinomas with cystic degeneration. Endoscopic ultrasound coupled with fine-needle aspiration has enabled not only the
detailed examination of pancreatic cystic lesions but also cytological, biochemical and immunocytological analysis . A previous report by
Kongkam et al. could not identify any unique endoscopic ultrasound finding in cystic neuorendocrine tumors although others have suggested
that cystic neuorendocrine tumors exhibit more frequently a thick wall compared to mucinous cysts . Anyhow, the most important advantage
with endoscopic ultrasound is the possibility to obtain tissue and fluid samples from the cysts. Several studies have shown that endoscopic
ultrasound-guided immunocytology with staining for neuroendocrine markers, such as synaptophysin and chromogranin A, is an accurate method
to establish the diagnosis of cystic neuroendocrine tumors , which was key to diagnosis also in the present case. In our patient, the cyst
fluid levels of carcinoembryonic antigen were normal. Elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen in cysts are a useful marker of mucinous
cysts and it is therefore interesting to note that numerous previous studies have reported that cyst fluid levels of carcinoembryonic
antigen are usually low in cystic neuroendocrine tumors . This unusual case with a cystic neuroendocrine tumor in the pancreas underlines
the clinical impact of endoscopic ultrasound in the work-up of patients with unclear lesions in the pancreas. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HT and GWJ performed the
endoscopic ultrasound. HT wrote the first draft. OJ performed the histology and immunostaining. OE performed the computed tomography and
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. HT wrote the first draft. All authors contributed to the final manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
