Optic nerve (ON) aplasia is a rare developmental anomaly comprising of absence of the ON, ganglion cells and the central retinal vessels. It
is usually accompanied by a variety of central nervous system (CNS) malformations. We report an extremely rare case of bilateral true ON
aplasia occurring as an isolated CNS anomaly. A 10-month-old female child was detected with bilateral absence of fixation, associated with
multiple ocular findings of microcornea, anterior embryotoxon, pupillary corectopia, partial aniridia and lens coloboma. The optic disc
locations were visible as avascular whitish areas. There were no retinal vessels seen in the disc area or elsewhere. There were bilateral
multiple chorioretinal atrophic patches present. B-scan ultrasonography showed bilateral absence of ONs. Magnetic resonance imaging showed
thinned out bilateral ONs with a hypoplastic optic chiasma and optic tract. There were no other CNS anomalies. Flash visually evoked
potential was unrecordable. Optic nerve (ON) aplasia is a rare, congenital developmental anomaly, comprising of absence of ON, central
retinal vessels and ganglion cells.12 It is generally, accompanied by other central nervous system (CNS) anomalies. A search of the medical
literature has revealed only two previous reports of bilateral ON aplasia in otherwise normal children.34] A 10-month-old female child, born
of a third degree consanguineous marriage, presented with an inability to make eye contact and follow objects since birth. There was no
significant history regarding the antenatal, natal and post-natal period. Developmental milestones had been reached normally. General
examination revealed platycephaly of the skull. Neurological and other systemic examinations were within normal limits. On ophthalmic
examination, an absence of fixation with up-rolling of each eye was noted. The child did not follow any light or visual target and the
pupillary reflexes were absent in both eyes. Ocular movements as tested by Doll's eye maneuver were normal. The ocular adnexa were also
normal. Anterior segment examination revealed bilateral anterior embryotoxon with bilateral microcorneas. The right eye had an inferiorly
placed pupil (corectopia) while the left eye had partial aniridia associated with a lens coloboma in the inferotemporal quadrant. There were
no abnormalities seen on gonioscopy and intraocular pressures were within normal limits. Axial lengths were also within normal limits.
Ophthalmoscopy revealed the absence of both optic discs, which were represented by whitish, undefined round structures. Both, the disc area
and the retina were devoid of retinal blood vessels. There was marked choroidal tessellation with multiple areas of chorioretinal atrophy
seen bilaterally [Figures 1 and 2]. Right eye fundus shows whitish area representing disc, absent retinal vessels, multiple chorioretinal
atrophic patches. Inset shows a view of inferior retina Left eye fundus shows whitish area representing disc, absent retinal vessels and a
large chorioretinal atrophic patch The ONs could not be seen on B-scan ultrasonography. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed the
presence of markedly thinned out ONs [Figure 3]. The optic chiasma and optic tracts were hypoplastic. Flash visually evoked potential (VEP)
was unrecordable. There were no other CNS abnormalities detected. T2 weighted magnetic resonance imaging showing thinned out optic nerves
with hypoplastic chiasma The ON is formed of the axons of the retinal ganglion cells, which are derived embryologically from the inner
neuroblastic layer of the optic cup.5 Failure of development of these cells is rare. When there is accompanying failure of development of
mesodermal elements as well, it is termed aplasia of the ON which is an absence of optic disc, ganglion cells and central retinal vessels.12
Many cases, which have been reported in literature as ON aplasia are, in fact, cases of ON hypoplasia as some of the features above are
present.6 Our case had true bilateral ON aplasia as there were no retinal vessels seen in either eye and the optic discs were visible as
ill-defined avascular whitish structures. The radiological report of thinned ONs, were likely to be merely ON sheaths with some glial
tissue. Flash VEP was performed to distinguish ON hypoplasia from ON aplasia. VEP was unrecordable. Variable ophthalmic features associated
with ON aplasia include micro-ophthalmos, enophthalmos, ptotic lids, squint, microcornea, trabeculodysgenesis, iris hypoplasia, iris
coloboma, aniridia and persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous.12] In the current case, there were several associated ocular abnormalities,
such as microcornea, anterior embryotoxon, corectopia, partial aniridia, lens coloboma and multiple chorioretinal atrophic areas. ON aplasia
cases are generally associated with multiple CNS anomalies such as hydrancephaly and hypopituitarism.78 Our patient had a platycephaly,
which was not accompanied by any CNS abnormalities other than ON aplasia. Management of such cases is directed towards any associated
neurological problems. Since there is no specific ophthalmic management, the parents are counseled regarding education, vocational
rehabilitation and mobility training of blind children. To the best of our knowledge, this is only the third case of bilateral ON aplasia in
a normal child, which is an extremely rare developmental anomaly. Dr. Priscilla Joshi, Prof. and HOD, Department of Radiology, Bharati
Hospital and Research Centre, BVD University Medical College, Pune. Dr. Umesh Kalane, Pediatric Neurologist, Department of Pediatrics,
Bharati Hospital and Research Centre, BVD University Medical College, Pune. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
