Conflict of interest Hereby, we declare that the article: Pyogenic liver abscess caused by Gemella morbillorum. Paolo Borro, Alessandro
Sumberaz, Gianni Testino from Centro Alcologico Regionale - Regione Liguria, UO Alcologia e Patologie Correlate; IRCCS AOU San Martino -
National Institute for Cancer Research, Genova, Italy, state no conflict of interests Even though Gemella morbillorum infection (GMI) is
rare in humans, it may nevertheless, cause endocarditis, meningitis, brain abscess, pleural empyema, nephritis, mediastinitis, and
occasionally, liver abscess. We are describing the case of a 64-years-old Caucasian male admitted with fever and abdominal pain. Laboratory
parameters revealed inflammation signs, and instrumental examinations showed the presence of diverticula in the ascending colon. Abdominal
ultrasound (US) and computer tomography (CT) showed two focal lesions in the right liver lobe. One had the characteristics of a simple cyst;
the second was hypoechoic with a low density area, possibly containing necrotic material. US-guided needle biopsy was found negative for
neoplastic cells, showing purulent infiltrate. Pus culture was found positive for GMI. Systemic antibiotic therapy coupled with repeated US-
guided needle aspiration, induced the resolution of the hepatic abscess. Few cases have been reported of hepatic abscess caused by GMI in
immunocompetent non-cirrhotic subjects. A pesar de que la infección por Gemella morbillorum (GMI por el término en inglés) es poco común en
seres humanos, puede causar endocarditis, meningitis, absceso cerebral, empiema pleural, nefritis, mediastinitis y en ocasiones, absceso
hepático. Describimos el caso de un hombre caucásico de 64 años que ingresó con fiebre y dolor abdominal. Los parámetros de laboratorio
revelaron signos de inflamación y los exámenes mostraron la presencia de divertículos en el colon ascendente. La ecografía abdominal (US) y
la tomografía computarizada (CT) mostró dos lesiones focales en el lóbulo hepático derecho. Una presentó las características de un quiste
simple; la segunda fue hipoecóica con una zona de baja densidad, que posiblemente contenía material necrótico. Biopsia con aguja guiada por
US dio un resultado negativo para células neoplásicas, mostrando infiltrado purulento. Cultivo de pus fue encontrado positivo para GMI. Una
terapia con antibióticos sistémicos, junto con aspiración repetida con aguja guiada por US indujo a la resolución del absceso hepático.
Pocos casos se han reportado de absceso hepático causado por GMI en sujetos inmunocompetentes no cirróticos. In immunocompetent patients,
pyogenic hepatic abscess (PHA) is often cryptogenetic or secondary to ascending colangitis, diverticolitis or appendicitis. Moreover, the
risk of developing a hepatic abscess increases when chronic diseases such as diabetes, cirrhosis, neoplasia, or liver transplant are
present. Commonly, the process is caused by flogistic focuses in the colorectum mucosa, pancreas, cholecyst, or the biliary tree. From these
regions the microorganism spreads via bile or portal system into the liver, causing an abscess. The most common pathogens involved in this
process are Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bacteroides, Enterococci, Streptococci, Staphylococci, and -occasionally- Salmonella
typhi. Despite the fact that diagnosis of a hepatic abscess is easy using abdominal ultrasound (US) and/or computer tomography (CT), the
differential diagnosis between primitive or secondary neoplasm may be difficult. The diagnosis of hepatic abscess is carried out by using
the US-guided needle biopsy; whereas, treatment is based on both US-guided needle aspiration and systemic antibiotic therapy. We are
describing a case of hepatic abscess caused by Gemella morbillorum infection (GMI), a saprophyte microaerophilic Gram-positive coccus of
gastrointestinal, urogenital and respiratory mucosa, which eventually may cause endocarditis, meningitis, cerebral abscess, pleural empyema,
nephritis, and mediastinitis 1 , 2. On March 2010, a 64-year-old immunocompetent man was hospitalized for hyperpyrexia (38-39° C) and
epigastrium pain, which had started suddenly one week earlier. He was not taking any medications, was not abusing alcohol and had not been
abroad. His past medical history was clear. Physical examination showed no skin rash, no abdominal tenderness; palpable liver, spleen, and
abdominal mass were all absent. Defecation and diuresis were normal. Laboratory parameters revealed: WBC 14x103 cell/(L (neutrophils 87%);
ESR 109 mm/h, CRP 33 mg/dL, fibrinogen 1,230 mg/dL. Alanine aminotransferase resulted 120 IU/L (n.v. 0-40 IU/L) and (-glutamyl transferase
200 IU/L (n.v. 8-61 IU/L); bilirubin was in the normal range. Blood test was negative for HIV, HCV, HBV, and other hepatotropic viruses. Six
haemocultures collected over two consecutive days, as well as chest radiography, resulted negative. Abdominal US revealed a liver lesion of
approximately 10 cm in diameter, with irregular form and poorly defined margins, located in the lateral section of the right liver lobe,
close to the vena cava. No intra-hepatic or extra-hepatic biliary dilatation was observed. The liver, spleen, pancreas, and kidneys were of
normal size. Spiral CT confirmed the low-density liver area slightly enhanced at the early phase after injection of a contrast medium. Also,
the T2-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) confirmed the mass with high signal intensity and with slight enhancement at the early phase
after gadolinium administration. All three imaging techniques gave rise to the suspicion of a necrotic sepimented area or neoplastic liver
lesion. Furthermore, two other small lesions with similar density to the above were identified in liver segments 5 and 7. An anechoic ovalar
lesion, close to the largest lesion, referable to a simple liver cyst was also detected (Figs. 1A, B and C). Figure 1. A. US shows a large
hypoechoic lesion with ill-defined margins (black arrow heads) and an anechoic lesion (black arrow). B. Abdominal spiral CT reveals a
hypointense area that was slightly enhanced in the periphery and in septations after contrast administration (black arrow heads) and a small
lesion with similar density (white arrow head). C. MRI reveals a large sepimented lesion (black arrow heads) and a small hypointense lesion
referable to a liver cyst (black arrows). D. A contrast-enhanced CT carried out 20 days after the discharge shows a hypointense lesion
referred to a liver cyst (black arrow) and a complete resolution of the abscess. Treatment with antibacterial (ceftriaxone 2 g bid iv +
metronidazole 500 mg tid iv) and antifungal (itraconazole 200 mg iv) was started after hemocultures were collected. Fever responded poorly
to paracetamol. Thoracic CT, gastroscopy and tumoral markers resulted negative; whereas, colonoscopy revealed diffuse large diverticula in
the ascending colon. A US-guided needle (Chiba 18 G) biopsy with aspiration of the liver lesion showed abundant (60 mL) purulent fluid which
resulted positive for Gemella morbillorum. Focal necrosis with fibrosis, but no atypical cells, was observed in the examined sections.
Needle aspiration induced prompt resolution of the hyperpyrexia, but persistent irregular low fever continued. On the basis of the
antibiogram, therapy using teicoplanin (6 mg/kg/day 1 and then 3 mg/kg/day iv) plus imipenem (1.5 g/day iv) was replaced with the former
therapy. Ten days later, the US revealed a liver lesion of approximately 3 cm in diameter and the febricula was still present. Two other US-
guided needle (Chiba 18 G) aspirations of the liver lesion collected 30 and 20 mL of pus, respectively, on day 20 and 30 and the fever
disappeared. The flogistic parameters (ESR, CRP, etc.,) also returned to normal values, and the patient was discharged with instructions to
continue antibiotic treatment for a total of 30 days. Abdominal US and CT carried out 20 days after discharge revealed complete resolution
of the liver lesion. A follow up visit, 6 months after discharge, showed the patient in good health (Fig. 1D). Pyogenic hepatic abscess is
rare in industrialized countries with an incidence of 11.8 (men), and 9.7 (women) cases per million. Recently, the trend was found slightly
raised. When PHA occurs, the mortality rate is high, 26.9% after 30 days, and it can increase to 62.5% in patients affected by cirrhosis.
The most common pathogens of hepatic abscess are E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bacteroides, Enterococci, Streptococci, and Staphylococci.
However, to our knowledge, few reports exist on PHA related to a GMI, summarized in Table 1. The liver is a possible -though rare- site for
lesions from ascending colangitis, diverticulitis, or appendicitis related to portal venous drainage of visceral organs. Table 1. Published
cases of liver abscess due to Gemella morbillorum In our patient, fever, abdominal pain, leukocytosis, elevation of ESR and CRP gave rise to
suspicion of infection. Both US and radiologic images show the presence in the side sector of the right liver lobe of an irregular lesion
with poorly defined margins, and all the imaging techniques gave the suspicion of necrotic areas in an abscess or neoplasm liver lesion
(primary or metastatic). Despite the elevated sensitivity of US, CT, and MRI, it is often difficult to make a differential diagnosis between
a septic liver abscess and a primitive or secondary hepatic neoplasia. The US-guided needle biopsy and aspiration excluded the presence of
neoplastic cells and the purulent fluid resulted positive for Gemella morbillorum. Gemella morbillorum is a saprophyte ubiquitary gram+
coccus often present in the gastrointestinal, urogenital and respiratory mucosa. In this case the most probable source of GMI is in the
large diverticula of the ascending colon, diagnosed via colonoscopy. Intestinal mucosal infection may then have spread to the liver through
portal vein drainage 3 , 4. Percutaneous aspiration is the method of choice used to identify the pathogens (89.0%) and remove purulent
infection. Ch Yu et al., reported 101 cases of liver abscess (98.4% pyogenic), 28.1% were multiple: the percentage of positive needle
aspiration was 96.8 and the success rate was unrelated to the size or number of abscesses in a single patient. Moreover, Yu et al., reported
that intermittent needle aspiration, when compared to continuous catheter drainage, was associated with higher treatment success rate,
shorter duration of hospital stay, and lower mortality rate, although this did not reach statistical significance 5. The other two
intrahepatic small "metastatic" abscessual lesions were resolved with antibiotic treatment without percutaneous aspiration. Antibiotic
therapy resolves up to 80% of liver abscess and this, coupled with US-guided needle aspiration, yields virtually 100% success rate 6 , 7.
Pyogenic hepatic abscess is rare in immunocompetent and non-cirrhotic subjects. It is mostly secondary to ascending colangitis,
diverticolitis or appendicitis and is caused by pathogens. In this clinical case, a saprophyte coccus like Gemella morbillorum caused liver
septic invasion, possibly through the portal venous system. US, CT, and MRI were unable to differentiate between septic or neoplastic
abscess and the diagnosis was performed through percutaneous needle biopsy. The only possible source of the infection was the multiple colon
diverticula. In addition, intermittent needle aspiration of the hepatic lesion -coupled with systemic antibiotic treatment- induced the
complete resolution of the septic lesions and probably shortened the recovery time.
