There is limited information in the use of antitumor necrosis factor α, infliximab, in patients on hemodialysis. In Crohn’s disease (CD),
only 3 cases are reported. A 76-year-old man on hemodialysis for renal failure caused by immunoglobulin A nephropathy developed diarrhea and
abdominal pains. A marked edema was observed in the pretibia and ankle. An increase of C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, hypoalbuminemia, hypocholesterolemia, and moderate anemia was found. Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) found
wall thickness in the left colon. Sigmoidoscopy revealed multiple ulcers in the sigmoid colon and noncaseating epithelioid granuloma was
found in the biopsy specimen. Barium enema study exhibited collar button signs and longitudinal ulcers in the left colon. A severe form of
CD was diagnosed. Metronidazole seemed to decrease CRP but was ineffective in ameliorating diarrhea. Infliximab rather than steroid hormone
was chosen for the treatment. Standard induction therapy with infliximab was initiated. Symptoms rapidly improved then disappeared. CD
activity index decreased from 747 to a remission level of 134 after 2 infusions of infliximab. Scheduled maintenance infliximab therapy was
administered after the induction therapy. Ultrasonography and CT showed a disappearance of the wall thickness of the colon. Adverse
reactions were not observed. Infliximab was effective and safe in a patient with CD on hemodialysis. Our case has added additional
literature in accordance with previous reports supporting infliximab as effective and safe in patients on hemodialysis. The efficacy of
antitumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), infliximab, has been shown to be effective in various disease treatment including Crohn’s disease
(CD).1 However, there is limited information in the use of infliximab in patients on hemodialysis. Although the highest incidence in CD is
among younger generations, 10–30 years old, older people are also affected.2 Here we report a case of an old man on hemodialysis who
developed CD and was successfully treated with infliximab. A 76-year-old man, 166 cm tall and weighing 47.1 kg, receiving hemodialysis for 6
years was referred to our Division of Gastroenterology, Akita City Hospital, Akita City, Japan, in the middle of November 2013, because of
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever for 1 week. Hematochezia was absent. He was diagnosed with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome in 1973,
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in 1982, myocardial infarction in 1993, and immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy in 2005. IgA nephropathy
resulted in renal failure leading to hemodialysis thrice a week since 2007. Tenderness in the left lower abdomen and a marked edema in both
sides of the pretibia and ankle were observed. Laboratory data were as follows: an increase of C-reactive protein (CRP), 10.73 mg/dL (normal
range ≤0.19); an increase of erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 46 mm/h; hypoalbuminemia, 2.0 g/dL; hypocholesterolemia, 107 mg/dL; and
moderate anemia, hemoglobin 9.0 g/dL (Figure 1). Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) found wall thickness in continuous form in the
left colon. Sigmoidoscopy revealed multiple irregular-shaped ulcers in the sigmoid colon (Figure 2). Barium enema study exhibited collar
button ulcers, longitudinal ulcers, and coarse mucosa in the left colon (Figure 3). Negative results were obtained in the following tests:
cytomegalovirus antigenemia, stool culture, and Clostridium difficile toxin. Neither inclusion body nor immunohistologic cytomegalovirus
positive cell was found in the biopsy specimen. Neither ghost tubules nor subepithelial collagen thickening were observed. But noncaseating
epithelioid granuloma was found. Therefore, a severe form of CD was diagnosed.3 Metronidazole seemed to decrease CRP but was ineffective in
ameliorating diarrhea. Rapid efficacy of infliximab in CD4 and reports of safety of infliximab in patients on hemodialysis5–12 encouraged us
and our patient to use infliximab rather than steroid hormone that has an adverse osteoporotic effect. Latent tuberculosis was excluded by
normal roentgenogram of the chest and negative Elispot assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis.13 Hepatitis B infection was also excluded by
negative test in surface antigen, surface antibody, and core antibody.13 Written informed consent on the use of infliximab and publishing
the study was obtained. The standard induction therapy (3 infusions at week 0, 2, and 6) of infliximab (300 mg) was initiated.14 Infliximab
was infused on alternative days to hemodialysis. Symptoms rapidly improved then disappeared. Crohn’s disease activity index (CDAI) decreased
from 747 to a remission level (less than 150) of 1343 after 2 infusions of infliximab. CRP became normal and increase of albumin was
ascertained before discharge (Figure 1). A third infusion of infliximab was administered as planned (Figure 1). Although albumin was further
increased to 2.9 g/dL, fecal occult blood was more than 1000 ng/mL (Figure 1) indicating that there is still active inflammation in the
intestine. Scheduled maintenance infliximab therapy15 was administered. An easy tendency to arrhythmia and tachycardia and renal failure
hampered invasive morphological studies of the bowel after the standard induction therapy. Noninvasive studies with ultrasonography and CT
found a disappearance of the wall thickness of the colon. Adverse reactions of infliximab were not observed during the course. Clinical
course. CRP (normal range ≤0.19 mg/dL); ESR (≤10 mm/h); fecal occult blood (<100 ng/mL); T chol (≥120 to ≤220 mg/dL). CDAI = Crohn’s disease
activity index; CRP = C-reactive protein; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; IFX = infliximab; T chol = total cholesterol. Endoscopic
pictures of sigmoidoscopy. Inflamed mucosa with (A) multiple irregular-shaped ulcers (arrow) and (B) punched-out ulcer (arrow) was observed
in the sigmoid colon. Radiograph of barium enema study. Clear collar button signs were observed in the (A) sigmoid colon (arrows) and the
(B) descending colon (short arrows). Long fine arrows in (B) show calcification of the aorta. Collar button signs and longitudinal ulcers
are observed in both CD and ulcerative colitis.16–18 In the present case, an absent hematochezia and a positive noncaseating epithelioid
granuloma led to a diagnosis of CD. Biologic agents revolutionized treatment in medicine. TNF-α is a key molecule of the inflammatory
response and is involved in the pathogenesis of various autoimmune and noninfectious inflammatory conditions. TNF-α antagonists have been
shown to be effective in CD, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Behcet’s disease, ankylosing spondylitis, uveitis, psoriasis,
pyoderma gangrenosum, and hidradenitis suppurativa.1 In CD, TNF-α antagonists are effective in inducing and maintaining remission,15
systemic complications such as pyoderma gangrenosum and arthritis,19,20 and secondary amyloidosis.21 Infliximab was the first biologic agent
approved in Japan for CD in 2002 and for rheumatoid arthritis in 2003. There are very few reports on the use of infliximab in patients on
dialysis: rheumatoid arthritis,6,7 ankylosing spondylitis,9 sarcoidosis,5 and psoriatic arthritis.8 In CD, 3 case reports are available and
all are from Japan.10–12 In these reports, CD was first diagnosed followed by renal failure resulting in hemodialysis. Infliximab was used
for enterocutaneous fistula,10 relapse of CD,11 and uncontrolled activity with conventional treatment.12 Conventional treatment such as
5-aminosalicylate and steroid hormone was also ineffective in the former 2 cases.10,11 Therefore, in all the 3 cases of CD, infliximab was
used after conventional therapy. Infliximab was effective in these patients including CD.5–12 Adverse effects were described in 3 cases:
postinfusion transient itching,7 deep vein thrombosis,5 and pneumocystis jivoreci pneumonia.11 The latter 2 hampered the succession of
infliximab treatment. Except for these 2 cases, scheduled infliximab maintenance therapy was administered in these diseases.6–10,12 Needless
to say, attention to be paid to a variety of adverse events associated with infliximab.22–25 Pharmacokinetics of TNF-α antagonists in
patients on dialysis is not known. However, Kume et al,12 in CD, measured the serum concentration of infliximab before and after
hemodialysis and showed that the serum level of infliximab was essentially unchanged by hemodialysis. In our case, CD appeared in a patient
on hemodialysis. No adverse event of infliximab was encountered. The number of patients on regular dialysis treatment in Japan is steadily
increasing: 103,296 in 1990, 206,134 in 2000, and 309,946 in 2012.26 The primary disease for dialysis is diabetic nephropathy holding the
first place since 1998 accounting for 44.1% followed by chronic glomerulonephritis in the second place (19.4%). The mean age for initiation
of hemodialysis is 68.4 years.26 The number of patients with CD is also steadily increasing in Japan: 6609 in 1990, 19,651 in 2000, and
36,418 in 2012.27 Both diabetes mellitus and CD are popular in wealthy nations and they are not restricted to western countries anymore but
distributed worldwide and known as global diseases.28,29 It is anticipated that the number of CD patient on dialysis will increase in the
future not only in Japan but also worldwide. Our case has contributed additional literature in accordance with previous reports supporting
infliximab as effective and safe in patients on hemodialysis. Abbreviation CD = Crohn’s disease, CDAI = Crohn’s disease activity index, CRP
= C-reactive protein, CT = computed tomography, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate, IFX = infliximab, T chol = total cholesterol, TNF-α =
TNF-αtumor necrosis factor α The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
