Conflito de interesse: nada a declarar To describe a case of genital burn which raised the suspicion of maltreatment (sexual abuse and
neglect by lack of supervision). An infant was taken to the Emergency Room of a pediatric hospital with an extensive burn in the vulva and
perineum. The mother claimed the burn had been caused by a sodium-hydroxide-based product. However, the injury severity led to the suspicion
of sexual abuse, which was then ruled out by a multidisciplinary team, based on the consistent report by the mother. Besides, the lesion
type matched those caused by the chemical agent involved in the accident and the family context was evaluated and considered adequate. The
patient had a favorable outcome and was discharged after four days of hospitalization. Outpatient follow-up during six months after the
accident enabled the team to rule out neglect by lack of supervision. Accidents and violence are frequent causes of physical injuries in
children, and the differential diagnosis between them can be a challenge for healthcare workers, especially in rare clinical conditions
involving patients who cannot speak for themselves. The involvement of a multidisciplinary trained team helps to have an adequate approach,
ensuring child protection and developing a bond with the family; the latter is essential for a continued patient follow-up. Describir un
caso de quemadura de los genitales que llevó a la sospecha de malos tratos (abuso sexual y negligencia de supervisión). Lactante fue llevada
a la Emergencia de un hospital pediátrico por lesión extensa en región de la vulva y entre la vagina y el ano. La madre alegaba quemadura
por producto a base de soda cáustica, pero la gravedad de la lesión llevó el equipo a sospechar de abuso sexual. La sospecha fue alejada por
equipo multidisciplinario con base en el relato consistente de la madre, en el tipo de lesión compatible con el agente químico implicado en
el accidente y en la evaluación del contexto de vida familiar. El cuadro clínico evolucionó de manera satisfactoria, siendo dada alta
después de cuatro días de internación. El seguimiento ambulatorial en los seis meses posteriores permitió alejar también una posible
situación de negligencia de supervisión, con base en la historia previa del niño, en su estado de salud y en la observación de los vínculos
familiares existentes y de los cuidados dispensados por la familia a lo largo del tiempo. Accidentes y violencia son causas frecuentes de
lesiones físicas en niños, siendo el diagnóstico diferencial de ambos un desafío para los profesionales, especialmente frente a cuadros
clínicos raros en pacientes que todavía no verbalizan. La actuación de equipo multidisciplinario con profesionales instrumentalizados para
ese tipo de atención ayuda en la conducción adecuada, garantizando la protección del niño y la creación de vínculo con la familia, lo que es
esencial para un posterior seguimiento que haga viable la observación continuada del caso. External causes of morbidity and mortality (i.e.,
accidents and violence) in children and adolescents are a public health problem in Brazil. In 2011, in the state of Rio de Janeiro, 511
children between one and four years old died, mostly due to external causes (126 cases)( 1 ). These events are important because of both the
frequency with which they affect this age group and their short- and long-term consequences. It should be noted that only a small portion of
these occurrences result in death. Burns, whether accidental or intentional, are very common in children and usually occur at home. Several
previous studies have analyzed childhood chemical burns resulting from the accidental ingestion of alkalis( 2 , 3 ). Children under six are
at the greatest risk of poisoning with caustic products in the home environment in developing countries( 4 ). Conversely, there are few
reports of children with skin injuries resulting from contact with such products. In the United States, skin contact is responsible for one
third of injuries caused by cleaning products in children; also in that country, intake is the most frequent mechanism of injury( 5 ). In
Brazil, statistical data have shown that chemical agents are the cause of only 1 to 4% of burns, with caustic soda being the major causative
agent( 6 ). In a study conducted in Rio de Janeiro, skin exposure to cleaning products in the home environment accounted for only 2.4% of
cases( 7 ). Despite this low frequency, health teams should be prepared to deal with this problem, because of the severe clinical
consequences involved. Another challenge in the pediatric care of injuries by external causes is the difficulty involved indistinguishing
between accidental and intentional injuries. This problem becomes even greater when dealing with infants, as it is not possible to rely on
the patient's ability to talk. According to the Brazilian Society of Pediatrics( 8 ), and similarly to other types of accidents, most burns
do not occur by chance, but rather result from neglect (failure to protect and/or teach children) or constitute a cruel form of abuse
(deliberate injury). The latter situation accounts for 10% of the various forms of abuse and for 1 to 16% of the total number of burned
children and adolescents who seek medical assistance (p. 135). The unusual case of genital burn by caustic soda here reported aims to
discuss issues that go beyond clinical care and that can help healthcare teams to distinguish an accidental event from suspected
maltreatment (sexual abuse and supervisory neglect). The patient's medical record was reviewed to collect data on her admission to the
emergency department and subsequent outpatient appointments at the Clinic of General Pediatrics in the Martagão Gesteira Institute of Child
Care and Pediatrics (Instituto de Puericultura e PediatriaMartagão Gesteira, IPPMG), at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ). A
21-month-old female was brought by her mother to the emergency department of the hospital. The mother reported that, upon waking up,
approximately 90 minutes prior to her arrival at the hospital, she found the infant next to her on the bed carrying a caustic soda
container. The infant would have had access to the container while the mother was asleep. The mother then realized that the substance was
present in her daughter's vulvar region, and reported having thoroughly washed it with water and then sought medical care. Upon clinical
examination, the child was in good general condition and active. She presented a burn injury affecting the vulvar region and the perineum,
with a necrotic area of approximately 2cm in diameter, a bilateral second degree burn of approximately 0.5cm in diameter, and hyperemia in
the surrounding area (Figures 1 and 2). The region was cleaned with 0.9% saline and moisturized with a dermatological oil, according to
guidelines from the Rio de Janeiro Intoxication Center. Pediatric surgery and gynecology services were consulted, and the case was referred
to the social service due to suspicion of sexual abuse. The social worker who evaluated the patient and her family is part of a
multidisciplinary team - also comprising pediatricians, psychologists, and nurses - that provides assistance to families experiencing
violence situations. The case was analyzed by the team soon after the patient was admitted to the emergency department. The child remained
hospitalized. Figure 1Deep burn injury affecting the vulvar region and a lesion on the abdomen. Figure 2Burn on the outer part of the vulvar
region On the following day, the mother told the gynecologist that she generally used talcum powder when changing her daughter's diapers,
and believed that the infant had mistakenly used caustic soda on her vulva, thinking it was talcum powder. Examination showed slight
improvement of the genital injury, absence of active bleeding, and an intact hymen. During physical examination, the child imitated gestures
made by the team, corroborating the mother's account that the girl used to imitate gestures. The gynecology service concluded that the
injuries were consistent with maternal report and with burn caused by caustic soda. At an appointment with the social service, on the same
day, the mother reported that the substance causing the injury was a cleaning product used to unclog sinks. The product was kept in the
kitchen, on the floor, behind the stove, so that the infant could not reach it. The family was from the state of Ceará and had been living
in Rio de Janeiro for a few months. The mother was 19 years old and worked as a waitress at night. The father was 20 years old and worked as
a kitchen assistant in the morning. Both parents took turns in taking care of the infant during the day, with occasional help from other
family members. The infant did not attend daycare. Maternal report and physical examination failed to confirm the multidisciplinary team's
suspicion of sexual abuse. As a result, the case was considered to be an accident, and was not notifiedto the Guardianship Council. The
patient was discharged after four days of hospitalization. During outpatient follow-up, the team considered it appropriate to learn more
about the circumstances of the accident so as to assess the possibility of supervisory neglect. The mother confirmed the same facts reported
previously, adding that, before washing the region, she had tried to remove the product from the infant's vulva by rubbing it with her hand
to "clean" it. She felt guilty because she found out, at the hospital, that this action may have contributed to worsen the burn. Subsequent
contact with the family after discharge did not suggest care neglect. Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) is a solid, non-combustible,
hygroscopic substance, highly soluble in water; the aqueous solution is highly alkaline( 9 ). Caustic soda is found in some household
cleaning products, e.g., those used to unclog sinks and drains; therefore, it is commonly within reach of children, as in the case here
reported. Alkali burns penetrate deeper in the skin when compared to thermal or acid burns. This type of tissue injury comprises three
factors: intense cellular dehydration; saponification of fat, leading to the loss of thermal insulation; and enzyme protein inactivation and
binding with alkali, resulting in a chemical reaction that releases heat and further aggravates the initial injury( 6 , 10 ). Severity of
tissue damage is directly related to substance type, amount, and concentration, as well as to the duration of contact with skin. Alkali
burns can have acute or chronic complications, or even permanent sequelae( 10 ). Chemical burns in children are primarily accidental. In the
literature, only two case reports of exposure to caustic soda as a result of children maltreatment were found( 11 , 12 ). The rare frequency
of injuries caused by caustic soda, on the one hand, and the extent and depth of the injury reported in this study, on the other, were the
main reasons behind the emergency team's suspicion of sexual abuse. It was considered unlikely that the mere contact with a cleaning
product, as reported by the mother, would have been able to cause the injury found. In general, controversy between the type of injury
observed and the causative mechanism reported by parents is one of the indicators justifying suspicion of violence, and requires a thorough
evaluation to clarify the circumstances leading to injury( 13 ). Whenever there is the possibility that the injury may have been
intentional, professionals have to deal with other issues - in the present report, suspicion of sexual abuse and the possibility of
negligent supervision of the child. In both situations, the healthcare team has to go beyond merely clinical aspects to clarify and
understand the social, cultural, and emotional background of the families seeking assistance. This approach requires, on the part of
healthcare professionals, personal availability for an attentive listening and some degree of experience in handling difficult cases calmly,
not scaring or accusing the family. Professionals dealing with these situations also need to clarify the circumstances that have caused the
injury, find out who takes care of the child, and whether this care is appropriate for his or her age and development. It is also useful to
learn about the environment where the family lives, whether other accidents have already occurred, whether there has been a delay in seeking
care, and whether the child behaves and interacts appropriately with the caregiver( 14 ). These data will make it possible to assess the
level of risk to which the child may be exposed and will help decide on how to manage the case, e.g., hospitalization as a protective
measure, notification of the Guardianship Council,or outpatient follow-up. It is worth mentioning that notification should be made even in
cases of suspicion whenever it is not possible to involve other professionals. Because the emergency department is an important route of
admission to the health system, professionals working in this setting should be able to develop positive rapport with guardians, so as to
help increase adherence to the follow-up treatment proposed after discharge. Outpatient follow-up is a way of ensuring child protection, as
it allows long-term monitoring of the case. For instance, it allows to analyze the bond between child and parents, the family
characteristics, and new health problems that may emerge. Finally, follow-up is a way of providing guidance to parents regarding the
prevention of accidents and maltreatment. Neglect is a very common type of violence against children worldwide. According to the Brazilian
Ministry of Health, neglect is a disregard for the welfare, safety, affection, or education of children or adolescents, or the parents'
refusal to follow guidance regarding the immunization schedule, drug treatments, and educational and preventative guidelines( 13 ). The
chronicity and recurrence of these acts are important aspects to be taken into consideration when determining the presence of neglect. As
for the case reported here, social family history, family ties, and previous care of the child indicated that she was receiving adequate
care and that the accident was the result of an isolated oversight. During outpatient follow-up, the mother argued that she usually closed
the bedroom door whenshe and her daughter slept in the afternoon, but she had forgotten to do so that day. The outpatient team focused on
advising the mother to require family help in the care of the child and increase accident prevention measures. Over six months after the
accident, adherence to follow-up was good, and no complications were observed. In order to promote the safety of infants aged between one
and two years, it is important to advise parents to keep sharp objects, or objects that can be swallowed, out of children's reach; to use
protection devices to prevent falls on stairs or from windows; to use edge and corner protectors on furniture; to use a gate or other
obstacle to prevent access to the kitchen door and keep the bathroom door closed; to use special child seats in the car, always in the back
seat; and to store cleaning products and medicines in locked, high cabinets( 15 ). The present case deserves the attention of healthcare
professionals because it underscores the importance of accident prevention, a topic that should be consistently emphasized in the follow-up
of children and adolescents and adapted according to the stages of the child's development and the family's way of living. Health teams
should be prepared to consider violence as a differential diagnosis whenever necessary and should know how to clarify suspicions in a
welcoming manner, not to undermine either the care process itself or the relationship with the family. Conflito de interesse: nada a
declarar Descrever um caso de queimadura de genitália que levou à suspeita de maus-tratos (abuso sexual e negligência de supervisão).
Lactente foi levada à Emergência de um hospital pediátrico por lesão extensa em região vulvar e entre a vagina e o ânus. A mãe alegava
queimadura por produto à base de soda cáustica, mas a gravidade da lesão levou a equipe a suspeitar de abuso sexual. A suspeita foi afastada
por equipe multidisciplinar com base no relato consistente da mãe, no tipo de lesão compatível com o agente químico envolvido no acidente e
na avaliação do contexto de vida familiar. O quadro clínico evoluiu satisfatoriamente, sendo dada alta após quatro dias de internação. O
acompanhamento ambulatorial nos seis meses posteriores permitiu afastar também uma possível situação de negligência de supervisão. Acidentes
e violência são causas frequentes de lesões físicas em crianças, sendo o diagnóstico diferencial de ambos um desafio para os profissionais,
especialmente diante de quadros clínicos raros em pacientes que ainda não verbalizam. A atuação de equipe multidisciplinar com profissionais
instrumentalizados para esses atendimentos ajuda na condução adequada, garantindo a proteção da criança e a criação de vínculo com a
família, o que é essencial para o acompanhamento continuado do caso. As causas externas de morbimortalidade (acidentes e violência) em
crianças e adolescentes representam um problema de Saúde Pública no nosso país. Em 2011, no Estado do Rio de Janeiro, ocorreram 511 óbitos
de crianças de um a quatro anos de idade, sendo grande parte (126) por causas externas( 1 ). Esses eventos são importantes, tanto pela
frequência com que afetam a população nessa faixa etária, quanto pelas consequências em curto e longo prazos, sendo os óbitos a expressão de
apenas pequena parcela das ocorrências. As queimaduras são muito frequentes em crianças. Nessa faixa etária, elas ocorrem geralmente no lar
e podem ser acidentais ou intencionais. Na literatura, frequentemente encontram-se artigos sobre queimaduras químicas na infância
decorrentes da ingestão acidental de álcalis( 2 , 3 ), sendo as crianças menores de seis anos as que apresentam maior risco para o
envenenamento cáustico no ambiente doméstico em países em desenvolvimento( 4 ). Por outro lado, não são comuns os relatos de lesões de pele
decorrentes de contato de crianças com tais produtos. Nos Estados Unidos, o contato é o mecanismo responsável por um terço das lesões
causadas em crianças por produtos de limpeza, sendo a ingestão também o mecanismo mais frequente( 5 ). No Brasil, estatísticas mostram que
apenas 1 a 4% das queimaduras são provocadas por agentes químicos, tendo a soda cáustica como um dos principais causadores( 6 ). Em estudo
realizado no Rio de Janeiro, a via dérmica de exposição a produtos saneantes em ambiente doméstico correspondeu a apenas 2,4% dos casos( 7
). Apesar da pouca frequência, a gravidade das consequências clínicas aponta para a necessidade de as equipes de saúde estarem preparadas
para lidar com esse problema. Outro desafio é que, nos atendimentos pediátricos por causas externas, é comum a dificuldade de se
distinguirem os mecanismos acidentais dos intencionais. Em lactentes, esse problema torna-se ainda maior, uma vez que não se pode contar com
a verbalização do paciente. Segundo a Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria( 8 ), "como ocorre nos demais acidentes, na maioria das vezes, as
queimaduras não acontecem fortuitamente, mas resultam da negligência (falha na proteção e/ou educação da criança) ou constituem uma cruel
forma de abuso (lesão deliberada). Esta última situação representa 10% dentre as várias formas de abuso e de 1 a 16% do número global de
crianças e adolescentes queimados que procuram assistência médica" (p. 135). Este relato de caso, incomum, de queimadura de genitália por
soda cáustica, visa discutir aspectos que transcendem a assistência clínica e que podem auxiliar a equipe de saúde a distinguir um evento
acidental da suspeita de maus-tratos (abuso sexual e negligência de supervisão). Revisou-se o prontuário da paciente, coletando-se dados da
internação no setor de Emergência e das consultas ambulatoriais subsequentes no Ambulatório de Pediatria Geral do Instituto de Puericultura
e Pediatria Martagão Gesteira (IPPMG), da Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ). Paciente de 21 meses, sexo feminino, foi trazida
pela mãe ao setor de Emergência do hospital. Esta relatava que, ao acordar, há aproximadamente 90 minutos, percebeu que a criança estava ao
seu lado, sobre a cama, com o pote de uma substância à base de soda cáustica. A lactente teria tido acesso ao frasco do produto enquanto a
mãe dormia. Ao perceber que a menina apresentava parte da substância na região da vulva, a mãe relatou ter lavado a lesão com água em
abundância e ter buscado atendimento médico. Ao exame, a criança encontrava-se em bom estado geral e ativa. Observou-se queimadura em região
vulvar e entre a vagina e o ânus, com área de necrose medindo aproximadamente 2cm de diâmetro, queimadura de segundo grau de aproximadamente
0,5cm de diâmetro, bilateral e hiperemia ao redor (Figuras 1 e 2). Foi feita a limpeza local com soro fisiológico 0,9% e aplicado óleo de
uso dermatológico, seguindo-se orientação do Centro de Intoxicações do Rio de Janeiro. Solicitou-se parecer aos serviços de Cirurgia
Pediátrica e Ginecologia Infantil, comunicando-se o caso ao Serviço Social pela suspeita de abuso sexual. A assistente social que avaliou a
paciente e sua família faz parte de uma equipe multidisciplinar que acompanha famílias em situação de violência no IPPMG (na qual há
pediatras, psicólogas e enfermeira), tendo levado o caso para a avaliação da referida equipe logo após a entrada na emergência. A criança
permaneceu internada. Figura 1Queimadura na região vulvar, sendo possível identifi car a profundidade das lesões e uma lesão em abdome
Figura 2Queimadura na parte externa da região vulvar No dia seguinte, a mãe relatou à ginecologista que tinha o hábito de usar talco na
criança a cada troca de fraldas e acreditava que a filha teria confundido a substância com talco, passando-a na vulva. Ao exame, observou-se
discreta melhora da lesão de genitália, ausência de sangramento ativo e hímen íntegro. Durante o exame físico, a criança reproduziu gestos
da equipe, corroborando o relato da mãe de que ela repetia seus gestos. A conclusão do serviço de Ginecologia foi de que as lesões
encontradas eram compatíveis com o relato materno e com queimadura pela substância química envolvida. No atendimento realizado pelo Serviço
Social, também no dia seguinte, a responsável relatou que a substância em questão era um produto de limpeza utilizado pela família para
desentupir pias, sendo guardada no chão da cozinha da casa, atrás do fogão, para que a criança não tivesse acesso ao produto. A família era
procedente do Ceará e residia há poucos meses na cidade do Rio de Janeiro. A mãe, 19 anos, garçonete, trabalhava no turno da noite. O pai,
20 anos, trabalhava como auxiliar de cozinha no turno da manhã. Ambos se revezavam nos cuidados diários com a criança, com o suporte
eventual de familiares. A criança não frequentava creche. A impressão da equipe multidisciplinar, com base no relato materno complementado
pelo exame físico, não reforçou as suspeitas de possível ocorrência de abuso sexual. Assim, considerou-se o fato como acidente, optando-se
pela não notificação ao Conselho Tutelar naquele momento. Após quatro dias de internação hospitalar, a paciente recebeu alta. No
acompanhamento ambulatorial, percebeu-se a necessidade de esclarecer melhor as circunstâncias do acidente para avaliar se teria havido
negligência de supervisão. A mãe confirmou os mesmos fatos, acrescentando que, antes de lavar, tentou retirar o produto da vulva da criança
esfregando sua mão para "limpar". Sentia-se culpada porque soube, já no hospital, que essa ação pode ter contribuído para tornar a
queimadura mais profunda. Os contatos com a família após a alta não sugeriram negligência de cuidados. O hidróxido de sódio (soda cáustica)
é substância sólida incombustível, higroscópica e bastante hidrossolúvel, cuja solução aquosa é fortemente alcalina( 9 ). Compõe produtos de
limpeza domésticos, como aqueles usados para desentupir pias e ralos, o que faz com que crianças fiquem mais expostas ao contato, como no
caso relatado. As queimaduras por álcalis penetram mais profundamente na pele, se comparadas às queimaduras térmicas ou por ácidos. Essa
lesão tecidual compreende três fatores: desidratação celular intensa; saponificação da gordura, levando à perda do isolamento térmico do
corpo; e a inativação das proteínas enzimáticas que, paralelamente, formam ligações com o álcali, originando uma reação com produção de
calor, agravando ainda mais a lesão inicial( 6 , 10 ). A gravidade dessas lesões teciduais está diretamente relacionada ao tipo, à
quantidade e à concentração da substância, assim como ao tempo de contato com a superfície corporal. Podem ocorrer complicações agudas,
crônicas e até mesmo sequelas permanentes( 10 ). A queimadura química em crianças é primariamente acidental. Na revisão da literatura, só
foram encontrados dois relatos de caso de exposição à soda cáustica como forma de maus-tratos à criança( 11 , 12 ). A ocorrência rara de
lesões por contato causadas por esse agente químico, bem como o aspecto extenso e profundo da lesão no caso em questão, certamente
contribuíram para que a equipe da emergência suspeitasse de abuso sexual. Seria pouco provável que apenas o contato com um produto de
limpeza, conforme relatado pela mãe, fosse capaz de causar tal lesão. De fato, a incompatibilidade entre o tipo de lesão e o mecanismo
relatado pelos responsáveis é um dos indicadores para a suspeita de violência e requer um aprofundamento da avaliação para esclarecer as
circunstâncias que levaram à lesão( 13 ). Quando existe a possibilidade de a causa de uma lesão ser intencional, os profissionais se deparam
com novas questões a serem esclarecidas, como no caso relatado: a suspeita de abuso sexual e a possibilidade de ter havido negligência na
supervisão da criança. Ambas as situações colocam para a equipe de saúde o desafio de transcender às questões meramente clínicas para
compreender os aspectos sociais, culturais e afetivos das famílias atendidas, o que requer disponibilidade interna dos profissionais para
uma escuta diferenciada e certa experiência na condução dos casos de forma tranquila e sem assustar ou acusar a família. Esclarecer as
circunstâncias que levaram à lesão, saber quem cuida da criança e se esses cuidados estão adequados para sua idade e seu desenvolvimento,
como é o ambiente em que a família vive, se já ocorreram outros acidentes, se houve demora na procura de atendimento e se a criança interage
e se comporta de forma adequada com o cuidador são alguns dos parâmetros que auxiliam nessa avaliação( 14 ). Dessa forma, pode-se verificar
o grau de risco ao qual a criança pode estar exposta e decidir pela indicação de internação como medida protetiva, de notificação ao
Conselho Tutelar, necessidade de seguimento ambulatorial, entre outras providências a serem tomadas. Cabe ressaltar que a notificação deve
ser feita mesmo nos casos suspeitos, sempre que não haja possibilidade de acionar outros profissionais que auxiliem no esclarecimento dos
indícios encontrados. Sendo a Emergência uma importante porta de entrada para a rede de saúde, cabe ainda aos profissionais que aí trabalham
a tarefa de criar um vínculo positivo com os responsáveis, de modo que haja adesão ao seguimento proposto após a alta. O acompanhamento
ambulatorial é uma forma de garantir a proteção da criança, na medida em que possibilita a supervisão do caso em longo prazo. Desta forma,
pode-se conhecer o vínculo dos pais com a criança, o contexto familiar e a ocorrência de novos problemas de saúde, além de orientar os pais
quanto à prevenção de acidentes e de maus-tratos. A negligência é um tipo de violência muito frequente contra crianças em todo o mundo.
Segundo o Ministério da Saúde, caracteriza-se pelo descaso com o bem-estar e a segurança, com a afetividade ou com a educação de crianças ou
adolescentes ou ainda pela recusa dos pais em aceitar as orientações do calendário vacinal, tratamentos medicamentosos, orientação
educacional e preventiva( 13 ). A cronicidade dessas ações e sua reincidência são importantes características a serem avaliadas para
configurar a presença de negligência. A história social dessa família, os vínculos familiares e os cuidados prévios com a criança em questão
apontavam para cuidados adequados e indicavam que o acidente decorreu de um descuido pontual, passível nas circunstâncias apuradas. No
seguimento ambulatorial, a mãe afirmou que costuma trancar a porta do quarto para dormir à tarde com a filha, mas havia se esquecido naquele
dia. A equipe do ambulatório teve como foco a orientação para que a mãe acionasse sua rede de apoio familiar para ajudar nos cuidados da
criança e reforçar as medidas de prevenção de acidentes. Nos seis meses seguintes ao acidente, houve boa adesão ao acompanhamento, sem
qualquer tipo de intercorrência. Para promover a segurança de crianças de um a dois anos, é importante orientar os pais quanto a não deixar
ao alcance os objetos pontiagudos, cortantes ou que possam ser engolidos; colocar proteção nas escadas e janelas; proteger os cantos dos
móveis; colocar obstáculo na porta da cozinha e manter fechada a porta do banheiro; usar assento especial para crianças no automóvel, sendo
este colocado no banco de trás do carro; guardar produtos de limpeza e remédios em armários trancados, colocando-os em lugares altos( 15 ).
A ocorrência deste caso chama mais uma vez a atenção dos profissionais de saúde para a relevância da prevenção de acidentes, que deve ser
feita rotineiramente durante todo o acompanhamento da criança e do adolescente, adaptando-se às etapas de desenvolvimento e ao contexto de
vida das famílias. As equipes de saúde precisam também estar preparadas para incluir a possibilidade de violência como um diagnóstico
diferencial quando pertinente, sabendo conduzir o esclarecimento das suspeitas de modo acolhedor, a fim de não prejudicar o próprio processo
de cuidado e nem a relação com a família.
