Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH) is an extremely rare benign tumor, primarily diagnosed in young infants and children and it often
simulates malignant tumors on imaging. We present computerized tomography and magnetic resonance imaging findings of two nasal
chondromesenchymal hamartomas in a 5-year-old boy and a 6-week-old girl. NCMH is a rare, benign tumor-like lesion with good biologic
behavior. No recurrence after complete resection or malignant transformation of NCMH has been reported. A correct diagnosis is imperative to
avoid unnecessary adjuvant therapy. Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH) is a rare, relatively newly discovered, pediatric tumor. In
1998, McDermott et al. were the first to use the term NCMH to describe a tumor consisting mainly of chondroid or cartilaginous tissues and
mesenchymal elements that occurred in the nasal cavity and had similar morphology to chest wall mesenchymal hamartoma occurring exclusively
in infancy. Reported cases have occurred mostly in infants and young children, with characteristic histopathological features similar to
chest wall mesenchymal hamartoma in infancy . However, the affected age range can vary from newborn to the very elderly [1, 6–11]. To the
best of our knowledge, NCMH has been reported in less than 25 cases in the English medical literature [11, 12]; thus, the pathogenesis of
NCMH remains poorly understood. In this paper, we present computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of NCMH in
two young children. A 5-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of nasal obstruction, recurrent sinusitis, and noisy
breathing over a period of 4 years. The child had normal nutrition and development. Physical examination revealed a smooth, purple, non-
tender mass attached to the roof of the right nasal cavity. No palpable cervical lymphadenopathy was identified. The remainder of his
medical and family history was unremarkable. A CT scan revealed an oval-shaped, well-defined homogeneous soft-tissue mass in the right nasal
cavity. The mass measured 2.5 × 3.6 × 4.3 cm and involved the ethmoid sinus, extending up to the cribriform plate and the anterior cranial
fossa with evidence of bony erosion of the cribriform plate. Tumor density was measured in regions of interest in different slices and
ranged from 33 to 36 Hounsfield Units (HU) before contrast injection; it was strikingly enhanced after injection, to a range of 64 to 69 HU
(Figure 1). MRI demonstrated a well-demarcated homogeneous mass extending to the anterior cranial fossa in the right nasal cavity. The mass
had low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and mixed high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, with striking inhomogeneous
enhancement (Figure 2). No calcification, cystic component, or definite dural enhancement was identified. The right nasal cavity was
dilated. The middle and inferior turbinates were medially compressed and the nasal septum was deviated to the left, but the mass did not
invade adjacent structures. A biopsy was performed and the pathology report was consistent with NCMH. Operative findings revealed a well-
defined mass attached to the anterior skull base, and a subtotal resection was performed. Histopathologically, the mass was composed mainly
of irregular islands of chondroid tissues and mesenchymal elements such as spindle cells in a myxoid stroma (Figure 3). At present, a
follow-up CT at 3 years revealed no recurrence.Figure 1 CT of sinonasal cavity. (a) An axial non-contrast CT revealed an ovoid soft-tissue
mass in the right nasal cavity. (b ) An axial contrast-enhanced CT image showed marked enhancement. (c) A coronal contrast-enhanced CT image
revealed a marked enhanced mass which extends into the anterior cranial fossa and erodes the cribriform plate (arrow). The nasal septum was
deviated to the left and the right nasal cavity dilated.Figure 2 MR Imaging of sinonasal cavity. (a) An axial T1-weighted MRI revealed a
mildly hypointense mass in the right nasal cavity. (b) An axial T2-weighted MRI showed a well-defined hyperintense mass and strong signal in
both maxillary sinuses. (c) A coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI showed striking enhancement of the mass, extending into the anterior
fossa with intact dura.Figure 3 High-power photomicrograph. (a) A photomicrograph of the mass showing an irregular island of cartilage
merged with spindle cells (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification × 100). (b) A high-power photomicrograph showing spindle cells loosely
arranged in myxoid stroma (hematoxylin-eosin, ×200). CT of sinonasal cavity. (a) An axial non-contrast CT revealed an ovoid soft-tissue mass
in the right nasal cavity. (b ) An axial contrast-enhanced CT image showed marked enhancement. (c) A coronal contrast-enhanced CT image
revealed a marked enhanced mass which extends into the anterior cranial fossa and erodes the cribriform plate (arrow). The nasal septum was
deviated to the left and the right nasal cavity dilated. MR Imaging of sinonasal cavity. (a) An axial T1-weighted MRI revealed a mildly
hypointense mass in the right nasal cavity. (b) An axial T2-weighted MRI showed a well-defined hyperintense mass and strong signal in both
maxillary sinuses. (c) A coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI showed striking enhancement of the mass, extending into the anterior
fossa with intact dura. High-power photomicrograph. (a) A photomicrograph of the mass showing an irregular island of cartilage merged with
spindle cells (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification × 100). (b) A high-power photomicrograph showing spindle cells loosely arranged in
myxoid stroma (hematoxylin-eosin, ×200). A 6-week-old girl, born at full term by transvaginal delivery, presented with a 4-week history of
left nasal watery rhinorrhea and obstruction. Physical examination revealed a purple polypoid mass in the left nasal cavity. All other
findings of her medical and family history were unremarkable. Non-contrast CT scans revealed a 2.6 × 3.4 × 3.9 cm well-defined, expansile
mass with amorphous calcification in the left nasal cavity (Figure 4). The mass caused pressure remodeling of the adjacent bones without
evidence of destruction or invasion of the adjacent structures. MRI demonstrated that the signal intensity of the mass was heterogeneous on
T1- and T2-weighted images. The T2-weighted images further showed multiple round areas of high signal intensity within the lesion. The
majority of the mass showed a strongly heterogeneous enhancement and the multiple round areas of high signal intensity on T2-weighted images
were demonstrated as non-enhancing cystic components after administration of contrast medium (Figure 5). Total resection of the mass was
performed in this patient. Histopathologically, the mass was composed of multiple irregular cartilage islands in mesenchymal elements such
as spindle cells in a myxoid stroma. The patient is currently doing well postoperatively, without evidence of residue or recurrence
according to a 10-month follow-up CT scan.Figure 4 An axial non-contrast CT revealed an well-defined, irregular, calcified soft-tissue mass
in the left nasal cavity. Figure 5 MR Imaging of sinonasal cavity. (a) An axial T2-weighted MRI showed a well-defined, heterogeneous
hyperintense mass containing multiple small round areas of higher signal intensity (arrow). (b) Axial contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed
T1-weighted image demonstrated striking heterogeneous enhancement of the mass with multiple non-enhanced cystic components within the lesion
(arrow). An axial non-contrast CT revealed an well-defined, irregular, calcified soft-tissue mass in the left nasal cavity. MR Imaging of
sinonasal cavity. (a) An axial T2-weighted MRI showed a well-defined, heterogeneous hyperintense mass containing multiple small round areas
of higher signal intensity (arrow). (b) Axial contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed T1-weighted image demonstrated striking heterogeneous
enhancement of the mass with multiple non-enhanced cystic components within the lesion (arrow). The most common sinonasal tumors are
epithelial in nature. However, nasal masses, including those of epithelial and mesenchymal origin, are infrequently encountered in young
infants and children. Nasal hamartomatous lesions may be predominantly composed of mesenchymal and epithelial elements. Several different
types of hamartomatous lesions, including angiomatous, lipomatous, chondroid, neurogenic, and epithelial hamartomas, depending on
preponderant tissue, have been documented in the literature . Mesenchymal hamartomas are more common than epithelial lesions, but a
hamartoma of purely epithelial elements has not been described in children . The initial diagnosis of NCMH can be difficult or mistaken
radiographically. A correct diagnosis is made primarily from histopathologic examination. However, CT or MRI are diagnostic imaging
techniques of choice because they can reveal the tumor’s site of origin, extension, and relationships to adjacent structures, and can also
help determine the texture of the mass and aid in planning resection surgery. Most reported cases involved a heterogeneous soft-tissue mass,
which were predominantly solid and cystic with or without calcification on a CT scan [1, 3, 7, 10, 11]. The solid component of the tumor is
usually strongly enhanced. The lesion is inhomogeneous with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and with high signal intensity on
T2-weighted images with strongly inhomogeneous contrast enhancement. Calcification may be an important diagnostic clue which may help
differentiate it from other nasal masses. In a review of CT imaging characteristics of 15 reported cases with NCMH , 67% revealed bony
remodeling, thinning, or erosion, 53% demonstrated ethmoid sinus or intracranial extension through the cribriform plate, 50% demonstrated
internal calcifications, 40% showed cystic components, and 67% demonstrated moderate to strong enhancement. In our two cases, CT of the
lesion showed a well-demarcated homogeneous or heterogeneous soft-tissue mass with strong enhancement. In addition, it had low signal
intensity on T1-weighted MRI and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, with marked heterogeneous enhancement; 50% demonstrated
calcification or apparent cystic portions within the lesions, which is similar to other reported cases in the literature . The differential
diagnosis of NCMH mainly includes nasoethmoidal encephalocele, nasal glioma, rhabdomyosarcoma, lymphoma, and chondrosarcoma. Nasoethmoidal
encephaloceles often show mixed density or central soft tissue and peripheral water without marked enhancement, as well as a defect in bone,
but no destruction of the anterior cranial fossa . Nasal gliomas embryologically connect to the brain and are partially or completely sealed
off with the same signal characteristics as the brain on MRI [12, 13]. Nasal lymphomas are usually homogeneous soft-tissue masses with
uniform mild enhancement that distinguish them from NCMH. It can be very difficult to differentiate NCMH from rhabdomyosarcoma and
chondrosarcoma radiographically, but the latter two tend to have a much more destructive, ill-defined, and rapid-growing nature . We present
two cases of NCMH to alert others that an intranasal mass should be added to the list of differential diagnoses. NCMH is a rare, benign
tumor-like lesion with good biologic behavior. No recurrence after complete resection or malignant transformation of NCMH has been reported.
A correct diagnosis is imperative to avoid unnecessary adjuvant therapy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor-in-chief of
this journal. Computed tomography Hounsfield Units Magnetic resonance imaging Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TT Wang contributed as diagnostic radiologists. WH Li planned,
designed and analyzed the study, collected data and wrote the manuscript. QQ Li, YF Cui, CT Chu, and G Ren collected data. XR Wu contributed
as a pathologist and helped in writing the manuscript. ML Xiang contributed as otolaryngology–head and neck surgeon and performed the
operation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the two patients for publication
of these case reports.
