JJSA is an 81-year-old male patient hospitalized for decompensated heart failure. At 71 years of age, he experienced progressive dyspnea
that lasted for 1 month and an episode of palpitation that lasted for 1 day and arrived at at the emergency department. He gave history of
undergoing cardioversion in the past. He was then referred to the outpatient clinic of the InCor in October 1995. He also reported that he
had long-term pulmonary arterial hypertension and had undergone surgery for the removal of an intracranial hematoma in the past. Physical
examination, during the first consultation (October 30, 1995), revealed the following: heart rate of 76 beats per minute (bpm), systemic
blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, normal findings on chest auscultation. However, cardiac auscultation revealed normal heart sounds, regular
rhythm, and a systolic murmur (1+/4+) in the aortic area. Abdominal examination did not reveal any abnormalities and the patient did not
have pedal edema. ECG (October 30, 1995) showed sinus rhythm with atrial extrasystoles, heart rate of 100 bpm, and signs of right atrial
overload (small QRS complex in lead V1 and normal in lead V2) as shown in Figure 1. Electrocardiogram showing sinus rhythm and right atrial
overload. Four days later, he sought emergency medical assistance because the dyspnea had worsened. Physical examination (November 3, 1995)
showed the patient was in a stable condition, had tachypnea (respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute), heart rate of 80 bpm, and systemic
arterial pressure of 90/70 mmHg. Chest auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds at the base of the right lung and crepitations at the
base of the left lung. Cardiac auscultation revealed a regular rhythm with the heart sounds were muffled in both systolic and diastolic
phases. There were no murmurs or pericardial rub. The liver was palpated 3 cm below the right costal margin and there was swelling of the
right calf. Chest X-ray revealed right atrial opacification; ECG showed no changes. The results of the laboratory tests were as follows:
hemoglobin 16.9 g/dL, hematocrit 39%, leucocytes 5,500/mm3 (60% neutrophils, 33% lymphocytes, and 7% monocytes), platelets 244,000/mm3,
sodium 145 mEq/L, potassium 4.3 mEq/L, urea 39 mg/dL, creatinine 1.7 mg/dL, and blood glucose 97 mg/dL. Room-air pulse oximetry showed pH
7.34, pO2 66 mmHg, pCO2 33 mmHg, oxygen saturation 94%, bicarbonate 22 mEq/L, base excess -8 mEq/L. Pulmonary perfusion/ventilation
scintigraphy (November 3, 1995) showed hypoperfusion in the right upper lobe, anterior basal and lateral basal segments of the right lower
lobe, lateral basal segment of the left lower lobe, and anterior segment of the left upper lobe. Ventilation was normal except in the base
of the right lung, where it was decreased. The examination indicated a parenchymatous pathology in the base of the right lung and
thromboembolism in the other pulmonary regions (Figure 2). Pulmonary perfusion/ventilation scintigraphy showing hypoperfusion in the right
upper lobe, anterior basal and lateral basal segments of the right lower lobe, lateral basal segment of the left lower lobe, and anterior
segment of the left upper lobe, and decreased ventilation in the base of the right lung. The patient received oxygen supplementation via
nasal catheter (1 L/min), intravenous heparin (1.000 U/h), 40 mg of oral furosemide, and 37.5 mg of oral captopril daily. On the third day
of hospitalization the patient showed tachycardia, and ECG revealed atrial flutter with atrioventricular block 2:1 (Figure 3). The patient
underwent cardioversion and sinus rhythm was maintained (Figure 4) with amiodarone (600 mg daily). Electrocardiogram showing atrial flutter
with a 2:1 atrioventricular block. Electrocardiogram showing sinus rhythm and lateral inactive area. The dyspnea ameliorated and the patient
remained hemodynamically stable. He was discharged on the seventh day of hospitalization and was prescribed warfarin (5 mg), captopril (38.5
mg), furosemide (40 mg), and digoxin (0.25 mg) daily. Echocardiographic evaluation (June 25, 1996) revealed the following measurements:
aorta 33 mm, left atrium 52 mm, right ventricle 30 mm, left ventricle (diastole/systole) 64/55 mm, and ejection fraction 36%. There was
thickening of the aortic valve without stenosis, moderate tricuspid insufficiency, diffuse hypokinesis of both ventricles, and the systolic
pressure of the right ventricle was estimated as 77 mmHg, with signs of pulmonary arterial hypertension (pulmonary valve corrected with
absent A wave). Serological tests for Chagas disease was negative. Echocardiographic evaluation performed later (February 10, 1999) revealed
the following measurements: aorta 34 mm, left atrium 47 mm, right ventricle 33 mm, left ventricle (diastole/systole) 64/51 mm, and ejection
fraction 49%. There was thickening of the aortic valve with without stenosis, moderate tricuspid insufficiency, diffuse hypokinesis of both
ventricles, and the systolic pressure of the right ventricle was estimated as 79 mmHg, with signs of pulmonary arterial hypertension
(pulmonary valve corrected with absent A wave). The patient always experienced dyspnea on moderate exertion and there were several episodes
of atrial flutter with subsequent 2:1 atrioventricular conduction, and the control of coagulation was irregular. Laboratory tests performed
in 2004 showed the following results: TSH 9.54 µU/mL, total cholesterol 112 mg/dL, HDL-C 47 mg/dL, LDL-C 53 mg/dL, triglycerides 52 mg/dL,
creatinine 1.1 mg/dL, and glucose 87 mg/dL. From 1999 onwards, the patient's daily medication consisted of spironolactone (25 mg), enalapril
(40 mg), furosemide (40 mg), carvedilol (12.5 mg), digoxin (0.25 mg), and warfarin (5 mg). An X-ray obtained on May 10, 2005, revealed right
pleural thickening with opacification of the right costophrenic angle and the lower third of the right hemithorax. A laboratory evaluation
performed in January 2005 showed that creatinine had increased to 1.9 mg/dL. An analysis performed later (February 2006) showed an even
higher level of 2.3 mg/dL, with urea of 66 mg/dL. In February 2006, the laboratory tests results were as follows: total cholesterol 84
mg/dL, triglycerides 44 mg/dL, potassium 4.8 mEq/L, sodium 144 mEq/L, creatinine 2.3 mg/dL, urea 66 mg/dL, glucose 78 mg/dL, and PT-INR 1.6.
The urinalysis results were as follows: density 1.01, pH 5.0, protein 0.6 g/L, free hemoglobin +++, leucocytes 56,000/mL, and erythrocytes
30,000/mL. The patient was in a stable condition until March 3rd, 2006, when he sought medical assistance because of worsening dyspnea
worsening and pedal edema (present for 10 days). He reported having stopped his medication approximately 1 month before. Physical
examination (March 3, 2006) revealed anasarca, heart rate of 80 bpm, systemic arterial pressure of 90/70 mmHg, lungs with decreased breath
sounds in the base of the left lung. Cardiac auscultation showed irregular rhythm, muffled heart sounds, and a systolic murmur (++/4+) in
the tricuspid area. There was abdominal swelling without tenderness, and bowel movements were present. Scrotal and pedal edema were present
(++++/4+). ECG (March 3, 2006) revealed an irregular rhythm without a visible P wave, frequent ventricular extrasystoles, low-voltage QRS
complexes in the frontal plane and in V4 to V6 leads, and left bundle branch block (Figure 5). Electrocardiogram: ventricular extrasystoles,
atrial fibrillation, left bundle branch block. The laboratory tests performed on March 3, 2006 showed the following results: erythrocytes
4.4 million/mm3, hematocrit 43%, hemoglobin 14.4 g%, leukocytes 2,900/mm3 (neutrophils 56%, eosinophils 2%, lymphocytes 32%, monocytes 16%),
platelets 70,000/mm3, PT-INR 1.8, magnesium, 1.9 mEq/L, calcium 4.76 mEq/L, creatinine 3.3 mg/dL, urea 124 mg/dL, potassium 4.8 mEq/L,
sodium 140 mEq/L, and glucose 88 mg/dL. The patient received 40 mg of furosemide intravenously and was prescribed 120 mg of furosemide, 37.5
mg of captopril, and 0.5 mg of digoxin daily. The patient was diagnosed with congestive cardiac failure and malnutrition, thrombocytopenia,
lymphopenia, and pneumonia. He was further prescribed 2 g of ceftriaxone as antibiotic prophylaxis. The patient remained hypotensive and was
administered intravenous dobutamine. The laboratory test results on the second day of hospitalization (March 4, 2006) revealed the
following: erythrocytes 3.7 million/mm3, hemoglobin 12.7 g/dL, hematocrit 36%, MCV 97 µm3, leukocytes 2,300/mm3 (neutrophils 60%,
eosinophils 2%, lymphocytes 25%, and monocytes 13%), platelets 54,000/mm3, urea 127 mg/dL, creatinine 3.3 mg/dL, potassium 4.8 mEq/L, and
sodium 145 mEq/L. In the afternoon that day, the patient suffered a cardiorespiratory arrest and died despite the attempts for
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. An 81-year-old man hospitalized for worsening dyspnea. The patient reported having systemic arterial
hypertension for 10 years, with a history of electrical cardioversion for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia and having been hospitalized
in the past for decompensated heart failure. During the penultimate hospitalization he had tachypnea and hypoxemia with the swelling of the
right calf. Chest X-ray revealed opacification of the right lung base. On the basis of this data, the most probable diagnosis was pulmonary
thromboembolism1. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed by perfusion/ventilation scintigraphy, which showed hypoperfusion with preserved
ventilation. The complementary test most currently used is angiotomography of the pulmonary arteries, which is an alternative less invasive
than the gold standard technique of pulmonary angiography. Pulmonary perfusion/ventilation scintigraphy has an important role as it
diagnoses 30%-50% cases, although it may have a high rate of inconclusive results1. Ecocardiography revealed systolic dysfunction (left
ventricular ejection fraction of 36%), enlarged left atrium (47 mm), and increased pulmonary artery pressure, a complication of pulmonary
thromboembolism that is observed in up to 26% of cases1. Support therapy and anticoagulation treatment were initiated and maintained after
hospital discharge. With time, the patient improved but remained oligosymptomatic and showed progressive renal failure. He showed new
cardiac decompensation after having interrupted the use of medications and was hospitalized for treatment. On admission, leukopenia,
lymphopenia, and thrombocytopenia were observed. On admission, the chest X-ray showed pleural effusion and a pulmonary consolidation. The
most probable diagnosis for this elderly patient, who had acute cardiac decompensation, was hypotensive, and whose chest X-ray showed
consolidation, would be pneumonia and antibiotic therapy should be initiated. However, a diagnosis of myeloproliferative disorder should be
considered because the patient had leukopenia, lymphopenia, and thrombocytopenia. The pulmonary thromboembolism, due to tumor embolism, may
present itself as a consolidation in the chest X-ray1. Therefore, multiple myeloma is a possible diagnosis, because plasmocyte mutations are
unique, with neoplastic proliferation of plasmocytes and production of monoclonal immunoglobulin that results in several alterations, such
as cytopenia and renal failure. Renal failure occurs in 20% patients with multiple myeloma. Renal damage is caused by the immunoglobulin
light chains produced by the neoplasm. The early mortality rate is 30% among patients with myeloma who progress with renal failure and is
mainly associated with sepsis2. Circulating immunoglobulins in multiple myeloma increase serum viscosity and allow the formation of thrombi
and the occurrence of embolism. Therefore, it is reasonable to think that the patient may have had deep vein thrombosis followed by
pulmonary thromboembolism, which can be an early manifestation of multiple myeloma3. Cardiac involvement can also occur, usually resulting
in recurrent high-output decompensated cardiac failure4. Decompensated heart failure, in patients with multiple myeloma, can be divided into
2 subgroups: low-output failure, which is more common, and high-output failure5. High-output decompensated cardiac failure usually occurs in
patients with with preserved left ventricular contractility or underlying structural heart disease, which leads to contractile impairment
because of structural deterioration5. The cause of the high-output failure in multiple myeloma remains only partially understood and has
been associated with several factors. These include increased splenic inflow in patients who have splenomegaly with a splenic inflow
increase of 55% (in these cases, the spleen functions almost like a arteriovenous fistula), anemia, osteoclastic lesions caused by the
disease, which produce substances that lead to high-heart output state6. Amyloidosis should be considered as a differential diagnosis or
associated with multiple myeloma, because it can coexist in 10% cases7. Most frequently, multiple myeloma occurs first and amyloidosis
develops later. Some authors have reported cases in which amyloidosis was diagnosed first; however, these cases tend to be more serious and
have lower survival of approximately 1-2 years7. Amyloidosis is an uncommon disease and is therefore often not taken into consideration
during diagnosis. It usually presents as restrictive cardiomyopathy, with systolic function preserved until its last stage. Biatrial
dilation is also present, which leads to an increase in the incidence of thromboembolic events8,9. Therefore, secondary causes should be
investigated in elderly patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, progressive worsening of renal function, and thromboembolic phenomena.
Clinical changes primarily treated as conditions separate from the underlying disease may have a common origin of monoclonal gammopathy,
which may present as amyloidosis and multiple myeloma. (Dra. Bruna Affonso Madaloso) Diagnostic hypotheses: pulmonary thromboembolism,
cardiac failure attributed to cardiac amyloidosis, multiple myeloma. (Dra. Bruna Affonso Madaloso) At autopsy, the heart was heavy and
enlarged; however, the chambers appeared normal. Microscopic examination showed that the primary disease was amyloidosis. This condition
affected the myocardium (Figure 6) and the pericardium (Figure 7). In particular, obstructions were observed in the vascular tree of both
coronary arteries, leading to the formation of areas of myocardial fibrosis. In addition, obstructions of the vessels supplying the
pulmonary artery, and the aorta (vessels of the vasa vasorum) and of renal vessels were noted. (A) Histological section of the myocardium
stained with Congo red, showing amyloid deposits in small vessels and the interstitium. (B) Same area observed under fluorescence microscopy
where the amyloid deposition is shown. Objective magnification: 10×. Histological section of the epicardium showing amyloid deposit
indicated by arrows. Hematoxylin and eosin staining. Objective magnification: 40×. To investigate amyloidosis, we performed
immunohistochemical analysis of immunoglobulin light chains. Kappa light-chain staining was negative and lambda light-chain staining was
positive (Figure 8), indicating that the patient probably had multiple myeloma. Supporting this was the fact that he had pancytopenia and
systemic signs compatible with neoplasia. In the bone marrow sample obtained at autopsy (rib, Figure 9), there was no plasmacytic
proliferation or amyloid deposition; however, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that the disease was present in other locations.
Histological section adjacent to that of Figure 6, with immunoperoxidase labeling for lambda light chain, showing positivity in the same
areas of the amyloid deposition. Objective magnification: 10×. Histological section of the bone marrow showing absence of plasmacytic
proliferation. Hematoxilin and eosin staining; objective magnification: 20×. The patient was hypertensive and had benign nephrosclerosis and
myocardiocyte hypertrophy. In addition, he had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. As a consequence, the patient had cardiac failure.
Secondarily, he had thrombosis in the right atrium. Thus, pulmonary thromboembolism was the causative factor of death (Figure 10). (Dr.
Paulo Sampaio Gutierrez) Thromboembolism of the central pulmonary artery: gross examination (A) and microscopy (B). Hematoxylin and eosin
staining. Objective magnification: 5×. Primary diagnosis: cardiovascular amyloidosis (AL type) (deposition of lambda light chain). Secondary
diagnosis: systemic arterial hypertension. Causa mortis: pulmonary thromboembolism. (Dr. Paulo Sampaio Gutierrez) The course of progression
of cardiac failure suggests that the primary reason may not be amyloidosis. Possibly, the initial oligosymptomatic phase was caused by
systemic arterial hypertension with hypertensive myocardiopathy. Amyloidosis had a major role in the worsening of the patient's condition
and in the final outcome. Amyloid deposition was very significant in vessel walls. In most cases, cardiovascular amyloidosis is usually
diagnosed at autopsy10. A few years ago, we reported that <50% cases were diagnosed before patients die11. In particular, cardiac failure
occurred in elderly patients and in patients with other diseases, as was the case with the present patient11. Other difficulties include the
absence of low-voltage QRS complexes and the existence of systolic dysfunction. Hence, amyloidosis is suspected in cases of unusual clinical
and physiopathological patterns, which normally involve younger patients; however, it occurs mostly in elderly patients who have comorbid
conditions. More than 20 proteins with anomalous conformation are known to form amyloid deposits. In the heart, the most common proteins are
transthyretin (especially in senile cardiovascular amyloidosis) and light-chain amyloidosis (AL amyloidosis)12. AL amyloidosis appears to be
more frequent; however, the number of cases of senile cardiovascular amyloidosis is increasing as a result of the aging of the population13.
The prognosis of AL amyloidosis is worse than that of senile cardiovascular amyloidosis14. In the present case, lambda light-chain staining
showed that the disease was AL amyloidosis, despite the patient's advanced age. Gammopathies leading to AL amyloidosis and multiple myeloma
are plasmocyte dyscrasias, but the relationship between these conditions is not direct. Only 10%-15% patients with myeloma exhibit amyloid
deposition. The reverse, i.e., the number of patients with amyloidosis who present myeloma, has been less analyzed. A study conducted with
46 patients with amyloidosis in several organs (83% with cardiac involvement) showed that 57% of them met the criteria for myeloma15. In the
case of our patient, because amyloidosis was not clinically suspected, tests for multiple myeloma were not conducted. The bone marrow sample
analyzed during autopsy did not exhibit plasmocyte proliferation; however, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that the disease
was present in other locations. Although amyloid deposition in the pericardium has been described16, it is uncommon. Pulmonary
thromboembolism is the most frequent cause of death without diagnosis. In a survey conducted in our hospital17, it accounted for 34% of the
cases in which there were discrepancies between diagnoses and the autopsy findings. Section editor: Alfredo José Mansur
(ajmansur@incor.usp.br) Associate editors: Desidério Favarato (dclfavarato@incor.usp.br) Vera Demarchi Aiello (anpvera@incor.usp.br)
