Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 11 Final Diagnosis: Fibroepithelial polyp of epiglottis Symptoms: Dysphagia •
sore throat Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: — Rare disease Fibroepithelial polyp, a common type of tumor in the skin and
genitourinary tract, is very rare in the respiratory tract. We describe clinical, radiologic, and histological features of a fibroepithelial
polyp as a rare cause of an epiglottic mass in a child. An 11-year-old female presented with a 2-month history of sore throat and dysphagia.
Flexible laryngoscopy and MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) revealed a mass on the lingual surface of the epiglottis. The mass was removed
using a carbon dioxide laser and was confirmed histologically as a fibroepithelial polyp. Fibroepithelial polyp, although uncommon, should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of epiglottic mass in children. Fibroepithelial polyp is a benign lesion with mesodermal origin.
The estimated prevalence of fibroepithelial polyp is 1.2%, with a male predilection . Chronic inflammatory process has been suggested in the
etiology of fibroepithelial polyp. Fibroepithelial polyps may have congenital, infectious, and traumatic origins . The skin and
genitourinary tract are common sites for fibroepithelial polyps. Fibroepithelial polyps in the head and neck region are documented in the
external auditory canal, nasal cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, trachea, and bronchus . To date, fibroepithelial polyp arising from the
epiglottis has not been reported. Here, we describe clinical, radiologic, and histological features of a fibroepithelial polyp as a rare
cause of an epiglottic mass in a child. An 11-year-old girl was referred to a tertiary care children’s hospital for assessment of an
epiglottis mass. The child had a 2-month history of intermittent sore throat and discomfort with swallowing. The sore throat and discomfort
with swallowing progressed without a history of fever, hoarseness, breathing difficulty, voice change, weight loss, night sweats,
hemoptysis, or change in appetite. The birth history was un-remarkable; the patient had never been hospitalized and had never undergone
surgery. Past medical history and family history also were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a well-appearing child in no
respiratory distress, normal otologic exam results, and normal nasal exam results. A flexible laryngoscopic exam showed a mass with base
attached to the lingual surface of the epiglottis. Attachment of the mass appeared to involve the majority of the right side of the
epiglottis. No attachment to the tongue base was noted. The remainder of the glottis was within normal limits with good mobility of true
vocal folds. No other abnormality was found in the head and neck region. MRI revealed a lobulated mass appearing hyperintense on T1- (Figure
1A) and T2-weighted images (Figure 1B). No intrinsic signal abnormality of the adjacent vallecula or tongue base was noted. After contrast
administration, the mass showed no enhancement (Figure 1C). The mass was removed with the aid of the CO2 laser and submitted for pathologic
examination. Light microscopic examination showed features consistent with a fibroepithelial polyp (Figure 2). We documented the clinical
presentation and management of a unique case of fibroepithelial polyp involving the epiglottis. The mass was identified when the patient
became symptomatic and suffered from dysphagia and sore throat. Symptoms of fibroepithelial polyp are usually due to local mass effect.
Depending on the size and location of the mass, the clinical presentations may include a wide variety of symptoms such as difficulty
breathing, snoring, disturbed sleep, feeling something in the throat, or aural fullness. Fibroepithelial polyps of the pharynx or
tracheobronchial tree may present as an acute medical emergency, causing upper airway obstruction. In the presence of airway obstruction,
the airway must be secured. Fibroepithelial polyps are rare benign tumors with low incidence of malignancy . The etiology of fibroepithelial
polyps has not been established. Fibroepithelial polyps may have congenital, infectious, inflammatory, and traumatic origins. The clinical
differential diagnosis for epiglottic mass in children encompasses a wide spectrum of lesions, including, but not limited to, granulomatous
lesions (tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis), infectious lesions (cat-scratch disease, fungal infections), neoplastic
lesions, and systematic diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, relapsing polychondritis, and amyloidosis). Radiologic
assessment of an epiglottic mass in a child is useful to assess the origin and extent of the mass, to aid differential diagnosis, and to
plan surgery. Computed tomography (CT) provides assessment of the mass and the surrounding bony changes; however, CT cannot discriminate
between fibroepithelial polyp and other mass lesions of the epiglottis. MRI aids surgery planning by delineating the characteristics and
extent of the mass. In the presence of a mass without rich vascular structures, the risk of bleeding during an endoscopic transoral excision
is small. Considering the potential to grow and possibility of complications, the treatment of choice for fibroepithelial polyp of the
epiglottis is surgical excision and definitive diagnosis is made by histologic examination. Histological examination of fibroepithelial
polyps demonstrates connective tissue covered by normal respiratory epithelium. Compared to papillomas, fibroepithelial polyps lack squamous
epithelial overgrowth. The present case emphasizes that fibroepithelial polyp should be included as one of the possible differential
diagnoses in patients with epiglottic mass. Axial T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) images show a lobulated mass along the free edge of
the epiglottis to the right of midline. The mass was hyperintense. No intrinsic signal abnormality of the adjacent vallecula or tongue base
was noted. Post contrast administration, the mass showed no enhancement (C). Photomicrograph of the epiglottic mass shows shows features
consistent with a fibroepithelial polyp (hematoxylin and eosin, 100× total magnification).
