Corresponding author: Shiro Imagama Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai Showa-
ward, Aichi 466-8550, Japan Phone:+81-52-744-1908, fax: +81-52-744-2674, E-mail: imagama@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp Solitary fibrous tumor (SFT)
mostly originates from the pleura because of proliferation of fibroblast cells. It is extremely rare for the tumor to originate from the
spinal cord. Here, we report a rare case of SFT in the spinal cord that recurred repeatedly and progressed from intramedullary to
extramedullary. A 40-year-old man underwent C4-5 intramedullary and extramedullary tumor resection in another hospital. Eighteen years
later, he experienced symptoms of myelopathy because of tumor recurrence; therefore, he consulted with our hospital and underwent tumor
resection again. During surgery, we found that the tumor had an intramedullary and extramedullary location. Only partial resection was
possible because of intraoperative deterioration in the compound motor action potential (CMAP). After resection, the pathological diagnosis
was SFT. The postoperative course was good. However, two years later, a third tumor resection was required because of dysuria and tumor
growth. In this surgery, total resection of the tumor was possible without intraoperative deterioration of the CMAP. The tumor has not
subsequently recurred. However, SFT recurrence is relatively common and careful follow-up is required for early detection of recurrence,
even after successful removal of the tumor. Spinal solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) is a rare disease that commonly arises from mesenchymal
cells, but is often generated from the pleura.1) Carneiro reported the first spinal case of this disease in 1996.2) Thereafter, 34 cases of
this type of spinal tumor have been documented.2-31) However, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no report of recurrent regrowth
of spinal SFT that required repeated surgeries over a long period of time to treat disorders related to the spinal cord. Here, we present a
case of SFT of the cervical spinal cord as a rare clinical entity that recurred after tumor resection and we review the literature on the
occurrence and diagnosis of this tumor type. In January 1987, a 40-year-old male with gait disturbance and numbness in both hands underwent
spinal tumor resection at another hospital. The surgery was a C3–6 laminectomy after dural incision. A tumor was found on the dorsal side of
the spinal cord and contiguous from the extramedullary to intramedullary regions at the C4–5 level. Adhesion was mild. Subtotal tumor
resection was performed and the tumor was benign pathologically. Thereafter, symptoms improved and there was no recurrence for a long
period. In September 2004, the patient presented with numbness in his upper extremities and progressive lower extremity weakness with a
complaint of gait disturbance. In the initial consultation with our hospital, spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed recurrence of
an intradural 1.9×1.7×1.9-cm nodular lesion at the C4–5 level, which was clearly circumscribed by the spinal cord (Fig. 1). The tumor
appeared as a hypointense lesion on T1-weighted images with homogeneous enhancement by gadolinium. Computed tomography displayed no
calcification around the tumor. Symptoms worsened and tumor resection was performed at our hospital in January 2005. During surgery, after
C7 laminectomy, ultrasonic imaging showed that the tumor was located in the intramedullary and extramedullary regions. After debulking of
about two-thirds of the tumor, an intraoperative deterioration in the compound motor action potential (CMAP) prevented further mass
reduction of the tumor. After resting for 30 min, the CMAP decrease was reversed. However, complete tumor resection was not performed.
Although the tumor could not be resected completely after surgery (Figs. 2A, 2B), there was improvement of symptoms such as gait disturbance
and numbness, which enabled the patient to return to work. There was no deterioration of symptoms for the following two years, but in
November 2007 the patient experienced further neurological deterioration in the bilateral lower extremities and developed a neurogenic
bladder. MRI revealed recurrence of an intradural 2.2×2.1×2.0-cm nodular lesion along the posterior aspect (Figs. 2C, 2D). Recurrence was
accompanied by paralysis of the lower extremities and a revision surgery with the goal of total resection of the tumor mass was performed in
January 2008. Total resection of the tumor without compromising the CMAP was achieved during this surgery. Postoperative MRI performed 3
years after the revision surgery confirmed total resection and showed no evidence of tumor recurrence. Lower extremity strength had fully
returned and the patient had recovered to his preoperative state (Figs. 3). Histological examination revealed a well circumscribed,
partially encapsulated tumor with bland spindle cells with somewhat vesicular nuclei. Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for
vimentin and CD34, but negative for S-100 and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). The Ki-67 proliferation index was low, at approximately 1%.
These findings are consistent with SFT (Fig. 4). Magnetic resonance imaging at the time of the initial consultation with our hospital.
Sagittal T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) of the cervical cord gave isointense and iso- to hyperintense signals due to a intradural tumor
at the C4–5 level. Sagittal T1 gadolinium-enhanced (C) and axial (D) images showed homogenous enhancement. Sagittal T2-weighted (A) and
axial (B) imaging showed recurrence of the tumor six months after surgery at our hospital. Sagittal T2-weighted (C) and axial (D) imaging
revealed tumor growth two years after surgery at our hospital. Postoperative sagittal T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) images showing the
absence of a residual tumor at the present time. Microscopic examination of the tumor specimen after hematoxylin and eosin staining showed a
well circumscribed, partially encapsulated tumor along with bland spindle cells with somewhat vesicular nuclei (A). In immunocytochemical
analysis, the tumor cells exhibited strong positivity for vimentin (B) and CD34 (C). The Ki-67 proliferation index was low (approximately
1%) (D). (A-D:×400). SFT usually originates from mesenchymal cells such as those in the pleura and peritoneum.1) Of all cases of these
tumors, 40% are found in the subcutaneous tissue2) whereas others are found in deep soft tissues of the extremities or extra-compartmentally
in the head and neck region.2,3,5) Histologically, SFT consists of spindle cells with a mixture of hypocellular and hypercellular areas, and
the stroma is rich in collagenous connective tissue with a keloid-like pattern.19) Carneiro et al. described the first case of spinal SFT in
19962) and there are currently 34 cases described in the literature.2-31) These tumors originated in the meninges, spinal cord parenchyma,
nerve root, and dura19-20,32) and occurred in the intramedullary (64%), intradural-extramedullary (12%), and extradural (24%) areas. The
location was mainly in the thoracic region (56.3%), followed by the cervical region (31.2%) and the lumbar region (12.5%).22) Among
intramedullary SFTs, the origin has been reported to be the perivascular connective tissue, pia arachnoid and pia mater.9,26,33) Most cases
may be subpial in origin, similar to intramedullary exophytic tumors, because the pial surface of the spinal cord seems to be involved in
the tumor during surgery. The tumor in our case had an intradural-extramedullary location and the origin was unclear. There have been four
previous reported cases of intra-extramedullary spinal SFT,2,5,6,14) all of which occurred in the cervical region, with attachment with the
leptomeninges, nerve root, spinal cord film, and unknown in one case each. One of these cases recurred five years after surgery, but none of
the cases had recurrence after 20 years, as found in our case. In MRI, SFTs appear as hypointense or isointense lesions in T2-weighted
images because they are rich in collagen fibers, and can be homogeneous or heterogeneous in Gd-enhanced images because they are rich in
blood vessels.3,8,16) These findings are useful for differential diagnosis with meningioma. In addition, reported cases of SFTs have not
shown the "dural tail" sign, which is suggestive of meningioma.9) Immunostaining for pathological diagnosis in our case was not performed
after the initial surgery. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with SFT based on immunostaining performed after the second surgery. Differential
diagnoses of intradural tumor include meningioma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and hemangiopericytoma (HPC).22,32) SFT is
characterized by positive immunostaining for vimentin and CD34.26,34) In contrast, most fibrous meningiomas are positive for EMA, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors are generally positive for S-100, and HPCs are generally only focally and weakly positive for CD34
antigen.22,32,34) Therefore, immunostaining is specifically required for SFT diagnosis. Most cases of SFT are benign, but the behavior is
unpredictable. Most histologically benign SFT prove to be non-recurring and non-metastasizing lesions and most histologically malignant
tumors behave aggressively.36-38) However, even a benign SFT may have multiple relapses and metastasis. Muñoz et al. reported a case of
spinal cord SFT that was primarily diagnosed as benign, but showed hepatic and pulmonary dissemination after primary tumor resection.22)
Because the possibility of recurrence is as high as 20%,8) SFTs should be treated as a low-grade malignancy.35-37) In our case, total
resection was not possible in the earlier surgery and recurrence was observed and required a reoperation. This illustrates that frequent
examination of tumor regrowth is required after partial resection of SFT and early reoperation may be needed for total resection. In
addition, even after successful removal of the tumor, careful follow-up is important for early detection of recurrence. Our experience in
this case indicates that complete removal after an accurate diagnosis and careful follow-up is desirable for SFTs. None of the authors have
a conflict of interest regarding the contents of the manuscript.
