Corresponding author: Hirotaka Hara, MD Department of Otolaryngology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi
755-8505, Japan Tel and Fax: 81-836-22-2280, E-mail: harahiro@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp A 64-year-old Japanese man visited our outpatient department
complaining of an irritable sensation in the throat, occurring two days after eating raw freshwater fish (carp sashimi) at a Japanese-style
inn. During laryngeal endoscopy, a slow-moving worm (fluke) was found attached to the surface of the right aryepiglottic fold. After
inhalation of 4% lidocaine, the fluke was removed using endoscopic forceps. Patient’s throat symptoms immediately improved. The worm was
microscopically identified as Clinostomum complanatum. C. complanatum is a digenetic trematode that usually infects fish-eating water birds.
Clinostomum infections in humans are rare, and only 21 cases have been described in Japan and Korea. C. complanatum infection is known to
occur after eating raw freshwater fish, which is a secondary intermediate host. In humans, the metacercariae are released into the stomach
and migrate through the esophagus before lodging in the throat. Primary therapy involves endoscopic removal of the worm. Clinostomum
complanatum is a digenetic trematode. The primary hosts of this parasite are birds such as herons or ducks, and its second intermediate
hosts are freshwater fish such as carp, crucian carp, or loach1, 2). The parasite becomes a metacercaria inside the second intermediate host
by forming a globular film around its body and waits for an opportunity to infect the final host1, 3, 4). Although infections in humans are
extremely rare, if a person consumes a raw freshwater fish infected by the larvae of this parasite, the larvae will excyst in the stomach,
migrate through the esophagus, and attach to the throat and mature, causing parasitic pharyngitis or laryngitis. Human laryngitis caused by
C. complanatum is a rare disease; however, in Japan, Korea, and other Asian countries where eating raw fish is a tradition, it is possible
for individuals to become infected by this intestinal parasite5, 6, 7). In this study, we describe a patient with laryngitis caused by C.
complanatum that occurred after the patient ate freshwater fish sashimi. A 64-year-old Japanese man visited the outpatient’s department of
otolaryngology, Yamaguchi University Hospital, Ube, Japan. The patient complained of suddenly developed violent cough and irritable
sensation in the throat. He also experienced intermittent throat soreness. His symptoms occurred two days after he had eaten raw carp
sashimi for dinner at a Japanese-inn situated at a hot spring. He exhibited no symptoms of hoarseness, dyspnea or swallowing disturbance.
Furthermore, a blood test showed no increase in white blood cell count or C-reactive protein level, and a differential white blood cell
count showed no eosinophilia. A fiberoptic examination of the larynx revealed no clear signs of inflammation, such as redness or swelling of
the pharynx or larynx. However, there was a foreign object attached to the surface of the right aryepiglottic fold that moved slowly during
observation (Figure 1). Considering that the patient had consumed raw carp and that the shape of the object resembled a fluke when more
closely observed, the probable diagnosis was infection by a parasitic fluke. After explaining the procedure to the patient and obtaining his
consent, an endoscopic removal of the fluke was performed under local anesthesia because he did not have a strong gag reflex. To stop the
parasite moving and to make the removal easier, 1 ml of 4% lidocaine via inhalation was administered to the patient; with the patient in the
right lateral decubitus position, a parasite of approximately 6-mm length was removed using biopsy forceps with a laryngeal endoscopy. The
parasite was almost completely motionless during removal because of the effects of the lidocaine. Removal was easy because the parasite was
not strongly attached to the mucosa, too. The patient’s throat discomfort disappeared almost immediately after the parasite was removed. The
patient was consulted and visited the Gastroenterology department of our hospital for an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to confirm that
there were no residual parasites in the esophagus or stomach, and his treatment was completed. The overall length of the parasite was
approximately 6 mm (Figure 2). Microscopic findings showed that the frontal end consisted of an oral sucker with a ventral sucker slightly
caudal to it. There were black ovaries on both sides of the body, which was identified as the digenetic trematode C. complanatum. Endoscopic
findings of Clinostomum complanatum infection A slow-moving worm attached to the surface of the larynx (arrow). Gross image of Clinostomum
complanatum (6.0 mm in length) There were black ovaries on both sides of the body. OS: oral sucker, VS: ventral sucker, OV: ovary The
frequency of parasitic infections in humans is decreasing because of changes in lifestyle and environments where food is cultivated. For
example, roundworm infections spread because of the agricultural use of human waste, but their incidence has been greatly reduced with the
widespread use of chemical fertilizers. Similarly, in Japan, improvements in sanitation have decreased the incidence of parasitic diseases,
such as tapeworms and pinworms. Sometimes overseas travelers carry parasitic diseases such as malaria. However, infections from parasites in
food are still observed in areas where people consume raw meat or fish. People in Japan, Korea, and other Asian countries have consumed raw
fish for long. One traditional dish is sashimi and slices of raw fish that are now consumed all over the world as typical Japanese food such
as sushi. Sashimi prepared from fresh marine fish can be safely consumed, but not completely safe, because parasite such as Anisakis can
infect human, and other bacteria or virus also can cause gastroenteritis. However, wild fish that live in brackish water or fresh water may
be infected with parasites; thus, they are inappropriate to be consumed as sashimi. Sashimi made from carp, a freshwater fish, is a
traditional dinner item that is sometimes served at Japanese-style hot spring inns near lakes or streams. Currently, only carp farmed in
spring water that cannot be infected by parasites are used to make sashimi because cooking wild carp is an issue. To consume the wild fresh-
water fish without heating it, it would normally have to be frozen for 24 h at −20°C (−4°F) in order to kill the parasites. As far as we
searched previous reports extensively, this case constitutes the 19th documented case of Clinostomum infection in Japan (Table 1). There are
many reports from western Japan, and the infection is prevalent in areas along the Sea of Japan7). Interestingly, there have also been two
recent reports from Korea6, 8). Sites of parasitic infection include the pharynx, arytenoid region, posterior oropharyngeal wall, and
lateral lymphatic band. Typically, the only symptom is throat discomfort. However, some case reports also mention a sore throat or
swallowing pain, while others report bloody phlegm and fever9). A diagnosis is easily made by finding the parasite. If the patient has
consumed raw freshwater fish, the physician can search for a parasite while carefully inspecting the symptomatic area. There is no effective
antiparasitic drug, which makes mechanical removal necessary. Reported methods of removal include endoscopic removal under local anesthesia
and removal using a direct laryngoscope under general anesthesia. The alleged reason for choosing to remove the parasite under general
anesthesia is to ensure a proper grip on the fluke9, 10), but the fluke can almost be completely removed under local anesthesia7, 8). In our
case, the patient’s gag reflex was not strong; therefore, we had performed the endoscopic removal of the fluke under local anesthesia. If a
direct laryngoscope was required to remove the fluke, the position of the laryngoscope should be changed in case the fluke moved, which
would probably make the procedure more complicated. In contrast, with an endoscope, even if the fluke moves the endoscope can easily bend
and follow it. Kitagawa et al. 10) reported that when they were removing C. complanatum, the fluke was quickly moving; therefore, they had
to apply directly spraying it with 8% lidocaine solution to decrease its movements. In our case, the patient inhaled 1 ml of 4% lidocaine to
stop the parasite’s movements before safely removing the parasite using biopsy forceps. In the report described above, a minimal amount of
lidocaine was used to effectively stop the parasite’s movements, and we found that inhaled only 1 ml of 4% lidocaine was also effective. In
the life cycle of C. complanatum, the metacercariae enter a patient’s body, excyst in the stomach, migrate through the esophagus, and then
attach to the throat and mature, causing parasitic laryngitis. Therefore, there may be a delay of several days between oral ingestion and
emergence of symptoms. Even when a fluke is removed from the throat, the metacercariae may remain in the digestive tract or there may be
more than one parasite, making it necessary to not only examine the throat but also perform an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. We also
performed an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy in this case the day after removing the parasite and confirmed that there were no residual
parasites. A list of human cases of Clinostomum infection in Japan. We described a rare case of laryngitis caused by C. complanatum. In
cases where patients develop throat discomfort after consuming raw freshwater fish, this disease should be considered as a possible
diagnosis, and a fiberoptic examination of the laryngopharynx should be performed. None
