To the Editor: Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is an acute, severe, frequently fatal disease associated with cardiopulmonary failure; it
is caused by hantaviruses naturally hosted by wild rodents. Rio Mamore virus (RIOMV) was first described in 1996 in Bolivia; it was
associated with the small-eared pygmy rice rat, Oligoryzomys microtis (1). Subsequently, 1 strain of RIOMV was isolated from O. microtis
rats in Peru, designated HTN-007 (2); and 2 strains were recovered in the Brazilian Amazon from O. microtis rats (RIOMV-3) and
uncharacterized species of rodents of the genus Oligoryzomys (RIOMV-4) (3). Recently, HPS cases associated with RIOMV have been reported: 2
cases in Peru (4) and 1 case in French Guiana (caused by a variant named Maripa virus) (5). We report isolation of a strain of RIOMV from a
patient with fatal HPS in Brazil. In June 2011, a 28-year-old man was admitted to the Tropical Medicine Foundation Dr. Heitor Vieira
Dourado, Amazonas State, with a 4-day febrile illness that included nonproductive cough, myalgia, and headache. Laboratory testing revealed
hematocrit within reference range (43.9%), thrombocytopenia (27,000 cells/mm3), elevated levels of liver enzymes (alanine transaminase 347
IU/L, aspartate transaminase 139 IU/L), creatinine (1.2 mg/dL), and urea (40 mg/dL). Laboratory testing ruled out malaria, leptospirosis,
and dengue. About 24 hours after hospitalization, the patient experienced hypotension, progressive dyspnea, and acute respiratory distress.
Thoracic radiographs revealed bilateral diffuse alveolar pulmonary infiltrates. Despite empirical treatment with antimicrobial drugs,
mechanical ventilation, and inotropic therapy, the patient’s clinical condition deteriorated and he died on day 6 after illness onset. The
patient, who had no history of travel, resided on a submerged region in the western floodplain of the Solimões-Amazon River, Amazonas, a
state with low population density (6.2 persons/square mile), in a rural area of Careiro da Várzea Municipality (3°11′53′′S, 59°52′18′′W),
where access is possible only by boat. He had a history of contact with rodents not only at home but also in the boat he used. A serum
sample collected on day 6 after illness onset was evaluated for hantavirus by serologic and PCR testing. ELISA result was positive for IgM
and IgG against recombinant nucleocapsid protein (N) of the Juquitiba virus (6). Viral genome was detected by reverse transcription PCR, and
the complete genomic small segment sequence, designated LH60_11/Hu (GenBank accession no. KF584259), was determined (7). This sequence was
compared with a reference panel of sequences that covered the diversity of most hantaviruses in South America and was subjected to
phylogenetic analysis by MrBayes software version 3.1.2 (8). Nucleotide and amino acid sequence similarities between all taxa for the
partial N gene were calculated by using MegAlign version 5.05 (DNASTAR, Inc.; Madison, WI, USA). The best-fit evolutionary model general
time reversible + Γ + proportion invariant was determined by using MEGA version 5.2.2 (http://www.megasoftware.com) of the dataset compiled
only 905 nt of the N gene to include sequences of Anajatuba and Rio Mearim viruses from Brazil for comparison. Bayesian analysis indicated
that strain LH60_11/Hu is closely associated with rodent-derived RIOMV-3/Olm strain (Itacoatiara, Amazonas State) and in a sister
relationship with RIOMV-4/Olsp strain (Alto Paraíso, Rondônia State) from Brazil (Figure). Analysis of the partial sequence revealed
86.6%–95.4% of genetic identity with the strains recovered from rodents and 83.4% with the Maripa virus strain from humans. The sequence
from the human patient in Peru was not available for comparison. Phylogenetic relationships among hantaviruses were estimated by using the
Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo method implemented in MrBayes version 3.1.2 (8). The relationships were based on the initial 905-nt
fragment of the small segment. The numerical value ≥0.7 at the node indicates the posterior probability replicates that supported the
interior branch. The branch labels include GenBank accession number and virus species or strain. Boldface indicates the reference sequence;
scale bar indicates nucleotide substitutions per site. RIOMV, Rio Mamore virus. In July, the patient’s house and environment were
investigated; accumulation of garbage and other waste in homes that were still flooded was observed. We obtained and tested serum samples
from 15 healthy residents (10 female, 5 male) with a recent history of acute fever; IgG against hantavirus was detected in samples from 3
women (17, 25, and 57 years of age). This case report describes RIOMV as a highly pathogenic agent of HPS in Brazil. The location of the
patient with this fulminant case of HPS, Careiro da Várzea, borders the Municipality of Itacoatiara, where RIOM-3–infected O. microtis rats
and the first HPS case in Amazonas State, with no etiologic identification so far, have been reported (3,9). Careiro da Várzea is part of an
area in which grain production is expanding, an activity that attracts rodents to human dwellings, especially those in lowland regions that
are constantly flooded. The close association between the sequences from the human and the O. microtis rat (>98% aa identity) suggests that
the patient might have been infected as a consequence of close physical contact with an RIOMV-infected O. microtis rat. The geographic
distribution of these rats and, thus, the potential area at risk for transmission of RIOMV is vast, including 5 Brazilian states in the
Amazon Basin and contiguous lowlands of Peru, Bolivia, and Paraguay (10). This study confirms the notion that ROIMV is a highly pathogenic
hantavirus. Recent recognition of RIOMV as a causative agent of HPS might be attributed to either increased awareness by local physicians or
improved diagnosis of hantavirus infections. This finding emphasizes the need for extensive molecular investigation of undiagnosed
infections because of the shared clinical features with other diseases endemic to this region (e.g., malaria and dengue). Suggested citation
for this article: Oliveira RC, Cordeiro-Santos M, Guterres A, Fernandes J, X de Melo A, AP João G, et al. Rio Mamore virus and hantavirus
pulmonary syndrome, Brazil . Emerg Infect Dis . 2014 Sep [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2009.131472 This work was supported by
the National Counsel for Technological and Scientific Development–Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (grants 407664/2012-2 and 301641/2010-2) and the
National Institute of Science and Technology for Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (grant 573739/2008-0).
