Localized nasal, conjunctival and corneal amyloidosis was diagnosed in a 15-year-old pony with nasal and conjunctival masses and severe
dyspnoea. Multiple swellings had been evident in the nostrils for at least two years and had gradually increased in size before presentation
due to dyspnoea and exercise intolerance. Surgical debulking of the masses was performed and histological examination revealed large amounts
of extracellular, hyaline, eosinophilic, Congo red positive material in the lamina propria of the nasal mucosa. A tentative diagnosis of
localized nasal amyloidosis was made. The treatment relieved the clinical signs, however, the nasal masses recurred and bilateral
conjunctival, papillary masses developed. The horse was euthanized. Nodular nasal and papillary conjunctival masses consisting of rubbery,
grey to yellow tissue were found at necropsy. At the limbus this tissue infiltrated and expanded the cornea. The masses consisted of amyloid
and moderate infiltrates of T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes were present in the tissue. No predominance of either cell type was observed and
no distinct neoplastic mass could be identified. Ultrastructural examination of the nasal mucosa and cornea confirmed the presence of
abundant extracellular deposits of non-branching fibrils ranging from 9–11 nm in diameter consistent with amyloid. Immunohistochemistry of
amyloid revealed no labelling for AA amyloid, and no peptides representing serum amyloid A (SAA) were detected by microscopic laser
dissection and subsequent mass spectrometry. Peptides from immunoglobulin kappa-like light chains were detected and are suggestive of AL
amyloidosis, however the results were inconclusive and a final identification of the amyloid protein could not be made. Nasal amyloidosis is
a clinical entity of localized amyloid deposits in the horse. Localized amyloidosis involving the conjunctiva of the horse is previously
described in only seven cases and the present case is the first case of combined, localized nasal and corneal amyloidosis in the horse. In
several reported cases surgical excision has provided clinical improvement and return to normal levels of exercise, while medical treatment
has had no effect. The present case however, shows that rapid recurrence and progression of nasal amyloidosis to involve ocular tissues can
occur and lead to recurrent respiratory obstruction. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13028-014-0050-6) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Amyloidosis is a group of disorders characterized by extracellular deposits
of hyaline, proteinaceous material which shows characteristic green birefringence under polarized light after staining with Congo red. The
different amyloid proteins all form fibrils of beta pleated sheet conformation that are resistant to degradation and hence accumulate in
tissues. Amyloid deposits are classified according to the type of protein deposited and as localized or systemic based on tissue
distribution . Several forms of amyloidoses are reported in animals, however in the horse only amyloid light chain (AL) amyloidosis and
amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis have been described . AA amyloidosis occur secondary to chronic inflammatory conditions where AA protein, a
modified form of the acute phase protein, serum amyloid A (SAA), is deposited in major organs. In the horse the AA amyloid deposition
preferentially occurs in the liver, but the spleen, kidneys, adrenals, gastrointestinal tract and lymph nodes may all be affected . Both
systemic and localized AL amyloidosis may occur in horses . Localized amyloid deposition in horses primarily affects nasal tissue or skin,
and nasal AL amyloidosis is a clinical entity in the horse . Localized amyloidosis involving the conjunctiva of the horse is previously
described in seven cases , two of which had concurrent localised nasal or multifocal, localised, upper and lower respiratory tract
amyloidosis . Equine corneal amyloid deposition is reported only once, in a horse with initial nodular cutaneous amyloidosis . To the best
of our knowledge the present case is the first equine case of combined, localized nasal, conjunctival and corneal amyloidosis. The purpose
of this article is to describe the rare condition of localized ocular and nasal amyloidosis in the horse and provide a brief review of the
literature. A 15-year-old Norwegian Shetland pony mare was presented to an equine clinic with marked dyspnoea and bilateral nodular and
diffuse swelling of the nasal mucosa at the mucocutaneous junction and rostral nasal concha in June 2008. The nodular and diffuse swelling
had been present for at least two years and had gradually increased in size and infiltrated the circumference of the nares to cause markedly
reduced luminal diameter of both nostrils. Due to the respiratory difficulties surgical debulking of the tissue was performed. Histological
examination of the excised tissue revealed large amounts of extracellular, hyaline, eosinophilic, Congo red positive material in the lamina
propria of the nasal mucosa and a tentative diagnosis of localized nasal amyloidosis was made. The surgical treatment improved the clinical
signs; however the nodular swellings recurred over the next months and multiple, papillary to nodular, conjunctival proliferations also
developed bilaterally. In March 2009 the owners elected to euthanize the pony due to the recurrence of the nodular swellings and a reduced
general condition of the animal as the swellings rapidly increased in size. The pony was euthanized and immediately necropsied. The mare was
in normal body condition. A bilateral, nodular to diffuse thickening of the nasal mucosa at the mucocutaneous junction was evident
(Figure 1). A nodule measuring 2×1×1 cm was present in the right nostril, as well as diffuse thickening of the rostral nasal mucosa. Similar
milder changes were observed in the left nostril. There were bilateral, irregular, papillary proliferations in the ocular conjunctiva
(Figure 2) and intense conjunctival hyperaemia. The proliferative tissue was rubbery, yellow to white and was protruding above the eyelid
margins expanding the conjunctiva, causing marked disruption of the normal contour of the eyelids. At the limbus the cornea was expanded by
a similar pale tissue. No other gross abnormalities were noted. Tissue samples for histology were collected from grossly abnormal tissue
including the ocular globe, conjunctivae, and nasal mucosa, as well as sections from myocardium, lung, liver and kidney. Tissue samples were
fixed in 4% buffered formaldehyde, routinely processed, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 2 μm and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Sections from the cornea, conjunctivae, nasal mucosa, liver and kidney were also stained with Congo red according to Pucthler et al. .Figure
1 Amyloid masses in the right rostral nasal cavity. Nodular to diffuse thickening of the nasal mucosa at the mucocutaneous junction were
observed (arrows). The proliferative tissue was rubbery, yellow to white and poorly demarcated from the surrounding nasal mucosa.Figure 2
Multiple papillary projections are present in the conjunctiva. Irregular, papillary proliferations of the ocular conjunctiva were evident.
Amyloid masses in the right rostral nasal cavity. Nodular to diffuse thickening of the nasal mucosa at the mucocutaneous junction were
observed (arrows). The proliferative tissue was rubbery, yellow to white and poorly demarcated from the surrounding nasal mucosa. Multiple
papillary projections are present in the conjunctiva. Irregular, papillary proliferations of the ocular conjunctiva were evident.
Immunohistochemistry was performed with the EnVision method using polyclonal rabbit anti-horse antibodies specific for AA amyloid (Anti
amyloid K-10a) in 1/100 dilution with phosphate buffered saline and bovine serum albumin. Liver from a hyper-immunized horse used for serum
production with confirmed hepatic and systemic amyloidosis served as positive control. Immunohistochemistry to characterize the inflammatory
infiltrate was performed with polyclonal rabbit anti-human CD3 (A-0452, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and monoclonal mouse anti-human CD79 αcy
(M0755, Dako) antibodies. Equine lymph node was used as positive control tissue. For negative controls addition of the primary antibody was
omitted. The slides were counterstained with haematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted in polyvinyl alcohol mounting medium. For transmission
electron microscopy selected areas of paraffin embedded samples from the nasal mucosa and cornea was deparaffinised with xylene, post-fixed
with 2% osmium and re-embedded in LR-white. Counterstaining was performed with 4% aqueous uranyl acetate and 1% KMNO4. Samples for mass
spectrometry (MS) were collected from formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) corneal and nasal tissue by laser microdissection as described
in Additional file 1. Collection of only amyloid, identified as Congo red positive extracellular material, was attempted. Liver from the
serum producing horse with systemic AA amyloidosis served as positive control for AA amyloid (data not shown). The collected material was
subjected to protein identification using MS and a FFPE antigen retrieval approach . MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software
version 1.4.0.5 for peptide and protein identification. Identification of peptides was based on parent ion mass and unequivocal
fragmentation spectra. Microscopic examination confirmed the presence of multifocal to coalescing aggregates of a hyaline, eosinophilic
material in the lamina propria of the nasal mucocutaneous junction, in the conjunctiva and in the corneal stroma (Figure 3). Hyaline,
eosinophilic material was observed in the conjunctiva and nasal mucosa as large aggregates expanding the lamina propria, in a narrow
subepithelial zone, in the interstitium of subepithelial glands of the nasal mucosa and around vessels. Occasionally hyaline deposits were
present in the wall of arteries and arterioles. Large aggregates of hyaline, eosinophilic material were present in the superficial and
middle aspect of the limbal corneal stroma. Multifocally, mild infiltrates of plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages, and occasional
clusters of multinucleated giant cells were observed in the deposits in the cornea and conjunctiva. Macrophages and giant cells seemed to
phagocytise the hyaline material (Figure 4). In the conjunctiva of the eyelids and the globe papillary structures consisting of lamina
propria covered by hyperplastic, irregular epithelium was evident. Multifocal, moderate, subepithelial and perivascular infiltrates of
plasma cells and lymphocytes occasionally forming nodular aggregates were present in the lamina propria of the nasal mucosa and conjunctiva.
Mild subepithelial infiltration of plasma cells and lymphocytes was present in the limbal cornea. Additional findings in the conjunctiva
included mild, multifocal infiltrates of partially degenerate neutrophilic granulocytes, intraepithelial pustules and neutrophil
exocytosis.Figure 3 Microscopic image of the conjunctiva. Multifocal to coalescing aggregates of a hyaline, eosinophilic material were
present in the lamina propria of the conjunctiva (arrowheads). The papillary structures consisted of lamina propria covered by hyperplastic,
irregular epithelium. Multifocal, mild to marked, subepithelial and perivascular infiltrates of plasma cells and lymphocytes (arrows)
occasionally forming large nodular aggregates (*) were present in the lamina propria. Haematoxylin and eosin stain; bar 100 μm.Figure 4
Amyloid deposits and inflammatory infiltrates in the cornea. Multifocal clusters of multinucleated giant cells (arrows), macrophages,
lymphocytes and plasma cells surrounded the deposits in the cornea (*). Macrophages and giant cells appeared to have phagocytised amyloid
(arrowheads). Corneal neovascularisation was also evident. Haematoxylin and eosin stain; bar 20 μm. Microscopic image of the conjunctiva.
Multifocal to coalescing aggregates of a hyaline, eosinophilic material were present in the lamina propria of the conjunctiva (arrowheads).
The papillary structures consisted of lamina propria covered by hyperplastic, irregular epithelium. Multifocal, mild to marked,
subepithelial and perivascular infiltrates of plasma cells and lymphocytes (arrows) occasionally forming large nodular aggregates (*) were
present in the lamina propria. Haematoxylin and eosin stain; bar 100 μm. Amyloid deposits and inflammatory infiltrates in the cornea.
Multifocal clusters of multinucleated giant cells (arrows), macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells surrounded the deposits in the cornea
(*). Macrophages and giant cells appeared to have phagocytised amyloid (arrowheads). Corneal neovascularisation was also evident.
Haematoxylin and eosin stain; bar 20 μm. The hyaline, eosinophilic material in both the nasal tissue, conjunctiva and cornea stained
strongly with Congo red and displayed apple green birefringence in polarized light consistent with amyloid (Figure 5). No significant
lesions or homogenous, eosinophilic, extracellular material suggestive of amyloid were detected in other examined organs and no Congo red
positive material was observed when examining liver and kidney sections in polarized light.Figure 5 Nasal amyloid display apple green
birefringence in polarized light. Multifocal to coalescing aggregates of hyaline, eosinophilic material in the lamina propria of the nasal
mucocutaneous junction were observed perivascularly (arrow) and in a narrow subepithelial zone (arrowheads). The hyaline, eosinophilic
material stained positive with Congo red and displayed apple green birefringence in polarized light. The collagen fibres of the lamina
propria show white birefringence. Congo red stain; bar 100 μm. Nasal amyloid display apple green birefringence in polarized light.
Multifocal to coalescing aggregates of hyaline, eosinophilic material in the lamina propria of the nasal mucocutaneous junction were
observed perivascularly (arrow) and in a narrow subepithelial zone (arrowheads). The hyaline, eosinophilic material stained positive with
Congo red and displayed apple green birefringence in polarized light. The collagen fibres of the lamina propria show white birefringence.
Congo red stain; bar 100 μm. The amyloid in the nasal mucosa and cornea was negative for anti-AA amyloid antibodies. The lymphocytes
infiltrating the conjunctiva and nasal mucosa consisted of a mix of CD3+ T cells and CD79+ B cells. No clear predominance of either cell
population was observed. Ultrastructural studies of both the nasal mucosa and cornea confirmed the presence of abundant extracellular
deposits of straight non-branched fibrils ranging from 9–11 nm in diameter consistent with amyloid (Figure 6) .Figure 6 Transmission
electron microscopy the cornea revealed abundant amyloid deposits. Surrounding a corneal blood vessel (arrow) was perivascular,
extracellular non-branching fibrils (*). The fibrils ranged from 9–11 nm in diameter consistent with amyloid. Inset shows fibrils at high
magnification. Bar 5 μm, inset; bar 500 nm. Transmission electron microscopy the cornea revealed abundant amyloid deposits. Surrounding a
corneal blood vessel (arrow) was perivascular, extracellular non-branching fibrils (*). The fibrils ranged from 9–11 nm in diameter
consistent with amyloid. Inset shows fibrils at high magnification. Bar 5 μm, inset; bar 500 nm. Mass spectrometry data did not show a clear
identification of the amyloid protein in any of the samples. Several immunoglobulin kappa-like peptides were detected among the most
abundant proteins, but also albumin and hemoglobin were high on the list, indicating serum contamination of the sample (Additional file 2:
Table S1 and Additional file 3: Table S2). Proteins from two other known amyloid precursor proteins, apolipoprotein A1 and apolipoprotein
A4, were among the fifteen most abundant proteins identified in nasal and corneal samples. We also detected low amounts of peptides of other
known amyloid precursor proteins, including lambda-like light chains, gelsolin, lysozyme and fibrinogen. The histological and
immunohistochemical findings in this case are highly suggestive of localized, nasal and ocular, amyloid light chain amyloidosis. The lack of
immunoreactivity to AA amyloid antibodies and the fact that no SAA peptides were detected by mass spectrometry suggests that a SAA protein
origin is very unlikely. Lambda chains predominate in normal horse serum with a reported kappa lambda ratio of approximately 0.08 . The
kappa abundance in samples analyzed by MS indicates overrepresentation of kappa light chains in the specimen, indicating a diagnosis of
localized light amyloidosis of kappa type, alternatively a monoclonal gammopathy of kappa type with serum contamination of the specimens.
Unfortunately, no serum samples were analyzed to exploit this further. At present only AA and AL amyloidosis have been described in the
horse, however, with 30 different amyloid proteins identified in man , the possibility of a non-AA and non-AL amyloidosis in the horse
should also be considered. Localized, nasal amyloidosis is a rare clinical entity in the horse with only 23 reported cases (Table 1). Equine
idiopathic, localized, nasal amyloidosis also involving the conjunctiva is rare, and amyloid deposition in the cornea in this entity has not
been described previously. A horse described by Geisel et al. developed unilateral corneal and conjunctival amyloidosis after initial
presentation with nodular cutaneous amyloidosis. Over a period of 8 months after initial diagnosis this horse developed extensive,
multifocal amyloid deposits involving not only skin, but also muscle, subcutaneous fat, nasal mucosa, the joint capsule and tendon of the
tarsal joint, and was diagnosed with extramedullary plasmacytoma . In both our case and the case described by Geisel et al. amyloid
deposition most likely affected the ocular structures by extension and progression of the amyloid disease.Table 1 Reported equine cases of
localized nasal and ocular amyloidosis Year Authors No cases Type of amyloid Method of amyloid typing Locations Location Clinical signs
Concurrent diagnosis Treatment (T) Eye Nose Other Outcome (O) 1942 Hjarre and Nordlund [ 12 ] 3 Unknown ND 1 3 3 1 case larynx, guttural
pouches, pharynx, trachea, lungs (bronchii), submaxillary, retropharyngeal, mesenterial and thoracic lymph nodes, conjunctiva 1 case larynx
and local lymph nodes 1 case larynx Dyspnoea and epistaxis Case 1: Acute purulent bronchopneumonia Euthanasia 1927 to 70 Saunders and Rubin
[ 19 ] 3 Unknown NR 3 Conjunctiva NR NR NR 1987Shaw et al. 4Unknown. Presumed AAPS411 case pharynxDyspnoea, reduced performance, respiratory
stertorT: Topical and systemic cortisone - no effect, then surgical excision,O: Returned to former use, no recurrence for 1 year1988Nappert
et al. 2Unknown. Presumed ALPS2Dyspnoea, epistaxisT: Topical cortisone,O: No effect - euthanasia - one case. One case: NR1988Van Andel et
al., Niewold et al.# 6ALPS, IHC* Case 1WB AAS WB, AAS61Case 1- nodules subcutaneously, within fasciae and muscle, superficial lymph nodes,
oesophagus, synovium, ileocaceal valve, thoracic cavityDyspnoea, stertor, epistaxis, wastingCase 1: Histolymphocytic lymphosarcomaT: Case 1;
none,O: Euthanasia, Case 1,Case 2–6: NR1989Linke and Trautwein 2ALIHC2DyspnoeaT: Surgical excisionO: NR 1990 Mould et al . [ 16 ] 1 AL WB,
PS 1 1 Epistaxis and blood tinged epiphora T: Surgical excision, O: Clinical relief, no recurrence 9 month follow-up 1994Kasper et al.
2Unknown, Presumed AL (1) AA (1)PS2Dyspnoea, nasal discharge, respiratory stertor, episodic epistaxisT: 1 case surgical excision, 1 case
N,O: Improvement of clinical symptoms, no recurrence 12 month follow up2012Portela et al. 1UnknownND1EpistaxisT: Surgical excision,O:
Stable, but not in training2012Axiak and Johnson 1UnknownND2Exercise intoleranceNRT: 1 case surgical excision, 1 case NR,O: Improvement of
clinical symptoms, unknown follow-up 2014 Østevik et al . (this publication) 1 Unknown, Presumed AL IHC* 1 1 Dyspnoea, epiphora,
conjunctivitis Gastrophilus sp. infestation of gastric mucosa T: Surgical excision, O: Recurrence amyloid and extension to cornea and
conjunctiva - euthanasia Cases of localized ocular and combined nasal and ocular (conjunctival) amyloidosis are in bold. Cases of ERU, in
which the hallmark lesion is ciliary body amyloid deposits, are not included. PS - Potassium permanganate sensitivity, IHC -
immunohistochemistry for AL amyloid, IHC*- immunohistochemistry for amyloid A amyloid, WB - western blot, ND - not done, AAS - amino acid
sequencing, NR - not reported. #Amyloid from case 1 in the paper by van Andel et al. is further characterized by Niewold et al. and this
case is therefore not included as separate case in this table. Reported equine cases of localized nasal and ocular amyloidosis Cases of
localized ocular and combined nasal and ocular (conjunctival) amyloidosis are in bold. Cases of ERU, in which the hallmark lesion is ciliary
body amyloid deposits, are not included. PS - Potassium permanganate sensitivity, IHC - immunohistochemistry for AL amyloid, IHC*-
immunohistochemistry for amyloid A amyloid, WB - western blot, ND - not done, AAS - amino acid sequencing, NR - not reported. #Amyloid from
case 1 in the paper by van Andel et al. is further characterized by Niewold et al. and this case is therefore not included as separate case
in this table. In humans, only a single case of combined corneal and conjunctival amyloidosis has been reported in the literature. In this
case the amyloid deposits were believed to be secondary to previous ocular trauma; however neither the corneal or conjunctival amyloid
deposits were subjected to any form of typing . Localized conjunctival AL amyloidosis is a rare condition in humans, and appears to be an
entity distinct from localized nasopharyngeal and laryngo-tracheobronchial amyloidosis . Ocular amyloidosis limited to the cornea secondary
to chronic inflammation, such as trichiasis and keratoconus, are rare conditions in humans, and the precursor protein in these cases are
lactoferrin produced by the corneal epithelium . Additionally localized corneal amyloid deposition occurs in human gelatinous drop dystrophy
and lattice dystrophies . In these cases the amyloid precursor protein is lactoferrin in gelatinous drop dystrophy and kerato-epithelin or
gelsolin in lattice dystrophies . Immunohistochemistry and mass spectrometry are used to type amyloid in human medicine, and equine amyloid
light chain deposits have been shown to cross-react with some anti-human light chain antibodies, however not consistently . Typing of AL
amyloid by immunohistochemistry is very challenging also in man. False negative results when using commercial light chain antibodies which
frequently recognize epitopes on the constant portion of the light chain is a major problem. There is a vast variability from case to case
in light chain proteins which are highly modified. Additionally some authors report damage to AL deposits by formalin fixation , nonspecific
antibody absorption of antibodies may occur due to amyloid “stickiness” and the formalin fixation process can trap abundant normal serum
protein in the tissue and amyloid deposits, leading to nonspecific background positivity, (“contamination”) . Contamination can also be a
problem in MS, causing identification of irrelevant “background" proteins as seen in our case. Lastly, in very rare cases, co-deposition of
more than one amyloid protein has been reported . Clinical signs in this case consisted of dyspnoea and epiphora and are most likely related
to the space-occupying effect of the nodular amyloid deposits. In other cases of conjunctival and nasal amyloidosis epistaxis, blood tinged
tears, respiratory stertor, nasal obstruction and exercise intolerance have been reported . The masses of amyloid lead to nasal obstruction,
with abnormal and reduced airflow causing both stertor and reduced exercise tolerance. Bleeding is believed to be a consequence of increased
fragility of the mucosa in the affected areas leading to erosions and ulcerations, as well as loss of vascular integrity due to amyloid
infiltrating blood vessels . Conjunctivitis was observed in both our case and the case described by Geisel et al. and may be secondary to
physical disruption of the normal eyelid function by the extensive amyloid deposits. The amyloid fibrils are reported to have toxic
properties, however ocular amyloidosis in humans is generally not associated with inflammation or pain and this is unlikely to be the cause
of the conjunctivitis. Primary localized conjunctival, as well as localized nasopharyngeal and laryngo-tracheobronchial AL amyloidosis has
been described in humans . Amyloid deposition may be non-progressive or progressive, and symptomatic surgical debulking is the treatment of
choice and will often be successful in relieving the clinical signs . The condition is considered benign and prognosis for survival is good
to excellent, however the condition is often incurable and recurrence of amyloid deposits is noted in up to 50% of patients after surgical
resection of the affected tissue . Progression to systemic amyloidosis develops extremely rarely, but deaths due to severe haemorrhage of
affected airways, as well as respiratory failure and recurrent airway obstruction have been reported in human patients with amyloidosis of
the respiratory tract . Surgical debulking of the affected nasal mucosa was performed and initially provided clinical relief in the pony
mare. Recurrence occurred relatively rapidly and amyloid deposits also developed in the conjunctivae and cornea prompting the owners to
euthanize the horse. This contrasts with previous results as surgical treatment in eight equine cases improved the clinical signs and horses
successfully returned to previous levels of performance . No recurrence or increase in the remaining amyloid deposits were observed, however
follow up time was limited to 12 months in all cases. Additionally, these cases may not be representative because in many of the equine
cases (10/23) outcome was not reported and five horses were euthanized without treatment or after unsuccessful medical treatment .
Progression to systemic AL amyloidosis has not been reported in the horse, however the localized nasal amyloidosis in horses seems to be
less strictly limited to the respiratory tract, compared to people, where nasal and conjunctival amyloidosis are distinct entities . One
horse initially presented with nasal amyloid deposits, subsequently developed T-cell rich B-cell lymphoma (histiolymphocytic lymphosarcoma)
and amyloid deposition in multiple tissues, but parenchymal organs remained unaffected . Additionally, nasal amyloidosis in horses can
progress to involve the ocular structures and progression of conjunctival amyloid to involve the nasal mucosa has been reported in a single
horse . Three equine cases with sole affection of conjunctival tissues are also described, however no information regarding development of
the condition and outcome are reported . aDonated by G. Husby Professor Emeritus of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Additional file 1: Mass spectrometry method. Additional file 2: Table S1. Top 15 most abundant proteins from the cornea
as identified by mass spectrometry. Immunoglobulin kappa-like proteins, apoplipoprotein A1 (APOA1) and apolipoprotein A4 (APOA4) are among
the most abundant proteins identified in the sample. However, high amounts of hemoglobin indicative of serum contamination was also
detected. Additional file 3: Table S2. Top 15 most abundant proteins from nasal mucosa as identified by mass spectrometry. Immunoglobulin
kappa-like proteins and apoplipoprotein A1 (APOA1) are among the most abundant proteins identified in the sample. However, high amounts of
hemoglobin and albumin indicative of serum contamination was also detected. Mass spectrometry method. Top 15 most abundant proteins from the
cornea as identified by mass spectrometry. Immunoglobulin kappa-like proteins, apoplipoprotein A1 (APOA1) and apolipoprotein A4 (APOA4) are
among the most abundant proteins identified in the sample. However, high amounts of hemoglobin indicative of serum contamination was also
detected. Top 15 most abundant proteins from nasal mucosa as identified by mass spectrometry. Immunoglobulin kappa-like proteins and
apoplipoprotein A1 (APOA1) are among the most abundant proteins identified in the sample. However, high amounts of hemoglobin and albumin
indicative of serum contamination was also detected. Amyloid A Amyloid light chain Formalin fixed paraffin embedded Mass spectrometry Serum
amyloid A Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LØ did the drafting and
revising of the manuscript. GG evaluated the biopsy. RS did the post-mortem examination. TNW and GAS made an intellectual contribution and
reviewed the manuscript. GAS performed the mass spectrometry and interpretation of the results. All authors read, revised and approved the
final version of the manuscript. The authors would like to thank OE Semb for providing clinical information, IB Ytterdal and MKA Ådland for
technical assistance and L Ødegaard for technical assistance editing the tables.
