Immune hemolytic anemia is a well-known complication after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Posttransplant
hemolytic anemia results in increased red blood cell transfusions and medical sequelae including iron overload. We present a case report of
immune hemolytic anemia that occurred after allogeneic HSCT from an ABO major–mismatched, HLA-matched unrelated donor. The patient had high
anti-donor A type antibodies that were unresponsive to treatment with steroids and rituximab, resulting in persistent transfusion
dependence. A detailed time course of anti-A titers, plasma cell content of the marrow, and B-cell content of the blood is presented.
Treatment with bortezomib, a protease inhibitor, eliminated residual host-type plasma cells secreting anti-A and restored normal donor-
derived erythropoiesis. This report, and a review of literature for treatment of immune hemolytic anemia after allogeneic HSCT, supports the
utility of bortezomib as plasma cell–targeted therapy in this setting. Immune hemolytic anemia is a well-known complication of allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).1 Hemolysis typically occurs from 2 to 25 months after HSCT2,3 with an incidence of 3.1% to
6%.2,4 For the purpose of relative comparison to the incidence of hemolytic anemia observed outside of the transplant setting, this is much
higher than the incidence of immune hemolytic anemia in the general population (incidence rates per year, 0.0008%; prevalence, 0.17%).5,6
Severe immune hemolytic anemia alone rarely causes death in adults4 but is often associated with other complications and significant
morbidity.4,7 Thus, early effective treatment can prevent transfusion-related complications. Conventional options to treat immune hemolytic
anemia after allogeneic HSCT include corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), splenectomy, donor lymphocyte infusion, plasma
exchange, erythropoietin, rituximab, and other immunosuppressing agents such as cyclosporine.3,8 Bortezomib is an inhibitor of the 26S
proteasome and approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma in the United States; it has recently been reported
as treatment for immune hemolytic anemia,9,10 but the efficacy and safety of bortezomib on secondary immune disorders in allogeneic HSCT
recipients has not been extensively described. In this case report, we describe the successful use of bortezomib as treatment of persistent
immune hemolytic anemia after allogeneic HSCT and review published articles related to management of immune hemolytic anemia in this
setting. A 57-year-old man presented with pancytopenia and a marrow examination that showed International Prognostic Scoring System
intermediate-2 myelodysplastic syndrome, with deletion of 3q26 on cytogenetic analysis. He developed secondary acute myeloid leukemia after
three cycles of treatment with decitabine and achieved a complete remission (CR) after 7 + 3 induction therapy and two cycles of high-dose
cytarabine consolidation. He received an allogeneic granulocyte–colony-stimulating factor–mobilized peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation from a male HLA-matched unrelated donor in first CR. The donor's blood group was A+ D+ and the recipient's was O D+. The
allogeneic blood stem cell graft contained 9.8 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg and 114.4 × 106 CD19+ cells/kg. The patient received a reduced-intensity
conditioning regimen consisting of 5 days of 25 mg/m2/day fludarabine and 2 days of 70 mg/m2/day melphalan. Prograf and methotrexate (15
mg/m2 on Day 1 and 10 mg/m2 on Days 3, 6, and 11) were given for prophylaxis of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). He developed Grade I acute
GVHD of skin on Day 34 after transplantation that responded well to topical steroids and resolved within a week. The remainder of his
immediate posttransplant course was uncomplicated. He remained red blood cell (RBC) transfusion dependent after achieving neutrophil and
platelet engraftment on Day 17. A marrow aspiration on Day 97 showed decreased erythroblasts and excess plasma cells along with reduced
reticulocytes in the blood (Figs. 1B and 2). Plasma cells in the marrow were stained in marrow sections with anti-CD138 monoclonal antibody
(MoAb; Fig. 2) and estimated CD138 immunohistochemical score blinded to case identical number and date (Fig. 1D). Anti-A IgG and IgM
antibody titers were elevated consistent with persistence of host-type plasma cells (Fig. 1C). Clinical course of the reported patient with
immune hemolytic anemia. (A) Treatment course of steroids (black bars), rituximab (black arrows), and bortezomib (orange arrows). The height
of the black bars shows the relative dose of steroids. (B) Graph of Hb (black dashed line) and reticulocyte percentage (red solid line) with
timing of RBC transfusions (black arrows). (C) Graph of total IgG (black solid line with diamonds) and IgM (black dashed line with
triangles) and anti-A IgG titers (green solid line with diamonds) and anti-A IgM titers (green dashed line with triangles). Semiquantitative
titration of anti-A of both the IgM and the IgG subclasses were performed using standard methods. Briefly, 2% suspensions of A1 reagent RBCs
were mixed with patient plasma in test tubes. For IgM detection, after 15 minutes of incubation at room temperature the samples were
centrifuged and macroscopic agglutination was quantified; for IgG, samples were incubated for 60 minutes at 37°C, washed to remove unbound
antibody, incubated with anti-human IgG, and then centrifuged to score agglutination.13 (D) Numbers of CD19+ cells in blood (black dashed
line) were assessed by flow cytometry, and plasma cells percentage score for nucleated cells in bone marrow (blue solid line) were estimated
blinded to case identical number and date. Histologic sections of marrow from the patient with immune hemolytic anemia. Tissue sections were
immune stained with anti-CD138 MoAb, and CD138+ cells were visualized after secondary staining with a horseradish peroxidase–labeled
secondary antibody. Immunohistochemical analysis for CD138+ plasma cells present in marrow biopsies obtained on Day –22 (A), Day +97 (B),
Day +160 (C), and Day +249 (D) with respect to the day of transplant are shown. Overall cellularities of the marrow at the times represented
in A, B, C, and D were 40, 60, 50, and 15%. On Day 118, the patient's hemolytic anemia was treated with 1 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone
without a change in the anti-A titer or improved erythropoiesis (Figs. 1B and 1C). He then received 375 mg/m2 rituximab weekly × 4 doses
starting on Day 132 posttransplant with residual anti-A IgG and IgM antibodies and continued reliance on RBC transfusions every 10 days
(Figs. 1B and 1C). CD19+ cells were eliminated from the blood after rituximab administration (Fig. 1D) although anti-A IgG and IgM
antibodies in the blood and plasma cells in the marrow persisted (Figs. 1C and 2). As a third-line therapy, he received weekly subcutaneous
injections of 1.3 mg/m2 bortezomib starting on Day 175 (Fig. 1A). After four doses of bortezomib, serum anti-A levels decreased and then
disappeared (Fig. 1C). Likewise, reticulocytes started to increase in the blood from Day 342 (Fig. 1B) and hemoglobin (Hb) increased with
resolution of his transfusion-dependent hemolysis. In aggregate, he had received a total of 30 RBC units before erythropoiesis recovered.
Immunohistochemical analysis of CD138+ cells in serial histologic sections of marrow obtained before transplant (Day −22, Fig. 2A) and after
transplant on Days +97 (Fig. 2B), +160 (Fig. 2C), and +249 (Fig. 2D) showed an increased frequency of plasma cells (relative to marrow from
healthy controls) present before transplantation (Fig. 2A) and persistence of CD138+ plasma cells during the first 3 months after
transplantation (Fig. 2B). Treatment with steroids and rituximab decreased the numbers of plasma cells in the marrow (Fig. 2C), and
subsequent treatment with bortezomib further reduced the relative frequency of plasma cells in the marrow (Fig. 2D). While rituximab
treatment may have contributed to mild impairment of hematopoiesis and reduced overall cellularity of the marrow, bortezomib treatment was
associated with a further reduction in the frequency of CD138+ plasma cells in the marrow relative to nucleated cells from approximately
1.8% (Fig. 2C) to 0.6% (Fig. 2D). There are three possible mechanisms for immune hemolytic anemia after allogeneic HSCT.11 The first
mechanism is that the antibodies against donor ABO type RBCs derived from recipient lymphocytes persist or recur after allogeneic SCT
causing hemolysis. This can be seen in ABO major–mismatched allogeneic HSCT. The second mechanism is that the antibodies derived from donor
lymphocytes attack recipient ABO type RBCs. This is called passenger lymphocyte syndrome and can be seen in ABO minor–mismatched allogeneic
HSCT. The third is that donor plasma cells produce immune antibodies that cause hemolysis of donor ABO RBCs after engraftment. The hemolysis
caused by this mechanism can be seen in any type of allogeneic HSCT even in ABO-matched transplantation. With all three mechanisms,
successful treatment requires suppression of the plasma cells secreting antibodies to RBCs or erythroid progenitors. A review of the
literature found 18 reports of treatment of immune hemolytic anemia that developed after allogeneic HSCT in patients with hematologic
disease (Table 1). Clinical outcomes on a total of 92 patients were reported, with 39 deaths and 33 survivors. Treatment with oral
prednisone or IV methylprednisolone, with an initial dose of 1 mg/kg/day, was administrated as first-line treatment in almost all cases.
Hemolytic anemia resolved with steroids alone in 12 of 92 cases, with at least another 60 cases remaining transfusion dependent. Reported
second-line therapy of post–allogeneic HSCT immune hemolytic anemia included IVIG and, after Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval,
expansion to bulky non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in 2001,23 rituximab, a MoAb against the CD20 protein.4,9 Although rituximab has been reported as
effective treatment for immune hemolytic anemia in the nontransplant setting,24 13 of 32 patients treated with rituximab for hemolytic
anemia after allogeneic transplant did not achieve CR from RBC transfusion dependence. For patients with immune hemolytic anemia that
persists after administration of steroids, IVIG, and rituximab, less immunosuppressive treatment that is more specifically targeted to
plasma cells is needed, as many patients with immune hemolytic anemia die from opportunistic infections during immunosuppressive drug
therapy.3,7 Published data about immune hemolytic anemia after allogeneic HSCT for hematologic malignancies AA = aplastic anemia; ALG =
antilymphocyte globulin; ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML = acute myeloid leukemia; AZA = azathioprine; BMT = bone marrow
transplantation; BTZ = bortezomib; CBT = cord blood cell transplantation; CML = chronic myeloid leukemia; CsA = cyclosporine; CY =
cyclophosphamide; DLI = donor lymphocyte infusion; Eculiz = eculizumab; EPO = erythropoietin; FA = Fanconi anemia; HD = Hodgkin's lymphoma;
MDS = myelodysplastic syndrome; MM = multiple myeloma; MMF = mycophenolate mofetil; MPD = myeloproliferative disorder; MPS =
mucopolysaccaridosis; NHL = non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; PBSCT = peripheral blood stem cell transplantation; PE = plasma exchange; Ritux =
rituximab; SPLX = splenectomy; TCD = T-cell depleted; THAL = thalidomide; TLI = total lymph node irradiation; VCR = vincristine. Bortezomib
is a dipeptide boronate proteasome inhibitor, which reversibly inhibits the 26S proteasome function and leads to the accumulation of
polyubiquitinated proteins, inducing the death of both short- and long-lived plasma cells by activation of the terminal unfolded protein
response.25–27 The US FDA approved bortezomib to treat multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma patients. In view of its effect on
malignant B cells and plasma cells, bortezomib has been used to treat other plasma disorders, with case reports of successful treatment of
immune hemolytic anemia related to cryoglobulinemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, and myasthenia gravis.28–30 In addition, bortezomib can
deplete alloreactive T cells in allo-HSCT recipients, decrease T-helper Type 1 cells that secrete interferon-γ and interleukin-2,31 and
impair activation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells.32 Koreth and colleagues12 have recently demonstrated that bortezomib is efficacious
as part of GVHD prophylaxis for patients who received HLA-mismatched allogeneic HSCT after reduced-intensity conditioning regimens. The
literature on post–allo-HSCT hemolytic anemia reports the use of bortezomib as third-line therapy in only three patients, with one surviving
responder (Table 1). We report successful treatment with bortezomib of a case of immune hemolytic anemia after allogeneic HSCT that was
resistant to steroids and rituximab. For our patient, rituximab depleted CD19+ cells in the blood, but marrow plasma cells were resistant to
steroids and rituximab, with persistence of anti-A. After bortezomib administration, anti-A titers decreased and marrow plasma cells were
eliminated with a concomitant increase in reticulocytes in the blood and RBC transfusion independence. This case supports the utility of
bortezomib treatment to specifically target the residual host-type plasma cells responsible for production of anti-A. In conclusion, immune
hemolytic anemia after allogeneic HSCT for hematologic malignancy is a well-recognized complication that occurs rarely but is responsible
for considerable morbidity and reported mortality of more than 50%. Although many cases with hemolytic anemia respond to standard treatment
including steroids, IVIG, and rituximab, effective third-line therapy has not been established. We describe successful treatment of immune
hemolytic anemia resistant to steroids and rituximab with bortezomib. Disappearance of anti-A was concomitant with elimination of CD138+
plasma cells from the marrow. The authors have disclosed no conflicts of interest. complete remission hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
