Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 70 • Male, 84 Final Diagnosis: Appendiceal mucocele and pseudomyxoma peritonei
Symptoms: — Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Surgery Rare disease Mucocele of the appendix is an uncommon cystic lesion
characterized by distension of the appendiceal lumen with mucus. Most commonly, it is the result of epithelial proliferation, but it can
also be caused by inflammation or obstruction of the appendix. When an underlying mucinous cystadenocarcinoma exists, spontaneous or
iatrogenic rupture of the mucocele can lead to mucinous intraperitoneal ascites, a syndrome known as pseudomyxoma peritonei. We report 2
cases that represent the clinical extremities of this heterogeneous disease; an asymptomatic mucocele of the appendix in a 70-year-old
female and a case of pseudomyxoma peritonei in an 84-year-old male. Subsequently, we review the current literature focusing to the optimal
management of both conditions. Mucocele of the appendix is a rare disease, usually diagnosed on histopathologic examination of
appendectomized specimens. Due to the existing potential for malignant transformation and pseudomyxoma peritonei caused by rupture of the
mucocele, extensive preoperative evaluation and thorough intraoperative gastrointestinal and peritoneal examination is required. Appendiceal
mucocele, first described by Rokitansky , is a morphologic entity referring to localized or diffuse dilatation of the appendiceal lumen by
abnormal accumulation of mucus. The disease represents 0.3–0.7% of appendiceal pathology and 8% of all appendiceal tumors and it is more
frequent in females and in adolescents older than 50 years of age . Diagnosis is often difficult to establish preoperatively despite
thorough evaluation and most patients remain asymptomatic until the lesions are discovered incidentally either intraoperatively or
postoperatively by histopathological examination . Etiological factors are rarely inflammatory and are most commonly neoplastic. Treatment
is directed towards the underlying pathology. Proper management of neoplastic mucoceles is essential to prevent rupture and subsequent
development of mucinous intraperitoneal dissemination, resulting in a syndrome called pseudomyxoma peritonei. The latter is commonly
referred to as “jelly belly” and constitutes approximately 1% of all colorectal cancers in the United States . In the current study, 2 cases
representing the clinical “edges” of this challenging disease are described; the first is an appendiceal mucocele and the second is a case
of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Although both entities illustrate the clinical boundaries of the same problem, they have diverse management
options. A 70-year-old Caucasian female patient, with unremarkable medical history and no previous abdominal symptoms underwent a computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis during routine evaluation of new onset hypertension. The CT scan revealed a 2.2-centimeter, well-
defined mucocele of the appendix (Figure 1). Colonoscopy showed that the cecum was mildly distorted due to the mass in the appendix and to
avoid possible rupture, no further manipulation was applied. Based on the preoperative findings and the obvious extent of the mass to the
cecum, a right hemicolectomy followed by ileo-transverse colon anastomosis was performed. Extreme care was taken to ensure minimal tumor
handling for minimizing the risk of tumor seeding. There were no signs of intra-abdominal fluid or lymphadenopathy. Histology revealed
appendiceal distension (measuring 2.2×2.7 cm) with associated mucus. The appendix base opened into a hemispherical chamber and was distended
with mucin (Figure 2). Histopathological analysis showed a low-grade mucinous neoplasm (mucinous cystadenoma) of the appendix, but the 25
lymph nodes examined in the specimen were free of neoplastic disease. The patient was discharged on the fourth post-operative day after an
uneventful recovery and remained asymptomatic ever since (3 months) with no further treatment. An 84-year-old Caucasian male patient
presented with mild abdominal distension and altered bowel habits, reporting onset of the symptoms 5 months ago. His medical history
included a case of diagnosed acute appendicitis 10 years ago, most likely complicated by appendiceal rupture and phlegmon formation. As
reported by his relatives, he was then treated conservatively by hospitalization and long-term administration of intravenous antibiotics at
another institution. Except for mild prostatic hyperplasia, there were no referred comorbidities. During the present evaluation, the blood
results were normal but tumor markers, including CEA, Ca125 and Ca19.9, were considerably increased. An abdominal CT scan indicated the
presence of disseminated abdominal masses with associated ascites, suggesting the possible diagnosis of pseudomyxoma (Figure 3). Peritoneal
aspiration was performed and cytology results finalized the diagnosis. A laparotomy was performed, during which a large amount of mucinous
material in the peritoneal cavity (Figure 4) and a bulky 8–10 kg gelatinous tumor fully infiltrating the omentum (Figure 5) were found. All
mucinous substance was aspirated and an omen-tectomy was performed. The cecum was inspected and palpated with no recognition of the
appendix. No further actions were taken because no gross tumor was evident in the cecum, the patient was elderly, and the disease had been
only slowly progressing since the supposed initial rupture of the appendix 10 years ago,. Histopathological analysis reconfirmed the
diagnosis of pseudomyxoma peritonei of low-grade mucinous carcinoma origin. The postoperative course of the patient was uneventful and he
was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. Additional chemotherapy with oral capecitabine ensured a symptom-free status ever since (4
months). The present study confirmed that patients with mucinous neoplasms of the appendix present with clinically a challenging spectrum of
pathologic processes. Incidental discovery of an appendiceal mucocele is the rule, as happened to our first reported patient . On the other
hand, pseudomyxoma peritonei, although clinically more severe, frequently has a slow-growing course with non-specific abdominal symptoms;
therefore, a high level of suspicion is essential, especially if the medical history is indicative of probable previous appendiceal
pathology , as in the second case reported here. The mucinous neoplasms of the appendix are classified into 4 pathological entities
according to the characteristics of the epithelium : Simple or retention mucoceles result from non-tumoral obstruction of the appendiceal
outflow, usually by a fecalith or inflammatory stricture, and they are characterized by normal epithelium and mild luminal dilatation up to
1 cm.Mucoceles with local or diffuse villous hyperplastic epithelium. The luminal dilatation is also mild and they constitute 5–25% of
mucoceles.Mucinous adenoma/cystadenoma are the most common form, accounting for 63–84% of cases. These exhibit mostly epithelial villous
adenomatous changes with some degree of epithelial atypia, associated usually with marked (up to 6 cm) distention of the lumen.Malignant
mucinous cystadenocarcinomas represent 11–20% of cases. These demonstrate glandular stromal invasion, desmoplastic reaction, and/or presence
of epithelial cells in the peritoneal implants. The luminal distention is usually severe. Simple or retention mucoceles result from non-
tumoral obstruction of the appendiceal outflow, usually by a fecalith or inflammatory stricture, and they are characterized by normal
epithelium and mild luminal dilatation up to 1 cm. Mucoceles with local or diffuse villous hyperplastic epithelium. The luminal dilatation
is also mild and they constitute 5–25% of mucoceles. Mucinous adenoma/cystadenoma are the most common form, accounting for 63–84% of cases.
These exhibit mostly epithelial villous adenomatous changes with some degree of epithelial atypia, associated usually with marked (up to 6
cm) distention of the lumen. Malignant mucinous cystadenocarcinomas represent 11–20% of cases. These demonstrate glandular stromal invasion,
desmoplastic reaction, and/or presence of epithelial cells in the peritoneal implants. The luminal distention is usually severe. Mucinous
cystadenoma is at the benign end of the spectrum, with no risk of recurrence. Mucinous adenocarcinoma instead is associated with a very poor
survival rate and a high rate of metastases to lymph nodes and liver. In between these incongruent entities lie the mucinous neoplasms, of
which only a small subset are associated with the development of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Controversy still exists in using the terms “low
and high rates of recurrence” when referring to these mucinous neoplasms, as the World Health Organization (WHO) classifies both as “low-
grade mucinous neoplasm.” Many prefer to use these descriptors because the risk of recurrence and associated morbidity and mortality differ
greatly between the two6. These intermediate-grade tumors are characterized by mucin dissecting into or through the wall of the appendix
with or without epithelial cells. Extra-appendiceal mucin with epithelial cells characterizes the mucinous neoplasm with a high rate of
recurrence, which is most commonly associated with the development of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a broad
descriptive term embracing a wide spectrum of neoplasms, from the benign to the frankly malignant lesion. Although the ovary was considered
as the commonest primary site in the past, recent studies, based on immunohistochemical analysis and molecular biology, show that the ovary
is a rare source of pseudomyxoma, and lesions previously called “borderline mucinous tumors of the ovary” are typically metastatic from the
appendix . In the past, Ronnett et al. proposed a classification distinguishing “disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis” (DPAM) from
“peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis” (PMCA) . DPAM represents the classic PMP with paucicellular mucinous ascites and an indolent clinical
course, whereas PMCA has a higher percentage of overtly malignant cells/cell groups and a poorer prognosis . These 2 variants of PMP-DPAM
and PMCA are diverse entities, with the DPAM type remaining localized to the abdomen without metastatic behavior and the PMCA type behaving
like colloid carcinoma with metastatic and invasive potential . Nevertheless, although Ronnett’s classification is still useful, there is no
established consensus on terminology regarding the grade of the neoplastic cells in pseudomyxoma, which represent an imperative prognostic
factor. An international expert group of pathologists and clinicians is currently working on the standardization of terminology in this
field . The clinical symptoms are usually absent or non-specific in most cases of appendiceal mucoceles or even in the presence of
pseudomyxoma peritonei. The diagnosis is established basically by abdominal CT scan. In the existence of an appendiceal mucocele, CT scan
appearances include a well-encapsulated, round, thin-walled cystic mass. Calcification is seen in 50% of cases , while enhancing nodules in
the mucocele wall are suggestive of cystadenocarcinoma . Notably, mucoceles less than 2 cm are rarely malignant but larger mucoceles (6 cm
or more) are usually associated with cystadenoma or cyst-adenocarcinoma and a higher perforation rate (20%) . Ascites is a non-specific CT
scan finding in pseudomyxoma peritonei. Visceral scalloping, on the other hand, is a diagnostic sign and distinguishes mucinous from fluid
ascites on CT. As the mucin producing cells in pseudomyxoma peritonei are poorly adhesive, they are easily dislodged by peristaltic movement
and adhere at sites of relative stasis. The pouch of Douglas/rectovesical pouch, right and left subphrenic spaces, and surface of the liver
and spleen are the commonest sites involved . Although right hemicolectomy has been traditionally the standard treatment for mucinous
appendiceal malignancies, recent studies have suggested that an intact mucocele represents a rather benign process and does not result in
progression of the disease . A study by Gonzalez-Moreno et al. showed no survival advantage with right hemicolectomy versus appendectomy
after reviewing 501 patients diagnosed with appendiceal epithelial neoplasms . However, the authors suggested that the following indications
necessitate a right hemicolectomy: (1) requirement of total removal of the primary tumor or complete cytoreduction, (2) lymph node
involvement demonstrated by histopathological examination of the appendiceal or ileocolic lymph nodes, and (3) a non-mucinous neoplasm
identified by histopathological examination. Laparoscopic approaches have gained popularity over the last decade and many authors suggest
that laparoscopic appendectomy is a safe choice when treating a mucocele of the appendix . However, possible rupture and dispersion of mucus
or epithelial cells into the peritoneal cavity is associated with a poorer prognosis. Grasping of the appendix specimen should be minimal,
pneumoperitoneum levels should be low, and a retrievable bag should always be used when the laparoscopic approach is favored . Extreme care
is imperative to prevent iatrogenic occurrences but also not to underestimate the extent of the disease; hence, any mucinous fluid within
the abdomen should be carefully examined and if epithelial cells are identified, a diagnosis of pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome or mucinous
peritoneal carcinomatosis of appendiceal origin should be established. It is probably safer to convert to an open procedure if such
mucoceles are visualized during a laparoscopic approach . Treatment of pseudomyxoma peritonei is variable, both due to the rarity of the
disease and to its frequently slow-growing nature . Current treatment strategies range from watchful waiting to extensive cytoreductive
surgery alone or with hyperthermic intraoperative peritoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) or early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy (EPIC)
. Based on the Sugarbaker peritonectomy procedure, a recent study showed that cytoreductive surgery with intraperitoneal hyperthermic
perfusion permitted complete tumor removal, confirming the efficacy of this combined treatment in terms of improved long-term survival and
better regional control of the disease . However, other studies support that fluorouracil-based adjuvant systemic chemotherapy should be the
standard of care for patients with PMP of appendiceal origin . In situations where surgery is not immediately required, patients can be
monitored via CT scans, tumor marker laboratory tests, and physical symptoms, to determine when, and if, surgery is warranted. Since the
risk of developing an adenocarcinoma of the colon is 6 times greater in patients with a mucocele than in the general population, colonic
surveillance is warranted in these cases . Patients with appendiceal mucoceles can present with confusing symptoms and indeed may be
asymptomatic. Preoperative diagnosis, although challenging, greatly assists in determining the right management and minimizing both intra-
operative and post-operative complications. Pseudomyxoma peritonei represents a complex medical situation hat is best dealt with in a
specialist center where focus should be on the prevention of locoregional recurrence. (A, B) CT scan indicating a well-defined appendiceal
mucocele (arrows). (A, B) Specimen of right hemicolectomy with a well-defined mucocele of the appendix (arrow indicating lumen full of
mucus). (A, B) CT scan revealing nodular peritoneal implants and mucinous ascites, indicative of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Note that the
appendix is not recognized. Mucinous fluid aspirated from the abdominal cavity of a patient with pseudomyxoma peritonei. Specimen of
omentectomy in a patient with pseudomyxoma peritonei. Extensive tumor seeding to the omentum is identified.
