Relapsed cases of leprosy are not common in patients treated regularly with the recommended polychemotherapeutical schemes. Relapses must be
readily identified and distinguished from reactions. This article reports a clinical case of relapse in leprosy, with atypical and exuberant
skin changes in patient treated for eleven years with a paucibacillary scheme. Among the strategies for control of Hansen's disease, an
early diagnosis of cases and their adequate treatment with recommended polychemotherapy (PCT) regimens are paramount as recommended by World
Health Organization (WHO).1 Leprosy relapse cases are rare in patients treated regularly with the recommended polychemotherapeutical
schemes. Usually relapses occur in a period greater than five years after the cure.1 Differential diagnosis between reaction and relapse
must be based on the association of clinical and laboratory exams.1,2 This article describes a clinical case of relapse, with atypical and
exuberant cutaneous presentations. A 49-year-old female patient, originally from Gravatá-PE, complained about burning pain in feet, forearms
and hands, with onset three years ago. She referred a previous treatment for Hansen's disease 11 years ago, during six months. In the last
three years, she has used several drugs for the treatment of hansenic reaction. According to a notification sheet, the patient had been
classified under the tuberculoid clinical form, presenting negative bacilloscopy and discharged after being considered cured, at the end of
six months of treatment (in 2002). At the current physical examination, erythematous, infiltrative and fibrotic lesions, which followed a
linear pattern on forearms, hands and feet, drew attention (Figure 1, 2 and 3). She also presented madarosis on the full extension of her
eyebrows, distal nail dystrophy in hands and feet, and foveolar lesion in the cervical region. Bacilloscopy was then requested, with the
following result: IB: 5.75; IM: Whole Bacilli: 60; Several clumps. A histopathological exam of the erythemato-fibrotic lesions was also
requested, which evidenced a lymphohistiocytic, periadnexal, perineural and perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, vacuolated macrophages
containing clumps, besides the presence of bacilli in Ziehl-Neelsen staining (Figure 4). Based on the clinical history and complementary
exams, multibacillary polychemotherapy was started and the prednisone dose was increased to 40mg/day (patient was taking 20mg/day). After
one month, she already showed great improvement of lesions on the upper limbs and of pain symptoms in hands and feet (Figure 5). However,
the clinical improvement of feet lesions was not as pronounced as in the upper limbs (Figure 6). Infiltrative linear lesions on forearms and
hands. Atypical presentation pattern in dimorphous- virchowian Hansen's disease Infiltrated lesions of atypical pattern in Hansen's disease
Infiltrated lesions of atypical pattern in Hansen's disease Histopathological aspect of erythematous-infiltrate lesion, evidencing a
perineural and perivascular lymphohistiocytic inflammatory infiltrate Clinical improvement of infiltrative lesions, after introduction of
multibacillary polychemotherapy Aspect of linear and erythematousfibrotic lesions, before the treatment. Even 30 days after the introduction
of polychemotherapy, there was no remarkable improvement of feet lesions, as occurred with forearms In leprosy, relapse should be taken into
account when, after completion of adequate treatment and discharge after the patient is considered cured, signs and symptoms of disease
activity reappear.1,2 The patient had been initially classified (11 years ago) under the tuberculoid clinical form, being treated and
receiving a clean bill of health. Afterwards it progressed with new skin lesions. Patients that present worsening of lesions after
completion of treatment must be directed to referral services for evaluation.1 Sometimes the distinction between relapse and reaction is
difficult, and it is based mainly on clinical aspects: cutaneous lesions related to reactions usually start earlier, during or even up to
the first year after the PCT; on the other hand the lesions that suggest relapse happen later, appearing even many years after treatment (on
average, after a period of 5 years).1,2 As opposed to lesions arising from relapse, response to corticoids is remarkable in reactional
cases.1 According to the Ministry of Health, the criteria for diagnosing relapse for paucibacillary (PB) cases are: the patient who, after
receiving a clean bill of health, presents pain in nerve pathways, with new lesions and/or exacerbation of previous lesions which do not
respond to treatment with corticosteroids, for at least 90 (ninety) days; and patients with late reactional outbreaks, usually five years
after being considered healed.1 For multibacillary cases (MB): the patient who, after receiving a clean bill of health, presents cutaneous
lesions and/or exacerbation of old lesions, new neurological changes which do not respond to treatment with thalidomide and/or
corticosteroid in recommended doses and timeframes, positive bacilloscopy and compatible clinical picture with patients never treated
before; patients with late reactional outbreaks, usually five years after being considered cured. In a study carried out by Brito and
colleagues in 2005, in an endemic Hansen's disease region, the clinical criterion was the most used to decide for a new relapse treatment,
followed by bacilloscopy.3 The relapses of Hansen's disease may occur due to various factors, such as: immunosuppression, persistence of
bacillum, resistance to drugs, inadequate or irregular therapeutics, or wrong initial classification.2,4 Relapses associated with drug
resistance have been reported since the early 1960's, chiefly related to long-term use of dapsone.5,6 Reports of resistance to rifampicin
(RIF) are less common, although not less important, since RIF is the main drug of the PCT scheme, with a high bactericide effect.5 Diniz and
Col. Evidenced, in a retrospective cohort study (2009), that the magnitude of hansenosis relapse is low, and more frequent between the
dimorphous and virchowian forms.7 The patient was classified under the current clinical form, as dimorphous-virchowian, due to the presence
of foveolar lesion (characteristic of the dimorphous form) and diffuse and infiltrative lesions with positive bacilloscopy (characteristic
of the virchowian form).8 She was also diagnosed as carrier of type 1 hansenic reaction, with neuritis in upper and lower limbs (hands and
feet). It was considered a relapse due to the late onset of new lesions and no response to anti-reactional drugs. When a new treatment was
established, with a multibacillary scheme, there was clinical improvement of lesions, and with the increased prednisone dose there was
improvement of neuritic pain. Probably the patient was classified in an inadequate way eleven years ago (in the 1st treatment) and treated
with an insufficient scheme for the complete eradication of the bacilli. This way, there was persistence of viable bacilli, which slowly
multiplied for years, leading to the development of exuberant clinical lesions. There was no evidence of further exposure with nontreated
communicants. When a paucibacillary patient relapses as a multibacillary one, it is very probable that an error in classification occurred
during the initial treatment.3 For Ximenes et al (2007) and Shetty et al (2005), patients that presented reactional episodes have greater
probability of being treated as having a relapse.9,10 In spite of the attested efficacy of PCT/WHO schemes, surveillance of drug resistance
must be carried out. To that end, the referral units must forward sample material of multibacillary cases with confirmed relapse to the
national referral centers which perform this surveillance.1 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article:
Raiol TKA, Volpato SE, Guimarães PB, Lopes MLAA, Takano DM, Santana JM. Atypical lesions relapsed leprosy. An Bras Dermatol.
2014;89(5):808-11. Work performed at Hospital Otávio de Freitas - Recife (PE), Brazil.
