Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ) is an adverse drug reaction described as the progressive destruction and death of
bone tissue of the mandible or maxilla, in the course of bisphosphonate therapy. Orally administered bisphosphonates, widely used for the
treatment of osteoporosis, are rarely associated with BRONJ. Instead, the risk greatly increases whether the patient is concomitantly taking
steroid and/or immunosuppressant agents. The aims of this paper are to briefly discuss the evidence of the associations between
bisphosphonate therapy and BRONJ, and the effects of co-occurring factors such as the presence of rheumatoid arthritis, dental surgery, and
concomitant corticosteroid therapy. In particular, we present the case of an elderly woman with BRONJ suffering from rheumatoid arthritis,
with a recent dental extraction and with a very unusual complication: a temporal abscess, who was successfully treated. Bisphosphonate-
related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ) is an adverse drug reaction described as the progressive destruction and death of bone that affects
the mandible or maxilla of patients exposed to treatment with nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates, in the absence of a previous radiation
treatment.1 Currently, bisphosphonates are used in all cases in which it is deemed necessary to prevent bone resorption. They are
administered by intravenous injection to treat metastatic osteolytic problems caused by several conditions (ie, multiple myeloma, bone
metastasis by solid tumors with or without hypercalcemia, such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, cancer of the kidney or lung, or Paget’s
disease).2 They are also used in cases of low mineral bone density such as in post-menopausal osteoporosis or in osteopenia.3 All
bisphosphonates, in particular the amino-bisphosphonates, have high affinity for bone mineral crystals and accumulate in the bone matrix.
Bisphosphonates inhibit the enzyme farnesyl-diphosphate-synthase, causing cytoskeletal alterations, inducing apoptosis of the osteoclasts
and reducing the bone resorption capacity of these cells.4–6 The half-life into the general circulation is short (from 30 minutes to 2
hours), but the presence of nitrogen in their formulation makes their metabolization difficult, leading to their accumulation in bones.
Therefore, once the drugs are incorporated into bone tissue, they can persist for up to 10 years.7,8 Recent studies have shown that
bisphosphonates inhibit oral epithelial cell migration, causing a delay of wound healing.9–12 Uncertain are the therapeutic possibilities,
which up until today appear inadequate. Up until this point, no therapy exists which allows for the complete resolution/healing of lesion at
100%. Osteonecrosis involves only the maxillary bones, because these mostly undergo remodeling with respect to all the other bones in the
body and present a higher uptake of bisphosphonates, which here become quickly concentrated and in higher quantities.1 The most affected
parts are the mandible and, particularly, the alveolar bone. When in the bone, there has been an accumulation of bisphosphonates sufficient
to reach the toxicity threshold for osteoclastic activity and migration inhibition, if surgical or inflammatory damage sets in, the alveolar
bone is unable to react.13,14 There will be difficulty or absence of the healing process, leading to necrosis. The mucosa above begins to
lack vascularization from the underlying bone, and bone exposition occurs. The consequence will be bacterial colonization with
osteomyelitis. The bacterial strains isolated in the case of BRONJ, are the same that produce periodontal disease or dental abscesses.
Actinomyces bacteria is the most frequently isolated strain.15 Local risk factors include extractions, dental implant placement, periapical
surgery, and periodontal surgery involving bone injury. The threshold to inhibit wound bone healing depends on the total quantity of bone
mineral in which bisphosphonates are stored: smaller sized patients are more affected than larger sized ones.16 Orally administered
bisphosphonates require longer times for the development of BRONJ: 3 years according to Marx et al14 and 1 year in smaller sized patients,
according to Sedghizadeh et al.16 The duration of bisphosphonate treatment and the potency of the drug, may also influence the risk of
BRONJ. It should be noted that the association of two or more amino-bisphosphonates, and the association with corticosteroids, particularly
prednisone taken by subjects affected by rheumatoid arthritis (RA), which mainly affects women, polimyosite, or systemic lupus
erythematosus, certainly increases the risk of BRONJ setting in. RA is considered an important contributing factor for BRONJ, even though
the relationship between these diseases has not yet fully been understood. Bone tissue damage and loss are among the typical features of
RA.17 The main factors that contribute to cause osteoporosis in patients with RA include glucocorticoid therapy and patient immobility.18,19
Corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis is the most common iatrogenic cause of secondary osteoporosis, and cumulative corticosteroid treatment
increases the risk of osteoporosis: in fact 40% of these patients are affected by generalized osteoporosis, mostly after menopause.20
Studies on the effects of bisphosphonate therapy on bone loss due to RA indicate that bisphosphonates are effective in preventing bone loss
in patients with RA treated with glucocorticoids. Results from the literature show that BRONJ is triggered by dental surgery procedures
(51.7%) or lesions appearing spontaneously (41.38%) in patients affected by RA and treated with oral bisphosphonate.21 A 68-year-old woman
was referred on January 2014 to the Department of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery of our hospital with difficulty on mouth opening, trismus,
fever, headache, and general malaise. The patient’s past medical history was relevant for RA, treated from 1993 with gold salts,
methotrexate, leflunomide, daily oral calcium and vitamin D3, and prednisone. From 2005, after multiple vertebral fractures caused by severe
osteoporosis, the patient started a treatment with ibandronic acid, 150 mg, one tablet once a month. In March 2013, following an abscess in
46 zone, her dentist extracted the tooth element. The patient showed a noticeable right-sided mandibular abscess and a right-sided soft
temporal swelling and redness (Figure 1A), with severe pain on mouth opening. The oral examination revealed the presence of an abscess in
the posterior mandible, in the area of the recent extraction (Figure 1B), with pus leaking from the empty alveolus. Infection and swelling
was extending distally to the back molar 47. Radiologic exams (orthopantomography and CT [computed tomography] scan) (Figure 2A and B)
showed a widespread zone of radiolucency, rarefaction of trabecular bone with a large osteo-necrotic lesion around the extraction site,
which extended posteriorly to include the adjacent second molar, persistent extraction socket, and bone sequestra. All these data allowed us
to diagnose advanced BRONJ in the right mandibular zone. Magnetic resonance imaging (Figure 3) showed a temporal abscess located lateral to
the alveolar crista of the upper jaw and upwards deep into the temporal fascia. Before admission to hospital, the patient was treated with
amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (875 mg and 125 mg respectively) injection. After 2 days, a surgical toilette of necrotic bone in mandibular
angle was performed with extraction of the second molar. The temporal fascia abscess was drained through a temporal incision.
Microbiological samples showed an Actinomyces infection, with susceptibility to ampicillin, meropenem, and metronidazole, and with
resistance to amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. Surgical incision was not saturated, and daily medication with irrigation on sodium
hypochlorite and positioning of gauze of ialuronic acid was made twice a week. After microbiological analyses, which showed a resistance to
antibiotic therapy, amoxicillin and clavulanic acid was substituted with meropenem 2 g and metronidazole 500 mg day. After 3 weeks of
therapy, the patient was discharged and was followed up monthly in our clinic. Three months after the hospitalization, the patient had
complete resolution of infection. While the correlation between use of intravenous injection bisphosphonates and the development of BRONJ is
by now widely affirmed in the literature and was reported from 2003 by Marx,4 less clear and predictable is the correlation between BRONJ
and orally administered bisphosphonates.22 What remains secure, however, is that dental surgical interventions on patients who take
bisphosphonates on a long-term basis orally, present an elevated risk of BRONJ. The concomitant taking of medications containing
corticosteroids, as in the case of RA, increases this risk due to the synergistic action of these drugs on the bone. Corticosteroid
medications act directly on the bone by inhibiting the action of osteoblasts, favoring that of the osteoclasts, and indirectly through
hormonal pathways.23 The concomitant inhibitory action of bisphosphonates and corticosteroid drugs on bone and endothelial cells produce a
reduction of the bone turnover rate. Following a surgical trauma due to extraction, this triggers BRONJ. In our case, osteonecrosis was
already present before extraction of 46, which has highlighted the osteonecrotic zone. The peculiarity of this case consisted of the rare
localization of the abscess in the temporal position, which has considerably worsened the health status of the patient. This localization is
extremely rare and this is the first case documented in the literature. It may happen that a dental abscess extends along muscles and fascia
as occurs in the case of a parapharyngeal abscess or Ludwig’s angina; while it is very unusual, it spreads upward.24 This complication is
very dangerous because of risk of thrombosis of the cavernous sinus, and it can even compromise the orbit.25 Although the extension of
infection into the masticatory space has been observed to frequently extend superiorly against gravity, the pathway remains poorly
understood.24,26 A submasseteric pathway aided by mastication forces has been proposed.24 This complication is presumably attributable to
the declivous position, which the patient frequently used due to her current state of health. The patient, because she was a long-term
sufferer of a severe form of RA, was confined to a wheelchair and bed. All in all, BRONJ may be a potentially life-threatening condition
occurring in patients on bisphosphonate therapy. This case-report emphasizes the importance of screening patients for BRONJ, when they are
prescribed with bisphosphonates and concomitantly present further risk factors for BRONJ such as corticosteroid administration or oral
surgery. Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work. (A) Right-sided mandibular abscess and temporal swelling. (B)
Abscess of the mandible affecting the extraction area. The pus is leaking from the empty alveolus. The infection and swelling extend to the
second molar. Panoramic (A) and mandibular (B) CT showing a zone of bone rarefaction. There is a large osteo-necrotic lesion around the
extraction site adjacent to the second molar, with persistent extraction socket and bone sequestra. Abbreviation: CT, computed tomography.
Temporal abscess in the right zone.
