The sand flea Tunga penetrans usually infects the feet and affects primary school-age children and elderly persons in rural Uganda.
Tungiasis occurs nationwide but disease outbreaks have been reported in the Busoga sub-Region of eastern Uganda, associated with poor
sanitation and proximity between humans and domestic animals. Ectopic tungiasis, usually seen with extensive infection and at weight-bearing
body surfaces often follows exposure in highly infested environments. For patients who present abroad treatment may be surgical excision or
amputation. An adult female Musoga by tribe, resident in a Kampala City suburb presented at Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital’s
Oral Surgery and Jaw Injuries Unit with a discoloured swollen tongue, facial cellulitis and submandibular lymphadenopathy. A swelling
palpable in the body of her tongue was excised and sent for histology. Tungiasis of the tongue was diagnosed after microscopic examination
of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded Haematoxylin and Eosin-stained tissue sections. Lingual tungiasis is a rare diagnosis that was made on
histological examination. Atypical presentation outside an endemic area predisposed the patient to partial glossectomy instead of the less
invasive flea enucleation. Ectopic disease in a city-resident highlights the plight not only of visitors to infested areas but also of the
communities and their domestic animals. Tungiasis or sand flea disease caused by female Tunga penetrans (Linnaeus, 1758) and Tunga
trimamillata is an infection of the skin. The flea penetrates at periungual, interdigital or web sites, under toe nails or in grooves
between toes and the ball of the foot, causing a mild inflammation. Infection can result in abscess formation, deformity and loss of digits.
Tetanus is a potentially fatal complication of tungiasis . Ectopic tungiasis has been described involving the hands and elbows in Tanzania ,
Cameroon and Nigeria and the palpebrae in the Democratic Republic of Congo . Conjunctival , thigh, elbow and gluteal infections were
reported in the Caribbean and South America and growths over the ischial protuberances and knee . Heavy infection has been reported in
eastern African communities with poor living conditions, high rat populations and in settlement camps . Travellers, volunteers and
immigrants present abroad with infection of the feet and at times of the hands . Many undergo surgical excision; where diagnosis is
uncertain and disease is complicated a digit may be amputated . Tungiasis particularly afflicts primary school-age children and elderly
persons in rural Uganda. A survey of the Busoga sub-Region (Figure 1) following a disease outbreak in 2010 reported high prevalence, poor
sanitation and proximity between humans and domestic animals . National data on tungiasis is scanty but the disease is relatively confined
even in highly affected areas. Here we report an unusual case of tungiasis, reflect on the conditions leading to infection and relate the
options for individual treatment. A map showing the patient’s place of origin. Lake Victoria 1, Lake Kyoga 2, Kampala City 3, the Busoga
sub-Region 4. Graphical presentation used the HealthMapper application for the administrative divisions, then figures and numbers were
affixed. A forty eight year old female Musoga by tribe, resident in Katwe suburb to the south of Kampala City (Figure 1) presented at Mulago
National Referral and Teaching Hospital in the outpatients’ Oral Surgery and Jaw Injuries Unit on 25th July 2011. She had had discolouration
and swelling of the tongue for three weeks, difficulty in mastication and articulation and had taken antibiotics and analgesics. There was
no history of trauma, dental manipulation, bleeding or swelling of other parts of the body or treatment for chronic disease. No social
history had been recorded, her human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serostatus was not known and the extremities were not inspected. Physical
findings had noted a female in good general condition with swelling of the lower face and bilateral non-tender submandibular
lymphadenopathy. The anterior part of the tongue was swollen, discoloured red and a firm tender lump measuring 2 × 4 millimetres was
palpable. The mucosa, gingiva, palates, jaw and neck movements were normal. Abnormal haemogram findings were a leucocytosis of 14.5 × 103/μL
and neutrophilia of 10.2 × 103/μL (reference ranges 4–11 and 2–7 respectively), the bleeding indices were normal. With differential
diagnoses of papilloma, granuloma, Kaposi sarcoma and cyst, the lump was excised and sent for histological examination. The patient was
prescribed cetrimide-lidocaine hydrochloride mouth wash and gargle and a week later, the facial swelling and submandibular lymphadenopathy
had subsided. There was no record of subsequent visits. Microscopy of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded Haematoxylin and Eosin-stained tongue
sections had shown a space-occupying lesion within skeletal muscle. This was surrounded by numerous neutrophils, macrophages and giant
cells, some lymphocytes and occasional eosinophils. Several oval-shaped structures, some intact some cracked, aggregated in compartments
that occupied most of the space. Discontinuous spiral-bound elongations at the periphery of the lesion represented the flea’s chitinous
exoskeleton (Figures 2, 3 and 4). Based on the circular containment of numerous oval aggregations, elongated fractionated segments
encapsulating the space and accumulation at the tissue-lesion interface of inflammatory cells characteristic of a foreign body reaction,
tungiasis of the tongue was diagnosed. A space-occupying lesion within tongue tissue (X2). The lesion A is seen below the epithelium of the
tongue B, surrounded by a granulomatous reaction D. Histology sections were prepared from surgically resected formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded tongue tissue and stained using Haematoxylin and Eosin. The parasite’s exoskeleton enclosed compartments of ova (X10). The
exoskeleton F of the sand flea’s abdomen interceded between aggregations of ova E and the cellular infiltrate D predominantly of
neutrophilic granulocytes, macrophages and giant cells. The ova E cracked and the flea’s rigid epicuticle F was inevitably disrupted and
partly displaced by the tissue sectioning (X20). The clinical findings were non-specific. A swollen hyperaemic tongue could have been
reactive to a bite injury, friction irritation or allergen. A protuberance could be a papilloma, granuloma, malignancy or cyst and
discolouration due to chemotherapy or Kaposi sarcoma . Community assessment of oral health conditions in ten Districts of Uganda yielded
that apart from dental conditions, oral HIV lesions contributed 28.6%, oral cancer 10.3% and benign oral tumours 3.4% . A study on Ugandans
with AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma found that females more frequently presented with oral lesions . In this case, histology found an
embedded egg-bearing organism with features characteristic of tungiasis . The diagnosis was further underscored by the patient’s tribe and
place of origin, given the outbreaks and high infection rates in Busoga . The circumstances of infection were intriguing. Exposure of the
tongue would occur when the face was fairly close to the soil. This could be during home visits or cultural and social gatherings in the
village when people sleep on the ground. The flea would access the tongue if nasal obstruction, habitual tongue protrusion or open-mouth
posture kept the lips apart. For a tungal lesion surgical excision was quite invasive. In the communities, the flea is enucleated preferably
intact using a safety pin or thorn and the remnant ulcer doused with pepper extract, plant oil or petroleum product. The nuisance is thus
removed and the parasite burden reduced. Extraction nonetheless requires caution in Busoga due to the high tetanus rates . Alternative
treatments are topical applications that suffocate the flea, which is then eliminated by the body’s repair mechanisms. These have been used
in extensive infection where flea extraction would be overwhelming, highly traumatic or dangerous. In French Guiana 20% salicylated vaseline
killed the parasites and facilitated their removal , in Brazil 0.8% ivermectin, 0.2% metrifonate, 5% thiabendazole and placebo lotions were
compared and an extract of coconut, jojoba and aloe vera cured and prevented new infections . In highly infested areas, locally available
products with a repellent effect are desirable; infections of the mouth may require a special oral paste. Tungiasis of the tongue in an
adult resident of Kampala City is a rare diagnosis even for a native from Busoga. The atypical appearance and presentation outside the
endemic area predisposed the patient to partial glossectomy rather than simple enucleation. Though invaluable, histological exclusion of the
clinical diagnoses came late. This case, probably the first of lingual tungiasis, highlights the plight not only of visitors to infested
areas but also of the communities and their domestic animals. The patient gave written informed consent for treatment by the Oral Surgery
and Jaw Injuries Unit of Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital. Informed consent for the publication of clinical findings and
images was obtained; copies of the consent forms are available for review by the Editors of this journal. The Director General of Health
Services, Uganda Ministry of Health gave permission to publish this case report and to use their Household Survey Report on Busoga. AIDS:
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome; HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. ES
examined the tissue preparations for parasitic organisms, sought the patient’s details, obtained Ministry of Health Data and prepared the
manuscript. HW examined the tissue preparations for neoplasms, malformations, abnormal growths, degenerations, irritants and non-parasitic
organisms. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. 1. ES’ qualifications: MBChB MPH Doktors der Medizin. Lecturer of
Parasitology, Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Makerere University College of Health Sciences Kampala,
Uganda 2. HW’s qualifications: MBChB MMed MD. Professor in the Department of Pathology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Makerere University
College of Health Sciences Kampala, Uganda The Medical Microbiology and Pathology Departments of Makerere University are housed within
Mulago Hospital Complex and serve the Clinical and Pathology Laboratories of Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital. Patient
information is kept on cards in the Outpatients’ Department. The histology report is kept in the Pathology Department of the School of
Biomedical Sciences, Makerere University College of Health Sciences. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/14/112/prepub We thank the Director General of Health Services, Uganda Ministry of Health for
permission to publish this report and are grateful to Mr Kirumira Richard of the Department of Pathology, School of Biomedical Sciences for
preparing the histology slides. The histology images were refined by Dr Kalungi Samuel of the Department of Pathology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Makerere University College of Health Sciences.
