Focal acral hyperkeratosis is a rare genodermatosis with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. It is characterized by usually
asymptomatic keratotic papules along the borders of the hands and/or feet. The main differential diagnosis is acrokeratoelastoidosis of
Costa, which differs from the former only by not presenting elastorrhexis in histopathological examination, thus requiring this exam for a
correct diagnosis. Thirty-one year old, white female presented multiple round, brilliant, asymptomatic normochromic, hyperkeratotic papules,
measuring approximately 1-2 mm in diameter, on the transition area between the ventral and dorsal surfaces of the hands (Figure 1). She
reported the appearance of lesions during adolescence, not associated with trauma, and with progressive increase in number. She cited
similar cases in her family (cousin and sister). An excisional biopsy was performed for diagnostic confirmation on a papule on the right
hand. Histological exam, stained with hematoxylin eosin showed marked compact hyperorthokeratosis, over an indentation of the epidermal
border, which appeared thickened (Figure 2). Verhoeff staining (for elastic fibers) did not show any alterations on the dermis fiber
structure (Figure 3). Multiple normochromic hyperkeratotic, brilliant, oval papules, with approximately 1-2 mm in diameter, on the
transitional area between dorsal and ventral hand surfaces HE 40x. Panoramic vision evidencing marked compact hyperorthokeratosis Verhoeff
200x. Staining for elastic fibers (in black) demonstrating the intact elastic fiber frame in the dermis The diagnosis of focal acral
hyperkeratosis was made in face of the clinical and anatomopathological findings. Focal acral hyperkeratosis is a rare clinical variant of
marginal acrokeratodermas, which are characterized by keratotic lesions on the borders or transition areas of palmoplantar regions. Marginal
acrokeratodermas can be hereditary either with or without elastorrhexis (alterations in the elastic fibers) or acquired, with focal acral
hyperkeratosis being an autosomal dominant hereditary form (although sporadic cases may occur) without elastorrhexis. It is more frequent
among African-Americans, and it usually appears between 20 and 30 years of age.1,2,3 It is characterized by the appearance of oval or
polygonal, sometimes umbilicated and brilliant, keratotic papules, located on the borders of hands and feet. Some papules may coalesce
forming plaques. Usually lesions are asymptomatic and present slow and progressive growth. It may be associated to hyperhidrosis.3,4,5
Clinically, focal acral hyperkeratosis is similar to acrokeratoelastoidosis of Costa, with diagnosis defined by anatomopathological
examination. Focal acral hyperkeratosis, unlike acrokeratoelastoidosis of Costa presents histopathological alterations limited to the
epidermis (hyperkeratosis and acanthosis), absence of elastic fiber disorders (elastorrhexis) in the reticular dermis and normal collagen
fibers, besides not being associated with local trauma.6,7 Other differential diagnosis include plane warts, acrokeratosis verruciformis of
Hopf, colloid milium, degenerative colloid plaque of the hands and xanthomatous eruption.2,5 Since the lesions are asymptomatic and are not
associated with malignancies or morbidities, no treatment is necessary. Nevertheless, due to aesthetic reasons, several therapeutic options
are suggested in the literature, such as cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen, use of topical exfoliants (salicylic acid, lactic acid, urea and
tretinoin) as well as treatment with acitretin.1,2,7 We reported the case of a patient presenting clinical and anatomopathological features
typical of focal acral hyperkeratosis, with anatomopathological examination as an important tool to define diagnosis. Our patient continues
on clinical follow-up, using emollients and topical exfoliants. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article:
Sano DT, Melo LV, Tebcherani AJ, Sanchez APG Case for diagnosis. Focal acral hyperkeratosis. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(5):835-6. Work
performed at Padre Bento of Guarulhos Hospital Complex (CHPBG) - Guarulhos (SP), Brazil.
