Hansen's disease is a chronic infecto-contagious disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae. The bacillus prefers low-temperature areas and the
nose is usually the initial site of lesions. Transmission of the bacilli occurs by nasal and oropharyngeal secretions, and through solutions
of continuity of the skin and/or mucosae. Nasal manifestations are found in the later stages of the disease. A 70-year-old male patient,
native of Ibitiara-BA but resident in Guarulhos for 42 years complained about discomfort, nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea and pruritus. He was
referred to dermatology 3 months after his first visit to the primary health care center. Personal history: systemic arterial hypertension.
Dermatological examination of the nose and nasal cavity revealed the presence of confluent papulonodular lesions. Some of the lesions were
crusty (Figures 1 and 2). Smear was positive for Mycobacterium leprae. Serology for leishmaniasis, paracoccidioidomycosis and culture for
fungi were negative. Anatomopathological examination showed: pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, absence of granulomas, macrophages with wide
vacuolated cytoplasm. Search for acid-alcohol resistant bacilli using Ziehl-Nielsen staining was positive (Figure 3). Nasal leprosy. Tumoral
lesion with crusty surface within the nasal cavity Nasal leprosy. Collapse of the nasal septum. Tumoral lesion with crusty surface at the
end of the nasal dorsum HE-1000x. Clumps of acid-fast bacilli within macrophages Hansen's bacillus has tropism for cooler parts of the body,
such as the nasal septum, ear lobes, skin of extremities and testes, where temperature is ideal for its development.1 Multibacillary forms
of leprosy are associated with nasal lesions. Dermatological examination shows infiltration, hansenomas, ulceration and perforation or
suggestive and nonspecific changes, such as pallor of mucous membrane, congestion, vasculitis, crusting, atrophy and dryness.2-4 Nasal
obstruction in lepromatous leprosy reflects granulomatous infiltration of the mucosa.5 In leishmaniasis, perforation and collapse of the
nasal septum may occur as a result of the edematous infiltration of the supporting structures of the nose.6 Facial lesions in chronic forms
of paracoccidioidomycosis originate by contiguity to mucosa, lymph node, and bone lesions or by hematogenous spread of primary pulmonary
disease. This disease may also compromise the nasal pyramid and nasal septum.7,8 Other differential diagnoses of the condition in question
are tuberculosis (a highly prevalent infection in Brazil), as well as sinus lymphoma and autoimmune diseases like Wegener's granulomatosis
(which are more rare).9 Faced with this evidence, we made the diagnosis of lepromatous leprosy with exuberant nasal lesions. The patient
remains in outpatient follow-up and is being treated with multibacillary multidrug therapy (MB-MDT), as established by the World Health
Organization (WHO). He shows gradual improvement of mucocutaneous lesions. We emphasize the importance of the clinical picture of the nose
for the clinical diagnosis of the disease. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Yang JJH, Mohallem
DF, Cardoso TA, Lima Jr CLH, Tebcherani AJ, Vidigal MR. Case for diagnosis. Lepromatous leprosy with nasal lesion: exuberant clinical
presentation. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(5):837-8. Study conducted at the Complexo Hospitalar Padre Bento de Guarulhos (CHPBG) - Guarulhos
(SP), Brazil.
