Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: CJ FG NL TS XC XJ.
Analyzed the data: NL WL LZ. Contributed to the writing of the manuscript: NL. The anterolateral thigh flap has been the workhouse flap for
coverage of soft-tissue defects in head and neck for decades. However, the reconstruction of multiple and complex soft-tissue defects in
head and neck with multipaddled anterolateral thigh chimeric flaps is still a challenge for reconstructive surgeries. Here, a clinical
series of 12 cases is reported in which multipaddled anterolateral thigh chimeric flaps were used for complex soft-tissue defects with
several separately anatomic locations in head and neck. Of the 12 cases, 7 patients presented with trismus were diagnosed as advanced buccal
cancer with oral submucous fibrosis, 2 tongue cancer cases were found accompanied with multiple oral mucosa lesions or buccal cancer, and 3
were hypopharyngeal cancer with anterior neck skin invaded. All soft-tissue defects were reconstructed by multipaddled anterolateral thigh
chimeric flaps, including 9 tripaddled anterolateral thigh flaps and 3 bipaddled flaps. The mean length of skin paddle was 19.2 (range:
14–23) cm and the mean width was 4.9 (range: 2.5–7) cm. All flaps survived and all donor sites were closed primarily. After a mean follow-up
time of 9.1 months, there were no problems with the donor or recipient sites. This study supports that the multipaddled anterolateral thigh
chimeric flap is a reliable and good alternative for complex and multiple soft-tissue defects of the head and neck. The authors confirm that
all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting
Information files. Though relatively uncommonly, complex soft-tissue defects of head and neck which involve multiple and nonadjacent
anatomic sites can arise after radically surgery of advanced-staged malignancies or multiple lesions of the upper aerodigestive tract.
Meanwhile, immediate flap reconstruction is the gold standard for surgical treatment for the defects after tumor ablation. However,
functional and aesthetic reconstruction of complex and multiple defects in head and neck is still a major surgical challenge, because the
reconstruction of multiple and nonadjacent defects demand a flexible and feasible flap with multiplanar configuration and multiple paddles .
There are several reconstructive choices open to the clinician, including local cutaneous flaps, pedicled fasciocutaneous flaps and
microsurgical free flaps. It is usually not applicable for local and pedicled flaps to reconstruct such complex defects because of their
limited soft-tissue amount and less versatile design, while using two or more individual flaps for multiple defects might be an opinion, but
not the best. An ideal reconstructive procedure for multiple and complex three-dimensional defects should be performed in a single stage
operation, which not only can reduce operative time but also prevent likelihood of postoperative complications. For multiple and complex
soft-tissue defects, reconstruction with three-dimensional microvascular flaps is often the preferred alternative. The free anterolateral
thigh (ALT) flap, as first described by Song et al in 1984, is a versatile and reliable reconstructive option. This flap has already been a
workhorse flap for head and neck reconstruction in recent decades , . The advantages of ALT flap include consistent and reliable anatomy,
long vascular pedicle, the feasibility to create multiple skin paddles by recruiting additional perforators, the flexibility to reconstruct
composite defects by recruiting different tissue types, and low donor site morbidity. Based on multiple cutaneous perforators originated
from the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery (LCFA), free ALT flap can be harvested with multiple skin paddles for
multiple and complicated soft-tissue defects, which can eliminate the need for two or more separately flaps and vascular anastomosis . In
this study, we present our experience with free multipaddled ALT chimeric flap for functional and aesthetical reconstruction of complex head
and neck soft-tissue defects involving multiple nonadjacent anatomic sites in a single operation. Between May 2009 and August 2012, a total
of 12 consecutive patients with head and neck cancer indicated for radical resection and complex soft-tissue reconstruction with
multipaddled ALT chimeric flaps were enrolled. Of the 12 cases, 11 were men and only 1 was woman, with a mean age of 47.3 years (range, 33
to 62 years). None presented with distant metastases at the time of surgery. Tumor size was T4 in 4 patients (33.3%) and T3 in 8 cases
(66.7%). The baseline data about 12 cases are shown in Table 1. Abbreviations: BC, buccal cancer; TC, tongue cancer; HC, hypopharyngeal
cancer; OSF, oral submucous fibrosis; P, proximal paddle; M, middle paddle; D, distal paddle; W, width; L, length. After radical ablation of
cancer and other relative lesions, the resulting soft-tissue defects were classified into three types according to the locations of soft-
tissue defects: type I, patient with advanced buccal mucosa cancer in one site and oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) of contralateral buccal
mucosa (n = 7, Case 1, 2, 5, 7, 9, 12, 13); type II, patient with oral cancer and multiple oral mucosa lesions (leukoplakia or OSF) (n = 2,
Case 3, 6); type III, patient with primary or recurrent hypopharyngeal cancer which has also invaded anterior neck skin (n = 3, Case 4, 8,
11). The study followed the ethical guidelines of the Ministry of Health, China. Protocols applied in this study and the publish of
patients' details have been approved by the Hospital Ethical Committee of the Xiangya Hospital. The individuals in this manuscript have
given written informed consent to publish these case details. All patients were examined preoperatively by using a portable Super Dopplex
D900 non-directional hand-held Doppler probe (Huntleigh Diagnostics, Glamorgan, UK) to predict the vessel perforators originated from the
branches of the lateral circumflex femoral artery on the left or right anterolateral thigh. Enough separately and suitable perforators
should be detected on at least one thigh. Patients without enough perforators on both thighs were excluded. All defects were soft tissue.
The relevant surgical technique has previously been described , . Briefly, a line was drawn between the anterior–superior iliac spine and
the midpoint of the lateral border of the patella on the donor thigh in supine position. The locations of main cutaneous perforators were
detected using ultrasound Doppler preoperatively. Skin paddles were designed around the detected perforators. The pedicle of the
multipaddled ALT flap was supplied by the descending branch or transverse branch of the lateral circumflex femoral vessels. A medial
incision was made above the rectus femoris muscle and continued underneath the deep fascia of vastus lateralis to identify the located
cutaneous perforators with intramuscular dissection. Perforators were then dissected in a retrograde fashion until arriving at the
descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery. For some cases, a small segment of vastus lateralis muscle around perforator was
included as additional volume to augment the dead space and decrease tissue retraction after postoperative radiotherapy. And partial deep
fascial cuff and soft-tissue around the perforator was left to prevent the vessel spasm and facilitate the fixation of perforator. The
integrity of lateral cutaneous nerve was preserved carefully to decrease the risk of postoperative lateral thigh paresthesia. All skin
paddles of multipaddled ALT flap was checked for viability and then transferred to the defect with vessel anastomosis. We usually select two
recipient veins for anastomosis, which can secure the venous return of the flap. Hemostasis and drainage should maintained adequately to
prevent hematoma formation and the flap should be monitored carefully by clinical examination for color and capillary refill during the
early postoperative period. For excluded cases due to insufficient perforators, contralateral or bilateral ALT flaps could be supplementary
to reconstruct all defects. In our present study, for type I patients, after radical ablation, the bilateral complex defects involved full-
thickness cheek on one side and contralateral buccal mucosa. Tripaddled ALT musculocutaneous flap was raised, and the proximal and middle
paddles were chimeric and restored for the full-thickness cheek defects, while the distal paddle for the contralateral mucosa defect. For
type II patients, after surgical resection of tongue cancer and oral multiple lesions, resulting soft-tissue defects included unilateral or
bilateral tongue and buccal mucosa. Tripaddled ALT musculocutaneous flap was used to reconstruction the 3-dimensional defects. The proximal
and distal flaps were used to repair the bilateral mucosa defects respectively, and the middle one for tongue defect. For type III patients,
the invaded pharyngoesophagus and anterior neck skin were radical resected. Bipaddled ALT fasciocutaneous or musculocutaneous flap was
raised. The larger skin flap was whole or near circumferential to reconstruct the pharyngoesophagus, while the remaining for the skin
defect. Initially, 13 cases were selected for this study. One was excluded due to no enough perforators intraoperatively, although Doppler
showed enough perforator signals preoperatively in the operated thigh. For the remaining 12 cases, multipaddled ALT fasciocutaneous or
musculocutaneous chimeric flaps were harvested to reconstruction complex 3-dimensional defects in head and neck. The mean length of skin
paddle was 19.2 (range: 14–23) cm and the mean width was 4.9 (range: 2.5–7) cm. All flaps survived and all donor sites were closed
primarily. After a mean follow-up time of 9.1 (5–18) months, there were no problems with the donor or recipient sites. All patients
underwent postoperative radiotherapy. A 43-year-old man (case number 3 in Table 1) presented with left tongue cancer (T3N0M0), left buccal
cancer (T2N0M0) and extensive mucosa leukoplakia on right tongue (Fig. 1 and 2) underwent a radical ablation of all oral lesions and left
functional neck dissection. The resulting defects involved left half tongue, left buccal mucosa ranging from the gingival buccal sulcus of
maxilla to left hyomandibular furrow of mandible, and right tongue mucosa (Fig. 3). One-staged reconstruction by tripaddled free ALT
musculocutaneous flap was performed on the left thigh (Fig. 4). Partial vastus lateralis was included around the musculocutaneous perforator
for augmentation of dead space. The distal skin paddle (6×8 cm2) was used to cover the left buccal defect, the middle one (5×7 cm2) for left
half-tongue defect, and the proximal paddle (3×5 cm2) for right tongue defect (Fig. 5). The donor-site defect was closed primarily. Three
skin paddles were all survival, and no recurrence occurred during 12-month follow-up (Fig. 6). Note that the left tongue cancer (T3N0M0) and
left buccal cancer (T2N0M0) were not directly adjacent. The extensive mucosa leukoplakia (3×4 cm2) of right tongue was indicated to be
resected. Vascular anastomosis was made between the artery of the flap and the left superior thyroid artery and between the veins of the
flap and the external jugular vein as well as a branch of internal jugular vein. A 56-year-old male patient (case number 4 in Table 1)
presented with a local recurrent hypopharyngeal cancer that invaded the esophagus and anterior neck skin (Fig. 7). A salvage resection
involving the cancer, esophagus, anterior neck skin and bilateral neck dissection was performed. The resulting defects involved a part of
circumferential esophagus and anterior neck skin (Fig. 8). A bipaddled ALT fasciocutaneous flap was harvested (Fig. 9). The distal paddle
(7×12 cm2) was tubularized by itself to form a neoesophagus, while the proximal paddle (7×8 cm2) for the defect of anterior neck skin, which
also could monitor the inner free flap (Fig. 10). The flap survived completely without any complications (Fig. 11). Patient had good
functional outcome without fistula or stricture formation. However, this was the only one patient who complained of fatigue while ascending
and descending stairs for 2 months after operation, and felt obvious recovery at 4 months after operation. The distal paddle with two
separately perforators was tubularized by itself to form a neoesophagus. A 54-year-old male patient (case number 7 in Table 1) was presented
with the right buccal tumor and progressive trismus of about 6-month duration which was caused by severe OSF (Fig. 12). The patient
underwent a radical surgery for right buccal cancer, a transversal release of left OSF tissue, and right functional neck dissection. After
ablation, the bilateral buccal defects were noted, including a left buccal mucosa defect (3×4 cm2), and a right through-and-through cheek
defects which involved the intraoral defect (6×8 cm2) and the outer skin defect (4×6 cm2) (Fig. 13). A free ALT musculocutaneous flap with
three independent skin paddles was harvested (Fig. 14). The distal paddle was used to resurface the left mucosa defect, and two remaining
paddles were chimeric to reconstruct the right full-thickness cheek defects. The donor site was closed primarily. All skin paddles of the
ALT flap were survival, and the postoperative month opening of the patient was improved obviously (Fig. 15). The preoperative month opening
was severely limited. The postoperative month opening was obviously improved. There are several tissue organs with different locations and
configuration in head and neck, and reconstruction of multiple and complex soft-tissue defects after radical surgery in this region demands
a flap with three-dimensional requirement of both volume and surface. Two or more free flap transfers for complex defects in a single
operation are frequently encountered, nevertheless there are several disadvantages of limited availability of recipient vessels, having to
do two or more sets of microvascular anastomosis and a possible longer operating time. Free ALT flap has become an important option for
reconstruction of multiple anatomical locations in head and neck, which is often attributed to its multiple advantages: a long pedicle with
good caliber, a large and pliable skin territory with the ability to design more than one skin paddle depending on the perforator anatomy,
and the ability of two teams to work at the same time . The most important advantage of ALT flap for multiple and complex defects is the
fact that this flap can be harvested to include skin only or both skin and muscle, or as a chimeric flap with separately perfused skin
paddles for multiple anatomical locations Longo et al perfomed unipaddled or bipaddled free ALT perforator flaps for complex but adjacent
defect locations in head and neck. However, there is few literature concerned on the reconstruction of more complex soft-tissue defects
involving two or more nonadjacent anatomic sites. For such complex defects, ALT flap should be designed as multiple separately skin paddles
to cover multiple defects in different anatomical regions simultaneously. In our present series, all three types of complex soft-tissue
defects are unsuitable to be reconstructed by an unipaddled free ALT flap with a single perforator, because there were at least two
nonadjacent defect locations in one patient. Especially for type I patients presented with advanced buccal cancer and contralateral OSF, a
radical ablation of buccal cancer was primary and imperative, however it was also necessary to release contralateral OSF buccal mucosa and
correct the trismus . OSF is a chronic oral mucosal disease primarily affecting oral cavity and always leads to the restriction of mouth
opening, eventually impairing the ability to eat, speak and dental care . For these OSF cases, a free multipaddled ALT flap should be
designed to recover bilateral buccal defects, including a full-thickness cheek defects in one side and contralateral buccal defect. However,
for cases with type III defect, a single free ALT flap with a single perforator might be a supplementary option for cases with no enough
Intraoperative perforator by de-epithelializing the skin between the two paddles like the method introduced by Tan et al , Nevertheless,
overmuch folding and looping of one flap can always increase the flap necrosis, while the design of individually perfused paddles with
separately perforators can reduce the risk. For the harvest of multipaddled free ALT flap, at least two separately and safe perforators
based on descending branch of lateral circumflex femoral artery (dbLCFA) should be found intraoperatively on one thigh. However, one of
principal uncertainties of free ALT flap is the variation of the perforator's anatomy and the occasional absence of satisfactory
perforators. Kimata et al. and Wei et al. considered that 2 to 3 cutaneous perforators can be found to run through the medial edge of vastus
lateralis. From our experience and the work of others, at least 1 suitable cutaneous perforator could be always found . The first perforator
with the largest diameter can be always found to exit within a 5-cm-diameter circle centered at the midpoint of the line between the
anterior superior iliac crest and the superolateral border of the patella. Although 5–6% cases with absent cutaneous perforators were also
described in some earlier studies, the small size of those presented perforators was considered as the likely reason for being overlooked ,
. Although preoperative Doppler examination is commonly used to map out ALT cutaneous perforators, operator dependence and false positive
are its main disadvantages. Shaw et al. speculated that false positives represented either pure muscular perforators, or signals from the
main descending branch because of their proximity to the tip of the probe when the intervening layer of fat is minimal. Chiu et al.
considered that preoperative multi-detector computed tomographic angiography (CTA) could be performed to map perforator and evaluate the
dominant vascularity in the suitable thigh before transferring chimeric ALT flaps . However, it was hard for CTA to show the direct location
of cutaneous perforators just like Doppler for surgeons. While in our enrolled cases, we can find at least 2 or 3 reliable cutaneous
perforators intraoperatively on one thigh with the help of preoperative Doppler examination. So although there are many methods to locate
the perforators, in our experience a handheld Doppler probe has adequate sensitivity for perforator location. Meanwhile, we agree with the
free-style flap harvest concept, which means any cutaneous perforators located by a handheld Doppler probe can potentially be harvested by
retrograde dissection as a free flap, regardless of regional anatomy. However, in our present study, for the only abandoned patient, who was
an old female patient, it was a very rare case that we only found a single reliable cutaneous perforators on each thigh intraoperatively,
although preoperative Doppler showed at least 2 perforators in one thigh The too small size of the presented perforators and moderate
dystrophy of the case might be the main reasons. The more microsurgical experience and careful manipulation should be needed. However, for
the rare patient in our present study, two unipaddled ALT flaps from both thighs had to be harvested to recover multiple defects in her head
and neck. In our present study, a small segment of vastus lateralis muscle around perforator was included in the majority of cases as
additional volume to augment the dead space raised after radical cancer ablation and prevent tissue retraction of postoperative radiotherapy
. Meanwhile, we usually leave partial soft-tissue or a small deep fascial cuff around the perforator to prevent the vessel spasm, especially
perforators and limit the risk of damage to the vessel. So the free ALT flaps in our cases were the musculocutaneous or fasciocutaneous
flaps, not the perforator flap as classically described . Free ALT musculocutaneous flap does not affect quadriceps muscular function,
because only the vastus lateralis is dissected and still three bellies of the quadriceps can provide good functional synergy . Meanwhile,
careful preservation of the lateral cutaneous nerve and femoral motor nerve branches can decreases the risk of complications, such as
lateral thigh paresthesia, musculoskeletal dysfunction, and compartment syndrome . However, Anatomical variations include the nerve passing
through the pedicle of the ALT flap, or passing between perforators, seen in 28% of a 36-human cadaveric thigh dissection study . The close
course of the vascular pedicle with the femoral motor nerve branch innervating the vastus lateralis could lead to nerve damage during flap
elevation, resulting in knee extension weakness . In our present study, only one patient (Case 2) complained of fatigue while ascending and
descending stairs for 2 months after operation. This might be attributed to the intraoperative temporary damage of the femoral motor nerve
branches in the vastus lateralis. Early physical therapy plays an important role in minimizing the weakness of the vastus lateralis .
However, in comparison with salvage reconstruction of the advanced cancer, this could be considered negligible. Moreover, the selection of
recipient vessel is also very important to avoid flap failure . Although the vessels of the ALT flap match closely to the recipient vessels
in head and neck, radical surgery of cancer in head and neck could usually cause the recipient vascular impairment or resection. There are
two veins of different sizes accompanying the artery of the ALT flap, while many authors believed that only one accompanying vein
anastomosis was enough for venous return . Kimata et al prefers to check the quality of venous back-flow and choose an appropriate vein for
anastomosis after the anastomosis of the artery has been completed, because the flow strength of venous return sometimes differs between the
two veins, unrelated to venous size. Rubino C reported that flow rate measured postoperatively on flap arteries is significantly correlated
with flap weight. In order to avoid congestion of the multiple ALT flap and postoperative complications, we usually chose a branch of
internal jugular vein and the external jugular vein as the two recipient veins for anastomosis. It can secure the venous return of the flap
and no flap congestion occurred in our series. In our experience, we believe that the multipaddled ALT chimeric flap is a reliable option
for the reconstruction of complex soft-tissue defects with multiple different spatial orientations in head and neck, because it can provide
several independent skin paddles for multiple separately defects simultaneously with minimal donor site morbidity.
