A 29-year-old man presented with generalized, painless, erythematous lesions and fever. The patient had recently been diagnosed with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. His CD4 T-cell count at presentation was 14 cells/mm3, and he had been started on antiretroviral
therapy 15 days before onset of disease. The patient reported illicit drug use and alcohol consumption and had regular contact with cats. On
physical examination, the patient was found to have countless scattered, erythematous, violaceous nodular lesions ranging from 5 to 20 mm in
diameter (Figure 1A Figure 1.(A) Multiple erythematous nodules on the face. (B) Close-up view of multiple exophytic nodules. (C) Clumps of
tangled, dark bacilli on a Warthin–Starry stain (×100). and B) along with hepatosplenomegaly. A diagnosis of bacillary angiomatosis was made
based on skin biopsy histopathology, which revealed clusters of tangled bacilli on a modified silver stain (Figure 1C), and a positive
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Bartonella spp. targeting the 16S-23S ribosomal RNA gene intergenic transcribed spacer. Bacillary
angiomatosis is a reactive vasoproliferative lesion that usually occurs in immunocompromised patients in response to infection by Bartonella
species.1 The lesions are clinically indistinguishable from Kaposi's sarcoma and pyogenic granuloma. The clinical presentation after the
initiation of antiviral therapy in this patient suggests immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. Erythromycin or tetracyclines are the
antibiotics of choice.2 The patient was treated with doxycycline until the CD4 cell count was above 200 cells/mm3, resulting in complete
resolution of lesions. (A) Multiple erythematous nodules on the face. (B) Close-up view of multiple exophytic nodules. (C) Clumps of
tangled, dark bacilli on a Warthin–Starry stain (×100). Authors' addresses: Fernando Mejía, Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von
Humboldt, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru, E-mail: fernando.mejia.c@upch.pe. Carlos Seas, Instituto de Medicina Tropical
Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru, and Departamento de Enfermedades Infecciosas Tropicales y
Dermatologicas, Hospital Nacional Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru, E-mail: carlos.seas@upch.pe.
