Buschke-Fisher-Brauer keratoderma is a rare hereditary autosomal dominant disease of incomplete penetrance. Important differential diagnoses
include other palmoplantar keratinization disorders, acquired or hereditary, which is done based on the histopathological findings. This
diagnosis alerts especially about the possibility of associated neoplasms. Treatment involves topical keratolytic agents, usually with
little efficacy, or with long-term systemic retinoids with follow-up of exuberant collateral effects. Palmoplantar keratodermas (PPK) are
due to hyperproliferation of the stratum corneum of the epidermis in palmar and plantar regions, which may be secondary to a hereditary or
acquired origin. The hereditary ones group themselves according to the transmission mode, clinical presentation (focal, punctate or diffuse)
and the presence of dermatological or non-dermatological associated alterations.1 The Buschke-Fischer-Brauer keratoderma was described for
the first time in 1879 as "Disseminated clavus of the hands and feet"1. In 1910, Buschke and Fischer documented the disease and named it
"Keratoderma maculosa disseminata palmaris et plantaris".2 In 1913, Brauer demonstrated the hereditary nature of the disease which from then
on was called "Buschke-Fischer-Brauer palmoplantar keratoderma".3,4 In 2005, a study done in China evidenced a region of 5,06-cM in
chromosome 15q22.2-15q22.31 as the genetic locus of the syndrome.4 This disease has an estimated prevalence of 1.17/100,000.2 Its clinical
presentation happens mainly at the end of infancy and adolescence; however, there are reports of late onset, in the fifth decade of life, at
an average of 12 to 33 years of age.4,5 Clinically, it presents with numerous and tiny hyperkeratotic papules on the entire palmoplantar
surface. In locations of greater pressure on the sole of the foot, the lesions are prone to coalescence and a more diffuse pattern.4,5 This
probably occurs due to the constant friction on these regions, the plantar region due to deambulation and palmar region due to actions
performed by hand, like work or leisure activities. The majority of the diagnoses is done incidentally due to the asymptomatic nature of the
syndrome, eventually presenting only an increase of sensitivity in sites of greater pressure.5 Another important characteristic is the
association of Buschke-Fischer-Brauer keratoderma with other abnormalities, such as malignancies - colon adenocarcinoma, prostate cancer,
breast cancer and metastatic non-small cell lung cancer, neurological alterations, nail dystrophies, psoriasis and keratosis pilaris.2,4-7 A
75-year-old patient, male, white, bedridden for 15 years due to a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) sequela, reports painful and hardened
lesions in the palmoplantar region since childhood with worsening after being bedridden. He also reported having two children with the same
clinical picture. At the dermatological exam, he presents keratotic papules and cutaneous horns on the palmoplantar region (Figures 1, 2 and
3). His daughter has the same clinical picture of palmoplantar keratotic papules, but plane instead. The anatomopathological exam of the
lesion evidenced hyperkeratosis, orthokeratosis and acanthosis without koilocytosis. Keratotic papules and cutaneous horns on right plantar
region Keratotic papules and cutaneous horns on left plantar region Keratotic papules and cutaneous horns on left palmar region The
worsening and exacerbation of lesions are probably explained by the sequelar clinical picture of diminised movement due to the CVA. The
impossibility of deambulation and performance of daily labor activities, leisure or other needs led to the decrease of friction of keratotic
papules, enabling the formation of cutaneous horns in the palmoplantar region of this patient. The palmoplantar keratodermas are a permanent
thickening of the stratum corneum of palms and/or soles. They represent a group of acquired or hereditary diseases. The hereditary ones are
grouped into three forms based on morphology (diffuse, punctate or focal), mode of transmission and by the association of dermatological or
extra-dermatological alterations.1 The palmoplantar keratoderma of BuschkeFischer-Brauer is a hereditary autosomal dominant disease of
incomplete penetrance, whose genetic locus was found in a 5.06 cM region in 15q22.2-15q22.31.1,4 It is a rare disease, with prevalence of
1.17/100,000 in Croatia, manifested in the 12 to 30 years age group, with no difference between sexes, although predominance in males is
reported.1,5 It is clinically characterized by hyperkeratotic papular lesions, punctate, irregularly distributed on palms and soles,
converging into yellowish plaques in sites of greater pressure and friction.1,8 At one extreme, the papules acquire a verrucoid aspect or of
cutaneous horns, especially when some factor diminishes the degree of pressure or compression over lesions, as was evidenced in this
patient. Usually asymptomatic, they may however generate pain in the pressure zones and make palmar grasp and walking difficult.8 In the
above mentioned case, the lesions were similar to cutaneous horns, showing an exuberant clinical picture of the disease, due to the fact
that the patient remains bedridden, with no friction mechanisms responsible for the planing of lesions. Nail alterations are common: nail
thickening, dyschromia, subungual hyperkeratosis, hemorrhages, onychogryposis, onychomadesis, onychorrhexis, grooves, cracks, among others;
however, these are nonspecific manifestations, as well as the association with hyperhidrosis.1,2,3,6,8 Important differential diagnoses are
exposure to arsenic, verruca vulgaris, acrokeratoelastoidosis of Costa, punctate porokeratotic keratoderma and focal acral hyperkeratosis,
lichen planus and painful calluses disease, which show respectively: mild to moderate keratinocytic dysplasia, koilocytosis, focal
hyperkeratosis with elastorrhexis, parakeratotic columns with hyperkeratosis, focal hyperkeratosis without elastorrhexis, vacuolization of
the basal layer and epidermo1,2,3,5,9,10 In palmoplantar keratoderma of BuschkeFischer-Brauer, histology reveals thickening of the horny
layer, flattening of the underlying structures and non-specific alterations such as parakeratosis and acanthosis.1,2,9,10 There is an
association with neoplasms, especially of the digestive tract, like pancreas, colon adenocarcinoma, besides renal and mammary
neoplasms.2,5,8 There is also a report of association with psoriasis, keratosis pilaris, arthropathy related to HLA-B27.2,5,7 The treatment
is administered with keratolytic agents, such as topical salicylic acid especially in asymptomatic clinical pictures; debridement, excision
as alternatives to temporary relief of cutaneous thickening and systemic retinoids, like acitretin in more severe and symptomatic cases,
which shows better results; nevertheless, it has important adverse effects which may lead to discontinuation of treatment.1,2,5,8,9 Such
agents may demonstrate considerable improvement, although a long-term treatment is needed. Relapses may occur.8 Conflict of interest: None
Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Antonio JR, Oliveira GB, Rossi NCP, Pires LGG, Oliveira GB. Exuberant clinical picture of
Buschke-Fischer-Brauer palmoplantar keratoderma in bedridden patient. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(5):819-21. Work performed at Faculdade de
Medicina de São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP) - São José do Rio Preto (SP) - Brazil.
