Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 78 Final Diagnosis: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) Symptoms: Dyspnea • fatigue
Medication: Idarubicin followed by cytarabine Clinical Procedure: Chemotherapy Specialty: Hematology Unusual clinical course Renal failure
is a common presentation of acute myelomonocytic and monocytic leukemia. It is usually the result of a combined glomerular and tubular
dysfunction and is associated with a poor prognosis. No guidelines exist for treatment. We herein describe the case of a 78-year-old
Caucasian man who presented with acute myeloid leukemia M5, leukostasis with a white count of 340 000/ml, and acute renal failure with a
creatinine of 7.7/dL. The patient was initially treated with leukapheresis and 3 days of idarubicin in the setting of continuous renal
replacement therapy that resulted in rapid reversal of his renal failure. He then received 7 days of continuous infusion cytarabine and went
into a complete remission. Renal failure may complicate the presentation of AML but can be reversible with treatment. Dose adjustment of the
chemotherapy is not needed and the treatment can be greatly facilitated with the use of continuous renal replacement therapy, as indicated
in our case report. In addition, we emphasize that organ dysfunction, even in elderly patients, is not necessarily a contraindication to
aggressive treatment if it is felt to be disease-related and reversible. Leukostasis, acute renal failure, and extramedullary tissue
infiltration are more likely to be present at diagnosis in patients with acute myelomonocytic and monocytic leukemias (M4 and M5) than in
other subtypes of AML and have been associated with poor prognosis and death within the first week of presentation . The combination of
acute renal failure, proteinuria, hypokalemia, and hypophosphatemia specifically appears to be characteristic for patients with AML M4 and
M5 because it is not found in other subtypes and is the result of a combined glomerular and tubular dysfunction. Although this is a
relatively common presentation, there is no good data to guide initial treatment decisions in patients with AML and acute renal failure. In
our review of the literature we identified 1 case report describing reversibility of renal failure and tubule dysfunction with chemotherapy
treatment in a patient with AML M5 who presented with leukostasis and did not require renal replacement therapy . In another case of a
pediatric patient presenting with AML M4 and renal failure, radiation therapy to the kidneys was attempted and apparently failed, and then
dose-reduced chemotherapy in the setting of hemodialysis reversed the renal failure and induced remission of the leukemia . We report a case
of a patient presenting with AML M5, leukostasis, acute renal failure, and hypophosphatemia. To our knowledge this is the first case
describing complete reversibility of the renal failure and tubule dysfunction after treatment of the underlying leukemia with full-dose
chemotherapy and in the setting of continuous renal replacement therapy. A 78-year-old Caucasian man with atrial fibrillation, hypertension,
and dyslipidemia presented to our service with 2 days of oliguria after a week of fevers, dyspnea, fatigue, and sore throat. Initial
laboratory evaluation revealed abnormal blood counts: 340×109/l white blood cells (98% blasts), 59×109/l platelets, and a 26.9% hematocrit.
Serum chemistries were significant for the following values (in mg/dL unless otherwise noted, abnormal values are in bold): sodium 140,
potassium 4.0, chloride 101, bicarbonate 24, blood urea nitrogen 49, creatinine 7.7, uric acid 16.2, calcium 11.6 (11.9 corrected),
phosphate 0.9, magnesium 2.4, and lactate dehydrogenase 1329 IU/L. His urinalysis showed many cellular casts consisting of white cells that
had the appearance of blasts. Chest x-ray showed bilateral infiltrates suggesting leukemic infiltration or infection. A bilateral renal
ultrasound showed normal-sized kidneys and no hydronephrosis. A bone marrow biopsy was performed, showing that 99% of the aspirate
cellularity consisted of large cells with large nuclei, with irregular nuclear containing an open chromatin, prominent nucleoli, moderate
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio; basophilic cytoplasm and occasional cytoplasm vacuoles, consistent with blasts. The marrow was packed, with
overall cellularity approaching 100%. There was an interstitial infiltrate of immature cells consistent with blasts occurring in sheets
occupying 99% of marrow cellularity. Cell marker analysis demonstrated that the majority of the cells isolated from the peripheral
blood/bone marrow expressed immature antigens CD34, HLA-DR, myeloid associated antigens CD117, CD13 (dim), CD15 (variable), CD11c, CD64
(subset), and CD71, whereas lymphoid-associated antigen CD7 and were negative for CD10 (cALLa), B-cell antigens, other T-cell antigens CD2,
CD3, CD5, CD4, CD8, as well as CD33, CD14, CD41, CD56, and Glycophorin A. Overall picture was consistent with AML, FAB subtype M5 without
chromosomal abnormalities. FLT3 and NMP1 mutations were negative. The gravity of his diagnosis was conveyed to the patient and palliative
care was offered. The patient, highly functional and still productive in the community, opted for aggressive treatment and was admitted to
the intensive care unit. He was started on aggressive intravenous hydration (initially 250 ml/hr and then 125 ml/hr of D5W with 150 mEq/L of
sodium bicarbonate), antibiotics (cefepime), and hydroxyurea at 1000 mg twice a day. He received rasburicase and underwent 3 sessions of
leukapheresis. Continuous venovenous hemofiltration with dialysis (CVVHD) was initiated. He was then started on induction therapy with
idarubicin at 9 mg/m2 on day 1 and 12 mg/m2 on days 2 and 3. By day 4, his white cell count had returned to normal levels, his creatinine
had improved to 1.3 mg/dL and uric acid to 5.9 mg/dL, and CVVHD was discontinued. On Day 5 he was started on 7 days of cytarabine at 100
mg/m2/day as a continuous infusion. His day 14 bone marrow was ablated, his peripheral counts recovered by day 28, and his day 28 marrow
showed normal hematopiesis without an excess of blasts. His hospital course was complicated by enterococcal bacteremia, candidemia,
pulmonary aspergillosis, and a gastrointestinal bleed, but he recovered and was discharged to home on day 44. He then underwent
consolidation chemotherapy with 6 cycles of low-dose idarubicin and cytarabine. He relapsed 14 months after the time of first remission. He
was subsequently rein-duced with clofarabine and cytarabine and went into a second remission. He underwent further consolidation with
clofarabine and cytarabine but relapsed 6 months later. He was retreated with decitabine but developed a viral gastrointestinal infection
that resulted in acute tubular necrosis requiring hemodialysis. Thereafter, he chose palliative care and died 22.5 months after his original
presentation. Renal dysfunction and failure is a common presenting sign in patients with acute myelocytic and monocytic leukemia. The
etiology of renal failure in patients with AML M4 and M5 is multifactorial and the result is a combined glomerular and tubular dysfunction,
which is a unique manifestation compared to the other types of leukemia . Older studies suggested that eventually all patients with M4 and
M5 develop proteinuria and about 50% of them develop “azotemia” . A main cause for glomerular dysfunction is direct infiltration of the
kidneys by blasts. Enlarged kidneys are a sign of leukemic infiltration but patients may also have microscopic infiltration as indicated by
autopsy series in which leukemic infiltration of the kidneys was found in almost all patients with M4 and M5 . In addition, patients with
AML M4 and M5 have a high serum and urine level of lysozyme, thought to originate from the blast cells . Lysozyme directly damages tubule
cells, leading to proximal tubular acidosis similar to Fanconi’s syndrome and patients present with proteinuria and with hypokalemia and
hypophosphatemia despite sometimes having a very high cellular turnover and/or renal failure. (“lysozyme kidney”) . In addition patients
with myelocytic and monocytic leukemia may have hypergammaglobulinemia (in contrast to the hypogammaglobulinemia seen in the other subtypes
of AML), which has also been implicated as a contributing factor to tubular dysfunction . Spontaneous tumor lysis has in rare cases been
described in patients with acute leukemia and can also lead to acute renal failure at presentation, but the characteristic electrolyte
abnormalities (hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia) associated with the “lysozyme kidney” can help distinguish between the 2 syndromes. Another
mechanism that can explain renal failure at presentation is leukemic thrombi in the renal vasculature, but this seems to be rare . In our
patient, the cause of renal failure was most likely multifactorial. He had renal infiltration, as evidenced by the presence of leukemic
blast casts, but also had tubular dysfunction with hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. We did not pursue a kidney biopsy because it would be a
significant risk and unlikely to alter management. Instead we used rasburicase to control his uric acid level and initiated CVVHD.
Continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH) has been used successfully in patients with Burkitt’s lymphoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia
both to prevent and treat tumor lysis syndrome and to allow for the safe administration of chemotherapy in the setting of renal
insufficiency . In theory the slow, continuous removal of metabolites achieved by CVVH should be physiologically superior and better
tolerated compared to the intermittent forms of dialysis . If the hemofiltration provided by CVVH is not sufficient to remove the
metabolites, then continuous dialysis can easily be started in the form of CVVH with dialysis (CVVHD). We decided to treat his underlying
leukemia with idarubicin first (slightly dose-reduced only on day 1) because it is hepatically cleared and can be safely administered. The
dose adjustment for continuous infusion cytarabine in patients with renal failure has not been established but there is a concern for
accumulation of its toxic metabolite Ara-U . In addition, cytarabine is a dialyzable small molecule (243.22 kilodaltons – KD) that can be
easily removed by CVVH, sharply limiting its efficacy . Idarubicin, on the other hand, is a large (533.96 KD), non-dialyzable molecule .
Lysozyme is also a small molecule (15 KD) and it is likely that CVVH contributed to the rapid reversal of our patient’s renal failure by
quickly lowering his lysozyme levels. In addition, a sharp decline in the number of lysozyme-producing leukemic cells was achieved with
leukapheresis, hydroxyurea, and idarubicin. The end result was a rapid reversal of his renal failure and tubular dysfunction, indicating
that the damage induced by leukemic infiltration and lysozyme can be temporary. The return of his renal function to normal allowed us to
safely administer the cytarabine after the completion of idarubicin. Administering cytarabine out of sequence did not appear to negatively
affect the day 14 or 28 marrow results or overall outcome. Renal failure due to combined glomerular and tubular dysfunction may complicate
the presentation of acute myelocytic and monocytic leukemia but can be rapidly reversible with treatment. Dose adjustment of the
chemotherapy is not needed and the treatment can be greatly facilitated with the use of continuous renal replacement therapy, as indicated
in our case report. Because anthracyclines are not renally cleared, they can be administered first, and cytarabine administration can begin
after the reversal of kidney dysfunction and discontinuation of continuous renal replacement therapy. We emphasize that organ dysfunction,
even in elderly patients, is not necessarily a contraindication to aggressive treatment if it is felt to be disease-related and reversible.
Statement The authors did not receive any funding or support for this case report. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
