Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 69 Final Diagnosis: Mesenteric desmoid tumor Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Surgery Rare disease Intra-abdominal fibromatosis is a benign rare tumor of fibrous origin with a
significant potential for local invasion and no ability to metastasize, but it can recur. The etiology of desmoid tumors is unknown. It is
often associated with conditions such as familial adenomatous polyposis and Gardner syndrome. We report the case of a 69-year-old man who
presented to our hospital with an acute pulmonary embolism. The patient had a past history of colic surgery for a polyp with a high-grade
dysplasia. Pulmonary angiography showed partial occlusion of the right superior lobe artery and partial occlusion of the middle lobe artery.
The patient was given thrombolytic therapy. Abdominal computerized tomography revealed a mesenterial giant mass with compression of the
inferior vena cava (IVC). A biopsy of the mass, confirming aggressive fibromatosis. A laparotomy was performed, which revealed a massive
growth occupying the abdomen and attached to the previous ileocolic anastomosis. One day after surgery, his condition deteriorated. This
report underlines the potential of imaging investigations of abdomen and vena cava if pulmonary embolism is suspected, especially when there
is no evidence of peripheral venous thrombosis or other predisposing factors. Unfortunately, data on the surgical management of desmoid
tumor is scarce. Therefore, the standard of treatment is a surgical resection for resectable tumors. A desmoid tumor, also referred to as
aggressive fibromatosis, is a rare benign tumor but has highly locoregional aggressive potential arising from a proliferation of fibrous
tissue, with an incidence of 2–4 per million per year and a slight female preponderance. It has no known etiologic factor; however, it is
associated with certain familiar syndromes such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) . Other risk factor include: previous trauma,
prolonged estrogen intake, and previous surgery. Desmoid tumors can localized in a variety of anatomic sites: abdominal wall,
retroperitoneum, and extremities with a high aggressive potential of adjacent structures. A 69-year-old-man was admitted into our unit
through the emergency room for a suspected acute pulmonary embolism. The diagnosis was confirmed by pulmonary angiography, which showed
partial occlusion of the right superior lobe artery and partial occlusion of the middle lobe artery. The patient had a medical history of
tuberous sclerosis, a right colectomy for a polyp with a high-grade dysplasia, prostate cancer, and chronic constipation. He reported no
history of abdominal trauma or prior venous thromboembolic event. On admission the patient was stable and abdominal examination revealed a
mobile abdominal mass involving the entire right abdomen. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed an intraperitoneal
heterogeneous, tissular mass (20×11×16), arising from the mesentery, involving the duodenojejunal angle, and the inferior vena cava was
severely compressed (Figures 1 and 2). The inferior vena cava was dilated and showed no laminar thrombi distal to the obstruction. The
patient was given thrombolytic therapy followed by heparin administration for 3 weeks. A biopsy of the mass confirmed the aggressive
fibromatosis. The patient was prepared for surgery. A laparotomy was performed and confirmed the large mesenteric mass involving the
proximal jejunal region and the ileocolic anastomosis (Figure 3). No lymph nodes or ascites were seen. No focal lesion was noted in the
liver. The mass was resected with a part of the adherent jejunal and cholic segment, using linear GIA stapler anastomosis. The postoperative
course was complicated by a fatal acute myocardial infarction and the patient died on post-operative day 1. The microscopic and
immunohistochemical findings were compatible with the diagnosis of an aggressive mesenteric fibromatosis (Figures 4) (the tumor was positive
for vimentin and to beta-catenin). Fibromatosis (or desmoid tumor) is an uncommon but highly aggressive group of benign tumors arising from
fascial or musculoaponeurotic tissues, including mesenteric fibromatosis . Fibromatosis comprises 0.03% of all tumors, with a slight young
adult preponderance and no identifiable etiologic factor. It is, however, associated with familiar syndromes such as familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP) . A possible genetic predisposition may be implicated, especially in patients with Gardner’s syndrome having a high
potential for developing mesenteric fibromatosis compared with the normal population. Most of the patients are clinically asymptomatic and
the symptoms are associated with progressive invasion of contiguous structures and organ compression . In 2007 Koh et al. published their
experience and reported 5 mesenteric fibromatosis patterns: 1) spontaneous regression pattern, 2) stable pattern, 3) variable growth
pattern, 4) progressive growth pattern, and 5) aggressive growth pattern . They found that 75% of all patients had a progressive growth
pattern necessitating early surgical treatment . Because of the rarity of desmoid tumors and the unavailability of data on their surgical
management, there are neither specific guidelines nor a standardized therapeutic approach to its management. Therefore, curative surgical
resection remains the standard of treatment for resectable tumors . Preoperative biopsy is recommended for differential diagnosis with
intestinal carcinoma, carcinoid tumor, mesenteric fibromatosis, lymphoma, and retroperitoneal fibrosis . Radiotherapy is indicated for
unresectable or recurrent tumors . Acute pulmonary embolism due to compression of the inferior vena cava related to mesenteric fibromatosis
is very rare. Few cases of pulmonary embolism caused by gastrointestinal disease appear in the literature . In this report the patient died
and the origin of the thrombosis was the tumor itself. This report underlines the potential interest of imaging investigations of the
abdomen and vena cava if pulmonary embolism is suspected, especially when there is no evidence of peripheral venous thrombosis or other
predisposing factors . Mesenteric fibromatosis is usually asymptomatic and presents with a variety of clinical features . The physicians
should be suspicious when a pulmonary embolism is present without evidence of deep vein thrombosis or other predisposing factors.
Consequently, therapeutic strategies should be specifically tailored for each patient and their unique presentation according to anatomic
location . Conflicts of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography abdominal scan
(sagittal section) showed a mesenterial mass occupying almost the entire right abdomen, with compression of inferior vena cava. Contrast-
enhanced computed tomography abdominal scan showing a heterogenous mesenterial mass (axial section). Intraoperative image showing attached
jejunal segment. Histopathological picture of mesenteric desmoid tumor showing a tumor composed of stellate and spindle cells.
