Angiomyolipoma (AML) is a rare benign renal tumor occurring in about 0.3 to 3% of the general population. Most frequently it takes the form
of small single tumors occurring sporadically or accompanying tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville-Pringle disease). In some cases the tumor may
reach a very large size and be a cause of various serious complications. This case description concerns a 26-year-old female patient,
suffering from hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism and binocular blindness during the course of septo-optic dysplasia, in whom a giant, left
renal AML was diagnosed and treated surgically. According to the authors’ knowledge this was the first reported case of a huge size AML in a
patient with de Morsier syndrome. Angiomyolipoma (AML) is a rare benign renal tumor histologically containing elements of smooth muscle,
adipose tissue and blood vessels in various proportions. It occurs in 0.3 to 3% of the general population, four-fold more frequently in
women and the peak of incidence falls between the 30th and 50th years of life . Most frequently (80%) these are small, singular tumors which
occur unilaterally and occasionally. In the remaining cases they coexist with tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville-Pringle disease) and they may
be bilateral and multiple and achieve significant sizes . A tumor which is bigger than 10 cm and affects a whole organ is considered a
‘giant’ AML . Septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome) is a very rare syndrome of congenital defects consisting of optic nerve
hypoplasia, hypopituitarism, and agenesis of the septum pellucidum . The patient, a 26-year-old woman with a diagnosis of hypopituitarism,
hypothyroidism and binocular blindness in the course of septo-ocular dysplasia was admitted to the Clinic of Urology because of a large
tumor of the left kidney. The patient was 139 cm tall, weighed 52 kg and her BMI amounted to 27 kg/m2. Her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg,
heart rate 70/minute, creatinine levels 66 μmol/l, and her electrolytes, blood count and urinalysis were normal. The lesion had been
diagnosed incidentally in another medical centre during investigation of persistent stomach ache with a suspicion of pyelonephritis. During
case examination a perceptible mobile pathological resistance was reported on the left side of the stomach from the costal arch up to the
iliac fossa. On abdominal ultrasonography (USG) examination, a large, intra-abdominal and left flank heterogeneous tumor with dimensions
170 × 78 mm, mostly hyperechogenic (consisting probably of adipose tissue with little vascularization observed in Doppler color) and
probably coming out of the left kidney, was reported. The right kidney was 108 mm long, with no urinary retention and no deposits. The
diagnostics were extended by computer tomography (CT) angiography of the abdomen with contrast, in which the following was stated: numerous
AMLs in the left kidney, the biggest coming out from its lower part and affecting the whole paranephric space and going down to the level of
iliac fossa with dimensions of about 226 × 95 × 104 mm. Except for this the other intra-abdominal organs revealed no abnormalities
(Figures 1, 2). The patient qualified for surgical treatment. The whole kidney with the entire tumor was removed (Figure 3 and Figure 4) by
performing a median transperitoneal incision. Due to the risk of serious bleeding, the priority was to reach the renal vessels. The
procedure was performed without any complications with the loss of 100 ml of blood. Further recovery proceeded without any complications.
Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of AML.Figure 1 Computer tomography (CT) angiography - visible tumor and pathological
vessel. Figure 2 A different scan with a visible tumor. Figure 3 A post-surgical specimen with a visible fragment of ureter and healthy
renal parenchyma. Figure 4 A post-surgical specimen with a visible fragment of healthy renal parenchyma. Computer tomography (CT)
angiography - visible tumor and pathological vessel. A different scan with a visible tumor. A post-surgical specimen with a visible fragment
of ureter and healthy renal parenchyma. A post-surgical specimen with a visible fragment of healthy renal parenchyma. AML is one of the
rarely occurring solid tumors of the kidney (2 to 6%). Most frequently they are diagnosed by chance during imaging examinations and they do
not reach large sizes. They occur multifocally in about 1/3 and bilaterally in about 15% of all cases. They coexist with tuberous sclerosis
(Bourneville-Pringle disease) with a frequency of about 20%. In such patients AML is diagnosed in 40 to 80% with a 2 to 3% risk of
coexistence of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). AML has a mild nature and it does not produce metastases. Most frequently it proceeds
asymptomatically. It may induce hematuria and uncharacteristic pain . The most serious and dangerous complication for health from AML is
spontaneous bleeding into the retroperitoneal space from pathological vessels, referred to as Wünderlich syndrome . Diagnosis is based
mainly on imaging examinations: USG and CT (presence of adipose tissue within the tumor mass of density of 10 Hounsfield units is a
characteristic feature), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), angiography. Tumors larger than 4 cm are usually symptomatic and these are the
tumors which require control every six months . The incidence of AML larger than 10 cm in individuals without a diagnosis of tuberous
sclerosis is extremely rare. The commonly applied methods of treatment include: cryoablation, embolization, tumorectomy, partial resection
of the kidney, or nephrectomy. The choice and scope of treatment is determined by: tumor size, its vascularization, symptoms and
comorbidities . Septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome) is a syndrome of congenital defects which occurs at a frequency of 1:50,000 and
which consists of: optic nerve hypoplasia, hypopituitarism, and agenesis of the septum pellucidum. Its etiology is multivariate and still
not fully known. Recent reports claim a possible role of the HESX1 gene which is responsible for the development of the pituitary and
central parts of the brain. Boys fall ill from this syndrome just as often as girls . So far, an increased frequency of coexistence of renal
carcinomas, including AML, has not been described. Herein, we have presented the first case of a large AML in a patient with de Morsier
syndrome. We have presented an extremely rare case of the coexistence of congenital defects in the form of septo-optic dysplasia associated
with a giant renal AML. The patient required a precise diagnostic work-up and radical surgical treatment. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. angiomyolipoma body mass index computer tomography magnetic resonance imaging renal cell
carcinoma septo-optic dysplasia ultrasonography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions MC was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. MS critically revised the manuscript. ZJ reviewed the literature and
gave final approval of the submitted version. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information MC is the first
author. We thank the editor and reviewers for providing medical writing services.
