To the Editors Sleep-related eating disorder (SRED) is defined as recurrent episodes of involuntary eating and drinking during arousal from
sleep with problematic consequences.1 Patients are partially or fully amnestic for this eating behavior. The pathophysiologic mechanism of
SRED is uncertain but it has been suggested that it may be related to dopaminergic dysfunction. This theory is supported by the increased
prevalence of SRED in restless legs syndrome (RLS).2 Several case reports have been reported in which SRED was associated with zolpidem
use.3–6 The authors present a case of a patient who showed binge eating behavior after sleep-onset due to mirtazapine treatment. The patient
showed complete remission after mirtazapine treatment was discontinued. On the basis of a literature review, this is the first report of
SRED linked to the use of mirtazapine. The subject in this case report is a 24-year-old woman who was brought to the psychiatric ward by her
parents and was admitted with depressed mood and suicidal gestures (drug ingestion: zolpidem 50 mg). She reported that she had experienced
depressed mood, volition loss, and sleep disturbance for several years and had treated her symptoms with fluoxetine (40 mg/d), trazodone (75
mg/d), and zolpidem (10 mg/d) at a local psychiatric clinic she had visited a year ago. Also, she intermittently experienced night binge
eating after sleep-onset but could not remember her eating behavior the next morning. Her weight increased from 50 to 70 kg during a period
of 6 months. Physical and neurological examinations and all laboratory tests were normal. There was also no evidence of RLS, periodic limb
movement disorder (PLMD), and history of other prior parasomnias. Abnormal eating behavior could be associated with zolpidem and fluoxetine
combination therapy. Therefore, we discontinued her all medications at intake and replaced them with mirtazapine (30 mg/d) and clonazepam
(0.25 mg/d). Her depressive mood, suicidal ideation, and insomnia improved, and her night binge eating episodes disappeared. After 2 weeks
of inpatient therapy, she was discharged from the hospital with markedly improved states. However, 2 weeks after discharge, she reported
weight gain and night binge eating episodes (4 weeks of mirtazapine and clonazepam use). She usually received her medications around 11 p.m.
and went directly to bed. Approximately 1 to 2 hours after sleep-onset, she arose and ate large amounts of food. She seemed to be awake and
showed nervousness and irritability when family attempted to stop her behavior. But she could not remember her unusual eating behavior the
next morning. Even after her mirtazapine dose was reduced to 15 mg/d, her abnormal eating behaviors continued. We finally discontinued
mirtazapine, and the binge eating behavior disappeared. For a diagnosis of SRED, a patient must experience recurrent episodes of involuntary
eating and drinking with problematic results. These involuntary eating and drinking episodes should include 1 or more of the following:
consumption of peculiar forms of food or toxic substances, insomnia related to sleep disruption with daytime fatigue or sleepiness, sleep-
related injury, dangerous behaviors performed while in pursuit of food or while cooking food, morning anorexia, and adverse health
consequences from recurrent binge eating of high-caloric foods.1 Because our patient exhibited recurrent episodes of binge and
uncontrollable eating after arousal from sleep, she could not remember her abnormal eating behavior; her symptoms met the diagnostic
criteria for SRED. Several drugs, such as zolpidem, triazolam, olanzapine, risperidone, and quetiapine related to SRED,3–9 and topiramate,
clonazepam, and dopaminergics showed therapeutic benefits through case reports and small uncontrolled studies.10–12 Mirtazapine enhances
serotonin release by blocking α-2 autoreceptors and heteroreceptors, selectively antagonizing the serotonin 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors in the
central and peripheral nervous system. Blockade of 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors may produce antidepressant effects by relieving sleep
disturbance or increasing appetite. Mirtazapine also has a potent antagonist effect on histamine 1 receptors, which may augment the sedative
and appetite-increasing effects. The pathophysiology of SRED is still unclear. However, because SRED is prevalent in patients with RLS and
PLMD, there is evidence that SRED may be related to dopaminergic dysfunction.2,10,13,14 Some investigators have reported that combined
selective α-2 adrenoceptor antagonists and norepinephrine transporter inhibitors caused a marked and selective increase of extracellular
dopamine in prefrontal cortex.15,16 However, second-generation antidepressants alone may cause RLS in 9% of patients, and mirtazapine
induced or exacerbated RLS in 28% of patients.17 Moreover, recent reports showed an association of mirtazapine with PLMD-like symptoms.18
Although serotonin-mediated dopamine inhibition might be a mechanism,19 it is uncertain which mechanism of mirtazapine causes SRED. Here, we
report the first case of mirtazapine-related SRED. The use of mirtazapine should, therefore, be considered a possible precipitating factor
for developing SRED, and it will not necessarily have an immediate onset. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
