Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 62 Final Diagnosis: Hepatic artery thrombosis Symptoms: Abdominal pain •
Nausea • Vomiting Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Surgery Rare disease Isolated hepatic artery thrombosis is an extremely
rare condition with only a few cases reported in the literature. A 62-year-old woman presented with a 5-day history of right upper quadrant
abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting. Physical examination revealed right upper quadrant tenderness. Her initial laboratory
work was significant for elevated aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels (745 and 431 U/L, respectively). A computed
tomography of her abdomen showed a thrombus within the hepatic artery, with multiple hepatic infarcts but no evidence of portal vein
thrombosis. Hypercoagulability workup was unremarkable; she did not have any evidence of atrial fibrillation on ECG or telemetry. She was
treated with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin. Over the course of her hospitalization, her AST and ALT levels peaked to 2065 and
1217 U/L respectively, and trended down thereafter. We believe that our case is unique for 2 reasons: 1) Our patient did not undergo any
procedure that may have precipitated hepatic artery thrombosis and 2) Despite the absence of concurrent portal vein thrombosis, she had
biochemical and imaging findings of hepatic ischemia. Hepatic artery thrombosis is a common complication of liver transplantation ; it is a
rare complication of various intra-abdominal procedures , but spontaneous hepatic artery thrombosis is an extremely rare disorder, with only
a few cases reported in the literature. We report a case of spontaneous hepatic artery thrombosis leading to multiple hepatic infarcts in an
elderly patient. A 62-year-old African-American woman with a medical history of hypertension, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and treated
stage 3 breast cancer, presented with a 5-day history of constant right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea and non-bloody vomiting. Her
pain had no relation to food intake, nor was it associated with fever, urinary symptoms, or alterations in bowel habits. She endorsed no
history of prior episodes or recent trauma. Her physical examination revealed a soft abdomen with normoactive bowel sounds, and right upper
quadrant tenderness with no evidence of rebound or guarding. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or ascites. The rest of her exam results were
unremarkable. Her initial laboratory work was significant for a hepatocellular process as evidenced by her elevated AST and ALT levels (745
and 431 units per liter, respectively). Her initial liver function tests along with baseline and peak levels are presented in Table 1. Her
CBC was normal, but her BMP showed baseline creatinine of 1.2 mg/dL, and no evidence of electrolyte abnormalities (Tables 2 and 3). Her
coagulation profile on presentation showed slight prolongation in PT to 15.7 seconds, INR of 1.31, and normal PTT (Table 4). An EKG was done
and showed sinus tachycardia and left ventricular hypertrophy. She had no history of atrial fibrillation. Because of her laboratory findings
and persistent abdominal pain, a CT scan of her abdomen with contrast was done. This revealed a thrombus within the hepatic artery, with
multiple low attenuating areas present within the liver, which were most compatible with hepatic infarcts. She had no evidence of portal
vein thrombosis (Figure 1). She was started on anticoagulation with subcutaneous enoxaparin. During her hospital stay, her AST and ALT
levels peaked at 2065 and 1217 U/L, respectively, but started trending down thereafter (Figure 2). A workup for underlying chronic liver
disease was negative (ANA, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, viral hepatitis panel, iron panel, and
ceruloplasmin levels). She also underwent a transthoracic and transesophageal echo-cardiogram, which did not show a thrombus or vegetation
as a possible embolic source. At this point, she was thought to have spontaneous hepatic artery thrombosis with resultant hepatic infarcts.
A hypercoagulability workup was initiated and showed slightly low levels of protein C, protein S, and anti-thrombin III levels (which were
difficult to interpret in the setting of an acute thrombus). A D-dimer was elevated at 7.87 fibrinogen equivalent units (FEU), while her
fibrinogen levels were also elevated to 840 mg/dL. Her clinical course, however, continued to deteriorate and on the fifth day of
hospitalization, she became lethargic and developed severe inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Her lab results showed increasing
leukocytosis, acute kidney injury, and a new right lower lobe opacity on her chest imaging. She was transferred to the intensive care unit
where she was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics for possible hospital-acquired pneumonia leading to severe sepsis. Shortly thereafter,
she suffered a sudden cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was not performed as she had already signed DNR/DNI forms prior to her
admission. Her family denied permission for autopsy. Hepatic infarcts following hepatic artery compromise are very rare because of the dual
blood supply from the portal vein and the hepatic artery, along with the extensive hepatic arterial collateral system. However, localized
hepatic infarcts following thrombosis or compression of an intrahepatic branch of the hepatic artery by various etiologies have been
described, and typically lead to a transient increase in transaminases (AST, ALT), without compromising the hepatic synthetic function . The
vast majority of cases of hepatic artery thrombosis are reported as complications of orthotopic liver transplantation, with incidence rates
of 3% to 9% . It is a leading cause of graft loss and mortality during the immediate postoperative period . Multiple risk factors have been
identified and include technical difficulties during surgery, older donor age, lack of ABO compatibility, cigarette smoking, hypercoagulable
states, preservation damages, regrafts, and a donor positive for cytomegalovirus in a CMV-negative recipient . The clinical presentation
varies depending on the timing of the thrombosis. Early hepatic artery thrombosis (within 4 weeks) may present with acute graft failure,
sepsis/liver abscess, and biliary leak/stricture . On the other hand, late hepatic artery thrombosis (after 4 weeks) can be clinically
silent, with altered liver function tests. It can also present with biliary complications such as cholangitis with hepatic abscesses, bile
leak, biliary strictures, and, eventually, progressive graft failure . Besides liver transplantation, hepatic artery thrombosis has been
reported to complicate various other procedures. Jia et al. reported a case of right hepatic artery thrombosis following debridement and
T-tube drainage of the common bile duct for severe pancreatitis and acute suppurative obstructive cholangitis in a patient with polycythemia
vera . The patient developed an unexplained rise of ALT and AST levels more than 30 days postoperatively. CT angiography confirmed the
diagnosis of right hepatic artery thrombosis. In 2009, Herrera Melero et al. reported a case of hepatic artery thrombosis and portal vein
thrombosis complicating the postoperative course of a patient with Klatskin’s tumor, who underwent left hepatectomy, cholecystectomy, and
roux en y cholangiojejunostomy . In their case report published in 2004, Poggi et al. described the development of a massive hepatic
infarction following an ultrasound-guided percutaneous radiofrequency thermal ablation of hepatocellular carcinoma. Color Doppler US
revealed right portal vein thrombosis and right hepatic artery occlusion, confirmed by abdominal computed tomography . Other procedures
reported to lead to hepatic artery thrombosis include: Placement of hepatic catheters/Port systems for intra-arterial chemotherapy of liver
tumors .Hepatic artery reconstruction following ablative surgery for hepatobiliary and pancreatic malignancies . Placement of hepatic
catheters/Port systems for intra-arterial chemotherapy of liver tumors . Hepatic artery reconstruction following ablative surgery for
hepatobiliary and pancreatic malignancies . Our review of the literature revealed only 2 case reports of hepatic artery thrombosis in the
absence of a recent abdominal intervention. O’Connor et al. reported the first case of “spontaneous hepatic artery thrombosis with
infarction of the liver” in 1976 . Their patient presented with symptoms of congestive heart failure and bronchitis. His hospital stay was
complicated by left lower extremity gangrene, requiring an above-the-knee amputation. Two weeks later, he developed fever and right upper
quadrant pain; his laboratory work was remarkable for SGOT (serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase) of 3500 mU/ml, which peaked to 5100
U/ml, then slowly trended down to 250 U/ml 9 days later, when the patient suffered a myocardial infarction and died. Autopsy showed
thrombosis of the celiac trunk with extension to splenic, common hepatic, and right and left hepatic arteries. In 2004, Francque et al.
reported a case of left hepatic artery and portal vein thrombosis leading to hepatic infarction in a 73-year-old patient who suffered blunt
abdominal trauma; his liver function tests were remarkable for massive elevations of AST and ALT (2518 U/L and 1334 U/L, respectively) with
slight elevation in the levels of alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyltransferase, and bilirubin. Doppler ultrasound disclosed a
heterogeneous area in the left lobe and thrombosis of the left branch of the portal vein. No arterial signal could be recorded in the left
lobe. Computerized tomography scan showed a well-marginated, peripheral perfusion defect without visualization of a left arterial branch or
a left portal branch. Angiography confirmed the above findings. The levels of transaminases decreased slowly and eventually normalized 3
months later . In the absence of a recent surgical intervention or trauma, a workup for an underlying hypercoagulable state is essential as
this may determine the course of management. Although there are no guidelines in the management of isolated hepatic artery thrombosis, the
duration of anticoagulation may be influenced based on the precipitating event. Two important factors that may have played a role in the
development of spontaneous thrombosis in this patient are a history of advanced cancer and sepsis. In the case of cancer, a hypercoagulable
or prothrombotic state occurs due to the ability of tumor cells to activate the coagulation system. It has been estimated that
hypercoagulation accounts for a significant percentage of mortality and morbidity in cancer patients. Prothrombotic factors in cancer
include the ability of tumor cells to produce and secrete procoagulant/fibrinolytic substances and inflammatory cytokines, and the physical
interaction between tumor cells and blood (monocytes, platelets, neutrophils) or vascular cells. Other mechanisms of thrombus promotion in
malignancy include nonspecific factors such as the generation of acute phase reactants and necrosis (e.g., inflammation), abnormal protein
metabolism (e.g., paraproteinemia), and hemodynamic compromise (e.g., stasis). In addition, anticancer therapy (e.g.,
surgery/chemotherapy/hormone therapy) may significantly increase the risk of thromboembolic events by similar mechanisms, such as
procoagulant release, endothelial damage, or stimulation of tissue factor production by host cells. However, not all of the mechanisms for
the production of a hypercoagulable state of cancer are entirely understood . On the other hand, sepsis is often associated with hemostatic
changes ranging from subclinical activation of blood coagulation (hypercoagulability), which may contribute to localized venous
thromboembolism, to acute disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), characterized by widespread microvascular thrombosis and subsequent
consumption of platelets and coagulation proteins, eventually causing bleeding manifestations. The key event underlying this life-
threatening complication is the overwhelming inflammatory host response to the infectious agent, leading to the overexpression of
inflammatory mediators. The latter, along with the micro-organism and its derivatives, are now believed to drive the major changes
responsible for massive thrombin formation and fibrin deposition, namely: 1) the aberrant expression of the TF by different cells
(especially monocytes-macrophages), 2) the impairment of physiological anticoagulant pathways, orchestrated mainly by dysfunctional
endothelial cells (ECs), and 3) the suppression of fibrinolysis due to overproduction of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) by ECs
and likely also to thrombin-mediated activation of thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) . Hepatic artery thrombosis in the
absence of a recent intra-abdominal surgical intervention is rare. There are very few cases of spontaneous hepatic artery thrombosis
reported in the medical literature. We believe that our case is unique for 2 reasons: Our patient did not undergo any procedure that may
have precipitated hepatic artery thrombosis.Despite the absence of concurrent portal vein thrombosis, she had biochemical and imaging
findings of hepatic ischemia. Our patient did not undergo any procedure that may have precipitated hepatic artery thrombosis. Despite the
absence of concurrent portal vein thrombosis, she had biochemical and imaging findings of hepatic ischemia. We believe the precipitating
factor of her presentation was malignancy-related hypercoagulability. However, it is felt that her frustrating outcome was not directly
related to hepatic artery thrombosis, but rather to severe sepsis in an unfortunate patient with multiple co-morbidities. Computed
tomography showing hepatic artery thrombosis with multiple peripheral hepatic infarcts. (A) Thrombus noted in proper hepatic artery as
pointed by green arrow. (B) Magnified image of clot noted within hepatic artery. (C) Multiple peripheral low-attenuating irregular areas
compatible with hepatic infarcts. (D) Evidence of peripheral infarcts in the liver, mostly over left hepatic lobe. Trend of transaminases
during hospital course. Liver function tests. Basic metabolic panel. Complete blood count. Coagulation panel.
