Contributed equally Biallelic mutations of the SLC25A13 gene result in citrin deficiency (CD) in humans. Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis
caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD) is the major CD phenotype in pediatrics; however, knowledge on its genotypic and phenotypic
characteristics remains limited. The present study aimed to explore novel molecular and clinical characteristics of CD. An infant suspected
to have NICCD as well as her parents were enrolled as the research subjects. SLC25A13 mutations were investigated using various methods,
including cDNA cloning and sequencing. The pathogenicity of a novel mutation was analyzed bioinformatically and functionally with a yeast
model. Both the infant and her father were heterozygous for c.2T>C and c.790G>A, while the mother was only a c.2T>C carrier. The novel
c.790G>A mutation proved bioinformatically and functionally pathogenic. The infant had esophageal atresia and an accessory hepatic duct,
along with bile plug formation confirmed by laparoscopic surgery. However, the father seemed to be healthy thus far. The findings of the
present study enrich the genotypic and phenotypic characteristics of CD patients, and provided clinical and molecular evidence suggesting
the possible non-penetrance of SLC25A13 mutations and the likely involvement of this gene in primitive foregut development during early
embryonic life. The SLC25A13 gene on chromosome 7q21.3 was cloned, whilst its protein product, CITRIN, was designated in 1999 by Kobayashi
et al (1). This breakthrough finding opened up a new research field on citrin deficiency (CD) and laid the foundation for subsequent
investigation into this autosomal recessive disorder. Subsequently, citrin was found to be the liver-type aspartate/glutamate carrier
isoform 2 (AGC2) (2,3). The laboratory and clinical characteristics of this CD, whether molecular (4–12), biochemical (13,14), medical
imaging (15), hepatohistological (16–18), metabolomic (19,20), behavioral (21), therapeutic (22–26) or epidemiological (27–31), have been
increasingly depicted, while patients with CD have been diagnosed not only in Asia (32–42), but also in Europe (43–46) and North America
(47–49). Currently, CD has developed into a worldwide panethnic disease entity encompassing at least three age-dependent clinical
phenotypes, i.e. neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD) in neonates or infants, adult-onset type 2
citrullinemia (CTLN2) in adolescents and adults, as well as failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency (FTTDCD), which
was recently suggested to be a novel CD phenotype between NICCD and CTLN2 (7,11,12,19,50,51). Although considerable laboratory and clinical
progress has been made in CD research, the genotypic and phenotypic characteristics of this disease entity remain far from being completely
clarified. To date, a total of 84 deleterious mutations of the SLC25A13 gene have been reported (11,12,30,52–54), constituting valuable
molecular evidence for the definite diagnosis of patients with CD. However, the pathogenicity of the majority of missense mutations was
based on conventional bioinformatics evidence and studies on their direct functional effects are rather limited (10,12). Moreover, all
phenotypic, therapeutic and prognostic knowledge on patients with CD has been gained through the clinical management of such patients, both
pediatric and adult, and knowledge on the effects of SLC25A13 mutations on CD fetuses remains limited (55), constituting a novel issue of
perinatal medicine. In the present study, an infant with NICCD was diagnosed, who harbored a novel deleterious SLC25A13 mutation and
demonstrated inspissated bile syndrome (IBS) along with multiple congenital anomalies of the digestive system. We herein report the
molecular and clinical characteristics of this case of NICCD. The research subjects in the present study were a female infant (C0218)
suspected to have NICCD and her parents. The clinical findings of this family were described as a case report. The majority of the data were
collected at our clinical practice or from the laboratory and imaging databases at our own hospital, with partial biochemical or imaging
results from the medical records in another hospital, which were provided by the parents of the patient at the time of her referral. This
study was carried out after written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the infant prior to their enrollment in the present
study. For screening analysis of the novel mutation, 60 used blood samples (with 120 SLC25A13 alleles) for health examinations were
collected as the controls. This study was approved by the Committee for Medical Ethics, the First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China, adhering to the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki (WMADH 2008), which was adopted by the 59th WMA General
Assembly, Seoul, Korea, in October 2008. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples collected from the subjects. Four high-
frequency mutations of the SLC25A13 gene, i.e., c.851_854delGTAT, c.1638_1660dup, c.615+5G>A and IVS16ins3kb, were screened by PCR/long and
accurate (LA)-PCR and PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. Subsequently, all 18 exons and their flanking genomic
sequences were amplified by PCR/LA-PCR, and the amplified products were then sequenced, as described in our previous studies (7–9,11,15). As
previously described by our group (9,11), EDTA anticoagulant peripheral blood samples were collected, the lymphocytes were isolated with
lymphocyte separation medium (LSM, MP) and then homogenized immediately in RNAiso Plus (Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Japan) to extract the total
mRNA following the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, the SLC25A13 transcripts were reverse-transcribed and amplified by PCR, and
the purified products were cloned into the pSIMPLE-18 EcoRV/BAP Vector (Takara Bio Inc.) and transformed into DH5α Escherichia coli
competent cells. To examine the co-segregation of the 2 SLC25A13 variations detected in the family, only the cDNA clones containing exons 1
and 8 together were selected for further sequencing analysis, since the 2 variations occurred in these 2 exons, respectively. The sequencing
results of the cDNA clones were aligned with the SLC25A13 mRNA sequence to judge the parental origins of the 2 variations. A nested PCR-RFLP
procedure was performed in the present study for the screening for the novel missense variation in the control individuals. The nucleotide
sequences of the forward and reverse primers were as follows: 5′-TCACTCATTCCAGT GCCTTG-3′ (IVS6F) and 5′-CAATGCCGCAAAGGCAA CTG-3′ (IVS8B) in
the first PCR; and 5′-GAGTTTGTTC TGGCAGCACAG-3′ (Ex8F) and 5′-TATTTCAGTATAG CCTTCAGTTTGG-3′ (Ex8R) in the second. The temperature profile
was 94°C for 5 min followed by 40 cycles (20 cycles in the second PCR) of 94°C for 30 sec, 59°C for 40 sec and 72°C for 1.0 min, and a final
extension step at 72°C for 10 min. The restriction endonuclease for RFLP analysis was Hpy188I (New England Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, MA, USA).
For frequency calculation of the variation, the mutated allele number was divided by the total allele number of the SLC25A13 gene in all
controls and then the quotient was amplified by 100%. The conservative property of the amino acid affected by the novel missense mutation
was surveyed as described in our previous publication (11). Briefly, using a comparative alignment software of Genetyx® version 7.1 (Genetyx
Co., Tokyo, Japan), the amino acid sequences of human citrin and aralar were aligned with those in the homologous proteins from 10 different
eukaryotic species, including chimpanzee, dog, mouse, rat, chicken, Xenopus tropicalis, macaque, Caenorhabditis elegans, opossum and cow.
The amino acid sequences of the homologous proteins were collected from ENSEMBL at http://www.ensembl.org/index.html. Moreover, 2 online
tools, MutationTaster (http://mutationtaster.org/MutationTaster/index.html) and PolyPhen-2 (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/), were
used in this study to evaluate the pathogenic potential of the novel missense mutation. In the first software, a probability value close to
1 indicates a high ‘security’ of the prediction and in the second software used, the mutation with a probabilistic score >0.85 is classified
as ‘probably damaging’, while a score >0.15 is classified as ‘possibly damaging’, as recently described (12). A yeast model with a
disruption of the agc1 gene, which is highly homologous to human SLC25A13, was applied in the present study to evaluate the functional
effects of the novel missense mutation. The diploid agc1-disrupted yeast strain, BYagc1Δ, was the same as the one used in our previous
publication (12). The normal citrin-encoding cDNA sequence was amplified and recombined into the expression vector, pYX212 (Novagen Inc.,
Madison, WI, USA), to form the plasmid, pYX212-citrin. The novel missense mutation was introduced into the wild-type cDNA by overlap-
extension PCR, and the generated variants were cloned into pYX212 to constitute the plasmid pYX212-mutant. Subsequently, transformation of
the BYagc1Δ strain with the empty plasmid pYX212 (vector), pYX212-mutant and pYX212-citrin control (citrin) was carried out, and the
transformed strains were cultured in SA medium with acetate as the unique carbon source. The growth abilities of the transformed strains
were examined after 96 h of culture by measuring the OD600, and the data were analyzed with one-way ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni method
to compare the differences in the mean values among the different groups, with a value of P<0.05 considered to indicate a statistically
significant difference. All raw data were logarithmically transformed in the case of non-homogeneity of variance prior to statistical
comparison. A 7-month-old female infant was referred to our hospital due to prolonged jaundice for approximately 4 months and growth
retardation for 1.5 months. Her jaundice (yellow skin and sclera) drew the attention of her parents at the age of 3.3 months. A liver
function test at the local hospital revealed elevated cholestatic indices, including gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), direct bilirubin
(Dbil) and total bile acid (TBA) (Table I). Due to the prolonged jaundice and unresolved laboratory abnormalities, the infant was referred
to another hospital at the age of 4 months, where magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed the dilatation of common hepatic and
bile ducts. Laparoscopy was thus performed when the infant was aged 4.5 months, and an intraoperative cholangiography displayed biliary tree
dilatation and filling defect in the common bile duct, along with an accessory hepatic duct (AHD) joining the cystic duct (Fig. 1A). A
cholecystectomy was subsequently performed, an intrabiliary thick plug in the color of dark green was removed, and bile duct irrigation and
choledochostomy with T-tube drainage was carried out. Pathological analysis of the plug confirmed the diagnosis of inspissated bile syndrome
(IBS). Thereafter, the infant’s jaundice subsided and the laboratory indices gradually improved (Table I); the infant was discharged at the
age of 5 months. Half a month later, nevertheless, a physical examination revealed that her body weight was 5.34 kg (−3.6 SD), her length
was 59 cm (−3.2 SD) and her head circumference was 39 cm (−2.5 SD). Another anthropometric test at the age of 6 months revealed a weight of
6.0 kg (−2.5 SD) and a length of 62.0 cm (−2.2 SD). The growth retardation continued in the following month, and the infant was referred to
our hospital at the age of 7 months for further evaluation, following the removal of the drainage T-tube. The infant was born to a non-
consanguineous couple after 37 weeks of uneventful gestation with a birth weight of 2.25 kg. On the first day after birth, the infant was
admitted to hospital due to vomiting and respiratory distress. Contrast imaging of the upper digestive tract revealed the existence of
esophageal atresia (EA) (Fig. 1C), which was then resolved by a gastroesophagostomy under general anesthesia. The couple had experienced 2
pregnancies prior to this one, but both were aborted in the first trimester. Both parents appeared healthy, without any clinical symptoms or
signs of CTLN2. There was no known family history of any genetic disease. Physical examination at referral revealed a weight of 6.25 kg
(−2.6 SD), a length of 63.0 cm (−3.3 SD) and a head circumference of 42 cm (−1.0 SD). There was no dysmorphic appearance, only a slightly
chubby face. There was no evidence of jaundice (yellow skin and sclera) and there were no visible petechiae or ecchymoses. No pallor or
cyanosis of the lips were observed. There was no tachypnea or dyspnea, and no stridor, wheezes, crackles or crepitus could be heard on
auscultation of the both lungs. The heart sounds were normal without audible murmurs or arrhythmia. Upon abdominal inspection, no dilated
veins or abdominal distention were observed. The liver was palpated with a soft edge 2 cm below the right costal margin in the mid-
clavicular line. Her spleen was not palpable. A neurological examination revealed slightly reduced muscle tone. There was no neck stiffness,
knee reflex was normal and there was no positivity for Brudzinski’s or Kernig’s sign. Following biochemical analysis, no abnormal liver
function index was observed, although the serum GGT level was elevated, suggesting the existence of cholestasis, as shown in Table I. Taking
into consideration her prolonged jaundice, growth retardation and chubby face, and the 2 first-trimester miscarriages of her mother,
SLC25A13 gene analysis was performed on the family to evaluate the possibility of a diagnosis of CD. A lactose-free and MCT-enriched
therapeutic formula was subsequently introduced, while a diet rich in protein and lipids was also encouraged. A clinical following-up 4
months later revealed that the weight of the infant was 7.9 kg (−1.6 SD), her length was 70 cm (−1.5 SD) and her head circumference was 44
cm (−0.8 SD), along with a marked improvement (complete recovery) of the cholestatic indices, GGT, TBA and Dbil (Table I). High-frequency
mutation screening did not reveal any SLC25A13 mutation. However, direct DNA sequencing revealed that both the infant and her father
harbored c.2T>C and c.790G>A (p.V264I) variations, while the mother was only a carrier of c.2T>C (Fig. 2). To the best of our knowledge,
c.790G>A is a novel SLC25A13 variation that has not been previously reported. Following SLC25A13 cDNA cloning analysis, from a total of 27
clones from the infant, 7 were found to harbor c.2T>C, another 18 carried c.790G>A, 1 had neither, and the remaining clone had both
variations. Analysis of the cDNA clones from the father revealed similar characteristics. The total 29 cDNA clones consisted of 9 clones
with c.2T>C, 13 with c.790G>A, 3 with neither, and 4 with both variations. These findings clearly indicated that the 2 variations were both
biallelic, not only in the infant displaying clinical characteristics, but also in her father who did not show any symptoms or signs of CD
to date. Using the newly-developed nest PCR-RFLP protocol (Fig. 3), c.790G>A (p.V264I) was screened in 60 control samples and no carrier was
found, indicating a frequency of <1%. The comparative alignment of the amino acid sequences of the homologous protein in a diversity of
species (Fig. 4) documented the highly conservative property of the valine at codon 264 affected by this mutation. The probability value of
>0.9999 upon MutationTaster analysis strongly indicated its deleterious nature, but according to the results produced by Polyphen-2
analysis, this mutation was predicted to be benign with a score as low as 0.001. This discrepancy necessitated conducting functional
analysis for this novel missense mutation. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the growth ability of the BYagc1Δ yeast transformed with the mutant
plasmid (p.V264I) was significantly reduced (P<0.01) in comparison with that transformed with the plasmid pYX212-citrin (citrin). However,
when compared with the empty plasmid group (vector), the growth ability in the mutant group (p.V264I) was still higher (P<0.01). These
findings indicated that the p.V264I mutation reduced, but did not eliminate the AGC2 function of citrin protein. In previous studies, the
c.2T>C variation frequency was found to be 3.0% (6/200) in a Chinese (9), and approximately 2.8% (85/3074) in a Thai population (31), both
suggesting that it may be a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the SLC25A13 gene. This initiation codon variation gave rise to a citrin
molecule lacking the first 34 amino acid residues, and this truncated protein lost the ability to localize within the mitochondrial
membrane, thereby leading to an almost complete loss of AGC2 function (10). Although the frequency of this deleterious SNP has been proven
to be rather high, a homozygous variation (a patient with CD) has yet to be identified. A possible explanation for this issue is the
homozygote lethality. In the present study, the two spontaneous miscarriages of the mother in the first trimester may reflect the high
pathogenicity of this SNP. It was very likely that the two aborted fetuses (possibly both with homozygous SNP) could not survive through an
uneventful pregnancy. As regards the c.790G>A mutation, in addition to the bioinformatic evidence supporting its disease-causing
characteristic, the functional analysis in this study provided direct eukaryotic evidence further solidifying its pathogenicity. However,
this missense mutation caused the reduction, but not the elimination of AGC2 function of citrin protein, as illustrated in Fig. 5. This is
the most likely explanation for the survival of this infant through the entire pregnancy, and her delivery as a full term baby. This novel
c.790G>A mutation, along with the c.2T>C variation, constituted reliable diagnostic evidence for NICCD in the infant, and further expanded
the mutation spectrum of the SLC25A13 gene. The term IBS, also known as bile plug syndrome, was used to indicate patients with prolonged
jaundice in whom normal extrahepatic bile ducts containing inspissated bile were found at surgery for presumed extrahepatic biliary atresia
(56). Although cholestasis has been reported as a characteristic histological characteristic of NICCD (17), such a large bile plug causing
obstruction of the common bile duct as in this infant has not been reported previously in patients with NICCD. The contributing factors for
IBS included Rh and ABO incompatibility, blood transfusion, parenteral nutrition in pre-term infants, diuretic medication, bowel dysfunction
and disseminated intravascular coagulation (57). None of these factors was found in this infant, and CD may be a very likely contributing
etiology for her IBS. Actually, canalicular bile secretion involves a series of ATP-binding cassette transporters as export pumps for bile
salts and other organic solutes (58), and among these, the bile salt export pump (BSEP), a pump noteworthy in particular, transports bile
acids across the apical membrane and constitutes the major determinant and driving force for the generation of bile flow (59). Since CD
causes energy shortage in the liver (12,24), the function of these transporters, including BSEP, would thereby be affected inevitably in
this infant with NICCD, causing deficit of the major driving force, disturbing her generation of bile flow, giving rise to intra- and
extrahepatic cholestasis, and finally resulting in IBS formation. Accessory bile ducts are rare congenital anomalies of the primitive
foregut bud during the development of the biliary tract before 5 weeks of gestational age; apart from their importance to the radiologist
and to the biliary and hepatic transplant surgeon, these anomalies may be associated with congenital lesions elsewhere (60). In the present
study, the infant with NICCD with AHD also suffered from EA, another malformation originated from the division of the primitive foregut into
ventral respiratory and dorsal esophageal parts during the 4th week of embryonic life (61). Although the underlying mechanisms remain
unknown, EA has been recognized a multifactorial complex disease with the involvement of genetic and environmental factors, and has been
reported to be associated with some single-gene disorders, such as Feingold syndrome, CHARGE, anophthalmia-oesophageal-genital (AEG) and
Opitz G syndrome (61,62). To the best of our knowledge, congenital anomalies of the digestive system in patients with CD have been rarely
reported, although a Chinese infant with NICCD with congenital biliary atresia, confirmed by abdominal laparoscopy and liver biopsy, was
previoulsy reported (54). In the present study, we reported the concurrent existence of AHD and EA in an infant with NICCD. These findings
suggest that the SLC25A13 mutation may be an additional contributing genetic factor leading to congenital anomalies of the primitive foregut
during the early stage of fetal development, although more molecular, embryonic and histological evidence is required in order to address
this issue. Non-penetrance refers to the lack of clinical signs and symptoms in genetically affected individuals. This phenomenon is not
uncommon, not only in Mendelian disorders inherited as autosomal dominant traits (63,64), but also in some autosomal recessive diseases,
such as Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome (65) and Wolfram syndrome (66). Whether or not CD penetrance is complete has remained an
unresolved issue for years (27). However, there have been several reports on adult individuals harboring the biallelic but non-penetrant
mutations of the SLC25A13 gene, at least at the age these individuals were when these mutations were reported. Two adult siblings had been
definitely diagnosed as being homozygous for the c.851_854del4 mutation, one demonstrating the typical clinical and laboratory
manifestations of CTLN2, while the other did not (67). In addition, a girl with the SLC25A13 genotype c.851_854del4/c.1799_1800insA
displayed characteristics of NICCD, but her mother heterozygous for the mutations c.1799_1800insA and IVS16ins3kb did not display any
symptoms of CTLN2, as it recently demonstrated by a Japanese group (68). In the present study, we reported similar findings. The lack of
CTLN2 phenotypic characteristics in the father, who had the same genotype as that of the infant with NICCD, lent further support to the
concept that CD penetrance may be incomplete, and suggested the existence of other environmental, genetic or epigenetic factors that may
modulate the onset of CTLN2. In conclusion, in this study, we reported two individuals in the same family both harboring the same biallelic
variations, but demonstrating markedly different phenotypic features. The infant had IBS and multiple anomalies of the digestive system,
while the father appeared healthy. Bioinformatically and functionally, the c.790G>A variation proved to be a novel pathogenic mutation of
the SLC25A13 gene. These findings further enrich the clinical and molecular spectrum of NICCD, and suggest the existence of CD non-
penetrance and the possible involvement of SLC25A13 in primitive foregut development during early embryonic life. The authors would like to
thank all research subjects for their kind cooperation in providing blood samples and clinical data. The present study was financially
supported by grants from the Innovation Fund of Jinan University (No. 21612430) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.
81070279 and 81270957). citrin deficiency neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency adult-onset type 2 citrullinemia
failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency aspartate/glutamate carrier isoform 2 gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase direct
bilirubin total bile acid Cholangiography via punctured gallbladder and esophageal contrast radiography. Note the filling defect in the
common bile duct (asterisk) and the dilated upstream biliary tract without contrast flow into the duodenum, and the accessory right hepatic
duct (arrow) joining the cystic duct (A). A postoperative contrast study (B) via the T-tube placed into the common bile duct (asterisk)
displayed a right bile duct stricture (arrow) where the gallbladder had been surgically removed. Note the free contrast passage into the
duodenum. Esophageal contrast radiography (C) before gastroesophagostomy showed obvious dilatation of the upper esophagus, without contrast
flow into the trachea, lower esophagus or stomach, while postoperative contrast radiography (D) displayed the contrast flow through a mild
annular stricture (arrow) between the upper and middle esophagus. SLC25A13 gene variations in the family unveiled by direct DNA sequencing.
The patient and her father both harbored the c.2T>C and c.790G>A (p.V264I) variations, while the mother was only a carrier of the former
variation. Nested PCR-RFLP protocol for the screening of the c.790G>A(p.V264I) variation. (Left panel) Schematic diagram of the enzymatic
digestive protocol. The variation generated a digestive site for the enzyme Hpy188I, producing 2 fragments of 34 and 168 bp. PCR
amplification of the normal allele gave rise to an expected product of 202 bp. (Right panel) Representative gel electrophoresis for the PCR
products digested with Hpy188I, showing a band of 202 bp from the normal allele, and another band of 168 bp due to the variation. Note that
the patient and her father were both heterozygous for the variation, while the mother was not. Comparative alignment of the amino acid
sequences of the homologous proteins. The mutation p.V264I affected an amino acid highly conservative in all the 12 homologous proteins from
11 eukaryotic species including human, chimpanzee, dog, mouse, rat, chicken, Xenopus tropicalis, macaque, Caenorhabditis elegans, opossum
and cow. Effect of the novel c.790G>A(p.V264I) mutation on the AGC2 function of citrin protein. The agc1Δ yeast strains transformed with
empty plasmid pYX212 (vector), pYX212-mutant (p.V264I) and pYX212-CITRIN control (citrin) were cultured in SA medium for 96 h, and their
growth abilities were examined by measuring OD600 nm. The results are the means ± SD of 6 repeated experiments, and different letters above
the bars indicated a statistically significant difference (P<0.01). Dynamic alterations of the biochemical indices in the infant with citrin
deficiency. M, months (age of infant). Time at which laparoscopic surgery was performed, and time of referral to our hospital. ALT, alanine
transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; GGT, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; TP, total protein; Alb, albumin;
Glb, globulin; Tbil, total bilirubin; Dbil, direct bilirubin; Ibil, indirect bilirubin; TBA, total bile acid.
