Deceased. Single, severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) which elevates CNS amyloid, increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD); while
repetitive concussive and subconcussive events as observed in athletes and military personnel, may increase the risk of chronic traumatic
encephalopathy (CTE). We describe two clinical cases, one with a history of multiple concussions during a career in the National Football
League (NFL) and the second with frontotemporal dementia and a single, severe TBI. Both patients presented with cognitive decline and
underwent -Florbetapir positron emission tomography (PET) imaging for amyloid plaques; the retired NFL player also underwent -T807 PET
imaging, a new ligand binding to tau, the main constituent of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT). Case 1, the former NFL player, was 71 years old
when he presented with memory impairment and a clinical profile highly similar to AD. -Florbetapir PET imaging was negative, essentially
excluding AD as a diagnosis. CTE was suspected clinically, and -T807 PET imaging revealed striatal and nigral -T807 retention consistent
with the presence of tauopathy. Case 2 was a 56-year-old man with personality changes and cognitive decline who had sustained a fall
complicated by a subdural hematoma. At 1 year post injury, -Florbetapir PET imaging was negative for an AD pattern of amyloid accumulation
in this subject. Focal -Florbetapir retention was noted at the site of impact. In case 1, amyloid imaging provided improved diagnostic
accuracy where standard clinical and laboratory criteria were inadequate. In that same case, tau imaging with -T807 revealed a subcortical
tauopathy that we interpret as a novel form of CTE with a distribution of tauopathy that mimics, to some extent, that of progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP), despite a clinical presentation of amnesia without any movement disorder complaints or signs. A key distinguishing
feature is that our patient presented with hippocampal involvement, which is more frequently seen in CTE than in PSP. In case 2, focal
-Florbetapir retention at the site of injury in an otherwise negative scan suggests focal amyloid aggregation. In each of these complex
cases, a combination of -fluorodeoxyglucose, -Florbetapir and/or -T807 PET molecular imaging improved the accuracy of diagnosis and
prevented inappropriate interventions. Recent attention has been focused on the cognitive risks involved in contact sports. These concerns
have been associated historically with chronic and repetitive concussions in boxers, but recently professional football players,1,2 hockey
players,3 and wrestlers4 have become the focus of expanded attention. In addition, the sometimes-fatal consequence of a single, significant
traumatic brain injury (TBI) has been highlighted recently by the media due to high profile cases (for example,
http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/Movies/story?id=7119825 and http://www.express.co.uk/comment/columnists/richard-and-
judy/451938/F1-racing-driver-Michael-Schumacher-ski-crash-highlights-sport-secret-on-head-injuries). On the basis of clinical and postmortem
studies, the conventional wisdom has been that a single severe TBI increases risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD),5,6 whereas the consequences
of chronic repetitive TBI, first identified in boxers, increases the risk for a tangle-predominant disease, or tauopathy, known as dementia
pugilistica.7 More recently, the term ‘chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)' has been applied when dementia pugilistica-like
neuropathology was observed in retired National Football League (NFL) players, as well as in entertainment wrestlers, victims of domestic
violence and in military veterans exposed to blast and concussive injuries from improvised explosive devices.1,2,4,8, 9, 10
Neuropathologically, CTE is characterized by prominent tauopathy, variable degrees of diffuse amyloid deposition, and degeneration of the
neocortex, hippocampus, amygdala, basal forebrain and mammillary bodies. The nature, distribution and patterns of neurofibrillary
degeneration in CTE are distinctive from AD,11,12 and neuropsychological, mood and neurobehavioral dysfunction in CTE typically presents in
midlife after a latency period, usually years or decades after exposure to the repetitive trauma.13 The cognitive and behavioral symptoms of
CTE begin insidiously, followed by progressive deterioration. Mood symptoms typically include depression, apathy, irritability and
suicidality. Behavioral symptoms include poor impulse control, disinhibition and aggression, as well as frequent comorbid substance abuse.
Nevertheless, CTE remains a controversial diagnosis, as it is a pathological diagnosis, and no consensus on the clinical diagnosis has yet
been developed.14,15 Therefore, diagnosis may be difficult to determine on the basis of a standard clinical and laboratory evaluation
criteria. The challenge faced by many clinicians in such cases is making an accurate diagnosis from among the various dementias that share
cognitive, mood and behavioral symptoms, particularly when considering the differential diagnosis of AD or frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and
CTE. To order the appropriate tests and implement the most effective treatment available, clinicians must determine the underlying
neuropathology on the basis of clinical evaluation and history, and will ultimately diagnose an individual with a neurodegenerative disease
to be proven at the postmortem examination. Three new positron emission tomography (PET) tracers have been approved recently by the US Food
and Drug Administration as clinical tools to estimate brain amyloid burden in patients being evaluated for cognitive impairment (CI) or
dementia. Imaging with these tracers, if positive, means AD plaques are present; if the scan is negative, cerebral amyloidosis is absent,
and a negative scan, such as the one in this case using -Florbetapir, provides in vivo confirmation that the dementia is not AD, if
negative. Such scans increase the accuracy of diagnosis. Amyloid imaging may improve etiological likelihood in situations where the
differential diagnosis cannot be resolved on the basis of standard clinical and laboratory criteria.16 In the absence of brain amyloid it is
unlikely that the cause of an individual's cognitive decline is due to AD.17 Early studies suggested that TBI increased the risk for AD at
an earlier age of onset; however, these findings were not based entirely on neuropathological evidence and some were methodologically flawed
(for review, see ref. 18). The diagnosis of AD requires the presence of amyloid β neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in brain.19
The clinical distinction of AD from other causes of posttraumatic CI can be challenging, but accurate diagnosis is required to avoid
misdiagnosis, incorrect prognosis, incorrect family history, and potentially, initiation of inappropriate treatment. Several new PET imaging
neurotracers have been developed that detect pathological tau in vivo. One such ligand, -T807, is one of a novel class of 5H-pyridoindole
labeled with that has a high affinity and selectivity for tau over amyloid β (>25 fold).20 Preliminary imaging studies in AD transgenic mice
and patients found that this ligand has favorable imaging kinetics, high target cortical to cerebellum uptake ratios, and an accumulation
pattern that followed the characteristic tau deposition pattern seen in AD.19 Here we present two clinical cases in which the in vivo
findings utilizing these new PET tracers for amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles clarified the diagnoses. A 71-year-old retired
professional football player who had sustained multiple concussions during a decade-long NFL career ending approximately 40 years ago
presented with a history of progressive CI. During his professional career, he reported experiencing multiple concussions but was unable to
estimate their number. He did not recall any episodes of loss of consciousness, but did remember being dazed and confused for up to a full
day following some of these injuries; having difficulty finding his way home after a game or, upon awakening on the day after some games,
being unable to recall the identity of the team against whom he had played the previous day. After retiring from the sport, he had a
successful business career (outside of sports) for approximately 20 years. After retiring from business, he coached high school football.
Over the past several years, however, he and his wife noticed impaired memory and thinking, notably short-term memory, and more so in the
past year. Agitation emerged after his memory decline, and increased in the year before evaluation. There were no other reported behavioral
disturbances; mood was normal. He was evaluated for progressive neurodegeneration by the NFL Neurological Care Program team at Mount Sinai
Hospital, a multidisciplinary team consisting of a neurologist, a dual-board-certified neurologist-psychiatrist, a neuropsychologist and two
neuroradiologists. All evaluators were TBI and AD experts. At the time of the evaluation, the patient was taking both donepezil and
memantine, neither of which had any benefit that was obvious to the patient's wife. The evaluation included comprehensive neurologic and
neuropsychological assessment and, given the potential differential diagnosis, a clinical -Florbetapir PET scan to determine the presence or
absence of amyloid. A research -T807 PET scan was performed to determine the possible presence of tauopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the brain was conducted 3 months before PET imaging. The MRI revealed global volume loss, especially in the hippocampus. Arachnoid
cysts were present in the middle fossa bilaterally. The mammillary bodies were poorly visualized and therefore suspected to be atrophic. The
hypothalamic/infundibular/pituitary system appeared preserved structurally. Neurologic exam was grossly normal. Eye movements were normal in
all directions. Muscle tone and strength were intact, reflexes were brisk and symmetrical, and no movement disorder was detected upon
initial exam. Retrospectively, mild hypomimia was noted. Case 2 was a 59-year-old male physician who had spent nearly 30 years as a member
of a group medical practice. He had suffered a head injury while skiing (wearing a helmet) approximately 10 months before the evaluation.
Specifically, he fell off a ski lift with head impact on concrete. He later had a fall on the slopes. He denied loss of consciousness (his
family noted transient loss of awareness), but reported persistent headache for a few weeks following the head injury. He then began to
experience intermittent numbness of his right ear and numbness and weakness in his right hand, for which he sought neurological evaluation
approximately 3 months post injury near his residence in another part of the country. MRI revealed recent and chronic bleeding over the left
hemispheric convexity, and he underwent a craniotomy to evacuate a left frontal subdural hematoma. The site of the injury was right
occipital, thus the subdural hematoma appeared to be a result of a contrecoup injury. Following craniotomy, his headaches persisted as did
the intermittent numbness and weakness in his right hand, for which he was begun on levetiracetam. Detailed history revealed that for many
months before the accident his family had noted a change in his personality, episodic increased agitation and altered cognition (word
retrieval, short-term memory). They reported that the patient had difficulty recalling recent events but that recall of childhood
information remained generally intact. He forgot recent conversations and began having difficulty recognizing the faces of acquaintances,
patients and old friends, as well as pictures of famous people. He struggled with abstract reasoning (for example, how people and things
related to one another) and had trouble following directions. He would ask the same questions repeatedly and told the same stories multiple
times without recalling he had done so. He was unable to maintain attention and concentration when a story became increasingly complicated,
and would become agitated and irritable as a result of not being able to follow the story line. When confronted about his cognitive
difficulties he would become angry and agitated, and would ‘act out' in the presence of his family. According to the family, the patient
would experience ‘manic highs and depressed lows'. When in a good mood, he enjoyed being with others and was largely socially appropriate.
His mood could change rapidly, and he would become withdrawn or belligerent. When in a depressed state he expressed suicidal ideation.
According to the family, the patient was less emotionally available for things that had been important to him (for example, family
relationships). For months before his fall, he had become apathetic and lost interest in hobbies that he previously enjoyed. Approximately 4
years ago (3 years before the fall), the patient had experienced a depressive episode. He had attributed his depression to work-related
stress and was treated with sertraline. He had no history of psychiatric hospitalization or psychotherapy. At the time of his evaluation at
Mount Sinai Medical Center he was not taking antidepressants. The patient was referred for a comprehensive neuropsychological assessment
(JM) and neurological evaluation (SG, AA) at the Mount Sinai Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, as well as appropriate laboratory studies.
CT and MRI revealed atrophy of the anterior poles of both temporal and frontal lobes (Figure 1). Molecular imaging included both
-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET and -Florbetapir scans. At the time of the evaluation, his medications were atorvastatin 20 mg daily and
acetaminophen PRN. He had had a previous neuropsychological evaluation at another facility, 3 months before our assessment. The findings on
the prior examination were consistent with the current evaluation. The patient had 16 years of education and premorbid intellectual function
was estimated to be in the average range. Neuropsychological tests revealed impaired information processing speed, fine motor function,
verbal comprehension and fluency, confrontational naming, and immediate and delayed verbal recall. Intellectual function was preserved. On
self-report, he acknowledged minimal depression and mild anxiety (Table 1). Norms were corrected for age and years of education. Following
this comprehensive evaluation, the experts disagreed as to whether AD was present, in addition to likely posttraumatic encephalopathy. Two
independent neuropsychologists from the Mount Sinai Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC) reviewed the neuropsychological test results
and supported the inclusion of possible AD on the basis of the neuropsychological phenotype, although the primary examining team (with the
exception of one of the neurologists) opposed the inclusion of possible AD as a diagnosis. Thus the patient was referred for -Florbetapir
PET imaging for diagnostic clarification. -Florbetapir imaging was conducted with a GE Discovery STE 16-slice PET/CT camera. The patient was
injected with 370 MBq (10 mCi) of -Florbetapir. Image acquisition began approximately 60 min post injection, for 10 min. Images were
acquired in three dimensions, using a one-frame and one-bed position. Reconstruction was performed with a 120 × 120 matrix utilizing
iterative reconstruction, with 35 subsets and two iterations. The z axis filter was standard, and a 2.57-mm full width/half maximum filter
was used. The field of view was 30 cm in diameter, with 47 total slices. The clinical -Florbetapir scan results were rated by nuclear
medicine physicians (JM or LK) trained to interpret -Florbetapir scan results using a binary (positive or negative) visual approach.20
Transaxial, coronal and sagittal images were examined. The scan results were considered positive if uptake in the cerebral gray matter
equaled or exceeded the uptake in the white matter in at least two major areas of the brain. A positive -Florbetapir scan indicates
moderate-to-frequent fibrillar amyloid plaques; a negative -Florbetapir scan indicates sparse-to-no fibrillar amyloid plaques, which is
inconsistent with a diagnosis of AD. A negative scan thus implied that the cognitive decline was not due to AD. In the retired NFL player
under consideration here -Florbetapir PET scanning was negative for cerebral amyloidosis (Figure 2), thereby excluding AD. This case
illustrates the potential for brain amyloid imaging to clarify diagnosis and to prevent inappropriate treatment. Ironically, this patient
had sought out this evaluation to assess his eligibility for a clinical trial for AD. The -Florbetapir results ruled out his inclusion in
trials of Aβ-reducing agents. -T807 imaging was acquired with a Siemens ECAT EXACT HR+ PET Camera. The patient was injected with 370 MBq
(10 mCi) of -T807. Image acquisition began ~110 min post injection, for 20 min. Images were acquired in three dimensions, using one-frame
and one-bed position. Reconstruction was performed with a 128 × 128 matrix utilizing iterative reconstruction, with 16 subsets and 4
iterations. A three-dimensional post hoc Gaussian filter (5 mm) was applied to the image volume. A total of 63 axial slices of 2.42 mm
thickness were displayed for visual interrogation by a nuclear medicine physician expert in brain imaging (JS). In addition, quantification
of the scan was performed by spatially normalizing the PET image to a T807 template image and applying a modified Hammers volume of interest
template21 for extraction on regional standard uptake values (SUV). Brain SUV were divided by the cerebellar cortex SUV to calculate SUV
ratios in multiple cortical and subcortical regions. Visually, the -T807 PET scan revealed signal in some temporal areas. However, the
preponderance of the signal arose bilaterally from the regions of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra (Figure 3). Consistent with
this visual assessment, the region with highest SUV ratios were globus pallidus (1.85), putamen (1.57) and hippocampus (1.45), while the
substantia nigra SUV ratio was 1.40. His premorbid intellectual function was estimated to be in the high average range. He manifested
significant deficits in memory, language (verbal fluency and confrontation naming), and executive functioning; performance on most cognitive
measures was far below levels expected for his age, education and estimated premorbid abilities; they ranged from significantly impaired to
high average (Table 2). Results were consistent with previous testing, which was suggestive of FTD. On self-report, he endorsed minimal
depression that fell within the normal range (Table 2). Norms were corrected for age and years of education. -FDG PET imaging: -FDG PET and
-Florbetapir PET imaging were performed on consecutive days. All imaging procedure details were identical to those described for case 1. The
patient was injected with 440.3 MBq (11.9 mCi) of -FDG. Forty minutes later, PET images of the brain were obtained. FDG PET showed decreased
uptake in the medial portions of both frontal lobes, mildly on the right, moderately on the left (left > right), decreased uptake in the
posterior portion of the left temporal lobe and mildly decreased activity in the right anterior temporal lobe. Otherwise, the distribution
of radiotracer was normal in cortical and subcortical structures (Figure 4). The impression was of abnormal FDG PET scan that demonstrated
decreased metabolism in the medial portions of the frontal lobes, more pronounced in the left side than the right, and the posterior portion
of the left temporal lobe. The patchy nature of hypometabolic regions raised the possibility of a vascular etiology. -Florbetapir PET
imaging: The patient received 403.3 MBq (10.9 mCi) of -Florbetapir through intravenous injection. Sixty minutes later, PET images of the
brain were obtained. The -Florbetapir PET images showed normal distribution of radiotracer uptake throughout the cortical and subcortical
structures, except for a small area of increased cortical uptake in the right occipital region. The scan was read as negative for
significant amyloid deposition, thus the diagnosis of AD was not supported. However, there was amyloid accumulation focally and specifically
in the region of the patient's TBI (right occipital) but also on the left side as well (Figure 4). The final diagnosis was frontotemporal
lobar degeneration. What appeared to be a rapidly progressive dementing process looking like AD after a head injury (before -Florbetapir PET
imaging) was ultimately diagnosed as frontotemporal lobar degeneration, albeit with focal posttraumatic amyloidosis. Although focal
amyloidosis is the most parsimonious interpretation, we cannot exclude the possibility that the -Florbetapir is binding instead to chronic
astrocytosis or hemosiderin in the resolving contusion in that region. We present two cases in which amyloid imaging clarified uncertain
diagnoses. Case 1 may be the first assessment demonstrating, during life, lack of AD pathology in an NFL player with a remote history of
multiple concussions and current cognitive decline that had many of the features of AD. A panel of expert clinicians were unable to reach
unanimity on the inclusion of possible AD as a diagnosis. The patient's clinical presentation with memory loss was suggestive of AD. The
absence of amyloid as revealed by -Florbetapir PET imaging excluded AD pathology and thereby prevented his inappropriate inclusion in an
amyloid-lowering medication clinical trial. Omalu et al.1 revived the term CTE (originated by Critchley in 1949, in a book chapter entitled,
‘Punch-drunk syndrome: The chronic traumatic encephalopathy of boxers') in their report of the case of a retired NFL player with progressive
neurological dysfunction. Thereafter, evidence of CTE in American football players became increasingly evident.1,2,4,22,23 Currently, the
challenge is no longer the acceptance of CTE as a diagnostic entity associated with repetitive head trauma, but rather a much needed
accounting of the actual numbers of affected persons as well as the numbers of those who remain unaffected despite exposure to identical
repetitive head traumas.24 With regard to the short-term memory problems in case 1, Guskiewicz et al.25 reported a strong relationship
between TBI history and memory complaints in former NFL players. In that study, individuals with a history of at least three concussions
were three times more likely to report significant memory problems and five times more likely than those with no history of concussions to
have been diagnosed with mild CI.25 In their review of 48 cases of neuropathologically confirmed CTE, McKee et al.9 found that memory loss
was reported in over half of the individuals. As in AD, loss of insight often precluded patients from recognizing their deficits; this
valuable information was derived from friends or family, and the patients frequently demonstrated anosognosia during the course of the
evaluation. Impairment in executive function was common in cases of neuropathologically confirmed CTE.8 Executive functions are a collective
set of higher-order abilities (judgment, self-inhibitory behaviors, decision-making, planning and organization) considered to be dependent
primarily upon adequate functioning of frontal lobe networks. Damage to various regions of the frontal cortex can disrupt these higher-order
abilities, leading to poor impulse control, and socially inappropriate, avolitional and/or apathetic behaviors. For example, damage to the
orbitofrontal regions can result in significant changes in personality. Thus, changes in personality, apathy, impulsivity, aggression and
‘short fuse' behaviors typical of CTE14 are consistent with the atrophy, structural damage and other neuropathological changes of the
frontal lobes that have been described in nearly all reported cases of CTE.8,9,14 Given these findings, the overlap in neurocognitive and
behavioral symptoms may make the distinction among AD, CTE and FTD difficult, in the absence of molecular evidence of disease-specific
proteins. In the cases reported here Florbetapir imaging served as an in vivo method of discrimination that resulted in diagnostic
clarification that would ultimately guide treatment planning and intervention. The -T807 imaging in case 1 yielded somewhat unexpected
results. The preponderance of the ligand retention was subcortical and localized to the basal ganglia and substantia nigra. This
distribution is not typical for CTE and is more similar to that of progressive supranuclear palsy, although our case did not manifest the
typical clinical symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy. Ling et al.26 recently reported a patient with concurrent CTE and progressive
supranuclear palsy, in whom they proposed that this atypical phenotype arose because of the superimposition of the brain trauma and CTE on a
genetic background already predisposed toward progressive supranuclear palsy. The prominent amnesia, the absence of a movement disorder and
the involvement of the hippocampi in the -T807 retention all support the formulation of the diagnosis of CTE. Such a coincidence has also
been proposed for the handful of concurrent cases of CTE and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.11 This result emphasizes the need for novel
ligands such as -T807 and for heightened suspicion for atypical phenotypes in the clinical setting of TBI. Other ligands that recognize
microglia or TDP43 (ref. 11) might also be useful in providing a fuller appreciation of the spectrum of CTE. Indeed, the neuroimaging of CTE
may lead to expansion and/or revision of the definition and staging10 of CTE beyond the current pathology-based system. In case 2, the
patient had a history of personality change and a fall from a ski lift with head impact on concrete and some alteration in level of
consciousness. When referred, the tentative diagnosis was AD. This initial formulation was ultimately rejected once it was clarified that
the personality change preceded the TBI and the patient was given a diagnosis of FTD. The Florbetapir scan revealed only a small focal
occipital retention of ligand at the site of impact. There was no amyloidosis elsewhere in the brain, and the MRI and FDG PET showed atrophy
and hypometabolism in the frontal and temporal poles, consistent with a frontotemporal lobar degeneration etiology for his clinical FTD
syndrome. The best explanation was that this patient had FTD due to frontotemporal lobar degeneration compounded by the diffuse and focal
injuries induced and perhaps accelerated by the TBI; the focal occipital cortical amyloidosis itself had an uncertain contribution to his
clinical symptoms. Our findings in case 2 are somewhat consistent with those of Hong et al.27 who performed PET imaging in patients who had
sustained moderate-to-severe TBI within 1 year of injury; they utilized Pittsburgh compound B (abbreviated PiB; the version of PiB is known
as Flutemetamol or Vizamyl) PET imaging, the first amyloid labeling ligand to be developed. They found increased distribution of -PiB
following TBI, the specificity of which was validated by neocortical binding of tritium-labeled PiB in regions of amyloid deposition in the
postmortem tissue of another cohort of patients who had sustained a TBI and died at intervals of 3 h to 56 days after injury.28 Our patient
had sustained TBI within 1 year of our evaluation and -Florbetapir PET imaging. Our CTE/molecular imaging experience has included
-Florbetapir PET imaging of young, active boxers post knockout (n=3, ages 35, 36 and 42 years), but these studies have been unrevealing
(Jordan and Gandy, unpublished observations). A number of uncontrolled variables, including levels of amyloid upregulation insufficient to
aggregate into diffuse plaque, rapid clearance of any aggregated amyloid post TBI, or insufficient sensitivity of florbetapir to detect low
levels of diffuse amyloid could explain this. In conclusion, amyloid imaging offers in vivo affirmative confirmation of the presence or
absence of amyloid deposition and may increase the accuracy of the likely cause of CI or dementia in patients with a history of TBI. Future
evaluation in repetitive head trauma where CTE is suspected may be best served by tau imaging because beta-amyloid is usually relatively
sparse or absent in CTE brains.9 Therefore, selective tau binding ligands may be more useful for diagnosis or ruling out CTE. We are now
testing this hypothesis in a new cohort of patients and research subjects. We gratefully acknowledge Ash Rafique for technical support. EMM
received grants from the Veterans Affairs Administration and the Icahn School of Medicine Clinical Research Center. SG thanks the Cure
Alzheimer's Fund, the Department of Veteran Affairs, the Gideon and Sarah Gartner Foundation and the Louis B. Mayer Foundation. SG has
received grants from NIA, NINDS, Baxter Pharmaceuticals, Polyphenolics and Amicus Pharmaceuticals. He has served as a member of the Data and
Safety Monitoring Board for the Pfizer-Janssen Alzheimer's Immunotherapy Alliance, as a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of DiaGenic
and as a consultant to Amicus Pharmaceuticals and to Cerora. This research was supported in part by the Icahn School of Medicine Alzheimer's
Disease Research Center grant P50 AG005138. The authors declare no conflict of interest. Imaging from a 59-year-old, physician with a
sports-related injury (case 2). Magnetic resonance imaging showing atrophy of the frontal poles of the frontal and temporal lobes
bilaterally. (a) and (b) Arrows indicate a subdural hematoma (SDH). Imaging from a 71-year-old retired NFL player (case 1). Left panel is CT
image and right panel is -Florbetapir PET imaging, which was negative for amyloid accumulation. CT, computed tomography; NFL, National
Football League; PET, positron emission tomography. Imaging from a 71-year-old retired NFL player (case 1). -T807 signals (arrows) originate
from the globus pallidus (GP), substantia nigra (SN) and hippocampus. Images depict axial (a) sagittal (b) and coronal (c and d) orientation
of the brain. A, anterior; H, head; L, left; NFL, National Football League; P, posterior; R, right. Imaging from a 59-year-old, physician
with a sports-related injury (case 2). -Florbetapir PET imaging findings were negative for amyloid accumulation except for focal
-Florbetapir retention at the site of impact in the occipital region (arrows). (a) CT (left panel) -Florbetapir PET (middle panel) and FDG
PET (right panel) at various depths of the brain. (b) -Florbetapir PET indicating amyloid accumulation. CT, computed tomography; FDG,
-fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography. Abbreviations: BNT, Boston Naming Test; CPT, Connors' Continuous Performance Test
II; CVLT-LDFR, California Verbal Learning Test long delay free recall; DK-FST, Delis Kaplan Free Sort Test (norms corrected for age and
years of education); FAS, Controlled Oral Word Association Test; GPB, grooved pegboard; SCT, Short Category Test; WAIS-IV, Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale, 4th edn; WNL, within normal limits. Scores under other neuropsychological tests reported only as percentiles. Raw scores
were not available. Abbreviations: AMNART, American National Adult Reading Test; BDI-II, Beck Depression Inventory (norms corrected for age
and years of education); BNT, Boston Naming Test; CVLT, California Verbal Learning Test; FAS, Controlled Oral Word Association Test (letters
FAS); MMSE, Mini Mental Status Examination; TBI, traumatic brain injury; WAIS-IV, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, 4th edn; WCST,
Wisconsin Sorting Test; WMS-IV, Wechsler Memory Scale, 4th edn; WNL, within normal limits. Full scale IQ NC is not calculated due to a
42-point discrepancy between verbal and nonverbal abilities; nonverbal abilities stronger.
