We report a rare case of Aspergillus terreus endogenous endophthalmitis in an immunocompetent patient with subretinal abscess and also
review the reported cases. A 50-year-old healthy male presented with sudden painful loss of vision in right eye. He was diagnosed with
endogenous endophthalmitis and underwent urgent vitrectomy. Aspergillus terreus growth was obtained in culture. At final follow-up, there
was complete resolution of the infection but visual acuity was poor due to macular scar. Aspergillus terreus is a rare cause of
endophthalmitis with usually poor outcomes. Newer antifungals like Voriconazole can be sometimes associated with better prognosis. Fungal
endogenous endophthalmitis is usually associated with immunocompromised states. Aspergillus terreus is a rare cause of endogenous
endophthalmitis with only six reported cases. We report a rare case of A terreus endogenous endophthalmitis in an immunocompetent patient
and review the other cases which have been reported. This is the first case report of A terreus endogenous endophthalmitis from India. A
50-year-old healthy non diabetic male presented with sudden painful decrease in vision in right eye (OD) since one week. The patient gave
history of a bout of gastroenteritis 2 weeks back. On examination, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in OD was perception of light with
accurate projection of rays. Anterior segment examination showed circumciliary congestion, corneal haze, anterior chamber cells 3+, clear
lens, and 3+ vitreous cells. Intraocular pressure was 10 mm of Hg. Indirect ophthalmoscopy showed grade 3 vitritis with central yellowish
sub retinal lesion [Fig. 1a]. The retina appeared attached. BCVA in the left eye was 6/6, N6. Left eye was normal. Ultrasonography confirmed
the presence of a subretinal lesion. A provisional diagnosis of endogenous endophthalmitis in OD was made and the patient was advised urgent
surgical intervention. A complete systemic examination which included HIV testing, urine, and blood culture along with a physician
evaluation was done. (a) Colour fundus photograph of OD at presentation, showing vitreous haze and subretinal abscess at the posterior pole
(white arrow). (b) Colour fundus photograph of OD at final follow up, showing scarred subretinal abscess (white star) and persistent
subretinal fluid inferiorly (white arrowhead) The patient underwent 20 G Pars Plana Vitrectomy. Undiluted vitreous aspirate was sent for
microbiological tests. The patient received intravitreal Vancomycin (1 mg/0.1ml), Ceftazidime (2.25 mg/0.1 ml), and Voriconazole (50
μg/0.1ml) at the end of the procedure. Microscopy of the wet mount preparation with 10% KOH and Calcofluor white under fluorescent
microscope revealed plenty of septate filamentous fungal elements which were branched in acute angle [Fig. 2a]. Examination of the tease
mount preparation from the culture revealed conidiophores of variable length, biseriate compactly columnar phialides covering the entire
vesicle, which shows morphological characteristics of Aspergillus terreus [Fig. 2b]. In culture, velvety colonies were obtained with a
characteristic cinnamon brown color, with brown pigmentation in the reverse [Fig. 3a] A broad ranged panfungal polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) targeting the Internal Transcribed Spacer II (ITS II) region was also positive, thereby confirming the presence of fungi in the sample
[Fig. 3b]. All other microbiological investigations like blood culture, urine culture, and HIV testing were negative. No active systemic
foci of infection was detected. (a) KOH mount prepared from the vitreous aspirate examined under fluorescent microscope after staining with
calcofluor white reveals characteristic septate, branched, filamentous fungi (Magnification ×40) (b) Tease mount preparation stained with
Lactophenol cotton blue reveals characteristic biseriate sterigmata on dome shaped vesicles characteristic of Aspergillus terreus
(magnification ×40) (a) Photograph of the culture plate showing characteristic velvety, cinnamon-coloured colonies of A. terreus (b) Gel
picture showing amplified products (ITS 2 region) of a pan-fungal PCR at the appropriate position (255 bp) NC1- negative control is round,
NC2- negative control 2nd round PC- positive control, 100 bp molecular ladder In the postoperative period the patient received six
injections of intravitreal Voriconazole. Three weeks following the surgery, he developed total retinal detachment which required
revitrectomy with endolaser and silicon oil tamponade. At final follow-up after 2 months, right eye vision was perception of light (PL)
only. Anterior chamber was quiet. Vitreous cavity was clear with a macular scar and persistent subretinal fluid inferiorly [Fig. 1b]. The
patient was advised resurgery which he refused. He was prescribed oral Voriconazole 200 mg twice daily for 2 months. A terreus is a
saprophytic fungus occurring in the soil and is occasionally pathogenic. Out of six reports of A terreus endogenous endophthalmitis [as
summarized in Table 1], majority have been associated with immunosupression. Only one report by Ng et al., of A terreus endogenous
endophthalmitis in immunocompetent individual exists in literature. Three cases of postoperative and 1 case of posttraumatic endophthalmitis
have been reported. Riddell et al., have reported the ocular manifestations of endogenous Aspergillus endophthalmitis. Patients present with
sudden painful unilateral blurring of vision, variable amount of circumciliary congestion, AC reaction and hypopyon. Fundoscopy reveals
vitritis, exudative lesions in the posterior pole, pre and intraretinal hemorrhages. Pseudohypopyon (pre-retinal layering of exudates),
pathognomic of Aspergillus endophthalmitis, has been reported. Our patient presented with subretinal abscess in the macular area which
eventually formed a scar. A detailed microbiological analysis is necessary in all cases. However, the sensitivity of identifying the
organism from vitreous aspirates, PCR, and vitrectomy specimen is 50, 72 and 90% respectively. Systemic and intravitreal Amphotericin-B has
been the main stay of treatment of Aspergillus endophthalmitis and has been reported to result in good outcomes. However, A terreus has been
reported to exhibit resistance to Amphotericin–B in 98% of the isolates, which is a cause of concern. Alternative antifungal like
Voriconazole, with an oral bioavailability of 96% and good aqueous and vitreous concentrations, is being used these days. Kramer et al. were
the first to report the successful use of intravitreal Voriconazole in A terreus endogenous endophthalmitis. In the present case, though the
infection was controlled with intravitreal and systemic Voriconazole, however, the final visual outcome was poor because of the central
macular scar. Our patient had no previous ocular trauma, surgery or medical history which could explain the present condition. The exact
source of infection could not be determined inspite of our best efforts. Clinical characteristics of patients with Aspergillus terreus
endophthalmitis To conclude, our study adds to the body of literature available on A terreus endogenous endophthalmitis. A terreus
endogenous endophthalmitis with subretinal abscess usually have a dismal prognosis. A high index of suspicion along with prompt medical and
surgical intervention may result in better outcomes. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
