Macular hole related retinal detachment is a common entity with poor surgical prognosis in highly myopic eyes. We describe the first case of
spontaneous closure of a macular hole with complete retinal reattachment in a highly myopic eye with posterior staphyloma. A 64-year-old
Chinese woman with high myopia was diagnosed as having a macular hole-related retinal detachment with vitreo-retinal traction in her right
eye by optical coherence tomography. Thirty-three months later, the macular hole closed, with formation of a lamellar hole and decreased
retinal detachment. Twelve months later, retinal reattachment was found to have occurred, accompanied by the development of macular
retinoschisis. Fifty-four months after initial examination, the retina remained attached with a lamellar hole and retinoschisis in the
macular area. The vitreo-retinal traction persisted during the follow-up period. As evidenced by the current case, in highly myopic eyes,
the vitreoretinal traction force, which contributes to a macular hole and retinal detachment, could be partially released by the development
of a lamellar hole or foveal schisis. This reduction of traction might contribute to retinal reattachment. Macular hole related retinal
detachment is a common entity in highly myopic eyes . Results of surgical procedures, like pneumaticretinopexy and pars plana vitrectomy
combined with other techniques, have not had favorable outcomes . In contrast to common reports of spontaneous closure of idiopathic macular
holes , reports of spontaneous closure of highly myopic macular holes have been exceedingly rare . We report here the first case of
spontaneous closure of a macular hole with complete retinal reattachment in a highly myopic eye. A 64-year-old female visited our hospital
for poor vision in her right eye. Ophthalmological examination indicated her vision was counting fingers and diffuse chorioretinal atrophy
at the posterior pole was observed. A B scan showed posterior staphyloma and a localized retinal detachment at the posterior pole. An A scan
showed the axial length was 31.37 mm. Optical coherence tomography (OCT, Cirrus HD-OCT, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, axial resolution
5 μm) revealed a full-thickness macular hole, 66 μm in diameter, accompanied by retinal detachment and vitreo-retinal traction from the
posterior hyaloid membrane that was attached to the macular area (Figure 1a and b). The patient chose to be observed after reviewing the
risks and benefits of surgery. Thirty-three months later, the macular hole was closed, with the formation of a lamellar hole and decreased
retinal detachment (Figure 1c and d). Twelve months later, retinal reattachment was observed to be complete, accompanied by the development
of macular retinoschisis. As indicated by subsequent OCT scans, such a condition remained stable, and vision remained at counting fingers
until 54 months after the initial examination. The posterior hyaloid membrane was detached from the inner surface of the macula in a wider
area during the follow-up (Figure 1e and f).Figure 1 Spontaneous closure of a macular hole and complete retinal reattachment in a highly
myopic eye. Panels a, c and e were horizontal scans, while panels b, d, f, were vertical scans. Retinal detachment and vitreoretinal
traction caused by the posterior hyaloid membrane were presented (a, b); a full thickness macular hole was noted accompanied by para macular
schisis inferior to the macula (b). The macular hole was closed (33 months later) and a lamellar hole formed with decreased retinal
detachment (c, d). The retina (another 21 months later) stayed completely reattached with macular retinoschisis surrounding the fovea. The
posterior hyaloid was detached from the inner surface of the retina in a wider area throughout the follow-up (e, f). Spontaneous closure of
a macular hole and complete retinal reattachment in a highly myopic eye. Panels a, c and e were horizontal scans, while panels b, d, f, were
vertical scans. Retinal detachment and vitreoretinal traction caused by the posterior hyaloid membrane were presented (a, b); a full
thickness macular hole was noted accompanied by para macular schisis inferior to the macula (b). The macular hole was closed (33 months
later) and a lamellar hole formed with decreased retinal detachment (c, d). The retina (another 21 months later) stayed completely
reattached with macular retinoschisis surrounding the fovea. The posterior hyaloid was detached from the inner surface of the retina in a
wider area throughout the follow-up (e, f). Recently, Li et al. reported the first case of spontaneous closure of a highly myopic macular
hole, which was ascribed to the release of the vitreoretinal tractional force . However, in the current case, vitreo-retinal traction from
the posterior hyaloid membrane was found initially and remained present throughout the follow-up, thus the release of vireoretinal traction
was unlikely. In this case, closure of the hole might have happened first, albeit the reason not fully being understood. The small size of
the macular hole in the current case might be one cause. It has been reported that in both emmetropic and highly myopic eyes, small macular
holes were more likely to be closed after surgical treatment [10, 11]. After closure, however, the retinal detachment was reduced with the
reabsorption of subretinal fluid by the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) pump, though this might be inefficient because of the degeneration
and atrophy of the RPE and choroid. However, the vitreo-retinal traction that was still present prevented the retina from laying down and,
consequently, these two forces might actually lead to tissue dehiscence; i.e., the development of a lamellar hole and macular schisis. In
highly myopic eyes, traction forces caused by the stretching of the eyeball and relative shortening of the retina, as well as vitreo-retinal
traction by the posterior hyaloid membrane, contribute to the development of many macular disorders . With the formation of a lamellar hole,
the retina might be elongated by the dehiscence of the tissues, resulting in reduction of the traction force. This could be partially
supported by the findings that a lamellar hole is a relatively stable condition in highly myopic eyes . Also, the subsequent development of
retinal schisis might further reduce the traction force in a similar way. As indicated in Figure 1e and f, at the final follow-up, the
retina was reattached with the presence of posterior hyaloid traction; therefore, the traction force was not released but was reduced by the
development of a lamellar hole and foveal schisis. It remains unclear whether surgical intervention could improve the visual outcomes. As
evidenced by the current case, nevertheless, spontaneous closure of a macular hole and complete retinal reattachment can occur in a myopic
eye. Future study with more cases might further improve our knowledge of this entity. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Dr. Chunhui Jiang conducts one project of Shanghai Committee of Science and Technology, and Dr. Gezhi Xu conducts 2 projects
supported by National Key Basic Research Program of China and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China, respectively. Optical coherence tomography Retinal pigment epithelium. Competing interests Dr. Chunhui Jiang,
and Dr. Gezhi Xu received $200 and $400 speaker honorariums, respectively, from the Zeiss Company in the past 2 years. Authors’
contributions JY: Acquisition, analysis and interpretation of the data; literature search and writing the article. CJ: Conception and design
of the study; acquisition, analysis and interpretation of the data; writing the article and final approval of the article. GX: Conception
and design of the study, critical revision and final approval of the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
collection, analysis and interpretation of data as well as the writing and preparation of the manuscript was funded by Shanghai Committee of
Science and Technology (Grant No. 13430710500), National Key Basic Research Program of China (Grant No.2013CB967503) and Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai, China (Grant No.12DZ2260500).
