The broad use of SNP microarrays has increased identification of unexpected consanguinity. Therefore, guidelines to address reporting of
consanguinity have been published for clinical laboratories. Because no such guidelines exist for clinicians, we describe a case and present
recommendations for clinicians to disclose unexpected consanguinity to families. In a boy with multiple endocrine abnormalities and
structural birth defects, SNP array analysis revealed ~23% autosomal homozygosity suggestive of a 1st-degree parental relationship. We
assembled an interdisciplinary healthcare team, planned the most appropriate way to discuss results of the SNP array with the adult mother
including the possibility of multiple autosomal recessive disorders in her child, and finally met with her as a team. From these
discussions, we developed four major considerations for clinicians returning results of unexpected consanguinity, all guided by the child’s
best interests: 1) ethical and legal obligations for reporting possible abuse, 2) preservation of the clinical relationship, 3) attention to
justice and psychosocial challenges, and 4) utilization of the SNP array results to guide further testing. As SNP arrays become a common
clinical diagnostic tool, clinicians can use this framework to return results of unexpected consanguinity to families in a supportive and
productive manner. Approximately 10% of the global population is related as second cousins or closer.1 Not surprisingly, long contiguous
stretches of homozygosity have been found in genomes across global populations.2 Reasons for consanguineous unions encompass a variety of
cultural, political, religious, and geographic issues.1,3,4 However, levels of malformations and significant medical defects are somewhat
higher among the offspring of first cousins (4.4%), compared to unrelated parents and parents who were at least second cousins (3.6%).5 In
some countries, including the United States, some close marriages are banned by law.1,6 Additionally, evidence of close consanguinity often
raises questions about the possibility of unreported or undetected abuse and/or incest. Taking a family history to construct an accurate
pedigree, including asking about possible relatedness of family members, has traditionally been an integral part of a medical genetics
evaluation.7 In describing family relationships, patients may reveal known consanguinity that is clinically relevant. The introduction of
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray testing has noticeably increased the identification of unexpected and/or unreported
consanguinity.8–11 SNP arrays, like array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), are often used in diagnostic testing for individuals
with birth defects, intellectual disabilities, and/or autism spectrum disorders to reveal genomic copy number variants such as deletions and
duplications. Unlike aCGH, SNP arrays can also reveal long contiguous stretches of homozygosity. These stretches of homozygosity can
represent consanguinity, shared ancestry, or isodisomic uniparental disomy (UPD),12 each of which is associated with an increased incidence
of autosomal recessive disorders. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics recently published guidelines to assist laboratories
in documenting suspected consanguinity as an incidental finding of genomic testing to the ordering clinician,13 in response to the
variability in laboratory reporting practices.14 However, no formal guidelines currently exist for ordering clinicians to disclose findings
of unexpected consanguinity to families while considering potential legal reporting obligations.15–17 In this paper, we describe a recent
illustrative case of unexpected consanguinity and propose practical and ethical considerations for ordering clinicians when returning
results of unexpected consanguinity in the clinical setting. We present the case of an 8-week-old male born vaginally at term to a 24-year-
old G1P1 mother and 22-year-old father. His mother took only prenatal vitamins and denied alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drug use during
the pregnancy. Prenatal ultrasounds were normal and prenatal genetic diagnostic studies were not done. The patient was found to have both
endocrine and structural abnormalities including congenital primary hypothyroidism, hypoglycemia with concurrent hyperinsulinemia,
deficiency in growth hormone and cortisol, prolonged direct and indirect hyperbilirubinemia, hypertrichosis, and anemia. An echocardiogram
showed a patent foramen ovale and mild left pulmonary artery branch stenosis. A brain MRI suggested mild generalized volume loss with slight
thinning of the body of the corpus callosum. The pituitary gland and stalk were normal in size, position, and signal without mass effect on
the optic chiasm. He was hypotonic centrally with moderate dysphagia leading to episodes of aspiration. Standardized neurodevelopmental
testing confirmed significant global developmental delay by six months of age. A three-generation pedigree showed that all the members of
this extended Mexican family were healthy. The mother denied consanguinity and reported that the father of the child, who was no longer
involved with the mother or child, was from a separate region of Mexico. After clinical evaluation, specialists in pediatric genetics and
endocrinology were unable to reach a unifying genetic diagnosis. Following pre-test counseling, an Affymetrix SNP array was ordered. The SNP
array analysis did not identify any clinically significant deletions or duplications. However, it did identify ~23% autosomal homozygosity
across multiple chromosomes (affecting a total of ~664 Mb, blocks ≥ 3 Mb). This level of homozygosity is consistent with a close parental
relationship or more distant relatedness in an isolated population (Figure 1a). The interdisciplinary healthcare team, consisting of a
clinical geneticist, genetic counselor, social worker, medical Spanish interpreter, and a patient advocate, discussed the results of the SNP
array with the mother and the implications for the child’s health. The mother denied consanguinity and/or sexual abuse during this and
several other visits. We left open the opportunity for the mother to disclose consanguinity in the future, should she need additional
psychosocial resources. In accordance with our hospital policies, we report unexpected consanguinity to the child protection team when the
safety of the mother (if a minor at conception or intellectually impaired) and/or the safety of the child (if abuse is suspected) are at
risk. We decided not to report this situation to the hospital child protection team for several reasons. 1) The mother was an adult and not
intellectually impaired. 2) She denied abuse of herself and her son. 3) The father of the patient was no longer involved. 4) We wanted to
maintain a collaborative clinical relationship with the mother for the optimal care of the child. From a medical standpoint, the SNP array
results suggested that this patient was likely affected by one or more autosomal recessive disorders within the homozygous regions. We then
investigated these regions using clinical exome sequencing and found a homozygous mutation in a gene for primary cortisol deficiency,
explaining at least part of his phenotype. Long contiguous stretches of homozygosity on SNP arrays can represent isodisomic UPD, shared
ancestry, or consanguinity depending on the size and location of the homozygous regions (Figure 1b). Genomic homozygosity can help
physicians identify DNA regions containing genes for autosomal recessive conditions but may also reveal unexpected consanguinity.8 When
unexpected, consanguinity can be difficult to discuss with families, both because of potential adverse health outcomes for the
child4,5,11,18 and legal implications for the parent(s)6,15,17. As this case demonstrates, pre-test counseling prior to ordering a SNP array
should include an explanation that consanguinity and potential relatedness may be identified. Providers can explain that such a finding of
consanguinity could be beneficial for making a diagnosis for their child. This process of pre-test counseling paves the way for future
discussions if unexpected consanguinity is discovered. This process also allows families to be fully informed when consenting to or
declining testing. If families decline, providers should explore and address the parents’ specific concerns. Such a discussion may prompt a
parent to make comments that lead a provider to suspect abuse. Based on our experience with this case, we have developed recommendations for
the review of cases of unexpected consanguinity identified through SNP arrays, including considerations or how to report the results to a
family, and whether the child protection team should be notified. We recommend that where possible, the issues raised by detection of
unexpected consanguinity be addressed through the formation of an interdisciplinary care team. Our team was comprised of a medical genetic
physician, medical genetic counselor, social worker, medical Spanish interpreter, and a patient advocate, with input from a bioethicist. The
specific roles of each team member are described in Figure 2a. This interdisciplinary care team model allows for the effective consideration
of the medical, ethical and reporting issues in the specific context of a case, and may be useful in other clinical environments when the
expertise is available. If the family feels overwhelmed by the team approach, one trusted member of the medical team may serve as the
primary contact between the family and the interdisciplinary care team. We identified four major considerations for clinicians in returning
results of unexpected consanguinity, all guided by the child’s best interests: 1) ethical and legal obligations for reporting possible
abuse, 2) preservation of the clinical relationship, 3) attention to justice and psychosocial challenges, and 4) utilization of the SNP
array results to guide further testing. First, the team should consider potential identification of, and reporting obligations stemming
from, possible abuse. If either parent of the affected child is a minor and/or intellectually impaired, the treating physician may have
ethical and legal obligations for reporting possible incest/abuse. Because consanguinity laws vary by state, providers need to be aware of
their local applicable statutes. In the case of unexpected consanguinity involving a minor parent, the hospital’s child abuse protectio team
should be involved to assess risk to this parent and/or the child (Figure 2b). Subsequent involvement with child protective services and law
enforcement may be necessary. If both parents are legal adults and not intellectually impaired, it is still possible that abuse has occurred
and might be ongoing. If a family member discloses abuse in pre- or post-test discussions, the team should provide support from a social
worker while respecting the abused adult’s autonomy to decide whether to report such abuse unless the safety of the child is in question. If
the family denies abuse, then a few scenarios may be possible: 1) a parent has been sexually abused and is not ready to disclose the abuse
at this time, 2) the parents know that they are closely related but may not choose to disclose their consanguineous union to the providers
because of shame or fear of potential societal or legal implications,19 or 3) the parents do not know or understand that they are closely
related. If the parents are consenting adults and disclose a consanguineous relationship such as a first-cousin relationship, legal
publications have reported that the provider may not be required to break providerpatient confidentiality and report this union, even if it
is unlawful.15,20 Second, because any of these scenarios can cause emotional distress and repercussions for the family, the clinician must
undertake the discussion with the family in a cautious and thoughtful manner. Sensitivity is critical to the preservation of the clinical
relationship with the family and is also in the best interests of the child by allowing ongoing care and communication. In particular, care
must be taken to preserve the dignity of the individuals involved, especially if the family considers consanguinity to be shameful.7 In our
case, the interdisciplinary care team decided to proceed without a strong confrontation with the mother. At the same time, we continued to
offer support in the form of a social worker and patient advocate should she decide to disclose possible abuse in the future. In this way,
we could work to maintain the mother’s trust while continuing to evaluate and treat the child. Third, many patients and families vary in
their education, literacy, language fluency, and economic status. To ensure equitable treatment for all patients while returning complex
results of genetic testing that suggest consanguinity, it is prudent to include a social worker, medical interpreter (where appropriate),
and a patient advocate on the care team (Figure 2a). Conversely, withholding the option to discuss SNP array results that suggest
consanguinity from specific patients and/or families is paternalistic, may be a form of dishonesty, and should be avoided. Fourth, once the
results have been disclosed and discussed, the provider must determine how to use the SNP array results to continue the child’s diagnostic
evaluation. The hypothesis given the SNP array results may more autosomal recessive disorders, and therefore genes that lie within the
homozygous regions are possible candidate genes. If mutations in one or a few of these candidate genes could likely cause the child’s
disorder(s), then targeted sequencing of that gene(s) can be undertaken. If no obvious causative candidate gene is identified, then exome
(or whole genome) sequencing may be considered. Regardless of the next steps, ongoing diagnostic evaluation and treatment of the child, and
the pursuit of the clinical best interest of the child, will frequently require the maintenance of trust and communication with a family.
Therefore, if the parents were both adults at the time of conception, and there is no suspicion or disclosure of abuse, it may not be
beneficial to pressure the family to disclose the exact nature of the familial relationships as the SNP array results guide further
diagnostic testing. In conclusion, we have used a clinical case to illustrate an interdisciplinary and practical approach for ordering
providers to utilize when planning disclosure of SNP array results suggestive of consanguinity to families. The child’s best interest is
paramount and is supported by maintaining ongoing trust and communication with the family while balancing legal reporting obligations. Our
work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(5K23HD057331 to A.E.B), a grant from the NIH/National Human Genome Research Institute (5ROOHG004316–0 to H.K.T.), and a grant from the
American College of Medical Genetics Foundation Summer Scholars Program to F.D. Thank you to Fuki Hisama for mentoring support. DISCLOSURE
The authors declare no conflict of interest. (a) A visual representation of all of the regions of homozygosity (purple blocks) in the
proband ≥ 3 Mb. These long stretches of homozygosity are located on multiple chromosomes. Note that the X-chromosome also appears to be
homozygous, but in fact is present in the normal hemizygous state as this individual is male. (b) A decision tree to help determine whether
stretches of homozygosity represent uniparental disomy, shared ancestry or consanguinity. Caution should be exercised, however, since a
result of high homozygosity alone is insufficient to claim consanguinity.9 (a) Roles of the interdisciplinary team members that work with
the patient/parent to support the best interests of the child. (b) Once consanguinity is suspected (from Figure 1b), a decision process is
necessary to decide whether the situation should be reported to a child protection group.
