We report on two brothers with a distinct syndromic phenotype and explore the potential pathogenic cause. Cytogenetic tests and exome
sequencing were performed on the two brothers and their parents. Variants detected by exome sequencing were validated by Sanger sequencing.
The main phenotype of the two brothers included congenital language disorder, growth retardation, intellectual disability, difficulty in
standing and walking, and urinary and fecal incontinence. To the best of our knowledge, no similar phenotype has been reported previously.
No abnormalities were detected by G-banding chromosome analysis or array comparative genomic hybridization. However, exome sequencing
revealed novel mutations in the ATP-binding cassette, sub-family D member 1 (ABCD1) and Dachshund homolog 2 (DACH2) genes in both brothers.
The ABCD1 mutation was a missense mutation c.1126G > C in exon 3 leading to a p.E376Q substitution. The DACH2 mutation was also a missense
mutation c.1069A > T in exon 6, leading to a p.S357C substitution. The mother was an asymptomatic heterozygous carrier. Plasma levels of
very-long-chain fatty acids were increased in both brothers, suggesting a diagnosis of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD); however, their phenotype
was not compatible with any reported forms of ALD. DACH2 plays an important role in the regulation of brain and limb development, suggesting
that this mutation may be involved in the phenotype of the two brothers. The distinct phenotype demonstrated by these two brothers might
represent a new form of ALD or a new syndrome. The combination of mutations in ABCD1 and DACH2 provides a plausible mechanism for this
phenotype. Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD; OMIM#300100) is a serious progressive, genetic disorder that affects the adrenal glands, the spinal
cord and the white matter of the nervous system. It is thought to be caused by genetic defects in the ATP-binding cassette, sub-family D
member 1 (ABCD1) (OMIM*300371) gene . ALD is characterized by variations in phenotypic expression; seven ALD forms have been reported so
far, including childhood cerebral, adolescent cerebral, adult cerebral, adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), Addison-only, asymptomatic or
presymptomatic, and olivo-ponto-cerebellar ALD . However, there is no exact genotype-phenotype correlation between ABCD1 defects and
clinical phenotype. Furthermore, the combination of defects in ABCD1 with defects in other genes, such as the hemophilia A gene or DXS1357E
, can complicate and worsen the clinical phenotype. We present two brothers with a distinct phenotype including congenital language
disorder, growth retardation, severe intellectual disability, inattention, dysphoria, drooling, heterophony, difficulty in walking and
standing without aid, standing on tiptoe with aid, urinary incontinence, and fecal incontinence. To the best of our knowledge, no cases with
a similar phenotype have been reported previously. We performed cytogenetic tests and exome sequencing in the two brothers and their parents
to screen for potential pathogenic causes. Two brothers and their parents, as well as 500 unaffected individuals (250 males and 250 females)
of matched geographical ancestry, were enrolled in this study. The study was approved by the Shenzhen People’s Hospital Ethics Committee,
which abides by the Helsinki Declaration on ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects. Written informed consent was
obtained from all the participants or their guardians. Genomic DNA was obtained from peripheral blood lymphocytes from all individuals,
using standard procedures . G-banding chromosome analysis (~850 bands) was performed on cultures of peripheral blood lymphocytes from the
two brothers and their parents, according to standard techniques . Array comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) was performed using
Agilent Technologies’ Array CGH Kits (Santa Clara, CA, USA). This platform is 60-mer oligonucleotide-based microarray that allows genome-
wide survey and molecular profiling of genomic aberrations with a resolution of ~20 kb (Kit 244A). DNAs were labeled by random priming
(Agilent Technologies) for 2 h using Cy5-dUTP for test DNAs and Cy3-dUTP for reference DNAs. Labeled products were column-purified. After
probe denaturation and pre-annealing with 50 μg of Cot-1 DNA, hybridization was performed at 65°C with rotation for 40 h. After two washing
steps, the arrays were analyzed using an Agilent scanner and Feature Extraction 10.5.0.1 software. The data were analyzed using CGH
Analytics 4.0 software (Agilent Technologies). The Aberration Detection Method 2 algorithm was used to identify aberrant intervals. Targeted
capture and massive parallel sequencing of approximately 201,904 coding exons from genomic DNA from the two patients and their mother were
performed using the Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon kit, following the manufacturer’s protocols. Briefly, genomic DNA was sheared by
sonication and the DNA fragments were then purified using a QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The fragment ends were
repaired and adaptors were ligated to the fragments (NEBNext DNA sample prep, New England Biolabs). The adapter-ligated templates were
purified using Agencourt AMPure SPRI beads and fragments with an insert size of about 250 bp were excised. Extracted DNA was amplified by
ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction, purified, and hybridized to the SureSelect Biotinylated RNA Library ‘baits’ (Agilent) for
enrichment. Each captured library was then loaded on a HiSeq 2000 platform for sequencing. Raw image files were processed using Illumina
Pipeline (v1.6) for base-calling with default parameters. SOAPaligner (v2.01) was used to align the sequencing reads to the NCBI human
genome reference assembly (build 36.3). Reads that aligned to the designed target region were collected for single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) identification and subsequent analysis. The consensus sequence and quality of each allele was calculated by SOAPsnp. Insertions and
deletions (Indels) in the exome regions were identified by de novo assembly of the sequencing reads. The reads were assembled using
SOAPdenovo with the 31-mer option enabled and the assembled consensus sequences were then aligned to the reference genome by LASTZ. The
alignment result was passed to axtBest to separate orthologous from paralogous alignments. Finally, breakpoints in the alignment were
identified and the genotypes of Indels were annotated. To distinguish between potentially pathogenic mutations and other variants, we only
focused on non-synonymous (NS) variants, splice acceptor and donor site mutations (SS), and short coding Indels, anticipating that
synonymous variants would less likely to be pathogenic. The variants were compared and filtered using public databases, including dbSNP
(v129), 1000 Genome Project (20100208 release), eight HapMap exomes, and YH genome. A novel variant was defined as one that did not exist in
these datasets. Only recessive models of inheritance (autosomal recessive model and X-linked recessive model) were considered because of the
normal phenotypes of the parents. Variants detected by exome sequencing were validated by Sanger sequencing. Patient 1: A 10-year-old boy
was the result of the third pregnancy of a 33-year-old, gravida six, para three, Chinese woman. The father was 34 years old. The parents
were non-consanguineous and healthy. The pregnancy was uncomplicated and the mother denied any exposure to alcohol, teratogenic agents,
irradiation or infectious diseases during the pregnancy. The boy was born at full-term and delivered by spontaneous vaginal delivery. His
birthweight was 2,500 g (3rd–10th centile), length was 46 cm (<3rd centile), and head circumference was 30 cm (<3rd centile). His growth
continued to be retarded, and his weight was 28.5 kg (<50th centile), length was 101 cm (<3rd centile), and head circumference was 46.5 cm
(<3rd centile) at 8 years old. He was noted to have global developmental delay, particularly affecting expressive language. He had never
spoken using phrases or ‘word combinations’. His hearing and vision were normal. He had severe intellectual disability (IQ < 25) and
response retardation. His cognition, attention and memory were impaired. He was often restless, crying and drooling, was interested in
strangers or novel things, and was frequently incontinent. He had dental dysplasia, with aberrant, dust-colored teeth; the maxillary teeth
11 and 21 were reversed, the 21 and 22 dental crowns were incompletely erupted, bilateral deciduous canines were ablated, and the distal
ends of both maxillary and mandibular permanent dental crowns were moderately or mildly tilted (Figure 1). His motor skills were impaired:
his manual dexterity and finger tapping were poor, he was able to pick up chopsticks or a spoon, but could not pick up small items or thread
a needle. He was never able to walk or stand without aid, and with aid, was only able to achieve a wobbling walk on tiptoe (Figure 2). He
was unable to raise or flex his lower limbs freely, and they were ice-cold and insensitive to pain, heat and cold, leading to frequent
frostbite and burning (Figure 3). Laboratory tests, including white blood cell and platelets counts, bleeding time, sedimentation rate,
serum electrolytes and protein, blood glucose, immune electrophoresis, C-reactive protein, C3 complement, autoantibody screening, and
antistreptolysin titer revealed no pathologic findings. The concentrations of cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) were normal,
though most sex hormones were lower than the reference values (Table 1). The plasma level of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) was
elevated, with a C24/C22 ratio of 1.342 (reference interval: 0.788–1.090), and C26/C22 ratio of 0.086 (reference interval: 0.018–0.038).
Sonography, X-ray examination, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scan showed no obvious abnormalities. The
mother had previously aborted three times and her first child died of liver cancer at the age of 6 years. There was no family history of
chromosomal anomaly or similar case, until the birth of a younger brother (patient 2) (Figure 4).Figure 1 The poorly developed permanent
teeth of the patient 1. Figure 2 Only with the aid, the patient 1 was able to stand on tiptoe. Figure 3 The lower limbs of the patient 1
showing many wounds caused by frostbite or burn unconsciously. Table 1 The hormones detection results of two brothers Tests Results
Reference intervals Patient 1 Patient 2 Triiodothyronine (T3)1.792.351.3 ~ 3.1 nmol/LThyroxine (T4)112.9121.666 ~ 181 nmol/LFree
triiodothyronine (FT3)4.135.283.10 ~ 6.80 pmol/LFree thyroxine (FT4)16.3416.1812 ~ 22 pmol/LThyrotropic-stimulating hormone
(TSH)3.303.700.27 ~ 4.20 uIU/mlLuteinizing hormone (LH)0.5490.2341.70 ~ 8.60 mIU/mlFollicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)1.670.9351.5 ~ 12.4
mIU/mlProlactin (PRL)84.6981.8398 ~ 456 uIU/mlEstradiol (E2)24.0518.3549.2 ~ 218 pmol/LTestosterone
(T)0.0690.0699.90 ~ 27.80 nmol/LProgesterone (P)0.0950.0950.70 ~ 4.30 nmol/LCorticosteroid
(CRO)196.2166.5171 ~ 536 nmol/LAdrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)9.27.12.2 ~ 16.6 pmol/LFigure 4 The Pedigree of the family. The open
square: normal male individual; the closed square: affected male individual; the closed square with an arrow: male proband; the open square
with a slash: deceased male individual; the small closed circle: abortion; the open large circle with a closed circle in center:
asymptomatic female carrier. The poorly developed permanent teeth of the patient 1. Only with the aid, the patient 1 was able to stand on
tiptoe. The lower limbs of the patient 1 showing many wounds caused by frostbite or burn unconsciously. The hormones detection results of
two brothers The Pedigree of the family. The open square: normal male individual; the closed square: affected male individual; the closed
square with an arrow: male proband; the open square with a slash: deceased male individual; the small closed circle: abortion; the open
large circle with a closed circle in center: asymptomatic female carrier. Patient 2: The younger brother of patient 1 was born as the sixth
child, 6 years after patient 1, at 40 weeks of gestation after an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery. His birthweight was 2500 g (3rd–10th
centile), length was 45 cm (<3rd centile), and head circumference was 31 cm (3rd–10th centile). He started learning to walk at 1 year old,
but his lower limbs were weak. He failed to thrive, and his weight was 9 kg (<3rd centile), length was 80.5 cm (<3rd centile), and head
circumference was 42.5 cm (<3rd centile) at 2.5 years. He had severe intellectual disability (IQ < 25) and response retardation. He was
inattentive and often drooling, restless and crying. The muscular tension in his lower limbs was high, and his muscle strength was low. He
was unable to stand, walk or speak, and was only able to stand with assistance at the age of 3 years (Figure 5). He was frequently
incontinent. Sonography, X-ray examination, MRI and CT scan showed no obvious abnormalities. Auditory brainstem response examination
revealed a high frequency hearing threshold in both ears (left ear: 60 db, right ear: 105 db). The concentration of ACTH was normal, but
cortisol and sex hormones were low (Table 1). The plasma level of VLCFA showed an increased C24/C22 ratio of 1.428 (reference interval:
0.788–1.090), and C26/C22 ratio of 0.092 (reference interval: 0.018–0.038). No obvious abnormalities were found by other laboratory
tests.Figure 5 The patient 2 was only able to stand with assistance. The patient 2 was only able to stand with assistance. The karyotypes of
the two brothers and their parents were normal according to G-banding chromosome analysis. No submicroscopic chromosome aberrations were
detected by array-CGH. The exomes in the two brothers and their mother were sequenced. A total of 35,495,497 bases in 244,069 exons from
21,326 genes were targeted for sequencing. An average of 3.8 Gb of effective sequence was generated per individual as 90 bp paired-end
reads; 2.9 Gb (76.3%) passed the quality assessment and aligned to the human reference sequence, and 63.3% of the total bases mapped to the
targeted bases with a mean coverage of 64.3-fold (Table 2). About 96% of targeted bases were sufficiently covered to pass our threshold for
variant calling. After identification of variants, we focused on NS, SS and Indels, which were more likely to be pathogenic mutations than
other variants. Each sibling had one or more NS/SS/Indel variants in ~3,000 genes. Using public databases (dbSNP129, 1000 Genomes Project,
eight HapMap exomes and YH genome) as filters, we identified 51 and 33 novel mutated genes in the two brothers, respectively. We compared
these genes from the two brothers with their mother to exclude variants that were not compatible with an autosomal recessive model or
X-linked recessive model. This reduced the number of candidate genes to 14 and eight, respectively. Three candidate genes were shared by
both brothers: one autosomal gene GNAQ (OMIM*600998) and two X chromosomal genes ABCD1 and DACH2 (OMIM*300608) (Table 3).Table 2 Summary of
original exome sequencing data Sample Bases (Gb) Map bases (Gb) Map bases rate (%) Exon map bases (Gb) Exon map bases rate (%) Exon length
(Mb) Covered length (Mb) Coverage (%) Mean sequencing depth Patient 13.933.0477.352.5063.6137.8137.4799.1066.01Patient
23.522.6775.852.2263.0737.8137.4199.0058.70mother4.053.1377.282.5763.4637.8137.3599.0068.22Table 3 Identification of the candidate genes for
two brothers by exome sequencing Filter Case 1 Case 2 NS/SS/I29832981Not in dbSNP129, 1000 Genome Project, eight HapMap exomes, and YH
genome5133Comparing to the mother148Shared by two cases3Each cell indicates the number of genes with nonsynonymous (NS) variants, splice
acceptor and donor site mutations (SS) and coding indels (I). Rows show the effect of excluding from consideration variants found in
dbSNP129, 1000 Genome Project, the eight HapMap exomes, and the YH genome. Columns show the effect of requiring that NS/SS/Indel variants be
observed in each case. Summary of original exome sequencing data Identification of the candidate genes for two brothers by exome sequencing
Each cell indicates the number of genes with nonsynonymous (NS) variants, splice acceptor and donor site mutations (SS) and coding indels
(I). Rows show the effect of excluding from consideration variants found in dbSNP129, 1000 Genome Project, the eight HapMap exomes, and the
YH genome. Columns show the effect of requiring that NS/SS/Indel variants be observed in each case. Sanger sequencing demonstrated that the
GNAQ mutations were false positives, but the mutations in DACH2 and ABCD1 were accurate. The ABCD1 mutation was a missense mutation
c.1126G > C in exon 3, leading to a p.E376Q substitution (Figure 6), and the DACH2 mutation was also a missense mutation
c.1069A > Tc.1069A > T in exon 6, leading to ap.S357C substitution (Figure 7). The mother was an asymptomatic heterozygous carrier
(Table 4). Sanger sequencing of 500 unaffected individuals of matched geographical ancestry failed to detect the ABCD1 mutation, while the
DACH2 mutation was present in one female. BLAST analysis (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) indicated that both the mutations,
c.1126G > C transition (E376Q) of ABCD1 and c.1069A > T transition (p.S357C) of DACH2, occurred in highly conserved positions (Figure 6, 7).
To assess the likelihood that the two variants had functional impacts on the respective proteins, the biophysical consequences of these
variants were predicted using PolyPhen-2. The variant c.1126G > C transition (E376Q) of ABCD1 was considered likely to be functionally
benign, while the variant c.1069A > T transition (p.S357C) of DACH2 was likely to be functionally damaging.Figure 6 Genomic structure of the
exons encoding the open reading frame of ABCD1 and identified mutations. ABCD1 is composed of ten exons that encode untranslated regions
(UTR) (orange) and protein coding sequence (blue) (upper panel). Sanger sequence of codons 375–377 in exon 3 of ABCD1 indicated the same
mutation was present in two brothers and their mother (middle panel). E376Q missense mutation was at a highly conserved position in ABCD1
shown by comparison to the corresponding sequence of six vertebrates (lower panel). Rattus = Rattus norvegicus; Cricetulus = Cricetulus
griseus; Pan = Pan troglodytes; Canis = Canis lupus familiaris; Bos = Bos Taurus.Figure 7 Genomic structure of the exons encoding the open
reading frame of DACH2 and identified mutations. DACH2 is composed of twelve exons that encode untranslated regions (UTR) (orange) and
protein coding sequence (blue) (upper panel). Sanger sequence of codons 356–358 in exon 6 of DACH2 indicated the same mutation was present
in two brothers and their mother (middle panel). S357C missense mutation was at a highly conserved position in DACH2 shown by comparison to
the corresponding sequence of six vertebrates (lower panel). Rattus = Rattus norvegicus; Cricetulus = Cricetulus griseus; Pan = Pan
troglodytes; Canis = Canis lupus familiaris; Bos = Bos Taurus.Table 4 The exome sequencing and sanger sequencing results of the 3 candidate
genes Gene Chromosome Position Reference Exome sequencing Sanger sequencing (NCBI36/hg18) Patient 1 Patient 2 Mother Patient 1 Patient 2
Mother Father GNAQ 979,726,915GG/TG/TGGGGG GNAQ 979,726,932TT/AT/AT/ATTTT DACH2 X85,856,344ATTA/TTTA/TA ABCD1 X152,654,804GCCC/GCCC/GG
Genomic structure of the exons encoding the open reading frame of ABCD1 and identified mutations. ABCD1 is composed of ten exons that encode
untranslated regions (UTR) (orange) and protein coding sequence (blue) (upper panel). Sanger sequence of codons 375–377 in exon 3 of ABCD1
indicated the same mutation was present in two brothers and their mother (middle panel). E376Q missense mutation was at a highly conserved
position in ABCD1 shown by comparison to the corresponding sequence of six vertebrates (lower panel). Rattus = Rattus norvegicus;
Cricetulus = Cricetulus griseus; Pan = Pan troglodytes; Canis = Canis lupus familiaris; Bos = Bos Taurus. Genomic structure of the exons
encoding the open reading frame of DACH2 and identified mutations. DACH2 is composed of twelve exons that encode untranslated regions (UTR)
(orange) and protein coding sequence (blue) (upper panel). Sanger sequence of codons 356–358 in exon 6 of DACH2 indicated the same mutation
was present in two brothers and their mother (middle panel). S357C missense mutation was at a highly conserved position in DACH2 shown by
comparison to the corresponding sequence of six vertebrates (lower panel). Rattus = Rattus norvegicus; Cricetulus = Cricetulus griseus;
Pan = Pan troglodytes; Canis = Canis lupus familiaris; Bos = Bos Taurus. The exome sequencing and sanger sequencing results of the 3
candidate genes We report on two brothers who presented with a distinct phenotype. The potential pathogenic cause was investigated using
G-banding chromosome analysis and high-resolution array-CGH in the two brothers and their parents, but no abnormalities were detected. Exome
sequencing was therefore performed on the brothers and their mother, to detect genetic variations. The small sample and uncertain
pathogenesis of the disease meant that both autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive models were possible. The rarity of the disorder
makes it unlikely that causative variants would be present in the general population, and we therefore compared our detected variants with
those in dbSNP129, 1000 Genomes Project, eight HapMap exomes and YH genome to eliminate shared variants. Sequencing and comparison of the
coding region from the affected brothers and their unaffected mother, and filtering out of the benign changes using public databases, led to
the identification of three candidate genes: one autosomal gene GNAQ and two X chromosomal genes ABCD1 and DACH2. Subsequent Sanger
sequencing showed that the mutations in GNAQ were false positives. The ABCD1 mutation was a novel missense mutation, c.1126G > C transition
(E376Q), in exon 3. Several lines of evidence support a causative role for this mutation in the brothers’ phenotype: 1) ABCD1 mutation is
consistent with an X-linked recessive model, which was one of the two possible inherited models; 2) the ABCD1 mutation is not present in the
public databases, including dbSNP129, 1000 Genomes Project, eight HapMap exomes and YH genome, and was not found in 500 normal ethnicity-
matched controls, excluding the possibility of an amino acid substitution polymorphism; and 3) comparative analyses of ABCD1 in other
species show that E376 is conserved among primates, rodents, and other vertebrate species. ABCD1 encodes an integral peroxisomal membrane
protein (ALD protein) that belongs to the ATP-binding cassette–transporter superfamily . The peroxisomal ATP-binding cassette transporter is
involved in the import of VLCFA into the peroxisome. Defects in ABCD1 have been shown to be associated with impaired peroxisomal β-oxidation
and accumulation of saturated VLCFA in all tissues of the body, and are considered to be the underlying cause of ALD . ALD is a rare
X-linked demyelinating disorder affecting the nervous system, adrenal cortex and testis , and is characterized by variation in phenotypic
expression . To date, several clinical forms have been reported in male patients (Table 5) . The cerebral forms, including childhood
cerebral, adolescent cerebral and adult cerebral, are associated with an inflammatory reaction in the cerebral white matter and progressive
neurological damage with rapid evolution, leading to a vegetative state within 6 months to 2 years after onset of symptoms, followed by
death at variable ages . In contrast, AMN mainly involves the spinal cord and peripheral nerves, the inflammatory response is absent or
mild, and its progression is slower. AMN usually presents with initial symptoms in adult men aged from 20 years to middle-age. Affected
individuals develop progressive stiffness and weakness in the legs, sphincter control abnormalities, and sexual dysfunction, and may also
have serious cognitive and behavioral disturbances over the decades . Addison-only individuals present with signs of adrenal insufficiency
between 2 years of age and adulthood; the signs include unexplained vomiting, weakness or coma. Individuals with asymptomatic ALD usually
have a biochemical abnormality, but no manifestation of adrenal or neurologic disease. The cerebellum and brain stem are usually involved in
individuals with olivo-ponto-cerebellar ALD, who present with signs between adolescence and adulthood.Table 5 Phenotypic comparison between
reported male ALD forms and two brothers Forms Description Two brothers Childhood cerebralOnset at 3–10 years of age with a peak at seven
years. This form virtually never occurs before three years of age. Affected boys present with progressive behavioural and cognitive
neurological deficits, such as inattention, hyperactivity, deterioration in handwriting skills, diminishing school performance; difficulty
in understanding speech, spatial orientation; clumsiness; visual disturbances; and aggressive behavior. Brain MRI examination can be
strikingly abnormal even when symptoms are relatively mild. Most individuals have impaired adrenocortical function at the time that
neurological disturbances are first noted. Total disability often within 3 years.Onset before 2 years of age. Presentation is not
progressive, including congenital language disorder, intellectual disability, growth retardation, response retardation, dysphoria, drooling;
difficulty in walking and standing; urinary incontinence and fecal incontinence; movement and sensory dysfunctions of lower limbs; normal
brain MRI, normal adrenocortical function.Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN)Onset at 28 ± 9 years, progressive stiffness and weakness of legs,
abnormalities of sphincter control, sexual dysfunction, distal axonopathy, inflammation mild or absent, mainly spinal cord involvement,
cerebral involvement later in 45% of cases.Adolescent cerebralLike childhood cerebral, but onset at 10–21 years of age. Somewhat slower
progression.Adult cerebralDementia, behavioral disturbances. Rapid inflammatory cerebral progression resembling the childhood form, without
preceding AMN, onset after 21 years of age.Addison-onlyPrimary adrenocortical insufficiency without neurological abnormalities, including
unexplained vomiting, weakness, coma, onset before 7.5 years of age.Asymptomatic or presymptomaticALD gene abnormality without neurological
or endocrine abnormalities, further studies can reveal subclinical adrenal insufficiency or mild AMN phenotype. This form is common in boys
under 4 years of age.Olivo-ponto-cerebellarCerebral and brain stem involvement, onset between adolescence to adulthood. Phenotypic
comparison between reported male ALD forms and two brothers The unique phenotype of the two brothers initially suggested a novel syndrome,
rather than ALD. However, a missense mutation in ABCD1 was unexpectedly identified in both brothers and their mother by exome sequencing.
Although PolyPhen-2 predicted that the biophysical consequences of the variant c.1126G > C (E376Q) of ABCD1 were likely to be functionally
benign, other variants in the same exon, such as c.1114A > T (p.K372*) and c.1137C > G (p.S379R), have been reported to lead to ALD .
Further laboratory tests showed elevated plasma VLCFA levels in the brothers, and no mutations were detected in genes associated with other
peroxisomal diseases, such as Zellweger syndrome, acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency, D-bi-functional protein deficiency, and b-ketothiolase
deficiency. The brothers should be therefore diagnosed with ALD. Nevertheless, the phenotype exhibited by the two brothers was not
consistent with any reported ALD forms. Their ages at onset would suggest childhood cerebral ALD (CCALD), but their conditions were not
progressive, their brain MRI results were normal, and they had severe congenital language and motor disorders and intellectual disability.
In contrast, cognitive and motor development are normal in CCALD prior to the onset of demyelinating lesions visible at brain MRI,
suggesting that the brothers’ phenotype differed from CCALD. In addition, both brothers had urinary and fecal incontinence, their ages at
onset were younger than 2 years old, they had severe congenital intellectual disabilities, and were unable to walk and speak, indicating a
phenotype incompatible with AMN and other known forms of ALD. The distinct phenotype displayed by the two brothers suggests that other
pathogenetic factors, in addition to ABCD1 mutation, may have been responsible for their condition. DACH2 is a homolog of dachshund. The
dachshund/Dach gene family encodes transcriptional cofactors that are conserved between insects and vertebrate. Drosophila dachshund is a
critical regulator of eye, brain, and limb formation, and null mutations in dachshund result in abnormal retinal, brain, genital, and limb
development . The vertebrate homologs Dach1 and Dach2 also play an important role in the development of the retina, brain and limbs . DACH2
encodes a transcription factor characterized by the presence of three conserved domains , which is involved in the regulation of
organogenesis, myogenesis, brain and limb development . The first domain (DD1) at the N-terminus (amino acids 66–162) and the second domain
(DD2) at the C-terminus (amino acids 452–543) are highly conserved in all members of the DACH protein family and appear to be involved in
DNA binding and in the interaction with EYA proteins, respectively . A third domain DD3 is present in the central portion of the protein
(amino acids 314–412) and is shared by all members of the DACH1 and DACH2 subfamilies, but its detailed function remains unknown. The
variant c.1069A > T transition (p.S357C) of DACH2 detected in the present study was located in the DD3 domain and was predicted to be
functionally damaging by PolyPhen-2, suggesting a potential role in two brothers’ phenotype. The combined mutations in ABCD1 and DACH2 thus
provide a plausible explanation for the abnormal phenotype observed in both brothers. However, further functional studies are needed to
clarify the effects of these variants. The distinct phenotype demonstrated by two brothers might represent a new form of ALD or a new
syndrome. The combination of mutations in ABCD1 and DACH2 provides a plausible mechanism for this phenotype. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YZ designed and led this study, analyzed test results and wrote the
manuscript. YL, KZ and JW initiated the laboratory investigations of the patients, collected samples and provided the phenotype information.
YL and YD(Yong Duan) confirmed and analyzed test results and reviewed the manuscript. YD(Yong Dai) was responsible for this study and
reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We gratefully acknowledge the participation of all the
participants.
