Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 50-year-old man presented with sudden onset abdominal pain and non-productive cough.
Past medical history was significant for hypertension, treated with hydrochlorothiazide, azilsartan and a beta-blocker. Cardiovascular exam
was notable for soft diastolic murmur in right second intercostal space and an abdominal bruit in umbilical region. A chest radiograph
revealed a left mediastinal mass (Panel A, Arrowhead). Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen revealed a Type
1A, complex thoracic aortic dissection originating at the aortic root (Panel B, four lumens: True lumen , acute dissection , Sub acute
dissection and chronic dissection respectively). The dissection extended down to the mid iliac arteries bilaterally (Image not shown). The
patient was transferred to tertiary care center and underwent an aortic root replacement. CT is the most utilized imaging modality for the
diagnosis of aortic dissection.1 The advantages of CT are ready and widespread availability in the emergency department setting, rapid image
acquisition, minimal patient discomfort, and sensitivity and specificity approaching 100% with multidetector CT.2 A negative CT may also
identify alternative causes for the patient’s clinical presentation. Limitations of CT include false positives from motion artifact in non-
electrocardiogram gated scans, false negatives from poor contrast opacification due to cardiac failure or thrombosed false lumen, and
identification of intimal flap in only 70% of cases.3,4 Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. A, Chest
radiograph revealing a left mediastinal mass. B, Complex thoracic aortic dissection originating at aortic root. 1) true lumen 2) acute
dissection 3) acute dissection 4) chronic dissection
