Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 61 year-old man presented to the Emergency Department for one day of nonspecific chest
pain. Bedside echocardiogram performed by the emergency physician revealed normal systolic cardiac function but also showed a large ( >
10mm) bicornuate interatrial septal aneurysm (IASA) projecting into the right atrium (Figure 1, Video 1). There was no evidence of
intraatrial thrombus. A formal echocardiogram performed later that day confirmed the diagnosis and also detected a patent foramen ovale
(PFO) with a left-to-right shunt that reversed with Valsalva maneuver. Given the increasing use of point-of-care echocardiography in the
emergency department, clinicians should learn to recognize common cardiac malformations such as IASA, a congenital lesion with a prevalence
between 2–10%.1 While familiar to cardiologists, the presence of an IASA may surprise the emergency physician, as few if any case reports
have appeared in the emergency medicine literature. The basic differential diagnosis to consider for IASA should include thrombus,
intracardiac tumor, and Chiari network (a web-like embryonic remnant in the right atrium).2 Though usually benign, IASAs have been
associated with cryptogenic stroke in younger patients (< 55 years).3,4 They are thought to facilitate thrombus formation via stasis and
provocation of atrial arrhythmias. IASAs are also highly associated with PFO, and the combination of the two lesions may increase stroke
risk in a synergistic fashion.5,6 Anticoagulation is typically initiated as secondary prevention in patients with a history of stroke or as
primary prophylaxis in patients with a visualized atrial thrombus.7–9 Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Four-chamber apical view demonstrating a large interatrial septal aneurysm. RA, right atrium; IASA, interatrial
septal aneurysm; LA, left atrium Normal systolic cardiac function and a large bicornuate interatrial septal aneurysm (IASA) projecting into
the right atrium (RA).
