Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 17 Final Diagnosis: Burkitt lymphoma Symptoms: Anisocoria, ipsilateral ptosis,
opthalmoparesis, paresis Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Oncology Unusual clinical course Burkitt lymphoma rarely affects the
central nervous system and ocular region. Under these conditions, computed tomography and (particularly) magnetic resonance imaging of the
skull increase the diagnostic accuracy, as they objectively show the topography of lesions and the effect of neoplasia on structures. We
report here the case of a 17-year-old male whose initial clinical manifestations were related to neurological impairment and to the ocular
musculature and ocular innervation. The diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma with leukemization and infiltration of the central nervous system was
confirmed. In this case, it is important to recognize that the neuroimaging findings were fundamentally important in indicating the initial
form of the disease and in directing the appropriate clinical management. Burkitt lymphoma is a highly proliferative neoplasm derived from
undifferentiated lymphocytic cells . This neoplasm is extremely infrequent, and, together with Burkitt-like forms, accounts for only 3–5% of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas in immunocompetent adults . Although rare, Burkitt lymphoma affects children more frequently, accounting for 30–50% of
pediatric lymphomas in some studies . We report here the case of an adolescent presenting with Burkitt lymphoma displaying an atypical
localization in neuroimaging exams. A 17-year-old male without any known immunodeficiencies or comorbidities developed paresthesia and
paresis of the right lower limb over a period of 3 months, which progressively worsened. He developed anisocoria due to right eye mydriasis,
ophthalmoparesis and ipsilateral palpebral ptosis over 1 week and was then referred for neurological monitoring for photophobia. The patient
was admitted to our hospital with worsening paresthesia, severe headache, vomiting, and lipothymia. He was slightly pale, presenting with
mydriatic pupils, ophthalmoplegia of the right eye (cranial nerve III) and ophthalmoparesis of the left eye (cranial nerve VI), palpebral
ptosis of the right eye, and paresis of the right lower limb. These clinical manifestations were consistent with compression of the
mesencephalic tegmentum, and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head was then requested, which revealed bilateral and symmetric
thickening in the topography of the third cranial nerve, with high uptake of contrast medium (Figure 1). This lesion extended to Meckel’s
cave, cavernous sinus, and superior orbital fissures and to the apices and lower portions of the eye sockets, being more evident in the
right eye (Figure 2). Also observed were the thickening and high uptake of the pituitary stalk and a small ill-defined lytic lesion in the
greater wing of the sphenoid bone, extending to the orbit, pachymeninx, and temporal muscles. The main diagnoses then suggested were
tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, lymphoma, and abscess. Laboratory tests were performed, which showed nonspecific changes. Empirical treatment for
central nervous system (CNS) tuberculosis and meningitis of the cranial base was begun. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the skull and
eye orbits showed bilateral thickening of the extraocular muscles, isointense in all sequences, in addition to elongated tissue with
increased uptake of contrast medium in the topography of the right oculomotor nerve, thickening of the left perimesencephalic cistern, and
bilateral obliteration of Meckel’s cave (Figures 3–6). A lumbar puncture showed clear and transparent cerebrospinal fluid that was smear-
positive for malignant cells and lymphomatous infiltration. The tuberculin skin test result was non-reactive. Subsequently, the patient
developed intestinal constipation and abdominal pain, and a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed mild ascites, discrete homogeneous
splenomegaly, and 2 lesions located in the pancreas that were hypodense and exhibited increased uptake of contrast medium, resulting in
dilatation of the main pancreatic duct and occlusion of the splenic vein with epigastric collateral circulation (Figures 7 and 8). The
abdominal CT scan revealed irregular wall thickening in the stomach, jejunum, ileum, cecum, and transverse colon, with signs of
intussusception at the ileal lesion (Figures 9–12). Confluent mesenteric lymphadenomegaly next to the jejunal lesion (Figure 10) and
hypodense lesions in the right kidney (Figure 7). The patient developed hematemesis and hemodynamic instability, requiring emergency
gastrointestinal endoscopy, whose histopathological finding identified an infiltrative and ulcerated gastric lesion. Hemostasis was
performed, and material was collected for biopsy, which revealed Burkitt lymphoma (Figures 13 and 14). A bone marrow biopsy showed the bone
marrow to be diffusely infiltrated with blasts, consistent with acute leukemia. The diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma with leukemization and
infiltration of the CNS was then confirmed. The treatment for CNS tuberculosis and meningitis was discontinued, and intrathecal and systemic
chemotherapy was initiated. The patient presented with neutropenia and fever, which were treated with cefepime for 11 days. He recovered
satisfactorily and was discharged 2 months after hospitalization with the disease in remission. Burkitt lymphoma is the most common form of
pediatric non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It has 3 main recognized variants: the endemic form, which occurs mostly in equatorial Africa and is
strongly associated with the Epstein-Barr virus; the sporadic form, which occurs worldwide; and the form associated with immunodeficiency,
primarily in individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus . Both the sporadic and endemic forms of Burkitt lymphoma present
mainly during childhood . The most common sites of involvement are the jaw, facial bones, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, ovaries, breast,
and extranodal sites . Abdominal tumors are the most common presentation in sporadic Burkitt lymphoma, whereas mandibular involvement is the
most common mode of presentation in the endemic form . The involvement of facial bones, including the orbital extension and exophthalmos,
are common in the endemic form but rare in the sporadic form, with few cases reported in the literature . Burkitt lymphomas primarily
involving the brain are extremely rare, with fewer than 10 cases reported in the literature . Meningeal involvement and cranial nerve
infiltration are the most common CNS presentations of Burkitt and Burkitt-like lymphoma. Meningeal enhancement following intravenous
contrast in the T1 sequence of MRI and in a CT scan is the classic finding for this form, but it can be extremely difficult to demonstrate
using CT scans . Suprasellar and parasellar tumors that simulate Tolosa-Hunt Syndrome have also been described. An expansive epidural mass
with compression on the vertebral canal is the most common presentation of spinal canal involvement . MRI is more sensitive in visualizing
the involvement of brain lesions and the head and neck . Extracranial head and neck lymphomas tend to present as isointense muscle lesions
in the T1 and T2 MRI sequences and with intense and homogeneous uptake of the intravenous contrast medium. The lesions can be permeative and
have foci of bone destruction, suggesting malignant lesions with aggressive behavior . The imaging findings for Burkitt lymphoma are non-
specific, and in addition to other histological types of lymphoma, the differential diagnosis should include malignant neoplasms with rapid
cell proliferation and similar signal characteristics in MRI, such as leukemic infiltration, metastatic neuroblastoma, and sarcoma.
Plasmacytomas should also be considered, including cases with bone involvement . Due to their multisystemic involvement and epidemiological
importance, we also initially considered sarcoidosis and tuberculosis in the differential diagnosis. In this case, empirical treatment for
CNS tuberculosis was initiated even before the diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma. The empirical treatment was based on clinical and
epidemiological data because our region has a high prevalence of tuberculosis. It is also worth noting the delay in performing lumbar
puncture. It is important to identify patients who are at risk of cerebral herniation, in which a lumbar puncture would be contraindicated.
The clinical features that suggest raised intracranial pressure include papilledema, focal neurology, and reduced consciousness levels .
Importantly, our patient had focal neurology and photophobia, in which papilledema is a difficult sign to detect . Thus, we opted to perform
a CT scan of the head prior to lumbar puncture. We describe a rare initial presentation of Burkitt lymphoma. The lesions started in the CNS
and ocular region. Subsequently, the patient had multisystem involvement. Thus, we emphasize the need to explore neuroimaging methods that
may indicate the initial form of the disease and guide appropriate clinical management. Axial CT section of the head after injection of
iodinated contrast medium. There is thickening of the oculomotor nerves (arrows) and of the left trigeminal nerve (arrowhead). Thickening of
the right superior rectus muscle is also observed (asterisk). Axial CT section of the head after injection of iodinated contrast medium.
This is bilateral thickening of Meckel’s cave and cavernous sinuses. An extension of the lesions to the superior orbital fissures and
orbital apices is also observed (arrows). Axial MRI section with 3-dimensional T2-weighted sequence. There is thickening of the oculomotor
nerves (arrows) and left trigeminal nerve (arrowhead). Axial MRI section with T2-weighted sequence and fat suppression. There is thickening
of the superior orbital fissures. Extension of the lesions into the orbit and infiltration of the medial rectus muscles (arrows), especially
in the right eye, are also observed. Axial MRI section with T1-weighted sequence with fat suppression after administration of paramagnetic
contrast medium. There is high uptake of the contrast medium in the changes described in Figures 3 and 4 (arrows). Axial MRI section with
T1-weighted sequence with fat suppression after administration of paramagnetic contrast medium. There is high uptake of the contrast medium
in the lesions in the cavernous sinus and Meckel’s cave (arrows). High uptake is also observed in the lesion in the hypothalamus
(arrowhead). Axial CT section of the abdomen after injection of iodinated contrast medium during the portal phase. There are solid lesions
with homogeneous enhancement from the contrast medium in the pancreas (arrows) and right kidney (arrowhead). Ectasia of the main pancreatic
duct (asterisk) is also observed. Axial CT section of the abdomen after injection of iodinated contrast medium during the portal phase.
There are solid lesions in the head of the pancreas (arrow) and in the transverse colon (asterisk). Gastroepiploic collateral circulation
(arrowheads) due to involvement of the splenic vein is also observed. Axial CT section of the abdomen after injection of iodinated contrast
medium during the portal phase. There is parietal thickening in the stomach, in addition to ulceration (arrow). Axial CT section of the
abdomen after injection of iodinated contrast medium during the portal phase. There is a mesenteric lymph node conglomerate (arrows)
associated with the parietal thickening of the jejunum (arrowhead). Solid renal lesions (asterisks) are also observed. Axial CT section of
the abdomen after injection of iodinated contrast medium during the portal phase. ‘Targeted’ aspect in ileal loop (arrows) is observed,
suggesting intestinal intussusception. Axial CT section of the abdomen after injection of iodinated contrast medium during the portal phase.
A solid lesion in the cecum (asterisk) is observed. Gastric biopsy (H&E). Corium the gastric mucosa (A) filled with diffuse proliferation of
round blue cells (B). (C) Neoplasm of round, blue cells filling the corium. There is molding of the cells as well as pictures of apoptosis
default setting of ‘starry sky’. (D) There is an area of tumor necrosis, reflecting the aggressiveness of the cancer. (A)
Immunohistochemical marker CD20 in neoplastic cells (a marker of B lineage lymphocytes). (B) Immunohistochemical marker CD10 in neoplastic
cells (a marker of germ cell tumors and lymphomas). (C) bcl-2: focal and weak positivity in scattered neoplastic cells (a marker for
differentiation with other B-cell lymphomas of high-grade). (D) Ki67 >90%, which is expected in Burkitt lymphoma (a marker of cell
proliferation, reflecting the aggressiveness of the cancer).
