Arachnoid cysts (ACs), particularly suprasellar cysts, cause a wide spectrum of endocrine disorders. Herein, we report two patients
diagnosed with an extensive AC in the middle cranial fossa while being investigated for etiologies of precocious puberty and short stature.
One of them required surgery due to his pubertal disorders associated with compression effects of cyst. After surgery, his puberty
progression was regressed within one year. On the other hand, surgery was not planned for the second patient considering of his cranial
imaging findings and the extremely low incidence of growth hormone (GH) deficiency caused by middle fossa AC (MFAC). We started treatment
with recombinant human GH and no complication was found during treatment follow-up. Endocrine disorders associated with MFACs are extremely
rare. By presenting with these two cases, we aimed to remain our fellow physcians that ACs can be possibly cause of endocrine disorders.
Clinicians should be careful evaluating endocrine disorders because real cause may not be cyst itself but masked by it. Arachnoid cysts
(ACs) are benign and usually originate from congenital developmental anomalies of the arachnoid membrane. They may also arise after an
infection, trauma, or hemorrhage (1). The prevalence is reported to be about 1.7%-2.6% in children (2,3). ACs make up approximately 1% of
intracranial space-occupying lesions and more than 50% of them occur in the middle cranial fossa (2). Many ACs are identified incidentally
in children examined for head injury or macrocephaly (4,5). Neurological and visual field abnormalities and diverse endocrine disorders such
as central precocious puberty and growth hormone (GH) deficiency have been reported to be associated with ACs, depending particularly on the
localization and size of the cyst (6,7,8). Herein, we present two patients with different endocrine disorders associated with an extensive
AC in the middle cranial fossa. Patient 1 An 18-month-old boy presented to the endocrinology clinic with rapid progression of growth and
increased head circumference almost since birth. He had been delivered at 38 weeks’ gestation by caesarean section due to breech
presentation. Birth weight has been 3000 g and length 50 cm. He was the first child of non-consanguineous parents and his family history was
unremarkable. On physical examination, the height was 90 cm [+2.4 standard deviation (SD)] and the weight was 15.5 kg (+2.6 SD). His head
circumference was 54 cm (+2.6 SD). The volume of each testis was 4 mL. The psychomotor development was normal. The basal luteinizing hormone
(LH) level was high (1.2 mIU/mL). After administration of LH releasing hormone stimulating test, serum LH and follicle-stimulating hormone
values rose to peak levels of 7.2 mIU/mL and 2.6 mIU/mL, respectively. Bone age as determined according to Greulich and Pyle method was 3
years. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to rule out intracranial lesions. The finding of MRI revealed an unilocular
large cyst extending toward the vertex in the left middle cranial fossa (Figure 1a and 1b). The pituitary stalk was deviated to the right
due to the compressive effect. A cysto-peritoneal shunt was implemented by neurosurgeons. Postoperatively, a hormonal assay during three
months showed decreased LH (0.05 mIU/mL). Pubertal development regressed within 1 year without medical treatment. Patient 2 A male patient
aged 11 years and 6 months was referred to the endocrinology department because of short stature. He was born at 40 weeks’ gestation by
normal vaginal delivery. His birth weight and length have been both normal. His growth throughout infancy and childhood was subnormal among
peers. He was the second child of non-consanguineous parents and two other siblings were healthy. His family history is unremarkable. He had
suffered a scalp laceration and cranial bone fracture after a traffic accident when he was 7 years old. At that time, an AC in the middle
cranial fossa had been incidentally detected. On physical examination, his height was 117 cm (-4.3 SD) and the weight was 20 kg (+2 SD). His
bone age as determined according to Greulich and Pyle method was 10 years and 6 months. Targeted and predicted height was 172.7±5 cm and
148.2 cm, respectively. Pubertal stage was Tanner stage 1. Laboratory findings, apart from a low level of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1
(11 ng/mL; <-3 SD), were almost normal. He had low growth velocity (1 cm/year). We then performed a GH stimulation test. The peak GH level
was 6.6 ng/mL with L-Dopa and 5.6 ng/mL with clonidine loading. Due to the history of a traffic accident and intracranial AC, the brain MRI
was repeated and a extensive right middle fossa AC (MFAC) was detected with no compressive imaging findings (Figure 2a and 2b). We decided
to treat the patient with recombinant human GH replacement therapy (0.025 mg/kg/d). His height increased by 9.2 cm in the last year, IGF-1
level was raised up to 274 ng/mL. There was no complication related to treatment in follow-up period. The control MRI scan 1 year after
start of treatment showed no change in the cyst size. Intracranial ACs are usually asymptomatic and are identified incidentally during
intracranial imaging. However, most patients with ACs (95%) are diagnosed in early childhood due to neurological symptoms and the remaining
of them (5%) are diagnosed due to endocrine disorders (2,9). Clinical symptoms show variability depending on the localization and size of
the cyst. Therefore, endocrine disorders such as central precocious puberty (CPP), GH deficiency and amenorrhea are associated commonly with
suprasellar ACs (8,10). Rarely, MFACs can be also cause of endocrine disorders. So far, only few such cases have been reported in the
literature. Mohn et al (8) reported follow-up of six patients with ACs. Two of them had a temporal AC, one had GH deficiency and another
suffered from precocious puberty. Onal et al (11) identified endocrine disorders associated with MFAC in 3 of 13 pediatric patients. One of
them had precocious puberty, while the others had GH deficiency. It is still unknown how ACs cause endocrine disorders. This association can
be possibly explained by the pressure-related compression or direct mass effect of the cyst on the hypothalamus-pituitary axis (12). MFACs,
particularly large cyst extending to the suprasellar region, may also cause endocrine disorders with similar effect (13). However, further
investigation is needed to confirm the pathological relationship between MFAC and endocrine disorders, particularly any finding of pituitary
stalk compression or stalk deviation (8,11). Therefore, during determining the treatment options, physicians should consider that the real
cause may be not the cyst itself but masked by the cyst. Surgical intervention is required when cyst causes either a mass effect or neural
compression and if there is no other possible reason found for the patient’s symptoms (14). If endocrine disorders are not associated with
the above-mentioned reasons and it is considered as a hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, then a hormonal evaluation and replacement therapy
can be implemented (15). Our patients were diagnosed during the investigation of the etiologies of precocious puberty and short stature. One
of them underwent surgery, because it was previously thought that the clinical findings were associated with mass-related compression
effects of the cyst. After surgery, MRI follow-up showed a remarkable reduction of the cyst size. His puberty progression also regressed
within one year. However, surgery was not considered as the first choice of treatment in the second patient, because, the pressure-related
compression effect of the cyst on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis was not a likely cause. Moreover, there is an extremely low incidence of
GH deficiency associated with MFAC. Hence, isolated GH deficiency is more likely diagnosed in this patient. Subsequently, we started
treatment with recombinant human GH and no complication was observed during the treatment follow-up. However, the long-term effect of GH
replacement therapy is also unclear for patients with ACs. We need more clinical experience before the effectiveness and safety of GH
replacement therapy can be established (8,10,16). In conclusion, coexistence of ACs with endocrine disorders should be kept in mind and
endocrine outcomes should be evaluated accordingly. However, during determining the treatment options, physicians should consider that the
real reason may be not the cyst itself but may be masked by the cyst. Therefore, each case should be individually assessed clinically and
radiographically, appropriate treatment options should be determined and should be followed up.
