Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 41-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a chief complaint of
hematuria three days status post extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy. The patient described a three-day history of worsening left-sided
abdominal pain immediately following the procedure. She denied any fever, chills, changes in bowel habits, hematochezia, increased urinary
frequency, urinary urgency, or dysuria. Physical exam revealed tenderness to palpation in the left upper quadrant, left flank and
periumbilical region with mild guarding. Laboratory studies revealed an anemic patient with downward trending hematocrit (red blood cell
count of 3.41 106/μL, hemoglobin of 10.6 g/dL, and a hematocrit of 31.3% down from 43% a week and a half prior). Urinalysis revealed red and
cloudy urine with 3+ leukocytes. A chest radiograph was unremarkable. A computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed a
laceration to the lateral aspect of the mid left kidney with a hematoma measuring 3.2 cm in thickness (Figure). The patient was subsequently
admitted to the hospital for monitoring and discharged on day nine. Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) is a widely used treatment
for symptomatic renal and ureteral stones, most effective with stones in the renal pelvis and upper ureter less than 1.5 cm in size.1
Complications include incomplete stone fragmentation, hypertension, and decreased effective renal plasma flow.2 In more severe cases, ESWL
can lead to renal rupture or hematoma.3 As seen with our patient, symptoms of renal rupture include persistent flank pain, decreased
hemoglobin, mild fever, tenderness, and guarding.4–6 Hematoma following ESWL may be detected by non-contrast computed tomography.3,4 Most
patients with kidney rupture only require supportive care.4–6 Surgical intervention or embolization is reserved for severe cases.4,6 Full
text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Computed tomography of the abdomen three days following extracorporeal
shockwave lithotripsy and laser lithotripsy procedures showing a laceration to the lateral aspect of the mid left kidney (black arrow) and a
hematoma on the posterior and lateral borders of the left kidney (H).
