We would like to offer our experience with an unreported type of metastasis to Bauhin's valve deriving from gallbladder adenocarcinoma as
well as determining intestinal obstruction. An 83-year-old woman presented with intestinal obstruction of 2 days duration. Contrast-enhanced
CT scan of the abdomen documented distended small-bowel loops and a 31 × 23 mm lesion in the right iliac fossa with distal ileal and cecal
involvement (Fig. 1); additionally, a centimetric metastasis was observed in segment IV of the liver. An initial conservative management
resulted successful permitting elective colonoscopy to visualize a polypoid lesion at the Bauhin's valve (Fig. 2); biopsies were
noncontributory. At this point, we decided to perform a right colectomy associated with an ultrasound-guided ethanol injection of liver
metastasis. At operation, we also had to remove a diverticulum arising from gallbladder fundus (not described by the previous CT), which was
indissociable from the right colic flexure. Histological examination revealed, to our surprise, a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the
gallbladder infiltrating to the muscular layer of the right colic flexure (pT3), metastasizing to the Bauhin's valve with extrinsic
submucosal invasion of the cecum (pM1) and no lymph nodal involvement (pN0). The patient did well after the operation and thus was scheduled
for adjuvant capecitabine. Biliary carcinoma mimicking a primary tumor of the small or large bowel is an extremely rare event. We found only
5 cases in the world literature (1). In two instances, an intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma metastasized to the hepatic and splenic flexure of
the colon, respectively, 5 and 6 years after resection of the primary tumor (1). A metachronous intestinal metastasis (none involving the
ileocecal valve) ensued from an extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (gallbladder excluded) in two cases and from acarcinoma of the intrahepatic
bile ducts in one case. Of interest, all of these patients were elderly men. To date, there has been no previous description of a
gallbladder adenocarcinoma causing a synchronous or metachronous metastasis to the Bauhin's valve; the presence of intestinal obstruction
particularly renders such a clinical context. Given the absence of infiltration of colonic mucosa, lymph node involvement and
intraperitoneal deposits, we think that hematogenous spread was the most likely pathway of metastasis occurring in our patient (1).
Moreover, alcohol ablation of liver metastases from gallbladder cancer represents another fortuitously interesting aspect of the presented
case, as only one previous example is documented in the literature (2). Contrast-enhanced CT scan of abdomen showed 31 × 23 mm lesion in
right iliac fossa with distal ileal and cecal involvement (within red circle). Colonoscopy documented polypoid lesion at Bauhin's valve.
