Laparoscopic approaches have been increasingly used in selected patients with either colorectal or liver cancer. However, simultaneous
resection of colorectal carcinoma with synchronous liver metastases is still a subject of debate. The present case describes combined
laparoscopic rectal and liver resections for a patient with primary rectal cancer and a synchronous liver metastasis utilizing a
Pfannenstiel incision for specimen extraction. The operative time was 370 min and estimated blood loss was 400 mL. Postoperatively, the
patient required parenteral analgesia for 48 h, resumed normal diet on day 3 and was discharged on day 7 after the operation. A laparoscopic
approach utilizing a Pfannenstiel extraction incision may present an advantageous and attractive option for simultaneous laparoscopic rectal
and liver resection in selected patients with the aim of improving short-term outcomes. The incidence of colorectal cancer has increased
alarmingly worldwide during the past few decades, ranking as the third most common malignancy in the world. Liver metastasis remains a
substantial problem affecting 20%–30% of patients upon presentation, becoming the most prevailed site of involvement. Generally, surgical
resection is the most effective and a potentially curative approach. However, different modalities of treatment have been observed in this
field. This era has witnessed an overwhelming success of laparoscopic technology due to its advanced technique as an alternative approach in
the management of colorectal cancer liver metastasis in selected patients. One-stage laparoscopic resection of both malignancies is
considered as an effective curative strategy in certain patients. Reports suggest that this technique is feasible, safe, and effective.
Therefore, using a second operation is avoided. Furthermore, it provides significant decrease in morbidity, hospitalization time, and
operative transfusion rate, without compromising curability or increasing mortality in comparison with open procedure. Hence, simultaneous
resection is considered a safe favorable option in selected patients with resectable synchronous colorectal liver metastasis. This is a case
of a one-stage laparoscopic resection of rectal cancer and synchronous liver metastasis utilizing a Pfannenstiel incision to extract both
specimens. Nevertheless, the experience of surgeons in advanced laparoscopic colorectal and hepatic surgery is fundamental to the success of
this type of collaborative surgery. This is a case of a 51-year-old man, diagnosed with rectal adenocarcinoma. The patient did not have any
pertinent past surgical or medical history. Presenting symptom was episodes of blood in his stool. Upon rectal examination and rigid
proctosigmoidoscopy, he was found to have a tumor at 6 cm from the anal verge. An endoscopic rectal ultrasound was done showing the presence
of a rectal tumor extending to the perirectal fat (uT3), it was later on confirmed by a pelvic magnetic resonance imaging, which also
revealed the presence of a suspicious 9 mm lymph node in the mesorectum. A positron emission tomography–computed tomography scan showed the
presence of a single hepatic metastasis in the left lobe of the liver (segments 2/3) measuring 4 × 3 cm Figure 1. Laboratory tests indicated
an elevated Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 27.4 μg/L, whereas the rest of the blood test results were within normal limits. He received six
cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (FOLFOX + bevacizumab), followed by a short course of pelvic radiation (25 Gy in 5 daily fractions).
Afterward he underwent a one-stage laparoscopic liver and rectal cancer resection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy (FOLFOX + bevacizumab).
Pathology of the resected specimens showed moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma for both the rectum and the liver with
negative margins. However, one of 14 mesorectal lymph nodes was positive. The estimated blood loss was 400 mL and the operative time was 370
min. Postoperatively the patient required parenteral analgesia for 48 h, and resumed a normal diet on postoperative day 3 and was discharged
on postoperative day 7. At 1-year follow up, the patient had no evidence of recurrence Figure 2. Preoperative CT of the liver Postoperative
CT of the liver The patient was placed in supine position with legs apart. A central line was inserted prior to surgery in order to monitor
the central venous pressure, which was maintained at 4–5 cm H2O during the liver resection. Pneumoperitoneum was established at 12 mmHg by
means of a supraumbilical Hasson technique. Operative trocars were placed as shown in Figure 3, and two additional trocars were then placed
in the upper abdomen/quadrants for hepatic resection after the rectal resection was completed. Port sites for laparoscopic anterior
resection (total mesorectal excision). The surgeon uses the two right side 5 mm ports for 5 mm instruments and the camera assistant will use
the 5–12 mm subumbilical port and a 5 mm port. Two additional ports were added to facilitate the liver resection. X - Port site for
Laparoscopic Anterior Resection L-Additional Port site for Laparoscopic Liver Resection ------ Pfannenstiel incision Rectal resection was
performed before the liver. A careful abdominal inspection was done to rule out peritoneal carcinomatosis. Rectal resection with total
mesorectal excision (TME) was carried out using our standard technique. This includes two 5 mm working trocars in the right lower quadrant
using a hook cautery for dissection and A-Trac® bowel graspers (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA) for traction. In addition,
another trocar in the epigastrium was used for retraction and the camera was placed in the umbilical port. The inferior mesenteric artery is
divided in a high ligation fashion with a Ligasure® after identifying the left ureter in the retroperitoneum. The descending and sigmoid
colon are mobilized in a medial-to-lateral fashion. The dissection is continued distally in the retrorectal “Holy” plan. The cleavage plane
between the presacral fascia and the visceral layer that underlies the mesorectum was identified at the level of the sacral promontory.
Mesorectal dissection was then carried out circumferentially using hook cautery. The proximal resection was performed using Endo-GIA
staplers (3.5 mm load, Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA). Measurement of the distance between the tumor and the distal resection line was
performed by digital exploration and flexible endoscopy. Once the TME was completed, a Pfannenstiel skin incision was made and an Alexis
wound-protector® was placed for protection and exposure. The distal rectum was divided using a Contour stapler, and the specimen was removed
and examined. A stapled side-to-end anastomosis was created transanally with a circular stapler (CDH #29, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc, USA). A
laparoscopic left lateral segmentectomy of the liver was performed after placing two additional 5 mm ports in the upper abdomen. The lesser
omentum was sectioned and the falciform ligament was divided partially to apply counter traction. The left triangular ligament was then
divided. The first few centimeters of the liver parenchyma was transected using Salient EndoSH2.0 Monopolar Sealer (formerly Tissue-link)
(Salient Surgical Technologies, Inc., Portsmouth, NH, USA) down to the level of the portal pedicle. Following that, a laparoscopic vascular
stapler (Covidien) was used to ligate the major vessels. Definitive hemostasis was obtained with monopolar coagulation in spray modality on
the transected liver surface and finally applying Surgicell®. No bile leaks or major bleeding were encountered. The specimen was extracted
through the same Pfannenstiel incision. Finally, a loop ileostomy was created in the right lower quadrant by expanding the trocar incisions.
In this case, we highlighted the advantages of performing a simultaneous laparoscopic rectal and hepatic resections, which has been
advocated due to its benefit in avoiding a second operation, reducing morbidity, providing a shorter treatment time, less operative trauma,
and yielding similar cancer outcomes to that of conventional treatment. Despite the favorable short-term results, which are based on a small
number of reported cases, more studies should be conducted on a larger scale assessing both short- and long-term outcomes compared with the
conventional multioperation approach. In a recent cohort and meta-analysis review of laparoscopic liver resections, the following concerns
were mentioned: Laparoscopic procedure requires extensive experience and expertise; and under the hands of unskilled or inexperienced
surgeons, difficulty in controlling hemorrhage when adjacent major vascular structures are injured is a potential concernNot all patients
are candidates as the oncological R0 resection is closely related with location and number, size, and complexity of metastasis, especially
when the liver lesion is located near the hilum or measures over 10 cm in size. Also the possible difficulty exposing metastasis situated in
the posterior or superior aspects of the right hepatic lobe. It is highly recommended to implement intraoperative ultrasound examinations in
order to correctly identify the stage of the disease to more accurately achieve a complete tumor clearance in laparoscopic procedures.
Laparoscopic procedure requires extensive experience and expertise; and under the hands of unskilled or inexperienced surgeons, difficulty
in controlling hemorrhage when adjacent major vascular structures are injured is a potential concern Not all patients are candidates as the
oncological R0 resection is closely related with location and number, size, and complexity of metastasis, especially when the liver lesion
is located near the hilum or measures over 10 cm in size. Also the possible difficulty exposing metastasis situated in the posterior or
superior aspects of the right hepatic lobe. It is highly recommended to implement intraoperative ultrasound examinations in order to
correctly identify the stage of the disease to more accurately achieve a complete tumor clearance in laparoscopic procedures. To date,
collected data are limited to observational studies and literature reviews, which may present some bias, considering the multifactorial
technical complexity of laparoscopic approach, patient selection, and the disease stage. The direction of many surgical institutes worldwide
toward increasing the use of laparoscopic major hepatic resection encourages further multidisciplinary research with the aim to postulate
inclusion criteria for appropriate surgical options and proper patient selection to avoid adverse events. On the other hand, the exact
technique and type of incision is still a subject of debate, in patients with synchronous colorectal liver metastasis. Simultaneous
laparoscopic resections of rectal cancer and liver metastases have been reported utilizing either midline or transverse incisions. However,
one of the important steps of laparoscopic liver resection is specimen extraction, and the size of the specimen is usually a limitation for
the use of laparoscopy. The present technique allows an expeditious extraction of intact specimens through a standard suprapubic
Pfannenstiel incision. This technique has additional functional and cosmetic advantages over other techniques of specimen retrieval. In
addition to improved cosmetic outcome compared with midline incision, it has been established that the Pfannenstiel incision is associated
with a lower incidence of wound infection and future hernia. In our opinion, the described combined technique is feasible and can be easily
and rapidly performed in selected patients. Furthermore, it facilitates the one-stage laparoscopic liver and rectal resection by reducing
the technical difficulties for specimen removal. In experienced hands, laparoscopic-assisted combined rectal and left lateral liver
resection with Pfannenstiel incision is a feasible procedure for the treatment of rectal cancer with synchronous liver metastases.
Nevertheless, larger studies are needed to confirm the feasibility of this approach. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
