Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 31 Final Diagnosis: Neurosyphilis Symptoms: Diplopia •facial droop • facial
nerve palsy • headache Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Infectious Diseases Unusual clinical course Symptomatic early
neurosyphilis with isolated acute multiple cranial nerves palsy as initial manifestation of HIV infection is very rare. It is caused by
direct invasion of the central nervous system by the spirochete Treponema pallidum. A 31-year-old African-American homosexual man presented
with bilateral hearing loss, constant vertigo, intermittent horizontal diplopia, and bilateral facial droop, which was associated with
occipital headache without fever. Neurological examination revealed bilateral vestibulocochlear and facial nerve palsy. On brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) before and after administration of gadolinium, he was found to have extensive isolated basilar meningeal enhancement
involving the midbrain, pons along the seven and eight nerves complex bilaterally, consistent with basal meningoencephalitis. Neurosyphilis
can present as initial manifestation of HIV infection with early involvement of basal meninges and cranial nerves. It is important to
understand that neurosyphilis is still a significant disease with complex neurological presentation. Early diagnosis and treatment of
neurosyphilis is crucial due to potential persistent disabilities that can be easily treated or even prevented. Neurosyphilis is very
challenging to diagnose due to its variable and complex presentation. This case illustrates a rare manifestation of isolated cranial
neuropathies due to neurosyphilis revealing undiagnosed human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in a young male. A 31-year-old African-
American homosexual healthy man who presented to the emergency room with 2 weeks history of acute bilateral hearing loss and constant
vertigo associated with intermittent horizontal binocular diplopia. He also had progressive difficulty closing both eyes, with increased
tearing. His symptoms were associated with continuous occipital headache and neck stiffness without any other neurological complaints or
fever. The review of systems was unremarkable and there had been no previous similar presentation. Neurological examination revealed a
drowsy patient but awake and following commands, with obvious bilateral facial droop and positive Bell’s phenomenon. He had significant
decrease in hearing, mainly in the left ear, with abnormal Weber test. The remaining of cranial nerves and neurological examination were
intact except for limited neck flexion due to pain and stiffness. On admission, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) before and after
administration of gadolinium was obtained and showed extensive basal meningeal enhancement surrounding the midbrain and pons (Figure 1A,
1B). There was associated increased T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal intensity in the brain stem parenchyma (Figure
2A, 2B). There was also subtle enhancement of the cisternal segments of the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves complex, mainly over the
left side (Figure 3). The image finding confirmed the diagnosis of basal meningoencephalitis. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
demonstrated a lymphocytic pleocytosis, with a white blood cell count of 298/μL, a glucose level of 22 mg/dL, and significant elevation of
protein level of 595 mg/dL. Laboratory test results were positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody, which was confirmed with
positive HIV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test result and elevated viral load. The serum CD4 count was low (237 cells/μL), serum rapid
plasma reagin (RPR) level was very high (1:64), Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA) was positive, the Venereal Disease
Research Laboratories (VDRL)-CSF dilution titer result was positive and elevated at 1:16. The other laboratory test results, including the
flow cytometry of the CSF and cytology, QuantiFERON test for tuberculosis, CSF India ink, and CSF gram stain and culture, were all negative.
The patient was started on intravenous penicillin G at dose of 4 million units every 4 hours for 21 days. The patient had improvement
gradually over couple days, with complete clinical recovery observed at 3 months. Antiretroviral therapy was initiated later in the
infectious disease clinic after the patient was discharged. Repeated brain MRI after 2 months showed resolution of the initial abnormal
image findings (Figure 4A, 4B). Symptomatic early neurosyphilis is a rare serious condition notable for its complex array of presentations,
which is caused by the spirochete Treponema pallidum . Neurosyphilis is almost unheard of in the United States in the era of penicillin
treatment for syphilis, but reemerged in the 1980s among persons with HIV infection. In the developed world, the rate of syphilis declined
rapidly with the widespread use of penicillin. In 2000, the incidence of syphilis reached its lowest point since the 1940s, at 2.1 cases per
100 000 population. The rates of syphilis have been increasing in the United States and other Western countries, primarily among homosexual
men. Although the incidence of syphilis in the United States declined by 89.7% during the 1990s and 2000s, the rate increased annually since
then . Traditionally, neurosyphilis is considered a form of late or tertiary syphilis, but CNS invasion by Treponema pallidum can occur at
any time after the initial infection and might actually occur more often than was previously thought ; delayed recognition and treatment may
result in irreversible sequelae . Patients with concomitant HIV and syphilis often present differently than syphilis patients without HIV.
They may present with more a fulminant picture, overlapping disease stages, multiple chancres, atypical skin rashes, and a more rapid
progression to neurosyphilis . Of note, syphilis has also been shown to negatively affect the immune status and viral load of patients with
HIV . Early neurosyphilis among HIV patients results in acute or sub-acute meningitis, cranial nerves palsy, and inflammatory vasculitis,
leading to a cerebral infarction or even intracranial hemorhhage . HIV-infected patients with symptomatic early neurosyphilis are known to
have variable clinical presentation; in a case series, approximately 75% of the patients had visual disturbances, ocular manifestation, and
headache; cranial nerve palsy occurred in about 6%, 12% had acute meningitis, 4% developed acute stroke, and almost half of the patients
were asymptomatic, and HIV infections were undiagnosed in nearly one-quarter of patients . Herein, the image findings and patient
presentation is consistent with syphilitic meningitis involving the basilar meninges resulting in basal meningoencephalitis and acute
multiple cranial neuropathies as initial HIV manifestation. Such complex presentation or unexplained neurological symptoms in a young
healthy patient should always raise the suspicion of neurosyphilis related to immune incompetence states such as undiagnosed HIV infection.
All patients with suspected HIV infection or syphilis presenting with neurological symptoms should have brain MRI with contrast and undergo
a lumber puncture with CSF analysis. It is important to understand that neurosyphilis is still a significant disease, with complex
neurological presentation. It is highly recommended to screen for neurosyphilis in patients with cranial nerves palsy or other unexplained
neurological findings, with special consideration in HIV patients. Brain MRI with and without contrast and CSF studies are essential tools
and very helpful in planning management. Early diagnosis and treatment of neurosyphilis is crucial due to potential persistent disabilities
that can be easily treated or prevented. Conflict of Interest Disclosures None reported. (A, B) Axial and coronal postgadolinium T1-weighted
images, respectively, showing diffuse nodular as well as smooth basal meningeal enhancement around the midbrain and pons (arrows). (A, B)
Axial brain image showing increased T2 and FLAIR signal intensity in the brain stem parenchyma (mid-brain and pons, respectively) due to
syphilitic meningitis (short arrows). Axial postgadolinium T1-weighted image showing subtle enhancement of the cisternal segments of the
facial and vestibulocochlear nerves complex in the left side (thin arrows). Such features are consistent with basal meningoencephalitis. (A,
B) Axial brain image showing complete resolution of previously increased T2 and FLAIR signal intensity in the brain stem parenchyma (mid-
brain and pons, respectively) 2 months after initial presentation and after anti-syphilitic therapy.
