We report a patient with human granulocytic anaplasmosis in South Korea. The patient had fever and thrombocytopenia. Human granulocytic
anaplasmosis was confirmed by seroconversion, PCR, and sequence analysis for Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Morulae were observed in the
cultured HL-60 cells inoculated with blood from the patient. Anaplasma phagocytophilum, the causative agent of human granulocytic
anaplasmosis (HGA), is a zoonotic tickborne pathogen transmitted by ixodid ticks that infects wild and domestic mammals and humans (1–3).
HGA was first identified in the United States in 1994 (1) and subsequently in countries in Europe (3), China (4), and Japan (5). To our
knowledge, there is no report regarding the clinical description of HGA patients in South Korea. However, A. phagocytophilum has been
detected in Haemaphysalis longicornis, Ixodes nipponensis, and I. persulcatus ticks (6,7) in this country. Molecular epidemiologic studies
detected A. phagocytophilum in 2.6% (5/196) of striped field mice (7,8) and in 63.6% (42/66) of Korean water deer (9). Seroprevalence
studies showed that 1.8% of serum samples from patients with acute fever were positive for A. phagocytophilum by an immunofluorescence
antibody test (10). We report a patient with HGA and characterized the A. phagocytophilum isolate from this patient. On May 17, 2013 (day 0,
day of illness onset), fever, chills, nausea, and vomiting developed in a 57-year-old woman who lived in Chuncheon, Gangwon Province, South
Korea. She came to a local clinic on the same day, and treatment with antipyretic drugs was initiated. The patient reported being bitten by
a tick on her right shoulder while mountain climbing in Gangwon Province 5 days before the fever occurred. She did not recall having contact
with any domestic animals and had no history of travel outside South Korea in the month before illness onset. On day 4, the patient came to
Kangwon National University Hospital (Chuncheon, South Korea) with a persistent fever despite use of antipyretics. The patient had a
temperature of 39.2°C, blood pressure of 76/61 mm Hg, heart rate of 88 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation level of 98.3% on room air. An
erythematous maculopapular lesion, 3 cm in diameter, was observed around the tick bite on the right shoulder. Laboratory tests showed
pancytopenia and increased serum aminotransferase levels (Table). *Day 0 was day of illness onset. Hb, hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit; AST,
aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; CPK, creatine phosphokinase; NA, not available; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PT,
prothrombin time; INR, international normalized ratio; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time. †Blood samples for culture and for
immunofluorescence antibody test were obtained. ‡Blood samples for immunofluorescence antibody test were obtained. On day 5, the patient was
treated with norepinephrine, ceftriaxone, and doxycycline. On day 7, her blood pressure and temperature were within reference ranges and a
norepinephrine infusion was discontinued. Peripheral blood smear showed no evidence of malaria, and antibody titer against Orientia
tsutsugamushi was <1:40. Test results for antibodies against Hantaan virus, leptospira, Borrelia burgdorferi, and Coxiella burnetii were
negative. Blood cultures prepared at the time of the visit were negative. On day 11, she was discharged from the hospital, and treatment
with antimicrobial drugs was discontinued. Because symptoms and laboratory findings, such as thrombocytopenia, anemia, and increased
aminotransferase levels (Table), of the patient were similar to those for severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS), anticoagulated
blood and serum were obtained on day 5 before treatment with doxycycline and on day 19. Samples were sent to Seoul National University
College of Medicine for additional diagnostic tests. RNA was extracted from blood by using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden,
Germany). Reverse transcription PCR for SFTS virus was performed according to described methods (11) and showed negative results. No
cytopathic effect was observed in Vero cells and DH82 cells after inoculating them with a blood sample. DNA was extracted from the blood by
using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN) to detect A. phagocytophilum 16S rRNA gene, ankA, groESL operon, and msp2. Nested PCR was conducted
to amplify a 926-bp fragment of the 16S rRNA gene by using an A. phagocytophilum species-specific primer set (12). Direct sequencing of the
PCR product was performed to confirm A. phagocytophilum, and the partial 16S rRNA gene sequence was deposited in GenBank (accession no.
KF805344). A nucleotide basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) search (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) with the obtained
sequence showed matches to only A. phagocytophilum sequences (99.3%–100% similarities). Aligning ≥2 sequences by using BLAST showed that the
obtained sequence had lower similarities (94.3%–98.6%) with other Anaplasma species (A. marginale [GenBank accession no. NR_074556], A.
centrale , A. ovis , A. platys , and A. bovis ) and with Ehrlichia species (E. chaffeensis , E. ewingii , and E. canis ). Comparison of the
16S rRNA gene sequence with sequences for other A. phagocytophilum strains from South Korea showed that this sequence was relatively distant
from those of Korean water deer isolates, but similar to those of tick isolates from Jeju Island (Figure 1, panel A). Comparison of the 16S
rRNA gene sequence with other sequences of A. phagocytophilum strains reported from other countries showed that our isolate was relatively
distant from the strains obtained from ticks collected in Gansu and Guangxi, China, and Hokkaido and Shimane, Japan. The isolate was similar
to a human isolate from the United States, tick isolates from Russia and China, and animal isolates from Yunnan, Zhejiang, and Hubei, China
(Figure 1, panel B). Phylogenetic trees for partial 16S rRNA gene sequences of an Anaplasma phagocytophilum isolate obtained from a patient
with human granulocytic anaplasmosis in South Korea (black dots) and those of the A. phagocytophilum strains reported from A) South Korea
and B) other countries. Trees were constructed by using the neighbor-joining method. Locations (country/province or city), hosts, and
GenBank accession numbers are indicated. Branch lengths of trees show evolutionary distances. Scale bars indicate 1.0% sequence distance.
KWD, Korean water deer. Nested PCR was performed to amplify a 667-bp fragment of the ankA gene (13), and single non-nested PCRs were
performed to amplify a 1,715-bp fragment of the groESL operon (14) and a 334-bp fragment of the msp2 gene (15). Direct sequencing of PCR
products was performed to confirm A. phagocytophilum, and partial ankA, groESL, and msp2 sequences were deposited in GenBank (accession
nos.KJ677106–KJ677108). Nucleotide BLAST searches with obtained sequences showed matches to only A. phagocytophilum sequences: 94.1%–97.9%
similarities for ankA, 97.9%–99.5% for groESL, and 97.8%–99.6% for msp2. For A. phagocytophilum culturing, a suspension of human
promyelocytic cell line HL-60 (ATCC CCL-240) was inoculated with the patient’s blood sample (day 5 postillness, before treatment with
antimicrobial drugs) and incubated at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 (10). The culture suspension was examined microscopically by Wright-
Giemsa staining of cytocentrifuged preparations of cells at 2 to 3-day intervals. Subculture was performed on day 14 postinoculation. On day
8 post-subculture, morulae within cultured HL-60 cells were observed (Figure 2). Light micrograph of Anaplasma phagocytophilum cultured in
human promyelocytic cell line HL-60, showing A. phagocytophilum morulae as basophilic and intracytoplasmic inclusions (arrows).
Wright–Giemsa stain, original magnification x1,000. Nested PCRs to amplify 16S rRNA and ankA genes showed positive results for isolates from
day 14 postinoculation and from day 10 postsubculture. Single, non-nested PCRs to amplify groESL and msp2 genes showed positive results for
the isolate from day 14 postinoculation but negative for the isolate from day 10 postsubculture. Comparison of sequences from culture
isolates and those from PCR products directly amplified from the blood sample showed that these sequences were identical. For serologic
diagnosis, an immunofluorescence antibody test kit for A. phagocytophilum (Fuller Laboratories, Fullerton, CA, USA) was used. Positive
cutoff titers were 1:16 for IgM and 1:80 for IgG, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Specific IgM titers increased from 1:16 (day
5) to ≥1:256 (day 19). Specific IgG antibody titers increased from 1:20 (day 5) to 1:160 (day 19). We confirmed a case of HGA in a patient
in South Korea (who was suspected of having SFTS) by using serologic analysis, PCR, culture, and sequence analysis for A. phagocytophilum.
According to the case definition of HGA of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, GA, USA) (2), this case fulfilled the
criteria for anaplasmosis. The patient had a history of a tick bite, and the clinical symptoms and laboratory findings were similar to those
of SFTS, an emerging vector-borne disease in South Korea (11). No effective treatment for SFTS is available, but doxycycline is effective
for treating HGA (2). Clinical features of HGA may be confused with those for SFTS, which may result in inappropriate treatment and severe
outcomes. Therefore, not only SFTS but also HGA should be considered as differential diagnoses for patients with fevers and thrombocytopenia
after tick bites. Suggested citation for this article: Kim KH, Yi J, Oh WS, Kim NH, Choi SJ, Choe PG, et al. Human granulocytic
anaplasmosis, South Korea, 2013. Emerg Infect Dis . 2014 Oct [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2010.131680 These authors
contributed equally to this article. Dr Kye-Hyung Kim is an infectious disease physician and a senior researcher at Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. Her primary research interests are medical virology and emerging infectious diseases.
