Prototheca wickerhamii, an environmental alga, rarely causes human infections. We present a case of Prototheca wickerhamii cutaneous and
systemic infections in an 85-year-old male with adrenal insufficiency. This organism was identified by morphological features and
microbiological tests. The patient was successfully treated with ketoconazole. An 85-year-old male presented with a fever lasting for 2
days. He had a history of adrenal insufficiency with prednisolone use for 2 years. Pruritic erythematous maculopapules on his lower
extremities appeared 1 year ago. On examination, he was febrile, tachycardic, and tachypneic. Multiple erythematous plaques were accompanied
by papules, shallow ulcers, and crusts on his four limbs (Figure 1). Empirical piperacillin/tazobactam therapy was initiated. Blood cultures
obtained on admission were positive after 3 days of incubation. Gram stain revealed spherical Gram-positive organisms of various sizes
(Figure 2). A subculture on a blood agar plate showed milky white yeast-like colonies (Figure 3). A lactophenol cotton blue wet mount
preparation disclosed characteristic endosporulating sporangia (Figure 4). The organisms isolated from both blood and cutaneous wound
cultures were identified as Prototheca wickerhamii using the API 20C identification system (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France).
Ketoconazole therapy was started on hospital Day 6. His clinical condition and cutaneous lesions improved with ketoconazole for a total of 4
weeks. Multiple erythematous plaques are accompanied by papules, shallow ulcers, and crusts on his right upper limb and left lower limb.
Gram stain of blood culture reveals spherical Gram-positive organisms of various sizes resembling yeast. Magnification, ×1,000. Milky white
yeast-like colonies are observed on blood agar plate after incubation at 35°C for 3 days. Wet-mount preparation with lactophenol cotton blue
discloses spherical sporangia containing multiple endospores with symmetrical arrangement. Magnification, ×1,000. Prototheca wickerhamii is
an achlorophyllic alga and is ubiquitous in nature, which can cause human infections. The definite diagnosis usually depends on
morphological identification of the organisms in wet slide preparations of cultures and/or direct identification in tissue specimens.1
Authors' addresses: Deng-Wei Chou and Kuo-Mou Chung, Department of Internal Medicine, Tainan Municipal Hospital, Tainan City, Taiwan,
E-mails: choudw@gmail.com and Kuomou_chung@yahoo.com.tw. Chao-Tai Lee, Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tainan Municipal Hospital, Tainan
City, Taiwan, E-mail: chaotai2010@yahoo.com.tw.
