Transforaminal cervical epidural steroid injection (TFCESI) is a common non-surgical adjunct in the management of patients with cervical
radiculopathy. It has gained popularity over the interlaminar approach because of its direct delivery of the steroid into the site of
pathology. These procedures require fluoroscopic guidance in addition to digital subtraction angiography (DSA) as they provide direct
visualization of the site of treatment. Several complications have been attributed to these injections including increased pain at injection
site, increased radicular pain, lightheadedness, increased spine pain, non-specific headache, and nausea. However, numerous reports have
described devastating complications related to these injections.1,2 We report a transient neurologic sequelae in a patient that underwent a
cervical epidural injection without fluoroscopic guidance. A 38-year-old Sudanese female underwent a TFCESI for cervical C5 radiculopathy of
the right upper limb in a private hospital in Khartoum, Sudan. She was seen in our hospital 2 weeks prior to the procedure for radicular
pain without any associated neurological deficit. The procedure was not carried out under fluoroscopic guidance or DSA. No details of the
procedure were obtained. On the day of the procedure, she developed right shoulder weakness with mild heaviness of the right lower limb. She
presented to our facility 2 days later and had no improvement of her symptoms. Neurological examination revealed evidence of cervical
myelopathy evident by paraparesis of the lower limbs with power grade 4 (MRC), the right being more affected than the left. Lab
investigations including complete blood count, screening for connective tissue diseases, and CSF for oligoclonal bands were all normal. The
brain MRI revealed no abnormality. However, the MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated an intramedullary plaque like-lesion of abnormal
signal intensity corresponding to the C5-6 region (Figure 1). She was initially treated with steroids as the initial impression was of an
underlying demyelinating disease. She showed complete recovery of her symptoms after 6 weeks follow-up, except for impaired sensations of
the C5 dermatome of the right side and power of grade 4+. Sagittal T2 MRI of the cervical spine of a 38-year-old female who underwent an
epidural steroid injection of the neck showing a right-sided intramedullary area of abnormal signal at the C5-6 level. Epidural steroid
injections (ESI) are a widely used procedure for the management of low back and neck pain with and without radiculopathy.3 Patients are
usually injected with corticosteroids into the epidural space, where they are believed to have an anti-inflammatory effect on the spinal
nerve.3 Several trials show moderate benefit from these injections; however, there is still controversy concerning their long-term effect.4
In our case, the patient developed acute transient paraparesis of the limbs, more on the right side. She showed marked improvement in the
following weeks. The cervical MRI revealed an abnormal signal intensity corresponding to the C5-6 region. This could be explained by the
fact that the cord infarction was only partial with ischemia occurring to the small branches of the radicular arteries. The cause of
ischemia could be due to direct injection of the drug into the radicular arteries as the procedure was carried out blindly or as a result of
embolization caused by particulates from the steroid used. It is unlikely to be clinically isolated syndrome or multiple sclerosis in the
absence of supportive evidence, and ischemia of the cord is the most likely explanation. Although TFCESI is considered safe, there are no
trials supporting safety or efficacy.3 They are associated with rare, but devastating complications including paralysis, brainstem
infarction, epidural lipomatosis, and epidural abscess.1,2 There is a significant risk of serious neurologic injury following TFCESI. The
causes being either an embolic effect or intra-arterial injection of a steroid causing a distal infarct. A recent outbreak of fungal
meningitis was reported due to the use of infected corticosteroids leading to 750 cases of fungal infection and 64 reported deaths.5 The
incidence of these rare complications remains unknown, though these procedures under fluoroscopic guidance and DSA may reduce these
complications. Both patients and practitioners alike should be aware of the serious risks associated with these injections. We emphasize
that TFCESI should be carried out under fluoroscopic guidance with control enhancement with DSA. Excerpts from the Uniform Requirements for
Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals updated November 2003. Available from www.icmje.org The International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors has recommended the following criteria for authorship; these criteria are still appropriate for those journals that
distinguish authors from other contributors. Authorship credit should be based on 1) substantial contributions to conception and design, or
acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; 2) intellectual content; and 3) final approval of the version to be published.
Authors should meet conditions 1, 2, and 3. Acquisition of funding, collection of data, or general supervision of the research group, alone,
does not justify authorship. An author should be prepared to explain the order in which authors are listed
