Angle Class III malocclusion is characterized by an inadequate anteroposterior dental relationship which may or may not be accompanied by
skeletal changes. In general, patients are distressed by a significantly compromised facial aspect which, when associated with a deficient
middle third, encourages patients to seek treatment. This article reports a two-phase treatment carried out in a female patient aged six
years and six months with a tendency towards a Class III skeletal pattern. This case was presented to the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics
and Facial Orthopedics (BBO). It is representative of the Discrepancy Index (DI) category, and fulfills part of the requirements for
obtaining BBO Diploma. A má oclusão de Classe III de Angle é caracterizada por uma relação dentária anteroposterior inadequada, que pode ou
não estar acompanhada de alterações esqueléticas. Em geral, o aspecto facial fica bastante comprometido, principalmente quando associado à
deficiência no terço médio, sendo esse, na maioria das vezes, o principal fator que motiva o paciente a procurar pelo tratamento
ortodôntico. Este artigo relata o tratamento realizado em duas fases, de uma paciente do sexo feminino, com seis anos e seis meses de idade,
com tendência a um padrão esquelético de Classe III. Este caso foi apresentado à diretoria do Board Brasileiro de Ortodontia e Ortopedia
Facial (BBO), representando a categoria com índice de grau de complexidade (IGC) igual ou acima de dez pontos, como parte dos requisitos
para obtenção do título de Diplomada pelo BBO. This report describes the case of a healthy female patient presented for treatment at the age
of six years and six months. Her medical and dental history was within the normal range, with no history of illness or trauma. She had good
oral hygiene and saw her pedodontist every six months. Her parents' chief complaint was that her upper teeth were positioned behind her
lower teeth. The patient's father had Angle Class III malocclusion with a skeletal Class III pattern as well. Given that his daughter's
dental arch resembled his own, he wanted her treatment to start as early as possible since he had been informed that in so doing she might
avoid future surgery, or at least minimize it in case it was needed in adulthood. Regarding her facial appearance, as shown in Figure 1, the
patient had good symmetry, slightly convex profile, lip competence, slightly protruding lower lip and little exposure of upper incisors at
speaking and smiling. Dental examination (Figs 1 and 2) revealed that the patient was in early mixed dentition with distal relationship of
the primary molars in straight terminal plane while in the posterior region only tooth #16 had begun erupting. She presented with
anteroposterior disharmony between maxilla and mandible, and maxillary constriction (atresia), resulting in a crossbite that extended from
tooth #53 to #65. She also had a deep curve of Spee, 3.3 mm overbite and 4 mm negative overjet. A decrease in eruption spaces was also noted
in teeth #12 and #22. The lower arch midline exhibited a 3.2 mm deviation, and there were spaces in the lower arch which produced a positive
5-mm discrepancy. Initial facial and intraoral photographs. Initial casts. In analyzing the panoramic radiograph (Fig 3), it was observed
that all permanent teeth were present, indicting that bone and tooth structures were within normal limits. Cephalometrically (Fig 4 and Tab
1), although the value of the ANB angle was within normal range (ANB = 3.5°), it could be verified through Wits analysis (Wits = -3 mm) that
the patient had a skeletal pattern tending towards Class III. This fact, coupled with her unfavorable family history - given that the
patient's father had a dental and skeletal Class III pattern - reinforced the need for early intervention. A growth pattern with vertical
tendency (SN-GoGn = 36°), severe axial inclination of upper incisors towards palatal (1-NA = 0°), and well positioned lower incisors (NB-1 =
26°) were also observed. It is noteworthy that mandibular manipulation caused no change from centric relation to maximum and habitual
intercuspation (MHI). In calculating the Discrepancy Index (DI) a total of 18 points (Fig 5) was found. Initial panoramic radiograph.
Initial profile cephalometric radiograph (A) and cephalometric tracing (B). Calculation of the Discrepancy Index (DI) adapted by BBO.
Planning involved a two-phase treatment. Initially, special attention would be given to the skeletal disharmony between maxilla and mandible
which, if left uncorrected, would contribute significantly to the worsening of this condition during the whole process of growth and
development of the bony bases. Thus, the anterior and posterior crossbites would be corrected, enlarging the maxilla in the transverse
direction, thereby gaining space in the anterior region for proper eruption of teeth #12 and #22. The patient and her parents would then be
informed of the importance of compliance in wearing the appliances and the need to perform treatment in two phases. In this first phase, the
patient was six years and six months old. The posterior crossbite would be corrected using a modified Haas palate expansion appliance
supported on the second primary molars with acrylic covering the incisor surface of primary canines and occlusal surfaces of primary molars
. Additionally, hooks would be soldered to the buccal surface of orthodontic bands fitted on second primary molars, combined with finger
springs to procline teeth #11 and #21. Maxillary protraction would be performed (a) to correct the anteroposterior discrepancy, and (b) to
procline the incisors with finger springs. This procedure would make use of Hickham's chin cup. After this stage, the patient would be
monitored every six months until the ideal moment came to implement the second treatment phase. At this stage, no orthodontic appliance was
placed in the patient's lower dental arch. The modified Haas appliance was installed and the patient was instructed to make 1/4 turn
activations every 12 hours for 15 days. After this period, the expander was stabilized and the patient started to wear Hickham's chin cup
with a force of 400 g on each side for 16 hours/day for 11 months. After this period, the modified Haas appliance was removed and the
patient began being evaluated every six months. After analysis of the examinations carried out in planning the second treatment phase, it
was observed that the objectives proposed for the first phase had been fully accomplished (Figs 6 to 10 and Tab 1). From a dental
perspective, anterior and posterior crossbites were corrected, and consequently overbite and overjet were also resolved, thus improving
alignment. As planned, a pattern of Class II molar relationship was attained through forward displacement of the maxilla, and sufficient
space for proper eruption of teeth #12 and #22. Intermediate facial and intraoral photographs. Total (A) and partial (B) superimposition of
initial (black) and intermediate (blue) cephalometric tracings. Cephalometrically, there was an increase in the ANB angle to 5° (SNA = 82°
and SNB = 77°) and a significant improvement in Wits value (Wits = 0 mm). This change was especially due to displacement of the maxilla
forward and downward, although there was a slight counterclockwise rotation of the mandible (SN-GoGn increased from 36° to 33° and FMA went
from 21° to 17°). After four years monitoring patient's development with appointments every six months, the second treatment phase started
during the period of pubertal growth spurt, when the patient was 11 years and 10 months old. The goals in this phase were to align and level
the teeth, achieving a perfect molar relationship and ultimately finishing the treatment. After finishing, extraction of third molars would
be indicated. To this end, a preadjusted fixed orthodontic appliance, Roth prescription, 0.022 x 0.028-in slot would be bonded to upper and
lower dental arches. In the finishing stage, individualized bends would be placed as required in stainless steel, 0.018 x 0.025-in
archwires, and intermaxillary elastics would be prescribed. After finishing, the retention phase would begin with the use of a wraparound
removable appliance placed in the upper arch and a lingual canine-to-canine retainer in the lower arch. The upper arch received orthodontic
bands with convertible triple tubes (0.051-in) welded to them, placed on teeth #16 and #26. Thereafter, preadjusted metal brackets (Roth
prescription, 0.022 x 0.028-in slot) were bonded to upper incisors for alignment and leveling with the aid of Twistflex 0.018-in wire and
stainless steel 0.016-in and 0.018-in wire, with expansion loop. After slight flaring of incisors, brackets were bonded to upper canines and
premolars. As of his moment, straight archwires made with 0.016-in, 0.018-in and 0.020-in were used. Eighteen months into treatment, teeth
#17 and #27 erupted and were included in alignment and leveling of teeth. Upon finishing, as planned, rectangular 0.018 x 0.025-in stainless
steel archwires were formed, torqued and individually coordinated as needed. Orthodontic bands with convertible rectangular double tubes
were fitted to teeth #36 and #46 in the lower arch, and 20 months into treatment, brackets were bonded to teeth #37 and #47. Alignment and
leveling was performed using 0.018-in twist-flex archwires and round 0.016-in, 0.018-in and 0.020-in stainless steel archwires. The case was
finished with 0.018 x 0.025-in rectangular stainless steel archwires with form, torques and coordination performed as needed on an
individual basis. Class II intermaxillary elastics in Class II direction were also employed to decrease lower anchorage and thus achieve a
perfect molar relationship. After performing this step, positions of maximum habitual intercuspation (MHI), centric relation and functional
guidances (right and left laterality, and protrusion) were verified. After ensuring that all planned objectives had been achieved, upper and
lower fixed orthodontic appliances were removed and the retention phase began. In this phase, a removable wraparound appliance was fitted in
the upper dental arch with a buccal 0.032-in stainless steel arch. The patient was instructed to wear it 24/7 for 18 months. After this
period, she would wear it 12 hours a day for six months, then only at nighttime for another six months. At the end of this period, the case
would be assessed to determine whether or not to suspend its use altogether. In the lower arch, a round 0.018-in stainless steel fixed
canine-to-canine retainer was bonded permanently to the lingual surfaces of teeth #33 through #43. At the end of treatment, additional exams
were required (Figs 11 to 14). They revealed that results were very favorable as all objectives were clearly achieved. Concerning the facial
features, as shown in Figure 11, the smile exhibits an adequate exposure of upper incisors, and the lower lip is parallel to the upper
teeth, displaying an excellent smile arc. Balanced facial symmetry and lip competence can also be observed. In analyzing the profile, it
appears that despite an overall harmony, the mandible still shows slight protrusion. Final facial and intraoral photographs. Final profile
cephalometric radiograph (A) and cephalometric tracing (B). In examining the teeth (Figs 11 and 12), it was observed that proper alignment
and leveling were achieved, as well as proper occlusion with a perfect relationship between upper and lower molars, and between the upper
and lower canines, on both sides. Overbite, overjet, posterior crossbite and lower midline were corrected. The spaces in the lower dental
arch were closed and proper intercuspation obtained. There was an increase in intercanine and intermolar widths in both dental arches. In
the upper arch, the intercanine width was 25 mm to 36 mm, and intermolar width 41 mm to 51 mm. In the lower arch, the intercanine width was
20 mm to 29 mm, and intermolar width 39 mm to 44 mm. Functional harmony was attained in protrusive position, as well as right and left
laterality and the centric relation coincided with the intercuspid position. It is noteworthy that all these results were achieved with only
mild apical remodeling. No sign of significant root resorption was observed at the end of treatment (Fig 13). Final dental casts. Final
periapical radiographs. As expected, several skeletal changes were observed. Mandibular growth occurred in the anterior direction, which
caused a decrease in the ANB angle from 3.5° to 1° while the SNA angle remained unchanged and the SNB angle rose from 77.5° to 80°. The
vertical dimension was controlled, with a significant decrease in the mandibular plane angle (SN-GoGn changed from 36° to 29° and FMA from
21° to 17°). These data can be viewed in Figure 14 and Table 1. Initial (A), intermediate (A1) and final (B) cephalometric values.
Cephalometric total superimpositions revealed that the maxilla and mandible moved forward and downward. Partial maxillary superimpositions
during the first phase showed vertical development of the alveolar process in the molars, and a substantial change in the inclination of
upper incisors. In the second phase, molar mesialization and extrusion were observed along with mild flaring and extrusion of incisors.
Partial mandibular superimpositions during the first phase showed mesialization and extrusion of molars, with flaring and extrusion of
incisors. In the second phase, molar extrusion and incisor uprighting were noted. Diagnosis and treatment planning of Class III malocclusion
should be performed judiciously. Moreover, patients and their families should be made aware of the entire process as results can be
unpredictable. Even if goals and a success rate have been established, the prognosis is unclear, since it depends largely on case
development and patient compliance. Even so, it is likely that once patient's growth has ended the need for retreatment by dental
compensation1 or surgical intervention may still exist.2 No consensus has yet been reached in the literature regarding the ideal time to
start treatment since some authors posit that growth and development of the craniofacial complex is genetically determined, and therefore
unalterable. For these authors, correction of most Class III cases necessarily involves surgery. Furthermore, orthodontic treatment should
be started immediately after the growth spurt period has ceased. Other authors however - although agreeing with the role of heredity in the
etiology of Class III - believe they can change growth pattern and direction by means of a non-surgical approach capable of minimizing the
malocclusion or even treating it successfully.2 When the patient is in the phase that precedes the pubertal growth spurt, early treatment is
indicated given that Class III malocclusions tend to become increasingly severe over time; the reason being that mandibular growth remains
active for a longer period than maxillary growth.2,3 Treatment of the case reported here was conducted in two phases. It was initiated when
the patient was six years and six months old. Younger individuals tend to achieve more favorable results between four and ten years of age,
although patients whose ages range from 10 to 14 years old also present positive results.3,4 In the first phase, rapid maxillary expansion
was combined with maxillary protraction using Hickham's5 chin cup. This device is easy to fabricate and individualize. It has met with wide
acceptance by patients, besides being more stable, especially during sleep.6 Although there are several types of appliances for orthopedic
protraction of the maxilla, the literature contains no studies comparing their efficiency. The skill of the professional handling the device
and patient comfort are important variables when choosing one of these appliances.2,7,8 The second treatment phase began in late mixed
dentition. At this stage, there was large overcorrection, and the patient was in Angle Class II malocclusion. Furthermore, the mandible was
slightly retruded, which is indicated in this case since she would otherwise continue to present with an unfavorable growth pattern.8 At
this stage, a conventional fixed orthodontic appliance was used. Treatment outcome was very favorable, both functionally and esthetically.
Upper arch expansion, which had been performed in the first phase, was stable, indicating that the morphological limits were respected.
Dental alignment and leveling were achieved in the second stage. Canine and molar occlusion was well established and anterior and posterior
crossbites corrected,9 with pleasing facial esthetics, good symmetry and adequate exposure of the upper incisors. » The author reports no
commercial, proprietary or financial interest in the products or companies described in this article. » Patients displayed in this article
previously approved the use of their facial and intraoral photographs. How to cite this article: Bayerl MLM. Two-phase treatment of patients
with crossbite and tendency toward skeletal Class III malocclusion. Dental Press J Orthod. 2014 July-Aug;19(4):122-35. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/2176-9451.19.4.122-135.bbo. Clinical case report, DI 18, approved by the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics (BBO).
Intermediate cast models. Intermediate panoramic radiograph. Intermediate profile cephalometric radiograph (A) and cephalometric tracing
(B). Total (A) and partial (B) superimpositions of intermediate (blue) and final (red) cephalometric tracings. Total (A) and partial (B)
superimpositions of initial (black) and final (red) cephalometric tracings.
