This is the first report of external abdominal oblique muscle injury occurring in a professional soccer player. A 28-year-old Caucasian
professional soccer player presented after experiencing a popping sensation associated with strong parietal pain localized between the left
11th and 12th ribs. Ultrasound examination revealed a collection of fluid under the 11th rib, suggesting injury of the left external oblique
muscle. Platelet-rich plasma treatment was administered and the soccer player returned to competition on the 21st day after treatment. This
rare injury results from a sudden intrinsic eccentric contraction of the internal oblique muscle while in a stretched position. Ultrasound
can help to confirm the diagnosis and to monitor clinical follow-up. Platelet-rich plasma treatment could aid recovery in high-level
athletes. Lateral trunk muscle injuries are often linked to participation in sports that require trunk rotation, such as tennis or handball,
but rarely occur in soccer players . The internal oblique muscle is more often injured than the external oblique muscle; the two muscles
together form a complex that controls trunk rotation and lateral trunk flexion. No case of external oblique muscle injury has been reported
in association with soccer practice. A 28-year-old Caucasian professional soccer player presented with left parietal pain 4 hours after
soccer training and 24 hours after a session of trunk strengthening, without any prior history of similar signs. The patient’s pain worsened
with sneezing, and disappeared during abdominal contraction and intense respiratory movement. Palpation revealed intercostal pain between
the left 11th and 12th ribs. Abdominal muscle contraction and isometric exercises were painless. Thoracic spine examination, costal and
abdominal visceral palpation, and pulmonary auscultation were within normal limits. The patient was able to continue practicing, with only
intense running causing extreme pain. Analgesic treatment did not relieve this mechanical pain, which was absent in activities of daily
living. Four days after the onset of pain, a competition was scheduled and the player was feeling ready to participate. Fifteen minutes into
the match, the patient experienced violent impact to his right shoulder, with extension of the ribcage on the left side. He experienced a
popping sensation associated with strong left parietal pain localized at the level of his previous complaint and had to leave the match. The
patient’s abdomen was sensitive during trunk rotation. Sitting was also very difficult, while walking was painless. Treatment with a level 1
analgesic (paracetamol) and local icing were prescribed. A bruise appeared 12 hours after injury, and a 3-cm deep tumefaction indicated a
hematoma. Ultrasound highlighted fluid collection under the 11th rib, suggesting a 4-cm injury of the left external oblique muscle (Figure
1). There were no signs of rib fracture on X-rays. At the completion of icing therapy, pain was present only during spinal extension and
during contraction of the trunk muscles. Treatment with platelet-rich plasma (Proteal®, Barcelona, Spain) was prescribed on the fourth day
after injury, with the patient’s consent. After administration of a local anesthetic (1% lidocaine chlorhydrate), 4 mL of platelet-rich
plasma was injected in the region of the injury. The patient was advised not to participate in sports for 3 days. The patient was able to
bike on the 4th day after injection, to run on the 5th day, to play soccer on the 15th day, and to compete on the 21st day. Trunk
strengthening exercises were resumed on day 15. Ultrasound examination on day 15 revealed progressive healing of the injury (Figure 2). The
patient returned to professional soccer practice with no recurrence of his symptoms during 12-month follow-up.Figure 1 A 4-cm injury of the
left external oblique muscle. Figure 2 Progressive resolution of the external oblique muscle injury (day 15). A 4-cm injury of the left
external oblique muscle. Progressive resolution of the external oblique muscle injury (day 15). The literature offers accurate analyses of
external oblique muscle injury. Three cases associated with cricket and several cases in baseball players have been reported [2, 4]. The
acute pain experienced with this type of injury makes continuing practice impossible. In these cases, the test of resisted side bending is
always painful. Cricket players are required to rest from their sport for 28–70 days. The injury most commonly occurs at the 10th rib, but
can extend from the 9th to the 11th ribs, based on the topography of the muscle insertions . Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging is generally
performed for professional athletes. However, this case and others have confirmed that ultrasound is effective in diagnosing abdominal
muscle injuries [3, 5]. Ultrasound follow-up has not been described, and healing has been assessed by progressive decrease in the size of
the injury. Thus, the treatment was based on functional improvement, because correlation between clinical signs and ultrasound findings is
lacking. In our patient, rib mobility and muscle strength both recovered in conjunction with a progressive reduction in pain over a 15-day
period. At 15 days, the patient restarted muscular strengthening exercises to stabilize the trunk. Initial treatment with rest, ice, and
physiotherapy is usually recommended for oblique muscle injury. Humphries et al. also recommended anti-inflammatory treatment .
Corticosteroid injections are sometimes administered, but there is no evidence of their efficacy for this condition [3, 5]. We chose to
inject platelet-rich plasma into the site of injury, under local anesthetic and with the patient’s consent, to improve pain relief and to
bring growth factors to the site of the injury . However, evidence is needed to show that this treatment hastens healing. A shorter, 21-day
rest period is possible in soccer players, because unlike cricket, soccer does not require the use of the arms, although trunk stabilization
is necessary. This kind of muscle injury can recur over time, although our patient has not experienced recurrence. This clinical report
describes a rare case of external abdominal oblique muscle injury in a professional soccer player. The diagnosis was confirmed by
ultrasound. Platelet-rich plasma was easily injected under ultrasound guidance to promote faster healing. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no financial, political, religious, or
any other competing interests. Authors’ contributions MD made the clinical diagnosis and treated the patient with platelet-rich plasma. PM
performed the follow-up ultrasound. CD helped to draft the Discussion section of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors thank Edanz Group ( http://www.edanzediting.com/) for assistance editing this manuscript.
