A 42-year-old male presented in June of 2011 with nocturnal fevers, night sweats, an 8-kg weight loss, and a cutaneous right chest wall
mass. In March of 2013, a computed tomographic scan of the thorax showed a 54 × 18 × 26-mm right lower lobe mass with peripheral
calcifications, and in May of 2013, he was admitted for a segmental lobectomy, in which histologic examination of the pulmonary tissue
revealed granulomas with multinucleated giant cells. The tissue was negative for acid-fast bacillae on Ziehl–Neelsen stain, and culture grew
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Therefore, he was started on four first-line antituberculosis medications and showed rapid symptomatic
improvement. A 42-year-old male patient with an unremarkable past medical history presented in June of 2011 with nocturnal fevers, night
sweats, an 8-kg weight loss, and a cutaneous right chest wall mass. He was started on multiple empirical antibiotics for presumptive
bacterial infection with no improvement. The mass progressed to two cutaneous chest wall fistulae, at which point additional empirical
antibiotics were prescribed with minimal improvement. In March of 2013, he presented to the local infectious disease clinic because of poor
appetite, malaise, a 10-kg weight loss, persistent chest wall fistulae, and chest pain. He had normal vital signs, and physical examination
was notable only for the presence of two lower right chest wall fistulae (Figure 1A). A computed tomographic scan of the thorax showed a 54
× 18 × 26-mm right lower lobe mass with peripheral calcifications (Figure 1B). In May of 2013, he was admitted for a segmental lobectomy, in
which surgeons removed abundant caseous material. Histologic examination of the pulmonary tissue revealed granulomas with multinucleated
giant cells. The tissue was negative for acid-fast bacillae on Ziehl–Neelsen stain, and culture grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A test for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative, and he was started on four first-line antituberculosis medications. He showed rapid
symptomatic improvement and was discharged 2 weeks after admission. (A) Clinical picture of the case. (B) Thorax CT scan showing a 54 x 18 x
26-mm right lower lobe mass with peripheral calcifications. Authors' addresses: Juan Cataño, Infectious Diseases Section, Internal Medicine
Department, University of Antioquia Medical School and Clinica Las Vegas, Medellín, Colombia, E-mail: kataju@hotmail.com. Jefferson Perez,
Infectious Diseases Section, Clinica Las Vegas, Medellín, Colombia, E-mail: alejoperezm@gmail.com.
