Dear Sirs, A 69-year-old male presented with a 16-year history of numbness and paraesthesia of both feet and symptomatic postural
hypotension. He reported episodes of painless thermal injuries to his limbs and lower urinary tract symptoms including reduced urinary flow,
frequency, nocturnal incontinence and recurrent urinary tract infections. There was a long history of diarrhoea which preceded his sensory
symptoms by 10 years and resulted in 20 kg of weight loss, and increasing memory difficulties with greatest difficulty in recalling recent
events. His mother had suffered from symptomatic postural hypotension and foot ulceration developing in her sixth decade; she died in her
seventh decade. It is not known whether she suffered from chronic diarrhoea or cognitive impairment. He has two brothers whom are
unaffected. Blood pressure was 156/92 lying and 79/53 standing. On neurological examination, cranial nerves were normal and there was mild
wasting of the intrinsic foot muscles more marked on the right than the left. Tone and motor strength was normal. On sensory examination,
pinprick was reduced to the mid-calf bilaterally, vibration sense was reduced to the knees, light touch to the ankles and joint position
sense was reduced at the hallux. His ankle jerk reflexes were absent. His gait was hesitant. He was unable to perform tandem gait and
Romberg’s sign was positive. Neurophysiological studies are summarised in Table 1 and showed a length-dependant predominantly axonal motor
and sensory peripheral neuropathy with subtle demyelinating features. Cognitive testing revealed impairment with major deficits, most
prominently in memory and executive function. Table 2 summarises all remaining investigations. Of note is the absence of any evidence of
systemic amyloid.Table 1Summary of neurophysiological studiesMotor studies19972013RightLeftRightLeftNerve Tibial Latency (ms) 5.8 5.4 6.5
Amplitude (mV) 0.8 1.1 0.05 Conduction velocity m/s 36 36 F Wave (max) ms 65.5 Absent Absent Peroneal Latency (ms): ankle 5.45 Amplitude
(mV): ankle 0.3 Amplitude (mV): above knee 0.3 Conduction velocity (m/s) 30.5 F Wave (max) ms Absent Ulnar Latency (ms): wrist3.30 Amplitude
(mV): wrist11.7 Amplitude (mV): above elbow9.6 Conduction velocity (m/s)45.6 F Wave (min) ms33.15 Median Latency (ms): wrist4.33.903.75
Amplitude (mV): wrist18.816.014.9 Amplitude (mV): elbow17.314.87.1 Conduction velocity (m/s)524843.3 F Wave (min) ms34.25Sensory
studies19972013RightLeftRightLeftNerve Sural Latency (peak) ms Absent Absent Absent Absent Amplitude (peak–peak) µV Absent Absent Absent
Absent Radial Latency (onset) ms1.90 Latency (peak) ms2.802.802.60 Amplitude (peak–peak) µV10.010.0 0.26 Conduction velocity (onset)
m/s44.7 Ulnar Latency (peak) ms3.03.4 Absent Absent Amplitude (peak–peak) µV 3.1 1.0 Absent Absent Median Latency (peak) ms4.104.10 Absent
Absent Amplitude (peak–peak) µV 2.20 2.10 Absent Absent Electromyography19972013Muscle Right tibialis anteriorNo spontaneous activity,
Normal pattern of motor unit recruitment with motor units up to 2.5 mVNo abnormal spontaneous activity. Voluntary recruitment moderately
severely reduced in density with an excess of slightly unstable irregular motor unit potentials: durations up to 20 ms, amplitude up to
10 mV Right first dorsal interosseousNo spontaneous activity, Normal pattern of motor unit recruitment with motor units up to 2.5 mVThe
neurophysiological studies were consistent with a length-dependant predominantly axonal motor and sensory peripheral neuropathy. However,
the slowing of the conduction velocities, prolonged F waves and conduction block of the median nerve suggest a possible demyelinating
component. Sympathetic skin response (performed only in 2013) was absent in the right hand and left footBold values indicate abnormal
results ms milliseconds, mV millivolt, m/s metres per second, µV microvoltTable 2Summary of relevant investigationsBlood tests Hb 11 g/dl,
WBC 5.34 × 109/L, platelets 119 × 109/L, MCV 101.5 fl, neutrophils 3.56 × 109/L Clotting screen normal Urea 10.1 µmol/L, creatinine
151 µmol/L, eGFR 41 ml/min Albumin 37 g/L Liver function tests normal IgA 2.2 g/L, IgG 9.8 g/L, IgM 1.2 g/L, no serum paraprotein
detected Serum free light chains: Kappa 26.8 mg/L, Lambda 20.9 mg/L. K/L ratio 1.28 Lipid profile normal CRP <1 mg/L NT- pro BNP
129pMol/L Cardiac Troponin 0.015T ng/mLUrine Creatinine clearance 35.6 ml/min 24 h urinary protein loss 0.31 g Bence Jones protein not
detectedGenetic testing PMP22 duplication/deletion negative Transthyretin, SPTLC1, Rab7 sequencing negativeAmyloid deposition
investigations SAP Scan: no visceral organ uptake DPD Scan: no cardiac uptake Fat aspirate: no Congo red stainingOther tests MRI brain: age
appropriate cerebral atrophy ECG: normal sinus rhythm Echocardiogram: IVSd 1.1 cm. Mild TR. No evidence of cardiac dysfunction. Summary of
neurophysiological studies The neurophysiological studies were consistent with a length-dependant predominantly axonal motor and sensory
peripheral neuropathy. However, the slowing of the conduction velocities, prolonged F waves and conduction block of the median nerve suggest
a possible demyelinating component. Sympathetic skin response (performed only in 2013) was absent in the right hand and left foot Bold
values indicate abnormal results ms milliseconds, mV millivolt, m/s metres per second, µV microvolt Summary of relevant investigations
Genetic testing revealed a recently described Y163X truncation mutation of the gene encoding prion protein (PRNP) . Prion protein is
tethered to the cell membrane via a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor and the Y163X mutation results in a premature stop codon such that
the truncated prion protein is no longer membrane anchored. The PRNP Y163X mutation, follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern,
presents with adult onset chronic diarrhoea, followed by symptoms of a mixed, predominantly sensory and autonomic neuropathy and late onset
cognitive decline and seizures. Pathologically prion protein is deposited throughout peripheral organs primarily the bowel and peripheral
nerves, either in between nerve fibres or as ragged deposits in the myelin with significant fibre loss and no evidence of demyelination, and
the cortex in the form of amyloid plaques, amyloid angiopathy, tauopathy and unique prion protein fragments. Pan-autonomic failure and
peripheral neuropathy is probably due to abnormal prion deposition within the peripheral nervous system. Direct toxic effects of prion
protein, deposited in bowel and urinary bladder, may contribute to severe diarrhoea and urinary symptoms. We have not studied adjacent
markers on chromosome 20 to define whether there is a common ancestor with the larger pedigree . A 2-bp deletion in codon 178 of PRNP has
been described in Japanese kindred causing a familial sensory and autonomic neuropathy with associated cognitive impairment . A different
insertional mutation of PRNP resulting in a truncation at position 163 has also been associated with hereditary sensory and autonomic
neuropathy . The clinical presentation of prion protein systemic amyloidosis caused by the PRNP Y163X mutation is distinct from previously
described forms of hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy with prominent and early bladder and bowel symptoms, late onset sensory/autonomic
neuropathy followed by cognitive involvement. The duration of symptoms and early onset of bowel dysfunction would also be atypical for
amyloid neuropathy. Interesting features of this case include some subtle demyelinating features noted on nerve conduction. Occasional cases
of amyloid polyneuropathy have also been reported to show demyelinating changes . Mild conduction slowing could represent direct toxicity of
the prion protein on Schwann cells or even prion protein haplo-insufficiency as axonal prion protein has been shown to be required for
myelin maintenance in mouse models . This case demonstrates the importance of PRNP analysis, which should be considered in the investigation
of unexplained diarrhoea with a sensory neuropathy and is an important differential of familial amyloid polyneuropathy. On behalf of all
authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. On behalf of all the authors, the corresponding author
states that we acted in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki.
