Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 20 Final Diagnosis: Annular pancreas Symptoms: Food intolerance • vomiting
Medication:— Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Gastroenterology and Hepatology Congenital defects/diseases Annular pancreas is a congenital
anomaly that consists of a ring of pancreatic tissue partially or completely encircling the descending portion of the duodenum. It is formed
due to the failure of the ventral bud to rotate, thus it elongates and encircles the upper part of the duodenum. It can present in a wide
range of clinical severities, and can affect neonates to the elderly, making it difficult to diagnosis. Although diagnosis of annular
pancreas can be made pre-operatively by upper GI series, upper GI endoscopy, or CT scan, 40% of diagnoses require surgery for confirmation.
We report the case of a 20-year-old woman presenting with history of vomiting and weight loss since childhood. We present the clinical
characteristics, surgical management in the form of bypass procedure done through a duodenojujenostomy, and follow-up of the patient.
Annular pancreas occasionally presents in adults. Variable presentations have been described in the literature, including pancreatic
neoplasm, pancreatitis, obstructive jaundice, duodenal obstruction, and peptic ulcer diseases. Most studies of these lesions are single case
reports or small series, which do not allow a surgeon to accumulate extensive experience; therefore, reliance on the combined experience of
others in recognition and appropriate management has been the norm. Annular pancreas is a congenital anomaly consisting of a ring of
pancreatic tissue partially or completely encircling the descending portion of the duodenum . The condition was first described by Tiedemann
in 1818 and named “annular pancreas” by Ecker in 1862. It is rarely detected in adult life after the development of complications. We report
the case of 20-year-old female patient who presented with history of vomiting and weight loss since childhood, discussing its clinical
characteristics and surgical management. The pancreas is normally formed from the fusion of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds between
the first 4–8 weeks of embryonic life. Annular pancreas results due to failure of the ventral bud to rotate and elongates to encircle the
upper part of the duodenum. Annular pancreas is one of few medical conditions that can present with a wide range of clinical severities. It
affects neonates to the elderly, thereby making the diagnosis difficult . A 20-year-old woman not known to have any medical illness
presented with history of vomiting since childhood. She had not previously sought any medical advice despite her intermittent vomiting and
underweight. She was vomiting gastric contents including food particles, mainly post-prandial, associated with epigastric pain and
heartburn, which was relieved after vomiting. All these symptoms progressed during the last year. There was no history of smoking or alcohol
consumption. On examination, she appeared underweight (BMI 17% kg/m2) and her vital signs were within normal range. The abdomen was soft
without any tenderness and no palpable masses or organomegaly. All her blood indices were within the normal limits. The patient was
investigated in another hospital by Barium meal and follow-through, which revealed a stricture between the second and third part of the
duodenum, with no filling defect seen, and slow passage of contrast through the stricture. The possibility of a band was raised by the
radiologist. In addition, she had an abdominal CT scan that showed a distended stomach with air-fluid level, and dilated first part of the
duodenum without an apparent transition. There was no clear diagnosis of an annular pancreas but it was suggested as one of the differential
diagnoses. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) done in that hospital revealed narrowing between the second and third part of the duodenum, with
a membranous stenosis in the second part of the duodenum, suggesting a duodenal web, with dilated upper part of the duodenum and food
residue within the stomach. A biopsy was taken, which was negative for malignancy. The differential diagnosis was annular pancreas versus
duodenal web, or a combination of both. Later, she presented at our hospital with the image of the obstruction, where she was taken to the
operating room for laparotomy. At laparotomy, there was a complete annular pancreas associated with significant gastric outlet obstruction,
with massive dilatation of the stomach, pylorus, and upper part of the duodenum. Although the annular pancreas did not seem to be causing a
tight band or external compression, it was still the transition point (Figure 1). On opening the duodenum, there was a duodenal web at the
transition point in the second and third part of the duodenum; therefore, a bypass procedure was performed through a duodenojejunostomy
proximal to the annular pancreas. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged 7 days after surgery. She remained well, and
had gained 2Kg at 3-month follow-up with better food tolerance. Annular pancreas is an uncommon congenital condition in adults. Five
theories have been suggested to explain the pathogenesis of annular pancreas, although various abnormalities appear to be involved in the
developmental process : Hypertrophy of both dorsal and ventral primordial.Persistence and enlargement of the left bud of the paired ventral
primordium.Fixation of the right bud of the ventral primordium prior to rotation.Adherence of the right ventral pancreatic bud to the
duodenum.Adherence of the tip of the left ventral angle to the duodenum. Hypertrophy of both dorsal and ventral primordial. Persistence and
enlargement of the left bud of the paired ventral primordium. Fixation of the right bud of the ventral primordium prior to rotation.
Adherence of the right ventral pancreatic bud to the duodenum. Adherence of the tip of the left ventral angle to the duodenum. Annular
pancreas represents a spectrum of diseases. Autopsy series indicated a prevalence of 5–15 cases per 100 000 adults. There are 2 peaks of
presentation – in infancy (52%) and in the fourth decade of life (48%) . This anomaly is frequently associated with other congenital
anomalies in adults, and malrotation, duodenal web, and Schatzki ring were some of the more common anomalies. Long Cheng et al. reported a
case of annular pancreas concurrent with pancreaticobiliary maljunction presenting with symptoms in an adult patient . The annulus itself
can be complete, partial, intramural, or extramural. A literature review revealed 160 cases of annular pancreas and 76 cases of duodenal
webs in adults. They all showed that the diagnosis is often overlooked in favor of gastric outlet obstruction. Duodenal webs can be mistaken
for scarring from duodenal ulcer disease . Therefore, annular pancreas should be considered as a possible cause of adult duodenal
obstruction. In a review by Zyromski et al. , the commonest presentation in 24% of patients is due to gastric outlet obstructive symptoms;
75% had abdominal pain as the primary complaint; 11% presented with jaundice; 22% with acute pancreatitis, a finding that is possibly
related to the high incidence of pancreas divisum (29%),with variable duration of symptoms from a few months to several years. Zheng et al.
suggest that although annular pancreas may encircle the duodenum completely in adults, food usually can pass through the duodenum without
trouble. However, the cause of the obstruction may be related to ulceration as a result of compression and obstruction from the annulus to
the duodenum secondary to chronic pancreatitis. In these cases, the level of the stenosis was at or above the papilla of Vater, suggesting
the annulus prevented the passage of alkaline secretions from the bile duct and pancreas, but patients with duodenal stenosis below the
papilla have no ulcer, nor do patients without duodenal stenosis . In another review, by Maker et al. , some of the patients who presented
with gastric outlet obstruction had coexisting peptic ulcer disease (PUD). They mentioned a classification system proposed in the Canadian
surgical literature in the 1970s with extramural (type 1) annular pancreas causing symptoms of gastric outlet obstruction, and intramural
ring (type 2) related to presentation more consistent with PUD. A number of case reports have documented neoplasia and adenocarcinoma
arising in the setting of annular pancreas . Zyromski et al. reported nearly one-quarter of adults in their study with annular pancreas
developed neoplasia of some type, including 10% with pancreaticobiliary neoplasia . Our case report describes late presentation of an
annular pancreas with vague abdominal symptoms since childhood. This points more towards the diagnosis of a duodenal web anomaly that might
explain the patient’s symptoms. Duodenal web anomalies in more than one-third of patients do not manifest signs or symptoms until adulthood.
The lesion can be asymptomatic or present as gastric outlet obstruction, resulting in antral dilation and secondary hypergastrinemia
commonly associated with PUD. The diagnosis of annular pancreas can be made preoperatively using numerous radiologic and endoscopic studies,
including upper GI tract studies and computed tomography (CT). However, in over 40% of cases, the diagnosis is only made at laparotomy . In
CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a ring of pancreatic tissue is seen surrounding the descending duodenum, in continuity with the
pancreatic head , and a magnetic resonance cholangiopancreaticography (MRCP) or an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP)
can identify the annular pancreatic duct encircling and extending to the right side of the duodenum . The annular pancreatic duct usually
communicates with the main pancreatic duct, but may drain into the intrapancreatic common bile duct, the duct of Wirsung, or the duct of
Santorini . Endoscopic ultrasonography can also be useful in non-obstructive forms . The treatment of symptomatic, obstructing annular
pancreas has classically been surgical. The preferred treatment is a bypass operation such as gastro- or duodenojejunostomy, but some cases
were treated by division of the annulus with transverse duodenoplasty, duodenoduodenostomy, or Whipple’s procedure in extreme cases,
depending on the case and the intra-operative findings . Early attempts at resection or division of the annulus resulted in more
complications of duodenal leak, pancreatitis, and pancreatic fistula, which is why it is safer to bypass the annular constriction by
duodenoduodenostomy or duodenojejunostomy, from the proximal duodenal bulb to the Jejunum. In summary, annular pancreas occasionally
presents in adults. Variable presentations have been described in the literature, including pancreatic neoplasm, pancreatitis, obstructive
jaundice, duodenal obstruction, and peptic ulcer diseases. The diagnosis of annular pancreas can be made pre-operatively by upper GI series,
upper GI endoscopy, or CT scan, although 40% of diagnoses required surgery for confirmation. The treatment of symptomatic, obstructing
annular pancreas has classically been surgical, as has been reported in the literature. With advancements in imaging modalities and an index
of suspicion, both may assist in finding more cases of symptomatic and asymptomatic annular pancreas in adults. Most studies of these
lesions are single case reports or small series, which do not allow a single surgeon to accumulate extensive experience; therefore, the
management of this congenital anomaly should be individualized according to the associated complications. Competing interests declared None.
Annular pancreas.
