To describe the first case of partial vision recovery in a 32-year-old woman with iatrogenic retinal artery occlusion (RAO) following
glabella calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA) injection, and to explore appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic measures according to a literature
review. A 32-year-old woman had left eye RAO and a bilateral visual field defect after CaHA injection into the glabella region. Topical and
systemic intraocular pressure lowering agents, isovolemic hemodilution, globe massage, and anticoagulation with acetylsalicylic acid were
prescribed. Carbogen inhalation and oral corticosteroids were also given. In addition to the above therapies, hyperbaric oxygen therapy
(HBOT) was implemented as adjuvant treatment. The final best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the left eye improved from hand motion at
15 cm to 0.1. Improved retinal circulation and decreased retinal vessel leakage were found in the follow-up fluorescein angiography.
However, there were still multiple emboli in the conjunctival and retinal arteries. This is the first case report on partial recovery of
BCVA after iatrogenic RAO following cosmetic CaHA injection. Because no reliable treatments have been reported for such complications, HBOT
may be considered as an alternative adjuvant therapy. As soft-tissue augmentation of the face has become more common, there has been an
increasing number of cases of ocular complications after facial filler injections, including hypersensitivity reactions, ecchymosis,
anterior chamber inflammation, strabismus, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, and retinal vessel occlusion . Among these complications, permanent
visual loss due to retinal artery occlusion (RAO) is the most devastating. To date, there have been no definite therapeutic guidelines
developed for iatrogenic RAO. Although a few cases with vision improvement were reported in the past, none of these cases were related to
RAO following calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA, RADIESSE®) injection. We herein describe a case of iatrogenic RAO following CaHA filler
injection with vision and retinal circulation improvement after treatment. We used hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) as adjuvant treatment in
this patient. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of partial vision recovery in RAO following CaHA filler injection.
We also provide a literature review to discuss the issues of diagnosis and treatment of this vision threatening disorder. A 32-year-old
woman sought treatment in the emergency department reporting sudden vision loss in her left eye. Four hours previously, she received vaginal
plastic surgery and CaHA filler injection into the glabella region by a local plastic surgeon under general anesthesia. After waking up, she
noted vision loss in her left eye, and was immediately transferred to our hospital. The initial best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at our
emergency department was hand motion at 15 cm in the left eye and 1.0 in the right. The left pupil was dilated with a positive relative
afferent papillary defect. There was neither ophthalmoplegia nor strabismus. Slit lamp examination showed multiple emboli along the
conjunctival vessels (Figure 1). Fundoscopy in the right eye (OD) revealed normal findings (Figure 2A), while the left eye (OS) showed
multiple emboli in the whole choroidal layer (Figure 2B). The corresponding spectral-domain OCT showed normal choroidal vascularity in the
right eye (Figure 2C). In the left eye, multiple hyper-reflective depositions, which resulted in dark acoustic shadows (arrow head) in the
retinal layer, were found (Figure 2D). Close-up imaging revealed distal RAOs (Figure 2E). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no
evidence of acute brain infarction, however, there were high-attenuation materials around the glabella region, which were compatible with
the CaHA filler injections (Figure 3). Fundus fluorescein angiography (FAG) obtained on the second hospital day showed multiple absences of
retinal perfusion in the arteriovenous phase (Figure 4A), and fluorescein leaking out of the occlusive retinal artery was found in the late
phase (Figure 4B). Under the diagnosis of iatrogenic RAO, the therapies were administered to shorten the ischemic period on the basis of the
European Assessment Group for Lysis in the Eye (EAGLE) guidelines, including topical and systemic intraocular pressure lowering agents,
isovolemic hemodilution, globe massage, and anticoagulation with acetylsalicylic acid. In addition, carbogen inhalation and oral
corticosteroids were also provided.Figure 1 Multiple emboli along the conjunctival vessels. Figure 2 Fundus picture. (A) Normal in the right
eye. (B) There were multiple emboli in the whole choroidal layer. (C) The corresponding SD-OCT in the right eye showed normal choroidal
vascularity. (D) In the left eye, multiple hyper-reflective depositions (arrow head) were found in the retinal layer, which caused dark
acoustic shadows, indicating CaHA emboli. (E) Magnification of the macular region shows multiple emboli (arrow) obstructing the distal
retinal artery and choroidal layer (circle).Figure 3 T2W1MRI demonstrated high-attenuation material around the glabella region (arrow),
corresponding with CaHA filler. Figure 4 Fundus fluorescein angiography (FAG) obtained on the second hospital day. (A) Multiple absences of
retinal perfusion in the arteriovenous phase. (B) Fluorescein leaking out of the occlusive retinal artery was found in the late phase. (C)
FAG obtained 5 weeks later revealed recovery of retinal circulation, and (D) decrease retinal vessel leakage. Multiple emboli along the
conjunctival vessels. Fundus picture. (A) Normal in the right eye. (B) There were multiple emboli in the whole choroidal layer. (C) The
corresponding SD-OCT in the right eye showed normal choroidal vascularity. (D) In the left eye, multiple hyper-reflective depositions (arrow
head) were found in the retinal layer, which caused dark acoustic shadows, indicating CaHA emboli. (E) Magnification of the macular region
shows multiple emboli (arrow) obstructing the distal retinal artery and choroidal layer (circle). T2W1MRI demonstrated high-attenuation
material around the glabella region (arrow), corresponding with CaHA filler. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FAG) obtained on the second
hospital day. (A) Multiple absences of retinal perfusion in the arteriovenous phase. (B) Fluorescein leaking out of the occlusive retinal
artery was found in the late phase. (C) FAG obtained 5 weeks later revealed recovery of retinal circulation, and (D) decrease retinal vessel
leakage. Despite the treatment, progressive blurred vision was still found in the following few hours. Intra-arterial fibrinolysis using
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator was not performed because of higher rates of adverse side effects . An alternative treatment
option, HBOT, was performed. Our patient received 100% oxygen via a face mask at a maximum ambient pressure of 2.5 atmospheres absolute. The
protocol for the treatment was 10 minutes of compression, followed by a hyperbaric phase of 60 minutes, and 15 minutes of decompression. The
treatment schedule was HBOT 3 times within the initial 24 hours, and 3 more treatments within the following 72 hours, for a total of 6
treatments. Conjunctival biopsy (OS) was performed later, which revealed multiple calcified foreign bodies in the vessel lumens (Figure 5).
The visual acuity remained stable after the treatments, and the patient was discharged. Three months after onset, the BCVA improved from
hand motion at 15 cm to 0.1 (OD). Fundoscopy in the left eye still showed multiple emboli in retinal vessels (Figure 6). Follow-up
fluorescein angiography (FAG) showed improved retinal circulation (Figure 4C) and decreased retinal vessel leakage (Figure 4D).Figure 5 The
pathology of a conjunctival biopsy showed several calcified materials (dashed circle) in the capillary lumen. Normal calcifications are not
likely and foreign bodies are more likely to be present.Figure 6 Three months after treatment, the fundoscopic image of the left eye still
showed multiple emboli in retinal vessels (arrow). The pathology of a conjunctival biopsy showed several calcified materials (dashed circle)
in the capillary lumen. Normal calcifications are not likely and foreign bodies are more likely to be present. Three months after treatment,
the fundoscopic image of the left eye still showed multiple emboli in retinal vessels (arrow). Our literature review revealed that a
retrograde embolic mechanism is generally thought to be the pathogenesis of RAO after cosmetic facial filler injections [4, 6]. Once an
injection pressure is higher than the systolic arterial pressure, the injected material displaces the arterial blood and travels proximally
past the origin of the retinal artery . When the plunger is released, the arterial systolic pressure then propels the resulting column of
material into the ophthalmic artery and its branches . We searched PubMed and MEDLINE (1950 through February 2014) using the key words
"visual loss", "visual impairment", "blindness", "retinal artery occlusion", "facial fillers", "facial injections", and "cosmetic
procedure". Forty-six case reports of visual disturbance following facial filler injections were identified through the first screening
[2–4, 6, 8–30]. We excluded the cases of visual disturbance not due to retinal artery occlusion after cosmetic injections. Only 2 cases met
our criteria, which were related to CaHA filler injection [2, 9]. We summarized these 2 cases and made a comparison with our patient (Table
1).Table 1 Characteristics and clinical data of 3 patients with CaHA filler injection CaseAge (yr)SexEyeInjection siteDiagnosisAssociated
ocular symptomsVisit/Therapy intervalTreatmentInitial BCVAOutcomeFollow - upEAGLE 6-step therapyAdjunctive treatmentFinal BCVAOther ocular
symptomsSung MS, 2010 25MRightglabellaPCAO, anterior segment ischemiaDilated pupil, exotropia, ophthalmoplegia, hyphema, hypopyon, cornea
edema, PtosisImmediatelyOne-stepTopical and systemic abxHM1.0Resolved anterior segment inflammation3MKim YJ 2013
30MBilateralglabellaOphthalmic artery occlusionDilated pupil, total ophthalmoplegia, ptosisNANANANLPNLPNANACurrent
study33FBilateralglabellaRetinal artery occlusionDilated pupil, RAPD, conjunctival injectionImmediatelyFive-stepCarbogen, HBOT,OD : 20/20 OS
: HMOD : 20/20 OS : 0.1Recovery of choroidal and retinal circulation in the left eye3Mabx = antibiotics; BCVA = best corrected visual
acuity; EAGLE = European Assessment Group for Lysis in the EYE study; F = female; HBOT = hyperbaric oxygen therapy; HM = hand motion; M =
male; NA = not available; NLP = negative light perception; PCAO = posterior ciliary artery occlusion; RAPD = relative afferent pupillary
defect; yr = years. Characteristics and clinical data of 3 patients with CaHA filler injection abx = antibiotics; BCVA = best corrected
visual acuity; EAGLE = European Assessment Group for Lysis in the EYE study; F = female; HBOT = hyperbaric oxygen therapy; HM = hand motion;
M = male; NA = not available; NLP = negative light perception; PCAO = posterior ciliary artery occlusion; RAPD = relative afferent pupillary
defect; yr = years. Our case is the first case report of vision and circulation improvement in posterior segment ischemia due to CaHA filler
injections. A variety of measures have been advocated in an attempt to treat non-arteritic retinal artery obstruction, but there were no
generally agreed upon treatment regimens, with no suggested treatment regimens for iatrogenic RAO. In 2010, Sung et al. first reported a
case of anterior segment ischemia concurrent with vascular embolization after injection of CaHA. The main affected part was the anterior
segment, and the involved vessel was the long posterior ciliary artery. Therapies included a topical antibiotic, topical steroids, and low-
dose oral corticosteroids. The significant improvement in final visual acuity was determined by the resolution of corneal edema and severe
anterior chamber inflammation, rather than an improvement in the posterior choroidal circulation. Theoretically, a limited nasal choroidal
ischemia, sparing the macula, will not result in an obvious visual acuity disturbance. Kim and Chou reported a patient with bilateral
blindness after CaHA injection in 2013 . The main affected part was the posterior segment, and the involved vessel was the ophthalmic
artery. However, only limited information on the treatments was provided, and the final visual outcome was no light perception in both eyes.
In our case, the injured arteries were the retinal artery and short posterior ciliary artery. We provided the treatment immediately when the
diagnosis was made. We completed 5 steps of a 6-step therapy, which followed the EAGLE study, including topical and systemic lowering of
intraocular pressure agents, ocular massage, hemodilution, and antiplatelet therapy with acetylsalicylic acid. In addition, interventions
that had been used as treatments for acute retinal artery occlusion were provided at the same time, including carbogen breathing, and low
dose oral prednisolone. Intra-arterial fibrinolysis using recombinant tissue plasminogen activator was not performed; instead, HBOT was
implemented in 6 treatments. Three months later, the BCVA in the left eye increased from HM/15 cm to 0.1, and the follow-up FAG indicated
recovery of retinal perfusion. In our literature review of 46 case reports, 15 reported therapies for iatrogenic RAO, including dilation of
the artery by breathing carbon dioxide/carbogen and using an oral vasodilator, [19, 29] physical removal of the obstruction by ocular
massage, [4, 20, 26, 27, 29] reduction of intraocular pressure by anterior chamber paracentesis, [4, 27] intravenous acetazolamide or
mannitol, [3, 4, 10, 27, 29] intra-arterial thrombolysis, [4, 22] anti-platelet therapy, [10, 12, 19] reduced red blood cell rigidity by
hemodilution, and systemic steroids to reduce retinal edema [2, 11, 12, 21–24]. Only 4 of the 47 cases, including our case, showed
improvements in visual acuity . The number of cases was too small to provide a safe, convincing, and reliable treatment protocol for RAO. In
our case, we observed a shorter occlusion time and faster restoration of perfusion. Thus, the rational goal of treatment should be
shortening the occlusion time and increasing perfusion. The major difference in our case from previous reports is the early HBOT within
24 hours after the onset of symptoms. A number of investigations have shown that early HBOT within 24 hours after the onset of symptoms had
beneficial effects for visual acuity improvements in eyes with RAO, and there were no serious major complications . However, for iatrogenic
RAO, there have been no case reports or large clinical trials to prove the efficacy of HBOT. Breathing 100% oxygen under 2.5 atmospheres
absolute can increase dissolved plasma oxygen by almost 17-fold than breathing room air. Under such hyperbaric conditions, enough dissolved
plasma oxygen can meet the normal requirements of the body at rest without the need for hemoglobin . Therefore, more oxygen can be delivered
deeper into the ocular tissue, including the inner retina via diffusion, to support tissue survival until recovery of perfusion in patients
with iatrogenic RAO . Thus, though the CaHA particles still remained in place for a few months after occlusion, we surmised that the effect
of HBOT in iatrogenic RAO could be the increase in oxygen perfusion into the retina, which further contributed to the improvement in visual
acuity. Another issue that needs to be mentioned is the possibility of central nervous system infarction. Just as the injected materials can
be pushed into the ophthalmic artery, an excessive force may also cause retrograde emboli into the internal carotid artery, resulting in a
cerebrovascular event. In our review, 7 of the 46 cases (7/46, 15.2%) [4, 10, 15, 17, 30, 36] had complications with a stroke event. Of
these, 6 cases were following fat transfer, [4, 15, 17, 30, 36] and the remaining case had hyaluronic acid injection . Therefore, we should
pay attention to each patient’s neurological symptoms and signs. It is recommended that routine neuroimaging examination, such as CT or MRI,
should be arranged in iatrogenic RAO to rule out the possibility of brain infarction. In conclusion, considering there are no reported
reliable treatments for iatrogenic RAO, a poor visual acuity outcome is inevitable. In this report, we offer our experience with HBOT for
the treatment of iatrogenic RAO. We found that early HBOT had some beneficial effects on retinal perfusion and visual acuity, while there
were no major complications. Therefore, along with recommended treatments by the EAGLE study, HBOT seems worthwhile for iatrogenic RAO
within the initial 24 hours if the equipment and a trained technician are available. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Retinal artery occlusion Fluorescein angiography Optical coherence tomography Magnetic resonance imaging Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
Best corrected visual acuity Calcium hydroxylapatite European assessment group for lysis in the Eye. Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YHH was involved in the design and execution of the study. Collection and
management of the data were completed by SFH and SHT. YHH and SFH participated in the management and interpretation of the data. YHH and SFH
participated in preparation, review, and approval of the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was
sponsored partly by the National Cheng Kung University Hospital Research Fund (NCKUH-10305021). The funder had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
