Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNC) of the ovary, or ovarian undifferentiated non-small cell carcinoma of neuroendocrine type, is a
rare entity that is frequently associated with ovarian surface epithelial tumors. Few cases have been reported in the literature. LCNC is an
aggressive tumor with tendency to present at advanced stages and to cause death after a short postoperative duration. We report three cases
of LCNC diagnosed histopathologically. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for chromogranin A, NSE, CD56, and
pancytokeratin. The patients were treated postoperatively with combination chemotherapy. Due to the rarity of LCNC, the general consensus on
standard therapy is not established. Although most patients are at stage I, the biological aggressiveness and poor prognosis of the tumors
have been reported in previous reports despite extensive surgery and chemotherapy. Ovarian neoplasms associated with hormone production and
secretion include sex-cord-stromal and germ cell tumors . Another tumor showing endocrine features is small cell carcinoma, which is divided
into hypercalcemic and pulmonary types . According to the World Health Organization (WHO), undifferentiated non-small cell carcinoma of
neuroendocrine type is synonymous with large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNC) [3, 4]. LCNC is a rare cancer, and 27 cases have been
reported in the literature so far . The clinical behaviors of LCNC are aggressive and show poor prognosis despite being diagnosed in the
early stages [2, 8, 9]. Most of the reported LCNCs are associated with teratoma or epithelial tumor, such as serous and mucinous tumors . We
report three cases of large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the ovary with a literature review. A 77-year old woman visited our clinic with
a 1-month history of abdominal distension and discomfort. She had been diagnosed with coronary artery disease prior to this presentation.
Physical examination showed ascites and firm/fixed mass in the suprapubic area. In the left supraclavicular area, nodular masses were
palpable, raising suspicion of metastatic lymph nodes. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge heterogenous soft tissue mass in the pelvic
cavity. Chest CT showed an extensive, conglomerated soft tissue density in the left supraclavicular area. The CA125 value was 124 u/ml. She
underwent an exploratory laparotomy. At operation, a 15-cm ovarian mass was found to adhere to the uterus, bladder, rectum, and small
intestine. About 500 ml of ascites was noted. The uterus, pelvic mass, and neck masses were removed, and there were large amounts of
intraoperative bleeding. The pathologic diagnosis of the ovarian mass was undifferentiated non-small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
ovary. Immunohistochemical staining was negative for synaptophysin, but positive for chromogranin A and NSE (Figure 1). The pathologic
examination revealed that the neck mass had malignant cells with massive necrosis. The cytologic evaluation of the ascites showed malignant
cells. She received 1 session of etoposide 100 mg/m2 for 2 days along with 1 session of carboplatin 300 mg/m2 at 14 days after operation.
She died of septic shock after 45 postoperative days.Figure 1 Microscopic pictures. (a) Neuroendocrine carcinoma: low-power field shows
solid sheets (H&E, ×40). (b) Cells with larger vesicular nuclei: prominent nucleoli, and mitotic activity (H&E, ×400). (c) Chromogranin A is
expressed in a neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). (d) Pancytokeratin is expressed in a neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). (e) NSE is expressed
focally in a neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). (f) CD56 is expressed in a neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). Microscopic pictures. (a)
Neuroendocrine carcinoma: low-power field shows solid sheets (H&E, ×40). (b) Cells with larger vesicular nuclei: prominent nucleoli, and
mitotic activity (H&E, ×400). (c) Chromogranin A is expressed in a neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). (d) Pancytokeratin is expressed in a
neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). (e) NSE is expressed focally in a neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). (f) CD56 is expressed in a
neuroendocrine carcinoma (×400). A 58-year old woman was referred to our clinic after being diagnosed with neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
ovary at a private clinic. She had complained of abdominal discomfort for 1 month prior to this presentation and was found to have an
ovarian mass. She had no remarkable past medical history or family history. She underwent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, total omentectomy, and pelvic lymph node sampling at the private clinic. The pathologic diagnosis of the mass was
undifferentiated non-small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma restricted to the left ovary. The surgical stage was Ia. She was treated with 6
sessions of a combination chemotherapy consisting of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and cisplatin 90 mg/m2. Five months after the last chemotherapy, a
recurrent mass was noted around the para-aortic lymph node area by CT scan. It measured about 2.3 × 1.6 cm on the left para-aortic area. The
CA125 level was 1.6 u/ml. She underwent secondary debulking operation. At the laparotomy, a 3-cm mass was noted in the left para-aortic
lymph node. The mass was removed and histopathologically examined. The pathologic diagnosis of the mass was large cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma recurrent in the para-aortic lymph node. She was treated with 7 sessions of taxotere 75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks. She died of multiple
organ failure at 17 months after initial diagnosis. A 67-year old woman was referred to our clinic because of an ovarian mass. She had
visited a private clinic due to urinary frequency, and the ovarian mass was found by transvaginal sonography. At presentation, CT scan
revealed a 13-cm multiseptated mixed solid and cystic mass in the left ovary which was suspected of cystadenocarcinoma. The CA125 level was
71.8 u/ml. She underwent total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, para-aortic lymph node
dissection, and total omentectomy along with multiple biopsy. At operation, the mass was composed of solid and cystic portions (Figure 2).
The pathologic diagnosis of the mass was neuroendocrine carcinoma of non-small cell type arising from the left ovary which involved the
pelvic peritoneum. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for pancytokeratin, CD56, and pancytokeratin, and was focally positive for NSE;
however, it was negative for synaptophysin and chromogranin A (Figure 1). The surgical stage was IIb. She was treated with a combination
chemotherapy consisting of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin 4-hour area-under-the curve (AUC4) every 3 weeks. She is still healthy
5 months after operation.Figure 2 A photograph of an ovarian mass. It is composed of solid and cystic lesions. A photograph of an ovarian
mass. It is composed of solid and cystic lesions. Neuroendocrine carcinoma originates from endocrine cells of the diffuse neuroendocrine
system, which in turn consists of a variety of cells present in the central and peripheral nervous systems as well as several endocrine
organs. These cells can produce biologically active amines and peptides which can act as neurotransmitters, hormones, or paracrine
regulators. Neuroendocrine cells are present in normal epithelium of the female genital tract . It has been shown that primitive endodermal
cells have the potential to differentiate into both endocrine and other cell types and that ovarian neuroendocrine tumors may develop from
non-neuroendocrine cells through activation of genes that promote neuroendocrine differentiation . In general, the incidence of epithelial
ovarian cancer increases in older patients (age >50 years), but the LCNC can be developed in premenopausal and postmenopausal women, ranging
from 22 to 76 years. Similarly, in our report the age of patients ranged from 58 to 77 years, and mean age was 67.3 years. Clinical symptoms
at initial presentation are variable. The most common clinical manifestation was abdominal pain in 7 cases [3, 13], followed by abdominal
distension (n = 4) , and an abdominal palpable mass (n = 3) [3, 5, 16], abdominal bloating (n = 3) , abdominal discomfort (n = 1) ,
postmenopausal vaginal bleeding (n = 1) , and dysarthria due to brain metastasis (n = 1) . In our report, abdominal distension, abdominal
discomfort, and urinary frequency occurred in one case each. The urinary frequency may have been due to compression of the bladder by the
huge ovarian mass. Most of the LCNCs are partially solid or partially cystic, with size ranging from 9 and 30 cm (mean size, 16.6 cm) [2, 3,
8, 14, 17]. In this report, the mean size of the mass was 13 cm, and the mass was also partially solid or cystic. The histogenesis of
neuroendocrine tumors is unknown. The following hypotheses have been proposed. First, neuroendocrine cells have been presented in the normal
epithelium of benign, borderline, and malignant tumors of the female genital tract. These cells serve as an origin of neuroendocrine tumors
of the ovary. Second, primitive endocrine cells can differentiate into endocrine and other cell types. Third, ovarian neuroendocrine tumors
may develop from non-neuroendocrine cells, which activate genes promoting neuroendocrine differentiation [12, 18]. CA125 is a tumor antigen
found in 75 to 83% of all epithelial ovarian cancers . Serum CA125 levels correlate with cancer stages or responses to treatment. A rise in
CA125 levels usually precedes tumor progression or recurrence. Therefore, CA125 can be used to monitor epithelial ovarian cancer. In LCNC,
serum CA125 levels are not specific to clinical courses. Table 1 shows reported serum CA125 levels in previous studies. The CA125 levels
range from 5.7 to 917 u/ml. Some authors have reported other tumor markers. Ngan et al. have reported that 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid
(5-HIAA) markedly increase in neuroendocrine carcinomas of the ovary. They also stated that 5-HIAA is a sensitive tumor marker of
neuroendocrine components.Table 1 Clinicopathologic review, adjuvant treatment, CA125 levels, and follow-up periods of reported cases
AuthorMean age (years)Chief complaintAdjuvant treatmentCA125 (u/ml)Follow-up periods (months)Lindboe et al. 64Abdominal discomfort,
nauseaCisplatin + Bleomycin + Etoposide3809Shakuntala et al. 40Abdominal distensionCisplatin + Etoposide2806Hinde et al. 54Abdominal
distensionCarboplatin + Paclitaxcel_8Dundr et al. 73Dysarthria, difficulty in verbal expression because of brain
metastasisCarboplatin + Paclitaxcel9412Cyberknife on brain lesionTsuji et al. 46Abdominal distensionCarboplatin + Paclitaxcel914Died after
4 months postoperativelyAslam et al. 76Abdominal painNoneWithin the normal rangeDied postoperativelyChenevert et al. 53Abdominal
massCarboplatin + Paclitaxcel80Died after 3 months postoperatively53Abdominal distensionCisplatin + Etoposide5.7Died after 7 months
postoperativelyBehnam et al. 27Pelvic massCarboplatin + Paclitaxcel10Veras et al. 11 cases22 to 63 6: abdominal painMean survival: 12Mean
follow-up periods: 283: abdominal bloating1: pelvic mass1: postmenopausal bleedingKi et al. 77Abdominal
distensionCarboplatin + Etoposide124Died after 1.5 months postoperatively58Abdominal discomfortCisplatin + PaclitaxcelnoneDied after
17 months postoperativelySingle Docetaxel67Urinary frequencyCarboplatin + Paclitaxcel71.85 Clinicopathologic review, adjuvant treatment,
CA125 levels, and follow-up periods of reported cases CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) usually show non-specific findings in LCNC
cases. Radiologic studies are not useful for the differential diagnosis of LCNC from other ovarian tumors [5, 15, 18]. The differential
diagnosis of LCNC includes other primary or secondary neuroendocrine tumors. Small cell carcinoma has smaller cells with molding and
necrosis. Metastatic neuroendocrine cancer cells are usually not found in the epithelial layer of the ovary. Several non-neuroendocrine
tumors, such as teratoma, sex-cord stromal tumor, and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, may show neuroendocrine differentiation. These biphasic
tumors can usually be distinguished from LCNC by identifying non-neuroendocrine components [3, 5, 12]. Immunohistochemistry is important to
diagnose neuroendocrine carcinoma. The most commonly used non-hormonal immunohistochemical markers are chromogranin A, synaptophysin,
cytokeratin, and CD56. NSE and Leu-7 lack specificity and may not be conclusive for neuroendocrine differentiation when other stains are
negative [3, 5, 15, 16, 18]. Our specimens were immunohistochemically positive for chromogranin A, NSE, CD56, and pancytokeratin. There is
no standard treatment of LCNC. Various combination chemotherapy regimens, such as platinum, paclitaxcel, etoposide, and bleomycin have been
used in previous studies. The survival periods varied among the groups. A combination of platinum and paclitaxcel has most frequently been
used with shorter survival. LCNC is rare, shows aggressive behaviors and poor responses to treatment. Due to the rarity of LCNCs, general
consensus on the standard therapy has not yet been established. Although patients with LCNC are at stage I, their survival rates are
relatively low due to biological aggressiveness despite extensive surgery and chemotherapy. We reported three cases of advanced or early
LCNC with a brief review of the literature. Written informed consent was obtained. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of our hospital (KC14ZISE0113). 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid 4-hour area-under-the curve computed tomography hematoxylin and eosin large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma magnetic resonance image World Health Organization. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions EYK wrote the initial draft. SYH and JSP performed the surgery and helped collect clinical
information. SYH, KHL and SNB designed the study and made the manuscript of this paper. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
