A 8-year-old girl with severe pectus excavatum and an atrial septal defect had simultaneous repair of the both defects, using thransthoracic
occlusion for atrial septal defect and improved Nuss technique for the pectus excavatum. Neither cardiopulmonary bypass nor sternotomy was
required in this procedure. Details of the procedure and outcome are described. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s13019-014-0168-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Coexisting pectus excavatum and
congenital heart disease is not uncommon. Traditionally, the approach to this problem has been to repair each one with a separate surgical
procedure because of fear of increased complications from bleeding, infections, and anesthesia . More recently, many reports of successful
combined repair have been published . These procedures of pectoralis muscle flaps elevation, resection of the deformed costal cartilages and
sternal osteotomy may be associated with increased bleeding because of the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) for repair of congenital heart
defect. Concomitant repair of a congenital heart disease and pectus deformity is still a challenge. We report a simultaneous repair of an
atrial septal defect and pectus excavatum with a technique that combined of thransthoracic occlusion for atrial septal defect and mordified
Nuss procedure. Neither CPB nor sternal osteotomy was required in this procedure. In Jul 2011, an 8-year-old girl was investigated for chest
tightness. She had a severe pectus excavatum and atrial septal defect (ASD) (Figure 1A). Computed tomographic scan confirmed the Haller
index was 6.2 (Figure 2A) and Echocardiography showed a secundum atrial septal defect with 15 mm size (Figure 3A). Pulmonary function tests
were within normal range. Thransthoracic occlusion for atrial septal defect and Nuss technique for the pectus excavatum were considered for
Simultaneous repair.Figure 1 Patient chest image. (A) Before cardiac surgery. (B) After cardiac surgery.Figure 2 Imaging of the pectus
excavatum. (A) CT showing the severe asymmetric pectus excavatum with severe cardiac compression and displacement. (B) X-ray showing the
strutting bar that corrected the funnel chest.Figure 3 TEE image showing the atrial septal defect. (A) Before cardiac surgery. (B) After
cardiac surgery. Patient chest image. (A) Before cardiac surgery. (B) After cardiac surgery. Imaging of the pectus excavatum. (A) CT showing
the severe asymmetric pectus excavatum with severe cardiac compression and displacement. (B) X-ray showing the strutting bar that corrected
the funnel chest. TEE image showing the atrial septal defect. (A) Before cardiac surgery. (B) After cardiac surgery. The sites of the
operation which included the lowest concaves of the sternum, the highest points of both ribs and the cutting area of the left and right
pectus were marked prior to the operation. A 3 cm incision was first made in the patient's right anterior 4th intercostal space. After the
pericardium was opened, a 5 mm incision was made in the right atrium for the insertion of the delivery sheath. Under continuous TEE
guidance, we used a diameter of 20 mm occluder (Shanghai Memory Alloy Company, Shanghai, China) to close the ASD. The procedure was
completed by inspection for residual shunting, atrioventricular valve distortion, or obstruction of the superior vena cava, IVC, or coronary
sinus. After the cardiac operation, two 1.5 cm skin incisions were made between the axilla anterior and backward lines on both sides of the
pectus wall. With continuous monitoring through the incision for ASD occlusion, an introducing clamp which connected a 18 cm strutting bar
(Shanghai Puwei medical instrument Company, Shanghai, China) was slowly moved from the right incision along the collapsed area of the
sternum toward the left incision. The convex side of the strutting bar was pulled over the backside of the sternum. When the strutting bar
was in the position, the sternum and anterior pectus wall were protruded in an expected shape. After withdrawn the introducing clamp, the
strutting bar on one side was invaginated in the holder. Subsequently, the holder and strutting bar were sutured to the rib periosteum. No
drainage tube was placed. Postoperative X-ray showed the positions of the strutting bar that corrected the funnel chest (Figure 2B) and the
occluder that closed atrial septal defect were satisfactory (Figure 3B).The patient was extubated on the day of surgery and was discharged
after 5 days. The cosmetic appearance appeared excellent (Figure 1B). Antiaggregation therapy consisted of heparin (administered during the
first 24 postoperative hours) and aspirin (3–4 mg/kg/d, continued for 6 months postoperatively). In Jul 2013, two years after operation, the
strutting bar was withdrawn, the cosmetic appearance appeared excellent, there was no episodes of ASD residual fistula, hydrothorax,
endocarditis, thromboembolism, or permanent rhythm disturbances. The combination of cardiac disease and pectus excavatum creates a dilemma
for surgeons. A pectus deformity may complicate cardiac surgery by making midline sternotomy technically more difficult. Some authors
suggest a two-stage procedure. Jones and colleagues recommend a two-stage approach, correcting the pectus deformity several months before
the cardiac pathology. They point out that one-stage procedures may prolong the duration of the operation, may increase the risk of
bleeding, may increase sternal infections and may not improve the exposure to the heart. However, others have reported simultaneous repair
of both the pectus excavatum and the heart defect achieved good result with no serious complication . The traditional repair of Ravitch has
been reported as a means of simultaneous repair of both defects. More recently, the minimal invasive procedure popularized by Nuss were used
in these patients with both defects. Okamura and colleagues reported one case, a 47-year-old woman, who had a concomitant pectus excavatum
and atrial septal defect repair using a combination of the Ravitch procedure and Nuss procedure, using the convex bar. Kao and colleagues
reported a 25-year-old man with severe pectus excavatum and an atrial septal defect had simultaneous repair of the defects, using a patch
for closure of the defect and placement of a Nuss bar for the chest wall defect. The results were satisfactory, but all the procedures
described above required CPB and sternotomy was not evitable. Our approach for the simultaneous repair for congenital heart defect and
pectus excavatum has proven safe and satisfying. Neither CPB nor sternotomy was required in this procedure. Simultaneous repair of an atrial
septal defect and pectus excavatum with the techniques that combined of thransthoracic occlusion for atrial septal defect and mordified Nuss
procedure is simple, minimal invasive and feasible. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's guardian for the publication of
this report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. YS
performed the operation and drafted the manuscript. PZ collected the clinical data and participated the operation. SYZ designed the
operation, revised and submitted the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. YS and PZ are surgeons of Department of
cardiovascular surgery, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Acedemy of Medical Sciences and postgraduate students of Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Southern Medical University. SYZ is the chief surgeon of Department of cardiovascular surgery, Guangdong General
Hospital, Guangdong Acedemy of Medical Sciences. Below are the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original
file for figure 1Authors’ original file for figure 2Authors’ original file for figure 3 Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’
original file for figure 2 Authors’ original file for figure 3 Cardiopulmonary bypass Atrial septal defect Transesophageal echocardiography
Computed tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. None.
