Approximately ten to fifteen percent of patients with myasthenia gravis are found to have a thymoma, and twenty to twenty-five percent of
patients with thymoma have myasthenia gravis. Thymomatous myasthenia gravis tends to have a difficult clinical course and poor prognosis. We
report two cases (one patient of Asian ethnicity and the other of Caucasian ethnicity) of atypical presentations of myasthenia gravis
associated with invasive malignant thymoma. Both patients were diagnosed at a young age, in their 20s. They presented with a turbulent
course of myasthenia gravis and recurrent thymoma, but obtained good outcome after aggressive treatment involving multiple different
specialists. Although thymomatous myasthenia gravis tends to have a difficult clinical course and poor prognosis, early and aggressive
treatment along with multidisciplinary management may improve the outcome of these patients. Although the relationship between myasthenia
gravis (MG) and thymoma is well documented, the prevalence and characteristics of MG associated with invasive thymoma are less known.
Approximately ten to fifteen percent of patients with MG are found to have a thymoma. Conversely, in patients with thymoma, 40 percent have
an associated autoimmune condition, presumably paraneoplastic in etiology. Twenty to twenty-five percent of patients with thymoma have
myasthenia gravis . Thymoma-associated MG (T-MG) is identified as a tumor originating from thymic epithelial cells, most being cortical
subtype (World Health Organization type B) . Because cortical thymoma usually has some morphological similarities with the thymic cortex,
they share the ability to propagate the maturation of immature naive CD4 T cells and spread mature naive T cells into the periphery. The
pathogenesis of T-MG suggests that epithelial neoplastic cells encircled by maturing T cells are capable of expressing epitopes cross-
reactive with skeletal muscle proteins, such as acetylcholine receptor (AChR) . AChR antibodies have been detected in all patients with
T-MG. The AChR antibody directly attacks the neuromuscular junction, affecting the endplate region of the postsynaptic membrane,
specifically aimed at the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors . The patient’s genetic profile may also play an important role as well as the
thymic ability to export autoreactive T cells in developing MG. Research has shown that MG has a genetic association to HLA-DR3 or ancestral
haplotype 8.1 in early-onset MG. The thymoma patients with a particular genetic profile convey high risk of developing MG . The incidence of
thymoma in the United States is 0.15 per 100,000 person-years. Asians, Pacific Islanders and African Americans appear more frequently among
thymoma patients . T-MG is equally common in men and women and occurs at any age with a peak onset around 50 years . Thymoma is a unique
thymic epithelial neoplasm with indolent growth and rarely presents with local invasiveness and metastases . Thymoma is graded according to
the World Health Organization (WHO) histological classification and is classified by the Masaoka staging system . Above stage II is
considered to be invasive. The incidence of MG associated with invasive high-stage malignant thymoma is rare. The severity of the MG is
evaluated according to the Medical Scientific Advisory Board of the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America clinical classification system
(MGFA), which was established in 2000 . Thymomatous MG tends to have a difficult clinical course and poor prognosis . We report here two
cases of atypical presentations of MG associated with invasive malignant thymoma. Both patients were diagnosed at a young age, in their 20s.
They presented with a turbulent course of MG and recurrent thymoma, but obtained good outcome after aggressive treatment. A 25-year-old,
right-handed, Caucasian woman noticed the inability to perform certain yoga positions with fatigability and decreased stamina for exercise
beginning at the age of 22. She soon developed diplopia, facial and proximal muscle weakness with difficulty lifting her arms above her head
and difficulty climbing stairs. She was admitted to a community hospital and had an extensive workup, including brain and spine images as
well as serum autoimmune studies, which were normal. She was given one cycle of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), which slightly improved
her symptoms. Her condition deteriorated with difficulty chewing, swallowing, and increasing weakness. She was referred to us and manifested
classical significant myasthenic weakness in her extraocular, bulbar and proximal arm and leg muscles. Repetitive nerve stimulation studies
revealed 17 percent compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude decrement in the right median nerve and 19 percent in the left spinal
accessory nerve. Forced vital capacity was 1.65 liters. Her AChR binding antibody was elevated at 133.06 and blocking antibody was positive
at 43. She was classified as MGFA class IVb. Prednisone, IVIG, and pyridostigmine were initiated. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan
showed a large anterior mediastinal heterogeneous mass with solid and cystic components measuring 6cm × 4.6cm × 5.2cm with invasion of the
pericardium. Video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) and anterior mediastinoscopy were performed. An extensive lesion was noted with local
adherence to the pulmonary left upper lobe and presence of a left pleural effusion. The invasive thymoma was classified as Masaoka stage
III. She received neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin and etoposide with 45Gy of radiation for tumor reduction. She had a
complicated clinical course with numerous myasthenia crises requiring repeated intensive care admission and endotracheal intubation for
ventilator support. Plasmapheresis and IVIG were administered at different times. She later underwent a median sternotomy for a radical
thymectomy with en bloc resection of a portion of the left upper lobe of the lung. The final pathology showed WHO type B1 with less than 10
percent residual viable tumor. Five months after the initial tumor was biopsied, she was found to have recurrent focus of tumor on the left
inferior phrenic nerve margin requiring adjuvant radiation for another six weeks. Serial chest imaging showed no evidence of recurrent
tumor. She is currently two years post thymectomy and has significantly improved to an MGFA minimal manifestation status (MMS). She is
currently maintained on a low dose of both prednisone and pyridostigmine without IVIG. A 25-year-old, right-handed, Asian man started to
notice difficulty in chewing and weakness in both arms and legs at age 20. He was given prednisone at a community hospital but his symptoms
did not improve. When he was referred to us one month later, he had quickly progressed to an inability to ambulate, dysphagia, slurred
speech, severe ptosis, weakness chewing and diplopia. His AChR-binding antibody was positive at 30.38 and blocking antibody was elevated at
36. Forced vital capacity was 1.3 liters. He was given IVIG, but no definite improvement was noted. He was admitted to the intensive care
unit in myasthenia crisis and given aggressive plasmapheresis and immunotherapy. He was classified as generalized myasthenia gravis MGFA
class IVb. A CT scan of his chest revealed a 7.6cm × 6.1cm anterior mediastinal mass with local invasion as well as some pleural nodules,
the largest of which was 2.4cm × 1.1cm. A biopsy was done through VATS and his invasive thymoma was classified as Masaoka stage IVa with
pleura dissemination. He was started on neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin and etoposide with radiation. A turbulent clinical
course ensued requiring repeated plasmapheresis and IVIG. Our patient then improved. His repeat chest image showed significant decrease in
the size of the anterior mediastinal mass and resolution of the posterior pleural thickening five months later. He was taken to the
operating room (OR) and underwent median sternotomy with resection of the anterior mediastinal mass, total radical thymectomy and resection
of the innominate vein successfully. Radiation therapy continued postoperatively. The final pathology showed WHO type AB thymoma with
invasion to the pleura and blood vessel wall of the innominate vein. Fluctuation and a difficult course followed requiring a combined
therapy including prednisone, pyridostigmine, IVIG and azathioprine. He slowly improved to MGFA class IIa and his prednisone and IVIG were
gradually reduced four months after the operation. Serial chest imaging was performed and a pulmonary cryptococcal nodule was detected two
years following the initial diagnosis of MG, which prompted fluconazole treatment. Three years after the diagnosis, he reached MGFA MMS and
was maintained on low-dose prednisone and azathioprine. Our patient’s MG relapsed again after two years with slurred speech, ptosis, double
vision, and extremity weakness secondary to medication noncompliance. He was restarted immediately on prednisone, azathioprine and IVIG;
chest imaging showed increased size of a left posteromedial pleural nodule to 2.7cm × 0.9cm. A biopsy showed recurrent metastatic thymoma.
Chemotherapy with cisplatin, cytoxan, and doxorubicin was begun. He underwent recurrent thymoma resection five months later with left
posterolateral thoracotomy with excision of two pleural masses and excision of the old lesions of the diaphragm with primary repair. The
final pathology showed metastatic thymoma in the left pleura and diaphragm. He improved gradually after thoracotomy. He is currently MGFA
Class IIa and remains on combination therapy of prednisone, azathioprine and IVIG. Several retrospective studies have been conducted to
identify variables that influence the natural history of T-MG and therapeutic approaches. Maggi et al. reviewed 197 patients with T-MG, with
mean age at onset being approximately 47 years. Twelve percent of the patients had invasive thymoma in Masaoka stage III, 3 percent in stage
IVa and 0.5 percent in stage IVb. Mean age at thymectomy was about 48 years. Almost 10 percent of the patients had recurrent thymoma, which
was 17 percent with invasive thymoma stage III . The study identified that early onset age before 45 as well as invasive thymoma were
significantly associated with the persistence of symptoms. Invasive thymoma was correlated with a higher probability of recurrence. The
chance of achieving remission in T-MG was 9.64 percent, but of those the majority were noninvasive stage I thymoma . Other studies looked
into the prognostic factors for T-MG and revealed that WHO classification had limitations in accurately predicting the prognosis of the
disease . Although a study led by Ruffini et al. demonstrated that WHO histologic classification and Masaoka stage are interrelated in T-MG,
in multivariate analysis only Masaoka stage was an independent prognostic factor . Furthermore, histological features had a lesser role in
foreseeing outcome after resection, thus Masaoka stage is believed to be a better predictor of clinical behavior, recurrence, and long-term
survival. One study found the rate of complete resectability varied by stage; essentially 100 percent resectability for stage II, 50 percent
to 60 percent for stage III, and approaching 0 percent for stage IVa tumors . Only completeness of resection was significantly correlated
with a better prognosis . Another study demonstrated that survival rate was significantly different among stage I, stage III, and stage IVa
with a significant correlation between complete resection and survival. Significant correlation was found between no invasion to the great
vessel, invasion except for the great vessel, and invasion to the great vessel . Invasiveness remains the best predictor of relapse-free
survival after resection. Drop metastasis into ipsilateral pleura and pericardium is a characteristic finding in invasive thymoma. The
metastases are frequently confined to the pleura, pericardium, or diaphragm . Lucchi et al. reviewed 123 patients diagnosed with T-MG with a
mean age of 56 years who underwent thymectomy and revealed that higher complete MG remission rate was achieved in early-stage thymoma. This
is the first study documenting that T-MG patients who achieved a complete remission in MG had a significantly better prognosis. Overall
survival was dependent on the Masaoka stage, the WHO classification, and the achievement of complete remission of myasthenia symptoms .
Compared to the above statistical data of incidence, survival rate, prognostic factors and, recurrent frequency of the T-MG, the two cases
of MG associated with invasive thymoma we report here are rare. Our patients’ symptoms of MG occurred at very young age, 20 and 22 years old
respectively, whereas studies showed the mean age of onset was 47 to 56 with a peak at 50 years. Among 197 patients in the Maggi et al.
study, only 10 patients were in the age group 20 to 29 years with low-stage invasive thymoma, and none of them were above stage III. Of
patients of all ages with WHO type B, only two had Masaoka stage III. None of the patients with WHO type AB had Masaoka stage IV. The
incidence of young patients with MG associated with high-stage invasive thymoma is extremity sporadic, which highlights the continued
challenge in managing MG associated with malignant thymoma and the necessity of multi-specialist involvement. Although radial surgical
resection is the cornerstone of therapy in T-MG, possibility of completeness of resection is very low in high-stage invasive thymoma and
almost impossible for stage IVa tumors . The consensus is that patients with invasive thymoma, especially stage III or IV, should receive
adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy, however, to date, no standard therapeutic strategy has been validated. Unfortunately, the recurrence
of invasive thymoma is a frequent event. When the thymoma invades the pleura or the pericardium, radical excision is nearly impossible.
Studies have identified that young onset age, high-stage invasive thymoma, recurrence rate and inability to achieve complete remission in MG
lead to poor prognosis for T-MG patients. Both of our patients, however, had favorable outcomes despite those factors. The reasons for our
success are multifactorial including: 1. Early and accurate diagnosis to safeguard the myasthenia crisis. 2. Plasmapheresis and IVIG
infusion prior to surgery to remove a great deal of the circulating surviving pathogenic antibodies. 3. Aggressive neoadjuvant chemotherapy
and radiotherapy to shrink the tumor size to ensure a complete surgical resection and continuation of radiation post operation for any
further invasion. 4. Adequate long-term combined immunosuppression and immunomodulation treatment to achieve control of the clinical
symptoms. 5. Regular image surveillance to detect any recurrent tumor in the early stage. Most importantly, thymomatous MG is a distinct
disease, and the collaboration among thoracic surgeon, oncologist, radiologist and neurologist to monitor the neurological and oncological
symptoms optimizes treatment through a synergistic effect and provides a favorable outcome to the patients. There is a known and established
relationship between thymoma and myasthenia gravis. Although thymomatous myasthenia gravis tends to have a difficult clinical course and
poor prognosis, early and aggressive treatment along with multidisciplinary management may improve the outcome of these patients. Written
informed consent was obtained from both patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HG, NA
and SRB were both involved in clinical diagnostic evaluation and management. HG, NA and SRB performed the electrodiagnostic studies. HG and
NA generated the first draft of the manuscript. SRB and RAR reviewed the manuscript. RAR revised and edited the manuscript using an
additional literature search. SRB and RAR were responsible for the intellectual content of the manuscript. All authors participated in and
provided significant contributions in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. HG is a neurophysiology
fellow at the University of Southern California-Keck School of Medicine-Los Angeles County Medical Center. NA is a staff neurologist at
Kaiser Permanente. SRB is a professor of neurology at the University of Southern California-Keck School of Medicine-Los Angeles County
Medical Center. SRB is Director of the University of Southern California Neuromuscular Program, a Fellow of the American Academy of
Neurology and the American Association of Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine, and is board certified by the American Board of
Psychiatry and Neurology in Neurology, Clinical Neurophysiology, Pain Medicine, and Neuromuscular Medicine. SRB is also board certified by
the American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine in Electrodiagnostic Medicine. SRB is a member of the advisory board and the scientific
committee of the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of California. RAR is a Deputy Editor for the Journal of Medical Case Reports, an Associate
Neurology Editor for BMC Neurology, Grand Rounds and WebmedCentral, and a Section Editor for BMC Research Notes. RAR practices general
neurology at Neurology Consultants Medical Group, serves as Medical Director of the PIH Health Stroke Program, is a Clinical Assistant
Professor of Neurology at the University of Southern California-Keck School of Medicine-Los Angeles County Medical Center, and is a Fellow
of the American Association of Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine. RAR is board certified by the American Board of Psychiatry and
Neurology in Neurology and Vascular Neurology, and Neurocritical Care and Neuroimaging by the United Council of Neurologic Subspecialties.
RAR is also board certified by the American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine in Electrodiagnostic Medicine. RAR is a former president of
the Los Angeles Neurological Society and a current Fellow of the American Academy of Neurology. We gratefully acknowledge both patients for
allowing us to publish their case reports.
