Notice: Authors are encouraged to submit quizzes for possible publication in the Journal. These may be in any specialty, and should
approximately follow the format used here (maximum of 2 figures). Please address any submissions to: Editor, Saudi Medical Journal, Prince
Sultan Military Medical City, PO Box 7897, Riyadh 11159, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Tel. +966 (11) 4777714 Ext. 42841. E-mail: info@smj.org.sa
A 56-year-old Sudanese male with hypertension for 15 years was admitted to Alzaytouna Specialist Hospital in Khartoum, Sudan in January 2014
with a history of acute paraplegia for 3 hours. He had severe lower thoracic pain radiating to the interscapular area. This was followed by
complete weakness of the lower limbs. The weakness worsened rapidly with complete paralysis within 30 minutes. Examination revealed blood
pressure of 90/65 mm Hg with pulse 80. He had flaccid paraplegia with a sensory level at T12. Lab investigations including complete blood
count, renal profile, coagulation profile, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were all normal. Urgent MRI of the dorsal region of the spine
was normal. Magnetic resonance angiography followed (Figure 1). Diffusion-weighted image (DWI) of the spinal cord revealed an abnormality
(Figure 2). We are reporting this case to document the occurrence of this rare problem and to emphasize the significant role of diffusion-
weighted images in such situations. Magnetic resonance imaging study from the present case of a 56 year-old man. A diffusion-weighted image
of the spinal cord of a 56-year-old man. Figure 1 is a magnetic resonant imaging of the patient hours after his first presentation. What
does it show?Figure 2 is a diffusion-weighted image of the spinal cord at the level of T12. What does it show?What is your final diagnosis?
Figure 1 is a magnetic resonant imaging of the patient hours after his first presentation. What does it show? Figure 2 is a diffusion-
weighted image of the spinal cord at the level of T12. What does it show? What is your final diagnosis? Magnetic resonance angiography study
from the present case of a 56 year-old man suffering from aortic dissection manifested by the presence of a true lumen and a false lumen
separated by an intimal flap (arrow).Diffusion-weighted image of the spinal cord of a 56 year-old man with aortic dissection at the lower
cord region opposite to T12 level showing a light bulb signal posteriorly (arrow).Acute ischemic infarct of the cord due to aortic
dissection. Magnetic resonance angiography study from the present case of a 56 year-old man suffering from aortic dissection manifested by
the presence of a true lumen and a false lumen separated by an intimal flap (arrow). Diffusion-weighted image of the spinal cord of a 56
year-old man with aortic dissection at the lower cord region opposite to T12 level showing a light bulb signal posteriorly (arrow). Acute
ischemic infarct of the cord due to aortic dissection. Neurologic sequelae of aortic dissection (AD) can occur in as many as 17-40% of the
patients.1 This can be explained by the fact that a detailed neurological exam is difficult to obtain in critically ill patients. It is even
more misleading as patients can present with painless dissections in 5-15% of the cases.1 Neurological symptoms of AD were classified into
different groups including stroke or transient ischemic attacks, spinal cord ischemia (SCI), ischemic neuropathy, and hypoxic
encephalopathy. Whereas SCI in patients with AD could be due to obstruction of the arteries supplying the spinal cord or due to general
hypotension. While DWI has been proven as the most sensitive modality for the diagnosis of acute cerebral ischemia, it shows the same
potential in evaluating spinal cord infarctions as shown in previous case reports.2-4 Magnetic resonance imaging could be normal in the
first hours or days after spinal cord infarction.5 This can delay any interventional therapy, which may be of much help to the patient
especially when presenting acutely. However, in the first few hours conventional MRI could be normal in some patients as concluded by a few
studies.5 In our case, a conventional MRI of the patient who presented 6 hours after the onset of symptoms was normal. The sagittal T2
showed no clear abnormality of the cord. The DWI of the cord revealed an abnormal signal at the level of T12. Although T2 images can
demonstrate findings of ischemia, they are non-specific and do not differentiate between acute and chronic lesions, and therefore they are
considered unreliable. Few reports have compared between diffusion-weighted and T2 images of patients diagnosed with SCI and almost all
cases demonstrate a better signal intensity on DWI than on T2 images in the first hours of presentation.2,3 As in our case, these reports
prove that DWI in the early hours of SCI is the best modality for the diagnosis. We emphasize the fact that acute aortic dissection should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of acute paraplegia after excluding other more common causes. We postulate that in some cases
where SCI was suspected but not documented, is due to the fact that DWI was not carried out. A DWI of the cord would provide additional
information for the assessment of ischemic changes and also improve on both sensitivity and specificity of the diagnosis and we recommend
that it should be an indispensable part of the MRI protocol. Ahmed AF, Idris AS, Kareem AM, Dawoud TA. Acute toxemic schistosomiasis
complicated by acute flaccid paraplegia due to schistosomal myeloradiculopathy in Sudan. Saudi Med J 2008; 29: 770-773. Rajab KE, Issa AA,
Das RK, Al-Aradi AN. Paraplegia in a puerperal woman due to spinal metastasis from papillary carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Saudi Med J
2005; 26: 985-988.
