A 38-year-old male was diagnosed with unrepaired ventricular septal defect associated with severe pulmonary arterial hypertension, cyanosis,
and significant exercise intolerance. His echocardiogram showed right ventricular dysfunction and moderate pericardial effusion with no
signs of cardiac tamponade. He was treated with an intensive course of inhaled iloprost and sildenafil. He showed a dramatic clinical
response; his saturation went up from 60% on admission to 90% on minimal oxygen with significant improvement in his symptoms and signs of
heart failure and total resolution of pericardial effusion. On follow up 3 and 6 weeks later, he was stable and could walk 360 meters in a 6
minutes walk test with disappearance of pericardial effusion. With unavailability of intravenous prostacyclin, we have shown in this case
that intensive administration of inhaled iloprost could be used intensively as a rescue therapy in severe cases of pulmonary arterial
hypertension with excellent results. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by progressive elevation of the pulmonary
arterial pressure, pulmonary vascular resistance, and right ventricular failure. Pulmonary arterial hypertension could be idiopathic or
associated with underlying diseases.1 The clinical picture depends on the severity of the disease. Symptoms such as progressive dyspnea,
cyanosis, exercise intolerance, and right heart failure may eventually lead to death.2 Current medical therapy provides a symptomatic
benefit, increases exercise capacity, and delays the clinical progression of the disease, thus prolonging and improving the life expectancy.
Treatment choices in PAH depend on the disease severity, the specific type of PAH, the presence of active vasoreactivity, and the patient’s
ability to response to medications with complex modes of administration. Inhaled iloprost has been approved for chronic treatment of PAH in
adults. It is a stable prostacyclin analogue with vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and vascular remodeling properties. Similar to nitric
oxide, when used by the inhaled route, it selectively dilates pulmonary vessels and improves oxygenation.3 The presence of pericardial
effusion (PE) in PAH usually represents advanced disease and carries a poor prognosis. The best treatment approach for those patients is
still controversial. This report presents a successful trial of an intensive course of inhaled iloprost as a rescue measure in a patient
presented in severe PAH and modified New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class IV, with significant clinical, radiological, and
echocardiographic improvement within a short period after initiation of the therapy. A 38-year-old Saudi male, a known case of ventricular
septal defect (VSD) diagnosed at age 11 years, was admitted at the Prince Sultan Cardiac Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. He underwent a
diagnostic right heart catheterization to characterize his hemodynamics before surgical repair, which showed severe and non-reactive PAH. He
was labeled inoperable and was kept on regular outpatient follow up. Five years prior to his current presentation, he became more cyanosed
with a significant activity restriction and his serial echocardiographic assessment showed chronic PE. In September 2012, he visited the
outpatient clinic complaining of severe shortness of breath with activity limitation. On examination, he was tachypneic and tachycardiac at
rest, deeply cyanosed with oxygen saturation of 65 -70% and showing signs of congestive heart failure. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm
with right axis deviation and P pulmonale. The initial chest x-ray (CXR) showed cardiomegaly, oligemic lung fields with chronic hypoxic
changes. Echocardiogram revealed large unrestrictive peri-membranous VSD with biventricular hypertrophy, mild tricuspid regurgitation with
supra-systemic right ventricular pressure and a moderate PE with no signs of tamponade. The overall picture was compatible with
Eisenmenger’s syndrome. Left ventricular systolic function was normal. A baseline 6 minutes walk test (6MWT) was carried out and the patient
could only walk for 2 minutes with a maximum distance of 120 meters and Borg dyspnea scale of 4. He was on oral furosemide, captopril, and
sildenafil (50 mg TID) as a chronic treatment. He was hospitalized for the management of his hypoxia, PE, and right-sided congestive heart
failure. He was started on oxygen, inotropes and aggressive diuresis with fluid restriction, aside from his previous medication. He stayed
for 24 hours in the adult congenital heart disease ward, but he did not show any improvement despite the aggressive management. On the
discussion of patient’s case with the pulmonary hypertension team, it was suggested to start a course of intensive inhaled iloprost therapy
(intravenous prostacyclin was not available) at a dose of 5 micrograms every 2 hours along with intravenous furosemide and oral sildenafil.
There was also a careful follow up of patient’s daily CXR, echocardiography, and laboratory work. He showed a dramatic response to this
regimen and at the end of the first week, his oxygen saturation was above 90% on 1L oxygen, and the signs and symptoms of heart failure were
controlled. The heart shadow on the CXR became smaller, and echocardiogram showed improvement of right ventricular contractility with
minimal residual PE. Inhaled iloprost was reduced gradually to the final dose of 5 micrograms every 4 hours with no documented side effects.
He was discharged from the hospital after 3 weeks in excellent condition on inhaled Iloprost 5 micrograms every 4 hours, aside from his
usual medications. He was still in good condition with oxygen saturation ranging from 85-90% in room air and no symptoms or signs of heart
failure during the follow up visits at week 3 and 6. His daily activities improved, and he could manage to walk 360 meters on 6MWT. His
echocardiogram showed a complete resolution of PE. At 3-months, he was asymptomatic [modified NYHA functional class I] and could walk 408
meters on 6MWT. Figure 1 illustrates the improvement in clinical and physiological parameters. He was advised to continue the same treatment
with regular follow up at the clinic. Improvement in 6 minutes walk test (6MWT) and New York Heart Association functional (NYHA FC) class I
with 3 months of treatment. Management of PAH is complex. The presence of PE in PAH usually represents severe right heart failure and is
associated with poor prognosis.4 Small or moderate PE may be present in up to 54% of patients.5 Patients with severe PAH and circumferential
PE may develop cardiac tamponade with isolated left heart compression, as the elevated pressure in the right heart chambers prevent right
atrial and ventricular compression. As the pericardial pressure continues to rises to the point exceeding the left chambers pressure, left
atrial, followed by left ventricular, diastolic collapse occurs leading to impaired filling of the left ventricle causing a drop in cardiac
output.6 Subsequently, a high index of suspicion is required to detect the development of the atypical form of cardiac tamponade in this
group of patients. Many studies have reported the detrimental effect of pericardiocentesis in this particular indication, including
mortality.4,7 The exact mechanism of this clinical deterioration is unclear, but may be related to the sudden loss of RV muscle tone with
inter-ventricular septal bowing secondary to the removal of large amounts of pericardial fluid that lead to decreased left heart filling
pressures and death.8 Intravenous epoprostenol is the drug of choice for patients presented in modified NYHA functional class IV and
pericardial effusion, unfortunately, it was not available to treat this patient. However, acute administration of inhaled iloprost has been
shown to lower mean pulmonary artery pressure and improved the right ventricular function, and subsequently decreases the PE.9 This has been
proven to be well tolerated as a long-term therapy with no substantial risk. In an uncontrolled trial of 19 patients10 with progressive
right heart failure despite receiving maximum conventional therapy, inhaled iloprost given 6-12 times per day was shown to improve the right
ventricular function in 8 patients. Furthermore, when combined with oral sildenafil, inhaled iloprost may produce a much greater beneficial
response than each agent alone. This combined vasodilatory effect can lead to significant improvement of the patient’s condition, including
exercise capacity, and pulmonary hemodynamics. In our patient, and because of the risk associated with pericardiocentesis, we choose to use
inhaled iloprost as a rescue intensive therapy to unload the failed right ventricle and improve cardiac output. The subjective improvement
was noticed very shortly after commencing the iloprost rescue therapy, and the objective improvement was detected in as early as 3 weeks
with a significant increment in walking distance and other prognostic clinical parameters. In conclusion, this report shows that the
intensive use of inhaled iloprost may have an important role in the management of patients with severe PAH and chronic pericardial effusion
who remain symptomatic despite the conventional treatment. We believe that using this therapeutic approach as early as possible in those
patients might shorten their need for oxygen, improve exercise capacity, and decrease the complications. This might further reduce the need
for intensive care, shorten hospital stay, and possibly prevent further deterioration in their condition. This observation should be further
tested in randomized clinical trials. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any
drug company. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company.
