A 28-month female with a clinical diagnosis of neurocutaneous melanosis and numerous intracranial abnormalities (including a right choroid
plexus tumor and left hemimegalencephaly) presented with a rapidly expanding tumor in the left occipital cerebrum. Microscopic examination
of the resected specimen revealed a myxoid mesenchymal neoplasm consisting of fusiform cells that were immunoreactive for vimentin, CD34,
and P53 but no melanocyte markers. Focused amplicon deep sequencing on DNA extracted from the brain tumor and a cutaneous nevus revealed a
heterozygous (c.37G > C; p.G13R) substitution in the NRAS gene. DNA sequencing of “normal” skin and buccal swab showed the identical NRAS
change albeit at lower allelic frequency. Her parents did not harbor the NRAS mutation. The skin lesion, but not the brain tumor, had a BRAF
mutation (c.1397G > T; p.G466V). A germline single nucleotide polymorphism in MET was found in the child and her father (c.3209C > T;
p.T1010I). The findings suggest NRAS mosaicism that occurred sometime after conception and imply an oncogenic role of the activating NRAS
mutation in both the brain and skin lesions in this child. Neurocutaneous melanosis (NCMS; Mendelian Inheritance in Man MIM# 249400) is a
rare congenital phakomatosis consisting of numerous giant cutaneous nevi along with extensive leptomeningeal melanosis. Approximately 100
cases have been described in the literature . The pathogenesis of NCMS likely involves a morphogenetic error in which melanocyte precursors
derived from the neural crest migrate abnormally and proliferate locally . Most cases with an identifiable cause have a somatic gain-of-
function mutation in codon 61 of the NRAS gene (MIM# 164790) located on chromosome 1p13 . Approximately 30% of affected children have
melanin deposits detectable in the leptomeninges or brain and half have epilepsy . We present a case of a female infant with NCMS who
developed an unusual myxoid mesenchymal brain tumor. DNA sequencing showed shared mutations in codon 13 of NRAS in the melanocytic nevi and
the brain tumor. This female child was born to a healthy non-consanguineous couple after an uneventful full-term pregnancy. At birth she had
numerous slightly raised, hairy melanocytic lesions on the scalp, neck, upper trunk, upper extremities, and hands; the largest was 4–5 cm in
greatest dimension (Figure 1). Skin lesions from the neck, scalp, and arm were previously excised and diagnosed as intradermal and compound
nevi with congenital features. She had normal height but was macrocephalic (97th percentile head circumference). She had been admitted to
hospital numerous times for uncontrolled seizures starting at age 2 months. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the brain and spine was
performed at 3.5 months age. T1 weighted images showed a solitary 2 mm focus of increased signal intensity in the right cerebellopontine
cistern; this was thought to represent melanin deposition. Cystic lesions, the largest of which was 2.7 cm diameter, with signal
characteristics the same as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were present around the atria of the lateral ventricles in the right cerebellopontine
cistern along with small cysts around the bodies of the lateral ventricles. The left cerebral hemisphere was larger than the right, and
parietal white matter volume was abnormally small. The combination of giant congenital nevi along with cerebral melanin deposition led to a
clinical diagnosis of NCMS . A CT scan of the head performed at 4 months age during an episode of status epilepticus showed no additional
abnormalities. An abdominal sonogram performed the following day showed no abnormalities. Repeat MR imaging showed the presumed melanocytic
nodule had increased to 3 mm; it was hyperintense on T1, hypointense on T2, and hyperintense on FLAIR. The periventricular cysts had
increased in size and quantity. A new lesion in continuity with the choroid plexus was expanding the temporal horn of the right lateral
ventricle. MR imaging of the brain at 21 months age showed a new left occipital brain tumor that was T2 hyperintense and enhanced strongly
following administration of gadolinium-DTPA. It grew from 1.6 × 1.5 × 1.2 cm to 4.0 × 3.6 × 3.2 cm 4 months later (Figure 2). A left
occipital craniotomy was performed at 24.5 months age. The tumor was not in contact with the meninges. It had a single vascular pedicle.
There was an easily identified plane between it and the adjacent brain. The tumor was removed in one piece without complication. MR imaging
of the brain 26 months after surgery (51 months age) showed no recurrence of the tumor; a vague region of non-enhancing T2 signal
abnormality in the right medial occipital lobe had expanded slightly.Figure 1 Photograph of the patient at 14 months age showing giant
congenital melanocytic nevi on each shoulder and numerous smaller satellite nevi on the neck, scalp, arms, and upper trunk. Figure 2
Magnetic resonance image of the brain. At 14 months age (upper image, coronal, T2 weighted) an enlarged left temporal lobe and a tumor of
the right choroid plexus (arrow) were apparent. At 23 months age (lower image, horizontal, T1-weighted) a 4 cm tumor is present in the left
occipital lobe. Periventricular cysts are located adjacent to the right occipital horn (arrow). Photograph of the patient at 14 months age
showing giant congenital melanocytic nevi on each shoulder and numerous smaller satellite nevi on the neck, scalp, arms, and upper trunk.
Magnetic resonance image of the brain. At 14 months age (upper image, coronal, T2 weighted) an enlarged left temporal lobe and a tumor of
the right choroid plexus (arrow) were apparent. At 23 months age (lower image, horizontal, T1-weighted) a 4 cm tumor is present in the left
occipital lobe. Periventricular cysts are located adjacent to the right occipital horn (arrow). The tumor was a 4.5 × 3.5 × 3 cm firm tan
nodule with a smooth external surface and uniform cut surface (Figure 3A). The brain tumor and skin biopsies were fixed in 10% neutral
buffered formalin, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin wax for sectioning (5 uM in thickness). All samples were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin for histologic evaluation. Immunohistochemistry was performed using primary antibodies against vimentin (mouse monoclonal, V9, Dako),
CD34 (mouse monoclonal, QBEND-10, Dako), alpha B crystallin (mouse monoclonal, G2JF, Novocastra), CD56 (mouse monoclonal, CD564, Dako), D240
(mouse monoclonal, D2-40, Dako), CD99 (mouse monoclonal, 12E71, Dako), Bcl2 (mouse monoclonal, 124, Dako), p53 (mouse monoclonal, D0-7,
Dako), Ki67 (mouse monoclonal, MIB-1, Dako), HLA-DR (mouse monoclonal, CR3/43, Dako), Factor 13a (mouse monoclonal, EP3372, Cellmarque),
GFAP (rabbit polyclonal, Dako), S100 (rabbit polyclonal, Dako), Collagen IV (mouse monoclonal, C1V22, Dako), pan-cytokeratin (mouse
monoclonal, AE1/AE3, Dako), EMA (mouse monoclonal, E29, Dako), CD57 (mouse monoclonal, TB01, Dako), HMB-45 (mouse monoclonal, HMB45, Dako),
MART-1/Melan-A (mouse monoclonal, A103, Dako), calretinin (rabbit polyclonal, Cellmarque), neurofilament (mouse monoclonal, 2 F11, Dako),
synaptophysin (mouse monoclonal, 27G12, Novocastra), NeuN (mouse monoclonal, A60, Lifespan Biosciences). Antigen retrieval was performed in
a Bull’s Eye Decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical, Concord, CA) for 1 minute at 125°C utilizing a Dako pH9 retrieval solution. All antibodies
were detected using the Dako Envision system (Dako) and diaminobenzidine precipitation solution. A sample of the tumor was fixed in 2.5%
buffered glutaraldehyde, post-fixed in osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in graded ethanol, and embedded in epoxy resin. Semithin sections
(0.5 μm) were stained with toluidine blue, and ultrathin sections were contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate then viewed with
electron microscopy using a JEM 1010 transmission electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).Figure 3 Macroscopic and microscopic
appearance of the tumor. (A) The firm tumor was easily dissected from the surrounding brain tissue and had a smooth tan-yellow glistening
cut surface. (B) Microscopic examination revealed a paucicellular tumor consisting of predominantly fusiform cells in a myxoid background.
There is moderate nuclear pleomorphism with a multinucleated cell in the center (hematoxylin & eosin). (C) The loose myxoid background
stained positive for Alcian blue. (D) Immunohistochemical staining for CD34 is diffusely positive. (E) Electron microscopic examination
showed stellate cells with long delicate processes and occasional multinucleation. (F) The extracellular material is abundant with clusters
of collagen fibers. (Original magnifications: B-C, ×400; D, ×200; E, ×2000; F ×30000). Macroscopic and microscopic appearance of the tumor.
(A) The firm tumor was easily dissected from the surrounding brain tissue and had a smooth tan-yellow glistening cut surface. (B)
Microscopic examination revealed a paucicellular tumor consisting of predominantly fusiform cells in a myxoid background. There is moderate
nuclear pleomorphism with a multinucleated cell in the center (hematoxylin & eosin). (C) The loose myxoid background stained positive for
Alcian blue. (D) Immunohistochemical staining for CD34 is diffusely positive. (E) Electron microscopic examination showed stellate cells
with long delicate processes and occasional multinucleation. (F) The extracellular material is abundant with clusters of collagen fibers.
(Original magnifications: B-C, ×400; D, ×200; E, ×2000; F ×30000). Microscopic examination showed an indistinct interface with the brain
parenchyma. The tumor had a diffuse pattern of stellate and elongated cells with delicate processes in a loose myxoid background. There were
no pigmented cells. Numerous small, multinucleated cells were evenly distributed within the lesion (Figure 3B). Rarely the cells clustered
around blood vessels. Very rare mitotic figures were present and there was no necrosis or endothelial hyperplasia. Focal areas of the
extracellular material stained with Alcian blue (Figure 3C). Reticulin staining was negligible. By immunohistochemistry, the cells were
positive for vimentin, CD34 (Figure 3D), CD56, D240, Bcl2, CD99 (weak), and P53. A subpopulation of cells was Factor 13a positive. An
estimated 5-10% of nuclei were Ki67 positive. Only perivascular cells (likely astrocytes) were positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), S100, and alpha B crystallin. Blood vessel walls were positive for E cadherin and collagen IV. There was no immunoreactivity for
cytokeratin (AE1/3), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CD57, HMB-45, MART-1/Melan-A, calretinin, neurofilament, synaptophysin, or NeuN.
Scattered HLA-DR positive cells were likely infiltrating microglia. Electron microscopic examination showed fusiform cells with abundant
rough endoplasmic reticulum and prominent intermediate filaments but no specific secretory organelles or obvious intercellular junctions.
The cells lacked a well-defined basement membrane and were surrounded by a flocculent extracellular material with rare clusters of striated
collagen bundles (Figure 3E, 3F). The diagnostic categorization arrived at locally and supported by external consultation was myxoid
mesenchymal brain tumor of uncertain growth potential. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples of the
intracranial tumor, an excised cutaneous nevus lesion, and grossly unaffected skin. DNA was also extracted from swabbed buccal cells of the
patient and both of her parents. DNA was quantitated using the Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Life Technology). Focused deep sequencing of 10 ng of
genomic DNA extracted from the above samples was performed using the Ion AmpliSeq Cancer panel (Life Technology). This includes PCR primers
covering 739 potential cancer-related hotspot mutations in 46 genes including KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and IDH1 . This technology permits
the interrogation of genetic alterations including mutations and insertions/deletions, even minor alleles in complex samples, in suboptimal
specimens including formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues. Processing of all samples was performed according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Construction and enrichment of the emulsion PCR library was performed using the Ion OneTouch instrument. Sequencing was done on
Ion 314 and Ion 316 sequencing chips using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (Life Technology) following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Data analysis including alignment to hg19 human reference genome, base calling, and identification of variants was done using the Ion
Variant Caller (version 2.2). Somatic variants from the brain tumor and the melanocytic nevus were identified after filtering out germline
changes identified from the patient’s buccal swab. Allele frequency of a variant is calculated by dividing the number of variant reads by
total reads in the same nucleotide position. All variants are covered by a minimum of 500 reads. The panel identified a missense mutation
(chr1:115258745; c.37G > C) in NRAS that results in a p. G13R amino acid substitution. The allelic frequency of the nucleotide change in the
brain tumor and the cutaneous nevus (58% and 33% respectively) is consistent with a heterozygous mutation (Table 1). The same change was
observed at an allelic frequency of 4.8% in the normal skin and 2.7% in the buccal swab of the patient. Deep sequencing of DNA extracted
from the buccal swabs from both parents did not reveal NRAS mutations. A BRAF somatic nucleotide change (chr7: 140481441; c.1397G > T)
resulting in amino acid substitution p. G466V was detected only in the nevus at an allelic frequency of 32%. A single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) resulting in a missense mutation (chr7: 116411990; c. 3209C > T; p.T1010I;) was found in the MET gene of the child’s
tumor and buccal swab as well as in the buccal swab of the father.Table 1 Allelic frequency of nucleotide change in NRAS and BRAF from deep
amplicon sequencing of pathology specimens and buccal swabs Gene NRAS BRAF Chromosome position (hg19)1:1152587457:140481411Nucleotide
changec.37G > Cc.1397G > TAmino acid changep. Gly13Argp. Gly466ValAllelic frequencies (%)Mesenchymal brain tumor58.00.0Melanocytic
nevus33.032.0Normal skin4.80.0Buccal swab2.70.0Mother buccal swab0.00.0Father buccal swab0.00.0 Allelic frequency of nucleotide change in
NRAS and BRAF from deep amplicon sequencing of pathology specimens and buccal swabs Neurocutaneous melanosis (NCMS), first described by
Rokitansky in 1861 , is a rare congenital disorder consisting of multiple large melanocytic cutaneous nevi and melanocytic proliferations in
the leptomeninges . Malformative lesions of the posterior fossa have rarely been described . Recent genetic findings have clarified the
pathogenesis of NCMS and large/giant congenital melanocytic nevi . Single postzygotic mutations of NRAS codon 61 and associated mosaicism
are responsible for the majority of NCMS cases and large/giant congenital melanocytic nevi . The same mutation is common in congenital
melanocytic nevi . The NRAS p.G13R somatic mosaicism in this patient is unusual and, to our knowledge, is the first instance reported in
association with NCMS. The presence mosaicism in combination with the absence of mutation in the parents suggests this mutation likely
occurred after conception. This is consistent with the mosaicism hypotheses for NCMS and other phakomatoses . This child does not show any
dysmorphic features associated with germline mutations in NRAS, which are usually similar to Noonan syndrome . NRAS mutations are considered
important in the genesis of melanoma. NRAS activates four major signaling pathways including RAF-MEK-ERK, RalGDS, PI3K-AKT/PDK1, and PLC/PKC
. Mutations affecting codons 12, 13 and 61, lead to constitutive activation of RAS GTPase in the absence of growth factor signaling and
ultimately neoplastic growth. The specific NRAS G13R mutation identified in this case has been rarely found in melanomas of the skin and
esophagus as well as in 1/27 patients with large congenital melanocytic nevi . In melanoma the most common NRAS (Q61R, Q61L, Q61K) and BRAF
(V600E, V600K) mutation sites and substitutions differ from those found in this patient . In addition to NCMS, this child had a low-grade
mesenchymal brain tumor, which itself is very rare. Typically children with NCMS do not develop sarcomas, although one rhabdomyosarcoma was
described in a congenital giant nevus . Children with NCMS are reported to develop choroid plexus papilloma and meningioma . Primary
sarcomas of the brain represented only 0.36% of brain tumors in one very large series and 0.7% of all sarcomas in another series . Most
likely arise from the meninges or blood vessels; among them are rhabdomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and angiosarcoma. Primary
non-meningeal myxoid mesenchymal intracranial tumors are especially rare. Reported cases include two low-grade fibromyxoid sarcomas and one
myxofibrosarcoma, the diagnosis of which was based on fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of the FUS/CREB3L2 translocation .
Both of these tumors have some features similar to the reported child’s brain tumor. It is important to emphasize that the tumor had no
morphologic or immunophenotypic features of melanoma. The relatively low-grade appearance of the brain tumor presented herein is discrepant
with its rapid growth. The rapid increase in size could be explained by expansion of the myxoid extracellular material rather than
neoplastic cell proliferation. The heterozygous state of NRAS in the melanocytic nevus and the brain tumor combined with additional novel
somatic mutations suggest cooperative involvement of oncogenic pathways in the brain tumor and especially in the skin lesions (BRAF
p.G466V). Only a single sarcoma (a rhabdomyosarcoma) has been described with the NRAS p.G13R mutation . Somatic mosaics of NRAS mutations in
almost identical protein regions (G12D, G12S, G13D) have been described in relation to juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia . Note that
neurofibromin is a major regulator of the NRAS pathway . NF1 is not assessed in the AmpliSeq Cancer Panel and we did not attempt direct
sequencing. However, given that the documented abnormalities are distal to neurofibromin signaling, a mutation in NF1 is not necessary to
explain this child’s phenotype. A germline SNP was found in the MET gene of this child (inherited from her father who is not known to have
any neoplastic disease). The MET gene encodes the receptor for hepatic growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) and appears to be involved in
cell motility, proliferation, and invasiveness . Mice that overexpress HGF/SF overstimulate the MET pathway and develop melanosis in the
central nervous system and patterned hyperpigmentation of the skin similar to NCMS . These mice also develop fibrosarcoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma . MET has been detected by immunohistochemistry in optic canal nevus cells from a child with NCMS . The p.T1010I variant
has been identified in thyroid carcinomas , neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) of lung , a pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma case , and has been
implicated as a risk factor for familial colorectal cancer . One early report described this change in MET as capable of altering signaling
in NEC , however more recently this variation was not shown to alter c-Met phosphorylation in NEC , nor does it seem capable of transforming
the Ba/F3 pro-B lymphocyte cell line . To summarize, the significance of the MET SNP in this child is unclear. Hemimegalencephaly has been
associated with other neurocutaneous syndromes including epidermal nevus syndrome, proteus syndrome, hypomelanosis of Ito, and
neurofibromatosis-1 . Recently, de novo somatic mutations with mosaicism in the PI3K-AKT3-mTOR pathway were shown to cause
hemimegalencephaly . NRAS is known to have direct interaction with PI3K . Given that this child had no mutation in PI3K, the NRAS mosaicism
is likely the explanation for the hemimegalencephaly. In summary, development of a primary intracerebral mesenchymal neoplasm in a child
with NCMS and hemimegalencephaly can likely be explained by specific NRAS mutant mosaicism possibly in combination with a MET germline
variation, which together constitute a unique combination. This case highlights the importance of DNA analysis from multiple sites, as well
as from parents, in individuals with complex disease states. The presence of an NRAS somatic mosaic supports the hypothesized developmental
pathogenesis of NCMS. Further exploration of the role of NRAS and MET in development of the neural crest derived pigment cells will be of
interest. Parents provided explicit consent for genetic tests and use of photographs. B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase
Deoxyribonucleic acid Fluorescent in situ hybridization MET proto-oncogene, receptor tyrosine kinase Magnetic resonance Neurocutaneous
melanosis Neuroblastoma RAS viral (v-ras) oncogene homolog Polymerase chain reaction Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Authors’ contributions FS – Literature review and initial drafts of manuscript. SY – Genetic analysis and drafting
manuscript. PJM – Neurosurgical care of child, editing manuscript. AEC – Clinical care of child, genetic explanation, editing manuscript.
MRD – Conceived project, final synthesis of manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Dr. Del Bigio holds the Canada
Research Chair in Developmental Neuropathology. We thank Dr. Peter Burger (Johns Hopkins University) for his consultation on the brain
tumor. We thank Tiana Baskin, Sharon Allen and Susan Janeczko for their technical assistance. We are grateful to the family for their
cooperation with these investigations and permission to publish the findings. SY would like to acknowledge the funding support of BrainCare
BC.
