Medullary carcinoma is a rare type of colon cancer with characteristic clinical and molecular features. Notably, despite its high-grade
histology, the prognosis is generally better than for colonic adenocarcinoma of the usual type. We present herein a singular case of
medullary colon cancer in which all of numerous lymph node metastases in the surgical resection specimen were completely necrotic in the
face of a wholly viable primary tumor. Possible mechanisms are discussed with emphasis on immune-mediated factors. Virtual Slides: The
virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/13000_2014_204 Medullary cancer is a rare
but well-characterized type of colon carcinoma . Although displaying high-grade histologic features, in general there are fewer lymph node
metastases and better overall survival compared to typical adenocarcinomas of the colon. We describe a singular case of previously untreated
medullary colon cancer in which all lymph node metastases were entirely necrotic whereas the primary tumor was, in stark contrast,
completely histologically viable. Although we cannot provide a definitive explanation for this phenomenon, an immune-mediated mechanism
seems most likely. A 75 year old woman presented with diffuse pain in her arms and legs of recent onset. Neurologic consultation led to a
diagnosis of polyneuropathy of uncertain etiology, likely paraneoplastic in origin. Her past medical history included hypothyroidism and
idiopathic sensory neuronopathy (both of at least fifteen years duration), pernicious anemia, oculopharyngeal dystrophy, arterial
hypertension, atherosclerotic heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and appendectomy. She had stopped smoking forty years
previously. As part of a subsequent “neoplastic workup” a PET-scan revealed a highly metabolically active mass in the cecum, with no other
sites suspicious for neoplasia identified. A CT-scan of the thorax was negative. She was not anemic, and stated she was completely
asymptomatic regarding the cecal lesion. An attempt at colonoscopic biopsy was unsuccessful, as, due to pain and significant diverticulosis,
the colonoscope could not be passed beyond the sigmoid. Shortly thereafter, a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy was performed.
Postoperatively, the patient received standard chemotherapy for colorectal carcinoma. Nearly one year following surgery, there is no
evidence of recurrent disease. Her polyneuropathy has resolved. All formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from the surgical
resection specimen were cut at 4 microns and routinely stained with hematoxylin-phloxin-saffranin (HPS). Selected tissue blocks were stained
with the histochemical stain PAS with diastase for the detection of epithelial mucin and the following immunohistochemical markers:
pancytokeratin (AE1/AE3, Millipore, 1:1000), cytokeratin Cam 5.2 (5D3, Becton Dickinson, 1:2), calretinin (SP65, Roche, prediluted), CEA
(II-7, Dako, 1:1000), CDX-2 (EPR2764Y, Roche, prediluted), EBV (C1, Dako, 1:1000), MLH1 (M1, Ventana, prediluted), PMS2 (EPR 3949, Ventana,
prediluted), MSH2 (G219-1129, Ventana, prediluted), and MSH6 (44, Ventana, prediluted). Mutation of the BRAF V600E gene was evaluated by
polymerase chain reaction according to a standard protocol. Macroscopic examination of the right hemicolectomy specimen revealed a discoid
cecal mass 4 cm in the largest dimension with invasion of the muscle wall. There was no infiltration of surrounding soft tissues or of the
visceral peritoneum (serosa). Multiple firm, whitish, lymph nodes suggestive of metastatic tumor were readily found in the mesentery. The
rest of the specimen was normal. Microscopic examination demonstrated features typical of medullary cancer (MC) (Figure 1a, b, c). Tumor
necrosis was absent. The tumor cells were positive with the epithelial markers pancytokeratine (Figure 1d) and Cam 5.2, calretinin, and
CDX-2 (weak) in accordance with the diagnosis. CEA and EBV immunostaining were negative. PAS with diastase staining confirmed the absence of
intra- or extracellular mucin. Microsatellite instability – high (MSI-high) was demonstrated by immunohistochemical staining: MLH1/PMS2
negative, MSH2/MSH6 positive. The BRAF V600E gene was mutated.Figure 1 Histology of the primary tumor. a) The well-circumscribed primary
medullary carcinoma is on the left (arrows). The caecal muscular wall (right) shows a marked Crohn’s-like inflammatory infiltrate. b and c)
Tumor cells are arranged in cords with associated intra-tumoral lymphocytes. Gland formation is absent. There are high-grade cytologic
features and several mitoses. Necrosis is absent. d) Pancytokeratin positivity of the tumor cells. Normal colonic epithelium at bottom right
provides a positive internal control. Histology of the primary tumor. a) The well-circumscribed primary medullary carcinoma is on the left
(arrows). The caecal muscular wall (right) shows a marked Crohn’s-like inflammatory infiltrate. b and c) Tumor cells are arranged in cords
with associated intra-tumoral lymphocytes. Gland formation is absent. There are high-grade cytologic features and several mitoses. Necrosis
is absent. d) Pancytokeratin positivity of the tumor cells. Normal colonic epithelium at bottom right provides a positive internal control.
Although no peritumoral lymphovascular invasion was seen, 11 of 32 resected peri-colic lymph nodes were positive. Staging of the tumor was
therefore T2 N2b M0 . However, all metastatic foci showed complete tumor necrosis surrounded by a brisk granulomatous inflammatory reaction.
In none of the involved lymph nodes were any viable tumor cells found (Figure 2a, b, c, e, f, g). Staining with pancytokratine and Cam 5.2
showed strong positivity in multiple lymph nodes, confirming the epithelial nature of the necrotic foci (Figure 2d).Figure 2 Histology of
the lymph node metastases. a, b and c) Several lymph nodes showing necrotic metastases surrounded by granulomatous inflammation. Viable
tumor cells are completely absent. d) Pancytokeratin positivity of the necrotic tumor cells within one of the lymph nodes. e and f) High
power views of lymph nodes with necrotic tumor and associated granulomatous inflammation. Viable tumor cells are completely absent. g) High
power view of necrotic tumor within lymph node. Viable tumor cells are completely absent. Histology of the lymph node metastases. a, b and
c) Several lymph nodes showing necrotic metastases surrounded by granulomatous inflammation. Viable tumor cells are completely absent. d)
Pancytokeratin positivity of the necrotic tumor cells within one of the lymph nodes. e and f) High power views of lymph nodes with necrotic
tumor and associated granulomatous inflammation. Viable tumor cells are completely absent. g) High power view of necrotic tumor within lymph
node. Viable tumor cells are completely absent. Medullary carcinoma (MC) of the colon is a rare tumor with characteristic histologic
features representing 5-8/10,000 colon cancer cases. An analysis of all 50 cases of MC in the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) database from 1973 to 2006 concluded that it occurs most commonly in the proximal colon (74%), favors older women, is less likely to
feature lymph node metastases, and has a good prognosis with one and two year relative survival rates of 92.7% and 73.8% . Macroscopically
and microscopically, MC is well circumscribed with a “pushing” or “expanding” growth pattern. It often grows to a large size (the majority
at diagnosis are greater than 7 cm) with infiltration of adjacent structures. The tumor cells have “high grade” cytologic features: high
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratios, round to oval nuclei, large amphophilic nucleoli, and vesicular chromatin. Mitoses are common and apoptotic
bodies are often found. The cells are arranged in nests, cords, and sheets and may widely infiltrate the intestinal wall; geographic
necrosis and perineural and angiolymphatic invasion are common . Intense intratumoral or peritumoral lymphocytic infiltrates, lymphocytic
infiltrates at the advancing tumor margin and conspicuous “Crohn’s-like” lymphoid reactions are common . Positivity with neuroendocrine
immunohistochemical markers is found in approximately one third of cases . Microsatellite instability – high (MSI-high): MLH1/PMS2 negative,
MSH2/MSH6 positive is typical . BRAF V600E mutation, as seen here, indicates a sporadic tumor . The differential diagnosis of MC includes
poorly differentiated colorectal adenocarcinoma, neuroendocrine carcinoma and “lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma”, for which the differential
diagnostic features are discussed elsewhere . To the best of our knowledge the present case is unique, as concomitant with a wholly viable
primary MC tumor, all numerous (11) lymph node metastases were completely necrotic at the time of surgery. In contrast, of the 68 MCs in the
series of Wick et al the authors stated “there was no difference in the microscopic appearance of lymph nodal tumor deposits vis-à-vis that
of the primary neoplasms”. Also of interest, in another large study of MC only one of 50 cases (2%) had greater than 7 lymph node metastases
. Do these findings represent an example of “spontaneous tumor regression”? Criteria for the diagnosis of spontaneous regression were put
forward nearly fifty years ago: 1) histologic regression of biopsy proven metastases, 2) radiologic regression of presumed neoplastic
disease, and 3) regression of metastatic tumor after therapy considered ineffective . The first criterion would most closely correspond to
the histologic findings we describe. Given its incidence and prevalence, spontaneous regression of colorectal cancer is an extremely rare
event, with only 21 cases reported between 1900 and 2005 according to a major review . All examples were moderately to poorly differentiated
adenocarcinomas of the usual type. Regression almost invariably involved the primary tumor or metastases following removal of the primary
tumor. It should be noted, however, that in several cases where regression of metastatic disease was reported, regression, or not, of the
primary tumor was not clearly specified. Numerous hypotheses concerning the mechanism(s) of tumor regression have been proposed, none
conclusive (8). Similarly, we cannot provide a precise explanation for this phenomenon, but the interplay of patient-specific factors and
immune-mediated events is likely. Regarding patient factors, there had been no neoadjuvant therapy. Causes of local ischemic events such as
bowel torsion (volvulus) or tissue entrapment in an internal hernia or by adhesions were not observed at surgery. However, the patient had
several auto immune-mediated diseases (hypothyroidism, idiopathic sensory neuronopathy, and pernicious anemia), suggesting heightened
activity of her immune system and, perhaps, increased immunosurveillance. As the primary tumor was entirely viable, the potential role of
the lymph node microenvironment in inducing tumor necrosis is worthy of consideration. One can speculate that tumor antigen processing by
lymph node antigen presenting cells (APCs) may have instigated a localized immunologic response leading to widespread cell necrosis. This
would imply, conversely, that the APCs infiltrating and surrounding the primary tumor itself were incapable of instigating such a response:
the tumor cells metastatic to the lymph nodes were therefore likely viable. Tumor cell necrosis, formally regarded as a passive phenomenon,
is now considered a form of programmed cell death (type III PCD) . Whereas apoptosis (type II PCD) involves the death of individual cells,
necrosis involves large cell numbers. It is mediated by complex signaling pathways that are activated when, for example, inadequate
vascularization leads to ischemia and hypoxia with resulting cell energy deprivation; a variety of anti-cancer drugs also induce necrosis.
Tumor cell necrosis in turn further stimulates the immune system: the release of a variety of cytoplasmic molecules to the extracellular
space upon loss of cell membrane integrity leads to activation of APCs and macrophages. Dendritic cell maturation and T-cell proliferation
subsequently occur with optimization of tumor antigen presentation and phagocytosis of dead cells. . As such, although the primary
initiating event in our case is unknown, we propose that this “lymph node-limited tumor necrosis” may be due to the ability of lymph node
specific immune cells to mount a tumor directed immune response. Finally, regarding the patient’s polyneuropathy, the development of
symptoms before tumor detection and the resolution of symptoms following tumor removal clinically support a paraneoplastic etiology .
However, no testing for neuro-oncologic antibodies was performed. Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes due to colon cancer are extremely
rare, with sensory neuropathy and vasculitis having been described . Of note, it has been observed that tumors causing paraneoplastic
neurologic disorders are often “heavily infiltrated with inflammatory cells” and have a better prognosis than histologically identical
tumors with no paraneoplastic neurologic manifestations . In summary, we present a unique case of medullary colon cancer. The simultaneous
occurrence of necrotic lymph node metastases and a viable primary tumor is possibly explained by an immunologic response in the lymph node
microenvironment. The patient’s history of multiple autoimmune diseases raises questions as to the role of her “activated” immune system in
responding to the metastases. This case, albeit of morphologic interest, and perhaps representing a form of spontaneous regression, raises
important questions relating to the immunologic response to tumor cells instigated within lymph nodes. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Antigen presenting cell Computerized tomography Medullary cancer Microsatellite instability Programmed
cell death Positron emission tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions AM was the primary author of the manuscript and provided the illustrations. YB provided clinical information and contributed
to the drafting of the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information The authors have no additional
information to provide. The authors have no acknowledgements to make.
