This case report describes a patient with chronic unilateral chemosis, likely due to treatment with amlodipine besylate. A 52-year-old man
visited the clinic with symptoms of foreign body sensation and puffiness in his right eye, which had persisted for 4 months. There were no
other symptoms, such as itching and pain, in his right eye and no specific symptoms in his left eye. He had been treated for hypertension
and hyperlipidemia for the previous 5 months with once daily amlodipine besylate/atorvastatin (Caduet) and candesartan cilexetil (Atacand).
Examination revealed marked swelling of the inferior bulbar conjunctiva in the right eye. Evaluation revealed no specific causes for the
longstanding chemosis. A change of medication to telmisartan/hydrochlorothiazide (Micardis Plus) without amlodipine besylate resulted in
significant improvements in his symptoms after 1 month and complete remission after 8 months. Prior to invasive evaluation including biopsy,
specific drugs should be considered as possible causes of idiopathic longstanding conjunctival chemosis. Conjunctival chemosis—the presence
of excess fluid in the conjunctival interstitium—is caused by several conditions, including exposure, trauma, infection, allergy,
obstruction of lymphatic and venous outflow, and inflammation of the conjunctiva and adjacent structures. This symptom is usually self-
limiting or shows complete recovery following removal of the causal factor. However, in some patients swelling of the conjunctiva may
persist for over 6 months with no obvious cause. In some idiopathic cases, tissue inflammation or lymphangiectasia may give rise to
irreversible chronic chemosis . Amlodipine besylate is a calcium channel blocker (CCB), one of the most commonly used classes of
antihypertensive agents. Peripheral edema is a common dose-dependent adverse effect of amlodipine besylate and a major cause of
discontinuation of therapy . We describe here a patient with chronic unilateral chemosis, likely due to treatment with amlodipine besylate.
A 52-year-old man visited our clinic with symptoms of foreign body sensation and puffiness in his right eye, which had persisted for
4 months. He was originally diagnosed with allergic conjunctivitis by a general ophthalmologist and was treated with olopatadine eye drops
(Pataday; Alcon, USA) once daily and 1% prednisolone eye drops (Pred-Forte; Allergan, USA) four times per day for 3 weeks. He was referred
to our clinic after the treatment was unsuccessful, even after oral prednisolone 30 mg/day for 3 days with a tapering schedule was added to
topical therapy for an additional one week. Upon referral to our clinic, the patient stated that his symptoms were negligible when he woke
up in the morning, but gradually increased over several hours and persisted with no fluctuations during the day time. There was no itching,
pain, or other symptoms in his right eye and no specific symptoms in his left eye. His medical history included hypertension and
hyperlipidemia, for which he had been treated for the previous five months with once daily amlodipine besylate 5 mg/atorvastatin 10 mg
(Caduet; Pfizer Inc, USA) and once daily candesartan cilexetil 8 mg (Atacand; AstraZeneca, UK), respectively. He reported no history of
other systemic diseases, drug allergy, atopic disease or trauma, but he reported always sleeping on his right side. Physical examination
revealed no other specific findings such as pitting edema. Slit-lamp examination showed moderate conjunctival chemosis in his right eye.
Swelling was gravity dependent, starting in the interpalpebral area and gradually increasing toward the inferior half, leaving a normal
superior bulbar conjunctiva (Figure 1A and B). The bulbar conjunctiva showed no evidence of a dilated lymphatic channel, and the palpebral
conjunctiva showed no papillary reaction or follicular hypertrophy. Both eyes showed no evidence of conjunctival hyperemia or injection, and
his left eye was normal. Vision was 20/20 in each eye and intraocular pressure, measured by Goldmann applanation tonometry, was 16 mmHg in
his right eye and 18 mmHg in his left eye. Exophthalmometric measure was normal, and neuroimaging using magnetic resonance imaging with
contrast enhancement showed no abnormalities such as an orbital mass or venous or lymphatic obstruction. Scheimpflug imaging revealed marked
swelling of the inferior bulbar conjunctiva in the right eye, but the anterior chamber depths of the two eyes did not differ significantly
(Figure 1C and D). Serum IgE and antibody titers for grass and house dust mites were normal. Blood tests, including renal and thyroid
function tests, protein concentration, inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein, complete blood
count and serum chemistry, showed results within normal ranges. The patient had not received any other topical or systemic treatment since
the referral from the general ophthalmologist. After the patient was referred to the department of medicine for evaluation of allergic and
other systemic diseases, his antihypertensive medication was changed to telmisartan 40 mg/hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg (Micardis Plus;
Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany). Slit-lamp examination 1 month later showed an almost complete absence of conjunctival chemosis, and he
reported that his symptoms were much improved. Therefore, the patient was followed up without any ocular treatment. All of his symptoms had
completely remitted and remained stable at his last follow-up visit, 8 months after the change in systemic medication (Figure 2).Figure 1
Clinical photograph and Scheimpflug images at presentation. Clinical photographs showing conjunctival chemosis in the right eye (A).
Swelling started in the interpalpebral area, gradually increasing toward the inferior half and leaving a normal superior bulbar conjunctiva
(B). Scheimpflug images at a 90-degree vertical scan showing marked conjunctival swelling inferiorly (arrow) in the right eye (C), although
the conjunctiva of the left eye remained unchanged (D).Figure 2 External appearance and Scheimpflug image after the cessation of the
amlodipine besylate. Slit-lamp examinations after the change of medication showed that conjunctival swelling in the right eye had completely
remitted (arrow) one month later (A) and remained stable until the last follow up visit 8 months later. Scheimpflug image at a 90-degree
vertical scan also revealed normal appearing conjunctiva (B). Clinical photograph and Scheimpflug images at presentation. Clinical
photographs showing conjunctival chemosis in the right eye (A). Swelling started in the interpalpebral area, gradually increasing toward the
inferior half and leaving a normal superior bulbar conjunctiva (B). Scheimpflug images at a 90-degree vertical scan showing marked
conjunctival swelling inferiorly (arrow) in the right eye (C), although the conjunctiva of the left eye remained unchanged (D). External
appearance and Scheimpflug image after the cessation of the amlodipine besylate. Slit-lamp examinations after the change of medication
showed that conjunctival swelling in the right eye had completely remitted (arrow) one month later (A) and remained stable until the last
follow up visit 8 months later. Scheimpflug image at a 90-degree vertical scan also revealed normal appearing conjunctiva (B). Unilateral
conjunctival chemosis persisted in the patient described here for about 4 months, during which time we were able to exclude several possible
causes, including exposure, trauma, infection, obstruction of lymphatic or venous drainage, inflammation, or systemic disease, resulting in
fluid overload. Previously, tissue inflammation or lymphangiectasia was observed in a biopsy specimen from a patient with idiopathic chronic
conjunctival chemosis . In contrast, we could exclude an inflammatory cause in our patient, since serum markers of inflammation were within
normal range, long term treatment with local and systemic steroids failed to improve symptoms, and combined medications such as atorvastatin
and an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) are reported to have anti-inflammatory properties [3, 4]. If structural abnormalities are
present, chemosis should be irreversible. However, we found that chemosis was reversible after amlodipine besylate was discontinued,
indicating that chemosis in this patient resulted from the medication rather than from any structural abnormality. CCBs have been reported
to preferentially dilate arterioles, increasing the pressure gradient between arteriolar and venule capillaries and leading to the
extravasation of intravascular fluid and resultant vasodilatory edema . Since the condition of the our patient resolved completely after
discontinuing amlodipine besylate, and assays for other causes yielded uniformly negative results, the conjunctival chemosis observed in the
patient was likely due to CCB-induced vasodilatory edema. Our patient was not rechallenged with amlodipine after resolution of chemosis for
ethical reasons and because his symptoms had resolved completely and his blood pressure was controlled on a new medication. A low dose of
diuretics, administered after amlodipine discontinuation, likely did not affect the resolution and progression of chemosis, inasmuch as CCBs
are reported to have a natriuretic effect and edema is thought to result from increased intracapillary pressure rather than from salt and
water retention . To our knowledge, only one other case report is similar to the case described here . However, our patient was treated with
5 mg/day amlodipine as the starting and lowest dose, with no increase in dosage. At this dose, only approximately 5% of patients will
experience swelling of peripheral tissue. Nevertheless, our patient developed conjunctival edema despite combination treatment with ARB,
which reduces CCB-induced vasodilatory edema . Moreover, in contrast to the previous patient , our patient experienced conjunctival chemosis
without peripheral edema. Edema in only one eye without peripheral edema may have several causes. The preferential arteriolar vasodilating
activity of CCBs has been shown to increase capillary pressure and flow, increasing capillary permeability and fluid hyperfiltration . Since
our patient always slept in the right lateral decubitus position, interstitial fluid on the right side of his body, including his right eye,
may have increased while sleeping in this position. In addition, capillary fluid filtration is held constant by the veno-arteriolar reflex
during a positional change to upright position, causing postural vasoconstriction in both the arteriolar and the venous limb in normal
situations . However, attenuation of this homeostatic mechanism due to selectively diminished precapillary vasoconstriction by CCBs could
augment interstitial fluid accumulation on the right side of the body after awakening. Furthermore, CCBs activate both the sympathetic
nervous system and the renin-angiotensin system . Thus, although CCBs limit precapillary vasoconstriction by the sympathetic nervous system,
postcapillary vasoconstriction by the renin-angiotensin system is buffered by ARBs, normalizing intracapillary pressure and avoiding
peripheral edema . The greater sensitivity of conjunctival vessels to angiotensin II than to phenylephrine may have resulted in conjunctival
chemosis in the absence of peripheral edema. That is, the ARB may have buffered postcapillary vasoconstriction less effectively and the
veno-arteriolar reflex occurring during a positional change may be less prominent in conjunctival than in peripheral capillaries. Although
the diffuse accumulation of interstitial fluid in the right eye during sleep may have been asymptomatic initially, a lack of postural
vasoconstriction and less effective buffering by ARB may have augmented gravity dependent fluid accumulation in the right eye, inducing
symptoms during the daytime. Studies assessing the differences in vascular properties and neurotransmitter receptors between conjunctiva and
other tissues are necessary to determine the mechanism underlying the induction by amlodipine besylate of edema in only one eye without
peripheral edema, including swelling of the feet or ankles. In summary, we have described a patient with chronic unilateral chemosis, which
was likely due to amlodipine besylate. Prior to invasive evaluation, including biopsy, specific drugs should be considered as possible
causes of idiopathic longstanding conjunctival chemosis. Early identification of the causative drug is important, as the risks of damage and
scarring of lymphatic structures increase as the duration of chemosis increases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Presented in part at the annual meeting of Korean Ophthalmological Society, Goyang, Korea, April 2013 and the Asia-Pacific
Association of Cataract and Refractive Surgeons, Singapore, July 2013. Calcium channel blocker Angiotensin II receptor blocker. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions KK conceived the study, performed the
examination and drafted the manuscript. WK helped to draft the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
