Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 58 Final Diagnosis: Glomus tutor of trachea Symptoms: Hemopthysis
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Otolaryngology Rare disease Glomus tumors are usually found over the dermis of the
extremities, particularly over the subungual region of the fingers, and occurrence in the trachea is an extremely rare event. To date, only
29 cases of tracheal and 2 main bronchus glomus tumors have been reported in the English literature. Our patient is the first ever reported
case in Taiwan that was managed by spiral tracheoplasty. A 58-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of hemoptysis. Computed
tomographic (CT) scan revealed a mass over the posterior wall of the trachea. Surgical resection with spiral tracheoplasty was performed due
to uncontrolled bleeding and airway compromise. Histopathology and immunostaining confirmed a glomus tumor. Postoperative course was
unremarkable and she was discharged in improved condition after 9 days of hospital stay. Although chronic symptom presentation is the rule
for tracheal glomus tumors, airway obstruction and bleeding are life-threatening presentations. Histopathological examination and staining
are important to differentiate it from hemangiopericytoma or carcinoid tumors. Spiral tracheoplasty after tangential resection may be tried,
as this preserves more tracheal tissue, decreases tension, and prevents postoperative leakage at the anastomotic site. Glomus tumors are
usually found over the subungual region of the fingers of the hand and the lower extremities. Its occurrence in the trachea is extremely
rare. To date, there are 31 reported cases of tracheal and proximal main bronchus glomus tumors in the English literature since it was first
reported by Mason in 1924 . Sleeve resection with primary reconstruction of the trachea is usually the treatment of choice for tracheal
glomus tumors. In patients with tangential tracheal lesions, spiral tracheoplasty has never previously been performed, but can be attempted
after tangential resection. Our patient is the first reported case to undergo successful spiral tracheoplasty, as pioneered by one of our
authors, after resection of this tumor that occurred in a very rare location. A 58-year-old Taiwanese woman was admitted to our hospital due
to hemoptysis. She had no known systemic illnesses in the past and did not smoke cigarettes or consume alcoholic beverages. She denied any
weight loss, fever, cough, dyspnea, or epistaxis prior to this incident. A chest CT scan was performed, showing a 2.2×2.2 cm polypoid lesion
over the posterior wall of the lower third of the trachea (Figure 1A, 1B). On examination, the patient was afebrile and breath sounds were
clear. Laboratory test results were unremarkable. A bronchoscopic examination was performed, showing a polypoid tumor over the posterior
wall of the trachea (Figure 2A). During admission, the patient had another episode of massive hemoptysis, which resulted in hypotension,
respiratory distress, and anemia that necessitated a blood transfusion. Our thoracic surgeon was consulted and surgery was performed.
Excision of the tracheal tumor via sternotomy was performed (Figure 2B) followed by reconstruction of the trachea with spiral anastomosis.
Afterwards, hemostasis was achieved, hemodynamics stabilized, and intraoperative fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed tracheal patency.
Hemangiopericytoma was reported on fast-frozen section. However, histopathology showed a hypervascular tumor composed of branching, dilated,
thick-walled vascular channels and thin-walled capillary-like vascular spaces, surrounded by lobular arrangements of oval-to-spindle cells,
with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and centrally-located rounded nuclei. A focal hemangiopericytoma-like pattern interspersed with thin-
to-coarse collagenous bundles was also noted (Figure 3A–3B). Immunohistochemical staining was positive for smooth muscle actin (Figure 3C),
focally reactive with synaptophysin and negative for cytokeratin, chromogranin A, S-100 protein, and HMB-45. This was later diagnosed as a
glomus tumor. Seven days after surgery, fiberoptic bronchoscopy was repeated, showing a patent trachea with mild granulation tissue over the
oblique anastomotic line and no stenosis (Figure 2C). The patient was discharged the next day. She is currently asymptomatic and no
complication or tumor recurrence has occurred in approximately 2 years of follow-up. Glomus tumors are usually benign and rarely exhibit
malignant potential. However, they can cause airway obstruction and bleeding. In 2001, the World Health Organization reclassified these
tumors with atypical and malignant features into 4 categories . The diagnosis of malignant glomus tumor is reserved for tumors having: a
size of >2 cm and subfascial or visceral location, atypical mitotic figures or marked nuclear atypia, and any level of mitotic activity.
Glomus tumors not fulfilling the criteria for malignancy, but having at least 1 atypical feature other than nuclear pleomorphism, as in this
case, are classified as glomus tumor of uncertain malignant potential. From 1950 to 2014, 29 cases of tracheal and 2 cases of proximal main
bronchus glomus tumors have been reported in the English literature. Characteristics of these patients are summarized in Table 1. There were
21 males and 10 females with a mean age of 52±17 years. The youngest was a 10-year-old girl and the oldest was an 83-year-old woman. These
tumors occurred anywhere along the length of the trachea and proximal main bronchus, and were all located over the posterior or
posterolateral tracheal wall. Tracheal glomus tumor is sometimes mistaken for a carcinoid tumor, or, as in our case, a hemangiopericytoma.
Therefore, immunostaining and careful histopathologic examination should be performed to avoid misdiagnosis. Some would argue for
conservative treatment or watchful waiting for treating this disease since it is benign in 95% of cases. However, complete resection was
performed in this case due to recurrent bleeding, acute airway obstruction, and a classification of “uncertain malignant potential”. Sleeve
resection with primary reconstruction of the trachea is the treatment of choice for tracheal glomus tumor. Complete surgical resection is
usually curative, but endoscopic intervention may be performed for lesions that are confined to the airway lumen without extension into the
airway wall. This can also be done when the tumor is benign, in patients with high surgical risks, or when the patient refuses surgical
intervention. Of the 31 cases described in the literature, most underwent surgical resection followed by reconstruction, with only 9
patients receiving endoscopic resection combined with laser ablation. In 2009, we introduced a technique called spiral tracheoplasty to
preserve tracheal tissue while reducing tension at the anastomotic site of the trachea after tangential wall resection (Figure 4). Briefly,
the procedure for spiral tracheoplasty consists of 5 steps. 1) After identifying the tumor, the trachea is separated from the esophagus by
about 2 cm to allow for manipulation and exposure of the operative field. 2) This is followed by tangential resection of the tracheal lesion
instead of a circumferential resection. For example, a 2-cm area of tracheal tissue and tumor was resected in this picture. 3) Both
transected tracheal ends are further separated from the esophagus and are rotated 90 degrees in opposite directions. The proximal end is
rotated clockwise while the distal end is rotated counter clockwise. 4) The tracheal ends are then trimmed for irregularities to obtain good
apposition. In this example, the 1-cm lengths at the proximal and distal ends are positioned next to each other, to obtain a mirror image
and are tested for exact fit. 5) Then, the anastomosis is performed using running sutures . Intra- and post-operative fiberoptic
bronchoscopy should be performed to check for tracheal patency, bleeding, and optimal anastomosis. In performing tracheal surgery, it is of
utmost importance that the safety of the anastomosis takes precedence over the completeness of the resection. In spiral tracheoplasty, a
tangential tracheal wall excision instead of a circumferential resection with end-to-end anastomosis is more advantageous since the resected
tracheal tissue is only half of the length removed or lost compared with circumferential resection, preserving and sparing more of the
trachea in the process. The tension created by twisting both ends in opposite directions is acceptable, since a 2-cm or more separation from
the esophagus was created prior to the twisting and anastomosis. This important step also frees the esophagus and allows it to shorten or
contract a little to accommodate and match the already shortened trachea. This procedure is most suitable for surgery of tangential lesions
of the cervicothoracic trachea, and laryngeal release or other types of release of the proximal trachea is unnecessary. This is the first
case wherein a tracheal glomus tumor was managed with this technique, and this is the first time that a bronchoscopic image is available
post-procedure. As seen in Figure 2C, the anastomotic line is tangential and oriented to the left, and the axis of the distal anastomotic
segment is not in the same plane as the proximal segment. Although glomus tumors are mostly benign, tumor location is important because
airway compromise and bleeding can be life-threatening. Histopathologic staining is critical to avoid mistaking it for a hemangiopericytoma
or a carcinoid tumor. Spiral tracheoplasty may be performed after tangential resection, as it preserves more tracheal tissue, decreases
tension, and prevents leakage at the anastomotic site, which is almost always fatal when it occurs. Statement There was no financial support
or conflict of interest regarding this manuscript (A) Axial CT scan image of the tumor located at the posterior wall of the trachea. (B)
Coronal section showing the polypoid tumor over the trachea. (A) Preoperative bronchoscopic image of the tumor almost completely obstructing
the trachea. (B) Gross appearance of the excised tumor. (C) Bronchoscopic image performed 7 days postoperatively showing mild granulation
tissue over the oblique anastomotic site. The trachea is patent and the axis of the distal anastomotic site is not on the same plane as the
proximal segment. (A) Representative low-power magnification of a cut section of the glomus tumor showing a hypervascular tumor composed of
branching, dilated, thick-walled, vascular channels and thin-walled, capillary-like vascular spaces (hematoxylin and eosin, 40×). (B) High-
power magnification of the tumor showing lobular arrangements of oval- to-spindle-shaped cells, with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and
centrally-located rounded nuclei (hematoxylin and eosin, 400×). (C) Immuno-staining showing tumor cells strongly reactive to actin.
Diagrammatic representation of spiral tracheoplasty after tangential resection of a tracheal tumor. (A) After identifying the tumor, the
trachea is separated from the esophagus by about 2 cm to allow for manipulation and exposure of the operative field. (B) This is followed by
tangential resection of the tracheal lesion. (C) Both transected tracheal ends are rotated 90 degrees in opposite directions. The proximal
end is rotated clockwise and the distal end is rotated counter clockwise. (D) The tracheal ends are then trimmed for irregularities to
obtain good apposition. (E) The anastomosis is performed using running sutures. Tracheal glomus tumor cases from 1950–2014.
