Cavernous hemangioma in the thymus is a rare presentation in mediastinal hemangiomas. The diagnosis is difficult to make promptly because
both invasive and noninvasive examinations usually fail to distinguish it from other tumors of the mediastinum. Their clinical presentations
depends on their size and their involvement with adjacent mediastinal structures. We treated a 52-year-old man with thymic cavernous
hemangioma that was incidentally detected by chest radiography during a routine health check, and had been misdiagnosed as thymoma before
the operation. The tumor was completely resected by thymectomy via video-assisted thoracic surgery. The pathological tissue was diagnosed as
a cavernous hemangioma, and no phlebolith was observed in the center. We reported this case of thymic cavernous hemangioma for its extremely
rare occurrence in the thymus. The preoperative diagnosis remains a challenge both clinically and radiologically. It is still difficult to
distinguish this tumor from other tumors in the thymus. Furthermore, biopsies might not result in a definitive diagnosis. Finally, surgical
resection provides material for histopathologic diagnosis. To facilitate the preoperative diagnosis of such a rare tumor, more cases will
need to be reported. Cavernous hemangioma is a rare tumor of the mediastinum, accounting for 0.5% or less of all mediastinal tumors . The
diagnosis is difficult to make promptly because both invasive and noninvasive examinations usually fail to distinguish it from other tumors
of the mediastinum. Their clinical presentations depend on their size and their involvement with adjacent mediastinal structures. We herein
report a case of an unusual hemangioma of thymic origin and a review of the literature concerning the clinical and pathological features of
this disease, which is often misdiagnosed as thymoma. A 52-year-old man was referred to our hospital for assessment of a suspicious mass
that was detected on a chest radiography during a routine health check. He denied symptoms, including chest pain, hoarseness, hemoptysis,
cough, dry cough, and dyspnea. He was a nonsmoker and had no exposure to any environmental fumes or dust. Physical examination revealed
normal breathing sounds in both lung fields. Laboratory findings were within normal limits. In these examinations, hematology test results
and biochemistry test results were within regular levels. Plain chest computed tomography (CT) displayed a circumscribed soft tissue mass
that was located in the anterior mediastinum, measuring 2.1 × 1.4 cm (Figure 1A). Contrast-enhanced CT showed a demarcated soft tissue mass
with no calcification and marginal enhancement (Figure 1B). The lesion was suspected to be a thymoma rather than a vascular neoplasm before
surgery. As a diagnosis was not established through imaging, surgery was scheduled. We approached the tumor, which was removed by thymectomy
using video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) rather than a median sternotomy. The thymectomy was performed in the lateral decubitus
position, utilizing a three-port, right-sided VATS approach under general anesthesia administered through a double-lumen endotracheal tube.
Three entry ports were made at the third and sixth intercostal spaces of the right posterior axillary, midaxillary, and midclavicular lines.
The camera was introduced via trocar through the lower port at the sixth intercostal space of the midaxillary line. The operative procedure
involved removal of the entire thymus gland including the anterior mediastinal fat, with careful attention to preservation of the phrenic
nerve and control of thymic venous tributaries draining into the left brachiocephalic vein. There was no invasion into adjacent structures.
After careful attention to hemostasis, a chest tube was placed to drain the pleural cavity, and the right lung was reinflated under direct
vision. Macroscopically, examination of the resected specimen showed an encapsulated tumor measuring 2.2 × 1.2 × 0.8 cm in the thymus that
could be palpated as a soft nodule. The cut surface seemed to have some fresh blood and the soft tissue was taupe, and no phlebolith was
discerned in the center. Histopathologically, it was diagnosed as a cavernous hemangioma consisting essentially of a large number of dilated
vessels with a single layer of endothelial cells with no signs of atypia or mitosis. Most of the channels contained red blood cells in the
cavity (Figure 2). No tumor tissue was detected at the surgical margin.Figure 1 Computed tomography showed a tissue mass in the anterior
mediastinum. (A) A plain chest scan showed a circumscribed soft tissue mass measuring 2.2 × 1.4 cm in size. (B) A contrast-enhanced scan
showed a demarcated tissue mass with no calcification.Figure 2 Histological features. (A) The channels that are dilated vessels with
endothelial cells contained red blood cells (arrow) and a thymic corpuscle (arrowhead) is observed. (H & E 40×). (B) Section reveals dilated
vessels with endothelial cells. Most of the channels contained red blood cells in the cavity thrombus. (H & E 200×). Computed tomography
showed a tissue mass in the anterior mediastinum. (A) A plain chest scan showed a circumscribed soft tissue mass measuring 2.2 × 1.4 cm in
size. (B) A contrast-enhanced scan showed a demarcated tissue mass with no calcification. Histological features. (A) The channels that are
dilated vessels with endothelial cells contained red blood cells (arrow) and a thymic corpuscle (arrowhead) is observed. (H & E 40×). (B)
Section reveals dilated vessels with endothelial cells. Most of the channels contained red blood cells in the cavity thrombus. (H & E 200×).
The postoperative course was ordinary. The patient was discharged 3 days after the operation with no complication. He has been followed up
for 8 months without evidence of recurrence. Hemangiomas in the mediastinum are uncommon tumors. About 90% of benign blood vascular
neoplasms in the mediastinum are cavernous or capillary hemangiomas . Vascular proliferations of the mediastinum include arteriovenous
hemangiomas, venous hemangiomas, glomus tumors, hemangiomas, angiofibromas, hemangiopericytomas, and angiolipomas . Cavernous hemangiomas
are venous hemangiomas. Although the origin of these tumors in the mediastinum is variable, a small number are of proven thymic origin.
Wychulis and colleagues reported a large review of 1,064 cases of mediastinal tumors collected over a 40-year period. Five of these cases
were hemangiomas, but none of them was of thymic origin . Yamazaki et al. found a total of 61 cases of mediastinal hemangioma reported in
Japan over the previous 50 years. Only one of them was of thymic origin. The patient was a 61-year-old man who was also assessed for a
suspicious mass identified on a chest radiograph during a routine health check. The mass was a well-demarcated nodule in the left lobe of
the thymus. There are three reports of six thymic hemangiomas for which no pathology reports and specific clinical data were available [1,
5, 6]. Yamazaki et al. reported that the tumor was asymptomatic in 56% of patients. The lesion might provoke symptoms if it is infectious or
if it exerts pressure on neighboring structures after becoming expanded. Patients with cavernous hemangioma present with cough, chest pain,
dyspnea, hemoptysis, and hoarseness. It has occasionally been observed as recurrent pleural effusion or recurrent pneumonia caused by an
airway obstruction . In our case, the patient presented without any symptoms. The preoperative diagnostic evaluation for mediastinal tumors
consists of an extensive medical history and chest CT. Hemangiomas are habitually round and lobulated with smooth margins. Cavernous
hemangiomas may show characteristic ‘puddles’ of enhancement following administration of a contrast agent . According to McAdams et al. ,
the center of the tumor shows more enhancement than the margin on CT. In our case, we could not observe this detection. In mediastinal
hemangiomas, the occurrence of characteristic ring calcification has been reported in about 10% of cases . However, no calcification was
found in our case. Histopathologically, a cavernous hemangioma is composed of dilated vessels covered by one layer of endothelial cells.
Differential diagnosis of the mass includes other tumors in the thymus, such as cystic lymphangioma, angiolipoma, and thymoma. Cystic
lymphangioma can occur in any location where normal lymphatic ducts are found. The most frequently reported sites are the head and neck
(75%), the axilla (20%), and other organs (5%). Histologically, any dilated lymphatic spaces are lined with attenuated endothelial cells
resembling the cells that line normal lymphatics. The lymphatic spaces are usually filled with proteinaceous eosinophilic fluid. The
supporting stroma is composed of collagen and may contain lymphocytes and lymphoid aggregates. Angiolipoma is a rare benign tumor consisting
of mature adipose tissue and blood vessels. Thymomas are classified using the Masaoka staging system, including stages I, II, III, and IV,
and the new World Health Organization schema (A, AB, B1, B2, B3). As the mass was in the thymus, we considered thymectomy necessary to
extirpate the lesion completely and that extirpation by VATS might be a better option to treat this condition than median sternotomy.
Surgical resection is associated with excellent long-term prognosis (Table 1).Table 1 Characteristics of patients
PatientAgeSexSymptomsLocalizationSize (cm)ResectionFollow-up (months)Prognosis135MalePain in neckCervical ectopic thymus tissue3 × 3Right
thoracotomy24Alive 252FemaleNoneLeft lobe of thymus4.2 × 3.2Right thoracotomy96Alive 363MaleDyspneaLeft lobe of thymus6 × 6Left
thoracotomy44Death 459FemaleNoneLeft lobe of thymus5 × 4VATS26Alive 552MaleNoneRight lobe of thymus2.1 × 1.4VATS12AliveVATS, video-assisted
thoracic surgery. Characteristics of patients VATS, video-assisted thoracic surgery. We reported this case of thymic cavernous hemangioma
for its extremely rare occurrence in the thymus. Preoperative diagnosis remains a challenge both clinically and radiologically. It is still
difficult to distinguish the disease from other tumors in the thymus. Furthermore, biopsies may not result in a definitive diagnosis.
Finally, surgical resection provides material for histopathologic diagnosis. To facilitate the preoperative diagnosis of such a rare tumor,
more cases will need to be reported. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor-in-chief of this journal. computed tomography
hematoxylin and eosin video-assisted thoracic surgery. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions CS was involved in drafting the manuscript. LL was involved in acquisition of data and preparing the figures. GC
designed and revised the manuscript. CS and YL were involved in drafting the manuscript. HX and LL was involved in acquisition of data and
preparing the figures. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. We greatly appreciate the assistance of the staff of the
Department of Thoracic Surgery, West-China Hospital, Sichuan University, and thank them for their efforts.
