Buruli ulcer, the third most common mycobacterial disease worldwide, rarely affects travelers and is uncommon in the United States. We
report a travel-associated case imported from Australia and review 3 previous cases diagnosed and treated in the United States. The
differential diagnoses for unusual chronic cutaneous ulcers and those nonresponsive to conventional therapy should include Mycobacterium
ulcerans infection. Buruli ulcer disease, caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans, is the third most common mycobacterial disease worldwide. Cases
are concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa but also occur in subtropical and nontropical regions (e.g., Australia and Japan) (1). M. ulcerans
disease is not endemic to the United States, but rare cases have been reported in travelers returning from regions where the organism is
endemic (2–4). We describe M. ulcerans infection in a man who returned to the United States after living abroad and review M. ulcerans cases
reported in 3 travelers. In December 2012, after unsuccessful treatment elsewhere, a 63-year-old white man was referred to the Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, for evaluation of skin ulcers. Previous medical history indicated hypertension and
hyperlipidemia. The patient sought care in April 2012 for a persistent, nonpainful ulcer (1-cm diameter) on his right medial calf (Figure).
No previous episodes or other symptoms of infection were reported. The patient had lived abroad for >10 years and had recently returned to
the United States from Queensland, Australia, where he spent his last month hiking in the Daintree Rainforest. His health care providers
recommended topical antimicrobial drugs and wound care, and a punch biopsy was obtained but the specimen was not stained or cultured for
acid-fast bacilli (AFB). Pathologic findings on the biopsy specimen were nonspecific (reactive epidermal changes and ulceration).
Progression of lesions caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans infection before, during, and after treatment. A–C) Left foot before treatment. D)
Left lower leg during treatment. E) Right calf before treatment. F) Right calf after treatment. G, H) Left foot after treatment. Between
April and July 2012, the ulcer increased to 4 cm despite multiple debridements. In September a painful, warm, erythematous lesion developed
on the patient’s left great toe. He consulted physicians in numerous subspecialties and underwent 2 more biopsies; specimens were not
initially stained or cultured for AFB. Pathologic findings from the specimens showed extensive necrosis without granulomas. The ulcers were
diagnosed as pyoderma gangrenosum with bacterial superinfection, and treatment was initiated with oral antimicrobial drugs
(amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125 mg twice daily) and prednisone (60 mg/day). Transient improvement occurred, but in late November, the toe
lesion worsened. When the patient was referred to the Veteran’s Affairs Medical Center in December 2012, biopsies were again obtained;
pathologic evaluation showed extensive necrosis (without granulomas) and numerous AFB. Fresh frozen tissue was sent to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; Atlanta, GA, USA) for mycobacterial testing. Empiric treatment with levofloxacin, doxycycline, and
azithromycin was initiated for nontuberculous mycobacterial infection, and the previously prescribed prednisone was rapidly tapered and
stopped. At CDC, immunohistochemical testing of tissue for mycobacteria showed extensive bacilli. DNA extracted from biopsy samples was
evaluated by PCR targeting 16s rRNA and the IS2402 insertion element (5). Sequences of IS2404 amplicons were 100% identical with those for
Mycobacterium ulcerans. Tissue cultured (30°C) at CDC grew AFB after 3 months (toe specimen) and 4 months (calf specimen); 16S rRNA gene
sequencing confirmed a Mycobacterium species, most closely matching M. marinum or M. ulcerans. Therapy, guided by World Health Organization
recommendations (1), was changed to rifampin (900 mg/day or 10 mg/kg bodyweight), clarithromycin (1,000 mg/day), and moxifloxacin (400
mg/day). In February 2014, after 15 months’ of antimicrobial drug treatment, debridement, and skin grafting to the left foot, the lesions
were completely healed. Imported M. ulcerans disease is exceedingly rare, even in today’s age of global travel. When the infection does
occur, diagnosis is often delayed. In addition to the case reported here, 3 other cases imported to the United States have been reported in
the literature since 1967 (2–4). The 4 M. ulcerans cases diagnosed in the United States were in men (median age 35 years, range 20–63)
(Table). Lesions were located on the upper (25%) and lower (75%) extremities, similar to cases in Africa, where lesions commonly develop on
the extremities of adults and on the trunk, head, neck, and upper limbs of children (6). Specific exposures were not identified in 3 of the
US patients; the fourth had exposure to fresh water, a known risk factor (6). The 2012 imported US case is similar to cases in Australia,
where patients have a median age of 61 years at diagnosis, and most have single lesions (95%) involving lower limbs (61%). However, in
Australia, the median time from symptom onset to diagnosis is 42 days, consistent with greater familiarity with the disease (7). *All
patients were male. Except for negative smear results for patient 1, culture and smear results for all patients were positive. QLD,
Queensland; –, Information not available. The 3 persons with the prior cases of imported M. ulcerans disease in the United States had
traveled to western Africa; the case-patient described herein had returned from Australia. Most M. ulcerans cases in Australia are linked to
temperate, coastal Victoria and tropical, northern Queensland (8). Persons with cases imported to other M. ulcerans–nonendemic countries
mostly traveled to Africa (1 traveled to South America), where the disease is present but uncommon (9–12). In regions where M. ulcerans
disease is endemic, it is readily recognized on the basis of lesion appearance and chronicity. In areas of Australia where Buruli ulcer
disease is nonendemic, diagnosis is delayed (13). A hallmark of imported cases is the difficulty in arriving at a diagnosis due to
nonfamiliarity with the disease. For the 4 imported US cases, the median time to empiric antimycobacterial therapy was 20 weeks, and the
median time to definitive diagnosis was 8 months. The differential diagnosis for M. ulcerans disease is broad, spanning infectious and
noninfectious etiologies, including filariasis, phycomycosis, resolving furuncle, and pyoderma gangrenosum. Samples from the case-patients
were uniformly AFB smear-positive, and for 1 case in which the culture failed to grow M. ulcerans, diagnosis was made by clinical and
epidemiologic history and presence of AFB in tissue. Because the organism is slow growing, prolonged culture (>3 months) at low temperatures
is required. A hallmark of M. ulcerans histopathology is the absence of granulomas and presence of extensive necrosis caused by the
organism’s secretion of mycolactone toxin, which suppresses the host’s immune response (7). The absence of granulomas on hematoxylin and
eosin staining may result in tissue not being stained for AFB unless clinicians have a high index of suspicion. Furthermore, depending on
the bacterial load and focal distribution, bacteria may not be detected by AFB staining. Molecular analysis of tissue is the most sensitive
and specific method for rapid and confirmatory diagnosis of M. ulcerans and should be pursued when disease is suspected (14). Treatment of
M. ulcerans disease has changed markedly over the last several decades. Prior to the early 2000s, availability of effective drugs was
limited, so surgery was the primary treatment. However, combination therapy with streptomycin, rifampin, and surgery (including skin
grafting) has been shown to be effective (1), and some cases can be managed with medical therapy alone. Standard antimicrobial treatment,
according to World Health Organization guidelines, consists of administering rifampin (10 mg/kg body weight daily by mouth) for 8 weeks and
streptomycin (15 mg/kg body weight daily by intramuscular injection) for 8 weeks (1). Extensive clinical experience has also shown a
combination of oral antimicrobial drugs (rifampin with clarithromycin or moxifloxacin) to be effective against Buruli ulcer disease (15). Of
the 4 reported US cases, 1 required surgery alone and 3 required drug treatment and surgery. Response to therapy has been favorable: 2 US
cases were cured by treatment with oral antimicrobial drugs. Because awareness of Buruli ulcer disease is limited in regions where M.
ulcerans is nonendemic, the potential for delayed diagnosis in such areas is increased. For persons with recent travel from M.
ulcerans–endemic regions, Buruli ulcer disease should be considered in the differential diagnoses of unusual chronic cutaneous ulcers and
skin ulcers nonresponsive to conventional therapy. Suggested citation for this article: Thomas BS, Bailey TC, Bhatnagar J, Ritter JM, Emery
BD, Jassim OW, et al. Mycobacterium ulcerans infection imported from Australia to Missouri, USA, 2012. Emerg Infect Dis. 2014 Nov [date
cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/ eid2011.131534 This work was supported by a grant (UL1 TR000448) from the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences to the Washington University Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences. Dr Thomas is a fellow in the Division
of Infectious Diseases at the Washington University School of Medicine. His primary research interest is in hospital-acquired infections and
health care epidemiology.
