Perforated cystic teratomas are rare. Our patient was a 16-year-old female who presented with severe chest pain two years ago. A right-sided
pleural effusion was accidentally detected by chest radiography performed at her school. Computed tomography revealed a high density area
with multiple small, thickened, lobulated lesions and a low density area with pleural effusion adjacent to a thinned wall. Pathognomonic
inhomogeneous computed tomography findings led to an accurate diagnosis of a mature teratoma that had ruptured long before presentation.
Thoracoscopic resection was performed, and the final histological diagnosis was a mature teratoma with partial rupture. Before puberty,
approximately 20% of patients with primary mediastinum tumors have germ cell tumors . Germ cell tumors of the mediastinum are believed to be
derived from the thymus, and they typically occur with equal frequency in men and women . There have been few published reports of the rate
of teratoma rupture; however, a rate of 36.0 to 41.0% has been reported in a high-risk population [2, 3]. We describe a patient who
underwent thoracoscopic resection for a mature teratoma that had ruptured two years earlier. A definitive diagnosis was made on the basis of
the results of preoperative computed tomography (CT). A 16-year-old female presented with severe chest pain two years ago. She reported
occasional right-sided chest pain and dyspnea on exertion but had never visited a hospital for her condition. Her past history was not
significant. Right-sided pleural effusion was identified at an annual health screening conducted at the high school. Contrast-enhanced chest
CT (mediastinal window) confirmed two inhomogeneous patterns, that is, a high-density area with multiple, small, thickened, lobulated
lesions of a maximum diameter of 25 mm on the anterior mediastinum (Figure 1A) and a low density area with pleural effusion adjacent to a
thinned wall on the former caudal side (Figure 1B). On admission, tumor markers (α-fetoprotein, β subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG), and carcinoembryonic antigen) were within normal ranges. No signs of inflammation were detected by blood examination, and needle
thoracocentesis was performed. Infection, secondary effusion due to pneumothorax, and bleeding were all ruled out by analyses of the pleural
effusion. Based on the findings of imaging and a systemic examination, a ruptured teratoma was finally suspected.Thoracoscopic resection was
performed. A 17 × 10 cm cyst with a smooth surface and thinned wall was found between the lower lobe and the diaphragm (Figure 2A). When we
observed the mediastinal side (thymus), small cysts containing various concentrates of lactescent creams were identified (macroscopic
findings, Figure 2B). Microscopic examination revealed that the tumor contained squamous epithelium associated with sebaceous glands,
aberrant pancreatic tissue containing pancreatic glands, and islets of Langerhans (Figure 2C), and columnar epithelium intermixed with
goblet cell and glandular epithelium. Neither immature cells nor malignant transformation was identified.Figure 1 Computed tomography
imaging. (A) Computed tomography revealed lobulated cystic masses with an enhanced tumor wall in the anterior mediastinam. (B) Computed
tomography revealed a low density area equal to pleural effusion with an adjacent thin wall.Figure 2 Thoracoscopic finding, resected
specimen and histological features of mature cystic teratoma. (A) Thoracoscopic image of a smooth-surfaced cyst with a wall between the
lower lobe and diaphragm. (B) Macroscopic photography showed a ruptured cystic lesion (left) and multiple lobulated cysts (right). (C)
Histologically, the pancreatic glands and islets of Langerhans were apparent. Computed tomography imaging. (A) Computed tomography revealed
lobulated cystic masses with an enhanced tumor wall in the anterior mediastinam. (B) Computed tomography revealed a low density area equal
to pleural effusion with an adjacent thin wall. Thoracoscopic finding, resected specimen and histological features of mature cystic
teratoma. (A) Thoracoscopic image of a smooth-surfaced cyst with a wall between the lower lobe and diaphragm. (B) Macroscopic photography
showed a ruptured cystic lesion (left) and multiple lobulated cysts (right). (C) Histologically, the pancreatic glands and islets of
Langerhans were apparent. The patient had no complications during the postoperative period and was discharged on postoperative day 4. At
follow-up examination, six months after surgery, she was found to be completely asymptomatic. Clinical symptoms are always associated with
ruptured teratomas, whereas only approximately 50% of unruptured teratomas are symptomatic, and severe symptoms such as chest pain of recent
onset or hemoptysis were more frequently observed in patients with ruptured teratomas than in patients with unruptured teratomas . In our
case, our patient had severe chest pain two years earlier, but she did not visit the hospital because her symptoms subsided. We conjectured
this symptom was the onset of rupture. The tumor was accidentally detected by chest radiography. To the best of our knowledge, there have
been few cases in which a ruptured teratoma was diagnosed after a long interval from the time of rupture. Suwatanapongched et al. reported
an intrapulmonary rupture of mediastinal teratoma after four years . However, we based onset on the diagnosis and only for symptoms in this
report, and there is no accurate evidence to confirm this. Our case may have had a later onset than believed. The following two primary and
controversial proposals relating to possible perforation mechanisms have been published: (a) sebaceous materials or digestive enzymes
derived from tumor tissue cause inflammation, infection, ischemia, and necrosis [2, 3] and (b) autolysis occurs via digestive enzymes
derived from the pancreatic or salivary gland of tumor tissue [2, 5, 6]. The latter hypothesis was most applicable to our case because
pathological examination revealed that there was no necrosis or ischemic findings, and the pancreatic duct and islets of Langerhans were
outstanding (Figure 2C). Hirawa et al. reported that high levels of amylase were noted in pleural fluid that originated from a mediastinal
teratoma . The serum amylase level in our patient was within the normal range, and the possibility of dilution with reactive effusion over
the preceding two years was considered. On the basis of their analysis of 17 tumors, Choi et al. also reported no significant difference
between ruptured and unruptured teratomas in terms of wall thickness, location of the mass, and tumor size . In the present case, the tumor
wall of the ruptured cystic lesion (3.8 mm) was thinner than that of an unruptured cystic lesion (6.8 mm). We hypothesized the following
mechanisms for this phenomenon: (a) degeneration of the ruptured cystic wall over approximately two years or (b) gradual thinning of the
wall due to a rise in pressure. Approximately 90% of unruptured teratomas present as homogeneous in CT findings . Homogeneity or
heterogeneity on CT is one means of distinguishing between ruptured and unruptured teratomas. In addition, Inoue et al. reported their
short-interval CT finding that an increase in the soft tissue area of the anterior chest wall adjacent to the tumor was extremely helpful
for making a definitive diagnosis of teratoma rupture, thereby facilitating prompt treatment by surgical resection . In the present case,
the tumor also had a high density area with multiple small thickened lobulated lesions and a low density area with pleural effusion adjacent
to a thinned wall (Figure 1A-B); therefore, we could make an accurate diagnosis with these CT findings. In conclusion, CT is a useful
modality for diagnosing a ruptured teratoma. It is important for surgical resection that a definitive diagnosis is obtained with these CT
findings. To the best of our knowledge, there is second report of a ruptured teratoma diagnosed more than two years after the onset of
perforation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HK, TH and MS performed this thoracoscopic resection. HK and TH
analyzed previous published data and wrote this manuscript. YS advised and proofred this manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
