Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease with equal prevalence across sexes. However, women present worse lung function with faster
function decline, earlier onset of bacterial colonization, more frequent pulmonary exacerbations (PE), greater bronchial hyper-
responsiveness, and higher mortality rates after puberty than men. The etiology of this gender disparity remains elusive but female hormones
have been implicated in several studies. A 20-year-old female with CF with severe recurrent PE, always related to the menstrual cycle since
menarche, combined with lung function decline requiring multiple courses of intravenous antibiotics. We report the cessation of PE and
recovery of pulmonary function following the insertion of a subcutaneous implant with 68 mg of etonogestrel (Implanon®, Organon Española
S.A. Laboratories, Madrid, Spain). Our case report supports the key role of female hormones in the development of PE and in the decline of
lung function in a woman with CF. When appropriate, hormonal manipulation through contraceptive methods should be considered as potential
treatment. Gender differences in the presentation of Cystic Fibrosis (CF) after puberty have been well described in the literature including
a shorter median life expectancy by close to 3 years observed in women compared to men . The etiology of this gender disparity remains
unclear but several factors such nutritional status, CF-related diabetes, lung function (LF), airway microbiota, pulmonary exacerbations
(PE), and sex hormones have been associated with it in previous studies [5, 6]. Estrogens (E) are involved in mucus secretion, lung
development, expression of inflammation factors, and the risk of acquiring Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) including its conversion
to the mucoid phenotype. In addition, E are also linked to increased activity of the sodium channel and Na+-K−ATPase, a decrease in the
chloride secretion mediated by the calcium channel, reduced airway surface liquid (ASL) height, and a modification in the activity of the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) . Finally, the expression of progesterone (P) receptors in the cilia of airway
epithelium is regulated by sex hormones. P decreases cilia beat frequency in human airway epithelial cells by approximately 40% and this
reduced cilia beat frequency may, in turn, contribute to impaired mucociliary clearance (MCC) . These findings suggest an association
between the changes in female hormones related to patient’s menstrual cycle with the documented gender disparity in CF-related morbidity and
mortality [10, 19]. Based on Irish register data, Chotirmall and colleagues reported that female CF patients on the oral contraceptive pill
(OCP) required fewer antibiotic courses and had a lower PE rate than their counterparts not on OCP . Sutton et al. studied the effects of
puberty on CF-related PE in women versus men by performing a cohort study using the United States Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient
Registry. Post-puberty, the number of PE per year in males was 0.24 lower than in females. Below we present our favorable experience using a
subcutaneous implant with etonogestrel (Implanon®) to reduce PE frequency and improve LF in a woman with CF. The patient was a 20-year-old
female with CF, genotype R334W/Q890X and pancreatic sufficiency, diagnosed as a 3 month-old due to respiratory symptoms. Since diagnosis,
the patient had had several PE caused by β-lactamase producer methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). At the age of 5,
she experienced the first of many acute pancreatitis (AP) episodes secondary to several oral medications, including antibiotics. These
episodes, associated with continuous PE, led to the insertion of a port-a-cath. Non mucoid P. aeruginosa isolations grew in five samples
from April 2000 to September 2009 and three samples of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia were also collected, once in 2005 and twice in 2010. The
patient was treated with intermittent aerosolized antibiotics (tobramycin and colistin) following the Spanish Protocol for eradication of P.
aeruginosa, and was on azythromycin (500 mg, three times a week) from February 2007 to July 2009 . Sputa acid-fast bacilli smears and
cultures for mycobacterium isolates were consistently negative. From the onset of menarche at the age of 14, PE had followed the same
pattern. Four days before the menstrual period, she would start experiencing increased cough and purulent sputum production, develop daily
fever (>38°C), exertional dyspnea, and anorexia. In February 2007, due to frequent PE and rapid LF decline, she was started on aerosolized
ampicillin (Gobemicina®, Normon Laboratories, Madrid, Spain) every 12 hours. As previously reported , the response to this treatment was
excellent for a year. On February 2008 she again suffered severe and frequent PE, even while on aerosolized ampicillin, and always related
to menstrual cycle as described above. We then introduced an OCP with 3 mg of drospirenona and 30 mcg of etinilestradiol (Yasmin Diario®,
Schering España S.A. Laboratories, Madrid, Spain) with initial good response and no PE for 7 months. On September 2008, the same pattern of
PE described above re-started requiring five courses of intravenous (IV) antibiotics. From March through May of 2009, the patient was
administered an OCP with 2.0 mg of ciproterone acetate and 0.035 mg of etinilestradiol (Diane 35®, Schering España S.A. Laboratories,
Madrid, Spain). The lack of response called for four courses of IV antibiotics. In total, from February 2008 until May 2009 she required
20 weeks of IV antibiotics (ceftazidime, linezolid, imipenem, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or a combination of these; Figure 1). We
observed a dramatic loss of LF as follows (Figure 1): forced expired volume in 1 second (FEV1) decreased from 2.33 L to 1.31 L (77% to 42%
of FEV1 predicted) and forced vital capacity (FVC) decreased from 2.71 L to 1.49 L (79% to 42% of FVC predicted). In addition, she had five
AP episodes. In May 2009, after discussing the case with the Department of Gynaecology, a subcutaneous implant with 68 mg of etonogestrel
(Implanon®, Organon Española S.A. Laboratories, Madrid, Spain) was inserted in the inner side of her left arm. Estradiol levels had not been
measured in this patient. Since then the patient had no PE episodes for two years, she did not require any oral or IV antibiotics, and her
LF stabilized around 1.61 L for FEV1 (48% of FEV1 predicted) and 2.16 for FVC (57% of FVC predicted). In addition, the treatment resulted in
a weight gain of 3 Kg (from 50 kg [10th percentile] to 53 kg [25th-50th percentile]). Further, no side effects were observed during this
period, the pattern of S. aureus colonization did not change, and no selection of resistant microorganisms appeared except a unique
isolation of non-mucoid P. aeruginosa, previously reported, four months after the insertion of the subcutaneous implant. From September 2009
through September 2010, we introduced aerosolized tobramycin (TOBI®, Novartis Laboratories) in on-off cycles following the Spanish Protocol
for eradication of P. aeruginosa. In July 2011, the patient had a severe PE episode requiring treatment with IV antibiotic. At this point,
the subcutaneous implant was replaced for another one. The patient has been PE episode-free since December 2012.Figure 1 Respiratory
function and intravenous-antibiotic use before and after insertion of first and seconf subcutaneous implant with etonogestrel (Implanon®).
⬇: intravenous antibic; FVC: forced vital capacity; FEV1: forced expired volumen in first second; (1): trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; (2)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and linezolid; (3): linezolid; (4): trimethoprim-sulfamthoxazole and ceftazidimel; (5): Imipenem. Respiratory
function and intravenous-antibiotic use before and after insertion of first and seconf subcutaneous implant with etonogestrel (Implanon®).
⬇: intravenous antibic; FVC: forced vital capacity; FEV1: forced expired volumen in first second; (1): trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; (2)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and linezolid; (3): linezolid; (4): trimethoprim-sulfamthoxazole and ceftazidimel; (5): Imipenem. CF is a
genetic disease with the same prevalence in both men and women. However, women experience worse LF, early onset bacterial colonisations, and
lower survival expectancy than men [1–3, 22]. E levels are involved in mucus secretion, lung development, expression of inflammation
factors, risk for P. aeruginosa colonization and its further conversion to mucoid phenotype, modification of the activity of the CFTR, and
alterations of MCC and ion transport in the ASL [10, 15, 19, 23]. Additionally, P decreases cilia beat frequency in airway epithelial cells
. These effects have a negative impact on the MCC of the ASL which may explain, to an important extent, the lower survival in women with CF
compared to their male counterparts. All these mechanisms could have influenced the presentation of PE in our patient during the luteal
phase when E and P levels are high. The OCP administered (Yasmin Diario® o Diane 35 Diario®) has a negative feed-back mechanism on
hypophysis hormones lowering endogenous E’s levels throughout the menstrual cycle, including the pre-ovulation peak. The subcutaneous
implant of etonogestrel (Implanon®, Organon Española S.A. Laboratories, Madrid, Spain) has a slow and sustained release of a P derivate
which inhibits endogenous progesterone levels throughout the menstrual cycle, including the luteal phase. Based on a careful study of this
patient’s clinical history we speculate that both the year-long effectiveness of the aerosolized ampicillin treatment and the 7-month
effectiveness of the treatment with the first OCP (Yasmin Diario®) may be explained by the patient’s young age. The first two years after
the onset of menarche are characterized by anovulatoy cycles which cause irregular E and P patterns during the menstrual cycle. After these
two years, the patient probably started experiencing regular ovulatory cycles which would have normalized her E and P levels across the
normal menstrual cycle. The OCP prescribed (Yasmin Diario® and Diane 35 Diario®) only contain E, thus, they could not be effective in this
particular case because our patient had the PE always during the luteal phase, rather than the preovulatory, or immediately before the
menstrual phase of the cycle when the E are high. We think the effectiveness of the implant, inserted around two years and a half after
menarche, was secondary to the reduction of E and P levels caused by the administration of exogenous P throughout the entire menstrual
cycle, including the luteal phase, while withholding administration of exogenous E. The efficacy of ovulatory inhibition with this type of
implant varies from woman to woman across time, diminishing by 10% to up to 50% between year 2 and 5 after insertion. In our case, a
substantial loss of efficacy could explain the patient’s new acute PE episode after the first two years post-insertion and the disappearance
of clinical symptoms again after the insertion of a new implant. The genotype of this patient (R334W, class IV mutation, and Q890X, class I
mutation) is uncommon and, in this case, associated with a severe expression of the disease with pancreatic sufficiency, numerous episodes
of acute pancreatitis, and severe pulmonary disease with frequent PE. Sutton et al. analyzed the United States CF Foundation Patient
Registry for a retrospective study of LF decline and rate of PE changes in CF before and after puberty. They concluded that whereas males
had lower rate of PE than females, there was no association between annual frequency of PE and race, pancreatic insufficiency, or genotype.
Further research is necessary to shed light on the relationship between CF genotype and the effect of female hormones on morbidity/mortality
in women. The effect of female hormones on women with CF is a complex issue given that women have different PE recurrence patterns according
to the different phases of the menstrual cycle. Thus, studying the history of PE pattern is essential in order to prescribe one
contraceptive method over another (with exogenous E, P, or a combination of both) according to the expression of clinical symptoms of each
patient. Pulmonary epithelium is a target for female hormones, including E and P. Their effects on lung function, inflammation, and immune
responses may impair MCC and are likely to partially explain the increase in PE frequency observed in women with CF. The case presented here
underlines the likely contribution of female hormones to the sex differential in morbidity/mortality in patients with CF. This case supports
hormonal manipulation as a potential highly effective therapy for women with CF. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Cystic fibrosis Lung function Pulmonary exacerbations Estrogens Pseudomonas aeruginosa Airway surface liquid Cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator Progesterone Oral contraceptive pill Acute pancreatitis Staphylococcus aureus Forced expired volume in
1 second Forced vital capacity. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AL
drafted the manuscript with LM and LS supervision. MR-V and JMG-C cared for the patient together with the medical team of the CF Unit at
Ramón y Cajal University Hospital. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript. We appreciate the collaboration of the patient
during all the treatment process and the elaboration of this manuscript. Funding The case report was written based on clinical observations
without any funding.
