Partial anomalous venous connection (PAPVC) is a rare congenital heart disease where the blood flow from one or more pulmonary veins (but
not all) returns to the right atrium or systemic venous circulation and is often associated with a sinus venosus atrial defect (SVD).
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) can provide limited information for this anomaly and the diagnosis of this congenital defect has been a
clinical challenge. We report here a case of a 75-year-old female with adult-onset pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), hypoxemia and
right-sided chamber dilatation. The diagnosis of PAPVC was made incidentally by multidetector computed tomographic angiography (MCTA) that
was performed to exclude pulmonary embolism. In this type of PAPVC, the atrial septum is intact, the right upper pulmonary vein (RUPV)
connects to the superior vena cava (SVC), and the SVC overrides across the atrial septum and has bi-atrial connection, all of which are
clearly manifested by MCTA. This case indicates the need to exclude a PAPVC and SVD in unexplained pulmonary hypertension, and MCTA is a
reliable non-invasive imaging technique with high resolution and wide anatomic coverage. The case also demonstrates that the coexisting SVD
with PAPVC is an anomalous venous connection instead of atrial septal defect (ASD) and its key feature is the overriding of SVC or IVC
across the intact atrial septum. Partial anomalous venous connection (PAPVC) is defined as one or more, but not all, pulmonary veins drain
into the right atrium or a systemic vein instead of the left atrium as in the normal heart. One of the most common types of PAPVC is the one
in which the right upper pulmonary vein (RUPV) connects to the right atrium or the superior vena cava (SVC) and that often coexists with a
sinus venosus atrial defect (SVD) [1, 2]. However, the anatomical features of SVD, whether it is an atrial septal defect (ASD) or an
anomalous venous connection, have been a matter of debate [3, 4]. Herein we report a 75-year-old woman with unexplained pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH) and right-sided chamber dilatation. The presence of PAPVC and SVD was confirmed by multidetector computed tomographic
angiography (MCTA) that showed the anatomical features of this congenital defect, including the RUPV connecting to the SVC, atrial septum
being intact, and the SVC overriding the intact atrial septum with bi-atrial connection. These features demonstrated the coexisting SVD with
PAPVC was an anomalous venous connection instead of ASD. A 75-year-old woman was presented to our hospital with 10 years of mild exertional
dyspnea and palpitation. She didn’t see any doctors until 1 month before presentation, when the symptoms of dyspnea and palpitation
aggravated. She was found to have cardiomegaly and left lung infection by chest radiograph, and a presumptive diagnosis of dilated
cardiomyopathy was made in a local hospital. Diuretics and inotropic agents were given but provided no relief of symptoms. She was then
referred to our hospital for further evaluation. On admission the patient’s blood pressure was 121/68 mmHg, heart rate was around 110 bpm
and irregular. The jugular veins were distended. Cardiac examination revealed an irregular tachycardia and a systolic apical murmur of grade
2/6. Rales were heard over the left lung base. The liver edge was palpable below the costal margin with tender. Edema was present in the
both lower extremities. Laboratory tests revealed unremarkable findings except for the reduced blood oxygen pressure of 57 mmHg.
Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation and evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed PAH
with the estimated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure of 77 mmHg and dilatation of the right ventricle (RV) and right atrium (RA)
(Figure 1A, B, C). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was unable to complete successfully. Pulmonary embolism was suspected and MCTA was
performed then, which confirmed the diagnosis of PAPVC and SVD. The anatomical and morphological features of this congenital defect were
clearly revealed by MCTA. The RUPV was unroofed and drained into the SVC at the level of the caval atrial junction (Figure 2A). The atrial
septum was actually intact and no true atrial ASD was present (Figure 2B, C, D). The SVC overrode across the intact atrial septum and had
bi-atrial connection (Figure 2B) with one opening connecting to the right atrium (Figure 2C) and another opening to the left atrium
(Figure 2D).Figure 1 TTE revealed PAH with right-sided chamber enlargement. A: Dilatation of the RVOT(right ventricular outflow tract) was
shown. B: Severe tricuspid regurgitation was shown in the parasternal short axis view (white arrow) with dilatation of RV and RA. C: The
pressure gradient between the RV and RA was around 67 mmHg by measuring the tricuspid regurgitation Doppler jet.Figure 2 MCTA demonstrated a
PAPVC associated with a SVD. A: The RUPV was unroofed and drained into the SVC at the level of the caval atrial junction (white arrow). B:
The SVC had bi-atrial connection and overrode across the atrial septum (black arrow), and the atrial septum was actually intact (black
triangle). C: The SVC had one opening connecting to the right atrium (black arrow); D: The SVC had another opening connecting to the left
atrium (black arrow). TTE revealed PAH with right-sided chamber enlargement. A: Dilatation of the RVOT(right ventricular outflow tract) was
shown. B: Severe tricuspid regurgitation was shown in the parasternal short axis view (white arrow) with dilatation of RV and RA. C: The
pressure gradient between the RV and RA was around 67 mmHg by measuring the tricuspid regurgitation Doppler jet. MCTA demonstrated a PAPVC
associated with a SVD. A: The RUPV was unroofed and drained into the SVC at the level of the caval atrial junction (white arrow). B: The SVC
had bi-atrial connection and overrode across the atrial septum (black arrow), and the atrial septum was actually intact (black triangle). C:
The SVC had one opening connecting to the right atrium (black arrow); D: The SVC had another opening connecting to the left atrium (black
arrow). Right heart catheterization and surgery correction of the anomaly was suggested but was declined by the patient. Intravenous
infusion of Alprostadil was initiated with 20 μg twice daily and then Beraprost with 40 μg three times daily. Sildenafil was recommended but
declined by the patient due to the high cost. The patient was discharged a week later with improved 6-Minute Walking Distance (300 meters at
baseline and 320 meters at the day of discharge). PAPVC is a rare congenital heart disease, with a prevalence of 0.1-0.2% in adult
population reported by a recent study . Anomalous right-sided pulmonary veins could return directly to the right atrium or a systemic vein
such as SVC, inferior vena cava (IVC), azygos vein, hepatic vein or portal vein. The left-sided PAPVC might drain into the innominate vein,
coronary sinus and hemiazygos vein [1, 5]. The RUPV connecting to the SVC is one of the most common forms of PAPVC and is often associated
with a SVD [2, 5, 6]. The diagnosis of PAPVC has been a clinical challenge. The patient’s clinical manifestation and progression vary
significantly depending on the amount of the intra-cardiac shunt. Symptoms or signs as dyspnea, atrial arrhythmias, right heart failure, and
pulmonary hypertension may occur but are not specific to PAPVC. A great number of PAPVC cases were misdiagnosed as primary pulmonary
hypertension , or were diagnosed incidentally [1, 8]. In our case, the patient developed the symptoms of PAH in her sixth to seventh
decades. No intra-cardiac shunt was found by TTE. MCTA was then performed to exclude pulmonary embolism, which incidentally revealed the
presence of PAPVC and the associated SVD. Although TTE is less sensitive and may miss around 33% patients , it remains the first choice of
non-invasive imaging modality to diagnose PAPVC. TTE could provide useful information other than direct evidence of intra-cardiac shunts.
Any findings by TTE with unexplained PAH or right-sided chamber enlargement should warrant further studies as TEE or MCTA. TEE has better
sensitivity and is highly diagnostic for PAPVC in experienced operators . Other methods as MCTA and cardiac MRI have gained increasingly
importance for non-invasive detection of vascular anomalies [1, 10]. In our opinion, contrast-enhanced MCTA has high spatial and temporal
resolution and is less operator-dependent compared with TEE. As shown in our case, the anatomical features as the presence, number of
anomalous veins and the associated defects can be reliably discovered by MCTA. SVD is the most common congenital anomaly associated with
PAPVC. A lot reports had simply indicated that this anomaly is a sinus venosus type of ASD but failed to study the accurate anatomical or
morphological features of SVD [5, 10, 11]. Recently, a few reports argued the presence of ASD in SVD [3, 4]. Oliver et al. studied the
anatomical features of SVD by comparing TEE data with surgical findings in 24 patients with a posterior inter-atrial communication closely
related to the orifice of SVC or IVC. Their findings supported that SVD should be regarded as an anomalous venous connection with an inter-
atrial communication outside the confines of the atrial septum . The MCTA imaging results in our case are consistent with their findings.
Therefore, the key anatomical feature of SVD is overriding of the mouth of the SVC, as shown in our case, or IVC across the intact muscular
border of the oval fossa, instead of ASD. At the beginning of development, the primitive lung drains via the splanchnic venous plexus into
the systemic venous circulation (cardinal and umbilical veins). The primitive PV or so-called PV Anlage originates from midpharyngeal
endothelial strand (MPES), which is a single non-lumenized structure at the time, and connects to the sinus venosus segment of the heart.
Additionally, the dorsal mesenchymal protrusion (DMP), located at the entrance of PV Anlage into the sinus venosus (connecting to the common
atrium), contributes to the atrial septum. Between 4th and 5th week of development, the primitive PV lumenizes and connects to the LA and
the primitive connections of the lung to the systemic veins regress. If PVs do not lumenize or become atretic, pulmonary-systemic
communications persists and TAPVC (total anomalous venous connection) or PAPVC develop. At the same stage, if DMP contribution to atrial
septation is impaired, a so-called sinus venosus defect develops [12, 13]. As to the SVC development, the anterior cardinal veins bring the
blood into the left and right common cardinal vein. They then empty via the right and left sinus horn into the sinus venosus and then into
the atrium. At the time of atrial septation, due to obliteration of the veins on the left side of embryo, the right sinus horn and veins
greatly enlarge and the sinoatrial opening shifts to the right and opens into the future right atrium. The right anterior cardinal and right
common cardinal veins become the SVC. The left sinus horn atrophies and the left common cardial vein greatly reduced to form the coronary
sinus [12, 13]. Any defects with this process may cause the SVC connecting to both the right and left atria. Therefore, the possible
embryological explanation to the anomaly reported here is that the RUPV does not lumenize when it should and the corresponding lung segment
drain its blood to the systemic venous circulation by means of persistence of connection to the SVC. At the same time, the DMP contribution
to atrial septation is non-defective and the atrial septum is intact. At last, the right sinus horn and right veins do not shift and the
left sinus horn and left veins do not regress properly, which cause bi-atrial connection of SVC. This case highlights the need to exclude a
PAPVC and SVD in patients with unexplained pulmonary hypertension and right-sided chamber enlargement. MCTA is a reliable non-invasive
imaging modality with high resolution and wide anatomic coverage. The case also demonstrates that the common coexisting defect with PAPVC,
SVD, is actually an anomalous venous connection instead of ASD and its key feature is the overriding of SVC or IVC across the intact atrial
septum. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Partial anomalous venous connection Total anomalous venous
connection Right upper pulmonary vein Superior vena cava Sinus venosus atrial defect Atrial septal defect Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Right ventricle Right atrium Multidetector computed tomographic angiography Transthoracic echocardiography Transesophageal echocardiography
Inferior vena cava Midpharyngeal endothelial strand The dorsal mesenchymal protrusion Pulmonary vein. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DWW contributed to the conception of the report and revision of the
report critically for important intellectual content. HW drafted the manuscript, was responsible for acquisition and interpretation of the
data, searched the literature, and revised the figures. HXG performed the MCTA examination, reconstructed the images and drew the figures.
All authors were involved in the patient’s treatment and made a substantial contribution to the manuscript preparation. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We thank Dr. Sishu Yuan who helped the reconstruction and drawing of the images.
