Clinical data: Heart murmur was auscultated in routine examination in a two-year old male child, who remained asymptomatic and without use
of specific medication. Physical examination: Eupneic, acyanotic, normal pulse. Weight: 18.6 Kg, Height: 109 cm, BP: 100/60 mmHg, HR: 90
bpm, saturation O2= 99%. Aorta was not palpable in furcula. In precordium, ictus cordis was not palpable and there were no systolic
impulses. Heart sounds were normophonetic, but audible on the right sternal border, and the second heart sound was constant and with mild
systolic murmur, +/++ of intensity, harsh, in the aortic area, irradiated to the right sternal border, larger than the left one. Liver was
palpable at 1 cm from the right costal margin. Electrocardiogram: Showed sinus rhythm and RS morphology in right precordial and rs in V6
compatible with right ventricular overload. Ventricular repolarization was normal. AP: +20ยบ, AQRS: +250ยบ, AT: +30ยบ. Chest radiography: Shows
hypoplasia of right lung with increased cardiac area positioned to the right and increased pulmonary vascular markings. There were signs of
vascular imaging on the right side of the retrocardiac image with an outlining that resembled a scimitar (Figure 1). Chest radiography shows
the increased heart area to the right with increased pulmonary vascular markings and venous vessel in the hypoplastic right lung, simulating
the shape of scimitar, in the retrocardiac image (arrows). Bi-Doppler echocardiogram: showed a clear enlargement of right cavities, dilation
of the pulmonary trunk and left pulmonary artery. 5 mm ostium secundum interatrial communication with shunt from the left to the right.
Pulmonary veins on the left normally drain in normal left atrium and right veins on the dilated inferior vena cava, next to the right
atrium. Measurements: RV = 26, LV = 31, PT = 21, RPA = 7, LPA = 13, annulus T = 22, annulus M = 16, annulus P = 15 annulus Ao = 15 mm, RVSP
= 37 mmHg, LVEF = 66%, (Figure 2). Angiography in right upper pulmonary vein enhances the Scimitar shape of right common pulmonary vein
(arrows) towards lower vena cava in A, Left Pulmonary Vein (LPV) in the Left Atrium (LA) in continuity of the Left Ventricle (LV) and Aorta
(Ao) in B and systemic-to-pulmonary vessel of descending aorta to right lower lobe in C. Echocardiographic images show the increased right
cavities in apical view of 4 chambers in D, the large increase of right ventricle in cross-sectional view in E and dilated pulmonary trunk
and left pulmonary artery in cross-sectional view in F. Cardiac catheterization confirmed the diagnosis of Scimitar syndrome with abnormal
draining of right pulmonary veins in inferior vena cava and interatrial communication. It was verified with an injection of contrast agent
in the descending aorta the presence of systemic-to-pulmonary collateral vessel which was being directed to the right lower lobe (pulmonary
sequestration) and underwent embolization by placing four spring coils (Figure 2). Pressures: RA = 11, RV = 40/12, PT = 36/8-17, PC = 16, LA
= 12, LV = 82/17, Ao = 90/60-70 mmHg. Clinical diagnosis: Scimitar Syndrome in hypoplasia of the right lung and interatrial communication,
with shunt from left to right, and pulmonary sequestration of the right lower lobe, in asymptomatic child. Clinical reasoning: Clinical
elements were compatible with the diagnosis of interatrial communication and abnormal drainage of right pulmonary veins on the lower vena
cava in hypoplasia of the right lung, indicating Scimitar syndrome. Pulmonary sequestration on the right side was established by the cardiac
catheterization. Differential diagnosis: Clinical findings and complementary tests, characteristic of Scimitar syndrome, have not found
differentials similar to other abnormalities. These elements must be always highlighted and remembered in the presence of hypoplasia of the
right lung. Under these circumstances, the associated pulmonary sequestration must also be remembered. Conduct: Surgery for redirection of
right pulmonary veins to the left atrium and closure of interatrial communication is supported by the effects repercussion, given the right
heart cavities large increase, motivated by shunt from left to right at the atrial level. Comments: Scimitar syndrome published by Cooper1
in 1836, and therefore designated by Neill, given the morphologic analogy with the Turkish curved in 19602, is systematically associated
with homonymous pulmonary hypoplasia to the right and sometimes with pulmonary sequestration, congenital cardiopathies (more commonly IAC)
and other defects known as "venolobar syndrome". The clinical status is similar to that of an interatrial communication, which is
repercussion when pulmonary hypoplasia is not significant. Otherwise, the more hypoplastic the lung is, the more reduced the pulmonary flow
is to the right and clinical manifestation is frustrated, to a point of not having a benefit from surgical correction. In association with
pulmonary sequestration, it is always recommended the embolization of systemic-to-pulmonary vessel in order to avoid complications of
pulmonary hemorrhage and localized pulmonary hypertension, in addition to pulmonary infection.
