A 72-year-old man presented with sudden onset of right-sided facial muscle weakness and slurred speech and a 3-day history of fevers,
myalgia and sore throat. There was no hyperacusis, change in taste or lacrimation. His history included untreated hepatitis C diagnosed
10 years before, but quiescent at his annual liver review 8 weeks before presentation. He smoked cannabis intermittently but there was no
recent alcohol or other drug abuse. There was a history of promiscuity with female partners. On examination, he was alert and orientated.
His blood pressure was elevated at 159/86 mm Hg but other vital signs and general examination were normal. Neurological examination showed a
severe right-sided lower motor facial weakness with Bell's phenomenon (see online supplementary video). The remaining cranial nerve
examination was normal, including eye movements, pupillary responses, facial sensation, hearing, taste and otoscopy. There was mild left hip
flexion weakness but preserved deep tendon reflexes. There was reduced sensation to temperature in a glove-and-stocking pattern; joint-
position sense, light touch and pain sensation were intact. There was mild gait instability on walking tandem. His condition progressed
rapidly and on day 2 of admission he developed left-sided facial weakness (figure 1) with bilateral, proximal lower limb weakness. His
paraesthesias were more painful. His lower limb deep tendon reflexes were no longer present (see online supplementary video). Spirometry
remained normal. He was transferred to a high dependency unit for ongoing monitoring. Bifacial lower motor neurone weakness (see online
supplementary video). What is the differential diagnosis and what are the most appropriate investigations? Lower motor neurone facial
weakness and (to a lesser extent) the absence of deep tendon reflexes are highly localising signs. The lesion explaining the facial and the
limb weakness can be localised to somewhere between the peripheral nerve roots and muscles; however, there are many possible causes (table
1). Dominant sensory symptoms (paraesthesias) make either a neuromuscular junction pathology (eg, botulism or myasthenia gravis) or a
myopathy (eg, polymyositis) less likely. The bilateral, although asynchronous, onset of the facial weakness suggests that generalised or
multifocal disease rather than a solitary lesion. The progression over days favours an infective or inflammatory/immune cause and makes a
vascular, neoplastic or degenerative process less likely. The differential diagnosis of acute bifacial weakness Other possibilities include
listerial rhombencephalitis, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, Sjögren's syndrome or other causes of multiple mononeuropathy, such as vasculitis,
HIV, syphilis or Lyme disease. The patient had not travelled outside Australia, making Lyme disease unlikely. ‘Facial-onset sensorimotor
neuropathy’, a novel neurodegenerative neuropathy, is also possible; however, the clinical course is usually indolent and progresses to
involve other limbs.1 A postinfective immune phenomenon would be an alternative. Normal or negative investigations included HIV, serum ACE,
creatine kinase, C reactive protein, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigen, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, blood cultures, antiganglioside antibodies, viral serology and contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain. Cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) examination showed 7 lymphocytes/µL (≤5), protein 1.04 g/L (0.15–0.45 g/L) and glucose 4.5 mmol/L (3.3–4.4 mmol/L). Oligoclonal bands
were positive in the serum and CSF. Neurophysiology 1 week after admission showed absent sural nerve sensory potentials, with prolonged
distal motor latencies, markedly reduced motor conduction velocities and prolonged and dispersed F waves bilaterally in the lower limbs,
consistent with an acute demyelinating polyneuropathy. What is the most likely diagnosis? In the early stage of Guillain–Barré syndrome,
absent or prolonged tibial nerve H-reflex responses are common, paralleling the loss of deep tendon reflexes. This is followed by abnormal
F-wave responses, temporal dispersion of distal compound muscle action potentials, prolonged distal motor and F-wave latencies and reduced
motor conduction velocity. A-waves and abnormal blink reflexes may also occur early in Guillain–Barré syndrome.2 Given that our case had
most of these features as well as CSF albuminocytological dissociation, the most likely diagnosis is the ‘bifacial weakness with
paraesthesias’ subtype of Guillain–Barré syndrome.3 4 Guillain–Barré syndrome is a postinfective polyneuropathy characterised by progressive
limb weakness and areflexia, commonly associated with CSF albuminocytological dissociation and neurophysiological evidence of peripheral
nerve dysfunction.2 Guillain–Barré syndrome has several regional variants,3 4 the most common being Miller Fisher syndrome: this presents
with external ophthalmoparesis, ataxia and areflexia, associated with the anti-GQ1b antibodies.2 4 In 1994, Allan Ropper described four
cases of bifacial weakness with paraesthesias, occurring in a postinfective period with a monophasic illness course and other investigations
consistent with Guillain–Barré syndrome.3 ‘Bifacial weakness with paraesthesias’ is now recognised as a localised subtype of Guillain–Barré
syndrome, along with a ‘pharyngeal–brachial–cervical weakness’ and ‘paraparetic Guillain–Barré syndrome.4 In the largest case series to
date, Susuki et al investigated 22 cases of bifacial weakness with paraesthesias and found that 86% had a preceding illness, with upper
respiratory illness more frequent than diarrhoea. There were IgM antibodies to cytomegalovirus in 30% and to Epstein–Barr virus in 20% (both
significantly more frequently than in Guillain–Barré syndrome). The most common first clinical symptom was distal paraesthesias (86%); 27%
had a unilateral onset of facial weakness. All cases had CSF albuminocytological dissociation and nerve conduction studies showed motor
demyelination in 64% and sensory abnormalities in 27%. As with previous studies in Guillain–Barré syndrome, anti-GM2 IgM antibodies were
more commonly (but not exclusively) present in patients with cytomegalovirus infection.5 All of Ropper's 1994 variants now appear in the
current classification of Guillain–Barré syndrome.6 What is the relationship between antiganglioside antibodies and acute inflammatory
neuropathies? Gangliosides are glycosphingolipids that are highly expressed in the nervous system. Antibodies against ganglioside antigens
sometimes develop with acute inflammatory neuropathies and can help to confirm the diagnosis as well as to distinguish between the clinical
subtypes. For example, GQ1b is strongly expressed in the oculomotor, trochlear and abducens nerves, as well as muscle spindles7 8; 83% of
patients with Miller Fisher syndrome have anti-GQ1b antibodies, probably causing the ophthalmoplegia and the cerebellar-like ataxia.7 Acute
ataxic neuropathies (Guillain–Barré syndrome/Miller Fisher syndrome overlap variants) can be anti-GQ1b or anti-GD1b antibody-positive. In
contrast, GT1a is more densely expressed than GQ1b in human glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves: anti-GT1a antibodies are common in the
pharyngeal–cervical–brachial Guillain–Barré syndrome variant (considered a Guillain–Barré syndrome variant rather than Miller Fisher
syndrome because limb weakness is a feature).9 Anti-GM1 or anti-GD1a antibodies can each occur in acute motor axonal neuropathy, an axonal
form of Guillain–Barré syndrome. Paraparetic Guillain–Barré syndrome6 is probably a localised subtype of acute motor axonal neuropathy,
since anti-GD1a antibodies sometimes occur in this condition. Screening for all ganglioside subtypes helps when investigating atypical
causes of weakness (figure 2). A schematic of antiganglioside antibody screening using ELISA. What is the best treatment for ‘bifacial
weakness with paraesthesias’? In Susuki's case series, all patients reached a nadir within 4 weeks and all but one made a good recovery.5
Some were treated with plasma exchange or intravenous immunoglobulin, although without any firm evidence base. We treated this patient with
intravenous immunoglobulin (2 g/kg) over 5 days, with regular spirometry, cardiac monitoring and deep vein thromboprophylaxis. Following a
second induction course, he regained strength over a month. Two months after the onset of his illness, he is independently mobile with mild
facial asymmetry. Guillain–Barré syndrome is a heterogeneous condition that includes rare regional variants presenting differently from
typical Guillain–Barré syndrome; these risks being overlooked in the differential diagnosis. Guillain–Barré syndrome can present in
localised subtypes, the main ones being ‘bifacial weakness with paraesthesias’, ‘pharyngeal–brachial–cervical weakness’ and ‘paraparetic
Guillain–Barré syndrome’. Deep tendon reflexes may be present initially in Guillain–Barré syndrome; patients with weakness of unexplained
origin require repeated examination. Guillain–Barré syndrome typically gives CSF albuminocytological dissociation and neurophysiological
abnormalities but positive antiganglioside antibodies also help with diagnosis. The authors thank Dr Yuki Fukamai at National University of
Singapore for performing antiganglioside antibodies. This work was supported by funding to Forefront, a collaborative research initiative
from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (Program Grant #1037746). Contributors: CC, LCN and MK acquired clinical
data. CC and MK produced initial drafts. LD performed and interpreted NCS. CC, LD, NY and MK produced the final paper. Competing interests:
None. Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. This paper was reviewed by Ben
Wakerley, Gloucester, UK.
