Pulmonary valve endocarditis without the involvement of other valves represents 1.5-2% of all cases of infective endocarditis. Isolated
pulmonary valve endocarditis caused by Candida is extremely rare with only one reported case in the literature and none reported in the
United States. Guidelines for management of Candida endocarditis recommend a combination of medical and surgical therapy. A 61-year-old
homeless male presented with fever, cough and shortness of breath. He was urgently intubated for hypoxia. He was initially diagnosed with
pneumonia but did not improve with empiric antibacterial therapy. Candida species were isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and the
patient eventually developed persistent C. albicans bloodstream infection. On further workup he was found to have infective endocarditis
with a large vegetation across the pulmonary valve. No other valves were involved. He was treated with intravenous antifungal therapy for
eight weeks. Valvular surgery was not performed. Follow up echocardiography after completion of therapy did not show any vegetations and the
patient clinically improved. This is the second reported case of isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis caused by Candida and the first to be
successfully managed with antifungal therapy alone. Pulmonary valve endocarditis should be considered in cases of pneumonia with Candida and
persistent fungemia. While surgery should be considered in all cases of Candida endocarditis, cure may be achieved with antifungal therapy
alone. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12879-014-0557-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users. Pulmonary valve endocarditis without the involvement of other valves represents 1.5-2% of all cases of infective endocarditis .
Fungal endocarditis is also rare, comprising <10% of all endocarditis cases . Despite the development of newer antifungal agents, mortality
from Candida endocarditis is estimated to be 30-37% . The Infectious Diseases Society of America 2009 candidiasis guidelines recommend a
combined medical and surgical approach for treatment of Candida endocarditis . There has been only one reported case of isolated pulmonary
valve endocarditis with Candida which was managed surgically . We report a case of isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis due to Candida
managed with medical therapy alone. A 61 year-old homeless African-American male was admitted to the intensive care unit with fever,
dyspnea, and hemoptysis for four days. He had a history of depression and active intravenous drug use. Physical examination was positive for
crackles in both lung fields. He had no track marks on his skin. His white blood cell (WBC) count was 0.3 × 103/μL with absolute neutrophil
count 100/mm3. Urine toxicology screen was positive for opiates and benzodiazepines. His basic metabolic panel was normal but his arterial
blood gas (ABG) analysis revealed a PaO2 of 62 mm Hg on room air. He was intubated in the emergency room for hypoxia. Computed tomography
(CT) scan of the chest revealed large patchy opacities in the right upper and middle lobes consistent with pneumonia and no evidence of
pulmonary embolism (Figure 1A). Empiric vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam were started. His initial blood cultures and serum HIV ELISA
antibody were negative. Three tracheal aspirate specimen smears were negative for acid-fast bacilli.Figure 1 Computed tomography of the
chest. A. Patchy opacities inthe right lung. B. Resolution of the opacities after intravenous Amphotericin B. Computed tomography of the
chest. A. Patchy opacities inthe right lung. B. Resolution of the opacities after intravenous Amphotericin B. Bronchoscopy performed on
hospital day three showed black secretions from the right lower lobe. He was started on Micafungin after bronchoalveolar lavage cultures
grew Candida albicans and Candida glabrata. Trans-bronchial biopsy was not performed due to friable mucosa. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram on
hospital day five revealed no valvular abnormalities or vegetations. Because of persistent fever and hypoxia, a second bronchoscopy was
performed on hospital day eight, which still showed black secretions; bronchoalveolar lavage cultures grew Candida glabrata. Two sets of
blood cultures collected on hospital day twelve grew Candida albicans. A central venous catheter that had been placed on admission was
removed; culture of the catheter tip showed no growth. Amphotericin B lipid complex was initially added to Micafungin. After his creatinine
rose from 0.9 to 4.5 mg/dL, this was switched to Liposomal Amphotericin B; his creatinine normalized to 1.1 mg/dL by hospital day thirty.
Additionally, his WBC count rose to 4.9 × 103/μL with 68% neutrophils calculated on an automated differential with no interventions other
than treating his underlying sepsis. The patient defervesced three days after amphotericin B was added and Micafungin was discontinued.
However, repeat blood cultures on hospital day fourteen again grew Candida albicans. A trans-esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) performed on
hospital day sixteen showed a 1.5 cm mobile mass on the pulmonary valve extending from the right ventricular outflow tract across the
pulmonary valve into the pulmonary artery (Figure 2A).Figure 2 Transesophageal echocardiogram. A. Pulmonary valve vegetation B. No
vegetation after four weeks of Amphotericin B. Transesophageal echocardiogram. A. Pulmonary valve vegetation B. No vegetation after four
weeks of Amphotericin B. A diagnosis of isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis secondary to Candida was made. Cardiothoracic surgery was
consulted; they advised medical therapy and later re-evaluation as the patient was a high-risk candidate for surgery. Blood cultures
obtained on hospital day 16 had no growth. After a tracheostomy was performed, the patient was transferred to a nursing home to complete
liposomal amphotericin B for a total of eight weeks. His repeat CT chest at the time of discharge showed complete resolution of pulmonary
infiltrates (Figure 1B) and he was weaned to tracheal mask. Lifelong suppressive oral fluconazole therapy was recommended. After eight weeks
of antifungal therapy, a repeat TEE did not show any pulmonary valve vegetation (Figure 2B). The patient clinically improved, his
tracheostomy was closed, and he was discharged back to the shelter. Six months after discharge, the patient was asymptomatic and doing well.
He had stopped taking his oral fluconazole despite recommendations for lifelong suppressive therapy. This report illustrates an unusual case
of isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis with Candida in an intravenous drug user that was managed successfully with medical therapy alone.
Isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis is rare . Endocarditis in an intravenous drug user usually involves the tricuspid valve, but a
structurally normal pulmonic valve is rarely the only one affected . Possible reasons for this are twofold. First, the lower pressure
gradient across the pulmonic valve leads to less shear stress compared to the other valves . This causes less valvular damage, making it
less vulnerable for endocarditis. Second, valvular abnormalities (congenital or acquired) are less common in the pulmonary valve. An autopsy
analysis of nine cases of isolated pulmonary valve infective endocarditis revealed seven cases had congenital heart disease and five cases
had septic pulmonary emboli . It is unclear if our patient had a primary Candida pneumonia leading to endocarditis or a Candida blood stream
infection with endocarditis and septic pulmonary emboli. We do not have a trans-bronchial biopsy to confirm a diagnosis of Candida
pneumonia, which is by itself, is rare . A patient with suspected Candida pneumonia should have a work-up for right-sided endocarditis. The
only other reported case of isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis due to Candida described a 66-year-old man with C. parapsilosis fungemia.
In that case, a two-stage operation was performed: initial resection of the pulmonary valve leaflets with vegetations and subsequent valve
replacement two years later . Current endocarditis guidelines recommend initial or induction therapy with amphotericin B with or without
flucytosine with surgical removal of vegetation, followed by chronic suppressive therapy with oral fluconazole . Although he had a large
fungal vegetation, our patient did not have any other indications for surgery, such as congestive heart failure, valve dehiscence, or peri-
valvular abscess . His chest radiography did not reveal evidence of new septic emboli once therapy was started and his blood cultures
sterilized soon after the diagnosis of endocarditis was made. There is conflicting data on outcomes associated with the combined medical and
surgical approach versus medical therapy alone . Because patients with Candida endocarditis often have other co-morbidities that affect the
decision to operate and their outcomes, the optimal management is unclear. However, there have been reports of successful therapy of Candida
endocarditis with antifungal medical therapy without surgical intervention . Fluconazole and amphotericin B both target ergosterol, a
component of the fungal cell membrane. Treating Candida endocarditis can be difficult because Candida species can form biofilms on native
and prosthetic heart valves that can lead to the poor antifungal activity of these agents. The resistance occurs through multiple
mechanisms, including decreasing the cell membrane content of ergosterol. The newer antifungal agents, such as amphotericin B lipid
formulations and the echinocandins, exhibit novel activity and may be more efficacious against Candida biofilms . Combination therapy with
echinocandins and lipid formulations of amphotericin B may be able to treat Candida endocarditis while limiting the emergence of resistance
. This may obviate the need for surgical removal of the fungal vegetation. Persistent Candida in respiratory cultures without other
etiologies for sepsis may be a sign of right-sided Candida endocarditis. Aggressive medical management of this rare condition may be
successful with newer antifungal agents that have activity against Candida biofilms. Medical therapy without surgical intervention deserves
consideration, especially in cases where surgery may not be an option. However, such patients should be monitored closely for signs of
treatment failure on medical therapy alone, such as septic embolization. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. Below are the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’
original file for figure 1Authors’ original file for figure 2 Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’ original file for figure 2
Microliter Cubic millimeter Partial pressure of oxygen Arterial blood gas Computed tomography Human immunodeficiency virus Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay Milligram per deciliter Trans-esophageal echocardiogram Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions Both SD and SD were involved in managing the patient, conducted the literature review, and
drafted and edited the manuscript. BC interpreted the echocardiography findings and participated in drafting the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
