Thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) is becoming increasingly popular due to reduced perioperative morbidity and mortality compared
with open surgical repair. However, complications can occur when the left subclavian artery is involved. When performing TEVAR with left
carotid-subclavian artery bypass the stent graft will extend to the left common carotid artery. We herein present the case of a patient with
a type B aortic dissection with an acute intramural hematoma. Chylothorax was noted after TEVAR with left carotid-subclavian artery bypass.
A 66-year-old female with descending aortic dissection that was treated conservatively developed the sudden onset of back pain. Aortic
computed tomography (CT) showed a type B intramural aortic dissection. TEVAR with left carotid-subclavian artery bypass was performed. Left
chylothorax was noted after surgery with drainage of up to 1000 mL per day. Conservative management was ineffective. Thoracoscopic ligation
of the thoracic duct was performed with resolution of the chyle leakage. Chylothorax can occur after TEVAR with carotid-subclavian artery
bypass and likely results from thoracic duct injury. When conservative treatments fail, ligation of the thoracic duct cephalad to aortic
hiatus can resolve the chyle leakage. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13019-014-0165-x) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) is becoming increasingly popular due to reduced
perioperative morbidity and mortality compared with open surgical repair . We herein present the case of a patient with a type B aortic
dissection with an acute intramural hematoma. Left chylothorax was noted after TEVAR with left carotid-subclavian artery bypass. A 66-year-
old female developed a descending aortic dissection and was treated conservatively with medical therapy because there were no complications
such as splanchnic ischemia, renal insufficiency, lower extremity ischemia, or focal neurologic deficits. One month later she was admitted
via our emergency department (ED) because of recurrent severe back pain. Aortic computed tomography (CT) showed a type B aortic dissection
with intramural hematoma and false lumen expansion (Figure 1). She underwent TEVAR. Left carotid-subclavian artery bypass was performed by
exploration from left low neck for left subclavian artery coverage (Figure 2A). After surgery, she resumed oral intake and increased left
pleural drainage of a milky fluid was noted on postoperative day 2. Aortic CT on postoperative day 4 revealed no endoleak or thrombosis.
Persistent pleural drainage of a milky appearing fluid of more than 1000 mL per day continued. The pleural fluid triglyceride concentration
was 227 mg/dL. Left chylothorax resulting from disruption of the thoracic duct during the left carotid-subclavian artery bypass was
suspected. Conservative medical treatment of nothing per oral (NPO) and administration of total parenteral nutrition (TPN) failed to reduce
the amount of drainage. Therefore, surgical ligation of the thoracic duct was planned at postoperative day 30. After induction of general
anesthesia, the right lung was deflated, and 3 trocar sleeves were inserted at lateral ninth, anterior lateral seventh, and anterior lateral
fifth intercostal spaces. The pulmonary ligament was transected, and the lung was retracted. The parietal pleura was incised along the
distal part of azygos vein toward diaphragm. The thoracic duct should be found between aorta and azygos vein. Careful dissection exposed the
thoracic duct as near as possible to diaphragm, which was then ligated (Figure 2B). Her recovery was uneventful, and the left Jackson-Pratt
drain was removed on postoperative day 5. At the 3-month follow-up, chylothorax was not recurrent (Figure 2C).Figure 1 Transverse CT scan
showed hematoma formation in the descending aorta. (A-C) One month before admission, descending aortic dissection was diagnosed and the
patient was treated with medical therapy. (D-F) At admission, as compared to the prior CT scan an intramural hematoma with false lumen was
noted.Figure 2 Images in operation and following. (A) The left subclavian artery was covered, and the stent graft extended to the left
common carotid artery. A coil was placed in the proximal left subclavian artery. A right to left carotid-carotid bypass was performed
(arrow). (B) Thoracoscopic surgery was performed to dissect and ligate the thoracic duct (arrow). (C) No pleural effusion was noted at the
3-month follow-up. Transverse CT scan showed hematoma formation in the descending aorta. (A-C) One month before admission, descending aortic
dissection was diagnosed and the patient was treated with medical therapy. (D-F) At admission, as compared to the prior CT scan an
intramural hematoma with false lumen was noted. Images in operation and following. (A) The left subclavian artery was covered, and the stent
graft extended to the left common carotid artery. A coil was placed in the proximal left subclavian artery. A right to left carotid-carotid
bypass was performed (arrow). (B) Thoracoscopic surgery was performed to dissect and ligate the thoracic duct (arrow). (C) No pleural
effusion was noted at the 3-month follow-up. TEVAR was developed to address degenerative aneurysmal disease including aortic dissection,
aortic transection, intramural hematoma, and penetrating aortic ulcer . When treating proximal lesions, the left subclavian artery will be
covered and the stent graft will extend to the left common carotid artery . The principal branches arising from the subclavian artery are
the thyrocervical trunk, which gives rise to the ascending and transverse cervical arteries, the suprascapular artery, and the inferior
thyroid artery; the costocervical trunk; the internal mammary artery; and the vertebral artery. Thus, there are many potential complications
following subclavian artery occlusion including upper extremity ischemia, stroke, spinal cord ischemia, and myocardial ischemia . Carotid-
subclavian artery bypass was designed to resolve subclavian artery occlusion. Unfortunately, many complications following carotid-subclavian
artery bypass can occur including vocal cord paralysis, phrenic nerve palsy, vagus nerve injury, bleeding, thoracic duct injury, lymphocele,
and sympathetic nerve injury resulting in Horner syndrome . Chylothorax results from disruption or obstruction of the thoracic duct and
subsequent leakage of chyle (lymphatic fluid of intestinal origin) into the pleural space . The pleural effusion typically has a high
triglyceride concentration, and often a turbid or milky white appearance. The etiologies of chylothorax can be categorized as nontraumatic
or traumatic . Malignancy is the leading cause of nontraumatic chylothorax. Surgical procedures in the area of the thoracic duct or nearby
structures can result in disruption of the thoracic duct or shearing of lymphatic tributaries, and account for the majority of traumatic
chylothorax cases. The thoracic duct is the largest lymph vessel, and extends from the second lumbar vertebra to the root of the neck. It
enters the thorax through the aortic opening of the diaphragm between the aorta and the azygos vein. At the level of the fifth thoracic
vertebra, the thoracic duct inclines towards the left side to enter the superior mediastinum and ascends behind the aortic arch and the
thoracic part of the left subclavian artery, between the left side of the esophagus and the left pleura, to the thoracic inlet. In the neck,
the arch of the thoracic duct rises 3 or 4 cm (up to 6 cm) above the clavicle and curves anterior to the vertebral artery and vein, the left
sympathetic trunk, the thyrocervical artery or its branches, the left phrenic nerve, and the medial border of scalenus anterior. It then
passes posterior to the left common carotid artery, vagus nerve, and internal jugular vein, and finally ends by opening into the angle of
the junction of the left subclavian vein and the internal jugular vein. Shimado and Sato reported four types of thoracic duct terminations .
Type A (38%) terminated at the venous angle, type B (27%) at the terminal end of the internal jugular vein, type C (28%) at the terminal end
of the external jugular vein, and type D (7%) was described as a complex branching pattern. Each type was further subdivided depending upon
the number of terminal branches, some of which drained directly into the subclavian vein. The termination is usually (87.5 to 100% of the
time) within 1 cm of the venous angle . Langford and Daudia reported 21 ducts (87.5%) terminated as a single vessel, two ducts (8.33%)
showed a bifid termination, and one duct (4.2%) had three terminal branches. Five thoracic ducts (20.8%) showed branching and re-
anastamosing patterns prior to their termination, irrespective of the number of terminal branches . The presence of such complex patterns is
an additional risk factor for iatrogenic trauma, and a potent source of confusion when faced with the surgical management of a chyle leak.
When TEVAR is performed at the proximal portion of the aorta, as in our patient, the left subclavian artery will be covered by the membrane
portion of the stent graft and the subclavian artery will be occluded. Left carotid-subclavian artery bypass is performed at the same time.
The thoracic duct drains chyle into the blood stream via the left subclavian vein. It is possible to injury the thoracic duct when
performing the bypass, to result in chyle leakage. We believe this is what occurred in our patient. For patients with traumatic chylothorax,
initial conservative management rather than surgical intervention is recommended. Conservative management includes chest tube drainage, and
either bowel rest with total parenteral nutrition (TPN) or a high protein-reduced fat diet with medium chain triglyceride (MCT)
supplementation . Attention to fluid and electrolyte management, nutrition, and the daily volume of pleural drainage are necessary. If the
amount of chylous fluid drainage is >1 L per day through the chest tube, early thoracic duct ligation is recommended. Patients draining more
than 1 L/day are unlikely to respond to conservative therapy, and usually require surgical intervention within 5 to 7 days . In contrast,
patients with?<?500 mL of chest tube drainage in the first 24 hours after cessation of oral intake and initiation of TPN tend to improve
with conservative management . If pleural drainage continues after 14 days of conservative therapy, some studies recommand thoracic duct
ligation as a longer duration of conservative therapy is associated with nutritional depletion and high mortality rates . The advent of
thoracoscopic surgery over the last decade has changed the approach to the management of a number of chest diseases. Because of fewer and
smaller incisions, thoracoscopic surgery is associated with less pain, faster postoperative recovery, shortened hospital stay, and decreased
long-term morbidity. Intrathoracic postoperative adhesions are milder with thoracoscopic surgery compared to open thoracotomy. Thoracoscopic
surgery has the advantage of shortened recuperation time and decreased blood loss . Because of the benefits associated with thoracoscopic
surgery, we utilized a thoracoscopic approach and the thoracic duct was reached through the right pleural cavity, and ligated just cephalad
to the aortic hiatus. Postoperatively, there was no chylothorax recurrence in our patient during the 3 months follow-up. Subclavian
revascularization procedures can be performed with relatively low risk, and complications are rare. Chylothorax can occur after TEVAR with
carotid-subclavian artery bypass from neck exploration and likely results from thoracic duct injury. When conservative treatments fail,
ligation of the thoracic duct cephalad to aortic hiatus by thoracoscopic surgery can resolve the chyle leakage. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. YJH carried out the manuscript. PRC collected references. YSL took the pictures of the case report.
HYF performed the operation of the patient. CKC coordinated all authors and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Below are the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original file for figure 1Authors’ original
file for figure 2 Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’ original file for figure 2 Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Thanks all medical colleagues to participate in the care of this patient. They made the treatment becoming
success.
