Clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCC) is generally thought to originate from ovarian, endometrial, or renal tissue. A CCC of the peritoneum (CCAP)
is an extremely rare medical condition and is associated with a poor prognosis. To date, only 10 cases of CCAP have been reported, of which
half resulted in death or recurrence within 6 months after initial treatment because CCAP is commonly resistant to multiple drugs. In this
report, we present a case of CCAP of the pouch of Douglas coexisting with an endometriosis and we offer a review of the related literature.
Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the peritoneum is an extremely rare medical condition with poor prognosis. Because of its reality, no standard
treatment has been established. Here, we report a case with primary clear cell adenocarcinoma in the pouch of Douglas treated by debulking
surgery followed by chemotherapy. A 59-year-old postmenopausal woman, gravida 2, para 2, was referred to our hospital for the treatment of a
pelvic mass. Her initial complaints were appetite loss and 12 kg weight loss over 3 months. Her past medical history was unremarkable,
except for an appendectomy, and her gynecological medical history included administration of a gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist for
the treatment of adenomyosis manifesting as severe dysmenorrhea. On her first visit, a vaginal ultrasound revealed a heterogeneous solid
mass with cystic areas which was located approximately 6 cm deep within the pelvis (Figure 1a). Pelvic examination revealed a firm adhesion
between the tumor and uterus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis revealed an 8 cm heterogeneous mass located on the posterior
(intestinal) surface of the uterus, with possible rectal invasion (Figure 1b). Uterine adenomyosis was also detected by MRI.
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography–computed tomography revealed a mass on the posterior surface of uterus with FDG uptake
in the nodules adjacent to right side of the mass and in the pelvic and obturator lymph nodes. The serum level of cancer antigen (CA) 125
was slightly elevated to 76 U/mL (normal limit: 35 U/mL), whereas CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were within normal
ranges. Taken together, we made a preoperative diagnosis of a left ovarian malignant tumor. During surgery, surprisingly, the tumor was
located in the pouch of Douglas and was found to not originate from the ovary (Figure 2a and b). The tumor was adherent to the uterus at the
left uterosacral ligament and had also invaded the rectum. Both ovaries appeared normal. During surgery, the tumor capsule was ruptured;
because of this, the tumor was removed together with the rectum, uterus and both ovaries. Total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy, partial infracolic omentectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and low anterior resection of the rectum were performed. There were no
macroscopic residual tumors, thus the procedures performed were considered an optimal surgical treatment.Figure 1 Clinical imaging of the
tumor. a. Vaginal ultrasonography revealed a 6 cm heterogeneous tumor located in the pouch of Douglas, with a suspected left ovarian
involvement. b. T2-weighted MRI revealed an 8 cm heterogeneous tumor located at the posterior (intestinal) surface of the uterus, with a
suspected rectal invasion.Figure 2 Image of the operation. a and b. Laparotomy revealed that the tumor did not originate from the ovary, and
it was located in the pouch of Douglas. There was a strong adhesion between the tumor and rectum. Clinical imaging of the tumor. a. Vaginal
ultrasonography revealed a 6 cm heterogeneous tumor located in the pouch of Douglas, with a suspected left ovarian involvement. b.
T2-weighted MRI revealed an 8 cm heterogeneous tumor located at the posterior (intestinal) surface of the uterus, with a suspected rectal
invasion. Image of the operation. a and b. Laparotomy revealed that the tumor did not originate from the ovary, and it was located in the
pouch of Douglas. There was a strong adhesion between the tumor and rectum. On macroscopic evaluation, a multilobular cyst with a yellowish
necrotic solid part was found on the cut surface of the tumor (Figure 3a). The tumor had invaded the uterine cervix and rectum, up to the
level of the mucosa. Both ovaries were visually tumor free. Microscopic examination of the tumor revealed a clear cell adenocarcinoma.
Glandular and papillary structures were lined by clear cells and a hobnail arrangement of cells within the glands was found (Figure 3b). The
clear cells contained eosinophilic cytoplasm. Immunochemical staining for cytokeratin 7 was positive, whereas staining for cytokeratin 20,
caudal-type homeobox protein 2, and estrogen receptor were negative. These results indicated that the tumor did not originate from the
rectum. Microscopically, tumor cells were not observed in either ovary. Lymphatic vessel invasion was observed in the invasive area of the
rectum, and 3 of 3 resected pararectal lymph nodes (#251) were involved by the tumor. On the other hand, there were no metastases in 28 of
resected regional pelvic lymph nodes. An adenomyoma was found in the uterus and endometriotic lesions were found at the peritoneum near the
tumor. Thus, the tumor was diagnosed as CCAP with endometriosis. Postoperative staging was FIGO stage IIB (pT2bN0M0).Figure 3 Gross and
microscopic appearance of the tumor. a. A photograph of the cut surface of the tumor. A multilobular cyst with a yellowish necrotic solid
part was observed. Both ovaries were normal. b. Histopathological features of the tumor. Clear cells lined the glandular and papillary
structure. A hobnail arrangement of the cells was seen (hematoxylin and eosin; original magnification: ×400). Gross and microscopic
appearance of the tumor. a. A photograph of the cut surface of the tumor. A multilobular cyst with a yellowish necrotic solid part was
observed. Both ovaries were normal. b. Histopathological features of the tumor. Clear cells lined the glandular and papillary structure. A
hobnail arrangement of the cells was seen (hematoxylin and eosin; original magnification: ×400). Six courses of combination chemotherapy
with paclitaxel and carboplatin (TC) as adjuvant therapy was planned. At 3 months after the primary surgery, the patient presented with
strangulated ileus, which was corrected by a second surgery. No recurrent disease was observed in the abdomen at the surgery. Then, the
patient completed the planned adjuvant therapy and has remained well with no evidence of disease 10 months after the primary surgery.
Primary peritoneal carcinoma was first described by Swerdlow in 1959 . The Gynecologic Oncology group defines the diagnostic criteria for
primary peritoneal carcinoma, where both ovaries are of normal size, with an extraovarian involvement greater than the surface ovarian
involvement . Our case met this criterion and was histologically diagnosed as CCC. To investigate reports of the incidence of CCAP, we
performed a search of the PubMed database using the key words “clear cell” or “peritoneal” and “primary”. The search was limited to the
English literature and CCAP cases. We identified 10 cases that are summarized in Table 1 . These limited cases were reviewed to provide
characteristics of CCAP and identify potentially effective treatments. As summarized in Table 1, 10 of the 11 cases (including our case)
were initially treated by debulking surgery. Complete resection was performed in six cases and the residual tumor size was >2 cm in four
cases. Eight cases received chemotherapy (seven postoperatively and one with primary chemotherapy). The chemotherapy regimens performed were
TC , irinotecan hydrochloride + cisplatin (CPT-P) , and cyclophosphamide + carboplatin + cisplatin (CCP) .Table 1 Summary of clear cell
adenocarcinoma of the peritoneum Case Authors Age Tumor size and location Past history or concurrent disease Concurrent endometriosis
Treatment Residual tumour Outcome 1Evans et al. 5418×13 cmBoth Ov EM, AM, EHYesDS followed by RT (pelvic; 4500R,upper abdomen;3000
R)NoneNAsigmoid mesocolon2Lee et al. 676 cmConcurrent EMA G1 of Ut (stageIb)NoDS+TAH+BSO>2 cmNAPelvic3Tziortzioti et al. 620.5-2
cmConcurrent CCC in EPNoDS+TAH+BSO +OM followed by CHT (6 cycles, regimen NA)>2 cmDOD at 6 moPeritoneal and omental4Ichimura et al. 45NABoth
Ov EMYesDS+TAH+BSO followed by CHT (3 cycles of CPA,CDDP, CBDCA)NoneROD at 32 moPelvic5Hama et al. 53NAEMYesDS+BSO followed by CHT (regimen
NA)>2 cmDOD at 5 moAscites and small peritoneal solid lesions6Terada et al. 493 cm, 2 cmPast EMA G3 of Ut (TAH+BSO)NoDSNoneNED at 6
moGastric peritoneal, splenic hilus7Takano et al. 535 cmNoneNoDS followed by CHT (1 cycle of CPT-11,CDDP, 1 cycle of TC)>2 cmDOD at 5
moUpper abdomen between liver and diaphragm and omentum8Takano et al. 6615×20 cmNoneNoDS+TAH+BSO+OM+PLD+PAD followed by CHT (6 cycles of
CPT-11, CDDP)NoneNED at 20 moInfracolic omentum and peritoneum of right abdominal wall9Matsuo et al. 3714×13 cmEMYesDS followed by CHT (6
cycles of TC), Secondary devulking surgeryNoneROD at 18 moAbdominal scar of EM surgery10Muezzinoglu et al. 5425 cmPeritoneal EMYesDS+TAH+BSO
following by CHT (regimen NA)NoneNED at 12 moAbdominal11Johnson et al. 545.6×3.7×3.5 cm3xMMs, TAH+BSO for LM and menorrhagiaNoCHT (6 cycles
of TC) followed by EBR followed by the interstitial HDR BT boost<2 cmROD at 4 moproximal vagina and vaginal cuff12This report597 cmAM,
EMYesDS+TAH+BSO+PLD followed by CHT (6 cycles of TC)NoneNED at 5 moPelvic (pouch of douglas)EM, endometriosis; Ov, ovary; Ut, uterus; AM,
adenomyosis); EH, endometrial hyperplasia; EP, endometrial polyp; LM, leiomyoma; EMA, endometrial adenocarcinoma; CCC, clear cell
adenocarcinoma, MM, myomectomy; DS, debulking surgery; PLD, pelvic lymph node dissection; PAD, para-aortic lymph node dissection; OM,
omentectomy; CHT, chemotherapy; RT, radiotherapy; EBR, external beam radiotherapy; BT, brachytherapy; CPT-11, irinotecan hydrochloride; CDD,
cisplatin; CBDCA, carboplatin; CPA, cyclophosphamide; NED, no evidence of disease; ROD, recurrence of disease; DOD, dead of disease; NA, not
available; mo, months. Summary of clear cell adenocarcinoma of the peritoneum EM, endometriosis; Ov, ovary; Ut, uterus; AM, adenomyosis);
EH, endometrial hyperplasia; EP, endometrial polyp; LM, leiomyoma; EMA, endometrial adenocarcinoma; CCC, clear cell adenocarcinoma, MM,
myomectomy; DS, debulking surgery; PLD, pelvic lymph node dissection; PAD, para-aortic lymph node dissection; OM, omentectomy; CHT,
chemotherapy; RT, radiotherapy; EBR, external beam radiotherapy; BT, brachytherapy; CPT-11, irinotecan hydrochloride; CDD, cisplatin; CBDCA,
carboplatin; CPA, cyclophosphamide; NED, no evidence of disease; ROD, recurrence of disease; DOD, dead of disease; NA, not available; mo,
months. We offered TC combination chemotherapy to our patient. One report had found that a TC combination therapy was effective for the
treatment of CCAP. Outcomes were poor in five cases. Of these, three patients died within 6 months, and disease recurrence had occurred in
two cases at 4 months and 32 months, respectively, after the initial therapy . Three patients died within 6 months and each had a residual
tumor of >2 cm . Early recurrence occurred in the inoperable patients. The characteristic features of the cases with particularly poor
prognosis were large residual tumors after primary surgery and inoperability. On the other hand, there were three cases with relatively good
prognosis . The primary features of these cases were having had an optimal or complete debulking surgery followed by chemotherapy. CCAP can
closely resemble ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma (OCC) and it is difficult to distinguish CCAP from OCC by preoperative imaging alone,
especially if the tumor is located in the pelvis close to the ovary or uterus, even though the radiological features of CCAP have been
reported in some cases. One report cited a multicystic mass with a multiseptate appearance and a heterogeneous solid part arising from the
peritoneum, suggesting the occurrence of a CCAP . In our case, we did not observe such features and we were unable to determine whether the
pelvic tumor originated from the peritoneum. We recommend further imaging studies to establish a definitive diagnosis of CCAP. An
endometriosis coexisted with the CCAP in our case. CCC is seen most frequently in the ovary and is often associated with pelvic
endometriosis , as an association with endometriosis has been well established . CCC occasionally develops from extraovarian endometriosis .
There are several reports of CCAP cases with coexisting endometrial lesions. In some reports, endometriosis was a required precursor of CCC
in peritoneal locations. However, others found that the tumor arose de novo from the peritoneum . The pathogenesis of carcinoma coexisting
with endometriosis has not been fully elucidated. In past reports, two possible theories for the association of carcinoma and endometriosis
were mentioned. These theories included a genetic defect in already existing endometriosis or a defect in the immune response of patients
with endometriosis that leads to the progression of endometriosis to subsequent malignant transformation . Hence, the pathogenesis of CCAP
associated with endometriosis remains controversial. The pathogenesis of peritoneal serous carcinoma is similar to that of ovarian cancer
and may be dependent on its origin from ovarian tissue remnants in the peritoneum remaining from embryonic development or from the mesoderm
that gives rise to both the ovarian epithelium and peritoneum . Therefore, female pelvic and abdominal mesothelium may give rise to primary
peritoneal carcinoma resembling ovarian cancer . In addition to these reports, non-serous carcinoma of the peritoneum has also been reported
. Therefore, CCAP may arise de novo from the peritoneum. Here, we report a case of primary clear cell adenocarcinoma arising from the pouch
of Douglas. Although 10 similar cases have been reported, there is as yet no established treatment regimen for this disease. Combination
chemotherapy with debulking surgery has been suggested for the treatment of residual tumors <2 cm with postoperative chemotherapy, such as
TC or CPT-P. To establish an effective treatment regimen for CCAP, a review of a larger number of cases is still needed. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions KY designed and conceived of the study and drafted the manuscript. NS participated in drafting the manuscript and
performed literature review. SM and YU contributed critical reading of the manuscript and editing. EM supervised and participated in
histopathological evaluation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Dr Buzard GS for his editing of the
manuscript. We also thank Asami Yagi and Kanako Sakiyama for their help with this manuscript.
