Competing Interests: The authors have read the journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests:
Michael S. Okun serves as a consultant for the National Parkinson Foundation (NPF), and has received research grants from National
Institutes of Health (NIH), NPF, the Michael J. Fox Foundation, the Parkinson Alliance, Smallwood Foundation, the Bachmann-Strauss
Foundation, the Tourette Syndrome Association, and the University of Florida Foundation. Dr. Okun has previously received honoraria, but in
the past >48 months has received no support from industry. Dr. Okun has received royalties for publications with Demos, Manson, Amazon,
Smashwords, and Cambridge (movement disorders books). Dr. Okun is an associate editor for New England Journal of Medicine Journal Watch
Neurology. Dr. Okun has participated in CME activities on movement disorders (in the last 36 months) sponsored by PeerView, Prime, and by
Vanderbilt University. The institution and not Dr. Okun receives grants from Medtronic and ANS/St. Jude, and the PI has no financial
interest in these grants. Dr. Okun has participated as a site PI and/or co-I for several NIH, foundation, and industry sponsored trials over
the years but has not received honoraria. Kelly D. Foote receives grant support from NIH, NPF and University of Florida Foundation. Takashi
Morishita has been supported by Japan Society for Promotion of Science and St. Luke Life Science Institute. He has received honoraria from
Otsuka pharmaceutical as a consultant within the past 12 months. Daniel Martinez-Ramirez, Zhongxing Peng-Chen, and Pam Zeilman have declared
that no competing interests exist. This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. Conceived
and designed the experiments: MSO DMR. Performed the experiments: MSO DMR PRZ TM KDF ZPC. Analyzed the data: MSO DMR PRZ TM KDF ZPC.
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: MSO DMR PRZ TM KDF ZPC. Wrote the paper: MSO DMR PRZ TM KDF ZPC. Original figure: ZPC. To
describe three DBS cases which presented with new side effects or loss of benefit from stimulation after long-term follow-up and to discuss
the potential contributing factors. A University of Florida (UF) database (INFORM) search was performed, identifying three patients, two
Parkinson's disease (PD) and one Essential Tremor (ET), with an unexpected change in long-term programming thresholds as compared to initial
evaluation. Clinical follow-up, programming, imaging studies, and lead measurements were reviewed. The UF Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approved this study. A substantial increase in the 3rd ventricular width (120%), Evans index (6%), ventricular index (5%), and cella media
index (17%) was uncovered. A change in thresholds across lead contacts with a decrease in current densities as well as a relative lateral
change of lead location was also observed. Hardware-related complications, lead migration, and impedance variability were not identified.
Potential factors contributing to long-term side effects should be examined during a DBS troubleshooting assessment. Clinicians should be
aware that in DBS therapy there is delivery of electricity to a changing brain, and atrophy may possibly affect DBS programming settings as
part of long-term follow-up. The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. All relevant
data are within the paper. Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) has become an effective treatment in select Parkinson's disease (PD), essential
tremor (ET), and dystonia cohorts , , with motor benefits reported at 10 years following implantation , . Several groups have suggested
recommendations on how to manage and troubleshoot factors that may be responsible for a worse DBS outcome , or factors leading to
dissatisfaction during long-term management . These issues, which have been previously described, include surgery-related complications
(intracerebral hemorrhage, deep cerebral venous hemorrhage/infection, seizure, sterile seroma, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, perioperative
confusion, suboptimal lead placement), hardware-related, (infection, skin erosion, electrode or wire fracture, lead migration,
neurostimulator malfunction, neurostimulator migration, pain in region of neurostimulator) and stimulation-related issues. Other possible
factors include disease progression, poor selection of DBS candidates, unrealistic patient expectations, improper programming and medication
adjustment, tolerance to DBS stimulation, and neuropsychiatric complications . Because of the rapidly growing number of patients with DBS,
it is critically important to recognize which factors, and how each of these factors will affect long-term response. We present three
patients with previously unrecognized long-term DBS related management issues. These cases led to the investigation of potential
mechanism(s) and factors for the stimulation-induced adverse events and loss of benefit. The University of Florida (UF) Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approved the use of our IRB approved UF INFORM database. Three patients were identified in our database, two PD and one ET, with
an unexpected change in long-term thresholds compared to initial evaluation performed 1 month after DBS surgery. The term thresholds, as
used in this paper, will define persistent stimulation-induced adverse effects for each electrode in the monopolar mode. Patient
records/information was anonymized and de-identified prior to analysis. Analysis included age, gender, diagnosis, disease duration, target,
follow-up duration, DBS settings (voltage, pulse width, frequency, impedance, and current density), and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating
Scale (UPDRS) motor or Tolosa-Fahn-Mardsen Tremor Rating Scale (TRS) scores at baseline, immediate postoperative, and long-term follow-up.
Current density, which is a measurement of electrical flow, was calculated at 6 months post DBS surgery (once settings were optimized) and
at 1 month after the most recent thresholds testing (using the settings tolerated by patients). The formula used was: (V x
PW/impedance)/0.06 cm2 . Initial programming thresholds were compared to a follow-up and imaging study was also obtained as part of
troubleshooting evaluation. Lead localization was measured using CT and MRI fused images. A possible lead migration was assessed applying
Cartesian coordinates between two time points, measuring the electrode' tip in the post-operative scan, and comparing it to the most recent
lead location (at the time of the side effect) using surgical planning software. Coordinates were assessed relative to the midcommissural
point. Standard error measurement of deviation was set at 1.4 mm, as previously reported . In order to assess ventricle size with respect to
brain tissue and cerebral atrophy, different indexes (Evans index, ventricular index, cella media index, and maximum width of third
ventricle) , were obtained from pre-surgical imaging and compared to the most recent brain scan. The Evans index is defined as the maximal
frontal horn ventricular width divided by the transverse inner diameter of the skull. The ventricular index is defined as the minimum width
of the lateral ventricles divided by the maximum width of the anterior horns of the lateral ventricles. The cella media index is the ratio
of biparietal diameter of skull to the maximum external diameter of lateral ventricles at cella media. The maximum width of the third
ventricle was measured drawing a line through the long axis of the third ventricle, parallel to the interhemispheric fissure where the third
ventricle was most visible. The width (in millimeters) was measured by drawing a second line perpendicular to the first line at its
midpoint. A 50 year-old male with PD status post right subthalamic nucleus (STN) DBS implantation 75 months prior, complained of a subacute
onset of left facial pulling that fully resolved with DBS deactivation. Surgery was initially indicated for “on state” disabling dyskinesias
and tremors unresponsive to levodopa. Baseline pre-operative UPDRS motor score off/on meds was 62/16 with post-operative scores off med/on
stim of 37 and on med/on stim of 31 at 6 months. During initial thresholds testing, the voltages required to produce left face/arm
paresthesias were 2.9 for contact 0, 3.2 for contact 1, 3.0 for contact 2, and 3.8 for contact 3. Currently, the voltages required to
produce muscle pulling, paresthesias, and cloudiness of thinking, were 0.5 for contact 0, 1.2 or contact 1, 1.2 for contact 2, and 0.9 for
contact 3. His brain scan revealed an increase in the maximum width of the third ventricle compared to the baseline scan performed six years
prior. Ten months after rechecking thresholds, the patient was doing well with lower settings and has complained of only one potential
episode of facial pulling which was deemed by the clinical team likely unrelated to stimulation. A 63 year-old male with PD status post left
STN DBS implantation performed 99 months prior, presented with increased “off” time and re-emergence of troublesome dyskinesias over the
last several weeks. The main indication for surgery was his “on state” dyskinesias and severe “off state” periods. His preoperative motor
score off/on was 50/12 with post-operative scores off med/on stim of 35 and on med/on stim of 22 at 6 months. The levodopa equivalent daily
dosage (LEDD) before surgery was of 1275 mg. During initial thresholds testing, the voltages required to produce right-sided paresthesias
and right arm pulling were 2.0 for contact 0, 2.5 for contact 1, 4.0 for contact 2, and 6.0 for contact 3. Currently, the voltages required
to produce right arm paresthesias were 0.5 for contact 0, 0.8 or contact 1, 1.5 for contact 2, and 0.8 for contact 3. LEDD at the time of
the troubleshooting visit was of 762.5 mg. His MRI revealed an increase in size of the ventricles as compared to his baseline scan,
performed 10 years before (Figure 1). Two years after re-programming with lower settings, the patient's symptoms have been controlled, but
psychiatric issues have emerged. The post-operative scan 10 years after DBS surgery shows an increase in size of the ventricles
(millimeters) and widening of the Sylvian fissure (arrow). A: Preoperative scan for DBS targeting; B: Most recent scan. A 65 year-old woman
with ET status post left ventralis intermedius nucleus (Vim) nucleus DBS implantation 47 months prior presented with a subacute lack of
benefit from DBS. Her indication for DBS included a long history of medically refractory tremor. The baseline TRS motor score was 46. During
the initial thresholds testing, the voltages required to produce tingling of the upper extremity were 2.6 for contact 0, and 4.1 for contact
1; contacts 2 and 3 did not produce side effects at 6 or more volts. Currently, the voltages required to produce right arm paresthesias were
1.0 for contact 0, 1.0 or contact 1, 0.3 for contact 2, and 3.3 for contact 3. A recent scan revealed a marked increase in ventricular size
as compared to the initial scan following DBS surgery. Twenty months after reprogramming, the patient reported feeling well, and no
adjustment in settings have been required. Table 1 describes patient's characteristics with subsequent motor scores. Table 2 compares the
initial with the most recent threshold testing, revealing decrements in the amount of voltage tolerated in cases, as well as decrements in
current densities in two patients. PD = Parkinson's disease; ET = Essential Tremor; R = Right; L = Left; STN = subthalamic nucleus;
Vim = ventralis intermedius nucleus; UPDRS = Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale; TRS = Tremor Rating Scale. Considering the standard
error of deviation (set at 1.4 mm) when measuring lead location, long-term postoperative lead positions were slightly different across the
cohort. The DBS leads were overall located at a more lateral position in recent scans in cases 2 and 3 (Δ = 2.68 and 1.88, respectively), as
compared to the initial measurements. In case 2, the collar angle changed from 13 to 15, while in the two other cases, the arc and collar
angles remained the same. When comparing atrophy indexes from the initial and most recent brain scans, there was a substantial change in the
3rd ventricular width (120%), Evans index (6%), ventricular index (5%), and cella media index (17%) across the patients (as shown in Table
3). Change in lead position was measured using a distance formula: √ (Xpre−Xpost)2+(Ypre−Ypost)2+(Zpre−Zpost)2. AP = antero-posterior. We
present a series of three cases with long-term DBS related management issues and an unexpected change in long-term programming thresholds as
compared to the initial evaluation. Our patients presented with long-term issues after several years of DBS related stimulation-induced
benefit. This presentation does not occur in typical surgery-related complications, since most of these issues are acute. Hardware-related
complications should be considered as a potential factor for side effects or a loss of benefit, and these types of complications have been
reported in 4.8% of cases , . However, careful examination of the neurostimulator, impedances, as well associated current drains revealed no
issues. In addition, plain x-rays of the DBS system were also normal, excluding a DBS lead/wire break. Another important issue could have
been impedance variability . However, the impedances across all cases decreased over time, and the values remained within reasonably normal
ranges (Table 2), and these would therefore be unlikely to have resulted in the large changes in programming thresholds. Lead migration was
another possible hardware-related factor. Small shifts in position could have contributed to induction of side effects or to the loss of
benefit . Perioperative brain shift could also account for differences in lead location . It is important to consider that by comparing the
lead location measurements, a lateral shift was documented in two of our patients. This lateral shift could at least in part be explained by
atrophy . Stimulation-induced side effects result from the spread of electrical current into brain regions other than the region intended
for stimulation. The most interesting finding in our patients was the unexpected reduced programming thresholds that were uncovered
following long-term follow-up. DBS-related adverse effects at relatively low levels of stimulation could suggest a suboptimally placed DBS
lead. Besides the slight lateral lead shift found in two of our cases, a substantial change in atrophy indices was also manifested. It is
unknown how atrophy may affect lead location, but presumably there would be a relationship. Change in atrophy indices could theoretically
affect lead position by simply slightly repositioning the DBS lead closer to surrounding structures. Brain atrophy is expected with aging
and is known to be hastened by neurodegeneration . Annual rates of brain atrophy have been reported to be 0.32%/year in healthy adults with
a median volume loss of 10.35 ml/year in PD patients . There has not been a standardized rate of brain atrophy for DBS patients reported.
Regarding deep brain structures, thalamic and Vim total volumes are approximately 13000 mm3 and 218 mm3, respectively , and these decline
over time have been reported in normal subjects , , and likely will also decline in affected subjects. Similarly, STN shrinks in volume with
time . We observed patients with an increase (worsening) in atrophy measurements (Table 2). The Vim's long narrow shape, measuring ∼8 mm
(dorsal–ventral) by ∼3 mm (anterior–posterior) by ∼12 mm (medial–lateral) and the typical trajectory of the DBS lead could be hypothesized
to result in spreading current into an unintended and adjacent region (capsule or sensory areas). This effect could similarly occur in STN,
considering its small size (150–240 mm3) , , and considering that STN atrophy and shifts in the lateral direction with increasing age ,
could also potentially result in spread of stimulation outside of the intended region. Atrophy could theoretically contribute to the
clinically manifested symptoms and in the reduced programming threshold tolerances and subsequent decrement in current densities in two of
our patients. The globus pallidus internus (GPi) is a larger structure (450 mm3), and its shape could possibly be more forgiving, but not
immune to disease related atrophy and spread of stimulation . No GPi DBS cases were observed in our clinic which actively follows over 600
patients, however a larger sample size and more careful follow-up will be needed. Figure 2 illustrates the DBS atrophy hypothesis, which
would posit that similar amounts of electricity are delivered to a shrinking brain (assuming stability of impedance measurements). The
mechanisms resulting in atrophy in this small group of patients is unknown and will need to be clarified in future studies which should
include long-term cognition and other relevant measures. Future studies will need to measure nuclei atrophy with more sophisticated imaging,
such as volumetry or tractography, and to compare to contralateral non-stimulated nuclei in unilateral cases. Progressive 10%, 20%, 30%, and
40% atrophy with stimulation spread to other structures can be observed following columns to the right. DBS = Deep Brain Stimulation;
Str = striatum; GPe = globus pallidus externus; GPi = globus pallidus internus; IC = internal capsule; Th = thalamus; STN = subthalamic
nucleus; Vim = ventralis intermedius nucleus; RN = red nucleus; SNR = substantia nigra pars reticulata. This figure is theoretical and shows
how atrophy may potentially affect lead location and stimulation fields. Disease progression could possibly explain the worsening of
symptoms over time, as was observed in cases 2 and 3. However, assessment of the UPDRS and TRS motor scores suggested that the symptoms
remained well controlled with chronic stimulation over time. Although worsening of tremor in ET patients with long-term follow-up is
expected, and has been previously observed to be related to disease progression , the appearance of sensory side effects at lower voltages
would suggests a different cause. Motor side effects, as in case 1, could have been a manifestation of dystonia, rather than internal
capsule current spread. This notion though possible, was unlikely, since the symptoms continued to worsen with increasing stimulation
voltage, and the symptoms abated when turning off the DBS. Additionally, there were programming threshold changes across all four DBS lead
contacts. In conclusion, unexpected emergent stimulation induced side effects or loss of benefit in DBS cases can be potentially important
clinical issues that may manifest more frequently in longer-term DBS management. Brain atrophy and disease progression may possibly play a
role in at least some of these patients; however, changes in lead position, and long-term pathophysiological changes cannot be completely
ruled out. Clinicians should be aware that in DBS therapy there is delivery of electricity to a changing brain and that several factors may
affect the response to long-term stimulation. It is therefore very important for DBS patients to have close follow-up and monitoring even
after many years post-implant. We thank Russell Moore for assistance with data collection, and the National Parkinson Foundation, Tyler's
Hope, and the Bachmann-Strauss Foundation for support of the center. This manuscript was run through the iThenticate system provided by the
University of Florida and the 1st author takes all responsibility for ensuring originality.
