Dear editor Malarial infections pass through multiple stages, beginning in the hepatic parenchymal cells where invading sporozoites mature
into schizonts. On maturation, these schizonts rupture and release merozoites into the bloodstream, which, in turn, target erythrocytes,
leading to the clinical manifestations of the disease . Exflagellation is characterized by thin, flagella-shaped microgametes emerging from
male malaria gametocytes; occurs in the midgut of the Anopheles mosquito; and has rarely been observed in peripheral blood specimens. Here,
we present a case of Plasmodium vivax infection characterized by exflagellation of microgametes and accompanied by the unusual presence of
exflagellated microgametes within the cytoplasm of peripheral leukocytes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
neutrophil involvement of exflagellated Plasmodium. A pregnant 26-yr-old Pakistani woman presented with a fever >40℃ lasting for 7 days. The
patient, who arrived from Pakistan 10 days previously, had no medical history of malarial infection. She had been treated with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), without improvement of symptoms, 4 days prior to her arrival at a local hospital. At presentation, the
patient appeared acutely ill. Her blood pressure measured 90/50 mmHg, and body temperature was 37.2℃. Complete blood cell and differential
counts revealed anemia with thrombocytopenia (white blood cell 6.61×109/L, hemoglobin 9.7 g/dL, platelets 64×109/L) and leukoerythroblastic
changes (nucleated red blood cell 1/100 WBC). Peripheral blood smears were performed within 40 min of the blood draw and revealed P. vivax-
infected erythrocytes (Fig. 1). Parasite density was determined to be 20887.6/µL. A malaria Pf/Pv strip (Asan Pharmaceutical, Whasung,
Korea) yielded a positive result for only P. vivax antibodies. Malaria nested PCRs (Eone Laboratory, Incheon, Korea) revealed P. vivax only.
In addition, 15-20 µm filamentous microgametes containing round-to-oval-shaped chromatin structures were observed. Some microgametes were
distributed outside of the RBCs, while others appeared exflagellated from the gametocyte. Some microgametes were observed within the
cytoplasm of neutrophils. Neutrophils containing microgametes exhibited phagosomes within the cytoplasm and/or nuclear condensation and
ruffled plasma membranes (Fig. 2). Quinine sulfate and clindamycin treatment were commenced, instead of primaquine, owing to the pregnancy.
Two days later, another blood smear was performed immediately after collection. Schizonts and gametocytes remained in the blood; however, no
microgametes were observed. Follow-up peripheral blood morphologic examinations were performed 9 days after initial diagnosis and showed no
malarial parasites. Four days later, the patient underwent an abortion due to the death of the fetus. One month after the initial diagnosis,
she was readmitted with a fever and diagnosed with a relapse of P. vivax. The patient was treated with primaquine, and Plasmodium was no
longer observed 5 days after treatment. Although reported by MacCallum in 1897 , the presence of exflagellated microgametes in blood is
rare; only one case has been reported, with only RBC involvement, in Korea . In vitro studies have revealed important roles of both
temperature and pH in exflagellation [4, 5]. Exflagellation of malarial parasites generally occurs at pH >7.6 and temperatures <30℃. Delays
in sample processing can result in in vitro exflagellation owing to increased blood pH that results from decreased carbon dioxide levels and
temperature. In this case, although blood pH and temperature were not available, the processing time was <40 minutes, suggesting in vivo
exflagellation. Clinically, exflagellated microgametes can suggest coinfection with other parasites, as their shape is similar to those of
Borrelia, spirochetes, microfilaria, and Trypanosoma. Borrelia is a helical organism containing 7-22 periplasmic flagella but no chromatin.
Trypanosoma is curved with a single nucleus and small kinetoplast; the microfilaria is large (between 100 and 200 µm) and has multiple
nuclei. In contrast, exflagellated microgametes are characterized by a sinuous body containing ovoid chromatin structures. Phagocytosis by
neutrophils is a major host immune response to pathogens. There are reports that WBC can survive for several hours in the midgut of the
mosquito and phagocytize parasites, thereby reducing the spread of malaria . However, in the case of Leishmania, neutrophils are not
activated and serve as a vector for silent entry of the pathogen into macrophages and are eventually killed by apoptosis . In the present
case, neutrophils might have been involved in phagocytosis of the parasite. However, the nuclear condensation and zeiosis of the neutrophil
plasma membrane suggested apoptosis due to infection with the malaria parasite . This is the first report of neutrophil involvement of
exflagellated Plasmodium. More studies are necessary to determine whether Plasmodium can infect neutrophils and use them as a vector. In
conclusion, we report a rare case of P. vivax infection showing exflagellation with neutrophil involvement that could be misidentified for
other bloodborne parasites. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Plasmodium vivax-infected
erythrocytes. (A) Amoeboid trophozoite. The arrow indicates a microgametocyte showing exflagellation of microgametes. (B) Mature
trophozoite. (C) Schizont in division. (D) Mature macrogametocyte (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×1,000). Microgametes of Plasmodium vivax and
neutrophils containing microgametes. (A) Microgamete of P. vivax. (B) Exflagellation of microgametes from a microgametocyte. (C) Neutrophils
containing microgametes within the phagosome. (D-G) Microgametes observed within the cytoplasm of neutrophils. Neutrophils show nuclear
condensation and a ruffled plasma membrane (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×1,000).
