A 64-year-old male was referred to our hospital for evaluation of proteinuria. His medical history and physical examination were
unremarkable. Laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 4,900/mm3, hemoglobin level of 12.9 g/dL, platelet count of
157,000/mm3, blood urea nitrogen level of 18 mg/dL, and serum creatinine level of 0.77 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed 2+ proteinuria without
hematuria. His 24-hour urine protein level was 920 mg/day. Serum protein electrophoresis showed a small M peak, and serum protein
immunofixation showed monoclonal gammopathy with an immunoglobulin G (IgG) κ-light chain. A bone marrow biopsy revealed normocellular marrow
with minor monoclonal plasma cell infiltration (< 5%). The patient subsequently underwent a renal biopsy. Histologically, the size and
cellularity of the glomeruli were normal with patent capillary lumina (Fig. 1A). Immunofluorescence staining was positive for κ-light chains
in the tubular cytoplasm, but there was no staining for IgG, IgM, IgA, λ-light chain, C3, or C1q (Fig. 1B). Under electron microscopic
examination, the proximal tubules contained sparsely scattered or abundantly packed rhomboid and rod-shaped medium electron-dense crystals
in the cytoplasm with segmental loss of microvillus surfaces (Fig. 1C). These findings are consistent with light chain proximal tubulopathy
(LCPT) with crystal formation. Despite significant crystalline deposition in the proximal tubules, there was no evidence of Fanconi
syndrome, and the patient had no metabolic or bone abnormalities. One year after diagnosis, the patient's hematologic and renal functions
were stable without treatment. Diagnosis of light chain crystal deposition may be challenging because the clinical and pathological
manifestations are uncommon and poorly characterized, sometimes resulting in an incorrect or missed diagnosis. Although this patient
presented with clinically asymptomatic proteinuria, a high index of suspicion was necessary to achieve an accurate diagnosis of LCPT without
Fanconi syndrome. Diagnostic work-up for asymptomatic proteinuria should include protein electrophoresis and ultrastructural examination of
renal biopsy specimens. This study was supported by a fund of the Biomedical Research Institute, Chonbuk National University Hospital (KPK).
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Renal histology. (A) Light microscopic findings showed that the
glomeruli appeared normal in size and cellularity (×400). (B) Immunofluorescence findings showed positive staining for κ-light chain in the
proximal tubules (×400). (C) Electron microscopy showed that the proximal tubules contained numerous rhomboid and rod-shaped, electron-dense
crystals and lysosomes in the cytoplasm and tubular cast (×2,500).
