Third REDO-CABG is a challenge for the surgical team. Usually a patent mammary is the only graft working and the sternotomy becomes a risky
procedure. Injury to a patent graft has been associated to a high mortality rate. Many different approaches have been proposed. We describe
a novel technique to approach the right coronary artery through a right anterior small thoracotomy using the right mammary prolonged with
saphenous vein for grafting the posterior descending artery on the beating heart. The technique is very simple and feasible because
anatomically the right coronary artery and the right mammary are very close and the mobilization of the heart is minimal. A terceira
reoperação de revascularização miocárdica é um desafio para a equipe cirúrgica. Normalmente, uma mamária patente é a única possibilidade de
enxerto e a esternotomia torna-se um procedimento arriscado. A lesão de enxerto patente tem sido associada a uma alta taxa de mortalidade.
Muitas abordagens diferentes têm sido propostas. Descrevemos uma nova técnica de abordagem da artéria coronária direita através de uma
pequena toracotomia anterior direita usando a mamária direita prolongada com enxerto de veia safena para a artéria descendente posterior com
o coração batendo. A técnica é muito simples e viável, pois anatomicamente a artéria coronária direita e a mamária direita estão muito
próximas e a mobilização do coração é mínima. The Third Redo-CABG (coronary artery bypass grafting) is always a challenge for the surgical
team. Usually, the patient has a patent mammary as the only graft working just in the midline which represents a risky situation for a re-
sternotomy. Most of the time other conditions as renal failure, low ejection fraction, increased age, unstable angina, cardiac failure and
pulmonary hypertension are present, representing also an increased risk for prolonged mechanical ventilation. Worsening this situation is
the absence of available conduit for the grafting because most of them have been already used for the previous surgeries. We are proposing a
technique to reduce the risk in this special group of patients, avoding the re-sternotomy, thus avoiding the cardiopulmonary bypass, and
using the skeletonized right internal thoracic artery for grafting the right coronary or the posterior descending artery (PDA) with minimal
manipulation of the heart. A 78 year-old diabetic patient was admitted in our service with recurrent angina for a REDO third coronary
surgery. He had had triple bypass in 1994 via median sternotomy. After that, he had PTCA stents two times in 1996 and 1998. In 2004, our
team performed a double bypass from a left thoracotomy using a saphenous vein graft from the descending thoracic aorta to the diagonal and
the marginal branch. The angiogram showed: RCA 100% occluded on the distal third. LAD 100% occluded proximally. Left main with patent stent.
CX 80% on the medium third. Collateral circulation from the left to the right coronary artery, the ascending, arch and descending aorta were
severely calcified, a patent LITA to LAD was keeping the patient alive. The ejection fraction was of 30% assessed by transesophageal echo.
Because of the patient was not suitable for PTCA, and there were no conduits available for grafting, we decided the use of the right
internal thoracic artery (RITA), prolonged with a small segment of saphenous vein available on the left groin for grafting the Posterior
Descending Artery (PDA). The patient approach was very risky from median Sternotomy because there was a patent LITA to LAD. The left
thoracotomy, as we use as a routine, was not possible because there was no graft of enough length available. The use of the right
gastroepiploic artery was also considered, but the patient had previous partial gastrectomy. As we had the experience before operating on a
patient with dextrocardia through a right thoracotomy, we decided to perform a right anterior thoracotomy for grafting the RCA to the PDA
branch. A fully written informed consent was obtained and signed from the patient and his wife, as well as their consent for the use of the
information and pictures for scientific reason. Before anesthetic induction, the patient was premedicated with 100 mg of Ketoprofen, 2 grams
of Dipirone, 8 mg of Dexametasone, and antibiotic profilaxis as per protocol, an intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted via a right femoral
artery to assist the left ventricle and improve the severe patient ischemia. The patient received a 1.5 mg/kg Propofol, 0.07 mcg/kg/min
Remifentanyl over 10 min, and 1 mg/kg Rocuronium. Then a bronchial blocker was inserted after the induction in order to exclude the right
lung, but the patient didn't tolerate the exclusion and we had to do a partial exclusion with the use of lap sponges. The position was on a
left lateral supine at approximately 30 degrees with the right arm elevated (Figure 1). Patient position - the patient is positioned with
the right arm elevated at approximately 30º toward left side. A right anterior thoracotomy was performed at the 6th intercostal space.
Bupivacaine was then injected on the upper and lower side of the incision as a part of our pain control protocol. With the use of
Finocchietto retractor in combination with a Rultract retractor, the right pleural space was approached. A lot of pleural adhesions were
removed from the right lung to achieve a proper surgical field. The pericardial fat and thymus rest were removed. The right internal
thoracic artery was dissected in a skeletonized fashion with the use of ultracision harmonic scalpel and a special forceps. Systemic heparin
(2 mgs/kg) was given to maintain an activated clotting time around 350 seconds. The right internal thoracic artery was transected distally
and a terminal-terminal anastomosis was performed with a small piece of saphenous vein previously removed from the left groin, using an 8/0
Prolene running suture (Figure 2). Anastomosis RITA-SVG - A small piece of SVG is anastomosed to the RITA with running suture of 8/0
prolene. Papaverine solution was spread around the RITA to improve its diameter and relieve from a possible spasm. The right side of the
heart was dissected from the adhesions of the previous surgeries very carefully avoiding lesion of the right atrium and the right ventricle.
The target vessel was founded following the previous occluded saphenous vein graft to the PDA performed in 1994. Using a Maquet Acorbat-i
stabilizer®, the artery was dissected, inspected to ensure the feasibility of the anastomosis and opened very carefully. A 1.5 mm flow-
through intracoronary shunt was inserted as a part of our routine (Figure 3). The distal anastomosis was then performed in the usual fashion
on the beating heart with the continuous running polypropylene 7/0 suture (Figure 4).The Butterfly Medistim Flowmeter was used to check the
graft flow, the PI (pulsatility index) was 2,9, the mean flow was 28 ml/min and DF (dyastolic filling) was 62% which was considered
satisfactory. Protamine was administered to achieve full heparin reversal and a further dose of Bupivacaine was injected on the upper and
lower side of the incision as usual. PDA stabilization and shunt in - The PDA is stabilized with the use of the Maquet-Acrobat and a 1,5
flow-thru shunt is placed. Anastomosis performed - The anastomosis RITA-SVG-PDA is performed with an excellent result. Transesophageal echo
was performed before and after the anastomosis in the same patient conditions: anesthetic drugs, use of inotropics and balloon assistance
and an impressive improvement of the postero-lateral wall contraction was showed, increasing the left ventricular ejection fraction from 30
to 45% (Figure 5). Transesophageal echo performed before (left) and after (right) the anastomosis in the same patient conditions: anesthetic
drugs, use of inotropics and balloon assistance. A multi-orifice catheter was placed inside the incision for a postoperative pain control
and the incision closed conventionally. The patient was awakened at the end of the procedure and extubated on the table. The postoperative
course was really uneventful. The intraortic balloon pump removed in the ICU 1 hour after and the patient discharged at home on the third
postoperative day. The coronary surgery has changed a lot in the last two decades. Now the surgeon has the obligation to know how to perform
many different procedures for the same purpose, thus resolving the patient ischemia. From the standard on pump, median sternotomy coronary
artery bypass grafting, which was the only technique used before, actually, we have the off pump-median sternotomy, lateral thoracotomy,
minimally invasive coronary surgery, video-assisted, robotic and hybrid procedures. And for the REDO-CABG we have also the axillo-coronary
via left thoracotomy, postero-lateral approach using the descending aorta and the xiphoidal approach using the right gastroepiploic artery.
This novel technique that we describe may help to resolve many difficult situations like the above patient, who was no candidate for any of
the above mentioned techniques. Moreover, especially in REDO-CABG, would be a good choice for a hybrid procedure when the LAD or the
circumflex could be stented and the RCA or PDA resolved by this RAST operation. Our only concern about this case is the long term patency of
the saphenous vein anastomosed to the RITA, of which good short term results are reported, but could be a choice when there is a lack of
conduit, like in our case. It's very important for the cardiac surgeon in the current era to keep open eyes at any new procedure, because
the coronary Surgery is becoming more and more complex every day.
