The diagnosis of Marked First Degree Atrioventricular Block is made with electrocardiogram when PR interval ≥0.30 s. A PR interval of up to
0.48 s had been reported in literature. Data is sparse on an extremely prolonged PR interval associated with Atrioventricular Dissociation
and Pseudo-Pacemaker Syndrome. Electrocardiogram with this type of uncommon features poses diagnostic and management challenges in clinical
practice. We report a case of a 22 year old Nigerian male from Igbo ethnic group who presented himself for medical screening with a history
of exercise intolerance, occasional palpitation and fainting spells. He has no history of cough, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
nor body swelling. A physical examination revealed that the patient has a pulse rate of 64 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg
and soft heart sounds. Standard 12-lead electrocardiogram showed an uncommon Marked First Degree Atrioventricular Block with an extremely
prolonged PR interval of 0.56 s. Long rhythm strips of the electrocardiogram showed extremely prolonged PR interval associated with
Atrioventricular Dissociation and variable degrees of Atrioventricular Block (Mobitz type I and II). An extremely prolonged PR interval may
occur in First Degree Atrioventricular Block and it may be associated with Atrioventricular Dissociation and Pseudo-Pacemaker Syndrome which
may pose diagnostic and management challenges. This suggests that not all cases of First Degree Atrioventricular Block are benign and so
should be sub-classified based on degree of PR interval prolongation and associated electrical abnormalities. Cardiovascular disorders are
the leading causes of preventable deaths globally . First Degree Atrioventricular (AV) Block characterized by prolongation of PR interval
was initially taught to be a benign electrocardiographic finding . The Framingham Heart Study (2009) reported that the presence of First
Degree AV Block doubled the risk of developing atrial fibrillation, tripled the risk of requiring an artificial pacemaker and associated
with a small increase in mortality. This risk was proportional to the degree of PR prolongation . First Degree AV Block is diagnosed with
electrocardiogram (ECG) when PR interval [measured from the onset of atrial depolarization (P wave) to the onset of ventricular
depolarization (QRS complex)] is >0.20 s. Marked First Degree AV Block is defined when the PR interval ≥0.30 s . It has been established
that Marked First Degree AV Block can cause symptoms similar to those produced by Pacemaker Syndrome even without pacemaker and this can
occur despite normal left ventricular function. This is what is referred to as Pseudo-Pacemaker Syndrome . Extremely prolonged PR interval
may produce unusual ECG features such as AV Dissociation, a common feature of Third Degree AV Block. A 22 year old Nigerian male from Igbo
ethnic group presented himself for medical screening following recurrent history of exercise intolerance, occasional palpitation and
fainting spells since early childhood. He has no history of cough, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea nor body swelling. A physical
examination revealed that the patient has a pulse rate of 64 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and soft heart sounds. Standard
12-lead ECG showed an uncommon variable degree of AV block predominantly Marked First Degree AV block with an extremely prolonged PR
interval of 0.56 s and AV Dissociation (Figures 1, 2 and 3). A clinical diagnosis of Pseudo-Pacemaker Syndrome was made and the patient was
referred to the University affiliated Teaching Hospital for further investigations and management.Figure 1 A resting standard 12-lead
electrocardiogram of a 22 year old man with a normal heart rate (65 beats per minute) and P wave occurring immediately after T wave with
anextremely prolonged PR interval (0.56 s). This was misinterpreted by the machine self-interpretation software as ‘absence’ of PR
interval.Figure 2 Marked First Degree Atrioventricular Block with extremely prolonged PR interval (A) transiting to Atrioventricular
Dissociation (B) in the first long rhythm strip (1). The second long rhythm strip (2) maintained First Degree Atrioventricular Block
throughout while the third long rhythm strip(3) commenced with First Degree Atrioventricular Block and progressed in it but with shortening
of the PR interval (C) followed by Atrioventricular Dissociation (D) and a return to First Degree Atrioventricular Block with extremely
prolonged PR interval (E).Figure 3 Marked First Degree Atrioventricular Block with extremely prolonged PR interval (A) transiting into
Mobitz type II(B), Mobitz type I(C), Atrioventricular Dissociation (D) and return to First Degree Atrioventricular Block (E) sequentially in
fourth long rhythm strip (4). Similar events occurred in the fifth long rhythm strip (5) but the sixth long rhythm strip (6) maintained
First Degree Atrioventriccular Block throughout the length of the strip. Varying RR intervals occurred because of the presence of variable
degrees of Atrioventricular Block. A resting standard 12-lead electrocardiogram of a 22 year old man with a normal heart rate (65 beats per
minute) and P wave occurring immediately after T wave with anextremely prolonged PR interval (0.56 s). This was misinterpreted by the
machine self-interpretation software as ‘absence’ of PR interval. Marked First Degree Atrioventricular Block with extremely prolonged PR
interval (A) transiting to Atrioventricular Dissociation (B) in the first long rhythm strip (1). The second long rhythm strip (2) maintained
First Degree Atrioventricular Block throughout while the third long rhythm strip(3) commenced with First Degree Atrioventricular Block and
progressed in it but with shortening of the PR interval (C) followed by Atrioventricular Dissociation (D) and a return to First Degree
Atrioventricular Block with extremely prolonged PR interval (E). Marked First Degree Atrioventricular Block with extremely prolonged PR
interval (A) transiting into Mobitz type II(B), Mobitz type I(C), Atrioventricular Dissociation (D) and return to First Degree
Atrioventricular Block (E) sequentially in fourth long rhythm strip (4). Similar events occurred in the fifth long rhythm strip (5) but the
sixth long rhythm strip (6) maintained First Degree Atrioventriccular Block throughout the length of the strip. Varying RR intervals
occurred because of the presence of variable degrees of Atrioventricular Block. Marked First Degree AV Block with extremely prolonged PR
interval ≥0.50 s is rare. Most reports on First Degree AV Block quote PR interval which are usually less than 0.50 s . It has been
established that PR interval ≥0.30 s should be classified as class IIa indication for pacing in a symptomatic individual . With extremely
prolonged PR interval, atrial systole occurs very close to preceding ventricular systole coupled with AV Dissociation. The consequential AV
dyssynchrony results in haemodynamic disturbances which may be symptomatic and require a dual-chamber pacemaker insertion [6, 7]. The
probability of fatal haemodynamic consequences may be high with an extremely prolonged PR interval with AV Dissociation like the index case.
Therefore, sub-classification of Marked First Degree AV Block based on the extent of PR interval prolongation becomes imperative. Moreover,
there is need for proper interpretation of every ECG by a cardiologist irrespective of the diagnosis made by the ECG self-interpretive
software of the ECG machine. In this case, the machine self-interpreting software recorded ‘*’in place of PR interval. This was a
misdiagnosis and could be misleading for an unsuspecting clinician and might have occurred because the machine self-interpreting software
did not recognise a PR interval in the range of 0.56 s. First Degree AV Block should not just be termed a benign ECG finding but rather it
should be properly interpreted and assessed based on clinical findings, degree of prolongation of the PR interval and associated electrical
abnormalities such as AV Dissociation and variability of the AV Block. An extremely prolonged PR interval may occur in First Degree AV Block
and it may be associated with Atrioventricular Dissociation and Pseudo-Pacemaker Syndrome which may pose diagnostic and management
challenges. This suggests that not all cases of First Degree AV Blocks are benign and so should be sub-classified based on the degree of PR
interval prolongation and associated electrical abnormalities. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Atrioventricular Electrocardiogram Atrial depolarization Ventricular depolarization. Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interest. Authors’ contributions OO carried out the medical screening and drafted the manuscript. AOA made substantial
contributions to the conception and the design of the study. OEA was involved in drafting of the manuscript. OAE was involved in revising it
critically for intellectual content. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank all the staff
of the Department of Physiological Sciences, Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife for their technical assistance.
