This report describes a middle-aged man presenting to the ophthalmologist with history of seeing floaters before both eyes since 2-weeks
duration. A history of intermittent headache and dizziness of recent onset was elicited on questioning. Ocular examination showed bilateral
early papilloedema and mild vitreous hemorrhage. Brain computed tomography (CT) disclosed features suggestive of colloid cyst of the third
ventricle in the region of foramen of Monro with moderate hydrocephalus. Emergency craniotomy and excision of the cyst was done, and the
patient is doing well for the last 18 months after the surgical intervention. The mechanism of this presentation, importance of early
investigations, and timely intervention are highlighted in order to avoid serious neurological sequelae. The literature was extensively
reviewed for atypical presentations of intraventricular colloid cyst. Colloid cyst is a benign neoplasm located in the rostral part of third
ventricle accounting for about 2% of all intracranial tumors.1 It is believed to be originating from the diencephalic vesicle or from the
persistence of the embryonic paraphysis. Occasionally, they are seen to be originating from locations like chiasma, sellar area, brain
convexity, lateral ventricle, septum pellucidum, brain stem, and subarachnoid space.12 Histologically, these lesions are composed of
epithelial cells and goblet cells, the latter secreting proteinaceous material that accumulate in the cyst.3. In more than 75% of cases,
headache associated with nausea and vomiting are the presenting symptoms.4 Unusual presentations like gait disturbance, temporary loss of
consciousness, drop attacks, quadriparesis, spasmodic torticollis, pseudoeclampsia, aseptic meningitis, blurred vision, psychiatric
problems, dementia, and so forth have been reported in the literature.156 This report describes a middle-aged man presenting to the
ophthalmologist complaining of seeing floaters before both eyes and was found to have bilateral early vitreous hemorrhage and papilloedema.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain disclosed the presence of a colloid cyst in the third ventricle with moderate hydrocephalus.
Retrospectively, it can be postulated that the presentation appears to be a variant of Terson's syndrome. Our case is unique in its
presentation. To the best of our knowledge, this remains the first reported case of colloid cyst presenting with features suggestive of
Terson's syndrome. A 41-year-old gentleman presented to the eye clinic complaining of seeing floaters before both eyes since 2 weeks. On
questioning, he admitted getting intermittent dull headache of mild to moderate intensity and dizziness on and off while walking since 2
months. There was no associated nausea or vomiting or other neurological symptoms. He was detected to be a hypertensive few months ago and
was on treatment with lisinopril 5-mg daily. Ocular examination revealed a best-corrected Snellen's visual acuity of 6/6 p in both eyes.
Anterior segment examination showed exotropia of about 45° in left eye that was alternating. Rest of anterior segment examination including
intraocular pressure was normal. Fundoscopy of the right eye revealed early vitreous hemorrhage. The disc showed slight blurring of margins
associated with peripapillary retinal hemorrhages [Figure 1a]. Fundus examination of the left eye showed early vitreous hemorrhage and
blurring of disc margin. There was a small area of preretinal hemorrhage inferior to the disc [Figure 1b]. B scan ultrasound also confirmed
early vitreous hemorrhage. (a) Fundus picture of right eye showing blurred disc margin (arrow head) and peripapillary retina hemorrhage (up
arrow). (b) Blurred disc margin (arrow head) and an area of small preretinal hemorrhage (up arrow) inferior to the disc A diagnosis of
bilateral early disc edema with mild vitreous hemorrhage was made, and he was investigated. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of brain showed a
well-defined oval nonenhancing hyperdense lesion measuring 2 × 1.9 × 2.3 cm at the anterosuperior aspect of third ventricle bulging through
the right foramen of Monro and compressing the left foramen of Monro causing dilatation of both lateral ventricles with cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) seepage [Figure 2]. Fourth ventricle appeared normal. Moderate 0.8-cm midline shift was also seen to the left side. Contrast-enhanced
brain CT scan showing a well-defined round hyperdense lesion (arrow head) in the roof of the third ventricle. Lesion is causing obstruction
of the outlet foramina of the lateral ventricle and causing moderate hydrocephalus. CT features suggestive of colloid cyst A presumptive
diagnosis of colloid cyst causing moderate obstructive hydrocephalus was made, and he was referred urgently to the department of
neurosurgery. He underwent emergency craniotomy and cyst excision. Histopathological examination of the excised tissue showed cyst contents
lined by cyst wall lined by ciliated cuboidal epithelium resting on fibrocollagenous tissue consistent with colloid cyst. Postoperative CT
scan showed pneumocephalus and subdural collection in the right frontotemporal region that resolved spontaneously after few days. The
patient improved symptomatically following surgery. On follow-up after 1 month, he reported complete resolution of floaters and headache.
Fundus evaluation showed resolving vitreous hemorrhage and disc edema. Follow-up after 3 months showed complete resolution of disc edema and
vitreous hemorrhage [Figure 3c and d]. He is being followed up closely for recurrence of symptoms. He has remained asymptomatic for the last
18 months after the intervention. (c and d) Fundus picture of right and left eye showing the complete resolution of disc edema and retinal
hemorrhages after surgical excision of the colloid cyst Colloid cysts are rare intracranial tumors mostly seen in the third ventricle, first
described by Wallmann in 1858.7 They are supposed to originate from either the diencephalic vesicle or remnant of embryonic paraphysis.68
They usually have a sporadic origin though few familial cases have also been reported.125 Presentation is usually at the age of 30-50
years.8 Headache is usually the presenting symptom in 68-100% of cases, which is typically severe, intermittent, and relieved by lying
flat.4578 Classic symptoms of colloid cyst are increased intracranial pressure, sudden onset of headache, neuropsychiatric manifestations,
normal pressure hydrocephalus, coma, and sudden death.1 Unusual presentations like gait disturbance, temporary loss of consciousness, drop
attacks, quadriparesis, hemorrhage, CSF rhinorrhea, hypopituitarism, diabetes insipidus, spasmodic torticollis, pseudoeclampsia, aseptic
meningitis, blurred vision, psychiatric problems, dementia, and so forth have been reported in the literature.156 Other reported unusual
visual presentations related to colloid cyst are normal tension glaucoma,9 nonspecific visual disturbance,10 and superonasal quadrantic
visual field defect.11 Foramen of Monro can act like an anatomical choke point of the third ventricle. Usually, a pedunculated colloid cyst
at this location disturbs the circulation of cerebrospinal fluid and can cause acute obstruction of the third ventricle resulting in
intracranial hemorrhage, brain herniation, coma, and death.457 Hence, early recognition and prompt management is mandatory to decrease the
mortality and morbidity. Our case is unique as the patient sought medical help with floaters as presenting symptom due to early vitreous
hemorrhage without any classical symptoms of raised intracranial pressure. History of intermittent headache and giddiness was elicited only
on questioning. This combination of papilledema, vitreous hemorrhage, and small preretinal hemorrhage in the presence of colloid cyst may be
considered as a variant of Terson's syndrome. The association of vitreous hemorrhage with any form of intracranial hemorrhage was named as
Terson's syndrome after Albert Terson, a French ophthalmologist. Later, the definition has been expanded by some authors to include
intraretinal hemorrhage.1213 It has been postulated that Terson's syndrome may be related to acute elevation of intracranial pressure,
independent of its causes and has been reported with similar incidence in severe brain injury.13 In our patient, it may be hypothesized that
the acute rise in intracranial pressure resulting in hydrocephalus due to obstruction of the foramen of Monro by the colloid cyst might have
resulted in acute rise in intraocular venous pressure resulting in rupture of peripapillary and retinal capillaries along with vitreous
hemorrhage. Intraocular bleeding was minimal as the patient presented at an early stage. Relatively accurate diagnosis can be made by CT or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Total resection of the colloid cyst is mandatory to prevent recurrence.1 A high index of suspicion
and detailed evaluation of patients with no other obvious predisposing cause for bilateral vitreous hemorrhage like diabetes, trauma, or
blood disorders may help in the early diagnosis and management of potentially life-threatening conditions of the brain as in this case.
Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
