Punctate inner choroidopathy (PIC), first described by Watzke et al., in 1984, is a disease of young, relatively healthy, myopic women
characterized by small yellow-white lesions of the inner choroid and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The chorioretinal lesions seen in PIC
tend to be small and acutely no larger than 500 μm. Acute lesions heals to atrophic scars and develop more pigmentation with time. Choroidal
neovascular membranes (CNVM) develops in more than half of these individuals. We describe a case of PIC occurring in a young adult male with
CNVM. The clinical characteristics, fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) findings are described. A
31-year-old male patient presented to us with complaints of blurring of vision and floaters in left eye for past 1 year. His best corrected
visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Anterior segment of both eyes were unremarkable. Fundus examination of
the right eye was normal, and the left eye showed multiple grey lesions over the posterior pole with a partially scarred subfoveal CNVM
[Fig. 1]. Color fundus photograph of left eye showing partially scarred choroidal neovascular membrane with punctate choroidal lesions On
FFA the lesions appear hyperfluorescent in the arterial phase [Figs. 2 and 3]. In later phases, the lesions stain [Fig. 4]. More lesions are
seen on FFA than are clinically visible. On ICGA lesions were hypofluorescent in the early, middle, and late phases [Figs. 5–7]. Many more
lesions are seen on ICGA than were clinically visible or seen in FFA. In the area of lesions larger choroidal vessels were seen crossing. He
was started on oral steroids and received intravitreal ranibuzimab for the CNVM. Left eye montage of Fluorescein Angiography (FA) late
arteriovenous (AV) phase showing punctate hyperfluorescent choroidal lesions with scarred choroidal neovascular membrane Fundus Flouroscein
Angiography (FA): Early phase showing hyperfluorescent choroidal lesions with hypofluorescence around choroidal neovascular membrane Fundus
Flouroscein Angiography (FA): Late phase showing extensive hyperfluorescent choroidal lesions with leak around superior area of choroidal
neovascular membrane Indocyanine green Angiography: Early phase showing hypofluorescent lesions at choroidal levels in the posterior pole
with hypofluorescence around choroidal neovascular membrane Indocyanine green Angiography: Middle phase showing dilated choroidal vessels
around punctate choroidal lesions Indocyanine green Angiography: Late phase showing persisting hypofluorescence around choroidal lesions
with hyperfluorescence around choroidal neovascular membrane PIC is a rare inflammatory choroiditis; some believe multifocal choroiditis and
PIC as spectrum of a single disease. Though it was first described in women, it has been reported in men as well. PIC is not associated with
anterior or posterior segment inflammation. Although PIC is not associated with significant visible inflammation, the lesions respond well
to immunosuppression; especially if associated with CNVM. This case is reported for its rarity, unusual unilateral presentation in male
gender and characteristic features (FFA and ICGA). This is the first case reported of unilateral PIC in a male in Indian ophthalmic
literature. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
