Dear Sir, Orbit is involved in upto 10% of all extranodal lymphomas. Lacrimal gland is the commonest orbital structure involved in orbital
lymphomas. We present a case of patient who presented with unusual features of lymphoma involving lacrimal gland. A 50-year-old female
presented with painless gradually progressive mass in superotemporal orbit for last 6 months [Fig. 1a]. There were no visual or systemic
complaints. CT scan revealed well-localized homogenous hyperdense superotemporal orbital mass with bony fossa formation [Fig. 1b] and globe
indentation. Differential diagnoses of benign orbital mass including lacrimal gland pleomorphic adenoma, fibrous histiocytoma, schwannoma
and neurofibroma were considered. The patient underwent orbitotomy with mass excision. The orbital mass measured 25 × 20 × 19 mm [Fig. 1c]
and had smooth outer surface. The histopathology of mass revealed diffuse sheets of atypical lymphoid cells present discretely, with small
round to oval hyperchromatic nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli [Fig. 2a and b]. Occasional mitotic figures were seen. These cells were
infiltrating the lacrimal gland substance [Fig. 2c]. The cells were positive with CD20 and negative with CD3 [Fig. 2d and e]. The final
diagnosis of low grade B cell lymphoma involving lacrimal gland was made. The patient thereafter received systemic chemotherapy and orbital
radiotherapy. Lymphoma of lacrimal gland usually presents radiologically with characteristic soft tissue deposits that are diffuse and tend
to mould to the lacrimal gland and surrounding structures. There are no bony changes or globe indentation. The present patient presented
with radiological features of solid orbital mass that have not been described in context of lacrimal gland lymphoma previously. (a) Clinical
photograph of the patient showing swelling in left upper eyelid region. (b) CT scan orbits showing superotemporal homogenous orbital mass
with globe indentation and bony fossa formation. (c) Excised orbital mass (a) Diffused sheets of atypical lymphoid cells present discretely
(H and E, ×100). (b) Small, round to oval cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli (H and E, ×400). (c) Lymphomatous
deposit infiltrating and destroying the lacrimal gland (H and E, ×40) (d) Tumor cells immunopositive with CD20 (anti-CD20, ×100). (e) Tumor
cells negative with CD3 (anti-CD3, ×100)
