Graham-Little-Piccardi-Lassueur Syndrome is a rare form of Lichen Planus, characterized by the presence of the triad: non-scarring hair loss
in the inguinal and axillary regions and follicular spinous or disseminated acuminate papules; typical, cutaneous or mucous LP; and scarring
alopecia of the scalp with or without atrophy. These features do not have to be present simultaneously. A 60-year-old woman reports a 5-year
history of violaceous and intensely pruritic lesions on the dorsum and scalp, associated with a 2-year history of hair loss. She also
reports decreased hair growth in the axillary and inguinal regions in the same period. Dermatological examination shows small, scaly,
erythematous-violaceous, flat papules on the dorsal region; multifocal scarring alopecia areas, with smooth, bright and atrophic surface;
discrete hair rarefaction in the axillary and inguinal regions; presence of longitudinal grooves and some depressions on the surface of the
nail plate; no oral lesions (Figures 1 and 2). The histopathology of the dorsal lesion is shown in figure 3A and that of the scalp is shown
in figure 3B. Cutaneous, erythematouspurpuric lesions on the dorsal region Perifollicular erythema with desquamation at the vertex of the
scalp; cicatricial alopecia and smooth, bright and atrophic surface A. HE 200x. Interface dermatitis with lichenoid pattern associated with
dermo-epidermic detachment and lymphocytic infiltrate in band-like pattern in the upper dermis. B. HE 200x. Detail of partially destroyed
follicle, with perifollicular fibrosis and perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate The treatment was performed using highpotency corticoids and
resulted, after three months, in an improvement of pruritus and a slight lightening of the lesions. Graham-Little-Piccardi-Lassueur (GLPL)
syndrome is a rare form of Lichen Planus (LP), characterized by the triad: non-scarring hair loss in the inguinal and axillary regions, and
follicular spinous or disseminated acuminate papules; typical, cutaneous or mucous LP; and scarring alopecia of the scalp with or without
atrophy. These features do not have to be present simultaneously.1-3 Its etiopathogenesis is attributed to emotional factors, endocrine
disorders, infections, neurological disorders, enzymatic changes, drug use and immune changes. However, its etiology remains unknown.4,5
There is a growing body of evidence that the dermatosis represents an autoimmune damage mediated by T cells against basal keratinocytes
expressing autoantigens altered on their surface.1,4 Particularly in the case of GLPL, studies have shown the role of inner centromere
proteins (INCENP) functioning as autoimmunity stimulating antigens; and Antigenic Mimicry or scattering of epitopes to stimulate a
transition from LP to an ulcerative, exanthematous or other rare forms of the disease.6-9 Diagnosis is clinical and histopathological.
Histological findings, however, are not always specific and conclusive. The most characteristic consists of interface dermatitis with
vacuolar degeneration of the basal cell layer and perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate in the middle dermis. The striking
pigmentary incontinence favors the diagnosis of LP. In the LP of the hair, from the early stages, an inflammatory infiltrate appears around
the hair follicles, especially in their upper half; and the follicular destruction occurs at a late stage.2,4,9 Differential diagnosis
should be made with other causes of acquired scarring alopecia, such as pseudopelade of Brocq, discoid lupus erythematosus, sarcoidosis,
follicular mucinosis, folliculitis decalvans, atrophic keratosis pilaris, graft-versus-host disease, eosinophilic cellulitis,
dermatomyositis, lichen sclerosus et atrophicus, scleroderma, mastocytosis, pyoderma gangrenosum, necrobiosis lipoidica and cicatricial
pemphigoid.3,5 The classic treatment is done with the use of systemic and topical corticosteroids, retinoids, phototherapy, tacrolimus,
hydroxychloroquine and cyclosporine, with partial and temporary results.3,8 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite
this article: Antonio JR, Lucca LCP, Borim MP, Rossi NCP, Oliveira GB. Case for diagnosis. GrahamLittle-Piccardi-Lassueur Syndrome. An Bras
Dermatol. 2014;89(6):1003-4. Study conducted at the School of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP) - São José do Rio Preto (SP),
Brazil.
