The main treatment for pemphigus vulgaris are systemic corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents, but due to adverse reactions and
therapeutic failure, new drugs such as rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil have been used. In this case report are described two cases of
severe pemphigus vulgaris refractory to various treatments, with resolution after use of rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil, associated
with corticosteroids. A higher-than-usual dose of rituximab was employed, without the occurrence of serious adverse reactions. Mycophenolate
mofetil was added as adjunctive therapy due to lack of response to azathioprine. Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a potentially fatal autoimmune
bullous disease with a mortality rate around 5%.1 The main treatment are systemic corticosteroids associated with immunosuppressants, but
due to adverse reactions and treatment failure new therapeutic drugs have been prescribed, such as rituximab2 and mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF).3,4 Rituximab is an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody that causes the depletion of B lymphocytes and B pre-lymphocytes. Initially
developed for the treatment of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, it has been shown to be an excellent option for autoimmune diseases like PV.2 MMF is a
relatively new immunosuppressant.3 It acts by specifically inhibiting activated T lymphocytes, with a more selective action, and with the
advantage of being less mutagenic regarding azathioprine.4,5,6 Its use is approved for the prevention of solid organs allograft rejection
and for lupus nephritis. Several studies point out its efficacy in the treatment of PV.4-8 In this current study two cases of severe PV are
reported, refractory to diverse treatments, with clinical resolution after use of rituximab and MMF combined with corticotherapy. Case 1 -
Male, 47 years old, with diagnosis of PV and using prednisone 120mg/day for one month. At the examination he presented eroded and crusted
lesions disseminated on the skin and erosions in the oral mucosa. Diagnosis of PV was histologically confirmed. Treatment was begun with
pulses of methylprednisolone IV and oral prednisone between pulses. The patient progressed rapidly with severe worsening and infusions of
intravenous immunoglobulin combined with prednisone and oral azathioprine were introduced (Figure 1A). After a period of improvement new
lesions appeared and pulses of cyclophosphamide IV were administered, continuing with oral prednisone. Again there was improvement but after
the fourth pulse a severe relapse occurred. Plasmapheresis was performed as well as a new pulse of cyclophosphamide with good response, but
after seven days there was onset of new lesions (Figure 1B). At this point, treatment with rituximab was initiated. Prednisone was
maintained and MMF was added. After the second cycle there was complete resolution of the clinical picture with hospital discharge, main-
taining prednisone and MMF (Figure 1C). The patient was hospitalized for eight months and presented severe complications like infections and
sepsis, before the initiation of rituximab, making use of several schemes of antibiotic therapy. During the outpatient clinic follow-up the
MMF dose was maintained and the dose of prednisone was progressively reduced in the course of one year, until suspension. At this point,
oral lesions appeared which persisted even after increase of prednisone. A new infusion of rituximab was started and the dose of MMF was
increased, with resolution of lesions. One year after the last cycle of rituximab, the patient remains with the disease controlled with MMF
2.5g/day and prednisone 10mg on alternate days. The therapeutic steps with drugs, doses, intervals and duration, are described in table 1.
(CASE 1): A: extensive erosion of lesions on the trunk and limbs, in the first phase of exacerbation of the disease before beginning
treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin. B: dorsolumbar region after plasmapheresis, before beginning treatment with rituximab. C:
dorsolumbar region after the end of second cycle of rituximab, three months after the first infusion Therapeutic phases - case 1 Note: MPD =
methylprednisolone; PDN = prednisone; IVIG = intravenous immunoglobulin; AZA = azathioprine; CPP = cyclophosphamide; PPH = plasmapheresis;
RTX = rituximab; MMF = mycophenolate mofetil. Case 2 - Female, 46 years old, with hypertension and diabetes, both difficult to control,
presented bullous lesions and erosions, with purulent secretion, disseminated on the scalp, face, trunk and limbs. Diagnosis of PV was
confirmed histologically. She was hospitalized and submitted to treatment with antibiotic therapy, pulses of methylprednisolone IV and
pulses of cyclophosphamide IV, with monthly intervals, besides oral prednisone and azathioprine. She achieved almost complete remission of
lesions after the second pulse of cyclophosphamide, with hospital discharge. After the fifth pulse she presented leucopenia and after the
sixth pulse there was relapse of the disease (Figure 2A). The patient was hospitalized again and rituximab infusions were administered with
two-week intervals, maintaining oral prednisone and azathioprine. There was improvement in the trunk lesions, but worsening of the facial
ones, even after the third infusion of rituximab (Figures 2B and 3A). As a consequence, together with the fourth infusion the prednisone
dose was increased and azathioprine replaced with MMF, with progressive improvement and hospital discharge after two months of
hospitalization (Figure 3B). Since then the prednisone dose was progressively reduced and two years after hospital discharge, the patient
remains with the disease under control with MMF 1g/day and prednisone 5mg/day (Figure 3C). The therapeutic steps, with drugs, doses,
intervals and duration, are described in table 2. (CASE 2): A: erosions in dorsolumbar region after relapse of the disease, during pulse
therapy with cyclophosphamide plus prednisone and azathioprine orally. B: improvement of lesions in dorsolumbar region, after the third
rituximab A B infusion (CASE 2): A: erosions on face and scalp, after the third rituximab infusion. B: healing of lesions on the face three
weeks after the fourth rituximab infusion, increase of prednisone dose and introduction of MMF. C: face and scalp 18 months after the end of
rituximab infusions Therapeutic phases - case 2 Note: MPD = methylprednisolone; CPP = cyclophosphamide; PDN = prednisone; AZA =
azathioprine; RTX = rituximab; MMF = mycophenolate mofetil. Rituximab is indicated mainly for patients with PV refractory to at least two
therapeutic modalities.2,9 The most used schemes are the four infusions per week at a dose of 375mg/m2; and the one of two infusions of 1g
with two-week interval. They are approved, respectively, for the treatment of B cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas, and for rheumatoid arthritis
refractory to therapy with anti-TNFα.10 The most common collateral effects are related to infusion (headache, fever, nausea, vomiting,
pruritus, hypotension). Severe effects such as sepsis and opportunistic infections are rare.9 In a study of 103 patients with PV who were
treated with rituximab, Schmidt and collaborators reported complete remission in 77% and partial remission in 21% of the patients. Severe
collateral effects occurred in 14% of the patients.2 In the two cases reported in this work a greater number of infusions of rituximab were
necessary until the resolution of lesions, with no occurrence of adverse reactions. MMF is considered by some authors the best
corticosteroid-sparing drug for bullous diseases.4,5 The recommended dose is 35mg-45mg/kg/day, administered every 12 hours with meals. The
dose should be gradually increased to avoid gastrointestinal effects.3,4,5 The drug is presented in 500mg capsules and there is another
form, sodium mycophenolate, presented in 360mg capsules, equivalent to 500mg of MMF.4 In a study with 36 cases of patients with PV and
pemphigus foliaceus treated with rituximab, the most used concomitant drugs were prednisone and MMF, in 53% and 50% of the cases,
respectively.10 The high cost and the off-label condition are factors that limit its provision by Unified Health System (SUS - Sistema Único
de Saúde). In the reported cases, rituximab was supplied by the hospital unit and the MMF by the nephrology sector, until obtained by SUS
with a judicial warrant. The reports in the literature and the results obtained in the described cases indicate that rituximab and MMF are
safe, effective drugs, with lasting results, revealing themselves as valuable therapeutic options for severe and refractory PV. 1-10
Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Biot SDRN, Franco JPA, Lima RB, Pereira HNC, Marques LPJ,
Martins CJ. Refractory pemphigus vulgaris treated with rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(6):980-4. Work carried
out at the Hospital Universitário Gaffrée e Guinle, Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brasil.
