American Tegumentary Leishmaniasis (ATL) is a chronic, non-contagious, infectious disease affecting millions of people worldwide. The timely
and proper treatment is of great importance to prevent the disease from progressing to destructive and severe forms. Treatment for ATL
recommended by the Brazilian Ministry of Health is similar for the whole country, regardless of the species of Leishmania. It is known that
the response to treatment may vary with the strain of the parasite, the immune status of the patient and clinical form. We report the case
of a healthy patient, coming from Manaus, Amazonas state, Brazil, who presented resistance to treatment with N-methyl-glutamine and
liposomal amphotericin B, only being healed after using pentamidine. American Tegumentary Leishmaniasis (ATL) is an infectious, chronic,
non-contagious disease that affects millions of people worldwide. It is caused by several species of protozoa of the Leishmania genus and
transmitted to men by wild and domesticated animals through females of Phlebotominae, of which the most common is Lutzomya. The most common
species in Brazil are L. (Viannia) braziliensis, Leishmania (Viannia) guyanensis, and L. (Leishmania) amazonensis.1,2 L. (V.) guyanensis is
the second most prevalent species in Brazil, one of the most common in the Amazon region. In a study performed in the state of Amazonas, it
was verified that in 88.1% of the patients with ATL the species found was L. guyanensis.3 ATL is currently distributed in all of the states,
with the Center-West region now occupying the third place in prevalence in the national territory.1,4 It is in a phase of geographical
expansion. Analyses of epidemiological studies of ATL have suggested changes in the behavior of the disease.2 Over the years, it was seen as
an occupational disease, affecting adult men exposed to forest regions, but today there is increasing involvement of women and children, as
a consequence of the urbanization process.1,5 The incubation period of the cutaneous form may vary from one week to one month, whereas
mucosal lesions usually appear from one to two years after the onset of infection. ATL may present diverse clinical forms, from self-
limiting cutaneous lesions to mucocutaneous disfiguring lesion forms, depending on the immune status of the patient and species of
Leishmania. 1 ATL diagnosis encompasses epidemiological, clinical and laboratorial aspects. The association of some of these elements is
frequently necessary to achieve the final diagnosis.2 Diagnosis is reached through direct research, culture in specific medium or
histopathological test. Immunological tests, such as Montenegro's intradermal reaction and indirect immunofluorescence, are indirect methods
used.1 Timely and adequate treatment is of great importance to prevent the evolution of the disease to destructive and severe forms, such as
the mucosal form.4 Drugs currently employed present high toxicity and frequent adverse effects and none of them is sufficiently effective.
3,6 Relapse, therapeutical failure in immunodepressed patients and treatment resistance are factors that motivate the search for an ideal
drug.6 The drug of choice is N-methylglucamine antimoniate (NMG). As a second-choice treatment there is pentamidine isethionate and
amphotericin B. Other drugs already used for the treatment of ATL are miltefosine, azithromycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole, allopurinol,
paromomycin and pentoxifylline.3,7,8 Although the ATL treatment recommended by the Health Department (Ministério da Saúde - MS) is the same
for the whole country, regardless of which Leishmania species caused the disease, there are few clinical trials showing the true efficacy of
these drugs. It is known that the response to the treatment with antimony may vary according to parasite strain, immune status of the
patient and clinical form.3,6 Female patient, 6 years old, originally from Manaus-AM, had resided in Campo Grande-MS for the last 4 months.
Two months ago she progressively developed an erythematous, crusted and erosive plaque with infiltrated edges, measuring 2.5 cm in diameter
in the distal extensor region of left arm (Figure 1). Direct investigation (imprint) detected amastigote structures compatible with
Leishmania sp. Histopathological examination revealed epidermis with pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, dermis with a dense inflammatory
infiltrate constituted of lymphocytes, plasmocytes, macrophages and some multinucleated giant cells. Macrophages containing corpuscles with
characteristics of amastigote forms of Leishmania (Figure 2) were observed. She received N-methylglucamine (NMG) (5.3ml/day for 20 days)
with discreet lesion regression. As she showed no improvement 2 months after the end of the NMG treatment, liposomal amphotericin B was
initiated (total dose of 575mg). Thirty days after the treatment active lesions still persisted. Suspecting that the Leishmania was acquired
in the Amazon region, we began using pentamidine, prescribing 7mg/kg IM in a single dose. The patient presented regression of the lesion and
a cicatricial plaque remained (Figure 3). Erythematous, erosive and crusted plaque of infiltrated borders, with a 2.5cm diameter in the
distal extensor region of left arm Epidermis with pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, dermis with dense inflammatory infiltrate constituted
of lymphocytes, plasmocytes, macrophages and some giant multinucleated cells. Macrophages were observed containing corpuscles with
characteristics suggesting amastigote forms of Leishmania sp (arrows) Atrophic cicatricial plaque after treatment with pentamidine In
Brazil, patients with cutaneous ATL infected with L.(V.) b. or L.(V.) g. treated with NMG IV or IM during 20 days have had healing rates of
50.8% e 26.3% respectively. The conclusion was that the leishmania species constitutes a predictor in the treatment success with NMG.6
According to some studies, in the treatment of ATL by L. (V.) guyanensis, pentamidine would be the drug of choice in the state of Amazonas.
Pentamidine would be an important therapeutic option for cutaneous ATL, due to its cost/benefit, besides being safe for treating
cardiopaths.3 Pentamidine is a second-choice drug for the treatment of ATL that does not respond to pentavalent antimonials, or when their
use is contraindicated. The papers of Pradinaud and Talhari demonstrated good results with low doses of cutaneous ATL caused by L. (V.)
guyanensis - total doses close to 1.0g.3 Pentamidine is the first-line drug in Suriname and in French Guiana, where L. guyanensis
predominates. In French Guiana, a cure rate of almost 100%, and in Suriname, of approximately 90% were observed.3,6 Few studies were
performed in the Americas using pentamidine as a therapeutic option for ATL. The classic recommended dose is 4mg/kg/day, through deep
intramuscular application, every 2 days, not exceeding the recommended total dose of 2g.3 The main adverse reactions related to pentamidine
are pain, induration and sterile abscesses at the injection site, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, adynamia, myalgia, headache, hypotension,
syncope, transient hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. 3,6,9,10 ATL is a neglected disease. In general, it involves populations with a low
socioeconomic level, has weak political force and is little attractive for the pharmaceutical industry. One of the great challenges is to
increase investments for the search of drugs with better efficacy, safety, low cost, ease of management and sustainability. 4 We report a
case of cutaneous ATL which presented treatment resistance to NMG and liposomal amphotericin B. In spite of being in a high prevalence area
of ATL, we interpreted it as acquired in the city of origin (Manaus) and opted for treating it with pentamidine, for some studies
demonstrate that, when treating ATL by L. (V.) guyanensis, pentamidine is the first-line drug in the state of Amazonas. Conflict of
interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Couto DV, Hans-Filho G, Medeiros MZ, Vicari CFS, Barbosa AB, Takita LC.
American tegumentary leishmaniasis - a case of therapeutic challenge. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(6):974-6. Work performed at the Department
of Dermatology, Teaching Hospital, Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul (UFMS) - Campo Grande (MS), Brazil.
