Here, we report and investigate the genomic alterations of two novel cases of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) in children with Williams-Beuren
syndrome (WBS), a multisystem disorder caused by 7q11.23 hemizygous deletion. Additionally, we report the case of a child with NHL and a
somatic 7q11.23 deletion. Although the WBS critical region has not yet been identified as a susceptibility locus in NHL, it harbors a number
of genes involved in DNA repair. The high proportion of pediatric NHL reported in WBS is intriguing. Therefore, the role of
haploinsufficiency of genes located at 7q11.23 in lymphomagenesis deserves to be investigated. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s13045-014-0082-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Chromosomal disorders are common
circumstances for the discovery of a genetic predisposition to cancer allowing identification and localization of new oncogenes. Williams-
Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a multisystem disorder caused by 7q11.23 hemizygous microdeletion . WBS is not currently considered as a risk
factor for cancer. However, the low incidence of both WBS and pediatric NHL (Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma) might hamper our ability to identify any
association between these rare diseases. An increased risk of NHL in WBS might have easily been underestimated until today. Furthermore, the
number of pediatric cancer reported in WBS has reached 11 cases and, strikingly, 8 (73%) of them where NHL, mostly Burkitt lymphoma
(Table 1). Here, we report 2 novel cases of NHL in children with WBS and the additional case of a non-WBS child with NHL and somatic 7q11.23
deletion (see case description in Additional file 1).Table 1 List of pediatric cancers reported in WBS patients Study Samples Authors Date
of publication Age (years), gender Type of tumor Reference 1WBS Patient 1Guenat DTS7, FNHL (Burkitt)-2WBS Patient 2Guenat DTS10, MNHL (B-NHL
stage IV)-3-Vanhapiha N20147, MNHL (Burkitt) and Ewing sarcoma4-Chonan M20133, MAstrocytoma5-Zhukova N20138, MNHL (Burkitt)6-Onimoe G201110,
FNHL (Burkitt)7-Urisarri Ruiz A200812, MNHL (T-cell)8-Thornburg CD20051,?NHL (Burkitt)9-Amenta S20048, MNHL (Burkitt)10-Culic V200214,
MALL11-Semmekrot BA19855, ?AstrocytomaTS: This Study; NHL: Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma; ALL: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, F: female; M: male. List
of pediatric cancers reported in WBS patients TS: This Study; NHL: Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma; ALL: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, F: female; M:
male. Since several different deletions account for the genotype of WBS, we first investigated germline and somatic structural variants in
these latest 3 patients using array-based CGH (Figure 1). We confirmed the presence of a constitutional 7q11.23 deletion in WBS patients. No
germline Copy Number Variation (CNV) was observed in patient 3. Intriguingly, the somatically acquired 7q11.23 deletion that occurred in
lymphoma of patient 3 was similar to the classical germline deletion observed in WBS patients and there was no evidence of other
rearrangements occurred in this tumor. Lymphoma cells of WBS patients exhibited CNV commonly found in B cell lymphoma excepting a subclonal
deletion of approximately 10 Mb at the locus 2q33.1-q35 involving IKZF2 in WBS patient 2. A recent study by Holmfeldt et al. demonstrated
that this deletion was common in low-hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia but this deletion had never been described in NHL. Then, next
generation sequencing of the WBS region showed a germline homozygous variant in exon 25 of ELN (c.1741G > C, p.Gly581Arg, rs.17855988) in
the 2 WBS patients. ELN encodes elastin, a constituent of elastic fibers. Many variants of ELN has been described and were associated to the
severity of cardiovascular symptoms of WBS patients. No recurrent variant was observed in the 27 other genes nor in the 2 miRNA loci of the
WBS critical region.Figure 1 Array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis of normal tissues and lymphoma cells of 2 WBS patients
and of a third child without WBS but with NHL and a somatic 7q11.23 deletion. A. Typical hemizygous loss of the WBS region on chromosome
7q11.23 spanning 1.5 Mb was observed in normal and tumor DNA of 2 patients with WBS. Patient 3 had the same deletion in lymphoma cells but
this deletion was somatic. B. Study of somatic chromosomal rearrangements showed a homozygous deletion encompassing chromosome band 9p21.3
at the INK4a/ARF locus on the tumor of patient 1. WBS patient 2 exhibited a large subclonal deletion on chromosomal region 2q33.2-q34
encompassing the IKZF2 gene locus and an amplification of a 10 Mb region at the locus 13q31.2-q31.3 involving MIR17HG. Patient 3 had no
other chromosomal rearrangements in the tumor. PBMC: Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization
analysis of normal tissues and lymphoma cells of 2 WBS patients and of a third child without WBS but with NHL and a somatic 7q11.23
deletion. A. Typical hemizygous loss of the WBS region on chromosome 7q11.23 spanning 1.5 Mb was observed in normal and tumor DNA of 2
patients with WBS. Patient 3 had the same deletion in lymphoma cells but this deletion was somatic. B. Study of somatic chromosomal
rearrangements showed a homozygous deletion encompassing chromosome band 9p21.3 at the INK4a/ARF locus on the tumor of patient 1. WBS
patient 2 exhibited a large subclonal deletion on chromosomal region 2q33.2-q34 encompassing the IKZF2 gene locus and an amplification of a
10 Mb region at the locus 13q31.2-q31.3 involving MIR17HG. Patient 3 had no other chromosomal rearrangements in the tumor. PBMC: Peripheral
Blood Mononuclear Cells. A number of genes mapping to the WBS region are involved in DNA repair: 1) Eleven PMS2 pseudogenes loci are located
at 7q11.23. PMS2 plays a crucial role in the DNA Mismatch Repair and a childhood cancer syndrome is associated to biallelic mutations of
PMS2 . However, in our study the 3 patients showed stable microsatellites (Additional file 2); 2) BAZ1B encodes a transcription factor with
an intrinsic tyrosine kinase domain that phosphorylates Tyr142 of histone H2A.X and is involved in the maintaining of gH2A.X in the sites of
DNA damages ; 3) RFC2 encodes a subunit of the Replication Factor C complex that interacts with BRCA1 for post replication repair after UV-
induced DNA damage ; 4) GTF2I encodes a transcription factor that promotes DNA translesion synthesis and genomic stability interacting with
PCNA and DNA polymerases . Finally, the hypothesis of a constitutional genomic instability in WBS is consistent with the results of a study
by Savina et al. that showed experimentally the relationship between an abnormal DNA-damage response and the 7q11.23 hemizygous
microdeletion when comparing the comet assay data in FISH-positive and FISH-negative lymphocytes from WBS-suspected patients . 7q11.23
deletion has been found as a relatively common occurrence in pilocytic astrocytoma , of which variants have been reported in 2 patients with
WBS . Nevertheless, genome-wide copy number analysis in NHL, including a recent study by Conde et al. that analyzed 648 patients, ages 20 to
85 years, have not found a susceptibility locus at 7q11.23 . However, NHL in adults encompasses a heterogeneous spectrum of diseases in
which diffuse large B-cell lymphoma predominates. NHL in children is a more rare event and pediatric DLBCL is uncommon. Burkitt lymphoma
that predominates in pediatric NHL, has also been studied by genome-wide CNV studies. Notably, Scholtysik et al. demonstrated a recurrent
loss at 7q11.22, localized at the centromeric limit of the WBS critical region, in 39 cases of BL . Amplifications of the WBS critical
region have also been found in a variety of cancers including large B-cell lymphoma , ovarian adenocarcinoma , papillary thyroid carcinoma
and cholangiocarcinoma . This might reflect complex mechanisms that regulate initiation/promotion of cancer cells by oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes clustered around recombination hot spots or fragile sites in the WBS region. Althought no epidemiological studies
demonstrated an increased risk of cancer in WBS the high proportion of pediatric NHL reported in WBS and the occurrence of a somatic
deletion of 7q11.23 in NHL is intriguing. In these patients, NHL seems to arise in the presence of the typical WBS microdeletion and in the
absence of homozygous mutation. The role of haploinsufficiency of genes located at 7q11.23 in lymphomagenesis deserves to be investigated.
Supplementary materials and methods [ 24 ]. Study of microsatellites instability by capillary electrophoresis fragment analysis. All
patients have stables microsatellites in both normal and tumor DNA when compared with the Microsatellite Instable positive control (Control
MSI+). BL: Burkitt Lymphoma, PBMC: Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contribution DG, JS, PSR and CB designed the study. SQ and JS performed CGH-array and analyzed the results. DG, and CF
analyzed the next-generation sequencing data. LB performed Microsatellite instability assay. CR, TC, PSR, CL, HF and PE provided clinical
and diagnostic input. DG, PSR, CL, CB and CR wrote the manuscript. All authors read, reviewed and approved the manuscript. This work was
funded by the French association “Cent pour sang la vie”. We would like to acknowledge the study participants and their parents. We thank
Brigitte Gilbert-Dussardier for her help in contacting the different investigators. We also thank “Comitato Maria Letizia Verga (Monza) per
lo studio e la cura della leucemia infantile” for the continuous support to research activities of Carmelo Rizzari and Tiziana Coliva and
“The Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation” for financial support to research works of Catarina Lundin. Finally, we thank Annalisa Weygandt
for the English language editing of the manuscript.
