Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 56 Final Diagnosis: Broncho-pleural fistula • empyema • supra-vena cava
syndrome Symptoms: Dyspnea • fever • facial edema Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Oncology and Pulmonology Unusual clinical
course It is extremely rare for pulmonary hilar lymph node metastasis (PHLNM) of a cancer to be independently lethal. Here, we report an
exceedingly rare case of cavitation in PHLNM from breast cancer triggering bronchopleural fistula and empyema (BPFE), complicated with
superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS). A 56-year-old woman who had undergone left segmental mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection due
to left breast cancer was then treated for 1 year with postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Recurrence of right PHLNM was observed 2 years
after the operation, for which 3 courses of bevacizumab (BEV) and paclitaxel combination chemotherapy were administered. The woman had
dyspnea and fever during the washout period, and CT examination revealed fistula formation between the right PHLNM cavitation and right main
bronchus, so she was admitted for further treatment. This fistula rapidly progressed to BPFE, and contralateral aspiration was observed to
cause pneumonia of the left lung. In addition, edema of both upper limbs and head and neck were observed, and CT examination revealed SVCS
caused by re-enlargement of PHLNM. Active treatment was performed, but the recommencement of chemotherapy was not possible, and she died on
Day 150 of admission. We think that PHLNM deteriorated to central necrosis due to chemotherapy with BEV taking effect, leading to formation
of BPFE. The case was also made more difficult due to the complication of SVCS caused by the re-enlarged PHLNM. Although pulmonary hilar
lymph node metastasis (PHLNM) is frequently observed in breast cancer , it is extremely rare for the condition to independently constitute a
serious risk for cancer death. Bronchial fistula and superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS) caused by metastasizing or disseminated lesions in
the thoracic cavity are serious paraneoplastic syndrome (PNS), the treatment for which often causes much suffering . This report describes
an exceedingly rare case of cavitation in PHLNM from breast cancer triggering broncho-pleural fistula and empyema (BPFE) complicated by
SVCS. A 56-year-old woman had undergone segmental mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection in November 2009, with a final diagnosis of
T2N0M0 that was estrogen receptor-negative, progesterone receptor-negative, and strongly HER2-positive. She received 6 courses of docetaxel
and 12 courses of trastuzumab as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. CT examination revealed right PHLNM 2 years after the operation
(Figure 1), so chemotherapy was recommenced. The appearance of new lesions had not been observed one year following recommencement of
treatment, but the right PHLNM indicated a trend toward enlargement, and bevacizumab (BEV) and paclitaxel combination chemotherapy was
commenced. Upon completion of 3 courses of chemotherapy with the same regimen, CT examination revealed PHLNM cavitation. Because she
complained of dyspnea and fever during the washout period, she was admitted for further medical treatments. Routine blood examination showed
a high degree of inflammation, with a leukocyte count of 25 900/μL, CRP of 33.32 mg/dl, and procalcitonin of 14.21 ng/ml. A sputum culture
test also detected Staphylococcus aureus. In addition, a CT examination on admission revealed fistula formation between the right PHLNM
cavitation and the right main bronchus and its peripheral obstructive pneumonia (Figure 2). Conservative treatment was immediately commenced
for the obstructive pneumonia, but a CT examination on Day 7 of admission revealed BPFE accompanying the formation of a fluid collection in
the right thoracic cavity. On Day 10 of admission, her condition became worse, complicated by pneumonia of the left lung due to the
contralateral aspiration caused by BPFE; therefore, selected intubation using bronchoscopy into the left main bronchus was performed.
Tracheotomy was subsequently performed and a double-lumen tracheostomy tube (Tracheopart, Toray Medical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted
into the left main bronchus via tracheostomy (Figure 3). Because the patient had cancer without any distant metastasis or recurrent lesions
except for the right PHLNM, and because lethal organ dysfunction brought on by PHLNM is very rare, active treatment was continued. However,
on Day 51 of admission, edema of both upper limbs, head, and neck were observed. Contrast CT examination revealed severe narrowing of the
superior vena cava due to exclusion and direct invasion by the right PHLNM (Figure 4), and the patient was diagnosed as SVCS. The use of
interventional radiology (IVR) for SVCS was considered at this time, but because resolving the SVCS would not improve quality of life (QOL),
and compliance with chemotherapy would not be possible, the proposal was abandoned. Ultimately, the patient had no dramatic improvement in
symptoms, and died on Day 150 of admission. While pulmonary hilar lymph node metastasis (PHLNM) is frequently observed in breast cancer , it
is rare for it to be lethal. We treated an extremely rare case in which PHLNM as the first recurring lesion after surgery and adjuvant
chemotherapy caused BPFE and SVCS. Treatment methods for BPFE include surgical methods such as lung decortication, thoracoplasty,
pneumonectomy, and plombage , and non-surgical treatment methods such as endoscopic cauterization, silver nitrate application, injection of
OK-432 into the thoracic cavity, and bronchoscopic plombage with fibrin glue . Because BPFE is refractory and is observed in critically ill
patients, treatment for BPFE is sometimes very difficult. If appropriate treatments are not administered during the early stages of BPFE
onset, sepsis and acute respiratory failure caused by contralateral aspiration are very likely to occur. In this case, poor general physical
condition (ECOG performance status was 3) made selection of a surgical treatment more difficult. Basic conservative treatment involves
drainage of the infected thoracic cavity and proper discharge of bronchial secretions, along with administration of an adequate dose of
antibiotics . Here, however, although these conservative treatments for BPFE were appropriately administered, dramatic improvement in the
extent of organization of the infectious site was not achieved. SVCS is a typical PNS of thoracic malignancies . Wierecky et al. reported
that it occurs in most cases as a result of either superior vena cava invasion by primary malignant tumors (60–90%) or malignant lymphoma
(6–25%), with onset due to metastasizing lesions in the thoracic cavity, which is relatively rare . In addition, the 1-year survival rate
after onset of SVCS is only around 20–25% , and patients with SVCS complicated by a malignant tumor generally have a poor prognosis
regardless of whether the tumor is a primary or metastasizing lesion. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are conventionally selected for
treatment of SVCS , but these methods had no immediate effect, and treatment itself was impossible given that the overall physical condition
of the patient was poor. Since confirmation of the utility of intravascular stent placement with IVR , it has become the treatment of choice
for SVCS . In our case, however, the onset of BPFE made cessation of chemotherapy unavoidable, and re-enlargement of the PHLNM during that
period might have caused SVCS. Although the indication of IVR for SVCS was discussed, the proposal was abandoned due to poor prospects for
improvement in QOL or sequential recommencement of chemotherapy, before even considering stent patency or the rate of complications.
Furthermore, although the utility of prophylactic IVR for predicted future SVCS onset due to thoracic or mediastinal tumors has not yet been
demonstrated, only IVR could prevent the onset of SVCS. This case presented several severe paraneoplastic complications triggered by the
PHLNM cavitation due to BEV and paclitaxel combination chemotherapy. BEV is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody against vascular
endothelial growth factor, and it exerts an anti-tumor effect by inhibiting angiogenesis in malignant tumors. The utility of BEV against
recurrent breast cancer is well-established by randomized control studies , and combination chemotherapy with paclitaxel was selected for
this case. Nishino et al. reported tumor cavitation in 14 of 72 cases (19%) of non-small-cell lung cancer treated with BEV combination
chemotherapy, in most cases carried out with paclitaxel or carboplatin . Tumor cavitation is thought to occur due to central necrosis caused
by the angiogenesis-inhibiting effects of BEV, and this change commonly suggests that the treatment has taken effect . In addition to tumor
cavitation as a result of chemotherapy in this case, fistula formation between the PHLNM cavitation and the right bronchus due to an
increase of airway and intracavernous pressure was thought to constitute the pathogenesis . This was an extremely rare case in which BPFE
and SVCS arose as complications triggered by the PHLNM from breast cancer. It is thought that PHLNM lapsed into central necrosis and
cavitation as a result of chemotherapy with BEV taking effect, and ruptured due to additional bronchial fistula formation and excessive
intracavernous pressure, forming BPFE. In addition, complications with SVCS arose due to re-enlargement of PHLNM during the period for which
a continuation of chemotherapy was impossible, resulting in a series of extremely rare pathological states. There is currently no clear
evidence for prophylactic IVR prior to onset of SVCS, but if implemented on the basis of informed consent, it may have been effective in
this case. The authors would like to thank Dr. Kazushige Ishida and Dr. Seika Nakamura for helpful discussions. (A) CT examination revealed
a 4.5-cm right PHLNM. (B) CT examination in coronal section also revealed the exclusion of lobar bronchi by PHLNM. (A) CT examination on
admission revealed fistula formation between the right PHLNM cavitation and the right main bronchus. (B) CT examination in coronal section
also revealed its peripheral obstructive pneumonia. A double-lumen tracheostomy tube for left bronchus. (Tracheopart, Toray Medical Co. Ltd,
Tokyo, Japan). (A, B) Contrast CT examination revealed severe narrowing of the superior vena cava due to exclusion and direct invasion by
the right PHLNM (arrow).
