Exposure to levamisole-adulterated cocaine can induce a distinct clinical syndrome characterized by retiform purpura and/or agranulocytosis
accompanied by an unusual constellation of serologic abnormalities including antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulants, and very
high titers of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Two recent case reports suggest that levamisole-adulterated cocaine may also lead to
renal disease in the form of pauci-immune glomerulonephritis. To explore this possibility, we reviewed cases of pauci-immune
glomerulonephritis between 2010 and 2012 at an inner city safety net hospital where the prevalence of levamisole in the cocaine supply is
known to be high. We identified 3 female patients and 1 male patient who had biopsy-proven pauci-immune glomerulonephritis, used cocaine,
and had serologic abnormalities characteristic of levamisole-induced autoimmunity. Each also had some other form of clinical disease known
to be associated with levamisole, either neutropenia or cutaneous manifestations. One patient had diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Three of the
4 patients were treated with short courses of prednisone and cyclophosphamide, 2 of whom experienced stable long-term improvement in their
renal function despite ongoing cocaine use. The remaining 2 patients developed end-stage renal disease and became dialysis-dependent. This
report supports emerging concern of more wide spread organ toxicity associated with the use of levamisole-adulterated cocaine. Now licensed
exclusively as an antihelminthic for use in veterinary medicine, levamisole was once used as a putative immunomodulatory agent for the
treatment of a variety of autoimmune conditions and malignancies. Toxicity eventually led to its withdrawal for human use in 1999. The most
worrisome toxicities seen in adults were neutropenia and agranulocytosis, which occurred in 2.5%–13% of patients and resolved promptly with
drug discontinuation.22,25,34 Small numbers of pediatric patients treated with prolonged courses of levamisole for refractory nephrotic
syndrome developed a distinctive rash characterized by retiform purpura distributed on the face (nose, cheeks, and ear lobes) and proximal
extremities. Biopsies of these purpuric lesions demonstrated thrombosis of superficial and deep dermal vessels with varying degrees of
leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Children with these rashes also had circulating antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) and
antiphospholipid antibodies (APLAs). Upon discontinuation of levamisole, the purpura resolved within 2–3 weeks, and the autoantibodies
disappeared over 2–14 months.20,28 In 2005, levamisole appeared as an adulterant in illicit cocaine entering the United States, presumably
added by suppliers in an effort to increase cocaine volumes and enhance the perceived quality of the drug.5,16 The prevalence of this
adulterant remained low through 2007 (detected in <10% of cocaine bricks seized by the United States Drug Enforcement Agency) but then rose
sharply. By 2010, approximately 80% of all seized stocks of cocaine contained levamisole,4 indicating that exposure to levamisole had become
almost ubiquitous among regular cocaine users. Indeed, 2 recent studies from inner-city hospitals identified levamisole in 63%-88% of urine
samples that tested positive for cocaine.3,18 Levamisole toxicity has re-emerged as a medical problem with multiple reports linking the use
of levamisole-adulterated cocaine to neutropenia, life-threatening agranulocytosis, and retiform purpura of the face and
extremities.26,36,37,42 As reported in pediatric cases, adults with retiform purpura linked to levamisole-adulterated cocaine have an
unusual combination of serologic abnormalities. First, they possess high titer ANCAs which stain in a perinuclear pattern (pANCA) due to
autoantibodies against multiple components of neutrophil granules, including myeloperoxidase (MPO), proteinase 3 (PR3), human neutrophil
elastase (HNE), lactoferrin, and cathepsin G. They also test positive for a lupus anticoagulant (LAC) and have APLAs, usually in the form of
IgM antibodies to cardiolipin.12,37 A conspicuous feature of clinical disease associated with levamisole-adulterated cocaine has been the
paucity of organ involvement aside from the skin and granulocytes. Two recent case reports, however, raised the possibility of an
association between the use of levamisole-adulterated cocaine and glomerulonephritis (GN).14,19 In the current study, we extend those
observations and report 4 cases of biopsy-proven pauci-immune GN seen at a single institution over a 2-year period. All patients were active
users of cocaine, had serologic abnormalities characteristic of levamisole-induced autoimmunity, and had at least 1 other clinical
manifestation linked to use of levamisole (retiform purpura, digital infarcts, or neutropenia). These observations suggest that use of
levamisole-adulterated cocaine can trigger a pauci-immune GN similar to that seen with the primary ANCA vasculitides, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (GPA) and microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). We reviewed the medical records of all cases of pauci-immune GN seen at San Francisco
General Hospital from 2010 through 2012. The study was approved by the San Francisco General Hospital institutional review board. For
inclusion in this series, patients had to have the following: 1) pauci-immune GN on renal biopsy, 2) cocaine exposure confirmed either by
patient history or by urine toxicology studies, and 3) serologic abnormalities characteristic of levamisole-induced autoimmunity. We defined
the latter as a positive test for ANCA in a perinuclear pattern (pANCA) by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) together with at least 1 of the
following: simultaneous presence of antibodies to MPO and PR3 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), a LAC detected by dilute Russell
viper venom time, or presence of IgM antibodies to cardiolipin. Because nearly 90% of cocaine in San Francisco is adulterated with
levamisole, we accepted cocaine use as a proxy for levamisole exposure.18 Renal biopsies were reviewed by a renal pathologist (KJ) to
confirm the presence of pauci-immune GN. We identified 3 female patients and 1 male patient who had biopsy-proven pauci-immune GN, used
cocaine, and had serologic abnormalities characteristic of levamisole-induced autoimmunity. All patients reported smoking cocaine, and all
tested positive for cocaine on urine toxicology screens, except for 1 who was anuric. Each had some form of clinical disease known to be
associated with levamisole, either neutropenia or cutaneous disease manifesting as retiform purpura or digital infarcts (Table 1). All
patients had elevated levels of serum creatinine, and the 3 patients who were not anuric on presentation had proteinuria and an active
urinary sediment, defined as the presence of dysmorphic red blood cells or the presence of red blood cell casts (Table 2). All 4 patients
had pANCAs in titers ≥1:320 as measured by IIF. Two patients had antibodies to both MPO and PR3, whereas the others had antibodies to MPO
alone. Three patients either tested positive for a LAC or had a circulating IgM antibody to cardiolipin (Table 3). Clinical Characteristics
of Patients Presenting With Pauci-Immune Glomerulonephritis Associated With Levamisole-Adulterated Cocaine Exposure Renal Manifestations and
Outcomes of Patients Presenting With Pauci-Immune Glomerulonephritis Associated With Levamisole-Adulterated Cocaine Exposure Immunologic and
Coagulation Profiles of Patients Presenting With Pauci-Immune Glomerulonephritis Associated With Levamisole-Adulterated Cocaine Exposure
Kidney biopsies from each patient in this series demonstrated changes consistent with pauci-immune GN. Three biopsies (Cases 1, 3, and 4)
exhibited evidence of recent/ongoing activity as supported by numerous cellular crescents and necrotizing lesions, while the other biopsy
(Case 2) showed more remote signs of glomerular injury with presence of fibrous and fibrocellular crescents. The latter biopsy also revealed
a higher percentage of global glomerulosclerosis and a greater degree of interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, findings associated with
chronic stages of GN. Otherwise, the nonsclerotic glomeruli in all biopsies were essentially unremarkable with no significant endocapillary
proliferation, mesangial widening, or mesangial hypercellularity. The biopsies showed no evidence of thrombotic microangiopathy or malignant
hypertension, which can be seen in association with cocaine use.13 The larger vessels within the renal parenchyma showed no evidence of
frank vasculitis. Immunofluorescence for IgG, IgM, IgA, C3 and C1q was negative in all cases, supporting the diagnosis of pauci-immune GN.
Ultrastructural analysis by electron microscopy confirmed the absence of electron dense immune-type deposits. Three of the 4 patients were
treated with short courses of prednisone and cyclophosphamide. Two of the treated patients had stable long-term improvement in their renal
function despite ongoing cocaine use. The remaining 2 patients developed end-stage renal disease and became dialysis-dependent. A 60-year-
old man with a history of chronic cocaine use was admitted with a 2-week illness characterized by polyarthralgia and the development of
retiform purpura on the upper extremities and overlying the zygomatic arches of the face. Serum creatinine was 1.60 mg/dL, increased from a
baseline of 0.60 mg/dL measured 4 months previously. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria and hematuria with dysmorphic red blood cells. A urine
toxicology screen was positive for cocaine. Serologic studies were notable for a high titer pANCA and the presence of antibodies to MPO and
PR3. He tested positive for a LAC and had IgM and IgG antibodies to cardiolipin. Biopsy of a purpuric lesion revealed congestion and
thrombosis of the superficial and mid-dermal vessels without evidence of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. A kidney biopsy showed pauci-immune GN
with focal necrotizing lesions and crescent formation (Figure 1A and 1B). Kidney biopsy histologic findings. A) Glomerulus from Case 1 with
a large cellular crescent (methenamine silver-periodic acid-Schiff; 400x). B) Glomerulus from Case 1 showing fibrin (arrow) of a necrotizing
lesion (trichrome; 400x). C) Medium power view of biopsy from Case 4 demonstrating a range of cellular to fibrocellular crescents. Features
of mild interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and interstitial inflammation are also noted (periodic acid-Schiff; 100x). D) Glomerulus
from Case 4 showing a small cellular crescent with associated fibrin of a necrotizing lesion (arrow) (hematoxylin & eosin; 400x). Three
daily intravenous doses of 500 mg methylprednisolone were administered, followed by oral prednisone 60 mg daily. During the 10-day
hospitalization, the skin lesions improved and the serum creatinine, which had peaked at 2.16 mg/dL, improved to 1.64 mg/dL. After
discharge, the patient continued using cocaine and discontinued all prescribed medications. Two weeks later, he was readmitted with
recurrent retiform purpura and a creatinine of 2.51 mg/dL. Urine microscopy revealed a persistently active urine sediment. Oral prednisone
was restarted, and he received a single 750 mg dose of intravenous cyclophosphamide. Over the next 2 weeks his skin lesions resolved, and
creatinine improved to 1.43 mg/dL. He was discharged on prednisone alone with plans for monthly infusions of cyclophosphamide but failed to
keep any appointments. On a visit to a different clinic 19 months after his renal biopsy, he had a serum creatinine of 1.37 mg/dL,
persistent hematuria and proteinuria, and a positive urine toxicology study for cocaine. A 49-year-old woman with hepatitis C, chronic leg
ulcers, and a history of cocaine abuse was admitted with painful purpuric lesions on the left leg and an associated cellulitis. Initial
laboratories on admission showed acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine of 1.88 mg/dL, elevated from her baseline of 0.50 mg/dL
measured 1 year previously. Urinalysis revealed hematuria and proteinuria, and examination of the urine sediment demonstrated red blood cell
casts. She received parenteral antibiotics with gradual improvement in her cellulitis. Creatinine remained stable throughout her
hospitalization, ranging from 1.72 to 1.88 mg/dL. Prior to discharge, she underwent serologic testing and a skin biopsy of the purpuric
lesions with plans to follow-up as an outpatient. Skin biopsy revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis and rare fibrin thrombi of the
superficial and deep dermal vessels. Serologic studies were notable for the presence of antibodies to MPO and IgM antibodies to cardiolipin.
She had no antibodies to PR3. She did not attend any of the scheduled outpatient follow-up appointments. Five months later, she presented
with hemoptysis and acute onset dyspnea. On presentation, she was hypoxemic with bilateral pulmonary infiltrates on chest radiograph. She
was severely anemic with a hemoglobin of 6.7 g/dL and had acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine of 7.31 mg/dL. Urinalysis revealed
hematuria and proteinuria, and examination of the urine sediment demonstrated dysmorphic red blood cells. A urine toxicology screen was
positive for cocaine. She was admitted to the intensive care unit with hypoxemic respiratory failure and started urgently on hemodialysis.
Bronchoscopy findings were consistent with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. She was transfused with several units of packed red blood cells and
received 3 daily intravenous doses of 1000 mg methylprednisolone, 3 sessions of plasma exchange, and a single intravenous dose of 500 mg
cyclophosphamide, followed by oral prednisone 60 mg daily. Serologic studies were notable for a high-titer pANCA, the presence of antibodies
to MPO, and a positive test for a LAC. Renal biopsy demonstrated presence of fibrous and fibrocellular crescents, consistent with pauci-
immune GN with evolving chronic changes due to prior activity. Following her initial course of therapy, the patient had no further alveolar
hemorrhage but remained dialysis-dependent. A 63-year-old woman with a long history of cocaine abuse presented to her primary care provider
with diffuse pruritis and arthralgia. Serum creatinine was 3.25 mg/dL, up from her baseline of 0.76 mg/dL measured 1 year previously, which
prompted a hospitalization for expedited workup. Upon admission, she was neutropenic with an absolute neutrophil count of 520 cells/mL, and
urinalysis revealed hematuria and proteinuria. A serologic workup was notable for a positive pANCA at a titer of 1:320, antibodies to MPO,
and a weakly positive IgM antibody to cardiolipin. A kidney biopsy revealed pauci-immune necrotizing and crescentic GN. Three daily
intravenous doses of 1000 mg methylprednisolone were administered. She was then transitioned to oral prednisone 60 mg daily and oral
cyclophosphamide 50 mg daily. One month after starting cyclophosphamide, she developed herpes ophthalmicus for which she was started on
intravenous acyclovir, and her cyclophosphamide was discontinued. She was poorly compliant with her outpatient medications and eventually
discontinued her prednisone. Serum creatinine remained stable at approximately 1.20 mg/dL over the ensuing 24 months despite intermittent
use of cocaine. A 43-year-old woman with hepatitis C and a history of cocaine abuse was admitted with altered mental status. Physical
examination revealed altered mental status, a pericardial friction rub, hemorrhagic bullae overlying her fingers, and distal digital
infracts. She was anuric and had a serum creatinine of 14.30 mg/dL. She received urgent hemodialysis for symptomatic uremia with improvement
in her mental status. Subsequent serologic workup revealed a pANCA with a titer of 1:5120, antibodies to both MPO and PR3, and IgM
antibodies to cardiolipin. A kidney biopsy demonstrated pauci-immune necrotizing and crescentic GN with presence of fibrocellular and
fibrous crescents (Figure 1C and 1D). She remained dialysis-dependent but continued to use cocaine and died from an intracerebral hemorrhage
several months following discharge. We report 4 cases of chronic cocaine users presenting with biopsy-proven pauci-immune crescentic GN, one
of whom had concurrent diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. All patients had clinical manifestations (skin disease or neutropenia) and serologic
abnormalities characteristic of the syndrome associated with levamisole-adulterated cocaine. Two other cases of biopsy-proven pauci-immune
GN linked to levamisole-adulterated cocaine have recently been published. Gulati et al reported on a 49-year-old Hispanic man who presented
with retiform purpura, acute kidney injury, and an active urinary sediment.14 The patient’s laboratory studies were notable for MPO
antibodies at high titers as well as a LAC. McGrath et al reported a case involving a 53-year-old woman who similarly presented with
retiform purpura, acute kidney injury, and an active urinary sediment.19 She tested positive for both MPO and PR3 at high titers. Both of
these patients underwent renal biopsies, which showed pauci-immune necrotizing crescentic GN. Taken together with the current series, these
reports support the emerging concern that prolonged use of levamisole-adulterated cocaine can lead to a drug-induced autoimmune disease
complicated by a clinically significant pauci-immune GN. In contrast to neutropenia and retiform purpura, pauci-immune GN was not observed
as a complication of levamisole when it was used therapeutically as an immunomodulatory agent. There was a reported case of renal
insufficiency and GN linked to the use of levamisole for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, but the renal biopsy revealed an immune-
complex-mediated proliferative GN with subepithelial deposits. After withdrawal of levamisole, the patient’s renal function improved.31
There were no purpuric rashes or cytopenias described in this case, which antedated the development of tests for ANCAs and APLAs. The
association of levamisole with a pauci-immune GN, therefore, appears to represent a new clinical phenomenon. The primary ANCA associated
vasculitides (AAVs) include GPA, MPA, and eosinophilic microscopic polyangiitis. These diseases affect multiple organ systems including the
upper airways, lung parenchyma, peripheral nerves, skin, and kidneys. The drug-induced AAVs caused by agents such as hydralazine and
propylthiouracil (PTU) manifest with clinical features that overlap to a significant degree with the primary forms of the disease,
particularly MPA.7,10 A similar spectrum of organ involvement appears to occur in patients with disease associated with the use of
levamisole-adulterated cocaine.19 Given variations in the treatment and prognosis of these different vasculitides, it is important to
differentiate levamisole-induced disease from the primary and other secondary forms of AAV. It has been previously noted that ANCA
serologies themselves allow for differentiation of the primary and drug-induced AAVs.10,39 Patients with disease associated with levamisole-
adulterated cocaine tend to develop high to extremely high titer ANCAs when measured by IIF, most often in a perinuclear staining pattern.
The ANCA antibodies in these and other cases of drug-induced AAV are directed at multiple antigenic targets within neutrophilic granules,
primarily MPO, HNE, cathepsin G, and lactoferrin.7,10,12,15,32,33 HNE and cathepsin G share epitopes with PR3, and antibodies to these can
result in a falsely positive anti-PR3 immunoassay due to cross reactivity. It is therefore possible to see a high titer pANCA and a
discordantly positive anti-PR3 antibody in those with drug-induced AAV.30,38,39 In contrast, the primary AAVs demonstrate modest ANCA titers
on IIF due to antibodies against either PR3 or MPO rather than multiple neutrophilic antigens.38,39 Unlike the primary AAVs, many agents
linked to drug-induced AAVs, including levamisole-adulterated cocaine, have also been shown to lead to positive antinuclear antibodies
(ANAs).7,32 Though clinical and serologic similarities exist among the drug-induced AAVs, the discriminating features of the illness
associated with levamisole-adulterated cocaine remain its unique cutaneous manifestations (retiform purpura), the frequent occurrence of
neutropenia, and the presence of APLAs and a LAC. Cocaine use, independent of the presence of adulterants, is associated with varying
rheumatic manifestations. These include cocaine-induced midline destructive lesion (CIMDL), organ specific and systemic vasculitides, and
vascular disease related to stimulant-induced vasospasm.11 Despite the widespread use of cocaine, CIMDL and cocaine-induced vasculitis
remain relatively uncommon. When these clinical manifestations do occur, they are associated with 1 of 3 serologic profiles which include:
no circulating autoantibodies in those with organ limited disease,6,17,21 a positive cANCA and PR3 antibody in those with multi-systemic
disease mirroring GPA,24 and a positive pANCA and PR3 antibody in those with CIMDL.35 The unexpected serologic discrepancy seen with CIMDL
is due to the presence of antibodies to HNE. Antibodies directed at HNE have not been detected in patients with GPA and are rarely reported
in MPA and eosinophilic microscopic polyangiitis.38,39 Because cocaine, like levamisole, can induce loss of tolerance to multiple targets
within the neutrophilic granule, one must rely on other features to differentiate pathology associated with unadulterated cocaine from that
of cocaine laced with levamisole. The unique cutaneous findings associated with levamisole are helpful if present, but otherwise one must
use discriminating laboratory features. Patients with clinical disease associated with unadulterated cocaine have not been shown to develop
APLAs or a LAC and do not develop neutropenia.8,12 The exact mechanism by which medications such as hydralazine, PTU, and levamisole induce
ANCA-associated syndromes remains unclear, but studies have implicated neutrophil extracellular traps (NETS) in the pathogenesis of these
conditions.23,29 NETs are comprised of a scaffold of chromatin DNA intermingled with histones and constituents of cytoplasmic PMN granules,
including MPO, PR3, and HNE. These elements are released from neutrophils during a unique form of cell death in response to various stimuli,
including intact pathogens, pathogen components, and high levels of reactive oxygen species. Antibodies and antibody-antigen complexes have
also been shown to induce NET release, though to a lesser degree.2 NETs may provide a source of intact antigen capable of inducing an
adaptive immune response, leading to the production of ANCAs.29 PTU in particular has been shown to cause production of disorganized NETs
that are resistant to normal homeostatic mechanisms of degradation. Immunization of rats with these abnormal NETs leads to pulmonary
capillaritis and pauci-immune GN.23 It is possible that levamisole, like PTU, acts via this mechanism to induce loss of tolerance to
multiple antigens from within neutrophil granules, resulting in clinical disease. Genetic and environmental factors likely play a role in
the pathogenesis of disease related to levamisole exposure. Patients carrying an HLAB27 allele are known to be at higher risk of developing
agranulocytosis when treated with levamisole.40 Demethylation of particular DNA sequences leading to altered expression of specific genes
appears to play an important role in the pathogenesis of lupus-like syndromes induced by procainamide and hydralazine.27,41 Whether
disruption of this type of epigenetic control also contributes to levamisole-induced autoimmunity is not known. Many patients on agents such
as PTU and hydralazine develop circulating ANCAs yet never develop vasculitis.15,33 This phenomenon is likely true in those exposed to
levamisole given the widespread use of cocaine, the high prevalence of levamisole in the drug supply, and the relatively low incidence of
retiform purpura, neutropenia, and GN in chronic cocaine users. The factors that distinguish those who develop clinical disease from those
who do not remain unclear. One important factor seems to be the chronicity of drug exposure. Patients with drug-induced AAVs and internal
organ involvement have typically been exposed to offending agents for prolonged periods of time, often on the order of years. With regard to
levamisole-adulterated cocaine, it is only in the past several years that cases of pauci-immune GN linked to levamisole have emerged. These
more recent cases may reflect the effect of chronic exposure to levamisole, which has now been present in the illicit cocaine supply since
2005. With this timeline in mind, agranulocytosis, retiform purpura, and circulating autoantibodies may represent an earlier phase of
levamisole-induced disease. With further exposure, patients may be at increased risk of developing renal involvement. Why patients
previously treated with prolonged courses of therapeutic levamisole alone did not develop pauci-immune GN is unknown. It may be that cocaine
acts synergistically with levamisole to result in a more advanced clinical phenotype. Alternatively, renal involvement may represent a dose
dependent effect of levamisole or a variable response related to the route of drug administration. All patients in the current series
reported smoking crack cocaine whereas all patients on therapeutic doses of levamisole in the past took oral formulations. The treatment of
drug-induced AAVs due to hydralazine and PTU provides a helpful framework for strategies in those patients with end-organ damage associated
with exposure to levamisole-adulterated cocaine. The mainstay of therapy for drug-induced AAVs is withdrawal of the offending agent. For
patients with end-organ involvement (GN or pulmonary hemorrhage), short courses of immunosuppressives appear to be efficacious and result in
durable remission rates provided that patients are identified early.9,10 Patients with pulmonary hemorrhage may be treated with
plasmapheresis in addition to immunosuppression. In the current series, 3 of the 4 patients were treated with short courses of prednisone
and cyclophosphamide. Although they were counseled to abstain from cocaine, all continued to use the drug. It is noteworthy that despite
these relapses and presumed repeated exposures to levamisole, short courses of immunosuppressive therapy were associated with improvement
and stabilization of renal function in 2 patients over the course of 19–24 months. The other patients in the series remained dialysis-
dependent, but they initially presented with more advanced renal disease. In contrast, the case reported by Gulati et al was treated in the
same manner as a primary AAV with a short course of prednisone, 4 infusions of rituximab, and maintenance with azathioprine. This treatment
course was associated with a partial remission and interval improvement in the patient’s creatinine to a new baseline. The case presented by
McGrath et al received an unknown course of immunosuppressives, which was also associated with a partial remission. These cases suggest that
durable responses can be achieved with short courses of aggressive immunosuppressive therapy even in the face of ongoing exposure to
levamisole. It is not known however whether successfully treated patients will ultimately relapse if re-exposed to levamisole-adulterated
cocaine on a persistent basis. Since 88% of urine samples testing positive for cocaine at San Francisco General Hospital also contain
levamisole,18 we assumed that all patients with a history of cocaine use were exposed to levamisole. No confirmatory studies were performed
to verify levamisole in patient samples from the current series. We limited the scope of this series to include only patients with biopsy-
proven pauci-immune GN. It is possible that there are other forms of GN, such as immune complex-mediated disease, that are associated with
levamisole use. Finally, no firm conclusions can be drawn regarding the efficacy of any of the therapeutic interventions we describe. We did
not conduct a therapeutic trial, and the natural history of pauci-immune GN associated with levamisole remains uncertain. In conclusion,
levamisole-adulterated cocaine not only results in retiform purpura and neutropenia, but can also lead to a pauci-immune GN, and possibly
pulmonary hemorrhage, in the setting of chronic drug exposure. There are unique exam and laboratory findings that help differentiate the
syndrome associated with levamisole-adulterated cocaine from the primary and drug-induced AAVs. Important discriminating laboratory features
include the presence of APLAs and LACs in combination with high titer ANCAs measured by IIF and positive antibodies to multiple constituents
of the neutrophilic granule. The mainstay of treatment is abstinence from cocaine and, by extension, levamisole. Though additional
observations are needed, it appears that those patients with severe end-organ involvement can be treated with short courses of
immunosuppressives without maintenance regimens. Cocaine is a common drug of abuse. In 2008, an estimated 1.9 million individuals in the
United States reported cocaine use within the past month, of which approximately 19% were current crack users.1 In light of this widespread
use and the high prevalence of levamisole in the illicit cocaine supply in the United States, clinicians may expect cases of drug-induced
AAV with internal organ involvement to occur with greater frequency in the future. Given the divergent treatment strategies for primary and
drug-induced AAVs, it is important for medical providers to maintain a high level of suspicion for disease associated with levamisole in
long-term cocaine users. Abbreviations: AAV = ANCA-associated vasculitis, ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, APLA =
antiphospholipid antibody, ANA = antinuclear antibody, cANCA = cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, CIMDL = cocaine-induced
midline destructive lesion, ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, GN = glomerulonephritis, GPA = granulomatosis with polyangiitis, HNE
= human neutrophil elastase, IIF = indirect immunofluorescence, LAC = lupus anticoagulant, MPA = microscopic polyangiitis, MPO =
myeloperoxidase, NET = neutrophil extracellular trap, pANCA = perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, PR3 = proteinase 3, PTU =
propylthiouracil. Financial support and conflicts of interest: Funding was provided in part by the Rosalind Russell Arthritis Foundation and
US Department of Veterans Affairs (AQC). DST is supported by K23DK094850 from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
