Neovaginal perforation can develop following sexual intercourse in patients that have undergone male to female gender reassignment surgery.
In such cases urinary tract symptoms may mimic acute cystitis and acute pyelonephritis. A 33-year old white transsexual patient presented to
the emergency department with dysuria, hematuria, difficulty urinating, widespread groin pain, bilateral side pain, clear vaginal discharge,
abdominal pain, and nausea 2-3 h after sexual intercourse. Abdominal tomography showed fluid around the vaginal cuff and air throughout the
abdomen. Vaginography showed contrast leaking to the abdomen from the vaginal cuff. The patient was considered as vaginal perforation and
admitted to clinic. Vaginal perforation should be considered in transsexual patients that develop urinary system symptoms following sexual
intercourse. Such cases were treated medically without the need surgery. In male to female gender reassignment surgery penile and scrotal
skin graft, or the rectosigmoid intestinal segment can be used to create a neovagina [1, 2]. Creation of a neovagina using penile and
scrotal skin graft is associated with more scar tissue and insufficient vaginal cuff length [3, 4]; therefore, the likelihood of vaginal
perforation following sexual intercourse is elevated in such cases. Herein we present the radiological findings and treatment in a 33-year
old gender reassignment surgery patient with vaginal perforation. A 33-year old white transsexual patient presented to the emergency
department with dysuria, hematuria, difficulty urinating, widespread groin pain, bilateral side pain, clear vaginal discharge, abdominal
pain, and nausea 2-3 h after sexual intercourse. The patient had undergone male to female gender reassignment surgery 7 years earlier, in
which penile and scrotal skin graft was used to create a neovagina. Physical examination showed that there was sensitivity in the suprapubic
region, costovertebral angle sensitivity, and defense and rebound. Laboratory findings included red blood cells 120 u/L in the full urine
test and leukocytes 19 × 109 cells/L in the full blood count; other laboratory findings were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography showed fluid
around the vaginal cuff and abdominal tomography showed fluid around the vaginal cuff and air throughout the abdomen (Figure 1a and b). As
vaginal perforation was considered, cystography was performed to search for extravasation originating from the bladder, but extravasation
was not observed (Figure 1c). Examination by the gynecology department showed clear discharge localized in the neovagina. A vaginal contrast
examination was performed. Vaginography showed contrast leaking to the abdomen from the vaginal cuff (Figure 1d).Figure 1 Axial pelvic
tomography image; free fluid (white arrow) around the vaginal cuff (black arrow) (a). Axial abdominal tomography image; Free air (white
arrow) in the subdiaphragmatic region (b). Cystography image; Contrast extravasation was not observed (c). Vaginography image; Contrast
leaking (white arrow) into the abdomen from the vaginal cuff (d). Axial pelvic tomography image; free fluid (white arrow) around the vaginal
cuff (black arrow) (a). Axial abdominal tomography image; Free air (white arrow) in the subdiaphragmatic region (b). Cystography image;
Contrast extravasation was not observed (c). Vaginography image; Contrast leaking (white arrow) into the abdomen from the vaginal cuff (d).
The patient’s abdominal pain, examination findings, and laboratory findings were evaluated by a specialist general surgeon. The patient was
admitted to clinic. As there was no pathology other than vaginal perforation based on abdominal ultrasonography and abdominal tomography,
and as the neovagina appeared normal upon vaginal examination, it was thought that with close monitoring the patient would recover and a
combination of ceftriaxone 1000 mg b.i.d. and metronidazole 500 mg t.i.d. antibiotherapy was started and continued for 7 d. The patient’s
abdominal pain became less severe and the fluid discharge from the neovagina stopped. On d 4 of the treatment the leukocyte count returned
to normal, and on d 7 of the treatment the patient was discharged with oral antibiotic therapy. At the 1-month follow-up examination the
patient was problem-free. At 6 weeks post treatment the patient recommenced sexual intercourse and at the 6-month follow-up had no
complaints. Penile and scrotal skin graft is the most common method for creating a neovagina, as it is associated with the lowest
complication rate and is the easiest to perform; however, there are some disadvantages to the method, such as scar formation, an
insufficient vaginal cavity, a narrow vaginal, intravaginal hair, the need for continuous dilatation, and the need for lubrication for
sexual intercourse [3, 4]. The literature includes 2 case reports of neovaginal perforation. Amirian et al. reported a case of neovaginal
perforation after washing with a douche pump and Giovanni Liguari et al. reported spontaneous perforation in the neovagina after stenosis.
To the best of our knowledge the present case report is the first to describe neovaginal perforation following sexual intercourse. In
addition, in the 2 earlier cases the sigmoid colon segment was used for the creation of the neovagina. In the presented case scrotal and
penile skin graft was used, and to the best of our knowledge this is the first report of neovaginal perforation in a neovagina formed from
scrotal and penile skin graft. Franco et al. reported that in transsexual individuals in which penile and scrotal skin graft was used
neovaginal length was 8-10 cm, which is longer than the natural vagina ; however, even with a vagina of 8-10 cm created using penile and
scrotal skin graft the expansion and extension potential of the neovagina in those cases were lower than those of a normal vagina and those
created using the sigmoid segment. As such, the likelihood of vaginal perforation during sexual intercourse is higher in such cases. In
transsexual surgery sacrospinous ligament fixation of the neovagina is performed in order to prevent prolapse during the postoperative
period . By inhibiting the mobilization capability of the neovagina such fixation facilitates perforation during sexual intercourse. In the
presented case there was an indication for laparotomy because of the acute abdominal findings; however, as the patient had undergone surgery
7 years earlier it was thought that performing laparotomy again could have resulted in additional complications. Moreover, the neovaginal
perforation case reported by Amirian et al. was followed up conservatively and the patient recovered without any surgical intervention . As
seen in previous studies on transsexual females in which penile skin was used to create the neovagina, the flora of the neovagina is formed
of aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms in the mixed structure found in skin and intestinal flora [9, 10]. In the presented case
administration of antibiotherapy that was effective on both aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms, and close monitoring resulted in complete
recovery without the need for surgery. In transsexual patients that present with urinary system symptoms following sexual intercourse
vaginal perforation should always be a consideration. Minimal perforations in such patients can be treated medically, without surgery.
Written informed consent was optained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions HD drafted the report. OO, NC and OE cared for patient. All authors reviewed the report and approved final
version of the manuscript.
