Gastric cancer in remnant stomach is a rare tumor but with poor prognosis. Compared with conventional open surgery, laparoscopic gastrectomy
has potential benefits for these patients due to advantages resulting from its minimally invasive approach. Herein, we report on three
patients with gastric cancer in remnant stomach who underwent laparoscopic total gastrectomy with intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy
successfully. The operative time was 280, 250 and 225 minutes, the estimated blood loss was 100, 80 and 50 ml and the length of
postoperative hospital stay was seven, eight and nine days respectively. Our experience has suggested that laparoscopic total gastrectomy
with intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy can be a safe, feasible and promising option for patients with gastric cancer in remnant stomach.
Gastric cancer in remnant stomach is categorized as carcinoma arising from the remnant stomach after partial gastrectomy, regardless of the
histology of the primary lesion (benign or malignant) or its risk of recurrence . It has a poor prognosis and surgical resection remains the
only effective modality of treatment. Most patients cannot withstand the huge blow caused by conventional open surgery because of their poor
general condition. Therefore, laparoscopic surgery, well known for its minimally invasive advantages, is likely a preferable choice for
these patients. However, the technical difficulty required for the procedure remains the major concern, especially for the safety of
laparoscopic adhesiolysis and intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy. Our surgical term introduced the laparoscopic technique on the gastric
cancer in remnant stomach successfully in our department based on our experience in the laparoscopic approach for diseases of digestive
tract . Herein, we report three cases of laparoscopic total gastrectomy with intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy (LTGIE) for gastric cancer
in remnant stomach, with detailed operative procedures to evaluate its safety and feasibility, as well as to summarize surgical experience.
This study protocol was prospectively approved by the ethics committee of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University
and informed consent was signed by each patient prior to surgery. The patient was a 55-year-old male who underwent a distal gastrectomy with
a Billroth II gastrojejunostomy for a peptic ulcer 30 years previously. The patient underwent a gastroscopy because of abdomen discomfort
and a mass was found at the lesser curvature of the remnant stomach. A histological examination confirmed adenocarcinoma and a further
examination did not reveal any distant metastasis. The patient’s position and the placement of trocars were similar to our previous studies
. The harmonic scalpel and scissors (Harmonic Ace scalpel, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc, Cincinnati, OH) were used to separate the adhesions
between the bowels, liver and abdominal wall (Figure 1). The remaining lesser omentum was dissected, exposing the common hepatic artery,
splenic artery and the left gastric artery (Figure 2). The left gastric artery was dissected at the origin. After isolating the
gastrointestinal anastomotic site (Figure 3), the input and output jejunal loops were lifted. With endoscopic linear staplers (Endocutter 60
staple; Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc, Cincinnati, OH), both input and output jejunal loops were transected at a point 5 cm distal to the
anastomotic site. The remaining omentum was isolated to the splenic flexure. The short gastric vessels and the gastrosplenic ligament were
dissected, mobilizing the stomach and exposing the esophagus.Figure 1 Separation of adhesions between the bowels and abdominal wall. Figure
2 Exposure of the common hepatic artery, splenic artery and the left gastric artery. Figure 3 Isolating the gastrointestinal anastomotic
site. Separation of adhesions between the bowels and abdominal wall. Exposure of the common hepatic artery, splenic artery and the left
gastric artery. Isolating the gastrointestinal anastomotic site. An intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy was performed using endoscopic linear
staplers. Two small holes were created; one on the anti-mesenteric side of the jejunum and the other on the esophageal stump. Each jaw of
the endoscopic linear stapler was inserted into the holes. After stapling, a side-to-side esophagojejunostomy was constructed (Figure 4A).
The common opening was closed and the esophagogastric junction was divided using endoscopic linear staplers (Figure 4B). The side-to-side
enteroenterostomy to the Roux loop was made about 35 cm below the esophagojejunal anastomosis using an endoscopic linear stapler. The common
opening was closed using the hand-suturing technique.Figure 4 Side-to-side intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy. A. Each jaws of linear
stapler is inserted into holes on the esophageal stump and the jejunum, then the linear stapler is fired. B. The common opening is closed
using linear stapler. Side-to-side intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy. A. Each jaws of linear stapler is inserted into holes on the
esophageal stump and the jejunum, then the linear stapler is fired. B. The common opening is closed using linear stapler. The patient was a
76-year-old male who underwent radical subtotal gastrectomy with a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy for gastric cancer six years previously. The
latest annual review of gastroscopy revealed a lesion in the remnant stomach and a histologically confirmed adenocarcinoma. Preoperative
examinations did not show any distant metastasis.Dividing adhesion and mobilizing the stomach similar to case 1, the remnant stomach was
lifted up; a purse-string suture was placed on the esophagus. A hole was made at the esophagogastric junction using a harmonic scalpel. The
anvil (ECS 25, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc, Cincinnati, OH) was introduced into the esophageal stump through the hole, then the purse-string
suture was tightened (Figure 5A). The esophagogastric junction was divided and the remnant stomach was extracted. The circular stapler was
introduced into the jejunum through the jejunal stump, attached with the anvil and fired (Figure 5B). The jejunal stump was closed with
endoscopic linear staplers.Figure 5 End-to-side intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy. A. The anvil is introduced into the esophageal stump
through the hole, then the purse-string suture is tightened. B. The circular stapler is introduced into the jejunum through the jejunal
stump, attached with the anvil and fired. End-to-side intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy. A. The anvil is introduced into the esophageal
stump through the hole, then the purse-string suture is tightened. B. The circular stapler is introduced into the jejunum through the
jejunal stump, attached with the anvil and fired. A 75-year-old male was admitted for repeated abdominal pain. He underwent a distal
gastrectomy with a Billroth II gastrojejunostomy for a peptic ulcer 30 years previously. An adenocarcinoma near the anastomotic site of the
stomach was found and a further examination did not find any distant metastasis. The patient underwent the operation as in case 1. The three
patients underwent entirely laparoscopic procedures without conversion. The operative time was 280, 250 and 225 minutes, the estimated blood
loss was 100, 80 and 50 ml and the number of retrieved lymph nodes was 18, 10 and 22, respectively. Their postoperative course was
uneventful; the three patients were discharged at postoperative day seven, eight and nine respectively. One patient is alive with no
evidence of tumor recurrence. One patient (case 1) suffered tumor recurrence at 14 months after the operation and died at 17 months after
the operation. One patient (case 2) died from Alzheimer’s 19 months after the operation, with no evidence of tumor recurrence. The clinical
characteristics, surgical outcomes and long-term outcomes are shown in Table 1.Table 1 Clinical characteristics and outcomes of the three
patients Case 1Case 2Case 3Age/sex55/M76/M75/MPrevious diseasePUGCPUPrior anastomosisB-IIR-YB-IITime since prior operation
(years)30630Operation time (minutes)280250225Intraoperative blood loss (mL)1008050Retrieved lymph nodes181022First flatus
(days)235Postoperative oral intake (days)345Postoperative hospital stay (days)789Follow-up period (months)171914GC, gastric cancer; PU,
peptic ulcer; R-Y, Roux-en-Y; B-II, Billroth II. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of the three patients GC, gastric cancer; PU, peptic
ulcer; R-Y, Roux-en-Y; B-II, Billroth II. The incidence of gastric cancer in remnant stomach is about 3 to 5% [7, 8]. Previous reports show
gastric cancer in remnant stomach may be associated with the lower acidic environment in the gastric stump, duodenogastric reflux,
Helicobacter pylori infection and Billroth II reconstruction [9, 10]. Gastric cancer in remnant stomach has often been described as having a
poor clinical outcome, with five-year survival rates of between 7 and 33% in previous studies [11, 12], and surgery is still the mainstay
way to cure. Many patients with gastric cancer in remnant stomach are aged, with denutrition from prior gastrectomy. Thus, it is a great
challenge for them to undergo conventional open surgery uneventfully and some patient-friendly procedures, such as laparoscopic procedures,
are needed. Laparoscopic procedures for gastric cancer have gradually gained acceptance worldwide, and especially in some East Asian
countries it has become the preferably choice due to advantages resulting from its minimally invasive approach [13, 14]. However, the
technical complexity of the procedure caused by adhesion and the anatomical deterioration has compelled many surgeons to discontinue their
trials. Severe intraperitoneal adhesion was previously considered as contraindicative for laparoscopic procedures. With the development of
the laparoscopic devices and surgical skill, laparoscopic procedures nowadays are performed in the treatment of postoperative adhesive ileus
and incisional hernia [15, 16]. Thus, it is possible to perform laparoscopic adhesiolysis safely on patients with gastric cancer in remnant
stomach. Moreover, the laparoscopic magnified view allows adhesiolysis to be more meticulous than open surgery. We also believe that
insertion of the first trocar in the open method can reduce risk of intestinal injury, and great care is needed to avoid injuring the
colonic arteries and the colon when separating severe adhesion between mesocolon and jejunum. To date, a few laparoscopic procedures for
gastric cancer in remnant stomach have been reported and most were laparoscopic-assisted gastrectomy (LAG) . Kwon et al. reported LAG are
technically feasible approaches for the management of remnant gastric cancer for experienced surgeons . However, LAG requires mini-
laparotomy, which appears to spoil it’s minimally invasiveness advantages. Some surgeons have reported that laparoscopic gastrectomy with
intracorporeal anastomosis has advantages over LAG, such as better cosmesis, less pain and less intraoperative blood loss [21, 22].
Additionally, LAG is not suitable for obese patients or those with a short esophageal stump . Forceful tension and limited vision will cause
tearing of the structure near the anastomosis, leading to a higher risk of fistula. Therefore, we chose to perform LTGIE for our patients.
In our studies, the patients’ postoperative outcomes are consistent with previous studies , with a fast recovery and short hospital stay.
The technical difficulty of intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy is another critical obstacle for surgical safety. To overcome this problem,
some modified techniques have been reported [25, 26]. These methods help to simplify the procedure of reconstruction and shorten the
operation time. The most representative method is the side-to-side approach using an endoscopic linear staple. With this method, the
anastomosis is not dependent on the size of the esophagus or the jejunum, but the endoscopic linear staple. A large anastomosis can be
easily achieved, imposing less risk of anastomotic stricture. In our study two cases were successfully performed with this method with no
anastomosis-related postoperative complications. Also, one patient had a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy during a prior operation in our study.
To preserve the Roux limb as long as possible, considering proper length of the Roux limb to protect the esophagus from entero-esophageal
reflux, an end-to-side anastomosis seemed to be the most suitable approach. As a representative technique for intracorporeal end-to-side
esophagojejunostomy, the OrVil™ (anvil) technique facilitates the conventional intracorporeal anastomosis and is time-saving. However, this
technique may bring the risks of oral bacterium infection and injure the esophagus during insertion and it was unavailable in our
institution. Thus, we performed the intracorporeal anastomosis with a conventional circular stapler rather than the OrVil™ technique. LTGIE
can be a safe, feasible and promising option for patients suffering from gastric cancer in remnant stomach, with advantages of being a less
invasive procedure and having a faster recovery time. Written informed consents were obtained from the patients for the publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. Laparoscopic total gastrectomy with intracorporeal esophagojejunostomy Laparoscopic-assisted
gastrectomy. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YPM, XWX and KC performed
the operation. JQC, DW and YCZ collected case data. Pan Y wrote the manuscript. YPM proofread and revised the manuscript. All authors
approved the version to be published. This work was supported by Zhejiang Key Subject of Medical Science Foundation (grant number:
11-CX-21).
