A 41-year-old man was initially evaluated in the emergency department for a 2-month history of shortness of breath, abdominal distension,
scrotal swelling, and left inguinal pain. Past history included long-term use of intravenous drugs, extensive and current alcohol use with
evidence of cirrhosis based on laboratory findings, and imaging and seropositivity for hepatitis C antibody without measurable viremia. He
also had a history of sustaining an upper abdominal stab wound requiring exploratory laparotomy in the early 1990s. He denied fevers,
rigors, night sweats, weight loss, or skin rashes. Initial evaluation revealed an ill appearing man with tachycardia (heart rate
120 beats/min) with mild hypotension (blood pressure 85–105/50–60 mmHg), and tachypnea (respiratory rate 20–25/min) requiring 2 L/min
supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula to maintain a blood oxygen saturation >95 %. He had distant heart sounds with tachycardia and regular
rhythm without murmurs or gallops. He had jugular venous distension with a positive Kussmaul’s sign and pulsus paradoxus. There was
significant abdominal distention present with a fluid wave. He had stigmata of chronic liver disease with spider angiomata noted and
collateral venous distension in the abdominal wall. Furthermore, he had scrotal swelling and bilateral lower extremity edema. He was
admitted to the hospital’s Medicine Service. On admission, a chest radiograph revealed enlargement of the cardiac silhouette (Fig. 1). A
bedside echocardiogram illustrated a large pericardial effusion with evidence of hemodynamic compromise, including right atrial and right
ventricular diastolic collapse, a >30 % respiratory variability in the tricuspid and mitral valve flow rates, and a swinging cardiac motion
consistent with the presence of cardiac tamponade demanding urgent intervention.Fig. 1Chest radiograph with findings of cardiac silhouette
enlargement, pleural effusions, and pulmonary edema. Echocardiography confirmed that cardiac silhouette enlargement represented a large
pericardial effusion without cardiac chamber enlargement Chest radiograph with findings of cardiac silhouette enlargement, pleural
effusions, and pulmonary edema. Echocardiography confirmed that cardiac silhouette enlargement represented a large pericardial effusion
without cardiac chamber enlargement Admission laboratory values revealed a normal white blood cell count, a mild macrocytic anemia (mean
corpuscular volume 95 fL) with a hemoglobin of 12.1 g/dL, a hematocrit of 36 %, and thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 84,000/μL.
Tests of liver function revealed serum concentrations of albumin of 2.2 g/dL (N > 3.5 g/dL), total bilirubin of 3.1 mg/dL, with direct
bilirubin of 1.9 mg/dL, an aspartate aminotransferase of 83 U/mL, an alanine aminotransferase of 37 U/mL, an alkaline phosphatase of
106 U/mL (upper limits of normal 150 U/mL), and a γ-glutamyl transpeptidase of 48 U/mL (upper limits of normal <98 U/L). Studies of
coagulation revealed an elevated prothrombin time (PT) of 21 s and an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.87. Abdominal paracentesis
revealed a serum albumin-to-ascites gradient (SAAG) >1.1 g/dL, and a total protein concentration of <2.5 g/dL, consistent with portal
hypertension: The total white blood cell count was 220/mm3, with 22 % neutrophils. These results were compatible with the diagnosis of an
uninfected ascites due to portal hypertension as a probable consequence of his cirrhosis. The initial chest radiograph revealed
cardiomegaly, bilateral pulmonary edema, and minimal pleural effusions (Fig. 1). Ultrasound scan of the right upper quadrant revealed a
nodular liver consistent with cirrhosis with evidence of portal hypertension such as mild splenomegaly and large volume ascites with no
space-occupying lesion was identified. Admission pericardiocentesis had an opening pressure of 20 mmHg and, after removal of 1.5 L of serous
pericardial fluid and placement of a drain, a closing pressure of 9 mmHg. Pericardial fluid analysis revealed protein concentrations and
other characteristics identical to those found in the ascitic fluid: All pericardial cultures were negative, and no organisms were seen.
Otherwise, the echocardiogram was relatively normal, as was cardiac function. Over the succeeding 24 h, 3 L of fluid drained from the
pericardial sac, as did an additional 3 L during the subsequent 24-h period. It was suspected that ascitic fluid was exiting through the
pericardial drain. During investigation, a mildly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 28 mm/h and serum concentrations of
C-reactive protein of 1.1 mg/dL, creatine phosphokinase of 101 U/L, aldolase of 6.1 U/L, and lactate dehydrogenase of 398 U/L were all
noted. Serum lipids and triglycerides were unremarkable. Investigation for the etiology of chronic liver disease revealed a serum ferritin
of 113 ng/mL, negative anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, antinuclear antibody, and anti-liver kidney microsomal
antibodies, and negative virologic evidence for hepatitis A or B. Hepatitis C Ab was positive, but serum hepatitis C virus was undetectable.
Serum α-1 anti-trypsin and ceruloplasmin, serum copper, and TSH concentrations were normal. Serological investigations for a possible
rheumatological disease were unremarkable as well as infectious evaluation for HIV, Lyme disease, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A PET/CT
scan revealed no FDG-avid focus in any area. Since decreased pericardial fluid volume was noted on the fourth and fifth hospital days, the
pericardial drain was removed. Two days later, he became progressively dyspneic with repeat chest X-ray showing bilateral pleural effusions,
cardiomegaly, and diffuses pulmonary edema. A radionuclide SPECT scan was then performed following injection of 5.11 mCi 99mTechnetium-
labeled, macroaggregated albumin (MAA) into the peritoneal cavity. There was essentially no delay between the infusion of 99mTc-MAA and
imaging. Although dynamic imaging was performed, the uptake in the pericardial sac was only faint at 15 min, but clearly visible at 1 h. The
most impressive images were obtained at 4–24 h (Fig. 2), where there was circumferential pericardial radiotracer distribution.Fig. 2Axial
and multi-planar reconstructed fused SPECT-CT images show radiotracer uptake within a large pericardial effusion at 4–24 h post-infusion. No
significant 99mTc-MAA activity was present within the pleural effusions, which were felt to be cardiogenic in nature, rather than
representing hepatic hydrothorax Axial and multi-planar reconstructed fused SPECT-CT images show radiotracer uptake within a large
pericardial effusion at 4–24 h post-infusion. No significant 99mTc-MAA activity was present within the pleural effusions, which were felt to
be cardiogenic in nature, rather than representing hepatic hydrothorax Diuretic therapy and continued sodium restriction were initiated in
the hope of decreasing formation of ascites and consequently of pericardial effusion, but these measures were unsuccessful. Given ongoing
alcohol and illegal drug use, he was not a candidate for liver transplantation. Therefore, a transjugular intrahepatic porto-systemic shunt
(TIPS) was performed which greatly relieved his symptoms. A post-procedure chest radiograph was with markedly improved appearance of the
cardiac shadow and both lung fields (Fig. 3). Resolution of the ascites and pericardial effusion is illustrated in Fig. 4.Fig. 3Post-TIPS
chest radiograph shows restoration of a normal cardiac silhouette, resolution of pericardial and pleural effusions, and resolved cardiogenic
pulmonary edemaFig. 4Axial and multi-planar reformatted coronal CT images, 72 h after performing TIPS, confirm patency of the porto-systemic
shunt and the absence of ascites (left panel), with complete resolution of the pericardial effusion (right panel) Post-TIPS chest radiograph
shows restoration of a normal cardiac silhouette, resolution of pericardial and pleural effusions, and resolved cardiogenic pulmonary edema
Axial and multi-planar reformatted coronal CT images, 72 h after performing TIPS, confirm patency of the porto-systemic shunt and the
absence of ascites (left panel), with complete resolution of the pericardial effusion (right panel) A 41-year-old man with presumed
Laennec’s cirrhosis and a scar from an upper abdominal stab wound that had required exploratory laparotomy in early 1990s (initially not
apparent or mentioned on admission to the Medicine Service) presented with symptoms of pericardial tamponade and ascites. On his most recent
admission, placement of a pericardial drain was required through which drained 7.5 L of fluid. Despite diuretic therapy and sodium
restriction during hospitalization, after removal of pericardial drain, he sustained a rapid recurrence of the pericardial effusion. Work-up
for numerous etiologies, including infectious, rheumatologic, and neoplastic, were all essentially negative. On later questioning, this
patient volunteered that he had failed to recall that his initial stab wound had penetrated his pericardium. A subsequent radionuclide scan
revealed a fistulous communication between the peritoneal and pericardial spaces. Failing conventional therapy for ascites and ineligible
for liver transplantation, he underwent a potentially lifesaving TIPS procedure with complete resolution of his ascites and his pericardial
effusion. Pericardial effusion resulting from a communication between peritoneum and pericardium is reported very infrequently due to its
unusual occurrence. Pleural effusions are more commonly associated with hepatic cirrhosis and ascites as a result of embryological defects
in diaphragmatic membrane closure. Peritoneo–pleural communications can occur secondary to congenital fistulae in the lumbocostal triangle
of Bodaleck, the right retrosternal triangle of Morgagni or the left sternocostal triangle of Larrey . Under these conditions, ascitic fluid
will flow from the peritoneal to the pleural space, given that pressure in the pleural cavity is less than that of the peritoneal cavity,
more commonly on the right side, but followed by left. In this setting, pericardial effusion has been reported in 4–10 % of patients with
cirrhosis and up to 63 % of patients with decompensated cirrhosis related to the physiological junction of pericardium and pleura. Cheung et
al. in discussing a case of hepatic hydropericardium that resolved after orthotopic liver transplantation theorized that there are
diaphragmatic and pericardial fenestrations that facilitate accumulation of ascitic fluid in the pericardium. Mild-to-moderate pericardial
effusions, with only 16 mL of fluid, were reported in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis [17 of 27 patients (63 %) compared with 3 of 28
controls (11 %)] . Badillo et al. reported that all patients with hepatic hydrothorax have advanced liver disease, as defined by a mean
model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score of 16 at initial evaluation. Most patients (64/77; 83 %) reported were managed with diuretics
and/or thoracentesis, while 8 (10 %) underwent TIPS and 5 (7 %) underwent liver transplantation. A total of 44/77 (57 %) patients died
during a mean follow-up of 12 months. The average time from initial evaluation to death for all patients, including medical management,
TIPS, and liver transplant, was 368 versus 845 days for those who underwent TIPS. Using TIPS in patients with ascites and hepatic
hydrothorax has been reported, although infrequently, with prolonged survival , but little is known about hepatic causes of pericardial
effusion. Pericardial effusion causing cardiac tamponade occurred in a previously asymptomatic patient with a history of alcoholic liver
disease and upper abdominal trauma, raising the possibility of existence of a peritoneo–pericardial communication. Had the history been
given sufficient attention, a plethora of laboratory and imaging studies aimed at excluding multiple etiologies may have been avoided. The
definitive test was a radionuclide scan that revealed the communication between the peritoneal and pericardial spaces. It is likely that a
fistulous tract between peritoneum and pericardium, from a stab wound in the early 1990s, became manifest only after he developed
significant ascites due to decompensated cirrhosis and portal hypertension. The key to relieving the cardiac tamponade, caused by the
ascites passing through the fistula, was using TIPS to control the portal hypertension, ascites, and the resulting cardiac tamponade, which
proved lifesaving.
