Tick borne encephalitis is the most frequent vector-transmitted infectious disease of the central nervous system in Europe and Asia. The
disease caused by European subtype of tick borne encephalitis virus has typically a biphasic clinical course with the second phase
presenting as meningitis, meningoencephalitis, or meningoencephalomyelitis. Cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis is considered a condition sine
qua non for the diagnosis of neurologic involvement in tick borne encephalitis, which in routine clinical practice is confirmed by
demonstration of serum IgM and IgG antibodies to tick borne encephalitis virus. Here we present a patient from Slovenia, an area highly
endemic for tick borne encephalitis, with encephalitis but without cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis in whom tick borne encephalitis virus
infection of the central nervous system was demonstrated. Cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis is not mandatory in encephalitis caused by tick
borne encephalitis virus. In daily clinical practice, in patients with neurologic symptoms/signs compatible with tick borne encephalitis and
the risk of exposure to ticks in a tick borne encephalitis endemic region, the search for central nervous system infection with tick borne
encephalitis virus is warranted despite the lack of cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis. Tick borne encephalitis (TBE) is the most frequent
vector-transmitted infectious disease of the central nervous system (CNS) in Europe and Asia and is considered an emerging disease due to
its rising incidence and the spread of endemic areas in recent decades . TBE caused by European subtype of TBE virus (TBEV) has typically a
biphasic clinical course with the second phase presenting as meningitis, meningoencephalitis, or meningoencephalomyelitis . Cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) pleocytosis is considered a condition sine qua non for the diagnosis of CNS involvement in TBE, which in routine clinical
practice is confirmed by demonstration of serum IgM and IgG antibodies to TBEV . Cases of TBE with neurologic involvement but without CSF
pleocytosis have been published , however, only the case recently reported by Pöschl et al. was convincingly substantiated . Here we present
a patient from Slovenia, an area highly endemic for TBE , with clinical features of encephalitis, who fulfilled criteria for recent CNS
infection with TBEV although he had no CSF pleocytosis. A 79-year-old man with arterial hypertension and chronic venous ulcers on both
shins, fell ill acutely with diarrhea, fatigue and sleepiness in midsummer 2013. After a week, diarrhea stopped, but he became febrile up to
38.5°C and was no longer able to walk independently due to general weakness. As a beekeeper he had been exposed to ticks in the past but
could not remember having had a tick bite during the preceding few months. At admission to hospital on day 8 of his illness, he was
lethargic, disoriented, but without signs of meningeal irritation. His blood pressure was 133/83 mmHg, heart rate 99/min, breathing rate
30/min and axillary temperature 38.9°C. Routine laboratory blood tests revealed normal blood cell count, mild hyponatremia (Na 129; normal
135-145 mmol/l), and slightly elevated concentrations of C-reactive protein (32 mg/l; normal 0-5 mg/l), liver enzymes (aspartate
aminotransferase 0.73; normal ≤0.58 μkat/l, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 1.12 μkat/l; normal ≤0.92 μkat/l) and creatinine (101 μmol/l;
normal 44-97 μmol/l). CSF examination yielded elevated protein concentration (1.31 g/l; normal 0.15-0.45 g/l), but normal leukocyte count (3
× 106/l; normal ≤5 × 106/l) and glucose concentration. In the following days the patient remained febrile up to 39.4°C. On day 10, tremor of
hands and tongue appeared and his mental status deteriorated to somnolence. Computed tomography of the brain showed only mild
periventricular leukopathy. Repeated CSF analyses on day 14 and 23 revealed elevated protein concentrations (1.23, and 2.02 g/l,
respectively), but still no pleocytosis (CSF leukocyte count 1, and 2 × 106/l, respectively). PCR analyses of CSF for the presence of TBEV
on day 8 and 23 were negative as were for HSV 1, HSV 2, VZV, and enteroviruses. Based on serological results the patient did not have Lyme
neuroborreliosis. However, serum IgM and IgG antibodies to TBEV were demonstrated using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay - ELISA (Enzygnost
Anti-TBE/FSME Virus IgG, IgM; Siemens, Marburg, Germany) (Table 1). The follow-up levels of specific serum antibodies and the avidity of
specific serum IgG (12.7%, 15.4%, and 51.6% on day 14, 21, and 65, respectively) indicated recent infection with TBEV. In addition,
demonstration of intrathecal production of anti-TBEV IgM and IgG verified CNS infection with TBEV (Table 1). From day 14 the patient was no
longer febrile and his mental and physical status progressively improved. Hospitalization was prolonged because of hospital acquired
pneumonia which was treated with amoxicillin/clavulanate. At transfer to a nursing facility on day 32 the patient was afebrile, completely
oriented, feeble, but without focal neurological deficit. Routine laboratory test results were unremarkable.Table 1 Enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay findings Anti-TBEVIgM antibody index a IgG antibody index a IgM in serumIgG in serumIgM in CSFIgG in CSFDay
141.47378.40.60153.7NANADay 231.1331300.67689.748.640.2TBEV, tick-borne encephalitis virus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; NA, not available.
aAntibody index of intrathecal synthesis of anti-TBEV IgM and IgG calculated according to Reiber’s formula . Enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay findings TBEV, tick-borne encephalitis virus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; NA, not available. aAntibody index of intrathecal synthesis of
anti-TBEV IgM and IgG calculated according to Reiber’s formula . Presenting symptoms and signs of TBE are nonspecific and similar as in
acute aseptic meningoencephalitis of other etiologies with fever in 92%, vomiting in 38%, headache in 67-100%, altered consciousness in
12-35.5%, seizures in 0.3-3.3%, tremor in 7-78%, dysphasia in 0.7-3.8%, spinal nerve paralysis in 2.7-15%, and cranial nerve paralysis in
3.3-11% of cases . Accordingly, our patient with fever, altered consciousness and tremor of the hands and tongue had clinical indications of
acute encephalitis. In our patient, recent infection with TBEV was demonstrated by the presence of specific IgM and IgG antibodies in serum
and further substantiated with the appropriate increase in antibody levels and IgG avidity in convalescent samples. Since detailed history
revealed that he had not had TBE in the past, had not traveled outside Slovenia, nor was he vaccinated against TBE, yellow fever or Japanese
encephalitis, and he had negative serum antibodies against West Nile virus, the only potential coinfecting flavivirus in Slovenia, the
possibility of false positive serological results for TBE due to cross-reaction is highly improbable. In routine clinical practice the
finding of specific IgM and IgG serum antibodies in a patient residing in endemic area, who has clinical signs/symptoms of
meningitis/encephalitis associated with elevated CSF leukocyte count, is considered confirmatory for TBE . However, demonstration of recent
infection with TBEV by itself does not attest for CNS involvement; in fact the majority of infections with TBEV are asymptomatic or without
prominent morbidity . For a reliable diagnosis of unusual TBE cases such as ours without CSF pleocytosis, which is most likely rather rare
and therefore associated with low pre-test probability, not only evidence of a recent infection, but also evidence of CNS infection with
TBEV is needed. We were unable to demonstrate the presence of TBEV in CSF by PCR, which is not surprising in regard to earlier reports that
the virus can be detected by PCR in blood during the initial phase of TBE, but extremely rarely in blood or CSF during the second phase of
the disease . However, we ascertained CNS infection by demonstration of intrathecal synthesis of specific antibodies to TBEV, which is a
much more sensitive approach for verifying CNS infection. The main source of CSF antibodies are lymphocytes B, but in patients with TBE
lymphocytes B comprise only 3-5% of CSF lymphocyte population . Therefore, one may hypothesize, that the major source of CSF antibodies are
lymphocytes B accumulated in the perivascular spaces of brain parenchyma . In reports including large number of patients with proven TBE,
CSF pleocytosis was established in all cases . This finding, however, might be due to a selection bias because in these studies CSF
pleocytosis was one of the inclusion criteria for the diagnosis of TBE . Our case, together with the recently published case by Pöschl et
al. , and some earlier less convincing reports , show that CSF pleocytosis is not mandatory in patients with encephalitis caused by TBEV.
This is in accordance with the reports on encephalitis caused by some other viruses such as herpes simplex 1 in which about 3% of cases take
place with normal CSF leukocyte count . The frequency of encephalitis without CSF pleocytosis caused by TBEV infection remains to be
determined. However, the paucity of reports implies that such presentation is most probably very rare. The findings in our patient suggest
that in daily clinical practice, in patients with symptoms/signs of encephalitis compatible with TBE and the risk of exposure to ticks in a
TBE endemic region, the search for infection with TBEV is warranted despite the lack of CSF pleocytosis. However, to reliably prove that the
encephalitis with normal CSF white cell count is caused by TBEV, a proof of TBEV CNS infection is needed besides the usual diagnostic
requirements i.e., the evidence of a recent infection with TBEV denoted by the presence of specific serum IgM and IgG antibodies. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ML, BP,
and DS were patient' clinical doctors. TAŽ carried out the microbiological analyses. DS, FFB., and FS helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
