Axillary recurrence of breast cancer that involves the brachial neurovascular bundle is uncommon. However, for many patients with such
recurrence, forequarter amputation can play a palliative role in relieving excruciating pain and paralysis of the upper limb. Further, for
those patients who do not have distant metastasis or other local-regional recurrence, forequarter amputation provides a chance for a cure.
Only a few case reports of curative amputations for recurrent breast cancer are present in the literature. Here, we report a case of
forequarter amputation for curative treatment of axillary recurrent breast cancer, together with a literature review. To date, we have
followed the patient for three years after amputation, during which there has been no evidence of recurrence or metastasis. Although radical
resection is feasible, it can be accompanied by surgical wound complications and psychosocial stress. Therefore, an organized
multidisciplinary approach is needed to ensure the success of radical resection. As medical treatment of breast cancer has improved, radical
amputation as a means of treatment is less often performed. Forequarter or interscapulothoracic amputation involves removing the entire
upper extremity, including the ipsilateral scapula and clavicle. Use of forequarter amputation to treat recurrent breast cancer was first
reported in 1900 by Buchanan , and four additional cases were reported by Pack in 1942 . Since then, few instances of forequarter amputation
for the surgical management of recurrent breast cancer have been reported. Indeed, to date, including the cases mentioned above, only 23
cases of forequarter amputation to treat recurrent breast cancer have been described in the literature, and only five of these amputations
were performed primarily for curative purposes . Here, we report the case of a patient with metastatic breast adenocarcinoma who underwent
forequarter amputation. In 2002, a 52-year-old asian woman underwent a lumpectomy for a stage II infiltrating duct carcinoma over her right
breast, followed by four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy combining doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide and paclitaxel. Chemotherapy was followed
by locoregional radiation. Eight years after the completion of chemotherapy, she found a slowly growing mass on her right neck. Positron
emission tomography (PET) scan revealed large infraclavicular mass and a supraclavicular adenopathy of the right neck and right nasal
cavity. Analysis of biopsy samples from both masses was consistent with metastatic carcinoma and suggestive of the metastasis having arisen
from primary breast cancer. She underwent removal of the right supraclavicular and infraclavicular masses at that time, followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy. However, one year after the surgery, she found a mass in the upper outer quadrant of her right anterior chest wall. Ulceration
and bleeding of the mass caused her to have a painful disability of her right upper limb. A computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure 1a)
revealed a mass in the upper outer quadrant of her right anterior chest wall. The mass had invaded the ribs and pleura. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI, Figure 1b) revealed that the mass involved the axillary artery and occluded the right lateral subclavian vein and axillary
vein.Figure 1 Preoperative coronal CT (a) and T1-weighted MRI (b) images of the tumor lesion surrounding the brachial plexus over the right
axillary area with chest wall invasion (arrow). Preoperative coronal CT (a) and T1-weighted MRI (b) images of the tumor lesion surrounding
the brachial plexus over the right axillary area with chest wall invasion (arrow). After a multimodality assessment followed by discussion
of the available options and risks, benefits and subsequent rehabilitation associated with forequarter amputation with the patient and her
family, she consented to the amputation. Surgery revealed a fungating tumor in the anterior superior chest wall that involved the right
first, second and third ribs. This tumor had adhered to the right lung as well as the brachiocephalic-subclavian vein and artery. During
surgery, the patient was placed in a semi-lateral position on her left side with her right side elevated at a 45° angle. An incision was
made over her sternocleidomastoid muscle, about 3 cm above where the muscle attaches to the clavicle. The incision was directed posteriorly
around the posterior triangle of the neck, around the scapula, under the axilla(including an extension along the latissimus dorsi muscle to
allow for proper flaps) and then anteriorly around the mass and across the chest wall. Subcutaneous dissection was done along the anterior
border of the manubrium and the right first, second and third ribs. For the scapulectomy, an incision was made in the patient’s back, and
the teres major and latissimus dorsi were dissected to obtain negative margins. The latissimus dorsi muscle was completely transected from
the chest wall and scapula and a flap was created under the teres major. The intercostal continuous dissection was carried up to the neck.
The platysma muscle was divided, and the sternocleidomastoid muscle identified and divided to identify the jugular vein, carotid artery and
vagus nerve. Once the neck musculature was divided and the carotid sheath contents isolated, the posterior scalene muscle was clearly
identified. Then the posterior scalene muscles were divided sequentially while the brachial plexus branches were identified. At that time,
the phrenic nerve was traced and dissected from the tumor, and the brachiocephalic vein and internal jugular vein that had adhered to the
tumor were ligated. The remaining attachments of the structures to the tumor and arm were dissected, including the subclavian artery and
first ribs. Then the chest wall was covered and reconstructed with the free forearm flap. Histological analysis of the metastatic mass
showed features of primary breast cancer of intracytoplasmic mucin and glandular formation in hematoxylin and eosin staining (Figure 2a).
Immunohistochemical staining revealed apositive finding of mammaglobin (Figure 2b), gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (Figure 2c) and
P63 (Figure 2d).Figure 2 Micrographs of the samples came from the same block proved metastatic breast carcinoma. (a) Hematoxylin and eosin
staining shows intracytoplasmic mucin and glandular formation. Immunohistochemical staining for (b) mammaglobin, (c) gross cystic disease
fluid protein 15 and (d) P63. All images 200x magnification. Micrographs of the samples came from the same block proved metastatic breast
carcinoma. (a) Hematoxylin and eosin staining shows intracytoplasmic mucin and glandular formation. Immunohistochemical staining for (b)
mammaglobin, (c) gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 and (d) P63. All images 200x magnification. The patient experienced no wound
complications during follow-up after surgery. To date, she has been followed up on for three years after surgery and has shown no signs of
malignancy (Figure 3).Figure 3 Coronal CT taken three years after surgery. There is no evidence of recurrence or invasion of malignancy.
Coronal CT taken three years after surgery. There is no evidence of recurrence or invasion of malignancy. Breast cancer is one of the
leading causes of death in women . Despite advances in systemic adjuvant therapy that have led to increased survival rates of women with
breast cancer , recurrent breast cancer is still frequently lethal . Approximately 5 to10% of patients who undergo mastectomy for operable
breast cancer will develop a chest wall or regional nodal recurrence within 10 years after surgery . There is wide variability in the
reported incidence of simultaneous locoregional and distant metastases (10 to 60%) . However, approximately one-third of patients who
present with a post-mastectomy locoregional recurrence have synchronous distant disease . Axillary recurrence is uncommon [17, 18], and its
symptoms are often initially vague. The initial involvement of the brachial plexus may be misinterpreted as a radiation- or chemotherapy-
induced brachial plexopathy . Delayed diagnosis and treatment of axillary recurrence may lead to tumor progression, which can include
extensive involvement of the brachial neurovascular bundle or underlying soft tissues [6, 20]. Invasion of the brachial plexus and axillary
vessels causes pain, limb dysfunction, lymphedema, paralysis and sensory impairment. Further, destruction of the overlying soft tissue leads
to invasion of the chest wall, skin ulceration, hemorrhage and even bacterial or fungal infections and sepsis. Decisions regarding therapy
for local disease are often affected by whether the patient receives systemic treatment and the response to such therapy. For patients who
may need a large resection, systemic therapy is preferable before resection not only to facilitate successful locoregional treatment, but
also to eliminate any early metastases. Surgical treatment is useful for controlling pain and ulcers and maintaining the patient’s quality
of life . However, sometimes a more radical surgical intervention, such as amputation, is recommended in order to improve the patient’s
quality of life and ability to perform daily functions [20, 22–24]. Although the majority of forequarter amputations are performed for high-
grade bone and soft tissue sarcomas or extensive osteomyelitis of the upper extremities, this radical operation may also be recommendedfor
the curative treatment of recurrent breast cancer or the palliation of locally advanced breast cancer [3–6, 20, 24–27]. The feasibility of
completely reducing tumor burden through the use of wide excision depends on the degree of tumor invasion to neighboring vital organs. If
the tumor involves the chest wall, an extended forequarter amputation could be performed, including resection of part of the chest wall [6,
28, 29], sometimes in combination with a pneumonectomy . In most patients, primary wound closure is achieved . However, soft tissue
reconstruction is requiredfor large defects that cannot achieve primary closure. For softtissue reconstruction various options have been
used, such as split skin graft, pedicled omentoplasty , fasciocutaneous deltoid flap [33, 35], free filet extremity flap or in one case an
osteomyocutaneous free flap that incorporated the elbow joint from the amputated extremity to reconstruct the shoulder contour . Most
patients who have needed forequarter amputation have had distant metastasis or other local-regional recurrence, and therefore the
amputations were for palliative purposes. Thus, most patients survived less than two years after forequarter amputation [19, 20, 24–27].
However, in cases of solitary lesions that do not have associated comorbidities, forequarter amputation is recommended not only for relief
of symptoms, but also for a chance of curative treatment. The literature (Table 1) documents five cases in which forequarter amputation was
performed with the goal of a cure; three of these patients lived for at least three years after amputation. However, there was also a higher
rate of wound complications (60%, three of five reported cases) when forequarter amputation was used with the goal of a cure because of the
wider dissection margin and larger soft-tissue defect. The benefit of postoperative radiation is unclear, however, we do not recommend
postoperative radiation in those who have been previously irradiated because of previous poor response and increased potential for wound
and/or flap complications .Table 1 Reports of forequarter amputation for curative treatment of axillary recurrence breast cancer
ReferenceNumber of patientsAge/GenderDiagnosisIndicationWound complicationLocal recurrenceSurvivalPressman 255/FRecurrentCurativeNone
delayed healingNoneA (48 months)67/FA (36 months)Sakamura et al. 157/FRecurrentCurativeFlap fringe necrosisNoneD (22 Months)Goodman et al.
156/FRecurrentCurativewound care flap necrosisNoneA (35 months)Ayvaz et al. 154/MRecurrentCurativeNot mentionedLung metastasis at 6 monthsD
(11 months)Tsai et al. [current study]152/FRecurrentCurativeNoneNoneA (36 months)A: alive; D: dead. Reports of forequarter amputation for
curative treatment of axillary recurrence breast cancer A: alive; D: dead. A multidisciplinary approach to breast cancer care is essential
to the successful integration of available therapies . When forequarter amputation is used for curative treatment, comprehensive treatment
is needed throughout preoperative assessment, resection and the postoperative period. The forequarter amputation itself and skin graft, if
needed, require a surgical team of orthopedic, general and plastic-reconstructive surgeons, while a team of radiologists, medical
oncologists and radiation oncologists are needed for pre and postoperative evaluation and management. A comprehensive pain management team
is also critical, not only to manage the patient’s limb pain before surgery, as most patients who require forequarter amputation experience
intractable and prolonged neurogenic pain prior to amputation [41, 42], but also the phantom pain after radical amputations. Although
significant pain relief is expected after a radial amputation, the literature indicates a 77% incidence of phantom limb pain after major
limb amputation . A rehabilitation team, including psychological support, is also essential. Psychological concerns for amputees include
fear of the unknown, loss of self-esteem, loss of self-confidence, fear of rejection and distress arising from having a malignant disease
with a poor prognosis. This emotional distress can contribute to suicide , therefore, counseling is necessary before and after the surgery
and psychological support is imperative for successful rehabilitation . We have reported the rare clinical occurrence of local-regional
recurrence of breast cancer over an axillary area without distant metastases. For this patient, the tumor burden reached a point where
salvage chemotherapy and radiation therapy were no longer useful due to the involvement of the brachial neurovascular bundle. Therefore,
forequarter amputation was used. As this case indicates, in cases where limb-sparing surgical resection is not feasible, forequarter
amputations not only play a role in relieving upper limb pain, but can provide a chance for a cure. Although this is a major amputation and
can have significant associated morbidity, a dedicated multidisciplinary team can help to reduce complications and achieve a successful
rehabilitation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Computed tomography Magnetic resonance imaging
Positron emission tomography. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CHT is
first author and reviewed the medical record and drafted the manuscript. HET and WKJ reviewed the medical record and PGC reviewed the
histology record. PF helped in medical record and manuscript preparation. YCF and HCH built up the study concepts. YY is the corresponding
author. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Keely Walker at City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte,
California for editing the manuscript.
