Urinary catheterization is a common procedure, particularly among patients with neurogenic bladder secondary to spinal cord injury. Urethral
catheterization is associated with the well-recognized complications of catheter-associated urinary tract infections and limited
genitourinary trauma. Unintentional ureteral cannulation represents a rare complication of urethral catheterization and has been previously
described in only eight cases within the literature. We describe two cases of aberrant ureteral cannulation involving two patients with
quadriplegia. These cases along with prior reports identify the spastic, insensate bladder and altered pelvic sensorium found in upper motor
neuron syndromes as major risk factors for ureteral cannulation with a urinary catheter. Urinary catheterization is a common procedure,
particularly among patients with neurogenic bladder secondary to spinal cord injury (SCI). The specific bladder dysfunction related to SCI
depends on both the level of cord injury and the duration of time passed since the original injury. Patients with hyperactive and flaccid
bladder secondary to SCI are often managed with long-term urethral or suprapubic catheterization. Urethral catheterization is associated
with the well-recognized complications of catheter-associated urinary tract infections (UTIs) and limited genitourinary trauma .
Unintentional ureteral cannulation represents a rare complication of urethral catheterization and has been previously described in only
eight cases within the literature . We describe two cases of aberrant ureteral cannulation involving two patients with quadriplegia seen at
our institution. These cases along with prior reports identify the spastic, insensate bladder and altered pelvic sensorium found in upper
motor neuron syndromes as major risk factors for ureteral cannulation with a urinary catheter. A 48-year-old quadriplegic female with a
chronic indwelling Foley catheter secondary to neurogenic bladder from a C6 SCI presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with a 1-day
history of acute right flank pain and visualized blood clots within her catheter bag. She reported having last changed her catheter earlier
that afternoon. Upon presentation to the ED, the patient was found to be hypertensive (206/129 mmHg). Initial laboratory results revealed
leukocytosis (12.9×109/L), and urinalysis was significant for >100 red blood cells (RBCs) and 4-10 white blood cells (WBCs). Urine gram
stain and nitrates were negative. Electrolyte panel demonstrated normal renal function (creatinine level, 0.6 mg/dL; estimated glomerular
filtration rate>60 mL/min/body surface area). A contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen/pelvis revealed cannulation of the
right distal ureter by the Foley catheter with the tubing extending 1 cm into the distal right ureter; mild right hydronephrosis was also
visualized with diffuse enhancement of the right urinary collecting system consistent with inflammation and infection (Fig. 1). Careful
review of the images showed the Foley catheter balloon completely filling this patient's small spastic bladder. The catheter was emergently
removed and replaced with a new catheter device. After replacement of the Foley catheter, the patient's exaggerated autonomic response,
pain, hematuria, and leukocytosis rapidly resolved. A 68-year-old gentleman with a history of C4-5 quadriplegia complicated by neurogenic
bladder and recurrent UTIs as well as known left-sided urolithiasis presented to the ED with a 1-day history of hematuria and abdominal
pain. On presentation, the patient was afebrile (36.7℃) and normotensive (120/83 mmHg); initial labs demonstrated leukocytosis (12.9×109/L),
and urine microscopy detailed >100 RBCs/high power field (HPF) as well as >100 WBCs/HPF. The urine gram stain was negative. Physical
examination demonstrated the presence of multiple blood clots within the patient's undergarments. A three-way urinary catheter was placed to
facilitate continuous bladder irrigation, which yielded further expression of numerous blood clots. The following day, a CT urogram was
performed that showed obstruction of the right distal ureter by the Foley catheter resulting in mild to moderate pyeloureterectasis (Fig.
2). The indwelling catheter was promptly readjusted and continuous bladder irrigation was stopped. Over the following 24 hours, manual
irrigation of the catheter demonstrated marked improvement in the patient's hematuria. Urinary catheterization is a common practice whose
most frequent complications include catheter-associated infections and genitourinary trauma . In patients in whom indwelling or intermittent
catheterization represents a daily component of a health maintenance routine, the risk for catheter-associated complications increases.
Within the hospital setting, others have reported that approximately 1.8% of total Foley catheter days are associated with possible UTI
episodes, whereas 1.5% of Foley catheter days are associated with genitourinary trauma . Urinary catheter-associated trauma is commonly
inclusive for urethral damage resulting in hematuria, accidental removal of the catheter without sufficient balloon deflation, or false
passage creation . The two cases of ureteral cannulation we identified from our institution prompted us to review the literature for similar
cases. Our review identified eight previous cases involving ureteral cannulation in the setting of urinary catheterization. The details of
these cases are included in Table 1 . These cases occurred between the ages of 26 and 77 years, with the majority occurring after the fifth
decade of life. Including our two presented cases, 80% of complications entailed female patients, and 5 patients (50%) had known neurologic
conditions (paraplegia , quadriplegia, or multiple sclerosis with autonomic dysreflexia ) traditionally associated with bladder dysfunction.
An additional two cannulation cases occurred secondary to iatrogenic placement during surgical procedures . Interestingly, four of the
patients with underlying neurological conditions experienced cannulation of the right ureter while both iatrogenic placements during surgery
occurred on the left. Additionally, all patients experiencing left-sided ureteral cannulation were female. Cord injuries above the conus
medullaris contribute to an upper motor neuron syndrome and may lead to bladder hyperactivity resulting in bladder spasm, urgency, and
incontinence. Over time, the reduction in bladder capacity as well as bladder and bladder sphincter hyperactivity may also lead to elevated
bladder pressures, which results in increased vesicoureteral reflux. Spinal cord injuries involving the conus medullaris or caudae equina
cause a lower motor neuron syndrome that can lead to bladder flaccidity and urinary retention. Others have proposed that the underlying
mechanism of ureter cannulation may be attributed to insertion of the Foley catheter during bladder contraction . The findings from this
series and review of existing cases suggest that individuals with bladder dysfunction due to upper motor neuron disease are at the highest
risk for this complication among patients undergoing urethral catheterization. We suggest that this population is particularly at risk
because of their small spastic bladders and altered pain perception. Those patients identified as having experienced this complication
through iatrogenic placement under surgical anesthesia and with a history of fibrotic bladder further implicate diminished pain perception
as a major contributor to this adverse event. Confirmation of urinary catheter placement typically constitutes the visualization of urine
flow into the collection tubing as well as subjective resistance after inflation of the retaining balloon. However, these methods of
confirmation remain error prone, particularly in the setting of frequent catheterization. In patients who experience the complication of
ureteral cannulation shortly after catheter placement during a surgical procedure, aberrant ureteral placement during introduction is the
most likely scenario. However, in many cases, particularly in patients with underlying neurologic conditions, it is unclear whether ureteral
cannulation occurs during the initial introduction of the catheter device or after subsequent migration. Traditionally, patients are
instructed that if they experience resistance to instillation, pain, or autonomic instability, catheter placement should be adjusted.
However, patients with neurologic sequelae are often unable to rely upon these clues as a means of detecting a catheter-associated
complication. Additionally, given the unclear role that catheter migration may play in the development of ureteral cannulation, patients
should also be instructed to monitor for adequate urine flow not solely at the time of catheter placement, but on a continuing basis. Given
the observed association between autonomic dysreflexia and ureteral cannulation, patients with upper motor neuron disease or altered pelvic
sensorium and a history of indwelling or intermittent catheterization presenting with autonomic instability should prompt evaluation for
irregular catheter placement. As observed within the presented cases, complications of ureteral cannulation are inclusive for hydronephrosis
and pyeloureterectasis in addition to various mechanisms of ureteral injury or possible ureteral rupture. These complications may
subsequently contribute to infectious processes such as UTI, abscess formation, or even fistulous formation . Following suspected or
confirmed ureteral cannulation, manual removal of the catheter following deflation of the catheter bulb should be attempted, if possible,
and further management decisions including surgical intervention should be based upon clinical correlation with consideration given to the
timing of the resulting complication or injury . Ureteral cannulation represents a rare complication of urinary catheterization. Review of
known cases identifies patients with bladder dysfunction due to upper motor neuron syndromes as the population at highest risk for
developing this complication, particularly among female patients. The contributing features of underlying neurological disease suggest that
the elements of bladder contraction and altered sensorium significantly add to the increased danger appreciated within this high-risk
population. Those patients at high risk should be educated at regular intervals regarding the importance of safe, aseptic placement and
monitoring techniques at both initiation of and continuing Foley catheter use. The authors have nothing to disclose. Computed tomography of
the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast demonstrating cannulation of the right distal ureter with a Foley catheter extending 1 cm
into the distal ureter. Computed tomography urogram demonstrating obstruction of the right distal ureter by the Foley catheter. Reported
features of patients experiencing ureteral cannulation as a complication of urethral catheterization
