Elevated intracranial pressure from cerebral edema is the major cause of early mortality in acute stroke. Current treatment strategies to
limit cerebral edema are not particularly effective. Some novel anti-edema measures have shown promising early findings in experimental
stroke models. Vasopressin antagonism in stroke is one such target which has shown some encouraging preliminary results. The aim of this
report is to highlight the potential use of vasopressin antagonism to limit cerebral edema in patients after acute stroke. A 57-year-old
Caucasian man with new onset diplopia was diagnosed with vertebral artery aneurysm extending into the basilar circulation. He underwent
successful elective vertebral artery angioplasty and coiling of the aneurysm. In the immediate post-operative period there was a decline in
his neurological status and brain imaging revealed new midbrain and thalamic hemorrhage with surrounding significant brain edema. Treatment
with conventional anti-edema therapy was initiated with no significant clinical response after which conivaptan; a mixed vasopressin
antagonist was started. Clinical and radiological evaluation following drug administration showed rapid clinical improvement without
identification of significant adverse effects. The authors have successfully demonstrated the safety and efficacy of using mixed vasopressin
antagonist in treatment of stroke related brain edema, thereby showing its promise as an alternative anti-edema agent. Preliminary findings
from this study suggest mixed vasopressin antagonism may have significant utility in the management of cerebral edema arising from
cerebrovascular accident. Larger prospective studies are warranted to explore the role of conivaptan in the treatment of brain edema and
neuroprotection. Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death in United States . Brain edema and herniation are implicated in the majority of
these cases . No effective agents exist that have altered the management of brain edema to the satisfaction of clinicians involved in stroke
care. Decompressive hemicraniectomy has reduced mortality in malignant middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke, but only when used in younger
populations within 48 hours of symptom onset . In the neurocritical care setting, mannitol and hypertonic saline are used extensively for
managing brain edema due to the lack of more effective options, rather than its therapeutic superiority . Significant controversy about the
advantages and disadvantages of these agents in long term patient outcomes following brain edema further complicate the clinical picture .
Hence there is a great need for alternative agents to rapidly decrease increased intracranial pressure as a result of stroke-related brain
edema, thereby reducing brain herniation and its subsequent morbidity and mortality. Arginine-vasopressin (AVP), a potent endogenous hormone
responsible for regulating plasma osmolality and volume, has demonstrated a role in the pathophysiological mechanisms in stroke . Evidence
of AVP’s significant role in cerebral edema has made it a promising drug target in the management of this condition . Chang et al. found
time-dependent increases in serum AVP levels after brain injury as well as attenuation of AVP levels following administration of 7.5%
hypertonic saline in an experimental stroke model . These studies also found that osmotherapy is effective in reducing intracranial pressure
(ICP) through a common AVP-mediated pathway. The mechanism of action of AVP is mainly mediated by 2 receptor subtypes: V1a and V2 which are
expressed in the brain, pituitary gland, myocardium, vasculature and kidneys. Experimental models have demonstrated the utility of V1a and
V2 AVP receptor antagonism in attenuation of ischemia related cerebral edema and infarct volume by aquaporin (AQP) 4 expression modulation.
Even though appealing, the evidence for clinical utility of vasopressin antagonism in stroke related brain edema is sparse. Conivaptan is a
mixed vasopressin receptor (V1a and V2) antagonist that belongs to the group of non-peptide vasopressin antagonists referred to as “Vaptans”
. This class has been approved by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in hypervolemic/euvolemic hyponatremia . We report a case of a
disabling stroke after an endovascular procedure who received conivaptan as last resort to reduce his brain edema. This patient’s clinical
course and radiological findings were serially monitored and recorded. Adverse events and safety data from this medication were also
monitored and documented. A 57-year-old Caucasian male with residual right-sided hemiparesis from a cerebrovascular event, 1 month prior to
this admission, presented with sudden onset of vision changes. He complained his vision was “upside down” with associated headache, nausea
and vomiting. His past medical history included pacemaker implantation, and multiple sclerosis in remission. On neurological exam, his
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 9 when including his previous residual neurological deficits. Higher cognitive
function was mostly intact except for dysarthria, and diplopia on horizontal gaze with right internuclear opthalmoplegia. His old deficits
from recent stroke included partial right facial palsy with right hemiparesis (motor system examinations using the Medical Research Council
(MRC) grade: 2/5 in right upper and lower extremity), hemi body numbness and intact cerebellar function. Computed tomography (CT) scan of
the head without contrast revealed left precentral gyrus hypodensity extending to the hand area, most consistent with an evolving late
subacute infarct corresponding to the patient's right upper extremity weakness. Most prominent was the finding of a partially calcified
16 mm fusiform aneurysm of the left vertebral artery (VA) with extension to the basilar junction and beyond. On day 1 of admission, he was
complaining of severe intractable headaches and depression. On day 6, he had a sudden decline in his neurological exam wherein he developed
complete facial weakness, became somnolent, and suffered a 25 minutes generalized tonic clonic seizure (which was treated with a standard
status epilepticus treatment regimen). Repeat head CT demonstrated new hypodensity in the mesial aspect of the left midbrain compared to the
admission study. This was most consistent with a subacute infarct in the basilar perforator territory which explained the patient's double
vision. Elective right vertebral artery angioplasty with aneurysm stenting of the vertebral artery was performed on day 13. Approximately
2 hours after the procedure his left pupil became fixed and dilated. He developed dense hemiplegia on his left side. Stat head CT
demonstrated interval development of acute hemorrhage in the mesial aspect of right thalamus measuring 11 × 9 mm in maximal axial
dimensions. There was also hemorrhage seen in the central part of upper midbrain measuring 8 × 8 mm. A significant vasogenic edema
surrounding the hematoma that extended up to the lower midbrain was seen (Figure 1A, B).Figure 1 Imaging before conivaptan administration.
The immediate post-procedure (intra-arterial stent insertion) CT head (without contrast) demonstrate acute hemorrhage in the right mesial
thalamus (A) with surrounding mild vasogenic edema and hypodensity on both sides of mid brain (B). The CT head (without contrast) before
conivaptan administration reveals slight decrease in the density of acute hemorrhage in the right mesial thalamus, but with worsening
surrounding vasogenic edema (C). The hypodensity in the mid brain has also worsened without any normal density tissue visible, especially
adjacent to the quadrigeminal cistern (D). Imaging before conivaptan administration. The immediate post-procedure (intra-arterial stent
insertion) CT head (without contrast) demonstrate acute hemorrhage in the right mesial thalamus (A) with surrounding mild vasogenic edema
and hypodensity on both sides of mid brain (B). The CT head (without contrast) before conivaptan administration reveals slight decrease in
the density of acute hemorrhage in the right mesial thalamus, but with worsening surrounding vasogenic edema (C). The hypodensity in the mid
brain has also worsened without any normal density tissue visible, especially adjacent to the quadrigeminal cistern (D). He was started on
hypertonic saline with a target serum osmolality of 300–320 mOsm/kg and serum sodium goal of 150–160 mEq/L (post-operative sodium was
140 mEq/L). On post-operative day 1, there was no change in his neurological exam as the patient remained unresponsive with left fixed,
dilated pupil and no movement on his left upper and lower extremity. There was interval increase in the brain stem edema in comparison to
brain imaging from the previous day (Figure 1C, D). Due to the lack of response from hypertonic saline, he was started on intravenous
conivaptan. Conivaptan was administered as per the drug administration guidelines approved by FDA with 20 mg infused over 30 minutes as a
loading dose, followed by a continuous infusion of 20 mg over 24 hours (0.83 mg/hour) planned for 2 days. On post-operative day 2, after
8 hours of receiving the loading dose of conivaptan, patient started responding to commands and was seen moving his left upper and lower
extremities. His sodium was 145 mEq/L. In the next 2 days he was showing significant progress on neurological exam, even demonstrating some
strength in his left upper extremity. Repeat head CT on day 18 (after 2 days of conivaptan administration) demonstrated expected hematoma
density changes both within the mesial right thalamus and in the central midbrain, but the size of the hematoma was stable compared to prior
examination. However, the perilesional edema had significantly decreased, most apparent in the upper and mid portion of the midbrain. The
comparison of the imaging at the level of both thalamus (Figure 2A, B) and midbrain (Figure 2C, D) showed noticeable resolution of brain
edema and restoration of some normal tissue after conivaptan administration. Despite making significant neurological improvements and
tolerating extubation our patient subsequently developed respiratory failure presumably due to aspiration pneumonia and his family opted to
shift to palliative care only.Figure 2 Imaging after conivaptan administration. Comparative images at the level of thalamus pre (A) and post
(B) conivaptan administration shows significant reduction in vasogenic edema (red arrows) with normal density appearing tissue seen in the
ventral aspect of right thalamus following conivaptan administration (thick blue arrow). Moreover, comparative images at the level of mid
brain pre (C) and post (D) conivaptan administration clearly demonstrate significantly reduced hypodensity (red arrows), especially adjacent
to the quadrigeminal cistern. The normal density appearing tissue emerges following conivaptan administration (blue arrow heads). Imaging
after conivaptan administration. Comparative images at the level of thalamus pre (A) and post (B) conivaptan administration shows
significant reduction in vasogenic edema (red arrows) with normal density appearing tissue seen in the ventral aspect of right thalamus
following conivaptan administration (thick blue arrow). Moreover, comparative images at the level of mid brain pre (C) and post (D)
conivaptan administration clearly demonstrate significantly reduced hypodensity (red arrows), especially adjacent to the quadrigeminal
cistern. The normal density appearing tissue emerges following conivaptan administration (blue arrow heads). Conivaptan is a mixed
vasopressin antagonist, currently approved for euvolemic or hypervolemic hyponatremia in heart failure, which has shown tremendous promise
in both experimental and clinical brain injury scenarios. It acts via both V1a and V2 receptors making it the only FDA approved mixed
vasopressin antagonist . There is strong literature evidence to show V1a antagonism is useful in limiting vasopressin mediated brain damage
after inducing stroke in animal models. The V1a antagonism was helpful in reducing brain edema via down-regulation of AQP-4 in these
experiments . Since the V2 receptor mediates AVP expression via positive feedback, V2 antagonism may, in theory, be advantageous when
formulating novel ligands for neuroprotection. In the neurocritical care literature, conivaptan has been used safely to reduce intracranial
pressure, increase serum sodium to desired goal, and to augment cerebral perfusion pressure . There is anecdotal evidence for its use in
neurosurgical and cardiac intensive care unit (ICU) settings where it show promise in the treatment of hyponatremia secondary to traumatic
brain injury and other conditions . The most common side effects described for the short-term use of conivaptan include infusion site
phlebitis, headaches, increased thirst, pyrexia and constipation. Orthostatic hypotension, hypokalemia, rebound hyponatremia, atrial
dysrhythmias, and sepsis are other serious adverse effects. Contraindications for using conivaptan are hypovolemic hyponatremia and
simultaneous use of CYP3A4 inhibitors . During stroke, AVP is released from the posterior pituitary in response to histamine activation of
magnocellular neurons in the hypothalamus AVP then interacts with its receptors V1a and V2 to mediate processes which lead to further
cerebral edema. Antagonism of these receptors is described below: Vasopressin receptor V1a is involved in the pathogenesis of secondary
brain damage following focal cerebral ischemia. The V1a receptor antagonism causes platelet inhibition, AQP-4 channel modulation, reduced
infarct size and vasodilation. Also, V1a antagonists have been shown to prevent the development of ischemia-induced cerebral edema, thereby
suggesting the importance of the V1a receptor interaction in water regulation in brain cells . Further, vasopressin V1a receptor antagonism
has largely been shown to improve outcomes after experimental stroke. A V1a antagonist SR49059, has been demonstrated to decrease rates of
brain water accumulation at varying time points in intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) . This agent also reduced AQP-4 expression and led to
decreased cerebral edema after ICH. The aforementioned antagonist was found to reduce cytotoxic brain edema via AQP-4 attenuation in an
experimental model of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) . Hence, it appears that AQP-4 channels, which play a key role in development
of brain edema, may be modulated by V1a antagonism . Other V1a antagonists have also shown similar effects in reducing brain water content
after cold-induced edema in addition to dose-dependent decreases in the permeability of the blood–brain barrier . The V1a antagonism
mediated neuroprotection is postulated to occur via dampening of cerebrovasodilation, caused by ATP-sensitive and calcium-sensitive
potassium channels, potentially leading to decreased reperfusion injury and vasogenic edema . Vakili et al. successfully demonstrated V1a
antagonism resulted in a dose-dependent attenuation of infarct volume and blood–brain barrier disruption and more importantly a decrease in
brain edema . The V2 receptor expression in the central nervous system is limited and the extent of its contribution in brain edema is thus
controversial . Some studies demonstrate V2 receptor antagonism may act by decreasing AVP release through a negative feedback mechanism .
Recently, a few studies have demonstrated that the V2 receptor antagonist, OPC-31260, may be effective in the early treatment of cytotoxic
edema and brain injury . Administration of OPC-31260 ameliorated cerebral neurological deficit in transgenic mice overexpressing
endothelin-1 in astrocytes (GET-1) after water intoxication. Treatment with OPC-31260 also significantly decreased water accumulation and
down-regulated AQP-4 expression levels in GET-1 mice after water intoxication. In fact, AQP-4 levels were shown to almost be completely
normal when comparing AQP-4 staining intensity in GET-1 mice with and without water intoxication. It was also shown that administration of
OPC-31260 at doses of 10 to 30 mg/kg led to a dose-dependent inhibition of subarachnoid hemorrhage-induced cerebral edema formation,
accompanied by an increase in urinary volume and decrease in urine osmolality without a significant alteration of urine electrolytes . The
V2 receptor antagonism also helped diminish water accumulation, decreased glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in astrocytes, and most
importantly led to a renal tubule-selective diuretic effect called aquaresis (electrolyte sparing diuresis), which may have additional
benefits in the reduction of cerebral edema . To further explore the exciting promise of Conivaptan’s use in stroke and brain edema, we have
developed an experimental murine stroke model . Early results from this study have been promising. We have demonstrated that conivaptan
ameliorated brain swelling at two early time points (12 h and 24 h) by more than 50% in comparison to control in MCAO. At 12 h, ipsilateral
average hemispheric edema (HE%) in the conivaptan-treated group (n = 16) was 6.64 ± 1.62% versus 16.55 ± 1.76% in controls (n = 16,
p = 0.0003). This was reproduced at 24 h, where HE% in the conivaptan-treated group (n = 12) was 6.81 ± 1.33% in comparison to 13.93 ± 1.57%
in the control group (n = 12, p = 0.002). Our studies are underway to answer some questions about its mechanism of action in attenuation of
brain edema by concentrating specifically on aquaporin channels and its ligands. Brain edema contributes significantly to morbidity and
death associated with stroke. However current option treatments are limited to hyperosmolar agents and surgical decompression. In this case
report we describe the potential of the mixed vasopressin antagonist, conivaptan, in the acute treatment of brain edema. To our knowledge,
this is the first case report in the literature describing the benefits of conivaptan use in clinical brain edema. Although this report is
very encouraging, additional randomized clinical studies and caution is advised regarding its use until the result of more definitive trials
investigating its safety and efficacy are known. We hope that this report highlights the inadequacy of standard treatment of cerebral edema
and generates future studies which explore novel therapeutic agents, including larger studies to fully characterize the potential role of
mixed vasopressin antagonism. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's next of kin for publication of this Case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Middle cerebral artery Middle
cerebral artery occlusion Intracranial pressures Arginine-vasopressin Aquaporin Food and Drug Administration National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale Medical Research Council Computed tomography Vertebral artery Intracerebral hemorrhage Hemispheric edema Intensive care unit
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions VSH, SA, DG and IS wrote the draft
manuscript. SB prepared CT images and was involved in drafting the manuscript. VSH, AAK and AIQ initiated the study, reviewed and edited the
manuscript, and approved the final version. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. No funding was provided for the production
of this report.
