Recent findings suggest that neural complexity reflecting a number of independent processes in the brain may characterize typical changes
during epileptic seizures and may enable to describe preictal dynamics. With respect to previously reported findings suggesting specific
changes in neural complexity during preictal period, we have used measure of pointwise correlation dimension (PD2) as a sensitive indicator
of nonstationary changes in complexity of the electroencephalogram (EEG) signal. Although this measure of complexity in epileptic patients
was previously reported by Feucht et al (Applications of correlation dimension and pointwise dimension for non-linear topographical analysis
of focal onset seizures. Med Biol Comput. 1999;37:208–217), it was not used to study changes in preictal dynamics. With this aim to study
preictal changes of EEG complexity, we have examined signals from 11 multicontact depth (intracerebral) EEG electrodes located in 108
cortical and subcortical brain sites, and from 3 scalp EEG electrodes in a patient with intractable epilepsy, who underwent preoperative
evaluation before epilepsy surgery. From those 108 EEG contacts, records related to 44 electrode contacts implanted into lesional structures
and white matter were not included into the experimental analysis. The results show that in comparison to interictal period (at about 8–6
minutes before seizure onset), there was a statistically significant decrease in PD2 complexity in the preictal period at about 2 minutes
before seizure onset in all 64 intracranial channels localized in various brain sites that were included into the analysis and in 3 scalp
EEG channels as well. Presented results suggest that using PD2 in EEG analysis may have significant implications for research of preictal
dynamics and prediction of epileptic seizures. According to current findings, dynamic changes in the brain during epileptic seizures may be
described using measures of neural complexity that reflect transitions in neural networks that may be assessed using nonlinear time-series
analysis.1,2 The concept of neural complexity is based on mathematical description that enables to assess whether activities of a neural
system are dynamically segregated, which means that small subsets of the system may tend to behave independently or they are dynamically
integrated and manifest coherent and synchronous activity.3,4 These changes in dynamical complexity of the neural systems may describe the
dynamic equilibrium between differentiation and integration in the complex neuronal dynamics and its development during the time.3,5
Together, these data suggest that increased neural complexity calculated from the electroencephalogram (EEG) and other psychophysiological
measures may reflect processes related to increased activity of independent areas that enable desynchronized parallel information
processing, and on the contrary, decreased complexity is related to synchronization phenomena in the brain that typically occurs during
epileptic seizures.2,6,7 These data may explain why preictal dynamics may lead to changes in neural complexity preceding epileptic seizure
as several studies suggest.2,8–11 With respect to current findings, the main purpose of this case study is to analyze the preictal dynamics
of the EEG complexity, assessed using algorithm for pointwise correlation dimension (PD2), focused to find differences in the EEG complexity
characterizing the preictal period. Although the PD2 as a sensitive measure of nonstationary changes of complexity in epileptic patients was
reported by Feucht et al,8 to the best of our knowledge, it was not used to study changes in the complexity of preictal dynamics. In this
context, using this sensitive measure of complexity may help to resolve some contradictory results obtained using various nonlinear
measures9 and quantify changes in complexity during the preictal period more precisely in comparison to other nonlinear indices. Twenty-
four-year-old right-handed man suffering from intractable extratemporal epilepsy because of suspected multifocal tuberous sclerosis
participated in the study. The patient manifested frequent complex partial seizures with initial loss of consciousness, vocalizations, and
late right-hand automatisms but without aura. For presurgical evaluation, 11 orthogonal standard MicroDeep multilead depth electrodes
(ALCIS, Besançon, France), with a diameter of 0.8 mm, length of each recording contact 2 mm, and intercontact intervals of 1.5 mm, were used
for invasive EEG monitoring. The electrodes were implanted in the frontal, temporal, occipital, and parietal lobes using the methodology by
Talairach et al12 and placed bilaterally. The exact positions of the electrodes in the brain were verified using post-placement magnetic
resonance imaging with electrodes in situ. Both the number and positions of these electrodes were determined by a diagnostic procedure with
the aim to localize the seizure origin prior to a surgical treatment. The recordings from 44 channels implanted into lesional structures and
white matter were not included into the experimental analysis. In addition to intracranial recordings, the EEG measure also included 3 scalp
electrodes (Fz, Cz, and Pz). In this presurgery evaluation, the epileptogenic zone most likely responsible for generation of epileptic
activity was located in the middle frontal gyrus. With the aim to study preictal changes of complexity from these electrodes, we have
analyzed EEG records from 64 intracranial channels, localized in 11 brain regions, and 3 scalp channels. Prior to the experiment, the
patient provided informed consent, and the study was approved by the Ethical Committee, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. The EEG
signal was simultaneously recorded from various intracerebral structures and from standard Fz, Cz, and Pz scalp electrodes, using the
128-channel TrueScan EEG system (Deymed Diagnostic, Payette, ID). All recordings were monopolar with earlobe reference. All impedances were
<5 kΩ. The sampling rate was 1 kHz. The long-term video-EEG recording was aimed to distinguish preictal (before), ictal (during), and
postictal recordings (after the clinical seizure). The clinical and electroencephalographic seizure onset was reviewed by 2 experienced
clinical epileptologists. The EEG showed 1 seizure but more quasi-independent partial seizures cannot be rejected. Partial seizure was not
confirmed and hidden multiple foci cannot be rejected. From these EEG records, 8-minute-long records before electroencephalographic seizure
onset, 2-minute-long records during the seizure, and 8-minute-long records after the seizure were used. For the analysis and statistical
comparison, 2-minute-long records were used, 4 from the preictal period, 1 during seizure, and 4 after the seizure. A practical approach to
studying complex dynamical systems is the method of time-series analysis. A postulate of this method is that every dynamic system, for
example, the human brain and its functions, is governed and determined by a number of independent variables. The time-series analysis
therefore represents a mathematical approximation that enables a reconstruction of certain variables underlying the multidimensional
dynamics from data obtained from the system during the time,13 for example, a psychophysiological measurement performed on the system during
an experiment. Because observational data reflect only a few independent variables of the system, approximation of the dynamic system
behavior therefore uses a finite number of (mathematically reconstructed) variables to approximate states of the system. The
multidimensionality of the dynamic system is therefore approximated by an embedding dimension that represents its dimensionality contained
(or embedded) in the data. In the analysis, the 2-minute-long EEG records characterizing brain activity during experimental periods were
processed using the software package Dataplore that is one of the most well-known software implementations for time-series analysis. Skinner
algorithm for the PD2 was used in the analysis.14 The PD2 algorithm for this calculation was selected because of its usefulness to detect
the complexity of phase transitions in nonstationary time series of dynamic systems.13 Calculation of the PD2 is based on the formula
PD2(i) = logC(r,i)/log(r), where C(r,i) is pointwise correlation integral that gives a average sort time over the whole signal that provides
a value for each point in time of the signal and r is a distance reflecting radius of the neighborhood around a certain point (between 0 and
1). All PD2 calculations were separately performed for each EEG channel (64 intracranial and 3 scalp electrodes) on the raw data with
parameters for embedding dimension from 2 to 8. These parameters are typical for majority of EEG signals and enable rigorous replication.
Following it, statistical evaluation of PD2 values for the preictal, ictal, and postictal periods was performed using t test by software
package Dataplore (t test is for high df values equivalent with nonparametric tests). Further data analysis was performed using descriptive
statistics (means and standard deviations), Wilcoxon test, and Friedman ANOVA using software Statistica version 8.0 (StatSoft, Inc, Tulsa,
OK). The results show that in all 64 contacts localized in 11 subcortical sites and 3 scalp channels, statistically significant decrease in
PD2 complexity between 1st and 4th preictal period has been found. The data also show significant decrease in PD2 complexity between
preictal and ictal period and statistically significant increase in PD2 complexity between ictal and postictal period (Table 1).
Topographical analysis focused on maximum differences in the EEG complexity indicator (PD2) characterizing preictal dynamics of EEG
complexity shows that very high differences between 1st and 4th preictal period were found in frontal operculum and insula, scalp channel
Cz, and the highest difference was found in scalp region Fz (Table 1, Figure 1). Values of Complexity (PD2) in the Brain Implanted and Scalp
Electrodes During Preictal, Ictal, and Postictal Periods Time dependence of complexity (PD2) in channel Fz during preictal period (8-0 min.
before seizure) that has the maximum difference between first and fourth preictal periods. In summary, the results show significant
differences between preictal, ictal, and postictal periods in all investigated brain sites. In the preictal periods, synchronized decrease
in complexity was observed, which suggests that many distant parts of the brain were in abnormal synchronous state reflected by PD2,
although descriptive EEG in the preictal period did not provide this information. The results of this case study indicate that EEG
complexity measured by PD2 may represent useful and applicable indicator for description of preictal dynamics, and its significant decrease
was observed in all analyzed implanted and surface electrodes used in presurgical EEG assessment. These characteristic changes describing
preictal dynamics may likely be explained by synchronous widespread excitatory and inhibitory influences in distant brain regions preceding
seizure activity that may be reflected in nonlinear dynamical description using complexity measures. In this context, various studies
describing dimensional complexity and chaotic dynamics related to neural dynamics and EEG have been reported including those describing
increased or decreased neural complexity and other nonlinear indicators preceding epileptic seizures.2,8–11 For example, Lehnertz and
Elger11 found a focal decrease in complexity measured using correlation dimension D2 during epileptic events, and some other studies have
found that complexity of the epileptogenic area can be influenced by anticonvulsant drugs.15 In addition, Feucht et al8 using correlation
dimension and “pointwise dimension” in analysis of the surface EEG records of 8 patients have found that pointwise dimension was able to
identify “strong epileptic activity” compared with control data. This identification of epileptic activity, in principle, is based on
significant changes in neural complexity that distinguishes these regions from other brain sites. Decreased or increased complexity
described by various nonlinear indices likely reflects various levels of integration and disintegration that may occur in strongly coupled
networks as well as weakly coupled cortical networks, both of which can create the same process of neural bursting and generate epileptic
activity.6 In this context, data of the present study although limited and need further confirmation suggest that using PD2 measure may have
significant implications for research of preictal dynamics and prediction of epileptic seizures. Abbreviations: EEG = electrocephalogram,
PD2 = pointwise correlation dimension. The study was supported by the project “CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology”
(CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068) from the European Regional Development Fund and Project GACR P407/12/1957. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
