A 48 year old female presented to causality with high grade fever with rigors and chills, right upper abdominal pain and jaundice of one day
duration. She had a past history of similar episode one month back for which she had undergone endoscopic biliary drainage. Hemogram
revealed leucocytosis with polymorphonuclear cell predominance. Liver function tests; total bilirubin 8.4mg/dl, direct bilirubin 4.9mg/dl,
alanine aminotransferase 96 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 84 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 438 U/L and normal albumin 4.1gm/dl. Serum
electrolytes and renal function tests were within normal limits. Plain x-ray abdomen revealed a radio-opaque foreign body in the left side
of abdomen. Ultrasound abdomen revealed a mildly enlarged liver with dilated intrahepatic biliary tree, multiple gall stones and a dilated
common bile duct. A provisional diagnosis of distally migrated double pigtailed biliary stent and cholangitis was made. Patient was managed
with urgent endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography with stenting and started on parenteral antibiotics as well as other supportive
measures. On the second day of admission stent passed off with fecal matter and repeat abdominal x-ray revealed no foreign body in the
colon. Patient improved with treatment and is being planned for cholecystectomy. Stent migration is one of the complications of biliary
stenting. Distal migration is more common than proximal migration. Risk of migration is more for plastic (5-10%) and covered metallic stents
(3-12%) compared to uncovered metallic stents (<1%). Complications of stent migration include recurrence of cholangitis, pancreatitis and
rarely intestinal obstruction or perforation. Stent modifications like creation of pig tails (single or double) or side flaps have been
tried to reduce the risk of stent migration but with limited success. With the improvements in endoscopic techniques and expertise biliary
stenting is more frequently done in the setting of acute cholangitis. Distally migrated stents may be identified as an intra-abdominal
foreign body before it passes off in the stool. We hope this clinical image will introduce the primary care physicians to the radiological
appearance in a case of distally migrated double pig tailed biliary stent. A, B) Plain x-rays of abdomen showing radio-opaque double pig
tailed stent in left colon
