RLC and MFV contributed equally to this work. Hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae (hvKP) strains can cause invasive liver abscess syndrome,
which is characterised by liver abscess with extrahepatic complications including central nervous system involvement, necrotising fasciitis
or endophthalmitis (Siu et al. 2012). hvKP was first reported in Taiwan in 1985 and, since then, infections caused by hvKP have been
described in several parts of the world, with many cases reported in Southeast Asia (Li et al. 2014). In the Americas, invasive liver
abscess syndrome has been reported in the United States of America, Canada and Argentina (Siu et al. 2012). However, this strain has not
been previously reported in Brazil. Recently, a 57-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus was admitted to the emergency department with a
history of fever, nausea, vomiting and mental confusion for five days. On the day of admission, she was comatose, icteric and had a poor
general appearance. Her temperature was 37.8°C and her blood pressure, pulse and respiratory rate were 110/60 mmHg, 96 beats/min and 48
breaths/min, respectively. Respiratory and cardiovascular auscultations were normal; however, a neurological examination revealed neck
rigidity. Bacterial meningitis was suspected and ceftriaxone 2 g IV q12 h was empirically prescribed after performing a diagnostic lumbar
puncture. Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was xanthochromic and showed glucose 0.0 mg/dL, protein 485 mg/dL and 8,640 cells/mm3 (8,121
neutrophils/mm3 and 259 lymphocytes/mm3). Direct examination of her CSF revealed Gram-negative bacilli. At admission, she also had the
following altered laboratory tests: glycaemia (264 mg/dL), serum creatinine (2.95 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen (152 mg/dL), alkaline
phosphatase (177 mg/dL), gamma-glutamyl transferase (138 mg/dL), alanine transaminase (50 mg/dL), aspartate transaminase (36 mg/dL), total
bilirubin (0.59 mg/dL), indirect bilirubin (0.18 mg/dL), direct bilirubin (0.41 mg/dL) and international normalised ratio (1.19). Brain and
multiple liver abscesses (segments IV, V and VIII) were detected through brain and abdominal computed tomography scans. K. pneumoniae grew
on blood (A58300) and CSF (A58301) cultures and both isolates were susceptible to all antimicrobials tested using a BDPhoenix Automated
System. The isolates were then submitted to the Alerta Laboratory, Federal University of São Paulo for further characterisation. After
surgical drainage of the brain abscess and percutaneous drainage of the liver abscess, the patient’s clinical condition deteriorated;
ceftriaxone was replaced by meropenem 2 g IV q8 h four days later. Eight days after admission, the patient developed ventilator-associated
pneumonia and K. pneumoniae (also susceptible to all antibiotics tested) and multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii were isolated from
semiquantitative tracheal aspirate cultures. Polymyxin B 1.125.000 UI IV q12 h was added to the meropenem. Fifteen days later, multidrug-
resistant A. baumannii bacteraemia was detected despite the use of broad antimicrobial therapy; thus, ampicillin-sulbactam 3 g IV q6 h was
added to the antimicrobial regimen. At 45 days after admission, the patient died due to septic shock and A. baumannii was again recovered
from blood culture. The patient had no previous history of cholelithiasis, liver cirrhosis, malignancies or steroid or chemotherapy use. In
addition, the patient had no history of international travel or known contact with Asian individuals. At Alerta Laboratory, the
identification and antimicrobial susceptibility profile of the K. pneumoniae strains were confirmed by MALDI-TOF and the agar dilution
method. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) results were typically interpreted according to the CLSI (2013); however, The European
Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (Breakpoint tables for interpretation of MICs and zone diameters, v.4.0) were used for
determining the MIC of polymyxin B. Both isolates showed susceptibility to all antimicrobials tested: amoxicillin-clavulanate (MIC ≤ 4/2
µg/mL), ceftazidime (MIC ≤ 0.25 µg/mL), cefepime (MIC ≤ 0.25 µg/mL), meropenem (MIC ≤ 0.06 µg/mL), imipenem (MIC ≤ 0.06 µg/mL), ertapenem
(MIC ≤ 0.06 µg/mL), ciprofloxacin (MIC ≤ 0.06 µg/mL), amikacin (MIC 2 µg/mL), tigecycline (MIC 0.25 µg/mL), fosfomycin (MIC 16 µg/mL),
piperacillin/tazobactam (MIC 4 µg/mL) and polymyxin B (MIC ≤ 0.125 µg/mL). The genetic similarity of the strains was evaluated by pulsed
field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and multilocus sequence typing techniques, as previously described (Tenover et al. 1995, Diancourt et al.
2005). Both strains exhibited identical PFGE patterns and were found to belong to ST23 (Tenover et al. 1995). Genomic DNA was extracted from
both isolates (QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, Qiagen®) and virulence-encoding genes were detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by DNA
sequencing (Table). Both strains presented a hypermucoviscosity phenotype and possessed magA, rmpA, kfu and aerobactin genes. MagA is a
mucoviscosity-associated gene that is related to the extensive production of a polysaccharide capsule and increased resistance to
phagocytes. The rmpA gene increases capsular polysaccharide biosynthesis and mucoviscosity. The kfu gene encodes an iron-uptake system that
is associated with a hypermucoviscosity phenotype and increased virulence (Ma et al. 2005, Hsu et al. 2011). TABLEFactors evaluatedTarget
geneSequence (5’-3’)Annealing temperature (°C)Amplicom (pb)ReferencesMucoviscosity-associated gene A maga-F CCGATGGTTGGGTTAGCTTT60801This
paper maga-R CTGGCCATATTGCTCCGTTGRegulator of mucoid phenotype rmpa-F AGTTAACTGGACTACCTCTGTTTC60543This paper rmpa-R
TACTTGGCATGAGCCATCTTTIron acquisition system kfu-F ATAGTAGGCGAGCACCGAGA60520 Yu et al. (2008) kfu-R AGAACCTTCCTCGCTGAACAAerobactin Aero_1-F
GCATAGGCGGATACGAACAT60556 Yu et al. (2008) Aero_1-R CACAGGGCAATTGCTTACCTAerobactin Aero_2-F CTGTCGGCATCGGTTTTATT60531 Yu et al. (2008)
Aero_2-R TGGCGTGTCGATTATTACCAThermotolerance phenotype clpk-F GTTGTGCGACGACCATTACC60557This paper clpk-R TCAGGAAATGCTCTGGACCGsequence of
primers used for amplification of virulence encoding genes sequence of primers used for amplification of virulence encoding genes As
described in this case report, the patient had the classical clinical and microbiological characteristics of community-acquired hvKP: liver
abscess with metastatic infections (bacteraemia and meningitis) caused by K. pneumoniae displaying a hypermucoviscosity phenotype and
belonging to capsular serotypes K1 and ST23, with the presence of the magA and rmpA genes (Chung et al. 2012, Siu et al. 2012). In addition,
the patient was diabetic, a risk factor reported by Siu et al. (2012). This clinical case report is important for increasing awareness among
Brazilian clinicians with regard to the fact that hvKP ST23 is already circulating in our region and causing serious infections in patients
without any previous history of international travel to Asia.
