Dystonia, cerebellar atrophy, and cardiomyopathy constitute a rare association. We used homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing to
determine the mutation, western blot and immunolabelling on cultured fibroblasts to demonstrate the lower expression and the mislocalization
of the protein. We report on a boy born from consanguineous healthy parents, who presented at three years of age with rapidly progressing
dystonia, progressive cerebellar atrophy, and dilated cardiomyopathy. We identified regions of homozygosity and performed whole exome
sequencing that revealed a homozygous missense mutation in TOR1AIP1. The mutation, absent in controls, results in a change of a highly
conserved glutamic acid to alanine. TOR1AIP1 encodes lamina-associated polypeptide 1 (LAP1), a transmembrane protein ubiquitously expressed
in the inner nuclear membrane. LAP1 interacts with torsinA, the protein mutated in DYT1-dystonia. In vitro studies in fibroblasts of the
patient revealed reduced expression of LAP1 and its mislocalization and aggregation in the endoplasmic reticulum as underlying pathogenic
mechanisms. The pathogenic role of TOR1AIP1 mutation is supported by a) the involvement of a highly conserved amino acid, b) the absence of
the mutation in controls, c) the functional interaction of LAP1 with torsinA, and d) mislocalization of LAP1 in patient cells. Of note,
cardiomyopathy has been reported in LAP1-null mice and in patients with the TOR1AIP1 nonsense mutation. Other cases will help delineate the
clinical spectrum of LAP1-related mutations. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13023-014-0174-9) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users. Dystonia, cerebellar atrophy and cardiomyopathy constitute a very rare association,
observed in rare mitochondrial disease and organic acidemia. We report on a boy with early onset dystonia, for whom work-up performed in
several institutions failed to reach a diagnosis. We performed homozygosity mapping in the patient by using the Human Omni2.5 array
(Illumina), and whole-exome sequencing (IntegraGen), using the SureSelect V4 capture kit (Agilent) and the HighSeq2000 sequencer (Illumina)
. For cell cultures work up, skin fibroblasts were maintained in DMEM (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin. Cells
were either plated on glass coverslips for immunofluorescence or pelleted for protein analysis. Cells were imaged using an Olympus FV-1000
confocal microscope, and electron microscopy was performed as described . For Protein extraction and immunoblotting, Cell pellets were lysed
in Protein Lysis Buffer. Proteins (20 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose. Membranes were blocked with blocking
buffer and incubated with primary or secondary antibodies diluted in the same buffer (secondary Alexa-conjugates antibodies: Life
Technologies; HRP-conjugated antibodies: Jackson ImmunoResearch). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian(s)
for gene analysis and publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The boy was born after an uneventful pregnancy to healthy Moroccan parents who are second-degree
related (Figure 1A). Familial history was irrelevant. Motor milestones were normal until the age of three, when the boy began to fall
frequently and to develop progressive dystonia that first affected lower limbs and spread rapidly to upper limbs, trunk, and face. He lost
ambulation at the age of 5. Dystonia was permanent, exacerbated by illness or stress, and by the age of 10 was completely generalized and
extremely painful. The child spent most of the day and night crying and was unable to maintain a sufficient level of food and liquid intake
(Additional file 1: Video S1). Severe contractures of the Achilles tendons and permanent feet deformations were noticed. Cerebellar
maneuvers on upper limbs were normal. There was no ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, or pyramidal signs. Intelligence appeared normal. Medications,
including paracetamol, opioids, benzodiazepines (diazepam, clonazepam, clobazam), L-Dopa, phenobarbitone, levetiracetam, piracetam,
vigabatrin, propanolol, trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride, dantrolene, baclofen, carbamazepine, valproic acid, topiramate, chlorpromazine,
amytriptiline, tetrabenazine, 1,3,5-benzenetriol, and magnesium sulfate, were tried unsuccessfully. The child’s pain was temporally relieved
by intravenous chlorpromazine. Nabiximols led to a dramatic relief of pain and dystonia, and allowed the patient to re-acquire the ability
to swallow, sit, and perform some voluntary movement (Additional file 2: Video S2). Attempts to wean the patient off medication led to rapid
recurrence of pain. At the age of 14, a dilated cardiomyopathy was diagnosed, and ejection fraction rapidly decreased leading to death at
the age of 17.Figure 1 Familial pedigree and brain MRI of the patient. A. Familial pedigree. B. Sagittal 3DT1 gradient-echo image shows
enlargement of the vermian fissures, which demonstrated cerebellar atrophy (mainly anterior). Reformatted axial 3DT1 gradient-echo image
shows small lentiform nuclei compared to caudate nuclei volume. Slight enlargement of the lateral ventricles was also present. C. Sanger
sequencing of TOR1AIP1 shows a homozygous A to C variant at position 179,887,067 on chromosome 1 in the patient (V1). Both parents are
heterozygous carriers (IV 1 and IV2). D. The mutated glutamic acid (surrounded by blue lines) is conserved across a broad range of species.
Familial pedigree and brain MRI of the patient. A. Familial pedigree. B. Sagittal 3DT1 gradient-echo image shows enlargement of the vermian
fissures, which demonstrated cerebellar atrophy (mainly anterior). Reformatted axial 3DT1 gradient-echo image shows small lentiform nuclei
compared to caudate nuclei volume. Slight enlargement of the lateral ventricles was also present. C. Sanger sequencing of TOR1AIP1 shows a
homozygous A to C variant at position 179,887,067 on chromosome 1 in the patient (V1). Both parents are heterozygous carriers (IV 1 and
IV2). D. The mutated glutamic acid (surrounded by blue lines) is conserved across a broad range of species. Prior to death, brain MRIs
showed progressive global cerebellar atrophy (Figure 1B). Monovoxel MR spectroscopy of the left basal ganglia revealed a reduced NAA/Cr
ratio indicative of neuronal loss without iron accumulation. Brain PET scans, electroencephalographic recordings, somatosensory evoked
potentials, audition and fundus examination, electroneurography, liver and kidney echographies were unremarkable. Muscle biopsy, performed
at the age of 6, revealed no abnormalities or biochemical deficits. Glucose, proteins, lactate, blood cell count, and neurotransmitters
levels in the CSF were normal. Analyses for each of the following, performed at least once, were normal: blood cell count, ASAT, ALAT, CK,
urea, creatinine, cholesterol, triglyceride, arterial lactate and pyruvate levels, ceruloplasmin, cupremia and cupruria, alpha fetoprotein,
very long chain fatty acids and long chain fatty acids, biopterin, urine creatine and guanidinoacetate, amino acid (blood and urine) and
organo acid (urine) chromatography, high-resolution caryotype, glucocerebrosidase, galactocerebrosidase, β-galactosidase, α-N-
acetylgalacosaminidase, aryl sulfatase A, hexosaminidase A and B, α-glucosaminidase, β-glucuronidase, α-mannosidase, β-mannosidase,
α-neuraminidase, acid sphingomyelinidase mucopolysaccharidoses and oligosaccharidoses, and sialotransferrin. No acanthocytosis was present
on any of several blood smears. No mutations were identified in DYT1, PANK2, PLA2G6, SCA17, or APTX, genes known to be involved in
neurodegenerative diseases with cerebellar atrophy and/or dystonia. Given consanguinity in the family, we assumed a recessive mode of
inheritance and predicted the causative variant would fall in a region of homozygosity. Homozygosity mapping revealed six homozygous regions
greater than 2 Mb. Whole exome sequencing produced 142 million reads, 98% of which could be aligned to the targeted sequence. Mean coverage
of the targeted sequence was 77 fold. 56 687 SNVs and 7 265 indels were called. Only nine homozygous variants with frequency below 1% in
internal (IntegraGen) and public databases (dbSNP 132; HapMap; 1,000 Genomes Project) were filtered out of these. Sequencing in the patient
and in family members (primers available upon request) reduced the number of candidates to four genes, present at the homozygous state in
the patient, and at the heterozygous state in the parents: ALMS1, B3GALT1, ZNF804B, and TOR1AIP1. The A>C missense variant (c.1448A>C) at
position 179,887,067 on chromosome 1q25.1-1q25.3 in TOR1AIP1 (NM_015602), located in a 6.8-Mb homozygosity region, resulted in replacement
of a highly conserved glutamic acid with alanine at amino acid 482 (GERP++ score 5.96; PhyloP score 2.285) (Figure 1C,D). Furthermore,
pathogenicity predictions were deleterious in Align GVGD, Polyphen-2, SIFT, and MutationTaster analyses. On the contrary, the variants in
ALMS1 (NM_015120; c.2202T>A/p.S732R), B3GALT1 (c.192A>T/p.E64D, NM_020981) and ZNF804B (c3118C>A/p.L1040I, NM_181646), were predicted to be
benign by at least three of the above-mentioned programs. GERP++ and PhyloP scores were lower for the ZNF804B variant (GERP++ score 4.15,
PhyloP score 1.467), and even negative for the ALMS1 and B3GALT1 variants. There was thus a strong bioinformatic convergence towards the
pathogenic character of the TOR1AIP1 variant only. In addition, the phenotype of this patient was divergent from that of Alström syndrome
(OMIM #203800) patients who have mutations in ALMS1. TOR1AIP1 encodes LAP1, a type II transmembrane protein. LAP1 interacts with torsinA
(encoded by TOR1A gene), which is mutated in autosomal dominant dystonia (DYT1; OMIM #12810) . The amino acid mutated in our patient is
located in the luminal domain, which interacts with torsinA. This domain is common to the three isoforms and has significant homology with
LULL1, another protein that interacts with torsinA. This variant was not observed in any of 100 ethnically matched controls and was absent
from >6500 exomes at the Exome Variant Server. To gain insight into the pathogenicity of the TOR1AIP1 mutation, we evaluated primary skin
fibroblasts from the patient. By western blot, a strong reduction in the expression of LAP1 isoforms was observed relative to control cells
(Figure 2A). Immunolabeling revealed a significant reduction in LAP1 staining in the nuclear envelope of patient cells (Figure 2B). Although
the endoplasmic reticulum was generally faintly stained, some areas showed accumulation of LAP1 (Figure 2B), indicating mislocalization of
the mutated LAP1. No defects in A-type or B-type lamins, SUN1, SUN2, or nesprin-1 or 2 protein localization were observed (data not shown).
Similarly, no blebs in nuclear envelopes were observed by electron microscopy in patient cells (Figure 2C). TorsinA is not normally
expressed in fibroblasts, so we were not able to determine if this protein was mislocalized.Figure 2 Sub-expression and mislocalization of
LAP1. A. Three bands were observed using anti-LAP1 antibody in control fibroblasts. Fibroblasts from the patient had significantly less of
the larger isoforms, whereas the expression of the shorter isoform was less affected (LAP1 antibodies: courtesy of Dr. W.T. Dauer, anti-
GAPDH: Santa Cruz Biotechnology; Olympus FV-1000 confocal microscope). B. Fibroblasts from patient show a strong reduction or total absence
of LAP1 at the nuclear envelope. A faint staining for LAP1 was observed at the ER (stained with calnexin antibodies, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology; secondary Alexa-conjugates antibodies, Life Technologies; HRP-conjugated antibodies: Jackson ImmunoResearch), and strong
staining was observed in some regions (see magnification in the inset). Scale bar: 10 μm. C. Electron micrograph of patient fibroblast did
not reveal alterations at the nuclear envelope. Scale bar: 5 μm; inset: 500 nm. Imaging as described before . Sub-expression and
mislocalization of LAP1. A. Three bands were observed using anti-LAP1 antibody in control fibroblasts. Fibroblasts from the patient had
significantly less of the larger isoforms, whereas the expression of the shorter isoform was less affected (LAP1 antibodies: courtesy of Dr.
W.T. Dauer, anti-GAPDH: Santa Cruz Biotechnology; Olympus FV-1000 confocal microscope). B. Fibroblasts from patient show a strong reduction
or total absence of LAP1 at the nuclear envelope. A faint staining for LAP1 was observed at the ER (stained with calnexin antibodies, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology; secondary Alexa-conjugates antibodies, Life Technologies; HRP-conjugated antibodies: Jackson ImmunoResearch), and strong
staining was observed in some regions (see magnification in the inset). Scale bar: 10 μm. C. Electron micrograph of patient fibroblast did
not reveal alterations at the nuclear envelope. Scale bar: 5 μm; inset: 500 nm. Imaging as described before . We have searched TOR1AIP1
mutation in 10 additional patients with dystonia during childhood: Five with primary dystonia associated with cerebellar atrophy and 5 with
primary cerebellar ataxia with progressive cerebellar atrophy and severe dystonia. We did not find mutations, which seems to indicate that
TOR1AIP1 mutation is not a common cause of dystonia of unknown origin. To our knowledge, cerebellar atrophy, dystonia, and dilated
cardiomyopathy are very rarely associated, except in some mitochondrial disease or organic acidemia. Our patient did not suffer from organic
acidemia and mitochondrial disorders were unlikely given normal blood and CSF lactate levels, NMR spectroscopy, and muscular biopsy.
Cerebellar atrophy and dystonia are observed in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Wilson disease, acanthocytosis, gangliosidosis , and
Niemann Pick type C and in some cases of spinocerebellar ataxias, particularly SCA17 . These were ruled out in the patient. TUBB4A mutations
have been recently involved in patients with dystonia, cerebellar and basal ganglia atrophy and hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HABC
syndrome) . In addition to the absence of white matter abnormalities in our case, exome analysis ruled out TUBB4A mutations. In the clinical
work up, other causes of dystonia (such as DYT1 and PANK2 mutation) or cerebellar atrophy (such as PLA2G6 mutation) were also ruled out.
Much older patients who have presented with the association of a less severe dystonia and a cerebellar atrophy have been described . Extreme
painfull dystonia was one of the primary clinical features observed when we first evaluated the child at the age of 11. Absence of effect of
any usual oral medications tried by us and others, and the dramatic improvement upon administration of nabiximols, a cannabinoid derived
from cannabis plant , remains very enigmatic but as been reported in adults with central pain and paroxysmal dystonia . LAP1, encoded by
TOR1AIP1, induces the ATPase activity of torsinA , the protein mutated in DYT1, an autosomal dominant dystonia with purely neurological
phenotype. LAP1 is the only protein with such function at the nuclear envelope described so far, and hence its mislocalization likely leads
to a dramatic loss of function of torsinA and probably of other torsin family proteins . Mice lacking LAP1 have abnormal nuclear membranes
that form blebs visible by electron microscopy in all cell types . In mice lacking torsinA, blebs are only present in neurons, probably
because of the high level of torsinB in non-neuronal cells . Such blebs were not observed in patient’s fibroblasts. The mutated LAP1
expressed by the patient may retain some functions required for the structure of the nuclear envelope. Our case appears much more severe
than DYT1, not only because of the severity of dystonia itself, but because of the cardiac involvement, similar to the phenotype of
Tor1a∆E/∆E mice and with disorders of nuclear membrane such as laminopathies . Recently, cardiomyopathy has been demonstrated in a tissue-
specific mutant lacking LAP1 . One Turkish family with a homozygous nonsense mutation was recently reported . Interestingly, affected
patients also present with a cardiomyopathy, although less severe than that observed in our patient, and associated with a limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy. The present observation is unique, and, therefore, it cannot be completely ruled out that the phenotype is not related
to a mutation in a region not covered by exome sequencing. However, we believe that the association between the previously unreported
phenotype of the patient and the mutation is very likely. First, clinical evaluations failed to identify another likely cause. Second, the
mutation affects a highly conserved amino acid, is predicted to be pathogenic, is absent in 100 ethnically matched controls and in >6500
exomes, and affects a protein that interacts with a protein involved in dystonia. Third, the patient phenotype correlates with that of mice
lacking LAP1 , and functional explorations of patient cells revealed reduced LAP1 expression and mislocalization. It is known that adequate
localization of LAP1 is crucial for its function . Finally, another family has been reported with nonsense mutation leading to
cardiomyopathy . For these different reasons, we believe that sequencing of TOR1AIP1 should be performed in patients with similar peculiar
phenotypic associations. All supporting data are available within the limits of patient’s confidentiality. Additional file 1: Video S1.
Severe and painful dystonia before starting nabiximols. Additional file 2: Video S2. Video taken by the parents after three months of
nabiximols. The father asks the child to move his leg. Severe and painful dystonia before starting nabiximols. Video taken by the parents
after three months of nabiximols. The father asks the child to move his leg. Imen Dorboz and Marie Coutelier contributed equally to this
work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ID and MC conducted gene
analysis, drafted the paper, and approved the final version. ATB designed and conducted the in vitro experiments and approved the final
version. JHC conducted gene analysis and approved the final version. MEB performed the MRI and participated in patient follow-up. She
approved the final version. JL designed and conducted the in vitro experiments and approved the final version. GS supervised gene analysis
and approved the final version. GB designed the in vitro experiments and approved the final version. OBT supervised gene analysis and
approved the final version. LS followed the patient, designed in vitro experiments, drafted the paper and approved the final version. The
authors thank the patient and his family for their strong support to report this case, Alexandra Durr for helpful comments, William T. Dauer
for the anti-LAP1 antibody, the DNA and Cell Bank of the Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, and the Fond National de la Recherche
Scientifique for the fellowship attributed to M. C. (aspirant FNRS). This work was financially supported by the French National Agency for
Research (ANR), the Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale (INSERM), the Université Paris Diderot-Sorbonne Paris Cité,
DHU PROTECT and the ELA Fondation (post doc fellowship for I.D.), the Université Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 06, the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the Association Française contre les Myopathies (AFM), the Verum Foundation, the Fondation Roger de
Spoelberch, and the program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06.
