We rapport the case of a patient presenting intra-abdominal metastasis of a pinealoblastoma, via a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt, confirmed by
an anatomo-pathologic exam. The patient presented an acute hydrocephalus secondary to DVP dysfunction. The surgical manipulation of this
metastasis had caused an acute circulatory deficiency due to massive serotonin release. In this case we analyze pineal gland physiology and
serotonin effect on different systems. Tumors of the pineal region are rare in adults: 0.4 to 1% of all brain tumors, but more commun in
children: 3 to 8% [1, 2, 3]. In humans, the pineal gland is 5 mm long, 1-4 mm thick and weighs about 100 mg in men and women . Pineal
parenchymal tumors (PPT) are more rare and represent only 0.3% of all primary tumors of the central nervous system. The size of the tumor is
larger in children especially in those younger than 4 years; probably due to greater extensibility and plasticity1. The pinealoblastoma may
be associated with the thyroid papillary carcinoma and the colonic polyps . The pinealoblastoma may be also associated with a congenital
retinoblastoma. We report the case of a girl presenting a cerebral Pinealoblastoma with abdominal metastasis. The objective of this clinical
case is to analyze the physiopathological mechanism of acute insufficiency circulation during surgical manipulation of the abdominal
metastasis. Patient Z.B 14-year-old had presented, at the age of 6 years, an intracranial hypertension syndrome. The investigations had
concluded for a hydrocephalus secondary to pineal tumor compression. She had a ventriculo-peritoneal derivation (DVP) which was complicated
with postoperative meningitis and peritonitis. Bacteriological samples did not isolate germs at LCR and at peritoneal liquid. The evolution
was favorable by antibiotics probabilistic treatment based on cefotaxim, Metronidazol and Gentamycin. Then, the patient was lost of view
during 6 years. Six years later, the girl presented a second episode of intracranial hypertension syndrome secondary to the tumor volume
increase. She had a tumor incomplete resection. Tumoral anatomopathologic exam objectified a pinealoblastoma, and then the patient had
supplementary sessions of radio and chemotherapy. Two years later, the patient consulted for left iliac fossa (LIF) pain without fever. The
abdominal scanography showed mesenteric lymphadenopathy and two intra peritoneal metastasis, the one measuring 78*78*59mm and other one
30*20*20 mm of big axle. 12 hours afterwards, the girl presents a third episode of clinical intracranial hypertension syndrome. The cerebral
scanography showed an acute hydrocephalus with a derivation parried in place. The patient was proposed for review of DVP under general
anesthesia. Surgical operation consists of two times, a first time for DVP cerebral end review and a second time dedicated for DVP
peritoneal end review. The first surgical time took place without hemodynamic or ventilatory complications and objectifies a permeable
valve. The second time showed DVP distal end obstruction by a tumor mass. The patient had a complete resection of this mass. The
anatomopathologic analysis objectified a pinealoblastoma and confirmed the hypothesis of intra peritoneal metastasis tumor via DVP. The
manipulation of the tumor mass had caused a circulatory deficiency marqued by an impregnable Sp02, low Pet CO2, a heart rate at 130 flapping
/ min and an impregnable blood-pressure requiring the administration of Noradrenalin at the dose of 2 mg/h, without important per operative
bleeding (300 ml). The postoperative evolution was marked by an anasarca, a myocardial suffering with troponine at 7 ng/l, hemodynamic
unstable state with systolic blood-pressure oscillating between 70 and 210 mm Hg and a sino-atrial tachycardia to 150-170 flapping/min
slowed down by amiodarone. 48 h later the patient had become conscious with a correct hemodynamic state authorizing the stopping of
catecholamine. Normalization of troponine and extubation at 4 days postoperative. To note that cardiac ultrasound scan was not made. After a
week stays in intensive care the girl regained her domicile with a discovery, in post intensive care consultation, of a left lower limb
thrombophlebite needing anticoagulation. The pineal region comprises several anatomical structures that are host to a spectrum of
histologically different types of tumors: gliomas, epandymomas, dermoid cysts, meningiomas, cavernomas and metastases. The pineal gland may
also present tumors that derive from their own histological components of different behavior. The pineal body parenchyma contains both a
large cell, the pineocyte, and a small cell, the pinealoblast: an apparent immature form of the large cell. A pinealocytoma arises from the
large cells and a pinealoblastoma from the small cells . Traditionaly, pineal parenchymal tumors (PPT) have been divided, by world health
organization (WHO), into 3 types: pinealocytomas, pinealoblastomas and mixed or transitional tumors. This classification is the most
commonly accepted. Pinealoblastomas are considered WHO class IV. The electron microscopy plays a useful role in this classification. The
pineal gland parenchyma tumor causes frequently ventricular obstruction. The obstruction may require shunting via a ventriculo-peritoneal
shunt for relief of hydrocephalus. The complications of ventriculo-peritoneal shunting for hydrocephalus are numerous and include
malfunction, infection, migration of shunt, perforation of viscera, bowel obstruction and metastatic tumor spread [6, 8, 9]. In our case the
anatomopathologic exam of the intra-abdominal tumor has confirmed the hypothesis of metastasis tumor by ventriculo-peritoneal shunt. The
pineal bland is a central structure in the cardian system that is innervated by a neural multi-synaptic pathway originating in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) located in the anterior hypothalamus. The SCN is the major circadian pace maker of the mammalian brain and
plays a central role in the generation and regulation of biological rhythms . The biosynthetic pathway of melatonin has been studied
thoroughly (Figure 1). L Tryptophan, an essential amine acid, is taken from circulation and hydroxylated then decarboxylated given serotonin
(5 HT). The subsequent N acetylation of serotonin by N acetyl transferase is the major regulation step in the biosynthesis: darkness
stimulates, light inhibits the synthesis of the N acetyltransferase at pineal gland, leading to a very marked rhythm for melatonin: the
maximum being located at night in physiological condition . In our case, the intra-abdominal metastasis tumor produces serotonin but there
is no acetylation by N acetyltransferase because this enzyme is synthesized at pineal gland under control of light stimulation. Then there
is accumulation of serotonin. Surgical metastasis tumor manipulation can produces very important plasmatic serotonin levels like in
carcinoid tumors (Figure 2). Melatonin synthesis at pineal gland Serotonin accumulation in the pinealoblastoma intra-abdominal metastasis
Serotonin receptors are classified into 7 types: 5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-HT3, 5-HT4, 5-HT5, 5-HT6 and 5-HT7. Serotonin receptors are coupled to G
proteins except 5-HT3 receptors which are receptor-channels also called ionotropic receptors. These receptors are localized in brain and in
peripheral organs but their distribution are not homogeneous . The signaling pathways to witch these receptors are coupled are known but it
is hardly possible to systemize clinical effects corresponding to their stimulation. Serotonin has a positive ionotropic effect and a
positive chronotropic action by 5-HT4 receptor stimulation and could take part in the genesis of certain rhythm disorders like in our case.
Also, the myocardial ischemia observed in this case can be explicated by coronary vasoconstriction by 5-HT2 effect. Serotonin induces either
a vasoconstriction, in particular of renal vessels, a vasodilatation. The response would depend on the preliminary tone of vessels and on
their normal or pathological state . Serotonin constricts veins and promotes platelet aggregating then seems to induce venous thromboses .
The action on blood pressure is complex, serotonin gives either sever hypotension or hypertension or no modification. The serotonin
bronchoconstrictive action was not observed in our case but the patient presented an anasarca due to the important capillary permeability
and diarrhea caused by increased intestinal motility by stimulation of 5-HT4 and 5-HT3 receptors . Serotonin is converted into inactive
molecules by biotransformation: 1°/ Oxidative deamination of the lateral amino chain by monoamine oxidase (MAO), leading to 5-hydroxy-indol-
acetaldehyde which is then oxidized into 5-hydroxy-indol acetic acid (5-HIAA) found in urines in quantities normally lower than 10mg/ 24h.
The 5-HIAA was not dosed in our case [11, 12]. 2°/ Conjugation by glucuronic acid or sulfate of the hydroxyl group OH in 5 position .
Pinealoblastoma metastatic tumor can be considerated like neuroendocrin tumor which secretes serotonin and caused circulation deficiency,
myocardial ischemia, bronchoconstriction, venous thrombosis, anasarca. The anaestisist may be confronted with these problems either in or
after surgery. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This study has been conducted by the anesthesia-reanimation team
of Sahloul hospital in Sousse Tunisia. Each member of the team has participated at different levels of the study. Dr Ladib Mohamed was the
neurosurgeon in charge of the patient.
