In clinical settings, bacterial infections are usually diagnosed by isolation of colonies after laboratory cultivation followed by species
identification with biochemical tests. However, biochemical tests result in misidentification due to similar phenotypes of closely related
species. In such cases, 16S rDNA sequence analysis is useful. Herein, we report the first case of an Achromobacter-associated buckle
infection that was diagnosed by 16S rDNA sequence analysis. This report highlights the significance of Achromobacter spp. in device-related
ophthalmic infections. A 56-year-old woman, who had received buckling surgery using a silicone solid tire for retinal detachment eighteen
years prior to this study, presented purulent eye discharge and conjunctival hyperemia in her right eye. Buckle infection was suspected and
the buckle material was removed. Isolates from cultures of preoperative discharge and from deposits on the operatively removed buckle
material were initially identified as Alcaligenes and Corynebacterium species. However, sequence analysis of a 16S rDNA clone library using
the DNA extracted from the deposits on the buckle material demonstrated that all of the 16S rDNA sequences most closely matched those of
Achromobacter spp. We concluded that the initial misdiagnosis of this case as an Alcaligenes buckle infection was due to the unreliability
of the biochemical test in discriminating Achromobacter and Alcaligenes species due to their close taxonomic positions and similar
phenotypes. Corynebacterium species were found to be contaminants from the ocular surface. Achromobacter spp. should be recognized as
causative agents for device-related ophthalmic infections. Molecular species identification by 16S rDNA sequence analysis should be combined
with conventional cultivation techniques to investigate the significance of Achromobacter spp. in ophthalmic infections. A 16S ribosomal DNA
(rDNA) clone library analysis was performed for microbiological diagnosis in a clinical case of buckle infection. This type of analysis has
previously been applied to a number of environmental samples to examine the microbial diversity within an ecological niche . In clinical
settings, it can be used to determine the microbial compositions of specimens, which would be beneficial to human health and would further
our understanding of the pathological manifestations due to chronic infections . In addition, in acute infections, causative bacteria are
expected to be readily identified from the predominant sequences in specimens when a 16S rDNA clone library analysis is employed. Buckle
infection is a rare postoperative complication of retinal detachment. It generally occurs in the late stages of postoperative course.
Although resident bacteria on the ocular surface, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis, have been reported as the
causative pathogens , environmental bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Stenotrophomonas maltophilia can also cause infections . Some
of the previous articles describing device-related ophthalmic infections reported isolation of a single pathogen. Considering that we
currently know relatively very little about the diversity of microorganisms in nature , culture-independent molecular approaches to detect
the causative agents may be useful for diagnosis of buckle infections. More than one pathogenic strains and unreported environmental strains
could be detected if the molecular genetic approach were applied to those cases. Herein, we report the first case of an Achromobacter
species-associated buckle infection diagnosed by use of a 16S rDNA clone library analysis. A 56-year-old woman complained of purulent
discharge and conjunctival hyperemia in her right eye. These symptoms began several months prior to the first visit to our hospital.
Eighteen years prior, she had received an uneventful scleral buckling surgery using a solid silicone tire in her right eye for
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Thirteen years after the surgery, she was administered oral cephem antibiotics once on suspicion of a
buckle infection. Although the symptoms temporarily improved, chronic inflammation persisted for several years. Because subsequent topical
quinolone and topical steroid treatments were ineffective, she visited our hospital for rigorous diagnosis and radical treatment. On the
first visit, the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye. Observation by a slit lamp microscope revealed conjunctival
hyperemia, purulent discharge, and episcleritis. A conjunctival fistula was also observed in the upper quadrants, and large yellowish
conjunctival follicles around the exposed buckle material were present (Figure 1). After examination, we removed the buckle material based
on the diagnosis of recurrent buckle infection.Figure 1 Pre-operative anterior segments photograph. The patient is looking downward.
Conjunctival fistula in the upper quadrants and large yellowish conjunctival follicles (black arrows) around the exposed buckle material
(white arrowhead) can be observed. Pre-operative anterior segments photograph. The patient is looking downward. Conjunctival fistula in the
upper quadrants and large yellowish conjunctival follicles (black arrows) around the exposed buckle material (white arrowhead) can be
observed. Pre-operatively, Alcaligenes and Corynebacterium species were isolated from the eye discharge. The bacterial identification and
drug susceptibility tests were performed automatically using a MicroScan WalkAway 96 SI (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Tokyo, Japan).
During the surgery, a 120° solid silicone tire was removed and the scleral bed was irrigated with 0.5% moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution.
Post-operatively, 300 mg/day of oral cefdinir was administered for 3 days, and both 0.5% moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution and 0.1%
betamethasone sodium phosphate ophthalmic solution were administered 5 times daily for 2 weeks. After removal of the silicone tire, the
symptoms improved rapidly. Retinal detachment had not recurred at this point. Many small yellowish-white deposits were found on the surface
of the removed buckle material (Figure 2A). Gram staining of the deposits showed a large number of gram-negative rods. Alcaligenes and
Corynebacterium species were also isolated from the buckle material. Species identification and drug susceptibility results were obtained
through laboratory procedures identical to those performed preoperatively. The drug susceptibility of the Alcaligenes strain isolated from
the buckle was identical to that of the strain preoperatively isolated from the eye discharge (Table 1). In the case of Corynebacterium,
there was a definite discrepancy in the drug susceptibilities between the strains obtained pre- and postoperatively; the strain isolated
from the eye discharge was resistant to cephalosporin, but the strain isolated from buckle depositions was susceptible to all antibiotics
tested (Table 2). Microbiological examination of the removed buckle material indicated that the causative pathogen is a bacterium that
belongs to the family Alcaligenaceae. We employed a 16S rDNA clone library analysis to identify the causative bacterium at the species level
and to assess the possibility of the involvement of other uncultured species in the buckle infection. Initially, the buckle material was
divided into two pieces, and one piece was stained with ruthenium red for examination by scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Figure 2B). The
other piece was placed into 15 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and sonicated repeatedly using a VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics
Gmbh, Berlin, Germany) at 60 W for 15 min at room temperature. PBS was replaced twice, and the final sonicate was used for DNA
extraction.Figure 2 Pictures of the buckle material. (A) Buckle material immediately after the extraction. Many yellowish-white deposits
(arrows) on the surface of the buckle material can be observed. (B) Ruthenium red staining. Deposits were stained red by ruthenium red for
scanning electron microscopy. Pictures of the buckle material. (A) Buckle material immediately after the extraction. Many yellowish-white
deposits (arrows) on the surface of the buckle material can be observed. (B) Ruthenium red staining. Deposits were stained red by ruthenium
red for scanning electron microscopy. The drug susceptibilities of the strain of Alcaligenes sp. and the strain of Corynebacterium sp.
Hyphen: not performed. S: susceptible. I: intermediate. R: resistant. Although the two strains of Alcaligenes sp. show the same profiles,
the two strains of Corynebacterium sp. show different profiles. Summary of 16S rDNA clone library analysis of the infected buckle material
a)Twenty-one 16S rDNA sequences obtained (631 bp of high quality sequence) are classified basing on SNIPs. b)Number of sequence belonging to
each sequence type is shown. c)Top hit microorganisims by which Blastn search of each sequence type indicated are listed. The number in
parenthesis shows identical base (bp)/alignment length (bp) to 16S rDNA from indicated species. Bacterial DNA was extracted from 200 μL of
the final PBS sonicate using Extrap Soil Kit Plus ver.2 (Nippon Steel Kankyo Engineering Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). The 16S rDNA gene
fragments were amplified with the purified DNA as a template and a universal eubacterial 16S rDNA primer set, 27f
(5'-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3') and Bac1392R (5'-ACGGGCGGTGTGAC-3'). After cloning the amplified products, the sequences were obtained from 24
clones using 27f as the sequencing primer. The low-quality sequences (Phred score <15) were trimmed, and the sequences were analysed for
homology to NCBI database sequences using the Blast program. Of the 24 clones, high-quality sequences were obtained from 23 clones, but two
of these were from the genomic regions other than 16S rDNAs. All of the partial 16S rDNA sequences obtained from 21 clones showed the best
match to those of Achromobacter species (Table 2; identity ranged from 99.4—99.8% over 99% of alignments with query sequences). It is likely
that the isolates initially identified as Alcaligenes spp. were in fact Achromobacter spp. This misidentification was probably due to the
low discriminatory power of the biochemical test for the species in the family Alcaligenaceae. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
observed among the sequences (12 sequences were identical). These SNPs might indicate that several different Achromobacter strains were
present in biofilms on the buckle material, although this was only the sequence diversity among the ribosomal RNA operons in a single
Achromobacter chromosome. To further refine the identification of causative bacterial species, the most predominant 16S rDNA sequences
obtained were aligned with those from 43 reference species (obtained from Ribosomal Database Project ver. 10) in the family Alcaligenaceae.
We aligned the 613-bp regions encompassed within well-conserved regions using the Clustal W program to adjust the positions to be compared.
All 21 of the sequences were phylogenetically positioned closely with the sequences from Achromobacter spanius (Figure 3). Based on these
results, we conclude that an Achromobacter sp. closely related to A. spanius was the causative agent in this case.SEM of the buckle material
showed numerous rod-shaped bacteria surrounded by a biofilm-like material, consistent with our conclusions from the 16S rDNA clone library
analysis (Figure 4, A and B).Figure 3 Phylogenetic relationship between the isolate from buckle material and other members of the family
Alcaligenaceae . Only the most predominant ST1 sequence (indicated by red and asterisks) was analysed. The tree was constructed using the
neighbour-joining algorithm. Numbers at nodes are bootstrap percentages based on 1,000 replications; only values >70% are shown. Bar, 0.01
substitutions per nucleotide position.Figure 4 Scanning electron microscopic images of the buckle material. (A) Low magnification. Deposits
attached after fixation by glutaraldehyde. (B) High magnification. Numerous rod-shaped bacteria surrounded by biofilm-like material are
observed. Phylogenetic relationship between the isolate from buckle material and other members of the family Alcaligenaceae . Only the most
predominant ST1 sequence (indicated by red and asterisks) was analysed. The tree was constructed using the neighbour-joining algorithm.
Numbers at nodes are bootstrap percentages based on 1,000 replications; only values >70% are shown. Bar, 0.01 substitutions per nucleotide
position. Scanning electron microscopic images of the buckle material. (A) Low magnification. Deposits attached after fixation by
glutaraldehyde. (B) High magnification. Numerous rod-shaped bacteria surrounded by biofilm-like material are observed. In clinical settings,
cultivation and phenotypic tests of isolated bacteria employing traditional culture techniques is the first step in diagnosis of infectious
diseases. In this case, we aimed to identify the causative pathogens for buckle infection by culturing the eye discharge and buckle
material. These cultures resulted in the successful isolation of the two candidates, Alcaligenes and Corynebacterium species. We surmised
that Corynebacterium spp. were a contaminant as they are one of the resident bacteria on the ocular surface , and Corynebacterium isolates
from the discharge and buckle material showed different antimicrobial susceptibilities. Therefore, these different strains of
Corynebacterium were most likely from the ocular surface. Correspondingly, the 16S rDNA sequences derived from Corynebacterium spp. were not
identified in 16S rDNA clone library analysis. We presume that the Corynebacterium spp. were washed away by irrigation during surgery and
sonication because they only attached to the surface of the buckle material and not embedded within biofilm. Although Alcaligenes spp. were
initially considered to be a causative agents, we had doubts about the microbiological identification based on the following observations.
First, the isolate in this case showed resistance to aminoglycosides while the majority of Alcaligenes species have been reported to be
susceptible to gentamicin . Second, the taxonomy of the family Alcaligenaceae is continually revised and updated and the biochemical test is
unreliable in discriminating Alcaligenes and Achromobacter due to their close phylogenetic relationship . Device-related biofilm infections
are often caused by opportunistic environmental pathogens and are often polymicrobial. The frequent discrepancy between direct microscopic
counts and the number of culturable bacteria from environmental samples is one of several indications that we currently know very little
about the diversity of microorganisms in nature . In addition, precise species identification is typically problematic in environmental
isolates. Therefore, we employed a 16S rDNA clone library analysis to precisely classify the isolate at the species level and to test the
possibility that the biofilm in this case was polymicrobial and contained uncultivable environmental bacteria. Although 16S rDNA clone
library analysis using 24 clones is insufficient for excluding the presence of other pathogenic strains, our results show that this case was
buckle infection caused by an Achromobacter species alone that is closely related to A. spanius. To our knowledge, this is the first case
report of buckle infection by Achromobacter sp. Reliable epidemiological data on bacterial isolates are important for empirical
antimicrobial therapy; therefore, precise identification of bacterial species is essential. Advances in surgery are expected to increase the
opportunities for embedding medical devices within the body with a concomitant increase in the risk for device-related infections by
opportunistic environmental pathogens. In fact, there are some reports describing Achromobacter-related infections from artificial devices
such as prosthetic knee joints and contact lenses [20, 21]. Clinicians should take into account the inherent limitations of traditional
microbiological assays and combine various approaches to obtain precise diagnoses when necessary. These efforts will likely increase the
reliability of epidemiological data in the field of infectious diseases. The taxonomy of the genus Alcaligenes is closely intertwined with
that of the genus Achromobacter and is frequently revised . Alcaligenes has also been isolated from clinical specimens, including ophthalmic
samples [12, 22–29]. Coenye et al. reported that several isolates identified phenotypically as Alcaligenes species belonged to the genus
Achromobacter based on genetic analysis, and they proposed two novel Achromobacter species from these isolates . It is important clinically
to discriminate Alcaligenes and Achromobacter because epidemiological data demonstrate that 72.7% of clinical Achromobacter isolates showed
multi-drug resistance while all of the Alcaligenes isolates tested were susceptible to imipenem, gentamicin, and ciprofloxacin . With regard
to the current clinical case, drugs to which Achromobacter spp. are potentially susceptible were initially administered, followed by the
administration of drugs to which Achromobacter spp. are known to be susceptible. However, inflammation around the buckle material continued
for several years. SEM observations were indicative of the long clinical course, recurrent symptoms, and Achromobacter’s resistance to
antibiotic treatment. Therefore, the Achromobacter-associated buckle infection case reported here is valuable for considering the
epidemiology and antimicrobial therapy of ophthalmic infections. The emergence of device-related infections caused by Achromobacter may be
intractable, even when efficacious antibiotics are administered. In conclusion, Achromobacter spp. should be recognized as causative agents
for device-related ophthalmic infections. Molecular species identification by 16S rDNA sequence analysis should be combined with
conventional cultivation techniques to investigate the significance of Achromobacter spp. in ophthalmic infections. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case and the accompanying images. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interest. Authors’ contributions FK, KK, and TN treated the patient. HE performed molecular genetic investigations, made
the final diagnosis, and wrote the manuscript. YM and TK reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We
would like to thank Nippon Steel & Sumikin Eco-Tech Corporation for technical support of the 16S rDNA clone library analysis.
