Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 70 Final Diagnosis: Rheumatoid arthritis-associated corneal ulcer Symptoms:
Blurring of vision Medication: Vancomycin • etanercept • adalimumab Clinical Procedure: Anterior lamellar keratoplasty Specialty:
Rheumatology Unusual clinical course Severe extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis usually occur in advanced stages of the
disease. In particular, ocular involvement may lead to inflammatory corneal ulceration, in which therapy is challenging owing to its
association with systemic vasculitis. Close collaboration between ophthalmologists and rheumatologists is paramount in providing the best
treatment approach in this sight-threatening condition. We present a case of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis associated with corneal
melting in the absence of other typical clinical manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis flare. The rheumatoid arthritis-associated corneal
ulcer was complicated in our case by concomitant infection with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, which was treated with
intravenous vancomycin after an initial antimicrobial ophthalmic solution proved not to be making adequate improvement in the corneal
healing. The recurrent corneal melting appeared to be aggravated by the ophthalmic infection while on immunosuppressive regimen. In patients
on biologic agents, intravenous antibiotics must be considered in addition to ophthalmic eye solution in controlling the infectious process.
Excluding concomitant ophthalmic infection is equally important before initiation of high-dose steroid and immunosuppressive regimens.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a symmetric, inflammatory, poly-arthritis of unknown etiology. Although the central pathology is within the
synovium of diarthrodial joints, extra-articular manifestations occur in about 40% of RA patients with positive rheumatoid factor (RF). The
ocular complications of RA include scleritis, which is particularly important because slight inflammatory changes may cause severe
interference with vision. Rarely, extra-articular manifestations can be severe and not respond to immunosuppressive therapy.
Immunosuppressive therapy in itself poses a major risk for infections. We report a case of RA with severe recurrent scleritis with corneal
ulceration, which did not respond to immunosuppressive therapy because of superimposed bacterial infection. A 70-year-old female with
history of RA, achieved clinical remission with etanercept, which she self-discontinued. Five months later, she developed blurring of vision
and pain in the left eye accompanied with burning sensation and watery discharge. Ophthalmology evaluation was consistent with corneal
perforation at 11o’clock position in the left eye secondary to corneal melt attributed to RA. She underwent anterior lamellar keratoplasty
on the left eye using a 3-mm donor corneal graft and was treated with intravenous corticosteroids (CS) – methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day.
Conjunctival aspirate, ocular discharge, and corneal tissue cultures grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). The patient
was started on topical vancomycin along with intravenous CS, which was later changed to oral CS, and 2 weeks later etanercept 50 mg SQ
weekly was restarted. On follow-up in the eye clinic 8 days later, she was found to have dehiscence of the inferior sutures along with
corneal dehiscence and graft failure. Evaluation was also suggestive of the graft having epithelial defects, positive Seidel test with
shallow anterior chamber, thinning, and a small area of leakage. Based on corneal graft culture, the patient was also found to have
concomitant MRSA infection, which was sensitive to vancomycin, linezolid, tetracycline, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. She was
readmitted and restarted on intravenous CS, vancomycin eye drops, and intravenous vancomycin 1 g IVPB every 12 h. She thereafter underwent
repeat graft revision and anterior lamellar keratoplasty. Intravenous CS was switched to oral CS and etanercept was switched to adalimumab
40 mg SQ every 2 weeks in an attempt to control the eye inflammation. After 2 weeks, she was re-admitted with septic shock due to left lower
extremity cellulitis and nosocomial pneumonia complicated by acute renal failure requiring hemodialysis. Initial blood cultures grew
Morganella morgagnii, which was sensitive to amikacin, ceftazidime, imipenem/cilastatin, gentamicin, ceftriaxone, and tobramycin.
Endotracheal aspirate culture grew Pseudomonas, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, and multi-drug
resistant (MDR) Acinetobacter baumannii, while repeat blood cultures were positive for ESBL Klebsiella pneumoniae and urine cultures grew
Candida albicans. She was treated initially with intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam for the lower extremity cellulitis, which was later
changed to intravenous imipenem/cilastatin and intravenous fluconazole. Metronidazole and vancomycin were initiated enterally because she
also developed antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Intravenous gentamicin and aztreonam were also added and administered at renal dosing
parameters for additional therapeutic coverage for the Morganella-associated sepsis and based on other culture results. The patient
subsequently developed severe hypoxic respiratory failure secondary to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) due to the underlying
septic shock and died in the ICU. Just prior to her last admission, she was seen in the eye clinic and her corneal graft was found to be
intact and healing well. The predominant ocular manifestations of RA include dry eyes in the form of Sjögren’s syndrome, scleritis, and
corneal ulceration, which may lead to blindness . The pathogenesis of RA-associated corneal ulcer is attributed to a local imbalance between
levels of a specific collagenase (MMP-1) and its tissue inhibitor (TIMP-1), causing the rapid keratolysis . Furthermore, it has been
suggested that corneal ulceration heralds the presence of active vasculitis locally and systemically requiring aggressive immunosuppression
. Systemic steroids are the mainstay of treatment in the acute management of corneal ulceration, but in severe cases combination
immunosuppression is required such as TNF-alfa inhibitors. This case illustrates a rare extra-articular presentation of RA manifesting only
with corneal ulcer in the absence of clinically active flares of joint inflammation. The rheumatoid-associated corneal ulcer was complicated
in our patient with concomitant MRSA infection. When corneal dehiscence occurred again, we decided to start intravenous vancomycin after
revision of corneal graft, because corneal melt can be rapidly progressive and can lead to endophthalmitis if undertreated. The patient
received only 1 dose of adalimumab, because biologic agents have been shown to be effective for ulcerative keratitis. A previous case of
rheumatoid corneal ulceration complicated by infection with MRSA has suggested that corneal infection can accelerate the corneal melting.
This occurs by three postulated mechanisms brought about by the infection: (1) inflammatory cells migrate to the central portion of the
cornea, which is usually devoid of inflammatory cells; (2) bacterial toxins and proteases may hasten the melting process; and (3) increased
ratio of matrix metalloproteinases-to-tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases . Our patient had a long history of seropositive RA and
presented with corneal melting, but her RA was well-controlled with the immunosuppressive regimen. The onset of corneal melting could
represent either RA progression or development of severe eye infection while on immunosuppressive regimen. Our patient had increased
clinical risk factors for the development of ocular complications – immune compromised state, presence of concomitant bacterial eye
infection, and the RA with seropositive markers (RF and anti-CCP), which have been shown to represent higher risk of worse inflammatory
ocular disease . Although immunosuppressive therapy is a major risk factor of corneal infection in RA patients , previous reports have
suggested that autoimmune corneal melting is an indication for systemic immunosuppression to avoid morbidity and mortality . In a
retrospective study done to compare the effect of tumor necrosis factor inhibition in managing RA manifestations, it was reported that there
is a higher clinical efficacy in treating joint inflammation (100%) compared to inflammatory eye disease (38%), suggesting differences in
the pathogenesis in these 2 inflammatory sites. The differential effect of TNF inhibitors implies that immunosuppressive therapy for one
target site might not work for another organ involvement, even in the same individual . Graft survival is highly influenced by adequate
control of immune-mediated corneal melting and prevention of superimposed corneal surface infection. A retrospective review on rheumatoid
arthritis-associated corneal perforations by Bernauer et al. reported that 80% of early (within the first 6 months) graft failures were
attributed to recurrent corneal melting following penetrating keratoplasty. This suggests the need for an aggressive immunosuppressive
regimen in the postoperative state. However, it was also observed that concomitant corneal infection was responsible for most graft failures
after 6 months . We reported a rare case of extra-articular manifestation of RA in the form of corneal ulcer, complicated by MRSA infection
in the absence of active disease flare, with systemic and articular features. In patients with RA on immunosuppressive therapy presenting
with corneal ulcer, superimposed bacterial infection should be treated aggressively with intravenous antibiotics and not just topical
antibiotics. It is equally important to exclude possible underlying infection, which must be treated appropriately before starting the
immunosuppressive regimen. Statement All authors have no conflicts of interest. There were no funding sources to declare.
