The presence of foreign bodies in the bladder often falls within questionable practices in psychiatric settings or in iatrogenic instances
such as during endoscopy or migration of foreign bodies around the bladder remaining after surgery on organs close to the bladder.
Psychiatric disorders have been reported in patients admitted for self-introduction of foreign bodies in the bladder during an act of sexual
satisfaction. However, to the best of our knowledge, no similar case in the context of suicide has been reported in the English-language
literature. A 56-year-old Moroccan man known to have untreated paranoid schizophrenia and a history of several previous suicide attempts was
presented to the emergency unit of our hospital after self-stabbing with a 15cm sewing needle. His stab wound was located at the hypogastric
region of the abdomen, with full penetration of the needle into the abdomen. A computed tomographic scan showed a breach on the dome of the
bladder responsible for extravasation of the contrast dye, which revealed a peritoneal cavity effusion of average abundance and a suspected
lesion of the left pelvic ureter. An exploratory laparotomy was performed. Approximately 1000mL of widely dispersed fluid was observed in
the abdominal cavity. During exploration of the bladder, two centimetric intrabladder breaches were found, one of which was a breach of the
left pelvic ureter without other associated lesions. The breaches were sutured, and a ureteral catheter was mounted. The patient’s post-
operative follow-up was unremarkable. The wide variety of ways that foreign bodies are introduced into the lower urinary tract pose
diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties for the urologist. Management of these patients is facilitated by the use of endoscopy. The
discovery of foreign bodies in the bladder always raises questions about the circumstances of introduction or migration of these materials,
as well as the psychological profile of the patient. This condition can be life-threatening. Timely and appropriate medical care should be
accompanied by psychiatric care in such cases. A 56-year-old Moroccan man known to have untreated paranoid schizophrenia with a history of
several suicide attempts was presented to the emergency room of our institution six hours after self-stabbing with a 15cm sewing needle that
had entirely penetrated into his abdomen. Upon clinical examination, he was found to be conscious with incoherent speech and stable vital
signs. During his abdominal examination, three entry points were found at the hypogastric region (one on the midline and two on the right
side) with generalized abdominal tenderness. The patient presented neither hematuria nor rectal bleeding.An X-ray of the abdomen revealed a
sewing needle projecting into the bladder area with no signs of pneumoperitoneum (Figure 1).A computed tomographic (CT) scan and a cystogram
both showed a breach on the dome of the bladder visualized as extravasation of contrast dye, peritoneal effusion of average abundance and a
suspected lesion of the left pelvic ureter, with no lesions in the digestive tract (Figures 2 and 3).Figure 1 X-ray of the patient revealing
a sewing needle projecting into the bladder area. Figure 2 Excretory phase computed tomographic scan showing lesions of the bladder and the
left ureter. Figure 3 Cystogram showing the sewing needle and contrast extravasation dye. X-ray of the patient revealing a sewing needle
projecting into the bladder area. Excretory phase computed tomographic scan showing lesions of the bladder and the left ureter. Cystogram
showing the sewing needle and contrast extravasation dye. The patient was admitted to the operating room, where an exploratory laparotomy
was performed. Approximately 1000mL of widely dispersed fluid was observed in the abdominal cavity. During the exploration of the bladder,
two centimetric intrabladder breaches and a breach on the left pelvic ureter were found without other associated lesions. These breaches
were repaired by surgical suture, and a ureteral catheter was mounted. The incision was closed primarily in two layers, and a urinary
catheter was placed. No problems were encountered during the patient’s peri-operative clinical course. The patient received psychiatric
care, and his post-operative follow-up was unremarkable. Foreign bodies in the bladder can occur either by self-introduction or by migration
from adjacent organs . Introduction of foreign bodies can be voluntary and related to a psychiatric disorder or can occur by accidental
penetration of objects or iatrogenic trauma due to firearms . This presentation can occur in various situations and can sometimes be life-
threatening . It often raises questions about the psychological profile of the patient. Psychiatric disorders have been reported in patients
admitted for self-introduction of foreign bodies into the bladder as an act of sexual satisfaction . However, to the best of our knowledge,
no case involving a patient with suicidal intent has been reported in the English-language literature to date. Bladder rupture may be
intraperitoneal, extraperitoneal or mixed intra- and extraperitoneal . The clinical presentation of these injuries may vary from simple
urinary symptoms suggestive of cystitis to signs of acute abdomen . Signs of bladder injuries may be overlooked, especially in the context
of polytraumatized patients, but the presence of the triad of macroscopic hematuria, suprapubic pain and voiding dysfunction suggest the
diagnosis and indicate exploration of the bladder . X-rays show a radio-opaque foreign body , but they may be unremarkable when the foreign
body is radiotransparent. In this situation, an ultrasonogram can objectify bright echogenic foci with distal acoustic shadowing . CT scans
of the bladder can be taken in two ways, either by intravenous contrast injection or retrograde filling by contrast dye. The intravenous
route is very imprecise in showing bladder rupture because bladder distension is insufficient. A cystogram is preferable in this situation
because it has a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 100% . The intra- or extra-peritoneal nature of the injury, which is easily
visualized on the cystogram, determines the therapeutic approach to be used. A pelvic CT scan provides valuable information on the status of
other pelvic organs as well as the pelvis itself . Cystoscopy may also help in making the diagnosis in the context of radiotransparent
foreign bodies by showing their nature and size, and it may also aid in identifying complications. It can be performed for therapeutic
objectives for extraction of these bodies when no associated lesions are found, and it may be used in cases of extra-peritoneal bladder
breach . The therapeutic approach depends on the patient’s condition, the assessment of the lesions, and the size, shape and nature of the
intravesical foreign body . The extraction of a foreign body in the bladder can be performed through surgical exploration. A suprapubic
cystostomy may be performed for large foreign bodies, when one of the extremities of the bodies is engaged in the bladder wall and when
attempts at endoscopic extraction fail . Finally, it is necessary to treat any existing urinary tract infection by using appropriate
antibiotics as well as tetanus vaccination, and psychiatric care should be requested to prevent a recurrence when the injury is a result of
a voluntary act . The wide variety of ways that foreign bodies are introduced into the lower urinary tract always raise curiosity because
such injuries are often related to sexual or erotic acts in a psychiatric context. To the best of our knowledge, no previous case of
attempted suicide by self-stabbing with foreign bodies has been reported to date. Radiology and endoscopy facilitate the diagnosis and
therapeutic care in these patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardians for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed
tomography. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YK was the principal
author and major contributor in writing the manuscript. ST, MA, SM, JEA, MFT and AK analyzed and interpreted the patient data and reviewed
the literature. MJE and MHF read and corrected the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported
by the Department of Urology, Hassan II University Hospital.
