Myositis ossificans traumatica is an unusual complication following a muscle contusion injury. A significantly large myositic mass causing
ankylosis of the elbow is even rarer. We report a 13-year-old boy who presented with a 14-month history of a fixed elbow with no movement
and a palpable bony mass in the anterior aspect of the elbow. He had sustained significant trauma to the affected limb 1 month prior to
onset of symptoms, which was managed by native massage and bandaging for 4 weeks. The clinicoradiological diagnosis was suggestive of
myositis ossificans, and the myositic mass was completely excised. Histopathology revealed lamellar bone. The 2-year follow-up showed full
function of the affected limb and no signs of recurrence. We report this case of clinical interest due to the unusually large myositic mass.
Heterotrophic ossification of the upper limb is a rare post-traumatic complication.1) Moreover, it is not very common among children. The
localized form of myositis ossificans of the upper limb often occurs in the brachialis muscle. When such ossification occurs around a joint,
fixed deformities and complete restriction of motion can result. Although the condition is said to be self limiting,2) excision is
unavoidable in circumstances where the myositic mass limits daily activities. High suspicion is needed to diagnose this condition
clinically. A painless enlarging mass occurring after single or repeated trauma should lead to a suspicion of myositis ossificans.3)
Ultrasound or radiographs should be used to make the clinicoradiological diagnosis. We experienced an unusually large myositic mass in a
teenage boy, which restricted elbow motion. Complete surgical excision led to significant improvement of elbow function. A 13-year-old boy
presented with a 14-month history of a fixed left elbow with no movement. He had sustained significant trauma to the affected limb 1 month
prior to onset of symptoms. He had received treatment in the form of native massage and bandaging with immobilization for 4 weeks. However,
he had difficulty moving his left elbow, which resulted in a fixed flexion deformity with no further movement. He had difficulties with
daily activities such as clothing himself and tying shoes. However, he managed using the normal limb, as he was right handed. A clinical
examination revealed bony ankylosis of the left elbow at 40° of flexion. A palpable diffuse irregular bony mass was present in the anterior
aspect of the elbow but the margins could not be delineated. No part of the bony mass or any other bony prominence was tender and warm. The
arm and the forearm segment appeared to be wasted when compared to those of the other limb. No distal neurovascular compromise or any
similar lesion was detected elsewhere in the body. Standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the affected elbow revealed an
unusually large mass connecting the distal humerus to the ulna (Fig. 1). Radio-opacity of the mass was similar to that of mature bone.
Complete hemogram and erythrocyte sedimentation rate values were within normal ranges. Considering the physical demand of the patient and
the unusual size of the myositic mass, surgical excision was planned. The procedure was performed under regional anesthesia with the patient
in the supine position and the limb abducted at the shoulder. An 8-cm curvilinear incision starting about 3 cm proximal to the elbow crease
and extending to the junction of the proximal and mid-third of the forearm was made. Skin, subcutaneous tissue, and deep fascia were incised
in line with the skin incision. The neurovascular bundle was identified and retracted. The extent of the abnormal bone was exposed
adequately (Fig. 2). The mass was excised completely after detaching it from the humerus and ulna (Fig. 3). The elbow was mobilized
intraoperatively, and full range resumed. The excised specimen was sent for histopathological examination and revealed lamellar bone both
peripherally and centrally. The child developed neuropraxia of the median nerve postoperatively, which recovered within 2 weeks.
Postoperative radiographs showed no trace of the myositic mass (Fig. 4). Elbow range of motion exercises were started by the middle of the
first week, as tolerated. Active flexion of 30° to 90° was possible during the initial postoperative period. The patient was reviewed every
2 weeks for the first 2 months and once monthly for up to 6 months to assess functional status. The patient regained full function of the
affected elbow and returned to school in 10 weeks. He scored the maximum of 100 on the Mayo Elbow Scoring System, which was attributed to
full functional status. The patient had the best possible functional status after 2 years. No signs of clinical or radiographic recurrence
were detected (Fig. 5). Myositis ossificans traumatica of the upper limb causing ankylosis of the elbow is a rare entity. The specific cause
for myositis and its pathophysiology remain unclear. Proliferation of connective tissue occurs after a muscle injury that differentiates
into mature bone. Such ossification preferably occurs in muscles that are repeatedly strained or injuried.3) The condition is said to be
self limiting, and spontaneous resolution occurs over a period of time.2) Lesions result in significant functional deficit in only 10%-20%
of patients.4) The most commonly involved regions are the thighs, hips, upper arms, calves, and soles of the feet.5,6) Myositis ossificans
has also been reported at some other rare sites.7,8) Native bandaging and repeated massage for traumatic conditions are still common in some
parts of Asia. This treatment predisposes to myositis, particularly around the elbow in children. Small specks of calcification usually
occur either anterior or posterior. However, the mass connecting the humerus to the ulna was almost the same diameter as the humerus in this
case. The early clinical course of myositis ossificans traumatica closely resembles that of osteosarcoma with localized swelling and
tenderness. Pain subsides after ossification, unlike osteosarcoma. Radiological and histopathological findings can satisfactorily
distinguish between the two. Radiographs of osteosarcoma show periosteal elevation and cortical destruction, which are not present in
myositis ossificans. During the early stage, computerized tomography demonstrates a zoning phenomenon in a myositis mass. Ultrasound also
shows a center of less echogenicity with an outer sheet-like hyperechoic peripheral rim. The late stage radiographically resembles fully
ossified bone. A histopathological analysis reveals a variable zonal pattern with a central zone of rapidly growing fibroblasts, an
intermediate zone of osteoblasts with immature osteoids, and a peripheral zone of mature bone. The late stage shows a well organized cortex
and a marrow space resembling mature bone.9) Conservative management with physical therapy, acetic acid iontophoresis, magnesium therapy,
and etidronate disodium are reported to be effective.10) Surgical excision is indicated only if the lesion is completely ossified because
premature excision leads to local recurrence. Our patient had fully mature bone bridging the distal humerus to the proximal ulna at
presentation. Surgical excision led to significant improvement and limited the disability, which was the major concern. Early postoperative
mobilization and physiotherapy helped our patient regain near normal function of the affected limb. The patient scored the maximum number of
points on the Mayo Elbow Scoring System and recovered full function of the affected elbow. A 2-year follow-up revealed no signs of
recurrence and full power in the elbow. Myositis ossificans traumatica is one of the most debilitating complications of muscle contusion and
can result in gross limitations in joint function. Many children who have received native treatment and massage present with myositis,
particularly of the elbow. We commonly observe small calcification specks. The acute stage results in immobilization. Chronic myositis may
present as a small globular mass in the brachialis muscle. However, in our case, the mass was of unusual size and was ankylosing the joint.
Surgical excision produced a satisfactory outcome. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Preoperative
radiograph. Intraoperative photograph showing the myositic mass. Excised myositic mass. Postoperative radiograph. Radiograph at the final
follow-up.
