Dieulafoy’s disease is a vascular anomaly characterized by the presence of a tortuous dysplastic artery in the submucosa. Although
frequently occurring in the gastrointestinal tract, multiple cases of Dieulafoy’s disease in the bronchus have been reported in the
literature. We report a case of a 15-year-old boy suffering recurrent massive hemoptysis. Bilobectomy stopped bleeding after unsuccessful
treatment with embolization of bronchial artery. It is concluded a congenital origin of this disease. Angiography and endobronchial
ultrasonography can be used to diagnose Dieulafoy’s disease of bronchus whereas bronchoscopy biopsy should be avoided. Surgery is needed
when embolization fails. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13019-014-0191-8) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. Dieulafoy’s disease was initially described in 1898 by a French surgeon George Dieulafoy as a cause of
bleeding in the stomach. It was defined as a vascular anomaly characterized by the presence of a tortuous dysplastic artery in the
submucosa, from which vascular branches derive that can be located in the mucosa . Apart from the stomach, this malformation has also been
described in other organs of the alimentary tract, e.g., esophagus, duodenum, gall bladder, jejunum, colon and rectum . In addition, a few
cases of Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus have been reported. This lesion leads to massive hemoptysis which is a life-threatening
condition associated with a high mortality rate. A prompt and efficient intervention is required in emergency to improve resuscitation and
survival. We present a case of a 13-year-old boy suffering from Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus without any previous respiratory
disorders or history of tobacco use. When the published data are summarized, we focus on pathogenesis, pathology and clinical manifestations
of the disease, and discuss strategies of diagnosis and treatment. A 13-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital in emergency with massive
hemoptysis. He had no history of any respiratory disorders or tobacco use. One week before admission, he coughed up approximately 500 ml of
fresh blood and was admitted to another hospital. Chest CT scan showed exudative lesion, consolidation and atelectasis of right lower lobe
(Figure 1A). He was immediately treated with Pituitrin and coagulation factors, and given red cell suspension and plasma. Hemoptysis was
controlled temporarily.Figure 1 Radiolographic findings of Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus. (A) A chest CT showed exudative lesion,
consolidation and atelectasis of the right lower lobe; (B, C) A CT angiography of bronchial artery showed a right bronchial artery arising
from the anterior wall of the thoracic aorta at T5 level; (D) Angiography of the bronchial artery showed that a distal right branch of the
bronchial artery arising from the thoracic aorta at T5 level was dilated and tortuous. Radiolographic findings of Dieulafoy’s disease of the
bronchus. (A) A chest CT showed exudative lesion, consolidation and atelectasis of the right lower lobe; (B, C) A CT angiography of
bronchial artery showed a right bronchial artery arising from the anterior wall of the thoracic aorta at T5 level; (D) Angiography of the
bronchial artery showed that a distal right branch of the bronchial artery arising from the thoracic aorta at T5 level was dilated and
tortuous. In order to find the cause of hemoptysis, he was transferred into our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Bronchoscopic
examination showed two non-pulsating polypoid nodules of approximately 3-6 mm which are located at the carina between the external and
posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe. The nodules were elevated about 1.5 mm above the surface and the covering mucosa appeared
smooth (Figure 2A). Because of our suspicion of Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus, the endoscopist was refrained from performing biopsy
and ordered endobronchial ultrasonography. Unfortunately, the ultrasound probe could not reach the lesion. A CT angiography of bronchial
artery was performed and identified a right bronchial artery arising from the anterior side of the thoracic aorta at T5 level (Figure 1B,
1C). The tortuous, dilated and elongated branches of the bronchial artery coiled around right middle and lower bronchus. Bronchial artery
angiography suggested a distal right branch of this bronchial artery was dilated and tortuous. Since this branch vessel was considered to be
the cause of hemoptysis, arterial embolization was performed successfully (Figure 1D).Figure 2 Bronchoscopic and pathological findings of
Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus. (A) Bronchoscopic examination showed two polypoid nodules located at the carina between the external
and posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe; (B) Macroscopic examination showed hemorrhage of the right middle and lower lobes; (C
and D) Photomicrograph showing a dilated and tortuous bronchial artery branch close to the bronchus, infiltrating the entire bronchial wall
and reaching the submucosa. Bronchoscopic and pathological findings of Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus. (A) Bronchoscopic examination
showed two polypoid nodules located at the carina between the external and posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe; (B) Macroscopic
examination showed hemorrhage of the right middle and lower lobes; (C and D) Photomicrograph showing a dilated and tortuous bronchial artery
branch close to the bronchus, infiltrating the entire bronchial wall and reaching the submucosa. Three months after first admission, the
patient was readmitted to our hospital in emergency with recurrent massive hemoptysis. Thoracotomy was performed. Obvious hematocele in the
middle and lower lobe of right lung, especially in the middle lobe, was observed during thoracotomy. However intra-operative bronchoscopy
failed clarifying the exact origin of hemorrhage. Consequently, a bilobectomy (the right middle and lower lobe) was successfully performed.
Macroscopic examination showed hemorrhage of the right middle and lower lobe (Figure 2B). The lung parenchyma showed areas of hemorrhage and
the bronchial lumens were filled with blood clots. Histologically, fresh bleeding and blood clots were seen in the bronchi, bronchioles and
alveoli. Small vessels with diverse thickness opened directly into bronchial lumens (Figure 2C and D). After surgery, hemoptysis did not
recur in the follow-up period of 5 months. This is the first case of Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus in a teenager. Similar cases in the
literature are summarized in Table 1. Up to date, the etiology and pathogenesis of this disease remain uncertain. A large proportion of
patients are non-smokers (11/17) and do not have any existing respiratory diseases (11/17). Three cases are teenagers or young adults,
suggesting a possibility of congenital cause. It seems that gender or age is not associated with the disease, although the sample size is
limited.Table 1 Clinical manifestations of Dieulafoy’s disease of bronchus 1 CaseAgeGenderPrevious respiratory diseaseSmoking
historyLocationTreatment (Outcome)Origin of vesselsRefEmbolizationSurgery132MnonoRULfailuresuccessPA1715MnonoRML/RLLfailuresuccessBAOur work
1Note: M: male, F: female; RUL: right upper lobe, RML: right middle lobe, RLL: right lower lobe; PA: pulmonary artery, BA: bronchial artery,
RMB right main bronchus. Clinical manifestations of Dieulafoy’s disease of bronchus 1 1Note: M: male, F: female; RUL: right upper lobe, RML:
right middle lobe, RLL: right lower lobe; PA: pulmonary artery, BA: bronchial artery, RMB right main bronchus. Several factors may cause
hemoptysis in Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus. Iatrogenic injury (e.g., biopsy or lavage by bronchoscopy) is a confirmed cause leading
to the rupture of lesion vessels and subsequent massive hemoptysis . History of respiratory diseases (e.g., tuberculosis, bronchiectasis,
chronic bronchitis and frequent pneumonia) and tobacco use may contribute to spontaneous fatal hemoptysis. Normally, two or three branches
of normal bronchial arteries usually less than 1.5 mm in diameter runs in parallel with the bronchi and creates a peribronchial plexus. The
arterioles from this plexus with a diameter of <0.5 mm enter the bronchopulmonary segments, pass the muscular layer of bronchial wall and
arrive beneath the bronchial submucosa . When the diameter of an arteriole is larger than 2 mm, it is regarded as abnormal and may rupture .
In addition to bronchial artery, some branches arising directly from pulmonary artery may abnormally open to bronchial lumen. In this
collection of 17 clinical cases, nine cases had arterioles arising from bronchial artery and three cases from pulmonary artery. These
arterioles are approximately >2 mm in diameter, closely surrounding the bronchus and reaching the bronchial submucosa. It is believed that
abnormal bronchial vessels are originated from abnormal development of the distal part of the sixth aortic arch, while abnormal pulmonary
vessels are developed from the aorta, the upper aortic intercostal arteries or internal mammary arteries . Dieulafoy’s disease of the
bronchus presents non-typical symptoms, including a burst of cough, recurrent massive hemoptysis, chest discomfort and symptoms associated
with low blood volume (e.g., dizziness, heart palpitation, cold clammy limbs, a constant decrease of blood pressure, etc.). Therefore,
Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus should be considered if a patient suffering from frequent and recurrent hemoptysis and symptoms of low
blood volume. Angiography is a useful tool to disgnose Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus. Up to date, there is no specific diagnostic
criterion to confirm a bronchial Dieulafoy’s lesion on angiography. Any abnormal arteries should be carefully evaluated. In particular, two
kinds of abnormal blood vessels supplying the bronchus deserve attention: convoluted and elongated branches of bronchial artery and arterial
plexus, which are primarily located on the right lobe or segment bronchus , and new vessels arising from branches of pulmonary artery . CT
angiography is also a good tool to locate the origin of abnormal vessels and bleeding . Under the bronchoscope, endobronchial Dieulafoy’s
lesion is characterized as small (usually <1 cm in diameter) and smooth elevated nodular lesions, often with white pointed caps and ridge-
like bulge between nodules. The sessile nodules are usually covered with by normal-appearing bronchial mucosa and can be pulsating or non-
pulsating . If Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus is misdiagnosed as benign submucosal lesions under bronchoscopy, biopsy may be taken and
results in lethal bleeding. Therefore a bronchoscopist must exercise extra caution in case of hemoptysis and avoid biopsy when Dieulafoy’s
disease is suspected. Even so, bronchoscopy is still a reliable way to examine endobronchial bleeding and, to some degree, to distinguish
Dieulafoy’s lesion with malignant tumors and other benign lesions. Up to date, there has been no consensus for treatment of Dieulafoy’s
lesion of the bronchus. Treatment strategy needs to be based on disease presentation, site of the lesion and medical expertise available.
Arterial embolization reduces the need for surgery and is obviously advantageous for patients who can not tolerate major surgery. Selective
embolization of bronchial arteries were performed in this cohort, however, only half of them fully recovered . Several reasons may
contribute to the failure of embolization of bronchial arteries: (1) abnormal vessels arise from pulmonary circulation rather than systemic
circulation ; (2) Revascularization and neovascularization may cause recurrent hemoptysis after embolization ; (3) drop of the embolus
dropping may cause of failure of an initially successful embolization. Therefore it is highly recommended to locate and follow up the
bronchial lesions and their feeding vessels as precisely as possible with bronchoscopy in combination with angiography. Surgical resection
is the second option for hemoptysis caused by bronchial Dieulafoy’s lesion. It is indicated when the abnormal vessel arises from pulmonary
circulation and when arterial embolization fails . If malignant tumor is suspected as a possible reason of hemoptysis, surgical resection
needs to be performed with a safe margin . If recurrent hemoptysis takes place afterembolization, and arterial angiography suggests
revascularization and neovascularization in the same lobe, lobectomy may be necessary . Dieulafoy’s disease of the bronchus may have a
congenital origin, arising from either systemic circulation or pulmonary circulation. Considering minimal invasiveness, selective
embolization of bronchial artery is considered the first-line treatment. If it fails, surgical resection will be needed. Arterial
angiography is a safe and effective method for initial diagnosis and subsequent follow-up. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Below are the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original file for figure
1Authors’ original file for figure 2 Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’ original file for figure 2 Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YF wrote the manuscript and managed the figures and tables; QW were
involved in the concept and made the critical revision of the manuscript; BW and YF performed the surgery and approved the manuscript; all
authors read and approved the manuscript. I’d like to express my sincere thanks to Dr. Chen to lend me hands in the course of word
processing and manuscript revision. (Xiaoxin Luke Chen, M.D., Ph.D., associate professor, Cancer Research Program, JLC-BBRI, North Carolina
Central University, Durham, NC 27707, USA).
