Differential diagnosis of severe progressive dementia includes a wide spectrum of inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases. Particularly
challenging is the differentiation of potentially treatable autoimmune encephalitis and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Such a coincidence may
indeed complicate the correct diagnosis and influence subsequent treatment. A 75-year-old woman was admitted due to rapid progressive
cognitive impairment. Her husband observed a temporal disorientation and confusion. The initial neurological examination and an extensive
neuropsychological evaluation showed significant impairments in almost all tested cognitive domains. All other neurological functions
including motor, sensory and coordinative function were intact. Initial diagnostics included EEG, MRI and lumbar puncture with unspecific
results. Complementary blood testing revealed a positive result for antineural antibodies to Contactin-associated protein 2 (CASPR2) and the
patient received treatment for CASPR2 autoimmune encephalitis. Further symptoms and results, including 14-3-3 proteins, led to suspected
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. The postmortem examination supported the diagnosis of a definitive Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. One could argue
that global screening for antineural antibodies may lead to a false diagnosis triggering intense and potentially dangerous procedures. We
believe, however, that potentially treatable causes of dementia should aggressively sought out and subsequently treated in an attempt to
curtail the course of disease and ultimately reduce the rate of mortality. Differential diagnosis of severe progressive dementia includes a
wide spectrum of inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases. Particularly challenging is the differentiation of potentially treatable
autoimmune encephalitis and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Such a coincidence may indeed complicate the correct diagnosis and influence
subsequent treatment. The diseases can mimic one another to such an extent that one is led to believe that the patient is suffering from CJD
when he or she has in fact a treatable autoimmune encephalitis or vice versa . None of these VGKC complex antibodies in CJD patients have
been found to be directed to LG1 or CASPR2, yet. We here report a recent case of Contactin-associated protein 2-Antibody (CASPR2) production
during ongoing CJD, discuss the potential biological causes and the clinical consequences. A 75-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital
due to rapid progressive cognitive impairment. During the previous year, the patient had shown mild cognitive impairment due to moderate
leukoariosis, thought to be associated with arterial hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. There was no positive family history of dementia
or dementia-like symptoms in the anamnesis. Ten days before admission, her husband observed a temporal disorientation and confusion, e.g.
the patient could not recall the present date and put a saltshaker into the refrigerator. When admitted to our care the patient was
conscious but disorientated to place, time and person. The initial neurological examination and an extensive neuropsychological evaluation
showed significant impairments in almost all tested cognitive domains including attention, concentration, memory, executive function and
visual-constructional ability. In addition, there was evidence of a right-sided visual neglect, aphasia in terms of language comprehension
disorder and pronounced apraxic impairments corresponding to dysfunctions of her left-sided parietal circuits. All other neurological
functions including motor, sensory and coordinative function were intact. An initial electroencephalography showed unspecific encephalopathy
patterns. The MRI showed multiple microangiopathic lesions: left-sided lesions in the thalamus, parietooccipital, temporo mesial, thalamic,
frontal and parietal cortices, as well as right-sided lesions in the basal ganglia. The brain-SPECT showed hypometabolism in the
frontoparietal and parietooccipital cortices, more obvious on the left side, with normal nuclide accumulation in motor and occipital cortex.
The primary investigation of cerebrospinal fluid revealed a pleocytosis of 7 Leukocytes/μl [<5 Leukocytes/μl] with a Total Protein of
701 mg/l [<450 mg/l] and 2,31 mmol/l Lactate [1,2-2,1 mmol/l]. Simultaneously, thyroperoxidase antibodies (serum titre 1606 IU/ml
[<60 IU/ml]) were detected. It was initially concluded based on these results that the patient was suffering from autoimmune encephalitis,
believed to be caused by autoimmune thyroiditis. High dosage intravenous methylprednisolone therapy was initiated . Despite treatment
however, the patient continued to exhibit cognitive and neuropsychological symptoms and presented the first tonic-clonic seizure, leading to
the initiation of Levetiracetam therapy. The ongoing diagnostic workup included a broad search for potential autoimmune diseases. Serum and
CSF were tested for antibodies to the following antigens: CASPR2, LGI1, NMDAR, GAD65, GAD67, GABABR, AMPAR1/2, GlyR and onconeural antigens,
whereby CASPR2-antibodies were detected (serum titre 1:2000, see Figure 1A; no antibody studies in CSF done). This result was interpreted as
support for the hypothesis of ongoing autoimmune encephalitis. Treatment was now escalated to eight tryptophan immunoadsorptions processing
two liters plasma per session. Although immunoadsorption effectively reduced the titre of CASPR2-antibodies (serum titre 1:32), the
patient’s cognitive and general neurological condition worsened. A positron emission tomography was now added to disclose malignancies.
Apart from cystic structures in kidneys and liver, no underlying oncological disease was detected. Four weeks after the first MRI, follow up
imaging now revealed new hyperintensities in the basal ganglia and both dorsal thalami [Figure 2 right]. Furthermore, the EEG now presented
a generalized periodic pattern with triphasic waves. Continuous CSF studies now showed normalization of Leukocytes (1/μl) and Total Protein
(292 mg/l), but increased Tau and 14-3-3 proteins leading to the suspicion of a possible Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease . The patient continued
to detoriate over the following month after discharge, dying approximately one year after the onset of symptoms. The postmortem examination
showed signs of spongiform encephalopathy [Figure 3], supporting our diagnosis of a definitive Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .Figure 1 MRI
formation of symmetrical hyperintensities in the putamen and caudate head within two months seen on T2-weighted and FLAIR images. Figure 2
Cell based assays for demonstration of CASPR2 antibodies (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). (A) Serum of patient diluted 1:15 incubated with HEK
cells transfected with CASPR2; the antibodies are visualized by a Alexa 594 anti-human-IgG antibody; mild counterstaining with Hoechst
33342. (B) Serum of a patient with classical limbic encephalitis and CASPR2 antibodies, technical details as in A. (C) Serum of patient
incubated with control cells not expressing CASPR2 (negative result), technical details as in A. These images demonstrate that the patient’s
serum does not bind non-specifically to the CASPR2 expressing HEK cells in A.Figure 3 Frontal cortex (lower side towards pia mater; upper
side towards white matter), PrP; Scale bar 100 um. Note the confluent spongiosis and the diffuse synaptic PrP deposits. Brains were fixed in
4% formalin and paraffin-embedded tissue samples of frontal cortex were cut into 3 μm thick serial sections, mounted on glass slides and
processed for immunhistochemical staining using specific antibodies to PrP. Visualization of primary antibody was achieved using the
diaminobenzidine streptavidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase method on an automated stainer (Ventana/Roche). MRI formation of symmetrical
hyperintensities in the putamen and caudate head within two months seen on T2-weighted and FLAIR images. Cell based assays for demonstration
of CASPR2 antibodies (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). (A) Serum of patient diluted 1:15 incubated with HEK cells transfected with CASPR2; the
antibodies are visualized by a Alexa 594 anti-human-IgG antibody; mild counterstaining with Hoechst 33342. (B) Serum of a patient with
classical limbic encephalitis and CASPR2 antibodies, technical details as in A. (C) Serum of patient incubated with control cells not
expressing CASPR2 (negative result), technical details as in A. These images demonstrate that the patient’s serum does not bind non-
specifically to the CASPR2 expressing HEK cells in A. Frontal cortex (lower side towards pia mater; upper side towards white matter), PrP;
Scale bar 100 um. Note the confluent spongiosis and the diffuse synaptic PrP deposits. Brains were fixed in 4% formalin and paraffin-
embedded tissue samples of frontal cortex were cut into 3 μm thick serial sections, mounted on glass slides and processed for
immunhistochemical staining using specific antibodies to PrP. Visualization of primary antibody was achieved using the diaminobenzidine
streptavidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase method on an automated stainer (Ventana/Roche). A rapidly progressive dementia with symptoms such
as disorientation, apraxia, aphasia, extrapyramidal dysfunction, and psychiatric symptoms caused by CJD may mimic treatable types of
autoimmune encephalitis. As shown in the present case, thyroperoxidase- and CASPR2-antibodies known to be associated with cognitive and
neuropsychological symptoms , can accompany the devastating spongiform encephalopathy. Our findings expand upon prior reports in which VGKC
complex antibodies were shown to be associated with CJD. In previous studies, the patient had not been tested for CASPR2 or LG1 and the
actual antigen could not be identified. In addition, a recently published study demonstrated neuronal surface antigens in patients’ CSF with
rapid neurological deterioration. Patients in this study suffered from different non-specific cognitive deficits with variable degrees of
memory loss and confusion. Interestingly, none of the patients in this series with definite CJD displayed antibodies against neuronal
surface antigens. Those few patients (1,7%) in whom neuronal surface antigens were detected did not fulfill the diagnostic criteria for
probable or possible CJD. This is in contrast to our finding, in which CASPR2-antibodies [Figure 1] in serum were clearly associated with a
positive test for 14-3-3 protein and later on confirmed definite sporadic CJD by postmortem neuropathological analysis. It should be noted
that the first positive finding of CASPR2-anibodies has been validated by a second test for CASPR2-antibodies, in which the serum titre,
parallel to the decreasing CSF cell count, was significantly lower as a result of immunoadsorption treatment. Another case series reported
about a 68-year-old patient with sporadic CJD tested positive for serum antibodies to VGKC and GlyR antibodies but negative for CASPR2 and
LG1 antibodies . The biological cause of this molecular mimicry is currently unknown and deserves further investigation. One may hypothesize
that prion-induced neurodegeneration may have triggered an immunological reaction in peripheral lymph nodes causing antibody production
against certain neuronal structures such as elements of voltage gated potassium channels. With the diagnosis still unconfirmed, we chose to
initiate therapy for the potentially treatable differential diagnosis. One could argue that global screening for antineural antibodies led
us to a false diagnosis triggering intense and potentially dangerous procedures. We believe, however, that potentially treatable causes of
dementia should be aggressively sought out and subsequently treated to avoid poor outcome. In fact, encephalitic syndromes are treatable
conditions that may mimic CJD . The development of a CJD case into a progressive and untreatable encephalopathy, as presented here, is
certainly very rare. Nevertheless, such unique cases are important as they present new opportunities to study the complex role of the immune
system in the CNS. Written informed consent was obtained from the legal guardian of the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Contactin-associated protein 2
Cerebrospinal fluid Central nervous system Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Electroencephalography Fluid attenuated inversion recovery Glycine
receptor Cells human embryonic kidney cells Leucine-rich, glioma-inactivated 1 Magnetic resonance imaging Prion protein Single-photon
emission computed tomography Voltage-gated potassium channel complex Competing interests Christian G. Bien, MD: CGB gave scientific advice
to Eisai (Frankfurt, Germany) and UCB (Monheim, Germany), undertook industry-funded travel with support of Eisai (Frankfurt, Germany), UCB
(Monheim, Germany), Desitin (Hamburg, Germany), and Grifols (Frankfurt, Germany), obtained honoraria for speaking engagements from Eisai
(Frankfurt, Germany), UCB (Monheim, Germany), Desitin (Hamburg, Germany), diamed (Köln, Germany), Fresenius Medical Care (Bad Homburg,
Germany), and received research support from Astellas Pharma (München, Germany), Octapharma (Langenfeld, Germany), diamed (Köln, Germany)
and Fresenius Medical Care (Bad Homburg, Germany). His employer (Krankenhaus Mara, Bielefeld, Germany) runs a laboratory for the detection
of auto-antibodies including; external senders are charged for antibody diagnostics. He received research support from diamed (Köln,
Germany), Fresenius Medical Care (Bad Homburg, Germany), Astellas Pharma (München, Germany) and Octapharma (Langenfeld, Germany). On behalf
of all other authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. Authors’ contributions FZ is lead author,
analyzed and interpreted the collected data, designed and wrote the manuscript. AH collected data of the patient and help in drafting the
manuscript. AR collected data of the patient and participated in the design and coordination of the manuscript. MDO carried out the antibody
investigations. MG provided post mortem figures and data. CGB provided figures and data to antibody investigation and revised the manuscript
for important intellectual content. WRS is senior author, revised the manuscript critically and gave final approval of the version of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
