Erythema nodosum is a panniculitis which may have various causes, such as drugs, infections, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease,
tuberculosis or can be idiopathic. We here report a case of a womandiagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis whose first symptom was erythema
nodosum. A thorough clinical and laboratory investigation of the patient presenting with erythema nodosum is always required, in order to
assess a possible systemic, underlying condition. Erythema nodosum is a panniculitis, characterized by red, tender nodules usually located
on the extensor surfaces of the legs. It may have various causes, such as drugs, infections, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease,
tuberculosis or can be idiopathic . In up to 50% of cases, the underlying etiology remains unclear . We here report a case of a 78 year old
woman, with free medical history, who presented to the Emergency Department of our Hospital with erythema nodosum on her both shins (Figure
1A). She also mentioned low grade fever since 15 days and a positive family history of tuberculosis (daughter). Her chest X-Ray revealed
bilateralhilar lymphadenopathy, mainly at the right side (Figure 1C). Further evaluation with High Resolution chest Computed Tomography
confirmed the lymphadenopathy and demonstrated ground-glass opacities. The Mantoux skin test was strongly positive (22 mm) (Figure 1B).
Anti-TB treatment was started, based on the positive Mantoux test, the compatible imaging findings and mainly, the history of close and
direct exposure. Sputum cultures proved to be positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Patient's response to treatment was impressive and in
her follow up visits, she remained free of symptoms and a define improvement of her imaging findings was observed. A) Erythema nodosun on
the patient's left shin; B) Positive Mantoux test; C) Chest X-Ray demonstrating hilar lymphadenopathy, mainly at the right side The
commonest causes of erythema nodosum reported in the literature, are streptococcal infection in children and streptococcal infection and
sarcoidosis in adults . Its course is, in most cases, benign and self-limited. However, therapeutic options include, among others, NSAIDS,
corticosteroids antimicrobial agents and colchicine. In conclusion, a thorough clinical and laboratory investigation of the patient
presenting with erythema nodosum is always required, in order to assess a possible systemic, underlying condition. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests Koufakis T: Patient's management and writing of the manuscript. Gabranis I: Patient's management and review
of the literature. All the authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
