Listeria monocytogenes causes gastroenteritis, meningitis and bacteraemia in immunocompromised, pregnant patients, the elderly as well in
immunocompetent patients. Focal infections with this organism are uncommon, especially in sporadic (non-outbreak) setting, require high
index of suspicion and are challenging to diagnose. We present 3 cases of Listeria monocytogenes presenting as focal infections to our
hospitals, all of which are the first reported cases from Australia. Three unrelated cases of unique focal infections caused by Listeria
monocytogenes are presented. 1) A 73 year old Caucasian lady on immunosuppression for colorectal cancer presented with prosthetic knee joint
septic arthritis, 2) An 83 year old Caucasian man presented with prosthetic vascular graft infection and 3) A 60 year old Asian man with
perianal abscess. Except for case 1, the other cases had a prolonged duration of symptoms on presentation. Listeria was not thought to be
causative organism in any of these cases until microbiological specimens isolated the organism. Matrix Associated Laser
Desorption/Ionization-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) assisted in making an earlier diagnosis of the infection in all three
cases. All of these patients had Listeria monocytogenes isolated from clinical specimens. They were managed with antibiotics and surgery
with favourable outcomes. Public health investigations to determine any dietary association were done, however no intervention was thought
to be necessary in any of the cases except provide dietary advice. The first two cases highlight the importance of microbiological sampling
in serious infections for definitive antibiotic therapy to be administered. Sporadic focal infections with Listeria occur infrequently and
are often not diagnosed till culture results from microbiological specimens become available. Dietary history should be an important aspect
of thorough clinical history and food consumption advice is crucial in immunocompromised patients on similar lines as given to pregnant
women about listeriosis. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12879-014-0641-x) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. Listeriosis is a serious food borne disease caused by the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes, affecting mostly
pregnant women, neonates, the elderly and immune-compromised hosts with relatively high mortality rates in these groups. Invasive infections
with Listeria may cause life threatening meningitis and bacteraemia in these groups. However it may also manifest as self-limiting
gastrointestinal illness in immunocompetent hosts. A multitude of focal infections with Listeria monocytogenes have been reported in the
literature affecting various organs . There have been multi-jurisdictional and statewide outbreaks of listeriosis in Australia associated
with contaminated food items in the past. However sporadic cases occur more often than cluster outbreaks . The source of infection in
sporadic cases remains largely unknown. We present three epidemiologically unrelated cases of sporadic origin presenting as focal
infections. A 73 year old Caucasian woman presented with acute onset of right knee pain for 1 week. She had a background of metastatic
colorectal carcinoma for which she was receiving 5-fluorouracil and oxiplatin chemotherapy, bilateral total knee replacements and type 2
diabetes. There was a preceding history of gastrointestinal illness 3 weeks prior to current presentation. A technetium 99 m-bone scan
(Figure 1) demonstrated increased tracer uptake in the right knee suggestive of a septic arthritis. On arthroscopic washout of the knee,
microscopy of the aspirated fluid revealed >109200 × 106/L polymorphs and gram-positive rods. Cultures of the aspirate confirmed Listeria
monocytogenes on horse blood agar at 3 days. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of penicillin tested by Etest® (AB Biodisk; Solna,
Sweden) was 0.5 mg/L. Blood cultures were negative. The patient completed a 2 week course of intravenous ampicillin (2 grams every 4 hours)
followed by benzyl penicillin (14.4 gram/daily) as intravenous infusion and then completed a 6 month course of amoxicillin (1 gram/TDS). She
remained asymptomatic at the end of therapy.Figure 1 Technetium-99 m bone scan depicting increased uptake in the region of tibial tuberosity
of the prosthetic knee joint (Images 1 and 2-red pointer denotes increased uptake in the region indicative of synovitis). Image 3 is
suggestive of hyperaemia in the right knee which is also indicative of the same. Technetium-99 m bone scan depicting increased uptake in the
region of tibial tuberosity of the prosthetic knee joint (Images 1 and 2-red pointer denotes increased uptake in the region indicative of
synovitis). Image 3 is suggestive of hyperaemia in the right knee which is also indicative of the same. The local public health unit was
notified. On telephonic interview with the patient they found that she had a penchant for raw meat; an environmental investigation was not
undertaken as this was deemed to be a sporadic case. An 86 year old Caucasian man with history of peripheral vascular disease and a
prosthetic (polytetra-fluroeythelene) left femoro-popliteal bypass graft in 2011, atrial fibrillation and mild mitral regurgitation
presented with a discharging skin sinus in the left groin. He also had abdominal pain, fever and a raised neutrophil count (14600 × 106/L)
on admission. An abdominal computerized tomographic (CT)) revealed left femoro-popliteal graft leak with haematoma formation which was in
close proximity to the graft (Figure 2). The patient subsequently underwent an operative excision of the femoro-popliteal graft with ovine
graft replacement and femoral endartectomy. Proteus mirabilis and Listeria monocytogenes were isolated from the operative samples of peri-
prosthetic fluid and graft tissue. He was commenced on intravenous ampicillin (2 grams every 4 hours) to which both of the above organisms
tested sensitive [MIC of ampicillin against Proteus mirabilis <2 mg/L by Vitek2, (bioMerieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France) and MIC of penicillin
against Listeria monocytogenes was 0.5 mg/L by Etest]. His post-operative course was complicated by a surgical site infection with an
extended spectrum β lactamase (ESBL) producing Enterobacter cloacae. He required a subsequent washout and addition of meropenem (1 gram/TDS)
to the antibiotic regimen. He had a good clinical response after 6 weeks of parenteral antibiotic therapy. In follow-up, he was clinically
stable and a management plan was made in consultation with patient’s surgeon and patient himself for long term oral amoxicillin (500 mg/TDS)
in view of the partial retention of the infected prosthetic graft.Figure 2 Abdominal CT scan showing the left femoro-popliteal graft and
surrounding collection. (See arrow). Abdominal CT scan showing the left femoro-popliteal graft and surrounding collection. (See arrow). This
patient, although elderly was not immunosuppressed with other medical conditions and no clear risk factors were identified for Listeria
infection apart from consuming meats from a local delicatessen. He was too deemed as a sporadic case by the public health unit. A 60 year
old Asian man was admitted with a perianal abscess present for 3 weeks prior to presentation. He had a history of atrial fibrillation and
was on oral flecainide. There were no concurrent neurological symptoms or any history of underlying immunosuppression. He underwent a
surgical incision and drainage of the perianal abscess which revealed positive microbiological culture of Listeria monocytogenes and mixed
bowel flora. The MIC of penicillin against this organism tested by Etest was 0.5 mg/L. A brain CT did not demonstrate the presence of any
cerebral abscesses. The patient received a 10 day course of oral ampicillin (1 gram/TDS) and ciprofloxacin (500 mg/BD). The public health
unit was notified, however apart from an interview with the patient, no further investigation was carried out as the case did not meet the
case definition of listeriosis. We performed PubMed search with terms “Listeria monocytogenes”, “prosthetic joint septic arthritis”,
“prosthetic vascular graft infection” and “perianal abscess” and reviewed articles in literature. To the best of our knowledge, these are
the first reported cases of prosthetic joint septic arthritis, prosthetic vascular graft infection and perianal abscess due to Listeria
monocytogenes in Australia. None of these 3 cases appear to be epidemiologically linked to each other nor were a part of an outbreak that
occurred in Australia in 2011–2012 . Listeria monocytogenes is a gram-positive rod that is ubiquitous in the environment; it is present on
unwashed vegetables and also found from foods that have been contaminated after processing. Listeriosis has a mortality rate of 10-44% in
food borne outbreaks. In Australia the incidence of listeriosis is 2.5-3.6 cases per million of population per annum . The Australian
national case notifiable definition of ‘listeriosis’ requires laboratory evidence in the form of isolation or detection of Listeria
monocytogenes from a site that is normally sterile, including meconium . Clinical and epidemiological evidence is not required. Although
similar to the Centre of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta) case definition, this differs from the European Centre of
Communicable disease control (ECDC) definition which takes into account all three- clinical, laboratory and epidemiological criteria and
subsequently classifies cases into probable and confirmed . CDC defines ‘invasive infection’ when the bacteria has spread beyond the
gastrointestinal tract . Invasive infections in pregnant women can manifest as premature delivery, miscarriages and stillbirth and as
meningitis, cerebral abscess and/or septicaemia in immunocompromised patients. Patients with underlying malignancy, CNS involvement
and ≥ 80 years have increased risk of mortality from invasive listeriosis . According to the New South Wales (NSW) Health Department
statistics of the 21 cases of listeriosis in 2011, 61% of patients were over 65 years and had underlying immunosuppression compared to 24%
patients who were 65 and under . A similar incidence of invasive listeriosis has been found in the United States with 24% of patients under
65 on some form of immunosuppressive therapy (glucocorticoids or chemo-radio therapy) . Solid organ or haematological malignancy is also an
established risk factor for listeriosis, with certain conditions like chronic lymphocytic leukaemia being associated with >1000 fold
increased risk compared to the general population . In NSW during 2011–2012, it was found that in patients who developed invasive
listeriosis 24% had history of malignancy and 28% were on immunosuppressant medications [Musto J, Health Protection NSW, personal
communication]. Septic arthritis is an unusual manifestation of infection with L. monocytogenes with less than 80 reported cases in the
literature. In the largest series of 43 patients from France, the most frequently involved joint involved was the hip (60%) followed by the
knee (21%) . In these patients 84% had associated orthopaedic devices, and 26% had underlying malignancy, as in our first case. Subacute
infection with a median duration of 4 weeks occurred in the majority. There were no fatal cases. Other case reports with septic arthritis
have demonstrated a link with tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors, which was not present in case 1 . Prosthetic graft infections caused
by Listeria species are rare, with only 8 cases reported in world literature, of which 6 patients were elderly or had underlying
immunosuppression . In all these cases haematogenous dissemination was the mode of infection, as was thought to be the case in our second
patient, and the organism was less frequently isolated in blood culture than fluid or tissue from the graft site. Most patients were treated
with definitive surgery as was case 2. Listeria can cause abscess formation, the most common sites being brain and liver. Only two cases of
perianal abscesses have been described so far in literature from a Danish series . Both these patients died as a result of septicaemia. Our
case 3 was quite well after surgical drainage of the abscess with a short course of oral antibiotics. Laboratory confirmation of listeriosis
requires isolation or detection of L. monocytogenes from a site that is normally sterile. A presumptive identification of Listeria can be
made on basis of typical short Gram positive rod with characteristic “tumbling motility” by light microscopy (at room temperature but not at
37°C) and aesculin hydrolysis. The availability of Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF
MS) has made confirmation of Listeria monocytogenes relatively quick in laboratories using it. In our laboratory MALDI-TOF MS has been
validated for this purpose . In addition to mass spectrometry we also confirm the identification of the organism by phenotypic strip test
(API Coryne®, bioMerieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Various methods of antibiotic susceptibility testing like Etest strips and disk diffusion
have been used. We routinely employ an Etest strip on Mueller Hinton agar with laked horse blood for penicillin (0.016-256 mg/L) and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (0.002-32 mg/L) for susceptibility testing on the Listeria isolates as per the CLSI M45 A2 document . Clinical
breakpoint for penicillin of ≤ 2 mg/L and for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole of ≤ 0.5/9.5 mg/L is interpreted as ‘sensitive’ as per this
document. All three isolates had MIC value for both these antimicrobials in ‘sensitive’ range. It is mandatory to report cases of
listeriosis (invasive and non-invasive) in all jurisdictions in Australia . Public health officers assess each of these notified cases to
determine the epidemiological links and the necessity for carrying out further investigations such as food sampling, tracing the food borne
source etc. Molecular analysis with binary typing and Multiple-Locus Variable number tandem repeat Analysis (MLVA) is performed in the state
public health laboratory on all clinically significant Listeria isolates. Binary typing (BT) is a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection
method of 8 gene loci on the Listeria genome. In binary typing, each strain is assigned a signature based on the presence (1) or absence (0)
of a set of defined DNA sequences. The results of BT are combined with MLVA typing (involves testing of another 9 gene loci) to provide
laboratory evidence for an outbreak. The isolates also undergo pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), multilocus sequence typing and
molecular serotyping at another reference laboratory in Australia in liaison with state public health authorities. In our cases molecular
analysis (Figure 3) revealed the following BT types: BT 158 (case 1), BT 254 (case 2) and BT 50 (case 3). All three cases were molecularly
unrelated to the listeriosis outbreak in NSW in 2011–2012. A national network of foodborne diseases epidemiologists called OzFoodNet exists
in Australia, which coordinates the analysis of the epidemiological data and molecular typing for determination of clusters and outbreaks.
Public health unit case management was done on all three cases (Table 1).Figure 3 Results of binary typing (BT) of the isolates. Results of
binary typing (BT) of the isolates. Public Health unit’s case management and investigation of the three cases MLVA- Multiple-Locus Variable
number tandem repeat Analysis; MLST- Multi locus sequence typing, PHU- Public Health Unit. The recommended therapeutic management of
invasive listeriosis is intravenous administration of penicillin or ampicillin with or without an aminoglycoside. The added value of
gentamicin is disputed and based solely on alleged in-vitro synergism . The duration of therapy for focal infections is based on evidence
from small case series. Optimal duration of therapy is unknown and should be based on person’s immune status and response to antimicrobials.
Both patients with septic arthritis and graft infection received 6 weeks of intravenous therapy. Debridement or replacement of prosthetic
material is generally considered necessary for cure, which was not performed in our case given her underlying morbidities. Thus far case 1
patient has had a good outcome. Case 2 had treatment with almost complete removal (small piece adjacent to anastomotic site left behind) of
the infected graft and drainage of the collection which has been shown to have good outcomes . Case 3 was managed with antibiotics alone
after drainage of abscess. The finding that only Case 1 had a history of gastroenteritis highlights the fact that gastrointestinal symptoms
may not be present in all patients. Asymptomatic and subclinical infections are known to occur in immunocompetent patients . We speculate
that case 2 and 3 may have had sporadic subclinical infections in the past with carriage of the organism in the gastrointestinal tract. Up
to 5% of healthy adults can have asymptomatic carriage of Listeria . Diagnosis of these focal infections can be extremely challenging based
on their clinical presentation. However modern techniques in the laboratory like MALDI-TOF have vastly improved the detection of such
infections especially when they are polymicrobial, as was demonstrated in cases 2 and 3. It also raises the importance of providing dietary
advice to patients who are undergoing chemotherapy or other immunosuppressive therapy, such as mycophenylate mofetil or TNF inhibitors.
Whilst consumption of raw meat is uncommon in Australian society, large scale outbreaks of listeriosis have also occurred even with
consumption of hard and soft cheeses in other countries and Australia . We recommend extending the advice that is provided to pregnant women
regarding the dangers of raw and unpasteurised foods and soft cheese to all patients undergoing immunosuppression. There is a need for
heightened awareness amongst clinicians of unusual organisms causing these focal infections where requirement for obtaining a
microbiological specimen is crucial for diagnosis. Treatment is often prolonged and inappropriate therapy may lead to progression of the
infection. Although localised and focal infections with Listeria are rare, they present with challenges associated with diagnosis and may
not have clear risk factors for their development. A thorough clinical history is vital and improved microbiological techniques have
facilitated their detection. We suggest giving appropriate dietary advice to immunocompromised patients. Written informed consent was
obtained from all patients for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor of this journal. Below are the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original file for
figure 1Authors’ original file for figure 2Authors’ original file for figure 3 Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’ original file
for figure 2 Authors’ original file for figure 3 Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions RC- Conceived the case report, wrote the initial manuscript, performed literature review, managed Case 3 in this report, and
liaised with local public health unit and reference laboratories in Sydney and Melbourne. CK- Managed Case 1 and Case 2, performed
literature review and liaised with Health Protection NSW, Sydney. SQ- Managed and followed up on Case 1. RA-Consultant in charge of Case 1.
AH-Consultant in charge of Case 1, provided input into the manuscript. HF- Consultant in charge of Case 2, provided input into the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to acknowledge Mr. Qinning Wang (Scientist) and Mr. Peter
Howard (Senior Scientist), Public Health laboratory, CIDM, Westmead for providing the details of all typing results, the Public health unit
(PHU) at Camperdown, Sydney (Dr. Michael Chou and Dr. Zeina Najjar) for providing details on the case investigations and Ms. Jennie Musto
(Health Protection NSW) for providing input about the investigations.
