A 46-year-old woman underwent upper endoscopy for evaluation of anemia, which revealed whitish granules at the duodenal papilla, diagnosed
as duodenal follicular lymphoma (DFL) by biopsy. Computed tomography and abdominal ultrasonography revealed that follicular lymphoma was
confined to the duodenum. Seven years after the diagnosis, fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scanning revealed
multiple lesions including in bone marrow and lymph nodes. Bone marrow biopsy of the right iliac bone revealed diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, indicating systemic dissemination and histologic transformation of the DFL. The patient responded to chemotherapy and has been
progression-free for 2.5 years. Although DFL is usually indolent even without any treatment, systemic dissemination with histologic
transformation can occur. This case suggests that the life-time follow-up that is usually done for patients with nodal follicular lymphoma
should be provided to patients with DFL. Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a neoplasm of germinal center B cells and is the second most common
subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Most patients with FL present with lymph node enlargement associated with bone marrow involvement.
Recently, FL that affects the duodenum (DFL) has been recognized. DFL is reported to be localized around Vater papilla and consists of
multiple small polyps. Primary DFL is an emerging clinical entity characterized by rare dissemination outside the gastrointestinal tract and
by excellent prognosis. Because the disease frequently involves the jejunum and ileum, imaging of the entire small bowel by double-balloon
enteroscopy or capsule endoscopy is encouraged.1 DFL has been recognized only recently and its features are not as yet fully understood. It
is possible for FL to undergo histologic transformation into diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The reported incidence of histologic
transformation varies, ranging from 16% to 60% depending on the length of follow-up and the rebiopsy/autopsy policy.2,3 Systemic progression
associated with histologic transformation of DFL has rarely been reported in the literature. Here, we report a case of DFL that transformed
into DLBCL. A 46-year-old female underwent upper endoscopy for evaluation of anemia. She was an asymptomatic hepatitis B virus (HBV) carrier
but had no notable past medical history. Her family history was significant for a mother and an older brother with hepatitis B cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma. On upper endoscopy, multiple whitish granules were seen around Vater papilla (Figure 1A). The biopsy specimen
revealed nodular architecture of small lymphocytes and balloon-like villous hypertrophy caused by extrafollicular lymphoma cells (Figure
2A). Immunohistochemical staining revealed that lymphoma cells were positive for CD20, CD79a, CD10, BCL2, and BCL6 and were negative for CD3
and CD5. The MIB-1 positive cells accounted for approximately 10% of all cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed the
IgH/BCL2 translocation, which was consistent with the diagnosis of follicular lymphoma. Lymphadenopathy was not detected by abdominal
ultrasonography and computed tomography. On physical examination, there were no palpable superficial lymph nodes and no hepatosplenomegaly.
Thus, she was diagnosed with DFL and was categorized as stage I according to the Lugano classification system. Hence, as her anemia was
supposed to be not related to duodenal lesion, we chose to observe her without any local or systemic treatment. After 1.5 years of her DFL
diagnosis, ultrasonography, and computed tomography revealed paraaortic lymph nodes 2 cm in diameter (Table 1). The patient was found to
have a palpable lymph node 1 cm in diameter on the right neck 3 years after the diagnosis (Table 1). Annual upper endoscopy showed a
gradually increasing number of whitish granules around Vater papilla (Figure 1B). Seven years after the diagnosis, laboratory tests revealed
marked elevation of lactate dehydrogenase at 362 IU/L and soluble interleukin-2 receptor at 783 U/mL. Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET) scanning was performed and revealed 18F-FDG accumulation in the iliac bone, left pubic bone,
thoracic vertebrae, right neck and flank, and right iliac lymph nodes (Figure 3A and B). The standardized uptake value max was 18.7 for the
right iliac lymph nodes. Despite the fact that the findings from the biopsy specimens from the duodenum and right neck lymph node were
consistent with FL, the biopsy of right iliac bone marrow showed sheets of large centroblasts that were positive for CD20, CD10, BCL6, BCL2
and negative for CD5, MUM-1 (Figure 2B). The MIB-1 positive cells accounted for 80% of all cells. FISH analysis revealed the IgH / BCL2
rearrangement. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of DLBCL transformed from DFL. The Ann Arbor stage at transformation was
IV. The series of endoscopic findings. At diagnosis of follicular lymphoma, the side-viewing endoscope revealed whitish granules around
Vater papilla (white arrow) (A). At the time of transformation, whitish granules at Vater papilla increased in number and clustered together
at Vater papilla (white arrow) (B). After 6 cycles of chemotherapy, the number of whitish granules decreased dramatically (white arrow) (C).
Endoscopic biopsy of granules around Vater papilla revealed the balloon-like villous hypertrophy caused by extrafollicular lymphoma cells
(HE staining, Scale bar: 250 μm) (A). Biopsy of right iliac bone marrow showed sheets of large B cells (centroblasts), suggesting histologic
transformation of follicular lymphoma into diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Normal hematopoietic cells were replaced by lymphoma cells (HE
staining, Scale bar: 50 μm) (B). Timeline of Clinical Course The result of 18F-FDG-PET scanning at transformation. 18F-FDG accumulated in
the iliac bone, left pubic bone, thoracic vertebrae, right neck and flank, and right iliac lymph nodes. Red signals indicate accumulation of
18F-FDG, suggesting high tumor proliferation. The maximum standardized uptake value was 18.7 in the right iliac bone. (coronal view ,
sagittal view). 18F-FDG-PET = fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography. As chemotherapy with R-CHOP regimen, rituximab
(375 mg/m2)–cyclophosphamide (750 mg/m2), doxorubicin (50 mg/m2), vincristine (1.4 mg/m2 (max 2.0 mg), and prednisolone (60 mg/m2) every 21
days, 6 cycles were administered. Entecavir 0.5 mg/day was initiated to prevent hepatitis B virus reactivation. After the chemotherapy,
upper endoscopy revealed the number of whitish granules dramatically were decreased (Figure 1C). The biopsy specimens of duodenal lesions
revealed no infiltration of atypical lymphocytes. 18F-FDG-PET showed no 18F-FDG accumulation. Hence, complete remission of DLBCL transformed
from DFL was achieved 9 years after the diagnosis (Table 1). The patient has been progression-free for 2.5 years after the transformation
was diagnosed (Table 1). The most frequently involved gastrointestinal follicular lymphoma (GI-FL) site is the second portion of the
duodenum (81%), followed by the jejunum (40%).4 Several lines of evidence suggest that GI-FL including DFL has distinct clinicopathological
features from nodal FL. Unlike nodal FL, local progression, dissemination outside the small bowel, or transformation to aggressive lymphoma
was virtually undetectable, even if left untreated, in a series of 63 patients with DFL.1 Moreover, DFL has been shown to share biological
characteristics with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma as demonstrated by its association with follicular dendritic cell,
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region family usage, and gene expression profiling.5–7 However, clinical course and prognosis of
patients with DFL still remain unclear. In general, the decision to treat FL is made based on histology, presence, or absence of symptoms,
disease burden, comorbidities, patient age, and patient preferences, with reference to the risks involved.8 Because FL usually progresses
gradually, delayed treatment (“watch and wait” policy) is a reasonable option for patients having asymptomatic nodal FL with low tumor
burden.9 The optimal treatment of GI-FL remains controversial. A “watch and wait” policy has been adopted in asymptomatic patients with GI-
FL,10 for those with nodal FL with low tumor burden. Damaj et al11 reported that 7 GI-FL patients did not receive any treatment, and 4 of
them progressed after a median follow-up of 37.5 months, but despite this, overall survival was excellent. However, surgery, radiotherapy,
and chemotherapy are also applicable for other patients.11 Treatment of DFL is also controversial. According to a retrospective analysis of
63 cases of primary DFL, all of which were low grade (1 to 2), the initial therapies included watchful waiting (24 cases), radiotherapy (19
cases), rituximab monotherapy (5 cases), CHOP (2 cases), R-CHOP (2 cases), radiotherapy and rituximab (1 case), mitoxantrone, chlorambucil,
and prednisolon (1 case), chlorambucil and prednisolone (1 case), and unknown regimen (1 case). Schmatz et al1 showed that a watch and wait
approach for primary DFL appears to be the most sensible strategy. Mori et al12 described a series of 27 cases of primary DFL; 14 patients
received therapy (local radiotherapy in 2 cases, and chemotherapy, including rituximab, in 12). Their estimated progression-free survival
rate at 3 years was 70%. The other 13 cases did not receive treatment and their progression-free survival rate at 3 years was 74%.
Therefore, due to the usually fairly indolent clinical course of primary DFL, a watch and wait policy would be appropriate initial
management.12 In the current case, we chose to watch and wait because there was a risk of HBV reactivation after rituximab and/or
chemotherapy. The patient was progression-free for 7 years after the diagnosis until histologic transformation occurred. This patient was an
asymptomatic HBV carrier. Recent meta-analysis revealed that HBV-infected people have higher risk for developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma with
the odds ratios of HBV-infected population developing FL and DLBCL being 1.66 and 1.84, respectively.13 Biological mechanism responsible for
lymphomagenesis in patients with HBV infection, however, is still unclear. This case indicates that DFL can undergo histological
transformation into DLBCL. There are few reports of the transformation of DFL into DLBCL. Sentani et al14 showed that, of 26 cases of DFL at
various stages, 1 experienced transformation of DFL to DLBCL in a submandibular lymph node 4 months after the diagnosis of primary DFL. In
addition, Mori et al12 reported that 1 of 27 cases of primary DFL developed histologic transformation. On the contrary, Schmatz et al1
reported that there was no transformation to high grade B-cell lymphoma among 63 cases of stage I DFL. It might be strange that histological
transformation in this case was demonstrated in the bone marrow while the original lesion in the duodenum remained without transformation.
Recently, using whole-exome sequencing, Pasqualucci L et al15 beautifully demonstrated that transformation of FL does not evolve as a linear
process (emergence of an aggressive subclone from the initial dominant FL clone) but derives from the divergent evolution of an ancestral
common precursor cell that acquired distinct mutations to become a FL or a transformed FL. Although bone marrow involvement had not been
demonstrated at diagnosis in this patient, it might be possible that common precursor cell exists in the bone marrow. In conclusion,
although it is rare, transformation from DFL to DLBCL can occur. Thus, life-long follow-up with timely imaging, as is done for patients with
nodal FL, is required for patients with DFL. Abbreviations: 18F-FDG-PET = fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, DFL =
duodenal follicular lymphoma, DLBCL = diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, FL = follicular lymphoma, GI-FL = gastrointestinal follicular lymphoma,
HBV = hepatitis B virus, R-CHOP = rituximab-cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone. All authors have no funding or
conflicts of interest to disclose.
