Conflicts of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. To describe a clinical report pre- and post-neurofunctional intervention
in a case of agenesis of the corpus callosum. Preterm infant with corpus callosum agenesis and hypoplasia of the cerebellum vermis and
lateral ventricles, who, at the age of two years, started the proposed intervention. Functional performance tests were used such as the
neurofunctional evaluation, the Gross Motor Function Measure and the Gross Motor Function Classification System. In the initial evaluation,
absence of equilibrium reactions, postural transfers, deficits in manual and trunk control were observed. The intervention was conducted
with a focus on function, prioritizing postural control and guidance of the family to continue care in the home environment. After the
intervention, there was an improvement of body reactions, postural control and movement acquisition of hands and limbs. The intervention
also showed improvement in functional performance. Postural control and transfers of positions were benefited by the neurofunction
intervention in this case of agenesis of the corpus callosum. The approach based on function with activities that involve muscle
strengthening and balance reactions training, influenced the acquisition of a more selective motor behavior. The central nervous system
(CNS) is responsible for the interpretation and transmission of sensory, cognitive, and motor information. In its central region lies the
corpus callosum (CC), which transmits the information between the cerebral hemispheres1 through a single, exclusive tract used for
integration.2 Alterations characterized by partial genesis (dysgenesis) or complete absence (agenesis) of the CC can generate an inter-
hemispheric disconnection.3 , 4 The incidence of agenesis and dysgenesis of the corpus callosum (ADCC) is estimated at one per 1,000 live
births,5 with a prevalence of 2.3% in North America and unknown in Latin countries.4 Congenital malformations of the CNS, in general, may be
associated with other malformations (brain or other segments) in 21% of cases.6 In ADCC, for instance, extra- and intracranial
abnormalities7 may occur concomitantly, such as hydrocephalus,8 seizures,9 syndromes,10 and CNS malformations,11 among others. The
associated diseases may potentiate or add other clinical characteristics to ADCC cases. Thus, cognitive, social, visual, auditory, motor,
and somatosensory deficits12 are typically observed in affected individuals. Some children with CC dysgenesis may have a typical
development, but with some deficiency in psychosocial behavior.13 However, it is observed that children with ADCC often have delayed motor
development, which can be demonstrated by maladjustment in performing skills, bilateral coordination, and manual control deficits.11 , 14
The motor intervention aims to reduce alterations resulting from the neurological disorder, capitalizing on the plasticity of the CNS
through specific interventions.15 In addition to seeking techniques that promote rehabilitation, there is a concern regarding the forms of
intervention, which should aim at functional capacity.16 Considering that rehabilitation plays a pivotal role in promoting functionality and
the stimulation of motor development, this study aimed to describe a case before and after a neurofunctional intervention in a child with
agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC). This study was performed at Clínica Escola de Fisioterapia do Centro de Ciências da Saúde e do
Esporte (CEFID) of the Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina (UDESC), and was approved by the Ethics Committee for Research in Human
Subjects according to Edict 263/2009, after the child's guardian signed the informed consent. During prenatal care, the ultrasonography
findings evidenced that the child had hydrocephalus. In the sixth month of pregnancy, the mother received a diagnosis of preeclampsia, which
resulted in an emergency C-section delivery. The male child was born at 35 weeks and 4 days of gestational age, with Apgar score at 1 and 5
minutes of 7 and 8, respectively; weight of 2,020 g; length of 48 cm; head circumference of 34 cm; and small for gestational age. During the
17 days in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) was detected, as well as hypoplasia of the lateral
ventricles and cerebellar vermis (Fig. 1). After NICU discharge, the infant was referred to early intervention at 3 months of corrected age
at the Associação de Pais e Amigos dos Excepcionais in Florianópolis. During the first two years of life, he underwent surgical procedures
for inguinal hernia removal, polydactyly repair, left testicle atrophy, and adenoids. At 2 years of age, he started presenting seizures,
currently treated with anticonvulsants. The genetic study, although inconclusive, might be compatible with acrocallosal syndrome, according
to the medical report. At 2 years and 6 months of chronological age, he was admitted for treatment at the school clinic of CEFID/ UDESC. To
perform the patient's assessment, a child neurofunctional record was used, which consisted of: 1) identification (personal data); 2)
personal history (past and current medical history, family history, associated diseases, and lifestyle); 3) motor behavior (reflexes and
reactions, motor pattern involving the description of symmetries, transfers, movement, and postural adjustments in all positions); and 4)
physical examination (muscle tone, deformities, postural deviations, and sensitivity). The Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM-88)17 and the
Gross Motor Function Classification System - Expanded & Revised (GMFCS-E&R),18 published in its Brazilian version19 - were applied to assess
pre- and post-intervention functional performance. At the initial assessment, the child had normal muscle tone in the upper limbs (UL) and
fluctuating tone in the lower limbs (LL). Despite having no joint deformity, the patient showed a tendency to equinovalgus foot. Moreover,
the following reflexes were absent: Landau, parachute, labyrinthine, neck and body straightening, and UL backward protective reaction.
Balance on all fours, standing, and in the sitting position was also absent. Regarding the motor patterns, the following was observed: a)
the UL remained under the body when transferring from supine to prone positions; b) there was lack of support from the UL in the prone
position, with incomplete cervical extension, poor range to grab objects, and lower limb extensor pattern; c) the patient was not able to
transfer from the supine to the sitting position; d) the patient did not remain seated with trunk control and hands free for long or at
backward movements; e) the patient did not perform transfers from the sitting position; f) the patient demonstrated weight-bearing in the
standing position, and simulated steps with support from the pelvic girdle; g) the patient showed self-locomotion for short distances using
the rolling movement, and, when prone, tried to crawl without alternating movement of the lower limbs; and h) absence of bimanual control
with large objects, unimanual control deficit, and incoordination to reach objects. At the initial GMFM, the points obtained were primarily
in lower positions (prone, supine, and sitting); however, even in these positions, he did not achieve the maximum score, as he did not
attain postural transfers, balance, and selective control of the limbs. According to the GMFCS-E&R, the child was classified as level IV
(self-mobility with limitations) for the corresponding age group (between 2 and 4 years). Based on this assessment, the goals of the
neurofunctional intervention were: to improve UL support in the prone position; to achieve uni- and bimanual coordination and handling of
objects; to promote the extension of the lower limbs in the sitting position; to acquire new postures (on all fours, kneeling, semi-
kneeling, and standing positions); and to promote the active transfer between them. Other goals were developing balance, protective, and
weight-bearing reactions in all positions, as well as strengthening of the limbs and abdominal muscles. During the intervention, the authors
sought to prevent range of motion alterations and deformities. The neurofunctional intervention was based on the use of kinesiotherapy, as
well as sensory and proprioceptive resources, in 40-minute sessions twice a week. The kinesiotherapy consisted of muscle strengthening,
stretching, and mobilization of upper and lower limbs, training postural maintenance and change, weight bearing, and stimuli for balance,
correction, and protection reactions. The mother actively participated in the intervention, giving feedback to the therapist by describing
the child's activities, continuing the treatment at home, performing the exercises taught by the therapist, and offering her child greater
freedom of movement. The intervention was conducted using a wooden platform, mats, benches, toys, wedges, support rolls, and Swiss balls.
The reassessment used the same initial tools and was conducted after 15 interventions, when the child was 2 years and 10 months of age. It
was observed that the tendency to equinovalgus deformity of the foot persisted, but the stretching, positioning, and instructions given to
the caregiver prevented the deformity. The balance reactions were favored by the intervention, so that they were acquired on all fours, as
well as in the standing and sitting positions. The protective, labyrinth, and neck and body correction reactions were acquired. In relation
to motor behavior, movement acquisition was achieved and postural permanence time improved. The following were achieved: a) in the prone
position: full support of upper limbs on hands, and ability to reach out; b) sitting: improved backward balance, allowing the patient to sit
on a bench and on his side, handling objects; c) on all fours: the patient remained with extended elbows and crawled with the lower limbs;
d) kneeling: actively sustained trunk with pelvic girdle support or support of a low stool; e) semikneeling: actively remained in the
position for a short time; f) in the standing position: gait was started with support from the therapist's hands or pelvic girdle. After
training, postural transfers from supine to sitting, from sitting to kneeling (actively assisted), from kneeling to semi-kneeling (actively
assisted), and from kneeling to standing with support of a low stool were achieved (Fig. 2). The child began to handle small and large
objects with better coordination and handgrip, which helped improve his daily activities and playing, according to the mother. This
improvement in movement control was demonstrated by the GMFM, as positions requiring control or weight bearing on hands and UL were
achieved. The results obtained when applying the scales at the final assessment were positive, as shown in Table 1. Due to low or zero
values acquired in dimensions C, D, and E, the authors chose to present the target score of dimensions A and B at the initial assessment.
After the intervention, dimension C was added to this score. At the GMFCS-E&R, the patient progressed from level IV to III. At this level,
he could crawl on his hands and knees, pull himself up to stand, and walk with assistance from others. Although he performed activities
related to level II, such as crawling alternately, this level could not yet be considered, because the child needed assistance when
transferring to the sitting position and still required gait aids for locomotion. The rehabilitation goal in patients with ACC is to improve
the individual's overall function through a multidisciplinary team and trained caregivers.15 The patient in this study had inguinal hernia,
as well as left testicle and adenoids atrophy, which are not part of ADCC. He also had polydactyly, seizures, and hydrocephalus, which may
be associated with CC malformation. These alterations, whether associated or not, emphasize the need for a multidisciplinary intervention.
The present patient demonstrated delayed motor development, which is common in this population.14 However, children with ACC may also have a
typical development, within the normal range of intelligence.13 Early intervention allows for a more effective prevention of the factors
that can cause or enhance development alterations. Thus, it is important to start treatment as early as possible in order to prevent
secondary physical or mental complications, thus capitalizing on the plasticity of the CNS as much as possible.15 In the present case, the
child showed no orthopedic deformities or limitations in range of motion. However, muscle weakness and altered muscle tone determined the
need for preventive intervention, which, in the long term, could result in the onset of deformities. Deformities and functional limitations
impair the performance of motor skills and should be prevented. Studies11 , 20 have demonstrated that individuals with ACC have significant
deficits in handgrip, manual dexterity, and coordination. It is essential that early intervention considers such aspects, aiming at the
stimulation of functionality. In this case report, the child showed great improvement in manual and bimanual motor skill acquisition in
handling objects. Joint stability, stretching, and muscle strength should be associated with central control, involving functional
activities of movement, acquisition, and maintenance of different postures.21 The therapeutic approach based on prevention of functional
limitations; muscle strengthening; and training of correction, protection, and balance reactions influenced the development of functional
capacity throughout the analyzed period. The motor intervention focused on functionality was shown to be effective, because both the
GMFCS-E&R and the GMFM evidenced an improvement in gross motor function after a short intervention period. However, the intensive
participation of the child's mother was crucial for the intervention's success. It is imperative to emphasize the importance of family
involvement in promoting child development in the home environment. Parents of children with ACC can help in improving deficit
characteristics that affect the daily lives of their children.22 Evidence suggests that, in children with congenital or acquired disorders,
a family-centered therapy focused on early identification of functional compensation, adapting the environment and tasks through feedback
and advising those responsible for the child, will help improve the quality of the child's performance.23 ACC has been rarely addressed in
scientific studies, and one reason for this fact may be the small number of cases worldwide. Furthermore, of the existing cases, no study
had proposed a neurofunctional intervention regarding postural control in patients with ACC. Therefore, this report can be used as basis for
future studies involving motor intervention in children with ACC, in order to develop the topic and support these results. Study conducted
at Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina (UDESC), Florianópolis, SC, Brazil. To Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível
Superior (Capes), for the grant received. Conflitos de interesse Os autores declaram não haver conflitos de interesse. Descrever um relato
clínico pré e pós-intervenção neurofuncional num caso de agenesia de corpo caloso. Após o nascimento prematuro foi detectada agenesia do
corpo caloso e hipoplasia dos ventrículos laterais e vérmis cerebelar. Aos dois anos iniciou a intervenção proposta neste estudo. Uma
avaliação neurofuncional, além da Medida da Função Motora Grossa e o Sistema de Classificação da Função Motora Grossa, foi utilizada para
obter o desempenho funcional da criança. Na avaliação inicial havia ausência de reações de equilíbrio e de transferências posturais, e
déficits no controle manual e de tronco. A intervenção foi realizada com enfoque na função, priorizando o controle postural e a orientação
da familia para continuidade do tratamento em ambiente domiciliar. Após a intervenção houve melhora das reações corporais, controle postural
e aquisição de movimentos de mãos e membros. A intervenção também mostrou melhora no desempenho funcional. O controle postural e as
transferências de posições foram beneficiadas por intervenção neurofuncional nesse paciente com agenesia de corpo caloso. O enfoque baseado
na função com atividades que envolvem fortalecimento muscular e treinamento das reações de equilíbrio influenciaram a aquisição do
comportamento motor mais seletivo. O sistema nervoso central (SNC) é responsável pela interpretação e pela transmissão de informações
sensitivas, cognitivas e motoras. Em sua região central, encontra-se o corpo caloso (CC), que transmite essas informações entre os
hemisférios cerebrais1 por meio de um trato único e exclusivo para a integração.2 Alterações caracterizadas por gênese parcial (disgenesia)
ou ausência total (agenesia) do CC podem gerar uma desconexão inter-hemisférica.3 , 4 Estima-se que a incidência de agenesias e disgenesias
de corpo caloso (ADCC) seja de um a cada mil nascidos vivos,5 com prevalência de 2,3% na America do Norte e ainda desconhecida em países
latinos.4 As malformações congênitas do SNC, de forma geral, podem estar relacionadas a outras malformações (cerebrais ou de outros
segmentos) em 21% dos casos.6 Na ADCC, por exemplo, podem ocorrer concomitantemente anomalias extra e intracerebrais,7 como hidrocefalia,8
convulsões,9 síndromes,10 malformações do SNC,11 entre outras. Essas doenças associadas podem potencializar ou adicionar outras
características clínicas aos casos de ADCC. Assim, déficits cognitivos, sociais, visuais, auditivos, motores e somatossensoriais12 são
típicos em indivíduos acometidos. Algumas crianças com disgenesia de CC podem apresentar um desenvolvimento típico, mas com alguma
deficiência no comportamento psicossocial.13 Entretanto, observa-se comumente que crianças com ADCC exibem desenvolvimento motor atrasado, o
que pode ser evidenciado em desajustes na realização de habilidades e déficits de coordenação bilateral e de controle manual.11 , 14 A
intervenção motora busca reduzir as alterações decorrentes do distúrbio neurológico, tendo em vista a possibilidade de exploração da
plasticidade do SNC mediante intervenção específica.15 Além da procura por técnicas que promovam a reabilitação, há uma preocupação relativa
às formas de intervenção a serem realizadas, as quais devem visar à capacidade funcional.16 Considerando que a reabilitação tem papel
primordial na promoção da funcionalidade e da estimulação do desenvolvimento motor, este estudo teve como objetivo descrever um caso clínico
antes e depois de intervenção neurofuncional numa criança com agenesia de corpo caloso (ACC). Este estudo foi realizado na Clínica Escola de
Fisioterapia do Centro de Ciências da Saúde e do Esporte (CEFID) da Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina (UDESC), sendo aprovado pelo
Comitê de Etica em Seres Humanos sob o parecer 263/2009 e consentido pelo responsável da criança. Durante o acompanhamento pré-natal, o
achado ultrassonográfico evidenciou que a criança apresentava hidrocefalia. No sexto mês de gestação, diagnosticou-se pré-eclampsia, que
resultou em parto cirúrgico de emergência. A criança do sexo masculino nasceu de 35 semanas e 4 dias de idade gestacional, com Apgar de 1º e
5º minutos de sete e oito, respectivamente, peso de 2020g, comprimento de 48cm, perímetro cefálico de 34cm e pequeno para a idade
gestacional. Durante o período de 17 dias de internação na UTI neonatal, detectaram-se agenesia do corpo caloso (ACC) e hipoplasia dos
ventrículos laterais e vérmis cerebelar (fig. 1). Após a alta da unidade neonatal, o lactente foi submetido à intervenção precoce aos três
meses de idade corrigida na Associação de Pais e Amigos dos Excepcionais de Florianópolis. Durante os dois primeiros anos de vida, passou
por procedimentos de remoção cirúrgica de hérnia inguinal, polidáctilo, testículo esquerdo (atrofia) e adenoide. Aos dois anos de idade,
iniciaram-se as primeiras crises convulsivas, tratadas atualmente com fármacos. O estudo genético, embora não conclusivo, pode ser
compatível com síndrome acrocalosal, de acordo com o relato médico. Aos dois anos e seis meses de idade cronológica, foi admitido para
tratamento na clínica escola do CEFID/UDESC. Para a avaliação da criança na insituição foi utilizada uma ficha neurofuncional infantil,
composta por: 1) identificação (dados pessoais); 2) anamnese (história clínica pregressa e atual, antecedentes familiares, doenças
associadas e hábitos de vida); 3) comportamento motor (reflexos e reações, padrão motor que envolvia a descrição de simetrias,
transferências, movimentação e ajustes posturais em todas as posições); e 4) exame físico (tônus, deformidades, desvios posturais e
sensibilidade). A Medida da Função Motora Grossa (GMFM-88)17 e o Sistema de Classificação da Função Motora Grossa - Ampliado & Revisto
(GMFCS-E&R),18 publicado em versão brasileira,19 foram aplicados para avaliar o desempenho funcional pré e pós-intervenção. Na avaliação
inicial, a criança apresentava tônus normal em membros superiores (MMSS) e flutuante em membros inferiores (MMII). Apesar de não ter
deformidade articular, o paciente mostrava tendência ao pé equino valgo. Além disso, as reações de Landau, de para-quedas, de retificação
labiríntica, cervical e corporal, de proteção de MMSS para trás, de equilíbrio em quatro apoios, em pé e na posição sentada apresentavam-se
ausentes. Em relação aos padrões motores: a) o membro superior permaneceu embaixo do corpo na transferência de supino para prono; b) houve
ausência de apoio de MMSS na posição prona, com extensão cervical incompleta, alcance de objetos pobre e padrão extensor de MMII; c) não
realizou transferência de supino para sentado; d) não se manteve sentado com controle de tronco e mãos livres por longo tempo ou em
movimentos para trás; e) não realizou transferências a partir da posição sentada; f) apresentou descarga de peso em posição ortostática e
simulou passos com apoio em cintura pélvica; g) realizou autolocomoção para curtas distâncias utilizando o rolar e, em prono, tentou
rastejar sem o movimento alternado de MMII; h) ausência de controle bimanual com objetos grandes, unimanual deficitário e descoordenação
para alcance de objetos. No GMFM inicial, os pontos obtidos foram basicamente em posturas mais baixas (prono, supino e sentado); porém,
mesmo nessas posições, não obteve pontuação máxima, já que não atingiu transferências posturais, equilíbrio e controle seletivo de membros.
De acordo com o GMFCS-E&R, a criança foi classificada no nível IV (automobilidade com limitações) na faixa etária correspondente entre dois
e quatro anos. Com base nessa avaliação, foram traçados os objetivos da intervenção neurofuncional: melhorar o apoio de MMSS em prono, a
coordenação e o manuseio de objetos bi e unimanual; promover a extensão de MMII na posição sentada; adquirir novas posturas (quatro apoios,
ajoelhado, semiajoelhado e em posição ortostática) e promover a passagem ativa entre elas. Visou-se ainda desenvolver equilíbrio, reações de
proteção e descarga de peso em todas as posições, assim como fortalecimento dos membros e dos abdominais. Durante a intervenção, buscou-se
prevenir as alterações na amplitude do movimento e das deformidades. A intervenção neurofuncional baseou-se na utilização de recursos
cinesioterapêuticos, sensoriais e proprioceptivos, em sessões de 40 minutos, duas vezes por semana. A cinesioterapia consistia em
fortalecimento muscular, alongamento e mobilização dos MMSS e MMII, treino de manutenção e troca de posturas, descarga de peso, bem como
estímulos às reações de equilíbrio, retificação e proteção. Durante o atendimento houve participação efetiva da mãe, transmitindo feedback
para a terapeuta ao descrever atividades desenvolvidas pelo filho, dando continuidade ao tratamento em casa, realizando exercícios ensinados
e oferecendo ao filho maior liberdade de movimento. Para a intervenção foram utilizados um tablado de madeira, colchonetes, bancos,
brinquedos, cunha, rolos e bolas suíças. A reavaliação utilizou os mesmos intrumentos iniciais e occoreu após 15 intervenções, aos 2 anos e
10 meses da criança. Observou-se que a tendência à deformidade em pé equino valgo ainda persistia, mas o alongamento, o posicionamento e as
instruções para o cuidador possibilitaram que a deformidade não se instalasse. As reações de equilíbrio foram favorecidas pela intervenção,
de forma que houve aquisição destas em quatro apoios, em pé e na posição sentada. Foram adquiridas as reações de proteção, de retificação
labiríntica, cervical e corporal. Em relação ao comportamento motor, houve aquisição de movimentos e melhora do tempo de permanência
postural. Dessa forma, obteve-se: a) em prono: apoio total de MMSS sobre as mãos e realizando alcance; b) sentado: melhora do equilíbrio
para trás, permitindo sentar em banco e de lado, realizando manuseio de objetos; c) em quatro apoios: permaneceu com os cotovelos estendidos
e arrastou-se com os MMII; d) ajoelhado: sustentou ativamente com suporte em cintura pélvica ou com apoio em banco baixo; e) semiajoelhado:
manteve-se ativamente por breve tempo; f) em posição ortostática: início da marcha com apoio do terapeuta em mãos ou cintura pélvica. Após
treinamento houve aquisição das transferências posturais de supino para sentado, de sentado para ajoelhado (ativo assistido), de ajoelhado
para semiajoelhado (ativo assistido) e de ajoelhado para em pé com apoio em banco alto (fig. 2). A criança passou a manusear objetos
pequenos e grandes com melhor coordenação e preensão, o que favoreceu suas atividades diárias e no brincar, segundo informações maternas.
Essa melhora no controle dos movimentos foi evidenciada pelo GMFM, já que posturas que exigiam domínio ou suporte de peso em mãos e MMSS
foram conquistadas. Os resultados obtidos na aplicação final das escalas foram positivos, conforme exposto na tabela 1. Devido aos valores
nulos ou baixos adquiridos nas dimensões C, D e E, optou-se por apresentar o escore meta das dimensões A e B na avaliação incial. Após a
intervenção, para esse escore foi acrescentada a dimensão C. No GMFCS-E&R, a criança passou do nível IV para o III. Nesse nível, já
realizava o engatinhar sobre mãos e joelhos, puxava-se para levantar e andava com auxílio de terceiros. Apesar de realizar atividades
referentes ao nível II, como engatinhar alternadamente, esta ainda não pôde ser considerada porque a criança necessitava de assistência em
transferencia da postura sentada, além de não utilizar auxiliares de marcha para a locomoção. O objetivo da reabilitação em pacientes com
ACC é melhorar o funcionamento global do indivíduo por meio de uma equipe multiprofissional e orientação aos cuidadores.15 O paciente deste
estudo apresentou hérnia inguinal, atrofia de testículo esquerdo e adenoide, que não fazem parte da ADCC. Já a polidactilia, as crises
convulsivas e a hidrocefalia, também encontradas, podem estar associadas à malformação do CC. Essas alterações, associadas ou não, realçam a
necessidade de intervenção multiprofissional. A criança relatada no presente estudo mostra atraso no desenvolvimento motor, que é comum
nessa população.14 Mas crianças com ACC também podem apresentar um desenvolvimento típico e dentro da faixa normal de inteligência.13 A
intervenção precoce possibilita a prevenção mais eficaz dos fatores que podem causar ou ampliar as alterações no desenvolvimento. Assim, é
importante iniciar o tratamento o mais cedo possível, a fim de prevenir complicações secundárias, físicas ou psíquicas para, dessa forma,
explorar a plasticidade do SNC o quanto possível.15 Neste caso, a criança não apresentou deformidades ortopédicas ou limitações na amplitude
dos movimentos. Contudo, a fraqueza muscular e a alteração de tônus determinaram a necessidade da intervenção preventiva, o que, em longo
prazo, poderia resultar em quadros de deformidade. As deformidades e as limitações funcionais prejudicam o desempenho de habilidade motoras
e devem ser prevenidas. Estudos11 , 20 têm demonstrado que indivíduos com ACC têm importante déficit na preensão, na destreza e na
coordenação manual. É fundamental que a intervenção precoce contemple tais aspectos, visando à estimulação da funcionalidade. Neste relato
de caso, a criança obteve grande melhora na aquisição motora manual e bimanual em manipulação de objetos por meio do treino da habilidade. A
estabilidade articular, o alongamento e a força muscular devem estar associados ao controle central, envolvendo atividades funcionais de
movimentação, aquisição e manutenção de diferentes posturas.21 A abordagem terapêutica baseada na prevenção de limitações funcionais, no
fortalecimento muscular e no treinamento das reações de retificação, proteção e equilíbrio, influenciou o desenvolvimento da capacidade
funcional ao longo do período analisado. A intervenção motora com enfoque na funcionalidade mostrou ser efetiva, pois tanto o GMFCS-E&R
quanto o GMFM indicaram a melhora da função motora grossa num curto período de intervenção. Contudo, destacase, neste caso, a grande
participação da mãe da criança para o sucesso da intervenção. É fundamental enfatizar a importância da participação da família na promoção
do desenvolvimento infantil em âmbito domiciliar. Os pais de crianças com ACC podem auxiliar na melhoria das características deficitárias
que interferem no cotidiano da criança.22 Evidências sugerem que, em crianças com desordens congênitas ou adquiridas, a terapia centrada na
família, voltada para identificar precocemente as compensações funcionais, adaptar o ambiente e as tarefas por meio do feedback e
orientações aos responsáveis, ajuda a melhorar a qualidade do seu desempenho.23 A agenesia de corpo caloso tem sido pouco abordada em
estudos científicos, e um dos motivos para isso pode ser o número reduzido de casos no mundo. Além disso, dos casos existentes, nenhum
estudo havia proposto a intervenção neurofuncional no que diz respeito ao controle postural na ACC. Dessa forma, este relato pode servir
como base para futuros trabalhos envolvendo a intervenção motora em crianças com ACC, a fim de aprofundar o tema e fortalecer esses
resultados. Estudo conduzido na Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina (UDESC), Florianópolis, SC, Brasil. À Coordenação de
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Capes), pela bolsa de estudos recebida.
