Tolvaptan is a new drug used for treating ascites induced by liver cirrhosis, and it is covered by health insurance in Japan. In the present
report, we describe the case of a 74-year-old man with type C liver cirrhosis and refractory ascites. He was receiving furosemide and
spironolactone daily, but still required repeat puncture for ascites removal. Administration of tolvaptan (3.75 mg/day) was started in
addition to his existing medications, and was subsequently increased to 7.5 mg/day. However, after 2 months, the ascites again exacerbated.
Nevertheless, after we discontinued the administration of furosemide, the tolvaptan became effective. This may be because furosemide
administration decreases urine osmolality, resulting in a non-response to tolvaptan. The selective vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist
tolvaptan is a newly introduced diuretic, and has a different mechanism as compared with conventional loop diuretics ; in Japan, it has been
used for fluid retention in heart failure patients since 2010. In 2013, it was approved for treating fluid retention associated with liver
cirrhosis (in doses up to 7.5 mg/day). Tolvaptan is an option for managing body fluid in liver cirrhosis patients who have been managed by
furosemide and/or spironolactone, and it has great potential for treating patients with a refractory condition. However, many issues remain
unclear, including the combined method for using it with existing drugs, dosing period, and prerequisites for obtaining favorable outcomes.
In the present report, we describe a case of refractory ascites associated with type C liver cirrhosis wherein a complete response was
achieved immediately after administering tolvaptan; however, the ascites exacerbated after 2 months, and the drug’s diuretic effect was
restored by discontinuing furosemide. A 74-year-old man presented to our hospital with abdominal pain and bloating since December 2013. He
had undergone craniotomy for a brain tumor approximately 30 years ago. He had no history of alcohol consumption or cigarette smoking, and
his family history was not significant. Since 2001, he had been managed regularly for type C liver cirrhosis. He did not have a treatment
history of interferon use. He had undergone sclerotherapy for esophageal varices in 2001 and hepatic arterial chemoembolization in 2004, and
did not have any recurrences. However, he continued to receive oral furosemide (20 mg) and spironolactone (50 mg) daily for ascites
retention. Although he maintained a body weight of 60 kg and an abdominal circumference of 85 cm, his body weight and abdominal
circumference rapidly increased to 70 kg and 100 cm, respectively. Ultrasound confirmed the presence of increased ascites; thus, the dose of
furosemide was increased to 30 mg/day, and puncture was repeated for ascites removal. Since there was no improvement, he was hospitalized in
January 2014. On admission, the following physical findings were noted: height, 168 cm; body weight, 69 kg; abdominal circumference, 100 cm;
consciousness, lucid; body temperature, 35.5 °C; blood pressure, 137/85 mmHg; pulse, 80 beats/min (regular). The palpebral conjunctiva
showed no sign of anemia. The bulbar conjunctiva had no yellow staining. The chest findings were normal with no evidence of heart murmur or
spider angioma. The abdomen was swollen, severely distended, and wave-palpable. He had spontaneous abdominal pain without tenderness and had
no edema in the extremities. His blood test findings are shown in Table 1. The Child–Pugh score was 9 points (B) with moderate or greater
ascites volume and no encephalopathy. His platelet count was low. No renal impairment was observed.Table 1The patient’s laboratory data on
admission Biochemistry Hematology TP6.8 mg/dLWBC1,800/μLALB2.4 mg/dLRBC357 × 104/μLT-bil1.30 mg/dLHb12.2 g/dLD-
bil0.35 mg/dLPlt4.0 × 104/μLAST64 IU/L Virus marker ALT60 IU/LHBs Ag(−)ALP311 IU/LHCV Ab(+)γ-GTP28 IU/L Urine examination
BUN11.0 mg/dLSpecific gravity1.010Cre0.81 mg/dLpH6.5Na144 mEq/LProtein(−)K2.9 mEq/LGlucose(−)Cl108 mEq/LOccult blood(−)eGFR71 mL/min/1.73 m2
Ketone(−) Coagulation UrobilinogenNormalPT70.3 %Bilirubin(−) TP total protein, ALB albumin, T-bil total bilirubin, D-bil direct bilirubin,
AST aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, ALP alkaline phosphatase, γ-GTP gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, BUN blood urea
nitrogen, Cre creatinine, Na sodium, K potassium, Cl chloride, eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate, PT prothrombin time, WBC white
blood cells, RBC red blood cells, Hb hemoglobin, Plt platelets, HBs Ag hepatitis B core antigen, HCV Ab hepatitis C virus core antigen The
patient’s laboratory data on admission TP total protein, ALB albumin, T-bil total bilirubin, D-bil direct bilirubin, AST aspartate
aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, ALP alkaline phosphatase, γ-GTP gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, BUN blood urea nitrogen, Cre
creatinine, Na sodium, K potassium, Cl chloride, eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate, PT prothrombin time, WBC white blood cells, RBC
red blood cells, Hb hemoglobin, Plt platelets, HBs Ag hepatitis B core antigen, HCV Ab hepatitis C virus core antigen On plain abdominal
computed tomography (Fig. 1), both the hepatic lobes were atrophic with a blunt margin and irregularity on the surface. A moderate volume of
ascites retention was observed.Fig. 1Plain abdominal computed tomography image. The hepatic lobes are atrophic with a blunt margin and
irregularity on the surface. A moderate volume of ascites retention is also observed Plain abdominal computed tomography image. The hepatic
lobes are atrophic with a blunt margin and irregularity on the surface. A moderate volume of ascites retention is also observed The ascites
fluid obtained following puncture indicated the presence of transudative ascites, which was macroscopically pale yellow and transparent with
a cell count of 200/µL and a protein level of 2.0 g/dL. The cytological diagnosis was class I, and the culture test was negative. The
patient’s clinical course is presented in Fig. 2. The patient was on salt restriction (≤5 g/day) and water restriction (≤1 L/day), and he
underwent three courses of cell-free and concentrated ascites reinfusion therapy (CART). However, he again exhibited ascites retention after
several days, and the urinary volume was insufficient at 1,000–1,500 mL/day. On day 10, oral tolvaptan (3.75 mg/day) was started, and his
urinary volume immediately increased to 2,000 mL/day. Adverse reactions, such as hypernatremia and liver dysfunction, were not observed.
Since the patient still required puncture for ascites removal, the dose of tolvaptan was increased to 7.5 mg/day on day 17. His urinary
volume increased to approximately 2,500 mL/day, and his body weight and abdominal circumference improved gradually without any puncture for
ascites removal. His abdominal pain and bloating improved, and he was discharged on day 22.Fig. 2The patient’s clinical course after the
first admission The patient’s clinical course after the first admission He continued tolvaptan (7.5 mg/day) treatment, and at approximately
day 60, the patient realized that his urinary volume had decreased. He presented with abdominal bloating and weight gain again. Re-
exacerbation of the ascites was suspected, and the patient was readmitted on day 72 (Fig. 3). A sufficient urinary volume was not observed
after admission. We presumed that urine osmolality decreased due to the continuous administration of furosemide, which may have hampered the
diuretic effect of tolvaptan in the renal collecting tubule; furosemide was discontinued on day 78. Subsequently, his urinary volume
temporarily increased to more than 4,000 mL/day. There is a possibility that the albumin infusions (days 78–80) affected the temporary
increase in his urinary volume; however, a volume of ≥2,000 mL/day was maintained over the next month after discontinuing furosemide. The
urine osmolality immediately increased from 300 to 650 mOsm/L after discontinuing furosemide. In addition, 3 days after discontinuing
furosemide (day 81), the urine osmolality decreased to 365 mOsm/L. The abdominal symptoms, body weight, and abdominal circumference returned
to their original levels. Tolvaptan was continued (7.5 mg/day) without exacerbation of the ascites. The serum sodium level was maintained
(range 139–144 mEq/L) throughout the course.Fig. 3The patient’s clinical course after the second admission The patient’s clinical course
after the second admission The use of existing natriuretic agents for treating ascites associated with liver cirrhosis is problematic for
the following reasons: hyponatremia is likely to occur; diuresis resistance or impaired renal function is induced by the activation of the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system; and hypoalbuminemia-associated treatment resistance may occur. Tolvaptan acts on the renal collecting
tubule, inhibits the reabsorption of water, and accelerates urinary excretion . Since it results in the excretion of only free water without
inducing natriuresis, tolvaptan improves hyponatremia . Moreover, it does not affect the activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone
system, thereby allowing the body fluid to be controlled without impairing renal function . According to Japanese and overseas large-scale
clinical studies, it exhibits a diuretic effect and improves clinical symptoms in heart failure patients [4, 5]. Thuluvath et al. reported
that the administration of a vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist in addition to conventional treatment with furosemide and spironolactone
increased urinary volume in liver cirrhosis patients. Okita et al. first reported the results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study on tolvaptan for refractory ascites associated with liver cirrhosis. When tolvaptan was administered to patients with
hepatic edema at dosages of 30, 15, or 7.5 mg/day for 7 days, the maximum decrease in weight and abdominal circumference was observed in
patients receiving 7.5 mg/day, thus providing the basis for the current upper dose limit in the present case. Sakaida et al. reported that
the weight loss obtained by short-term treatment with diuretics in liver cirrhosis patients strongly correlated with the volume of ascites,
accounting for approximately 30 % of cases with weight loss. Moreover, in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, they
reported that a significant weight loss was obtained in patients receiving 7.5 mg/day of tolvaptan, revealing that it is effective for
improving ascites . They also reported that it is useful for treating patients with hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin level <2.5 g/dL), because
of tolvaptan’s effect on the renal collecting tubule through the blood flow. Although tolvaptan is expected to play an innovative role in
treating refractory patients, no diuresis is achieved even after administration, and the efficacy of this drug can often be diminished, as
seen in the present case. An approach to determine its appropriate use involves the elucidation of the responders to this drug. One possible
approach is to use urine osmolality as a marker reflecting the function and activity of the renal collecting tubule. Imamura et al. defined
patients with heart failure who had an increase in urinary volume during 24 h after the start of tolvaptan administration as responders,
revealing that responders showed a significant improvement in body weight, brain natriuretic peptide levels, and clinical symptoms.
Moreover, they reported that the predictive factors of responders are urine osmolality of ≥352 mOsm/L before tolvaptan administration or a
≥26 % urine osmolality reduction at 4–6 h after administration . The mechanism of water reabsorption by vasopressin is as follows: the
binding of vasopressin to V2-receptors in the renal collecting tubule induces cyclic adenosine monophosphate dependent synthesis of the
aquaporin-2 water channel and its migration to the cellular surface, which in turn leads to increased water permeability in the collecting
tubule, thus resulting in enhanced water reabsorption mediated by an osmotic pressure gradient formed between the hypotonic urine in the
collecting tubule and the hypertonic renal interstitium . Tolvaptan competitively inhibits V2-receptor binding, thereby suppressing the
expression of aquaporin-2 and inducing water diuresis. Patients who initially have a low urine osmolality may have a decreased expression of
aquaporin-2 or a reduced osmotic pressure gradient, thus making it difficult for tolvaptan to be efficacious . The urine osmolality
increased from 300 to 650 mOsm/L after discontinuing furosemide in our patient. The urine osmolality should be evaluated before starting
tolvaptan. Although the urine osmolality was originally at the level where an effective water diuretic effect could not be obtained,
discontinuing furosemide may have increased urine osmolality in the medullary collecting tubule to the range where tolvaptan is effective,
thereby achieving diuresis. In addition, 3 days after discontinuing furosemide, the urine osmolality decreased to 365 mOsm/L; thus, the
urine osmolality may have decreased because of the sufficient water diuresis caused by tolvaptan. Since the maximum dose of tolvaptan has
already been used, it is important to review its preparation by evaluating the osmolality of concomitant diuretic agents. Our case is
valuable, because a non-responder became a responder by adjusting a loop diuretic. The maximum dose of tolvaptan is 7.5 mg/day. However, if
7.5 mg of tolvaptan is administered and the patient’s urine volume decreases, the doctor may assume that this effect is a result of another
diuretic. In our case, furosemide decreased the osmolality; therefore, we recommend that clinicians assess the osmolality and reconsider the
decreasing effect of other diuretics. Similarly, Imamura et al. reported that a patient with acute renal impairment did not respond to the
initial administration but responded to tolvaptan when the renal impairment resolved and renal osmolality was increased. The diuretic effect
of tolvaptan can be enhanced by considering the administration timing and by adjusting concomitant conventional diuretic agents. Although
the appropriate dosing period for tolvaptan in patients with hepatic edema is unclear, there is a potential diminished effect after long-
term administration. A future study on long-term users is needed to establish the efficacy of tolvaptan. Isao Sakaida and Shuji Terai
received a lecture fee from Otsuka Pharmaceutical Company, which manufactures tolvaptan. All procedures followed were in accordance with the
ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of
1975, as revised in 2008(5). Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study.
