Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exist. Objective: This article describes the
diagnosis, clinical and microscopic (histopathology and ultrastructural) features and treatment of a new family with hereditary gingival
fibromatosis (HGF) and highlights the importance of this genetic condition. Study Design: To characterize the pattern of inheritance and the
clinical features, members of a new family with HGF were examined. The pedigree was reliably constructed including the four latest
generations of family. Hematoxylin and eosin staining and ultrastructural analysis were performed with the gingival tissue. Results:
Examination of the family pedigree revealed that the patient III-2 represent the index patient of this family (initial patient with a
mutation), which was transmitted to her daughter through an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. The affected patients showed a
generalized gingival overgrowth. The patient was treated with surgical procedures of gingivectomy and gingivoplasty. The diagnosis was
confirmed by histopathology examination that showed a well-structured epithelium with elongated and thin papillae inserted in fibrous
connective tissue with increased amount of collagen. The ultrastructural aspects of the tissue show collagen fibrils exhibiting their
typically repeating banding pattern with some fibrils displaying loops at their end. Moreover, it was possible to seen in some regions
fibrillar component presenting tortuous aspects and loss of the alignment among them. Conclusions: This HGF frequently resulted in both
esthetic and functional problems. The genetic pattern of this Brazilian family suggested a new mutation, which was later transmitted by an
autosomal dominant trait. Key words:Gingival fibromatosis, genetic disease, pedigree, ultrastructure. Gingival fibromatosis (GF) is the
overgrowth of the gingival characterized by the expansion and accumulation of the connective tissue with the occasional presence of an
increased number of cells (1). It is a hereditary condition or due to side effect of medications including phenytoin, cyclosporin, and
nifedipine (2). The inherited form called hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF, OMIM 135300) is a rare isolated condition manifested by
slowly progressive, benign, localized or generalized enlargement of the gingival with an incidence of 1:750,000 live births (2-4). The
gingival enlargement is of normal color, firm consistency, non-hemorrhagic and asymptomatic. Genders are equally affected (5). Its
overgrowth of gingiva results in both esthetic and functional problems for affected individuals. The most common effects are diastemas,
malpositioning of teeth, prolonged retention of primary dentition, delayed eruption, cross and open bites, prominent lips, and open lip
posture (2,6). Although the gingival enlargement does not directly affect the alveolar bone, the gingival swelling may increase the
bacterial plaque accumulation, leading to periodontitis, bone resorption and halitosis (2). Most cases of HGF are detected at birth, but
sometimes it may not be noted until later childhood, at the time of eruption of deciduous or permanent teeth (7). The histopathology
features of HGF reveals dense connective tissue rich in collagen fibers and a hyperplasic epithelium with long rete pegs (8). Small
calcified particles, islands osseous metaplasia, ulceration of the overlying mucosa and inflammation can also be observed occasionally (9).
This article describes the diagnosis, clinical and microscopic (histopathology and ultra structural) features and the treatment of a new
family with HGF and highlights the importance of this genetic condition. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Research
Ethics Committee. Informed consent was taken from the parents or the legal guardians of the children. The pedigree was reliably constructed
including the four latest generations of family. Hematoxylin and eosin staining and ultrastructural analysis were performed from gingival
tissue. A small fragment of gingiva was also obtained to be analyzed on electron microscopy (Zeiss EM 109 – MegaviewG2/Olympus Soft Imaging
Solutions). Briefly, the gingival sample was fixed using the standard fixation protocol of the glutaraldehyde-osmium tetroxide, which was
followed by dehydration in acetone and infiltration with epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections of 60 nm in thickness were made and then stained
first with uranyl acetate and then lead nitrate. - Pedigree Analysis The pedigree was reliably constructed including the four latest
generations and is depicted in figure 1. The clinical examination and history of this family revealed that only two members (2.22%)
presented a generalized gingival overgrowth. Genetic abnormalities commonly associated with GF, characterizing a syndrome, were not
identified in this family. In the third generation, there was one affected member, who transmitted the trait to his descendant (family
proband) (fourth generation). No history of consanguinity was verified in the family. Thus, patient III-2 represent the index patient of
this family (initial patient with the mutation), which was transmitted to her daughter probably through an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance. Following is a brief clinical description of the two patients with HGF. Figure 1 Pedigree of family affected with Hereditary
gingival fibromatosis, showing an autosomal dominant trait. Affected individuals are indicated by blackened symbols; squares denote males
and circles denote females. Pedigree of family affected with Hereditary gingival fibromatosis, showing an autosomal dominant trait. Affected
individuals are indicated by blackened symbols; squares denote males and circles denote females. - Clinical Analysis A three-year-old
Caucasian girl was referred to the Stomatology Clinic of the State University of Montes Claros, due to pronounced fibrous gingival
overgrowth. The girl came accompanied by her maternal grandmother. Her medical history was unremarkable. Her weight and height were within
normal range and she did not exhibit any mental impairment. Clinical examination revealed generalized gingival hyperplasia involving both
the maxillary and mandibular arches, with morphologically normal teeth. The gingiva was pink, with fibrous consistency and covering some
dental crowns (Fig. 2). Gingival enlargement had been initially noticed two months after birth, but it became more intense during the period
of deciduous dentition. She had a marked cross bite with difficulties in the correct lip closure (Fig. 2). Figure 2 Clinical and
radiographic characteristics of the family with Hereditary gingival fibromatosis. Gingival overgrowth in the anterior facial area of the
proband (A) and her mother (B). In both, severe and generalized gingival enlargement involving both the maxillary and mandibular arches,
covers almost two-thirds of the clinical crowns. The teeth are morphologically normal. (C) Aspect of gingiva after the last surgical
intervention in the mother. (D). After seven years, the mother presents gingival overgrowth, indicating the recurrence of Hereditary
gingival fibromatosis. (E) Proand had a marked cross bite with difficulties in the correct lip closure. (F) The panoramic radiography
revealed any missing or malformed teeth of mother’s proband. Clinical and radiographic characteristics of the family with Hereditary
gingival fibromatosis. Gingival overgrowth in the anterior facial area of the proband (A) and her mother (B). In both, severe and
generalized gingival enlargement involving both the maxillary and mandibular arches, covers almost two-thirds of the clinical crowns. The
teeth are morphologically normal. (C) Aspect of gingiva after the last surgical intervention in the mother. (D). After seven years, the
mother presents gingival overgrowth, indicating the recurrence of Hereditary gingival fibromatosis. (E) Proand had a marked cross bite with
difficulties in the correct lip closure. (F) The panoramic radiography revealed any missing or malformed teeth of mother’s proband. The
grandmother reported that her daughter (mother of the proband) also exhibited gingival overgrowth. In the following visit, the girl’s mother
came with her daughter. The mother has 21 years and her medical history was also unremarkable. The patient did not have any evidence of
genetic syndrome, mental disorder or use of medications associated with gingival hyperplasia. Due to gingival overgrowth, she was submitted
to several gingival surgeries seven years ago at the age of 14 years old (Fig. 2). Currently, the patient presents gingival overgrowth,
indicating the recurrence of HGF (Fig. 2). Tooth malformations were not found. The radiographic examination did not show any missing or
malformed teeth (Fig. 2). - Treatment After oral hygiene instruction, the surgical treatment consisted of quadrant- by-quadrant
gingivectomy/gingivoplasty technique, followed by 0.12% chlorhexidine oral rinses twice a day for 2 weeks after each surgery. After the last
surgical intervention, both patients periodically returned for follow-up visits. Therapy at the post surgical follow-up visit was a cosmetic
and functional improvement. Scaling and prophylaxis continued to be performed every 6 months. The proband is being accompanied, with
professional prophylaxis and later will be performed the surgeries of gingivectomy/gingivoplasty. - Histopathology Analysis The histologic
examination of gingival overgrowth tissue specimens revealed a well-structured epithelium with elongated and thin papillae inserted in
fibrous connective tissue. The connective tissue showed an increased amount of collagen fiber bundles running in all directions. A chronic
inflammatory cell infiltrate was also observed (Fig. 3). Figure 3 (A/B) Histologic morphology from gingival tissue of the mother’s proband
showing an increased amount of collagen fiber bundles running in all directions and significant extension of the epithelial rete ridges
(H&E; original magnification – x10 and x50). Ultrastructural aspects of the tissue revealed collagen fibrils showing loops (C, arrow) and
other ones with apparent tortuous aspects and altered alignment among them (D, arrow). (A/B) Histologic morphology from gingival tissue of
the mother’s proband showing an increased amount of collagen fiber bundles running in all directions and significant extension of the
epithelial rete ridges (H&E; original magnification – x10 and x50). Ultrastructural aspects of the tissue revealed collagen fibrils showing
loops (C, arrow) and other ones with apparent tortuous aspects and altered alignment among them (D, arrow). - Ultra structural Aspects The
ultra structural aspects of the tissue show collagen fibrils exhibiting their typically repeating banding pattern of with some fibrils
displaying loops at their end. Moreover, an alignment among them was also observed in few regions (Fig. 3). HGF is traditionally considered
an autosomal dominant disease (10). Few reports have described that HGF may be inherited by an autosomal recessive gene (4,6,11). However,
some of the reports in which HGF was transmitted as an autosomal recessive inheritance clearly demonstrated that the gingival overgrowth is
associated with other systemic alterations as part of a syndrome (4,6,12). In cases where HGF is transmitted as a recessive trait without
other associated features, the history of consanguinity in the family seems to be always present (13). On the other hand, GF may be caused
by a new mutation. In these cases, the individuals are diagnosed as idiopathic gingival fibromatosis since there was no evidence of genetic
transmission in their family histories (2). The data described here provides evidence that the patient III-2 represents the index patient of
this family, and she transmitted the genetic defect to her daughter via autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. However, it has been
reported that unaffected individuals can occasionally transmit HGF in an autosomal dominant pattern to their offspring without themselves
being clinically affected. As, HGF is very uncommon and there was no history of consanguinity in the family, an autosomal recessive mode of
transmission is unlikely. X-linked inheritance is a possibility, but no reports of this type of Mendelian trait have been described in HGF
(14). Phenotype characteristics suggestive of a genetic syndrome were also not observed in any member of this family. The clinical
manifestations of the cases reported here were consistent with many reports of HGF (4,5,11). Manifestations of HGF may include focal sites
of gingival hyperplasia or generalized involvement, and the degree of hyperplasia may vary from slight to severe (4,5). The cases reported
here exhibited generalized and gingival enlargement that inhibited the complete eruption of the deciduous or permanent dentition into the
oral cavity. The anterior region of both maxilla and mandible were most severely affected. Histopathological aspects observed in this study
showed gingival tissues with a well-structured epithelium with elongated and thin papillae inserted into deep fibrous connective tissue with
collagen fiber bundles running in all directions. These microscopic findings are similar to those observed previously in other families
(15,16). Ultrastructural aspects revealed collagen fibrils presenting loops at their edges and loss of packing along with an apparent
tortuous pattern of organization and dissociation of them. On the other hand, an apparent changing in collagen fibrils’ diameter was not
observed in the tissue sample analyzed here, although Barros et al. 2001 (17) had described this feature as an important ultrastructural
finding to be observed in samples taken from hereditary gingival fibromatosis patient. It is known from previous reports that the HGF
usually begins at the time of eruption of the permanent dentition (4), but it can be detected at the eruption of the deciduous dentition and
rarely at birth (11). The enlargement seems to progress rapidly during “active” eruption and decrease at the end of this stage (18). The
presence of teeth appears to be necessary for HGF to occur, because the condition disappears or recedes with the loss of the teeth (19). In
the proband of the present study, the alteration was firstly noticed two months after birth, but it became more intense during the period of
deciduous dentition. In the proband’s mother, gingival enlargement developed with the eruption of permanent dentition. Indeed, HGF is
clearly a heterogeneous disorder in regard to clinical presentation and genetic inheritance (3,20). HGF cannot be cured but may be
controlled with varying degrees of success. When the enlargement is minimal, thorough scaling of teeth and home care may be all that are
required to maintain good appearance. However, excessive gingival tissue points to surgical intervention. Several authors have reported the
recurrence of hyperplasic tissue in HGF following surgical treatment, but the psychological benefits of even temporary cosmetic improvement
must not be underestimated and may outweigh the probability of recurrences in such a severe case (19). Here, the mother was unhappy with the
appearance of their gingival and was surgically treated by a combination of gingivectomy and gingivoplasty. In this case, the recurrence was
observed 7 years after initial treatment. In the proband, the approach was based on professional supervision and later the performance of
surgical procedure to control gingival increase. In summary, we evaluated four generations of a Brazilian family with two individuals
exhibiting HGF. Clinical assessment revealed generalized gingival hyperplasia involving both the maxillary and mandibular arches, with
morphologically normal teeth and histopathological analysis of gingival overgrowth tissue specimens showed a well-structured epithelium with
elongated and thin papillae inserted in fibrous connective tissue. The genetic pattern of this family suggested a new mutation, which was
later transmitted by an autosomal dominant trait. Further genetic studies are needed to better understand this HGF pathogenesis and
inheritance patterns. This work was supported by grants from the Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais-FAPEMIG, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil and the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnologico-CNPq, Brazil.
