Dorsolateral medullary infarction (Wallenberg Syndrome) is rare in clinical practice; however, the subsequent corneal lesions are more
uncommon. To our knowledge, only one such case was previously reported. We report a similar case with successful treatment and recovery, and
analyse both cases to address the clinical features and outcomes of such syndrome. A 43-year-old male presented with neurotrophic
keratopathy one month after sustaining dorsolateral medullary infarction. The patient underwent amniotic membrane transplantation twice.
Two-year follow-up observation revealed changes in nerve fibers and epithelial cells of corneal by laser confocal microscopy. By studying
both cases, we confirm that neurotrophic keratopathy could be as a delayed-onset complication of Wallenberg syndrome. The recognition that
neurotrophic keratopathy can follow dorsolateral medullary infarction could prevent the clinical misdiagnosis. The most common causes of
neurotrophic keratopathy (NK) are herpesvirus infection, corneal surgery, diabetes and pathologic conditions that damage the peripheral
fibers of the corneal nerve . However, NK was rarely reported due to the dorsolateral medullary infarction (Wallenberg Syndrome). Here, we
report NK as a delayed-onset symptom of dorsolateral medullary infarction and delineate its clinical features and treatment in conjunction
with a previous case reported by Hipps WM et al. in 2004 . A 43-year-old male visited the Department of Neurology, First Hospital of Xi’an
in March 2011 and complained of sudden loss of movement in his left extremities accompanied with the symptoms of facial numbness and hearing
impairment on the left, as well as dysarthria, cough, and vertigo. Neurological examination revealed left facial hypoalgesia, mild
dysarthria, weak uplift of the left soft palate, and a slow gag reflex. Left upper limb hemiparesis with grade V− power and left lower limb
with grade IV power along with left unilateral hypoalgesia were noted. Babinski and Chaddock signs were positive on the left side.
Diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI) revealed a region of hyperintensity in the left dorsolateral medulla (Figure 1A). MR angiography showed a local
blood flow disappearance from the left vertebral artery as well as the distortion of the basilar artery. CT angiography showed that the left
vertebral artery became slender in the cervical part (Figure 1B-C). The patient’s left hemiparesis slightly improved two weeks after
antiplatelet therapy, but his left facial hypoalgesia and thermoanesthesia persisted. The patient suffered from non-controlled hypertension
for three years, and had a drinking history of two years and smoking of one year. No history of diabetes, infections, surgeries or drug
hypersensitivity was noted.Figure 1 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT angiography findings. (A) Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging showed region of hyperintensity in the left dorsolateral medulla. (B) CT angiography showed that the left vertebral artery became
slender in the cervical part. (C) MR angiography showed a local blood flow disappearance of the left vertebral artery and basilar artery
distortion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT angiography findings. (A) Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed region of
hyperintensity in the left dorsolateral medulla. (B) CT angiography showed that the left vertebral artery became slender in the cervical
part. (C) MR angiography showed a local blood flow disappearance of the left vertebral artery and basilar artery distortion. One month after
the stroke, the patient started to complain of dryness, foreign body sensation and blurred vision in his left eye. Three days later, corneal
epithelial keratopathy occurred. The patient’s best-corrected visual acuity was 0.06 in the left eye and 1.0 in the right eye. An anterior
segment slit-lamp examination showed conjunctival hyperemia and an epithelial defect (4 × 4 mm2) in the center of the cornea with mild
stromal edema and entocorneal fold (Figure 2). Moreover, there was loss of corneal sensitivity in the left eye (tested by a gentle touch of
the ocular surface with a wisp of cotton followed by observation of the blink reflex or by comparing the sensation with the other eye). No
bacterial, viral or fungal growth was found in a culture of corneal scrapings. Due to the ineffectiveness of the antibiotic ointment
(Levofloxacin Eye Gel, 3 day treatment) and nutrition therapy (Deproteinated Calf Serum Eye Gel, 3 day treatment), corneal debridement and
amniotic membrane grafting (dry, stored, commercial amniotic membrane by JiXi RuiJi BioTechnology Co., Ltd) were performed in the left eye.
During hospitalization, the weakness in the patient’s left extremities completely recovered and corneal epithelium healed, but facial
hypalgesia was persistent. However, two weeks after discharge, corneal epithelial exfoliation recurred and became more severe. The second
corneal debridement and amniotic membrane grafting were subsequently performed in the left eye alongside palliative supporting
therapy.Figure 2 Corneal findings. An epithelial erosion and defect (sized 4 × 4 mm2) in the central corneal with conjunctival hyperemia was
observed in the left eye. Corneal findings. An epithelial erosion and defect (sized 4 × 4 mm2) in the central corneal with conjunctival
hyperemia was observed in the left eye. At post-operative month 6, laser confocal microscopy examination showed that the epithelial cells of
the cornea were of irregular shape with no innervation observed in the Bowman’s layer of cornea (Figure 3A). Scar tissue and
neovascularization was present in the superficial corneal stroma. The morphology of endothelial cells was normal. Twelve months post-
operative outcome showed that the boundary of the corneal epithelial cells was clearly recovering (Figure 3B); however, nerve fibers were
not found in the Bowman’s layer of cornea (Figure 3C). At post-operative month 24, nerve fibers and scar tissue were present in the Bowman’s
layer of cornea (Figure 3D). Moreover, the eyesight of the left eye improved to 0.3. The corneal sensation of the left eye recovered to
70%.Figure 3 Laser confocal microscopy examination findings. Laser confocal microscopy examination showed that corneal epithelial cells was
edematous, the boundary was not clear, and the connection was loose at post-operative month 6 (A). The boundary of the epithelial cells of
cornea were clearly recovered (B), but the nerve fibers were still not found in the Bowman’s layer of cornea (C) at post-operative month 12.
Nerve fiber and scar tissue can be found in the Bowman’s layer of cornea at post-operative month 24 (D). Laser confocal microscopy
examination findings. Laser confocal microscopy examination showed that corneal epithelial cells was edematous, the boundary was not clear,
and the connection was loose at post-operative month 6 (A). The boundary of the epithelial cells of cornea were clearly recovered (B), but
the nerve fibers were still not found in the Bowman’s layer of cornea (C) at post-operative month 12. Nerve fiber and scar tissue can be
found in the Bowman’s layer of cornea at post-operative month 24 (D). It has been increasingly recognized that the corneal nerves play a key
role in maintaining the anatomical integrity and functions of the cornea. Corneal nerve damage can lead to transient or chronic neurotrophic
deficits with a decrease in the viability, metabolism, and rate of mitosis of the epithelial cells. This may result in epithelial
intracellular swelling, loss of microvilli, and abnormal production of the basal lamina. As a consequence, symptoms of dry eye, corneal
damage and infection develop known as neurotrophic keratopathy (NK) . The vast majority of the corneal nerves are derived from the
ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve . Therefore, NK can be induced by any damage to the corneal sensory nerve pathways . The most
common cause of NK is the peripheral corneal sensory nerve injury induced by viral infection, refractive surgery, chemical or thermal burns,
ocular medication, and wearing contact lenses. Moreover, NK may develop from the damage of the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve as
well as ciliary nerves due to tumor formation and surgery (such as cataract and retinal surgery or ophthalmic laser procedures). Other
causes of NK include trigeminal ganglion lesions with herpetic viral infections and treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (e.g. microwave
coagulation or ethanol injection in trigeminal ganglion), or preganglionic trigeminal nerve root injury (including acoustic neurinoma,
schwannoma and aneurysma) and some systemic diseases which can decrease sensory nerve function or damage sensory fibres (e.g. diabetes and
leprosy). As a result, brain stem injury could lead to NK, but relevant reports involving such injuries are rare . A prerequisite for the
diagnosis of NK is the decreased or lost corneal sensation . Previously, Hipps et al. reported a 48-year-old male with persistent visual
loss due to neurotrophic corneal ulceration after dorsolateral medullary infarction . Reviewing Hipps’ and our cases we found that both
responsible foci of infarction are located at the dorsolateral medulla as determined by MRI. Both patients developed serious and persistent
ipsilateral facial hypalgesia and thermohypesthesia after the stroke. It is known that the lowest part of the spinal nuclei of the
trigeminal nerve is related to the pain fibers from its ophthalmic branch containing corneal sensory nerves; therefore, damage to the lower
part of the dorsolateral medulla may easily injure the corneal sensory nerve that comes from the lowest part of spinal trigeminal nuclei and
result in interruption of the corneal sensory nerve pathway. Such injury may also cause secondary axis cord degeneration and myelin damage,
finally leading to the occurrence of NK. Therefore, we inferred that damage of the spinal trigeminal tract or nuclei, especially the lowest
part, after medullary infarction is the root cause of the two cases of NK. The possible pathogenesis of the post-infarction NK may be the
lost nutrient substance supplied by corneal nerve fibers, diminished protective blink reflexes induced by impaired corneal sensitivity, the
desiccation of the corneal surface due to diminished lacrimal secretions, and abnormal epithelial cell metabolism with subsequent failure to
resist the effects of trauma, drying, infection, etc. . Further analysis of the two cases reveals the distinct features of dorsolateral
medullary infarction induced NK compared to that caused by other lesions: 1) more serious and persistent ipsilateral facial hypalgesia and
thermohypesthesia due to dorsolateral medullary infarction, 2) relatively delayed onset time of corneal damage (e.g. one to two months after
dorsolateral medullary infarction), 3) more rapid disease progression once the corneal lesion appeared, 4) relatively serious clinical
manifestations (e.g. corneal ulcers in the current case and corneal ulcers with infections in Hipps’ case), and 5) worse prognosis despite
aggressive treatment for NK and dorsolateral medullary infarction. Whilst the patient reported by Hipps et al. had permanent vision damage,
we provided to our patient with relatively successful treatment, which may serve as a reference for other colleagues. Furthermore, laser
confocal microscopy can helped to guide the degree of nerve damage and dynamic observation of corneal nerve regeneration, estimate the
treatment, and the prognosis of the patients. Wallenberg’s syndrome was originally described in 1895 and typically presented with vertigo,
dysarthria, ipsilateral ataxia, Horner syndrome, and decreased sensation on the contralateral body . However, the combination of signs and
symptoms varies according to the site of the lesion at dorsolateral medulla . By studying both cases, we confirm that NK could be as a
delayed-onset symptom of Wallenberg’s syndrome. Furthermore, we demonstrate that full recognition of this disease could prevent the clinical
misdiagnosis. We obtained written informed consent from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Neurotrophic keratopathy Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Study concept and design: SW, NL, FX. Analysis and
interpretation of data: All authors. Drafting of the manuscript: KS, XL, YQ. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content: All authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Songdi Wu is the professor of the Department
of Neurology, First Hospital of Xi’an. He has done research on neuro-ophthalmology and vascular disease. We thank Dr Jie Wu for helpful
comments on the final version of the Laser Confocal Microscopy images. The work was funded by grants to SD: SF1319(3) from the Science and
Technological Project of Xi’an City, China. The funding agencies had no role in the study design; in the collection, analysis or
interpretation of the data; in the preparation of the manuscript; or in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
