A 76-year-old female with a history of Parkinson’s, dementia, and hypertension presented to the emergency department with non-bilious, non-
bloody vomiting and abdominal pain for 2 days. Her exam was significant for borderline hypotension without tachycardia, abdominal distension
and a palpable ventral hernia. An emergency physician performed ultrasound showed free intraperitoneal air and gas in the liver (Video). A
computed tomography showed pneumoperitoneum, pneumatosis intestinalis, and hepatic portal venous gas (HPVG) (Figure). At laparotomy, she was
found to have a sigmoid colon perforation from adenocarcinoma, ischemic small bowel, and a colovesicular fistula. Post-operatively her
clinical status worsened, and she was transitioned to comfort care and expired on hospital day 2. HPVG was first reported in infants with
necrotizing enterocolitis.1 In adults, it is most commonly associated with mesenteric ischemia and pneumatosis intestinalis, accounting for
43% of HPGV cases2 and an associated mortality of 75%.2–3 It has been reported with other diseases such as diverticulitis, inflammatory
bowel disease, obstructive pyelonephritis, pancreatitis, cholangitis, uterine gangrene, and severe shock.4 HPVG is attributed to either
bacterial gas production in bowel entering mesenteric circulation4 or intraluminal air entering capillaries from impaired mucosal barrier or
increased intraluminal pressure.5 HPVG spreads to the periphery of the liver whereas pneumobilia collects centrally, in the direction of
bile flow. Treatment is always aimed at the underlying etiology of HPVG. Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text
available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Computed tomography without contrast of the abdomen and pelvis showing
free air (asterisks), pneumatosis intestinalis (thin arrows), and hepatic portal venous gas (large arrow). Ultrasound videos in epigastrium
and right upper quadrant showing pneumoperitoneum and hepatic portal venous gas.
