A 57-year-old male with a history of diabetes mellitus, hepatitis C, and intravenous drug abuse presented to the emergency department
complaining of abdominal pain of three months duration that had worsened in the week prior to presentation. Review of systems was
significant for back pain, nausea, and fever. The patient’s physical examination demonstrated a diffusely tender abdomen in addition to
bilateral costo-vertebral angle tenderness, bilateral lower extremity weakness, and decreased rectal tone. An acute abdominal series was
ordered to evaluate for bowel perforation (Figure). After review of this radiograph, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine
was ordered to confirm the suspected diagnosis of epidural abscess (Figure). The patient was transferred to the operating room for
successful thoracic hemi-laminectomy and discharged home on post-op day seven. The incidence of spinal epidural abscess has been estimated
to account for 0.2–2.0 per 10,000 admissions, although recent studies report that the incidence is rising owing to increased rates of
intravenous drug abuse and spinal surgical instrumentation.1,2 While the utility of plain film radiography is limited in the initial
evaluation of suspected epidural abscess, abnormalities suggesting the presence of the disease in the form of end plate erosions or findings
suggestive of osteomyelitis should not be ignored as these findings may be present in up to 89% of cases.3–5 In contrast, MRI with
gadolinium contrast has a reported sensitivity of 91% with an associated specificity of 100%, rendering it the imaging modality of
choice.5–7 Timely diagnosis of this relatively rare condition is paramount as the associated mortality of 5–16% is significant.8,9
Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Magnetic
resonance imaging of thoracic spine. Upright abdominal image demonstrating (A) paraspinal soft tissue density at the T10–T11 level worrisome
for the possibility of paraspinal abscess, (B) poor visualization of the T10–T11 disc interspace, and (C) MRI demonstrating findings
consistent with diskitis and associated sub-ligamentous abscess extending into the spinal canal at T11 and T12 with cord compression and
severe central canal stenosis at these levels.
