In systemic lupus erythematosus, acute kidney injury is usually associated with severe lupus nephritis and rarely associated with other
glomerular diseases. We recently encountered a patient with acute kidney injury that was associated with minimal change disease in systemic
lupus erythematosus. A 26-year-old Chinese woman who had a history of systemic lupus erythematosus presented with nephrotic syndrome and
acute kidney injury. She fulfilled four of the American College of Rheumatology criteria for the classification of systemic lupus
erythematosus. However, a renal biopsy revealed that there were no glomerular abnormalities or deposition of immune complex. Her generalized
edema disappeared, and her high serum creatinine level decreased to normal after prednisolone therapy. Though the relationship between lupus
and minimal change disease is still not defined, the possibility of systemic lupus erythematosus combined with minimal change disease must
be differentiated in patients with lupus and severe proteinuria. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized
by pathogenic autoantibodies and deposition of immune complexes in various organs. Lupus nephritis (LN) is caused by immune complex
deposition in the glomerulus . Diffuse proliferative LN and membranous LN are two predominate pathologic findings in LN. SLE combined with
minimal change disease (MCD) has rarely been reported. In this report, we describe the case of a patient with SLE who had acute kidney
injury (AKI) caused by MCD. She was treated successfully with steroids with a follow-up duration of 2 years. A 26-year-old Chinese woman
with a history of SLE of 10 years presented to our hospital. Her initial symptoms 10 years before her visit had been arthritis, malar
erythema and prolonged fever. The following were her laboratory investigation results at that time: antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer, 1:160
(+); anti-Smith (anti-Sm) antibody, +; urinary protein level, 3+; hematuria, −; complement 3 value, 0.36g/L. Her renal function test and
hematologic evaluation results were within normal ranges. A renal biopsy was not conducted at that time. Prednisolone 1mg/kg/day (40mg/day)
was prescribed first and then gradually tapered to 5mg/day over the course of 12 months. The patient had complete remission of signs and
symptoms of SLE after the corticosteroid treatment. She took prednisolone 5mg/day as maintenance therapy during the next 10 years. When she
was admitted to our hospital, she had a rapidly progressive edema and oliguria (urine output was about 250ml/day). Her physical examination
revealed that she had mild edema of the face and legs. She had not taken any drugs other than prednisolone within the preceding 6 months.
Her blood pressure level was 108/71mmHg. Her heart and lungs were normal. No liver, spleen or lymph node enlargement was found. The
following were the results of her laboratory investigations: urinary protein, 3+; 24-hour urinary protein, 4.16g/day; hematuria, −; blood
urea nitrogen, 21.0mmol/L; creatinine, 455μmol/L; albumin, 22.8g/L; total cholesterol, 5.26mmol/L; triglycerides, 1.45mmol/L; hemoglobin,
10.3g/dl; white blood cell count, 3.08×109/L; red blood cell count, 3.53×1012/L; platelets, 81×109/L; ANA, 1:320 (+); complement 3, 0.60g/L;
anti-DNA antibody–negative; anti-Sm antibody–negative; anti-ribonucleoprotein-negative; hepatitis B surface antigen–negative; anti-hepatitis
C virus–negative; and anti-HIV-negative. Her chest digital radiography and abdominal ultrasonography results were normal. She did not have
any other comorbid conditions or recent infections. Within just 1 week, the patient’s symptoms got worse, her edema became aggravated, her
urine output decreased to 50ml/day and her serum creatinine level rose to 550μmol/L (Table 1). Our first diagnostic impression was severe
LN. A percutaneous renal biopsy was performed on the patient’s fourth hospital day. Unexpectedly, glomeruli showed an almost normal
appearance under light microscopy. The capillary lumina were patent. The basement membranes were intact and not duplicated. The mesangium
was not widened and was not proliferated. The intertitium space showed a multifocal, mild mononuclear cell infiltration. The tubules were
minimally atrophic. The vessels were unremarkable. There was no obvious chronic damage in the kidney (Figure 1). Immunofluorescence
microscopy revealed an absence of deposits of immunoglobulin, complements and fibrinogen. By electron microscopy, we observed a marked
effacement of the foot processes of podocytes as well as a microvillous transformation. The mesangial area was unremarkable. The basement
membrane was irregularly wrinkled. The capillary lumina were patent. There were no electron deposits observed by electron microscopy
(Figure 2). With a diagnosis of MCD, an “adequacy” dose steroid regimen (prednisolone 1mg/kg/day, 50mg/day) was administered orally. Other
adjuvant therapies included hemodialysis, diuresis and supplemental plasma albumin.Table 1 Changes in multiple indicators during admission a
Hospital daySCr (μmol/L)Alb (g/L)Urine output (ml/24 hr)ANAC3 (g/L)145522.82501:3200.314b
55021.950––1018424.6750––1599.5251500––2058.626.420001:1000.6 aAlb, Albumin; ANA, Antinuclear antibody; C3, Complement 3; SCr, Serum
creatinine. bStart of prednisolone administration.Figure 1 Light microscopy of the patient’s renal biopsy tissue. We found that 18 glomeruli
were present in the sample. The glomeruli show an almost normal appearance. The capillary lumina are patent. The basement membranes are
intact and not duplicated. The mesangium is not widened and not proliferated. The interstitial space shows a multifocal, mild mononuclear
cell infiltration. The tubules are minimally atrophic. The vessels are unremarkable. There is no obvious chronic damage in the kidney.
Hematoxylin and eosin stain; original magnification, ×200.Figure 2 Electron microscopy of the patient’s renal biopsy. This section shows a
marked effacement of the foot processes of podocytes as well as a microvillous transformation The mesangial area is unremarkable. The
basement membrane is irregularly wrinkled. The capillary lumina are patent. No electron deposits are visible. Uranyl acetate and lead
citrate double-stain; original magnification, ×15,000. Changes in multiple indicators during admission a aAlb, Albumin; ANA, Antinuclear
antibody; C3, Complement 3; SCr, Serum creatinine. bStart of prednisolone administration. Light microscopy of the patient’s renal biopsy
tissue. We found that 18 glomeruli were present in the sample. The glomeruli show an almost normal appearance. The capillary lumina are
patent. The basement membranes are intact and not duplicated. The mesangium is not widened and not proliferated. The interstitial space
shows a multifocal, mild mononuclear cell infiltration. The tubules are minimally atrophic. The vessels are unremarkable. There is no
obvious chronic damage in the kidney. Hematoxylin and eosin stain; original magnification, ×200. Electron microscopy of the patient’s renal
biopsy. This section shows a marked effacement of the foot processes of podocytes as well as a microvillous transformation The mesangial
area is unremarkable. The basement membrane is irregularly wrinkled. The capillary lumina are patent. No electron deposits are visible.
Uranyl acetate and lead citrate double-stain; original magnification, ×15,000. A few days after the initiation of steroids, the patient’s
edema and her high serum creatinine level remitted slowly (Figure 3). By the 17th day of therapy, her serum creatinine level decreased to a
normal level (58.6μmol/L), and her serum albumin and urine output increased to 26.4g/L and 2000ml/24 hr, respectively (Table 1). She was
discharged from the hospital with improved symptoms and signs. One month after she was discharged, laboratory investigations revealed
negative urinary protein and normal serum albumin levels. The dosage of oral steroids was tapered gradually over the course of the next 10
months. After continuous treatment, her nephrotic syndrome resolved completely and no signs of relapse were noted during 2 years of follow-
up.Figure 3 Changes in serum creatinine levels during admission. Changes in serum creatinine levels during admission. SLE is a prototype
autoimmune disease involving multiple organs, with the kidney being most common. This disease is known as LN. A large number of immune
complex depositions in the kidney are the main reason for the onset of LN. A “full-house” phenomenon visualized under an immunofluorescence
microscope and electron-dense deposits in the glomeruli are its main pathological features. According to the International Society of
Nephrology and Renal Pathology Society (ISN/RPS) consensus, LN is classified into types I to VI. The nephrotic syndrome is commonly
associated with diffuse, proliferative LN (ISN/RPS class IV) and membranous LN (ISN/RPS class V) . Our patient had a long history of SLE;
however, her renal biopsy findings and clinical course were typical of MCD. The coexistence of AKI, MCD and SLE, as we saw in our patient,
is extremely rare. Treatments for LN and MCD are different. Patients with ISN/RPS class III or IV LN should receive long-term aggressive
therapy, including high doses of daily oral corticosteroids, intravenous pulses of corticosteroids, intravenous pulses of cyclophosphamide
therapy, mycophenolate mofetil and cyclosporine A, among other medications . However, treatments for MCD mainly involve oral corticosteroids
for 6 months to 1 year, possibly in addition to other immunosuppressive therapies. The clinical diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of LN
should be assessed with the support of a histological analysis, unless a renal biopsy is performed, in which case administration of a
cytotoxic agent is unavoidable. The presence of lupus and MCD in the same patient may not be just a coincidence. In the literature, 13 cases
on the association between SLE and MCD have been reported (Table 2) . Among these cases, SLE developed simultaneously with the onset of MCD
in five cases and after the onset of MCD in three cases. MCD developed during the course of SLE in five patients. Among these 13 patients,
four patients combined with abnormal renal function. Only one case was linked to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); the rest of
the patients had no obvious secondary factors. After administration of prednisolone or NSAID discontinuation, remission was achieved in all
patients. Their edema disappeared, their serum creatinine decreased to normal levels and their urinary protein turn to negative.Table 2
Literature review of patients with SLE and MCD a AuthorYearSexAge, yrSCr (mg/dl)Clinical courseMatsumura et al. 1989F37n.d.SLE developed
when MCD relapsedF21n.d.SLE developed when MCD relapsedF22n.d.SLE developed simultaneously with onset of MCDOkai et al. 1992M22n.d.SLE
developed simultaneously with onset of MCDMakino et al. 1995F411.51MCD developed during course of SLEHorita et al. 1997F25n.d.SLE developed
simultaneously with onset of MCDNishihara et al. 1997F170.5SLE developed when MCD was in remissionGuery et al. 1998F273.41SLE developed
simultaneously with onset of MCDPerakis et al. 1998F451.1MCD developed during course of SLESeo et al. 2002F412.2SLE developed simultaneously
with onset of MCDWang et al. 2006F191.9MCD developed during course of SLE (NSAID-induced)Hong et al. 2011F240.6MCD developed during course
of SLERedondo-Pachón et al. 2012F590.75MCD developed during course of SLE aMCD, Minimal change disease; n.d., No data SCr, serum creatinine;
SLE, Systemic lupus erythematosus. Literature review of patients with SLE and MCD a aMCD, Minimal change disease; n.d., No data SCr, serum
creatinine; SLE, Systemic lupus erythematosus. Our patient had significant proteinuria at the time of her initial diagnosis of lupus;
regrettably, a renal biopsy was not performed at that time. Thus, we were unable to distinguish which lesion developed first or whether they
arose simultaneously. The association between MCD and the concurrent presence of SLE is not absolutely clear. Immune abnormalities,
especially T-cell dysfunction, were considered to be the common cause of SLE and MCD in our patient. Patients with SLE with a renal
involvement have a low helper/suppressor T-cell ratio. In MCD, glomerular permeability factors derived from T cells, such as interleukin 13,
is known to increase glomerular permeability . There may be another pathogenic link, which is known to be associated with genes coded within
the major histocompatibility complex between these two diseases. A question remains whether SLE simply co-occurs with MCD or is a
precipitating agent of MCD. We reported a case of AKI associated with MCD in a patient with SLE. On the basis of our experience in this
case, we offer two suggestions. First, a renal biopsy should be performed in patients with SLE to exclude other nephrotic diseases. Second,
there may be an immunological association between SLE and MCD. Further investigation is needed to understand the relationship between SLE
and MCD. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Acute kidney injury Antinuclear antibody Lupus nephritis
Minimal change disease Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug Systemic lupus erythematosus. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions XW was responsible for the case collection, case follow up and manuscript writing. YW
contributed towards case collection and laboratory testing. LT and HW helped with the pathological diagnosis. Qinkai Chen contributed
towards the case collection, clinical treatment and critical correction for the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We acknowledge Qiuyue Li of the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University for her support in revising the manuscript
critically for important intellectual content.
