Hepatopulmonary syndrome is a clinical syndrome that can affect patients of all ages with liver disease and is more common in children with
biliary atresia. Contrast echocardiography is the test of choice to diagnose the presence of intrapulmonary vascular dilatation. The
established treatment for hepatopulmonary syndrome is liver transplantation. We present the case of an 8-month-old Caucasian baby boy with a
history of biliary atresia, polysplenia, and interrupted inferior vena cava who presented with hypoxemia and cyanosis that progressed
rapidly. A chest computed tomography angiogram revealed significant dilatation of the pulmonary vasculature, prompting further evaluation
and diagnosis of hepatopulmonary syndrome with contrast echocardiography. He was maintained on a milrinone infusion while awaiting liver
transplantation. His hypoxemia improved slowly following liver transplantation, requiring tracheostomy and prolonged ventilator dependence.
Hepatopulmonary syndrome should be included in the differential for progressive hypoxemia in children with liver disease, particularly those
with biliary atresia. Imaging with chest computed tomography angiogram and contrast echocardiography should be considered in cases of
unexplained refractory hypoxemia. Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a rare condition in children, although it is more common in children
with a history of biliary atresia [1, 2]. HPS is identified by the presence of liver disease and intrapulmonary vascular dilatation (IPVD)
resulting in impaired oxygenation. Clinical manifestations of HPS are related to both liver and pulmonary disease and include spider nevi,
clubbing, dyspnea, and cyanosis . Currently, the only proven treatment for HPS is orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT), and HPS is
considered a relative indication for transplantation . In fact, because HPS may present in the absence of synthetic liver dysfunction, it
may be the basis for requesting a petition of exception from the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS). Here, we describe a case of a baby
with heterotaxy syndrome and biliary atresia who presented with progressive hypoxemia. The diagnosis of HPS was suggested based on findings
noted on a chest computed tomography (CT) angiogram. The baby was maintained on a therapeutic regimen including a milrinone infusion until
OLT could be performed, after which his hypoxemia gradually resolved. To the best of our knowledge, the use of milrinone in a pediatric
patient with HPS has not been previously described. The diagnosis, management, and outcomes associated with HPS are reviewed. An 8-month-old
Caucasian baby boy with heterotaxy syndrome was admitted to our general pediatric ward after presenting to a scheduled clinic visit with
fever, hypoxemia and cyanosis. His history was significant for dextrocardia, polysplenia, interrupted inferior vena cava, biliary atresia
status post-Kasai procedure, and malrotation status post-Ladd’s procedure. He was febrile on presentation, and was started on oxygen via
nasal cannula for oxyhemoglobin saturations as low as 70%. His chest radiograph on admission showed a patchy right lower lobe opacity, and
he was started on antibiotics out of concern for pneumonia. He was subsequently transferred to our pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for
refractory hypoxemia requiring high flow oxygen therapy. Throughout his PICU admission, he continued to require high flow oxygen up to 9L
per minute and fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1 to maintain oxyhemoglobin saturation greater than 75%, with persistent desaturations
while upset. Early in his admission, he developed increased work of breathing requiring positive pressure ventilation with bilevel positive
airway pressure. A chest radiograph revealed pulmonary edema, and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) at that time was elevated at 1130pg/mL.
His pulmonary edema improved with diuresis, resulting in de-escalation of therapy with return to standard nasal cannula. He required blood
pressure support with a dopamine infusion during aggressive diuresis, which was subsequently weaned off without complication. Multiple
echocardiograms revealed no clear cardiac etiology of his hypoxemia. A chest CT angiogram with high resolution reconstruction of the lung
parenchyma was performed on the recommendation of our Radiology department to further evaluate the pulmonary vasculature and lung
parenchyma. CT imaging showed dilatation of the pulmonary vasculature bilaterally without significant abnormalities of the lung parenchyma
(Figure 1). Pulmonary arterial hypertension was felt to be an unlikely cause of his dilated pulmonary vasculature as right ventricular
pressures were measured as less than half of systemic pressures on echocardiogram. Given his history of biliary atresia and constellation of
symptoms, HPS was included on the differential diagnosis. He underwent agitated saline contrast study, which showed bubbles entering the
right-sided atrium (systemic atrium in the setting of dextrocardia) through a right pulmonary vein approximately 3 cardiac beats after
opacification of the left-sided chambers (Figure 2), consistent with clinically significant intrapulmonary shunting.Figure 1 Axial computed
tomography angiography images using intravenous contrast material in an 8-month-old baby boy below the level of carina (A) towards the base
(B, C). Diffuse dilatation of the pulmonary vasculature is seen to be more prominent in caudal sections (B, C). Lung parenchyma is normal
and dextrocardia is seen.Figure 2 Off-axis apical view with contrast injection (agitated saline). Patient has dextrocardia (A). Note good
opacification of the right atrium and right ventricle in (B) with contrast. No contrast is seen initially in the left atrium, suggesting no
atrial level shunt. Bubbles were seen in the left atrium after several beats (C) suggesting intrapulmonary shunts or arteriovenous
malformations rather than intracardiac shunts (images courtesy of Jimmy C Lu MD). Abbreviations: LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA,
right atrium; RV, right ventricle. Axial computed tomography angiography images using intravenous contrast material in an 8-month-old baby
boy below the level of carina (A) towards the base (B, C). Diffuse dilatation of the pulmonary vasculature is seen to be more prominent in
caudal sections (B, C). Lung parenchyma is normal and dextrocardia is seen. Off-axis apical view with contrast injection (agitated saline).
Patient has dextrocardia (A). Note good opacification of the right atrium and right ventricle in (B) with contrast. No contrast is seen
initially in the left atrium, suggesting no atrial level shunt. Bubbles were seen in the left atrium after several beats (C) suggesting
intrapulmonary shunts or arteriovenous malformations rather than intracardiac shunts (images courtesy of Jimmy C Lu MD). Abbreviations: LA,
left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to evaluate
for the presence of a congenital portosystemic shunt given the strong association of Abernethy malformation and heterotaxy syndrome and the
possibility of reversal of HPS with shunt occlusion. MRI did not reveal portosystemic shunting. The patient subsequently underwent
evaluation for liver transplantation. His liver enzymes and coagulation studies were normal. His bilirubin levels were also normal and given
normal bile ducts on abdominal ultrasound, a hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid scan was not performed. Abdominal ultrasound also demonstrated
diffuse liver disease, patent portal vein with hepatopetal flow, and no ascites. He did have polysplenia with splenomegaly. He had no signs
of collateral circulation on examination. No abnormalities were noted in his stools. His partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2)
was measured at 29mmHg while on FiO2 of 0.5. He was listed for transplant with a pediatric end-stage liver disease score of 28, which was
further increased to 35 following petition to UNOS for worsening clinical status. Prior to diagnosis of HPS, the patient was initiated on a
milrinone infusion for suspicion of diastolic heart failure. Following the diagnosis, he was trialed off milrinone with the rationale that
further pulmonary vasodilation actually may be deleterious given the diagnosis of HPS. However, he responded poorly with subsequent
oxyhemoglobin desaturations requiring reinitiation of the infusion. His oxygenation stabilized on a milrinone infusion of 0.5μg/kg/minute.
Inhaled nitric oxide was also trialed without significant improvement in oxygen requirement and was subsequently weaned off. Oxygen
requirements ultimately stabilized on a diuretic regimen including spironolactone and furosemide. He underwent OLT 2 months after initial
presentation. His postoperative period was complicated by hypercarbic and hypoxemic respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. He
underwent tracheostomy for chronic ventilator-dependent respiratory failure. He was transferred out of the PICU 2 months after OLT and
subsequently weaned off mechanical ventilation during the daytime. He was discharged home 4 months following OLT on FiO2 of 0.21 through a
tracheostomy mask with nighttime ventilator support. He continues to do well. Please see Figure 3 for a timeline of the patient’s clinical
course.Figure 3 Timeline of the patient’s clinical course. Abbreviations: HPS, hepatopulmonary syndrome; OLT, orthotopic liver
transplantation; PICU, pediatric intensive care unit. Timeline of the patient’s clinical course. Abbreviations: HPS, hepatopulmonary
syndrome; OLT, orthotopic liver transplantation; PICU, pediatric intensive care unit. This case report of HPS highlights the importance of
considering HPS in patients with liver disease and otherwise unexplained hypoxemia, even without significant liver dysfunction. It also
highlights the diagnostic modalities used to diagnose HPS in pediatric patients including CT angiogram and contrast echocardiography. Given
the pathophysiology of HPS involving pulmonary vascular dilatation, therapies such as milrinone and nitric oxide may appear
counterintuitive. This is a limitation of our approach as it is unclear why our patient had such a significant response to milrinone,
although we speculate there may have been a component of diastolic heart failure given the elevated BNP level. The clinical diagnosis of HPS
is based upon the triad of IPVD, liver disease, and impaired oxygenation, defined as partial pressure of oxygen <80mmHg or an alveolar-
arterial oxygen gradient greater than 15mmHg when breathing room air . HPS is a rare condition that can affect patients of all ages. The
patient in this case is notable for his young age; however, HPS has been diagnosed in children as young as 6 months . It is associated with
biliary atresia and polysplenia, and the reported prevalence of HPS in children with liver disease has ranged from 0.5% in patients with
portal vein thrombosis to 9% to 20% in those with biliary atresia [1, 2]. Common presenting signs and symptoms of HPS include dyspnea,
cyanosis and hypoxemia, which may worsen with crying and exertion. Platypnea (dyspnea that worsens in the upright position compared to
supine) and orthodeoxia (decrease in PaO2 >5% or 4mmHg in the upright position) are characteristic findings in HPS, and may be related to
increased pulmonary shunting in the context of altered pulmonary vascular tone . Of importance, HPS may be the cause of otherwise
unexplained hypoxemia in a patient with acute or chronic liver disease, as was seen in this case. Other signs and symptoms of HPS are
related to liver disease, such as spider nevi, palmar erythema, and thenar atrophy . Spider nevi are cutaneous vascular lesions that have
been associated with more severe hypoxemia and pulmonary dilatation and have thus been proposed as a cutaneous marker for IPVD . With regard
to abnormalities in the results of laboratory tests, elevated BNP has been found in children with intrapulmonary vascular shunting, which is
hypothesized to reflect the increased left atrial volume in patients with IPVD . Of interest, the presence of intrapulmonary shunting is not
associated with the severity of liver disease, as was demonstrated in this patient who had HPS in the absence of synthetic liver dysfunction
. From a radiological standpoint, HPS is characterized by diffuse dilatation of the peripheral pulmonary vasculature. In this case, the
diagnosis of HPS was first discussed following the findings of dilated pulmonary vasculature on CT angiogram. Thus, CT angiogram can be
helpful in a patient with liver disease and unexplained hypoxemia. Subsequent testing via contrast-enhanced transthoracic echocardiography
with agitated saline is useful in detecting the presence of IPVD. During this procedure, saline is shaken to produce microbubbles greater
than 10μm in diameter and administered through a peripheral vein in the arm. The presence of microbubble opacification in the left atrium
within 3 to 6 cardiac cycles following opacification of the right atrium is considered a positive test for the presence of intrapulmonary
vascular shunting . In consequence, contrast echocardiography is the recommended study for the evaluation of IPVD in diagnosing HPS, as it
is more sensitive than the lung perfusion scan with technetium and has no radiation exposure. Of note, it is important to exclude a
congenital extrahepatic portosystemic shunt (Abernethy malformation) in children with HPS, especially in patients with heterotaxy syndrome,
as this will impact the management of the patient. In the presence of a portosystemic shunt, HPS may reverse with shunt occlusion if the
portal vein is patent. If an extrahepatic portosystemic shunt has been missed, hypoxemia may return after the initial response to liver
transplantation . At this time, there are no proven pharmacological treatments for HPS, although there are case reports of improvement with
therapies aimed at inhibiting nitric oxide . Pentoxifylline (PTX), a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, is one such therapy that has been used in
studies for the treatment of HPS. The potential of PTX in HPS has been attributed in part to its inhibitory effect on nitric oxide synthase
resulting in decreased production of nitric oxide. PTX has also been found to down regulate angiogenesis . In a study performed by Kianifar
et al., pediatric patients exhibited significant increases in arterial oxygen pressure, oxyhemoglobin saturation, and decreased alveolar-
arterial oxygen gradient following 3 months of treatment with PTX . Milrinone is a selective phosphodiesterase 3 inhibitor with positive
inotropic and vasodilatory effects. Although implemented as a bridge in our patient with some success, the use of milrinone has not been
well studied in HPS. Nonetheless, milrinone has been used as rescue therapy for portopulmonary hypertension at the time of OLT . Liver
transplantation remains the only established therapy for HPS. Several studies have shown the reversibility of HPS in the majority of
pediatric patients following OLT . Post-transplantation survival has been found to be lower in patients with HPS compared to overall post-
OLT survival, with 1-year post-transplantation survival ranging from 62% to 84% in patients with HPS compared to 90% to 92% in patients
without HPS [9, 14]. Specifically in pediatric patients with HPS, the 1-year survival following OLT ranges from 62% to 100% [2, 15]. Gupta
et al. found no significant difference in post-transplantation survival between pediatric patients with and without HPS; however, all
patients with HPS in the study had PaO2 >50mmHg . It should be noted that preoperative hypoxemia is an important prognosticator for both
postoperative mortality and time to resolution of hypoxemia following transplant in HPS [14, 15]. Hypoxemia may transiently worsen
postoperatively, requiring prolonged support with mechanical ventilation for up to several months following transplant. The patient in this
case was severely hypoxemic preoperatively and exhibited prolonged ventilator dependence after OLT. In summary, HPS is characterized by
progressive hypoxemia caused by intrapulmonary shunting in patients with liver disease. While it is a rare condition in the general
population, it is not uncommon in patients with biliary atresia, and should thus be included in the differential diagnosis of hypoxemia in
children with biliary atresia, even without evidence of synthetic liver dysfunction. Saline contrast echocardiogram and CT angiogram may be
useful studies in such patients and typically reveal extracardiac shunt and pulmonary vascular dilatation in those with HPS. Full resolution
of HPS is possible with liver transplantation, and the severity of hypoxemia is associated with higher postoperative mortality. Therefore,
the diagnosis of HPS should ideally be made as early as possible. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s mother for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Brain natriuretic peptide Computed tomography Fraction of inspired oxygen Hepatopulmonary syndrome Intrapulmonary vascular
dilatation Magnetic resonance imaging Orthotopic liver transplantation Partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood Pediatric intensive care
unit Pentoxifylline United Network for Organ Sharing. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions MG reviewed the clinical course and participated in drafting and revising the manuscript. KWK participated in the
literature review and in drafting and revising the manuscript. MGM provided radiological images and participated in drafting and revising
the manuscript. TPS supervised the overall effort and participated in drafting and revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr Jimmy Lu for providing the echocardiographic images for this manuscript.
