Alert for the risk of oral bupropion addiction in patients with cocaine dependence. Single-case study. After a period of cocaine and alcohol
abstinence, a 42-year-old patient started taking oral bupropion to relieve the symptoms of cocaine craving. He increased the bupropion dose
up to 2250 mg/d without seizures. This case highlights the possibility of oral bupropion addiction after cocaine dependence. To our
knowledge, it is the first case in the literature and emphasizes the risk of bupropion's misuse. Therefore, physicians should carefully
examine the patient's profile before prescribing it, as well as follow appropriate measures. A 42-year-old male patient with a severe case
of alcohol and cocaine use disorder was being treated in a day hospital facility. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder after psychiatric
hospitalizations for manic episodes. After 3 years of follow-up, he managed to stop using cocaine and alcohol. His medications included
valproic acid 1500 mg/d, risperidone 2 mg/d, bupropion (immediate release) 300 mg/d, and clonazepam 4 mg/d. For his cocaine cravings, he
increased the clonazepam to 20 mg/d but discovered that bupropion would manage it much better. He took approximately 2250 mg/d of bupropion
for 3 months together with clonazepam 20 mg/d, still having anxiety as a collateral effect but no cocaine craving. He did not crush the
bupropion pills because they were very difficult to break. As soon as he disclosed these facts, the pharmacist of the facility began to
supply his medication on a daily basis. On 3 separate occasions, he relapsed and asked for more medication with the excuse he had been
robbed or lost the pills. The patient and relatives revealed that he also went to primary care services, with the allegation he had stopped
smoking. With the patient's awareness, contacts with these services were made to warn about the situation. When his doctor tried to lower
the dose, he said his depressive symptoms reappeared and was afraid to relapse in cocaine. He kept using bupropion 450 mg/d in a harm-
reduction rationale. He had no manic features during this period. Bupropion has a cathinone (beta-keto-amphetamine) structure and inhibits
the dopamine and norepinephrine transporter very similar to psychostimulants such as methylphenidate or the newly abused cathinone
3,4-methylen-edioxymethamphetamine (Simmler et al., 2013). Norepine-phrine mostly mediates the psychostimulant and dopamine the reinforcing
properties of drugs of abuse (Rothman et al., 2001). Thus, based on its chemical structure and pharmacological properties, bupropion could
be expected to exert stimulant-type psychotropic effects and to carry a risk of abuse. The substance is a relatively weak dopamine and
norepinephrine transporter inhibitor in vitro compared with other psychostimulants (Simmler et al., 2013) and typically has no
psychostimulant or rewarding effects when used orally and at therapeutic doses in humans. However, this may change when bupropion is
administered intranasally (Yoon and Westermeyer, 2013) or in high doses as reported in this case study. In addition, bupropion has been
reported to increase subjective self-confidence and activation similar to other psychostimulants such as cocaine in previous cocaine users
(Vento et al., 2013). Thus, bupropion may act as a psychostimulant at higher doses or in vulnerable populations. To our knowledge, this is
the first report on the oral use of bupropion that fulfills diagnostic for “Other (or Unknown) substance-related disorders” moderate
severity, correlating to 4 criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5 as specified in Table 1. Seizures may not
have occurred because of the use of clonazepam and valproic acid. These 2 substances could have allowed the patient to get higher and maybe
addictive doses that have not been studied yet because of ethical issues. DSM-5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5.
This case alerts the need for caution while prescribing bupropion. Special attention is needed with the patient's profile (stimulant
dependence, history of incarceration, or institutionalization) (Mariani and Levin, 2012, Hilliard et al., 2013). Other measures that may
help are explaining the risk of seizures, documenting the amount of pills provided, and prescribing pills exactly until return (Mariani and
Levin, 2012). The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
