A 33 year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with of two weeks of diffuse abdominal pain, right flank pain, and a slowly
enlarging right inguinal mass. She had no associated fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. She was evaluated by her primary care
physician, and an inguinal ultrasound was obtained prior to referral to the ED. On arrival in the ED, her vital signs were unremarkable, and
she was afebrile. On exam, there was no abdominal tenderness, and a 2cm × 2cm non-reducible, mildly tender right inguinal mass was noted. A
bedside ultrasound (Figures 1 and 2) was performed in the ED. Amyand’s Hernia: Named for Claudius Amyand, sergeant-surgeon to King George II
of England, Amyand’s Hernia is an appendix within an inguinal hernia.1 In the index case, he is credited with performing the first
successful appendectomy in 1735, on an eleven year-old boy with this condition.2 Although relatively rare, (0.13% of cases of acute
appendicitis occur in external hernias),3 it is important to consider this diagnosis in the setting of abdominal pain with an associated
inguinal mass. In addition, Amyand’s Hernia may mimic an acute scrotum in cases of appendiceal rupture after a period of incarceration.2 In
this particular case, bedside ultrasound demonstrated a non-compressible 7.4 mm tubular structure within a hernia sack (Figures 1 and 2),
representing the appendix. The patient was taken to the operating room for open appendectomy and femoral hernia repair. She was discharged
without any complications the following day. Supervising Section Editor: Rick McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Long axis view ultrasound of an inguinal mass. Short axis view ultrasound of an inguinal mass.
