Sydenham Chorea (SC) is an acute rheumatic fever complication. SC is the most common acquired childhood chorea, usually affecting children
five to fifteen years of age.1 It occurs following an untreated group A streptococcal infection and a latent period of one to six months.1,2
Despite rheumatic fever diminishing, 18% to 36% of acute rheumatic fever patients develop SC.3 Full recovery often takes several months;
some patients suffer permanent neurologic sequelae.1 An 11-year old male presented to the Emergency Department with two days of uncontrolled
body twitching. The movements affected his right arm and leg, with occasional lip twitches; he experienced intermittent confusion and
hyperactivity. The patient denied recent illness, but recalled a fever with headache and vomiting several months prior. Besides the above
findings, his physical examination was normal. The patient’s rapid streptococcal antigen test was negative, but his throat culture was
positive for group A beta hemolytic Streptococcus. An anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titer resulted at 503 (reference range, <240 IU/mL).
Symptoms progressed to include slurred speech, head jerking, awkward gait, and decreased right eye vision. Several motor manifestations are
pathognomonic: “Milkmaid’s grip” occurs when patients are unable to clench their fists, displaying as intermittent relaxation and tightening
of hand grip.1 “Choreic hand” is “spooning” of the hand by wrist flexion and extension of the digits.1 The linked video demonstrates this
patient’s motor manifestations (Video). Evaluation of chorea in pediatric patients should include testing for group A streptococcal
infection with throat culture and ASO titers. SC is key to diagnosing rheumatic fever and should prompt evaluation for rheumatic heart
disease. This patient’s brain magnetic resonance imaging and electrocardiogram were normal, but his echocardiogram showed mild mitral
regurgitation. Treatment included penicillin for ten days, instructions to get monthly bicillin injections through age twenty-one and a
recommendation for lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis. Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open
access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are
required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential
sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Motor manifestations of patient.
