The purpose of this study was to evaluate the brachial plexus (BP) dose of postmastectomy radiotherapy (PMRT) to the ipsilateral
supraclavicular (ISCL) area, and report the characteristics of radiation-induced brachial plexus neuropathy (RIBPN). The BP dose of 31
patients who received adjuvant PMRT to the ISCL area and chest wall using three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) and the records
of 3 patients with RIBPN were retrospectively analyzed based on the standardized Radiation Therapy Oncology Group-endorsed guidelines. The
total dose to the ISCL area and chest wall was 50 Gy in 25 fractions. Patients with a higher number of removed lymph nodes (RLNs) had a
higher risk of RIBPN (hazard ratio : 1.189, 95% confidence interval : 1.005-1.406, p = 0.044). In 31 patients treated with 3DCRT, the mean
dose to the BP without irradiation to the ISCL area was significantly less than that with irradiation to the ISCL area (0.97 ± 0.20 vs.
44.39 ± 4.13 Gy, t = 136.75, p <0.001). In the 3DCRT plans with irradiation to the ISCL area and chest wall, the maximum dose to the BP was
negatively correlated with age (r = −0.40, p = 0.026), body mass index (BMI) (r = −0.44, p = 0.014), and body weight (r = −0.45, p = 0.011).
Symptoms of the 3 patients with RIBPN occurred 37–65 months after radiotherapy, and included progressive upper extremity numbness, pain, and
motor disturbance. After treatment, 1 patient was stable, and the other 2 patients’ symptoms worsened. The incidence of RIBPN was higher in
patients with a higher number of RLNs after PMRT. The dose to the BP is primarily from irradiation of the ISCL area, and is higher in slim
and young patients. Prevention should be the main focus of managing RIBPN, and the BP should be considered an organ-at-risk when designing a
radiotherapy plan for the ISCL area. Clinical trials have confirmed that adjuvant postmastectomy radiotherapy (PMRT) can improve the
locoregional control rate (LCR) and survival rate of patients with locally advanced breast cancer, especially with axillary lymph node
metastasis . The incidence of recurrence in ipsilateral supraclavicular or infraclavicular fossa without PMRT is 4%-8%, when patients had
locoregional recurrence, supraclavicular or infraclavicular fossa was involved in 23%-43% of failures . Therefore, the guidelines of the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and the German Society of Radiation Oncology (DEGRO) recommend irradiation to chest wall
(breast) and the ipsilateral supraclavicular (ISCL) area for patients with locally advanced breast cancer . Because of the curative intent
of breast cancer surgery, attention should be given to late-stage injury after PMRT. It has been reported 14%-20% breast cancer patients
developed radiation-induced brachial plexus neuropathy (RIBPN) after radiotherapy in recent years . The brachial plexus (BP) is formed by
the last 4 cervical nerves (C5-C8) and the 1st thoracic nerve (T1). RIBPN symptoms include upper extremity numbness, pain, weakness, and
motor disturbance. RIBPN is slowly progressive and often leads to permanent disability and seriously affects the quality of life. The risk
of RIBPN is interested in head and neck cancer treated with high-dose radiation therapy and lung cancer treated with stereotactic body
radiotherapy . However, because the conventional fractionated irradiation method is more commonly used in PMRT, BP injury should be
different from that occurring with stereotactic body radiation therapy. At present, the BP is not always regarded as an organ-at-risk (OAR)
in the optimization and restriction of plans designed for the radiotherapy of breast cancer. Thus, the purpose of this study was to perform
a retrospective analysis of the radiation dose to the BP in 3DCRT plans with PMRT to the ISCL area and chest wall. We further investigated
the dosimetric features of the BP in radiotherapy, and the potential correlation with physical features. Lastly, we reported 3 patients with
RIBPN after PMRT. We retrospectively analyzed the 3DCRT plans of 31 breast cancer patients who received PMRT to the ISCL area and chest wall
between January 2007 and December 2007 at Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center (Group 1). In addition, we reviewed the records of 3 patients
with RIBPN who were admitted to our center between January 2001 and December 2007 (Group 2). RIBPN can affect both sensory and motor
function of the ipsilateral arm and hand, i.e. paraesthesia, oedema, pain, and dyskinesia. In present study, RIBPN was graded using a
modified late effects of normal tissue-subjective, objective, management, and analytic (LENT-SOMA) score . The study was approved by the
ethics committee of Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center. All patients provided written consent for storage of their medical information in
the hospital database and for research use of this information. In both groups the BP was contoured according to the standardized Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)–endorsed guidelines delineation : 1) Identify and contour C5, T1, and T2; 2) Identify and contour the
subclavian and axillary neurovascular bundle; 3) Identify and contour anterior and middle scalene muscles from C5 to insertion onto the
first rib; 4) Contour the brachial plexus as an organ at risk (OAR) using a 5-mm diameter paint tool; 5) Start at the neural foramina from
C5 to T1; this should extend from the lateral aspect of the spinal canal to the small space between the anterior and middle scalene muscles;
6) For computed tomography (CT) slices, where no neural foramen is present, contour only the space between the anterior and middle scalene
muscles; 7) Continue to contour the space between the anterior and middle scalene muscles; eventually the middle scalene will end in the
region of the subclavian neurovascular bundle; 8) Contour the brachial plexus as the posterior aspect of the neurovascular bundle inferiorly
and laterally to 1–2 CT slices below the clavicular head; 9) The first and second ribs serve as the medial boundary of the OAR contour
(Figure 1).Figure 1 Beam eye view (BEV) and cross-sectional diagram of the brachial plexus (PTV marked with blue lines). Beam eye view (BEV)
and cross-sectional diagram of the brachial plexus (PTV marked with blue lines). All patients both groups were irradiated to the ISCL area
and chest wall (CW). The total dose was 50 Gy in 25 fractions. The patient had a supine treatment position. All patients had three-
dimensional dose planning (Pinnacle 7.4f ®; Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, WA, USA) based on CT scanning with a slice thickness of 5 mm.
A planning target volume (PTV) including the chest wall, supraclavicular and infraclavicular (SIF) fossa as delineated. A common isocentre
for all fields independent of the technique was located in the junction between the SIF fields and CW fields. A high-energy linac with
photon beams and electron beams was used. All treatment plans were individually optimized. The ISCL field dose was specified to cover > 95%
PTV with at least 95% of the prescribed dose. The ISCL was irradiated with 6 MV X-ray and 12–15 MeV electron beam, and the CW was irradiated
with a 6 MV X-ray tangent field. The axillary and internal mammary lymph nodes were not irradiated. Thirty-one patients were redesigned the
treatment plan without irradiation to ISCL to compare the radiation doses to the BP with irradiation to the ISCL in Group 1 using dose-
volume histograms (DVH). The correlation between patient clinical features and the radiation dose to the BP with irradiation to the ISCL
area and CW was determined. Three patients with RIBPN after PMRT also were examined with respect to the radiation dose to the BP and
clinical features. SPSS 19.0 software was used for data analysis. The correlation between the radiation dose to the BP and clinical features
was analyzed using Pearson’s correlation coefficient. The independent effects of the clinical and dosimetric parameters associated with
RIBPN development were determined by univariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis. Factors with statistically significant
differences in univariate analysis were included in multiple logistic regression analysis. The correlation between the radiation dose to the
BP and clinical features was analyzed using Pearson’s correlation coefficient. Radiation doses of various plans were compared using paired t
test. A value of p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. Table 1 shows the correlation of clinical and dosimetric
parameters with RIBPN using univariate logistic regression analysis. Patients with a higher number of RLNs had a higher risk of RIBPN
(hazard ratio : 1.189, 95% confidence interval : 1.005-1.406, p = 0.044). Patients with younger age (p = 0.056), shorter height (p = 0.073)
and lower weight (p = 0.090) had a borderline significant trend with RIBPN development. The further multivariate logistic regression
analysis was not performed due to only one factor had predictive value with RIBPN development.Table 1 The correlation of clinical and
dosimetric parameters with RIBPN Characteristic Group 1 Group 2 p Age (y)49 (34–63)36 (31–43)0.056Height
(m)1.58 ± 0.051.51 ± 0.030.073Weight (kg)56.13 ± 7.3847.60 ± 1.830.090BMI (kg/m2)22.52 ± 2.4420.86 ± 0.280.259Number of RLNs
(n)23.42 ± 6.5134.00 ± 10.150.044Dmean (Gy)44.39 ± 4.1347.03 ± 1.540.286Dmax (Gy)56.16 ± 2.5859.33 ± 0.830.111V40
(%)79.90 ± 10.7487.55 ± 2.910.202V45 (%)68.22 ± 12.6376.29 ± 3.850.271V50 (%)49.25 ± 16.5858.97 ± 3.410.320V52.5
(%)28.52 ± 18.9832.12 ± 3.700.740V55 (%)6.08 ± 10.365.81 ± 1.510.963BMI: body mass index; RLNs: removed lymph nodes.Vn indicates the volume
of the BP receiving n Gy. The correlation of clinical and dosimetric parameters with RIBPN BMI: body mass index; RLNs: removed lymph nodes.
Vn indicates the volume of the BP receiving n Gy. The median follow-up time of 31 patients was 80.0 months (range, 74–85 months). The mean
dose (Dmean) to the BP without irradiation to the ISCL area was 0.97 ± 0.20 Gy, and the dose to the BP increased significantly with
irradiation to the ISCL area (t = 136.75, p < 0.001) (Table 1 and Figure 2). In the 3DCRT plans with irradiation to the ISCL area and chest
wall, the maximum dose (Dmax) to the BP was negatively correlated with age (r = −0.40, p = 0.026), body mass index (BMI) (r = −0.44,
p = 0.014) and body weight (r = −0.450, p = 0.011). There was no correlation between BP Dmax and height, and there was no correlation
between BP Dmean and age (r = −0.18, p = 0.340), height (r = −0.01, p = 0.990), BMI (r = −0.34, p = 0.060), or weight (r = −0.28,
p = 0.120).Figure 2 Clinical data and radiation dose to the brachial plexus in group 1 and group 2 patients. Clinical data and radiation
dose to the brachial plexus in group 1 and group 2 patients. Between January 2001 and December 2007, a total of 629 breast cancer patients
whose median follow-up duration was 63.1 months (range, 6–130 months). The postmastectomy CW and ISCL area received a dose of 50 Gy in 25
fractions with 3DCRT. All patients received 3DCRT after chemotherapy, and none of these patients received concurrent chemoradiotherapy. Of
these patients, 3 (0.48%) developed RIBPN. Symptoms of RIBPN in the 3 patients occurred in a median of 39 months (range, 37–65 months) after
radiotherapy. The time interval between the first appearance of symptoms and diagnosis was more than 6 months in all patients. Symptoms of
the affected limbs were aggravated in all 3 patients, and progressive neuropathic pain occurred. Two patients had decreased muscle power of
the intrinsic muscles and flexion dysfunction. Physical examination showed that there were no significant differences between the healthy
limb and the affected limb in skin color and temperature. Only enlargement of the limb circumference because of lymphedema was noted.
Electromyography (EMG) showed injury of the BP trunk. Tumor factors were excluded by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Symptomatic
treatments such as analgesics and neurotrophic drugs were administered to all 3 patients, and 2 patients also received physical
rehabilitation. After treatment, 1 patient was stable, and the other 2 patient’s symptoms worsened. The dose to the BP and clinical
characteristics of the patients with RIBPN are shown in Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 2.Table 2 Characteristics of patients with radiation-
induced brachial plexus neuropathy Characteristic Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Tumor locationLeft breastLeft breastRight breastStaging of
the primary tumor (AJCC 2008)T2N2M0T1N3M0T3N3M0SurgeriesMRM and ALNDMRM and ALNDMRM and ALNDChemotherapy6 courses of DCE6 courses of CEF6
courses of CEFEndocrine therapy-TAMTAMOnset of symptoms after radiotherapy35 months27 months29 monthsSymptom occurrence to seeking
care7 months12 months10 monthsInitial symptomsSensory disordersMotor deficitsMotor deficitsOverall symptomsPain, sensory disordersMotor
deficits, pain, sensory disordersMotor deficits, pain, sensory disordersLocalization of injuryC5-Th1C5-7C5-Th1Severity of injury (LENT-SOMA
scale)Grade 2Grade 2Grade 3Upper-extremity edemaYesNoNoTime of treatment27 months31 months12 monthsTreatment outcomeStableSlow
progressionSlow progressionMRM: modified radical mastectomy; ALND: axillary lymph node dissection; DCE: docetaxel, cyclophosphomide,
epirubicin; CEF: cyclophosphamide, epirubicin, 5-fluorouracil; LENT-SOMA: late effects of normal tissue-subjective, objective, management,
and analytic. Characteristics of patients with radiation-induced brachial plexus neuropathy MRM: modified radical mastectomy; ALND: axillary
lymph node dissection; DCE: docetaxel, cyclophosphomide, epirubicin; CEF: cyclophosphamide, epirubicin, 5-fluorouracil; LENT-SOMA: late
effects of normal tissue-subjective, objective, management, and analytic. Our analyses of the 3DCRT plans of 31 patients who received PMRT
to the ISCL area and CW showed that the dose to the BP was related to irradiation to the ISCL area. This finding is consistent with that of
Stanic et al. . There have been few studies on the occurrence of RIBPN symptoms, including worsening chronic pain and decreased sensory and
motor function, among the patients with breast cancer, head and neck cancer, and lung cancer after irradiation to the BP . Importantly, at
present RIBPN is an incurable complication. There is a significant difference in the incidence of RIBPN in the literature. RIBPN incidence
is in accordance with the irradiation technique, and ranges from 66% RIBPN with 60 Gy in 5 Gy fractions in the 1960s to less than 1% with
50 Gy in 2.0 Gy fractions today . In present study, the incidence of RIBPN was 0.48%. However, a study which 20% patients developed RIBPN
when irradiation to the supraclavicular lymph nodes and chest wall (breast) using 3DCRT technique with 50 Gy in 2.0 Gy fractions . Based on
the radiation technique in modern era, the combined treatment-related factors (surgery in the case of haematoma or chronic infection and
extended axillary lymph node dissection, et al.) and the patient-related factors (young or advanced age, obesity, hypersensitive patients,
or smoking, et al.) may affect the risk, severity, and nature of RIBPN . The follow-up time for different study may also affect the
incidence of RIBPN. It has been reported that the incidence of RIBPN is primarily related to the total dose and fractionated dose to the BP
. Moreover, Killer et al. reported the incidence of RIBPN was positively correlated with the dose to the BP . These findings may be related
to the fact that the BP is a serial organ. Therefore, Emami et al. have suggested that the dose tolerance for a 5% risk of developing RIBPN
at 5 years is 62, 61 and 60 Gy, and for a 50% risk at 5 years the dose tolerances are 77, 76 and 75 Gy for one-third, two-thirds and the
whole organ respectively. Lundstedt et al. reported that the incidence of RIBPN is 20% after conventional fractionation radiotherapy when
the prescribed dose to ISCL is 50 Gy . Though the prescribed dose in our patients was 50 Gy, the BP Dmax was higher than 110% of the
prescribed dose in some cases. Moreover, for patients with lymph node metastases in the ISCL area, the local dose with boost could be up to
60–70 Gy, which may lead to an increased incidence of RIBPN . For these reasons, we suggest that the BP should be considered as one of the
OAR when the ISCL area is planned to be irradiated. But we can not come up with a recommendation of the appropriate dose constraints to
brachial plexus due to limited number of patients. The Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group recommend the maximum dose to BP should not
exceed 54 Gy . In present study, the Dmax to BP in Group 1 and Group 2 are more than 54 Gy. A French study suggested that the Dmax to BP
should not exceed 60 Gy, even if possible, 50 Gy . Conventionally, ISCL fields are matched on to tangential breast fields using various
techniques , the difficulties in matching treatment fields to achieve homogenous dose distribution may results in overdose to BP. Therefore,
it is very difficult to achieve a dose of less than 50 Gy of BP. Helical tomotherapy and integrated IMRT treatment plans improved the dose
distribution of the supraclavicular region and showed better dose conformity and uniformity of the integrated target volume of the chest
wall and supraclavicular region without the requirement of field matching . Thus, the new irradiation techniques with brachial plexus-
sparing may be beneficial to the protection of the brachial plexus. There have few studies on the relationship between the dose to the BP
and morbidity, disease severity, and chemotherapy . In addition, unconventional fractionated irradiation is becoming more widely used, which
may potentially lead to an increased incidence of RIBPN . Thus, it is necessary to establish risk models for RIBPN based on DVH or normal
tissue complication probability models in further research. In present study, the Dmax to BP was not associated with RIBPN, but patients
with a higher number of RLNs were the independent factor associated with RIBPN development. Thus, the dose to the BP should be decreased as
much as possible when the dose to the planned target volume is satisfied in patients with a higher number of removed lymph nodes. In
addition, lymphedema after axillary dissection can cause brachial plexus neuropathy in breast cancer patients. It was about 13% patients
developed brachial plexus neuropathy after axillary dissection without regional radiotherapy. Radiotherapy to the supraclavicular lymph
nodes after axillary dissection increases the incidence of brachial plexus neuropathy. When adjusted for lymphedema the contribution from
radiotherapy is no longer formally statistically significant indicating that there is also an indirect effect mediated by the lymphedema .
Olson et al. and Lundstedt et al. have reported that the incidence of RIBPN was higher in young patients. This is consistent with our
finding of a negative correlation between BP Dmax and age. However, it was also reported that there was no correlation between age and the
incidence of RIBPN . In addition, our study showed that BP Dmax was negatively correlated with BMI and body weight, which is the same as
reported by Klein et al. . These findings indicate that the dose to the BP is relatively higher in slim patients. This, to a certain degree,
explains why RIBPN is more likely to occur in slim and young patients. In present study, patients with younger age, shorter height and lower
weight had a borderline significant trend with RIBPN development. The further studies with a larger sample size are needed to confirm our
study. Of the 629 patients with irradiation to the ISCL area and chest wall, only 3 (0.48%) developed RIBPN. The development of the RIBPN
symptoms in the 3 patients had a relatively long latent period; thus, a diagnosis of RIBPN may be delayed because of mile symptoms in the
early stage of the condition. On the other hand, the disease results in progressive and irreversibility deterioration and conservative
treatment is ineffective. Surgical treatments including BP neurolysis and revascularization by enveloping the BP using a greater free
omental flap have not provided satisfactory results . Induced pluripotent stem cell (IPSC) therapy is a new promising technique that is
still in the preclinical testing stage. Because comprehensive management of breast cancer has resulted in greater long-term survival,
greater attention should be paid to prevent the occurrence of RIBPN. There are several limitations to this study that should be considered.
First, the study was retrospective, and the sample size was relatively small. In addition, the follow-up duration was relatively short, and
the number of reported RIBPN cases was small. Therefore, the results cannot represent the majority of population. In summary, the incidence
of RIBPN was higher in patients with a higher number of RLNs after PMRT. The dose to the BP is primarily from irradiation to the ISCL area,
and is higher in slim and young patients. Prevention should be the main focus of managing RIBPN, especially for slim and younger patients.
Based on the results of this study, we suggest that the BP should be considered an OAR when designing a radiotherapy plan for the ISCL area.
Brachial plexus Post-mastectomy radiotherapy Ipsilateral supraclavicular area Radiation-induced brachial plexus neuropathy Three-dimensional
conformal radiotherapy Body mass index Locoregional control rate Removed lymph nodes Hazard ratio Confidence interval Planning target volume
Chest wall Supraclavicular and infraclavicular Late effects of normal tissue-subjective, objective, management, and analytic National
comprehensive cancer network German society of radiation oncology Intensity-modulated radiation therapy Organ at risk Radiation therapy
oncology group Computed tomography Dose-volume histograms Electromyography Magnetic resonance imaging Induced pluripotent stem cell San-Gang
Wu, Si-Juan Huang and Juan Zhou contributed equally Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions SGW, SJH, and JZ carried out the data collection and writing of the manuscript; SGW helped to conceive the study; ZYH
contributed to the design of the study; JYS and QL helped to collect data; HXL, HG, and FYL participated in statistical analysis. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81402527), the Sci-Tech Office of Guangdong Province (No. 2013B021800157) and the Education Scientific Research Project of Young Teachers in
Fujian Province (No. JB13131).
