A 38 year old obese female presented to the emergency department with 1 hour of nausea and blue colored urine. She endorsed recent flatus
and bowel movement but denied abdominal pain, dysuria, fevers, or toxic ingestions. She presented a urine cup on arrival with obviously blue
tinged urine (Figure). Her exam revealed a comfortable appearing female with no abdominal or costovertebral tenderness. She reported having
an OrberaTM intragastric balloon placement 15 months prior in Brazil (Apollo Endosurgery, Inc., Austin, TX). The patient was admitted to the
hospital for urgent endoscopic retrieval. However, as the device is not approved for use in the U.S., attempts to find a local physician
familiar with the procedure or the appropriate retrieval equipment were unsuccessful. Open surgical removal was offered to the patient, who
declined and instead returned to Brazil for removal there. The patient was lost to follow up. Obesity is a prevalent disease with treatment
options including diet, behavioral modification, medication and surgery. Patients, who are not candidates for more traditional bariatric
surgeries may benefit from endoscopically placed intragastric balloons (IGB).1 Once in the stomach, the balloon is filled with 500–700mL of
saline and 10mL of methylene blue (to identify leakage or rupture). The balloon displaces stomach volume which produces a sense of early
satiety when eating.2 Severe adverse complications include gastric perforation (more likely in those with previous upper GI surgeries),
gastric obstruction, gastric ulcer, esophagitis, and esophageal perforation.3 IGBs are only designed to remain in the stomach for a maximum
of 6 months, while this patient had her device for several more months than is recommended. Increased balloon rupture and displacement with
occasional intestinal obstruction are associated with patients who retain IGBs for more than 6 months.4 Treatment for ruptured and displaced
IGBs is endoscopic retrieval using proprietary equipment, or possible laparotomy. Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full
text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Patient’s blue urine after intragastric balloon rupture.
