Auditory musical hallucinations (AMHs) are rare complex auditory hallucinations in Parkinson's disease (PD) that have been limited
previously. The characteristics of AMHs in PD remain uncertain. We describe a 72-year-old woman with PD who presented with AMHs. The AMHs
occurred after immediate-release pramipexole was switched to extended-release pramipexole. The AMHs were a quiet piano or often songs on a
loud radio or background music over other sounds. The music was unpleasant, but not objectionable, threatening, or ego-syntonic, and it did
not interrupt her daily activities. AMHs in PD were non-threatening, and dopaminergic treatment may predispose patients to AMHs or be a
unique possible cause of AMHs. The hallucinations can occur after immediate-release pramipexole was switched to extended-release
pramipexole. Hallucinations, predominantly visual in nature, can occur in Parkinson disease (PD) and are often related to the
antiparkinsonian drugs. Visual hallucinations are a well-recognized problem. Besides visual hallucinations, patients with PD uncommonly
experience different forms of hallucinations, such as auditory hallucinations. Auditory hallucinations occur in 8% to 13% of patients with
PD and are generally accompanied by visual hallucinations. Most auditory hallucinations are a repetitive human voice.1 Auditory musical
hallucinations (AMHs) are rare complex auditory hallucinations in PD that have been reported in only 8 patients.2–6 Four patients for whom
detailed information is available have been documented,2–5 and 2 of these patients were deaf2,4 (Table 1). In patients with AMHs caused by
conditions other than PD, AMHs are characterized by repetitive and usually uncontrollable musical patterns, unrelated to external
stimulation. However, the characteristics of AMHs in PD remain uncertain. We describe a patient with PD who presented with AMHs. Auditory
Musical Hallucinations in Previous Patients With Parkinson Disease In December 2005, a 72-year-old right-handed woman with no clinically
significant history of disease, including epilepsy, migraines, or mental disease such as schizophrenia, noticed a tremor in her right hand.
In December 2007, she noted slowness of movement, difficulty in walking in narrow spaces, and the onset of left hand tremor in addition to
right hand tremor and presented at our hospital. She showed features of moderate Parkinsonism, including masked face, retropulsion,
bradykinesia, and right-side-dominant rigidity and resting tremor. The scores on parts I, II, III, and IV of the unified Parkinson disease
rating scale (UPDRS) were 0, 14, 24, and 0, respectively. The scores on the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) and Frontal Assessment
Battery were normal (30/30) and decreased (16/18), respectively. The results of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain were normal.
She was given levodopa (250 mg/day) and immediate-release pramipexole (1.5 mg/day), and the severity of these symptoms had decreased in May
2008. In August 2008, she showed wearing-off phenomenon and had freezing of gait. The dose of levodopa was consequently increased to
500 mg/day. Subsequently, she was given entacapone (200 mg/day) in June 2010 and zonisamide (25 mg/day) in July 2011. The score on UPDRS
part III was 12. The scores on the MMSE and Zung depression scale were 29 and 45, respectively. In July 2012, selegiline (5 mg/day) was
started since the severity of freezing gait had intensified, and the patient frequently fell. She was then given stable doses of levodopa
(500 mg/day), immediate-release pramipexole (1.5 mg/day, 3 times per day), entacapone (200 mg/day), zonisamide (25 mg/day), and selegiline
(5 mg/day). Neuroleptic drugs were not used. In December 2012, we switched from immediate- to once-daily extended-release pramipexole in
stable dosage because off-periods had increased. After that, she often had visual hallucinations such as animals or human hands and auditory
hallucinations such as rustling sounds. In April 2013, AMHs solely occurred. The AMHs were a quiet piano or often songs on a loud radio or
background music over other sounds. AMHs did not occur every day, but when they did the music persisted all day while the patient was awake.
She could not reproduce or stop the music. The AMHs were unrelated to visual hallucinations as well as other auditory hallucinations of
children talking together. The music was unpleasant, but not objectionable, threatening or ego-syntonic, and it did not interrupt her daily
activities. She had no hearing loss or history of using a hearing aid. The MMSE score was 28. Although the hallucinations persisted, she
requested no further measures to suppress the hallucinations, such as the reducing the doses of anti-parkinsonian drugs or using neuroleptic
agents, because the hallucinations were non-threatening and tolerable. In October 2013, zonisamide was increased to 50 mg/day because off-
periods had increased. The score on part III of the UPDRS was 14. After receiving the patient's informed consent, we switched back from
extended- to immediate-release pramipexole in a stable dosage in January 2014 to determine whether extended-release pramipexole was causing
the AMHs. When the patient visited to our hospital 5 day after switching back to immediate-release pramipexole, she reported that
recognizable subjects such as animals or persons that she previously saw clearly as visual hallucinations had disappeared, whereas some
unrecognizable shadows were often evident. AMHs sometimes occurred for several hours, particularly in the early morning or evening, and
other auditory hallucinations became faded. Twelve days after retuning to immediate-release pramipexole, visual hallucinations rarely
occurred, and AMHs and other auditory hallucinations had disappeared. Among the 5 patients including ours2–5 for whom detailed information
are available, AMHs in PD were non-specific incomprehensible tunes or different familiar or popular songs such as folk or lyrical songs,
which were unrelated to an external stimulus. AMHs were absent during sleep and were not related to visual hallucinations. The inability of
patients to interrupt AMHs might have been uncomfortable, but was not threatening. Female sex, hearing impairment, advanced age, psychiatric
conditions, cognitive disorders, alcoholism, obsessive–compulsive disorders, and neurological conditions (eg, seizure disorders, stroke,
tumors, central nervous systems infections, and brain lesions in the dorsal pons, temporal lobes, and frontal lobes) were reported as risk
factors for AMHs.3 Our patient had none of these risk factors except for female sex and advanced age. In the 5 patients including ours,2–5
neither cognitive decline nor depression was evident during AMHs, and disease severity and off-periods were apparently unrelated to AMHs.
The intervals between the time of altering treatment with anti-parkinsonian drugs and the onset of AMHs were long in 2 previous patients,
and the authors did not mention any relation between AMHs and anti-parkinsonian drugs.2,3 In another patient, however, short-term AMHs were
elicited by amantadine.4 In our patient, although other preceding dopaminergic treatments such as levodopa, entacapone, and selegiline might
have been prerequisite to the development of the hallucinations, the auditory and visual hallucinations occurred after immediate-release
pramipexole was switched to extended-release pramipexole, and similar findings have not been reported previously. Several months after that,
AMHs began. In studies of patients with advanced7 or early PD,8 switching from immediate- to extended-release pramipexole was safe, and the
most frequently reported side effects were dyskinesia or somnolence. In healthy male volunteers, the pharmacokinetics and tolerability of a
once-daily extended-release formulation of pramipexole were similar to those of an immediate-release formulation of pramipexole given 3
times daily.9 However, 2 patients with PD in whom dopamine dysregulation syndrome developed after switching from immediate-release to
extended-release pramipexole have been reported.10 AMHs in PD were non-threatening, and dopaminergic treatment may predispose patients to
AMHs or be a unique possible cause of AMHs. Abbreviations: AMHs = auditory musical hallucinations, MMSE = Mini-Mental Status Examination,
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PD = Parkinson disease, UPDRS = unified Parkinson disease rating scale. H.K. were responsible for the
overall study design, and H.K. wrote the manuscript. H.K. contributed to running the study and acquisition of data. H.K. contributed to
analysis and interpretation of data. H.K. and S.U. contributed to drafting and critical revision of part of the submitted materials. The
authors have no funding or conflicts of interest to disclose.
