Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma (CXPA) is an unusual epithelial malignancy that develops from a primary or recurrent pleomorphic adenoma
(PA), the most common tumor of salivary glands, and constitutes about 11.5% of all carcinomas that affect these glands. Intraoral minor
salivary glands and seromucous glands of the oropharynx are uncommon locations of CXPA. On histopathological examination, the tumor
comprises a wide morphological spectrum with a variable proportion between the benign and malignant components with the latter often
predominating and overlapping the PA, which may cause misdiagnosis. Here, we report a case of palatal minor salivary gland CXPA composed of
invasive micropapillary salivary duct carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma components with multiple nodal metastases in a 74-year-old
woman. Neoplastic cells showed heterogeneous immunohistochemical profile with both luminal and myoepithelial differentiation. The invasive
micropapillary salivary duct carcinoma component demonstrated overexpression of the oncoprotein human epidermal growth factor receptor-2.
This feature should be considered and evaluated as a possible target for adjuvant therapy in case of metastatic disease. Carcinoma ex
pleomorphic adenoma (CXPA) is defined as an epithelial malignancy that arises in or from a pleomorphic adenoma (PA), the most common tumor
of salivary glands.1,2 It is an uncommon neoplasm and comprises about 3.6% of all salivary tumors and 11.6% of all salivary gland
carcinomas.3 The pathogenesis of CXPA remains unclear, but the accumulation of genetic alterations on long-standing tumors seems to be a
crucial event in carcinomatous transformation of PA.4–7 Under microscopic examination, the tumor comprises a wide morphological spectrum
with variable proportion of the malignant component, which varies from a small focus to almost the entire lesion and is often represented by
a high-grade adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified, while specific types of salivary gland carcinomas such as myoepithelial carcinoma,
adenoid cystic carcinoma, or salivary duct carcinoma can occur.1–3,6,8,9 The involvement of minor salivary glands by CXPA is infrequent,
representing about 18% of the cases, mainly the soft and hard palate as the most common topographies.3 We describe the morphological and
immunohistochemical aspects in a case of invasive micropapillary salivary duct carcinoma (IMSDC) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) as
malignancies arising in a PA of the palate in a 74-year-old female patient with multiple nodal metastasis. A 74-year-old white woman
presented with a painful swelling in the right hard and soft palates associated with enlarged homolateral regional lymph nodes. A malignant
salivary gland tumor was suspected and the patient underwent resection of the mass with right radical neck dissection. Tumor-free margins
were confirmed by microscopic examination of intraoperative frozen sections. The resected specimen and 79 cervical lymph nodes were fixed in
4% buffered formalin and paraffin-embedded. Microscopic examination revealed an invasive neoplastic process with 3 distinct and well-
demarcated recognized elements. The first element, the scarcest area, was typical of PA, represented by occasional bilayered duct-like
structures in association with a myxochondroid stroma, which showed areas of discrete hyalinization (Figure 1A). The second included
intraductal and invasive areas of salivary duct carcinoma (Figure 1B), the latter with a micropapillary architecture. The intraductal areas
were composed of cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, pleomorphic nuclei with conspicuous nucleoli arranged in nests of varying size
in a Roman bridge-like cribriform pattern with central comedonecrosis. Morula-like cell clusters without fibrovascular cores represented the
invasive micropapillary component, which was surrounded by clear spaces that separated them from the inflammatory stroma (Figure 1C). The
third element had appearance of ACC with predominantly cribriform and double-layered tubular structures lined by small cells with scant
cytoplasm, hypercromatic and angulated nuclei (Figure 1D–F). There were extensive foci of intense basal lamina production in some areas and
eosinophilic cuboidal cells lining tubular structures were present (Figure 1G). Multiple tumor emboli could be observed in mucosal lymphatic
and blood vessels (Figure 1H). Thirty-nine lymph nodes showed metastatic deposits composed exclusively of IMSDC component (Figure 1I).
Fourteen months after tumor resection, the patient is alive and without evidence of disease. (A) Histological appearance of the remaining
pleomorphic adenoma withtubular structures in a myxochondroid background (hematoxylin and eosin, ×40). (B) Intraductal (right) and invasive
(left) areas of salivary duct carcinoma component (×40). (C) Invasive area of the salivary duct carcinoma consisted of cell clusters without
fibrovascular cores surrounded by clear spaces separating them from the stroma (×100). (D) The adenoid cystic component consisted
predominantly of cribriform structures (×40) with pseudocystic spaces lined by the neoplastic cells (E) and occasional eosinophilic cuboidal
cells lining luminal spaces (arrow) (×100). (F) Double-layered tubules in adenoid cystic areas and foci of intense basal lamina deposition
(G) associated with eosinophilic cuboidal cells determinig ductiform spaces (arrow) (×100). (H) Massive carcinomatous embolization of
mucosal blood and lymphatic vessels (×40). (I) Metastatic foci in lymph node exclusively composed by the invasive micropapillary salivary
duct carcinoma with areas of coagulative necrosis (×25). Immunohistochemical stains showed that in residual PA area, cytokeratin (CK)7
protein was positive in pseudoluminal-forming cells (Figure 2A); the IMSDC component cells had a strong cytoplasmic positivity to CK7 and to
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) in a membrane pattern, both in intraductal and invasive micropapillary areas (Figure 2B and
C). Cells with myoepithelial differentiation in ACC were positive to α-smooth mucle actin (α-SMA) and p63, as well as CK7 highlighted those
cells that determined luminal spaces (Figure 2D–F). The c-kit protein was negative. Both carcinomatous components displayed diffuse nuclear
p53 immunoexpression (Figure 2G), whereas the PA was negative. Ki-67 was expressed in <50% of the neoplastic cells in IMSDC, whereas the ACC
showed a very low proliferative index, with about 5% of Ki-67 expression (Figure 2H). (A) Immunohistochemically, ductal cells of the
remaining pleomorphic adenoma expressed CK7 (×100). (B) The invasive micropapillary salivary duct carcinoma cells strongly stained with CK7
and HER-2 in a membrane pattern (C), both in intratubular and invasive areas (×100). (D) Modified myoepithelial cells of the adenoid cystic
carcinoma component expressed α-SMA, nuclear p63 (E), and CK7 (F) highlighted cells with luminal differentiation (×40). (G) p53 expression
in IMSDC (right) and in ACC (left) (×100). (H) Ki-67 expression in malignant neoplastic cells (×100). ACC = adenoid cystic carcinoma,
HER-2 = human epidermal growth factor receptor-2, IMSDC = invasive micropapillary salivary duct carcinoma, α-SMA = α-smooth mucle actin.
CXPA is an infrequent malignant tumor of the salivary glands historically named as malignant mixed tumor, carcinoma ex mixed tumor,
carcinoma ex adenoma, and carcinoma ex benign pleomorphic adenoma.1 Although most CXPA occur in major salivary glands, cases involving the
oral and oropharyngeal minor glands account for about 17.5% of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology series. Of all these cases, 63% were
in the palate and 10.5% were in the upper lip. Other sites included the tongue, buccal mucosa, tonsil, and oropharynx. Signs and symptoms
most commonly reported were a painless mass of long duration.10 Although carcinomas arising in PA represent a wide morphological spectrum,
in most cases, CXPA is usually a high-grade adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified, but other differentiated salivary gland malignancies
such as mucoepidermoid carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, ACC, adenosquamous carcinoma, epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma, acinic cell
carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, myoepithelial carcinoma, and sarcomatoid carcinoma have been described.3,11,12 The double differentiation
of the carcinomatous component of CXPA described in this case is a very exceptional event and has been previously reported by 2 groups:
Freeman et al13 described a fatal nasal CXPA with adenoid cystic and squamous carcinomatous differentiation and Nakamori et al14 an
intracapsular salivary duct and squamous cell CXPA of the buccal mucosa (Table 1). So far, no case of palatal CXPA composed of IMSDC and ACC
has been reported. Reported Cases of CXPA With Double Differentiation of the Carcinomatous Component Based on the degree of extension
through the capsule of “maternal” PA by the carcinoma, CXPA may be subclassified as intracapsular, noninvasive or in situ, minimally
invasive (<1.5 mm penetration of the malignant component into extracapsular tissue), and frankly invasive (>1.5 mm of invasion from the
tumor capsule into the adjacent tissue) with prognostic implications.1,11,12,15 Frankly invasive CXPA is often associated with metastatic
disease and poor prognosis.15,16 In contrast, intracapsular and minimally invasive carcinomas have been considered tumors that behave in a
similar fashion to PA without malignant transformation.16,17 This statement is confirmed in this case, in which both carcinomatous
components were of the frankly invasive subtype and associated with the presence of multiple nodal metastasis. As would be expected,
modified myoepithelial cells of the ACC component showed diffuse immunoreactivity to the myoepithelial markers p63 and α-SMA, whereas CK7
was positive in those cells with a luminal distribution and c-kit was negative. The c-kit protein has been considered as a helpful marker in
distinction between ACC and other salivary gland tumors, which share morphological similarities, such as polymorphous low-grade
adenocarcinoma.18,19 The negative stain found should be partially explained by the fact that the ACC arising in a previous PA probably
displays a different immunoprofile and genetic abnormalities than ACC without PA association, perhaps owing to different mechanisms of
carcinomatous initiation and progression, despite the similar histopathological aspects. However, the p53 oncoprotein showed diffuse
positive staining in carcinomatous areas, but not in residual PA. The p53 oncoprotein has been implicated in the pathogenesis of CXPA, and
our findings corroborate this hypothesis. Furthermore, p53 overexpression is considered a helpful tool in identifying areas of carcinomatous
transformation in PA.20 The HER-2 oncoprotein is extensively studied in mammary ductal invasive carcinoma and its overexpression is often
associated with a poor prognosis and high frequency of nodal metastasis.21 Nevertheless, it is considered to play an important role in
targeting adjuvant therapy,22 as well as has been employed as an immunohistochemical marker to identify areas of malignant transformation in
PA, particularly if the carcinoma is of the salivary duct type.23 Furthermore, HER-2 overexpression by immunohistochemistry or amplification
by fluorescent in situ hybridization test in salivary gland CXPA and other salivary gland malignancies may elect patients for Trastuzumab
therapy, especially in case of metastatic disease.23 Recently, Di Palma et al24 reported a case of plurimetastatic CXPA successfully treated
by Trastuzumab and radiotherapy. In the presented case, HER-2 overexpression was identified only in the IMSDC component by
immunohistochemistry and curiously the 39 nodal metastatic foci were composed exclusively by this tumor. If the patient experience
recurrence, visceral metastasis, or both by the IMSDC, the status of HER-2 observed in this case could call attention to the possibility of
adjuvant therapy with Trastuzumab to cure. In summary, we report an unusual case of palatal minor salivary gland CXPA composed of IMSDC and
ACC with extensive nodal involvement based on histopathological and immunohistochemical findings. Improved understanding of the pathobiology
of this tumor and other salivary gland tumors may lead to rationally designed targeted therapies that could improve the outcome of patients
with CXPA. Abbreviations: α-SMA = α-smooth muscle actin, ACC = adenoid cystic carcinoma, CK = cytokeratin, CXPA = carcinoma ex pleomorphic
adenoma, FISH = fluorescent “in situ” hybridization, HER-2 = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, IMSDC = invasive micropapillary
salivary duct carcinoma, PA = pleomorphic adenoma. The study was conducted in full accordance with ethical principles. All authors support
the submission of the present manuscript. The authors have no funding or conflicts of interest to disclose.
