Serious thromboembolic events connected with rFVIIa therapy in hemophilia patients are rare. Only three cases are reported in children, all
of them with hemophilia A. We present unique case of patient with hemophilia B and high titer inhibitors to coagulation FIX, who developed
severe renal damage due to thromboembolic event during rFVIIa therapy, associated with unsuspected renovascular anomalies. Caution is
necessary if hematuria B requires administration of rFVIIa. US color doppler renal imaging before and after drug administration should be
sufficient as an early warning. Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa, Novoseven®) has been shown to induce hemostasis in hemophilia patients with
inhibitors against factor VIII or factor IX independent of factor VIII/factor IX. rFVIIa initiates hemostasis by forming a complex with
tissue factor (TF) exposed as a result of vessel wall injury. Pharmacologic doses of rFVIIa can enhance thrombin generation. Recombinant
activated factor VII (rFVIIa, Novoseven®) is in regular clinical use in haemophilia B patients with high-titer inhibitors to coagulation
factor IX (FIX) since 1996 . Potential adverse event of rFVIIa therapy is pathological blood clotting. However, when rFVIIa is used in
labeled indications such adverse event is rare and did not appear to be dose-related. The incidence of serious thromboembolic events after
treatment with rFVIIa in hemophilia patients with inhibitors appears to be much less than 1%, with only three cases reported in children,
all of them with hemophilia A and predisposing factors . We present the patient with hemophilia B and high titer inhibitors to coagulation
FIX who was treated with rFVIIa for severe life-threatening hematuria. Although hematuria was successfully treated, renal thromboembolic
adverse event associated with unsuspected vascular anomalies resulted in severe renal damage. To our knowledge, this is the first case of
tromboembolic event connected with rFVIIa therapy with this set of symptoms presented exclusively on kidney with underlying vascular
anomalies. The second normal kidney was fully spared. A seven-year-old Croatian boy with hemophilia B with high-titer inhibitors to
coagulation FIX was admitted at our institution with severe hematuria. The parents denied trauma, any medication or infection. He was
previously treated with rFVIIa, mostly for bleeding affecting limb joints. Clinical, diagnostic and medication follow-up is shown in
Figure 1. Painless hematuria was treated during the first three days with only symptomatic therapy consisting of intravenous hyperhidration
and bed rest. On the fourth and fifth day, a fall in hemoglobin level was noticed and single daily dose of 285 μg/kg rFVIIa was administered
intravenously in a 10–20 minute interval on both consecutive days. Despite the therapy, a life-threatening condition developed on the sixth
day with rapid fall of red blood cells count (RBC) accompanied with massive hematuria. The total rFVIIa dose was subsequently increased by
administration every three hours, four times in total with each amount of 105 μg/kg. The treatment successfully stabilized RBC count and
reduced hematuria. As hematuria, although reduced, continued, for the following two days the child received additional rFVIIa (once daily
285 μg/kg). On the fourth day of rFVIIa therapy the patient first time complained of left lumbar colic pain, and visible blood clots in
urine appeared. The rFVIIa therapy was discontinued. Only hyperhydration and occasional spasmolytic therapy were continued. From the
eleventh day, hematuria was only microscopic. In the course of the disease several ultrasound (US) examinations were performed. Initially,
normal US showed, coincidently with renal colics, enlarged left kidney with hyperechogenic inhomogenous parenchyma with partial loss of
corticomedulary differentiation and dilated pelvicaliceal system with hyperechogenic inhomogenous content compatible with clots. Only a
vascular bed over the left kidney without visualization of the parenchyma with practically afunctional renographic curve was found on 99mTc-
DTPA (Diethylene Triamine Pentacaetic Acid) renal scintigraphy (Figure 2A). In the first minutes of 99mTc-MAG3 (Mercaptoacetyltriglycine)
scintigraphy, the left kidney was very pale becoming increasingly better visualized later (Figure 2B). Renographic curve showed obstruction
over the third phase of the renogram. MSCT (multi-slice computer tomography) renal angiography revealed severe left kidney damage with 3
independent unobstructed arteries; two of them starting regularly, the third beginning caudally at the approximate position of the lower
pole of the left kidney. The same kidney had 2 veins who communicated with each other, the first had circumaortal course with vascular
convolutes and the second (accessory) showed retroaortal course supplying the lower pole of the kidney (Figure 3). Nine months later renal
scintigraphy was repeated. The finding was normal.Figure 1 Clinical, diagnostic and medication follow up. Blue shaded areas indicate days of
activated recombinant factor VII (rFVIIa) therapy. Orange boxes indicate times of renal US. WNL - within normal limits, *1 - left pyelon
dilation. Inhomogenous content compatible with pyelon clotting. Yellow box indicate time of renal Doppler, WNL - within normal limits.
Purple boxes indicate times of renal scintigraphy, *2 – functional abnormality of the left kidney, WNL - within normal limits. Brown box
indicates time of abdominal MSCT, *3 – renovascular anomalies of left kidney.Figure 2 Renal imaging in posteroanterior position (R = right
kidney, L = left kidney). A. 99mTc-DTPA renal scintigraphy shows vascular bed over the left kidney without visualization of the parenchyma
with practically afunctional renographic curve of the same kidney. B. 99mTc-MAG3 scintigraphy shows very pale left kidney becoming
increasingly better visualized later. Renographic curve of the left lidney shows obstruction over the third phase of the renogram.Figure 3
Multi-slice computer tomography (MSCT) renal angiography of both kidneys in anteroposterior position shows severe left kidney damage (arrow)
with 3 independent unobstructed arteries; two of them starting regularly, the third beginning caudally at the approximate position of the
lower pole of the left kidney. (R = right kidney). Clinical, diagnostic and medication follow up. Blue shaded areas indicate days of
activated recombinant factor VII (rFVIIa) therapy. Orange boxes indicate times of renal US. WNL - within normal limits, *1 - left pyelon
dilation. Inhomogenous content compatible with pyelon clotting. Yellow box indicate time of renal Doppler, WNL - within normal limits.
Purple boxes indicate times of renal scintigraphy, *2 – functional abnormality of the left kidney, WNL - within normal limits. Brown box
indicates time of abdominal MSCT, *3 – renovascular anomalies of left kidney. Renal imaging in posteroanterior position (R = right kidney,
L = left kidney). A. 99mTc-DTPA renal scintigraphy shows vascular bed over the left kidney without visualization of the parenchyma with
practically afunctional renographic curve of the same kidney. B. 99mTc-MAG3 scintigraphy shows very pale left kidney becoming increasingly
better visualized later. Renographic curve of the left lidney shows obstruction over the third phase of the renogram. Multi-slice computer
tomography (MSCT) renal angiography of both kidneys in anteroposterior position shows severe left kidney damage (arrow) with 3 independent
unobstructed arteries; two of them starting regularly, the third beginning caudally at the approximate position of the lower pole of the
left kidney. (R = right kidney). The risk of clot formation is low even if rFVIIa was given in higher doses (>300 mcg/kg BW) . But the
treatment with high doses of rFVIIa on an off-label basis significantly increases the risk of arterial but not venous thromboembolic events
among the elderly . In the literature we found a report of a woman with Glanzmann Thrombasthenia with haematuria and clotting in renal
pelvis after rFVIIa administration. In this case, the major reason for rFVIIa administration was intraoperative bleeding, during laparotomy
for pelvic inflammatory disease. It is well known that inflammatory process activate "kinin-kallikrein" system and that leads to increased
clotting . Our patient had multiple renal vascular anomalies. Multiple renal arteries are not uncommon. Various reports estimate its
incidence up to 32%, usually on the right side with very rare occurrence of triple arteries supplying one kidney . Anatomical variations of
multiple renal veins are less common with incidence ranging between 0.8 and 6% . Both anomalies occur far more commonly on the right side .
Anomalies occurring in both arteries and vein together are extremely rare. To our knowledge, this is the first report of combination of both
multiple arterial and vein kidney anomalies of one kidney while the other kidney had normal circulatory system. As we did not exceed
recommended rFVIIa dosage and as right kidney was spared, the contribution of such vascular anomaly to the thromboembolic incident of the
left kidney is a reasonable assumption. According to radionuclide examinations the main site of lesion and clotting event was intrarenal
vascular bed, primarily in glomerular region, while tubular region was less affected. Renal damage secondary to pelvicaliceal obstruction is
less likely. Such an extremely rare troboembolic event in patients with hemophilia B certainly do not compromise safe administration of
rFVIIa. However, caution is necessary if hematuria requires administration of rFVIIa. US color doppler renal imaging before and after drug
administration should be sufficient as an early warning. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of
this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DM conceived of the study, coordinated the study
and drafted the manuscript. EB participated in clinical research. DB participated in study design and helped to draft the manuscript. MP
participated in interpretation of nuclear medicine imaging. RS-P participated in interpretation of radiologic imaging. SG participated in
final design of the manuscript. DT participated in the sequence alignment and drafting of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved
the final manuscript. We have no people to match to acknowledgements criteria.
