Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD; OMIM 272200) is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism caused by mutations in the
sulfatase modifying factor 1 gene, encoding the formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE), and resulting in tissue accumulation of sulfatides,
sulphated glycosaminoglycans, sphingolipids and steroid sulfates. Less than 50 cases have been published so far. We report a new case of MSD
presenting in the newborn period with hypotonia, apnoea, cyanosis and rolling eyes, hepato-splenomegaly and deafness. This patient was
compound heterozygous for two so far undescribed SUMF1 mutations (c.191C > A; p.S64X and c.818A > G; p.D273G). Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency
is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism characterized by the defective activity of all known sulfatases . It is caused by
mutations in the sulfatases- modifying factor 1 gene encoding the FGE. Sulfatases are a family of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of
ester sulfates, including glycosaminoglycans, sulfolipids and steroid sulfates. These proteins share high amino acid sequence homology.
However they show different sub-cellular localization and substrate specificity . The SUMF1 gene encodes for a sulfatase-modifyng factor,
which converts a highly conserved cysteine within the sulfatase catalytic domain into Cα- formylglycine . It has been shown that this post-
translational modification is both an essential and limiting factor for the enzymatic activity of sulfatases . The SUMF1 gene is located on
chromosome 3p26. It spans 105 kb and the coding sequence is distributed over 9 exons. The cDNA for human FGE is predicted to encode a
protein of 374 residues. The protein contains a cleavable signal sequence of 33 residues, which indicates translocation of FGE into the
endoplasmatic reticulum, and contains a single N-glycosylation site at Asn-141 . The middle part of FGE (residues 179–308 in human FGE) is
represented by a tryptophan-rich subdomain. The C-terminal subdomain (residues 327–366 in human FGE) is the most highly conserved sequence
within the FGE family. FGE post translationally activates all newly synthesized sulfatase by generating the catalytic residue formylglycine.
Impaired FGE function leads to a reduction in sulfatase activities. It has been proved that variability of the clinical phenotype depends on
both residual FGE activity as well as protein stability . MSD is characterized by features of mucoplysaccharidosis and metachromatic
leukodystrophy including neurologic deterioration and development delay, gargoyle-like features, visceromegaly, heart involvement,
ichthyosis, hydrocephaly, cloudy corneal and skeletal anomalies . According to the age of onset, very neonatal, late infantile (severe or
LIS and mild or LIM) and rare juvenile (mild) disease subtypes can be distinguished . We described a clinical case of a girl with a neonatal
form of MSD, presenting typical findings of the disease. She was compound heterozygous for two so far undescribed SUMF1 mutations
(c.191C > A; p.S64X and c.818A > G; p.D273G). The girl is the first child of healthy, non-consanguineous parents. She was born by vaginal
delivery at week 40 with birth weight of 2,815 g, length 46 cm, and head circumference 32 cm. APGAR scores were 9/10. At 20 hours of life
she was transferred to our Neonatal Intensive Unit because of the appearance of rolling eyes followed by episodes of apnoea with cyanosis
and hypotonia, for which a treatment with phenobarbital was installed. At that time, physical examination showed coarse facial features,
high-arched, thick eyebrows, bulbous nasal tip, micrognathia, posteriorly rotated ears with attached lobes, flared thorax, inverted nipples,
hepatosplenomegaly, broad thumbs, mild ichthyosis and muscular hypotonia. (Figure 1A, B, C, D). At 11 days of life she presented two
episodes of obstructive respiratory arrest after stridor, treated with ventilation. The otolaryngologist’s evaluation revealed the presence
of a cystic formation of the vallecula, which was removed surgically with resolution of the episodes of apnoea.Figure 1 Phenotype. A: coarse
face, high-arched, thick eyebrows, bulbous nasal tip and mild ichthyosis. B: micrognathia, posteriorly rotated ears with attached lobes. C:
abdominal ichthyosis. D: ichthyosis of the lower limb and feet. Phenotype. A: coarse face, high-arched, thick eyebrows, bulbous nasal tip
and mild ichthyosis. B: micrognathia, posteriorly rotated ears with attached lobes. C: abdominal ichthyosis. D: ichthyosis of the lower limb
and feet. Because of the coarse facial features, hypertrichosis, and hepatosplenomegaly, a lysosomal storage disorder was considered. There
was an increased urinary excretion of glycosaminoglycans (1101 μg/mg creatinine; normal range, 30–200), with chondroitin sulfate (+++),
dermatan sulfate (+++) and heparan sulfate (++) on electrophoresis. Enzyme activitiy testing in leucocytes showed deficiency of
arylsulfatase A (0.0 nM/mg/h; n.v. 40–270), arylsulfatase B (0.0 nM/mg/h; n.v. 70–126), iduronate sulfatase (0.9 nM/mg/4 h; n.v. 51–123) and
galactose 6 sulfatase (0.6 nM/mg/17 h; n.v.20-27). This pattern was diagnostic of Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD). Molecular analysis of
the gene SUMF1 revealed two so far undescribed heterozygous mutations: c.191C > A s. S64X in exon 1 and c.818A > G p.D273G in exon 6. The
first heterozygous mutation was also demonstrated in the girl’s mother, while the second one was identified in the girl’s father. The
karyotype was normal, 46,XX. The echocardiography and EEG were normal; abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly; brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed dilated lateral ventricles with an enlarged cisterna magna, demyelination of the white matter, partial corpus callosum
hypoplasia with hypothrophy of the splenium and dismorphism of the hippocampum. Skeletal radiography revealed a pattern of dysostosis
multiplex with hypoplasia of L2, lumbar kyphosis and platyspondyly of the cervical vertebral bodies; broad ribs; broad and hypoplastic first
metacarpals, pointing of the second and third metacarpals, irregularity of the distal radial and ulnar metaphysis (Figure 2A, B, C, D). The
ABR examination showed mild hypoacusia.Figure 2 X-Rays. A: broad and hypoplastic first metacarpals, pointing of the second and third
metacarpals, irregularity of the distal radial and ulnar metaphysis. B: platyspondily of the cervical vertebral bodies. C: hypoplastic
vertebral body of L2, lumbar kyphosis. D: broad ribs. X-Rays. A: broad and hypoplastic first metacarpals, pointing of the second and third
metacarpals, irregularity of the distal radial and ulnar metaphysis. B: platyspondily of the cervical vertebral bodies. C: hypoplastic
vertebral body of L2, lumbar kyphosis. D: broad ribs. The child presented global developmental delay: could hold head up only at the age of
10 months, at the age of 12 months she was still hypotonic, with limited and jerky movements and it was impossible to meet her gaze. She
developed dorso-lumbar kyphosis and owing to L2 hypoplasia she had to wear a orthopaedic corset. She was seen again in our Clinical Genetics
Unit at 24 months of age. Her head circumference was 45 cm (50th centile), length 66 cm (<3rd centile), and weight 6.406 Kg (<<3rd centile).
Her psychomotor development was severely delayed and she uttered no words. At the age of 24 months she could not sit up unaided. Multiple
sulfatase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism affecting post-translational activation of sulfatases by the
formylglycine generating enzyme (FGE). Due to mutations in the encoding SUMF1 gene, FGE’s catalytic capacity is impaired, resulting in
reduced cellular sulfatase activities . More than 30 different SUMF1 mutations are known, most of them missense mutations that affect
stability and residual molecular activity of mutant FGE, which both determine MSD disease severity . A variable residual activity of the
different sulfatases has been described . Few studies were able to show a correlation of both residual activity and stability of FGE
variants with the clinical presentation of selected MSD patients. Patients with drastic impairments of both FGE stability and residual
enzyme activity displayed the most severe clinical phenotype whereas the mildest phenotype was associated with the highest residual FGE
activity among the studied variants. It is now possible to establish a genotype/phenotype correlation for MSD and to roughly predict the
clinical course for patients with the studied SUMF1 mutations. Missense mutations affecting crucial functional or structural residues in
FGE, as well as nonsense ones, will cause severe forms of the disease, whereas missense mutations not fully abrogating a functional
conformation of the FGE protein will lead to attenuated forms . Different types of MSD can be distinguished according to the age of onset:
neonatal, late infantile (0 to 2 years, severe or LIS and mild or LIM), and rare juvenile (2 to 4 years, mild) . The clinical picture of MSD
combines symptoms of the different sulfatase deficiencies. Patients show neurological deterioration and a neurodegenerative course of
disease similar to metachromatic leukodystrophy. Development delay, dysmorphism and organomegaly are present as found in various
mucopolysaccharidoses . Skeletal abnormalities remind one of Chondrodysplasia punctata type 1 and skin changes of X-linked ichthyosis . The
onset of symptoms in early infancy is associated with poor chances of survival; conversely, when features of the disease appear in late
infancy, patients survive longer. In general it is rare to carry out a diagnosis of storage disease in newborns apart from I-cell disease
also known as mucolipidosis II, which is a condition with a severe clinical course, typical radiological aspects and fibroblast inclusions.
Other symptoms include hyperplastic gums, thoracic deformities and congenital hip dislocation which are evident in newborn age. In the other
storage diseases the symptoms are not so evident in the newborn age. The diagnosis of MSD may not be simple due to the rarity of the
condition: in our case the features which led us to suspect the diagnosis were the MPS-like phenotype, the radiological signs compatible
with “dysostosis multiplex” and especially the cutaneous features. The child had no signs of chondrodysplasia punctata, in particular no
epiphyseal stippling. Indeed the presence of ichthyosis can be a very useful indicator in identifying the condition and can be the best
marker of the disease in newborns. Our patient had typical features of neonatal MSD including neonatal hypotonia, coarse face, mild
deafness, visceromegaly, hypoplastic vertebral bodies and delayed psychomotor development. It was demonstrated that the phenotypic outcome
depends on both residual FGE activity as well as protein stability . Another neonatal case was described which showed all the clinical
symptoms of the condition and a quick worsening course of the disease: he presented two nonsense mutations leading to almost fully abrogated
FGE activity, highly unstable FGE protein and nearly undetectable sulfatase activity . Our case presents a missense mutation along with a
nonsense mutation. In fact we have identified two so far undescribed SUMF1 mutations (c.191C > A; p.S64X and c.818A > G; p.D273G), resulting
in a severe clinical phenotype with early onset, but which allow survival beyond one year of life, in contrast with what has been reported
in literature up to this point. She has a serious clinical aspect, but probably less severe than that described by Schlotawa and is still
alive at the age of 2 years. MSD is still an untreatable disease. Thus, potential treatment approaches, and also genetic counselling,
directly depend on thorough analyses of the functional consequences of human SUMF1 mutations on the clinical and biochemical phenotype.
Understanding better the molecular mechanism at the root of this condition could aid the identification of the most appropriate therapeutic
approach of MSD in the near future. In conclusion, our patient illustrates well the main clinical features to suspect this condition in the
newborn age, ichthyosis in particular, the wide spectrum of clinical manifestations and biochemical abnormalities of this rare disease. This
case serves to highlight the importance of full and detailed evaluation of all patients with rare disorders and the need for continued
updates of suggested surveillance for these diseases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s guardian/parent/next of kin
for the publication of this report and any accompanying images”. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions LG and AI wrote the manuscript, LG, LS, GG, SB, NM, DF, LZ, TG, LP, AW, SR, II, LI, CG, SB, AS-F and OG
participated in the diagnostic process, AS-F evaluated the X-Rays, SP and AB carried out the molecular genetic tests. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors wish to thank the co-operating family-members for the necessary medical data and photographs for
publication as well as the photographers Marco Bonazzi and Luca Valcavi. This research was funded in part by Fondazione Manodori.
