Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a severely disabling inflammatory disorder of the central nervous system and is often misdiagnosed as multiple
sclerosis (MS). There is increasing evidence that treatment options shown to be beneficial in MS, including interferon-β (IFN-β), are
detrimental in NMO. We here report the first Caucasian patient with aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibody (NMO-IgG)-seropositive NMO presenting with a
tumefactive brain lesion on treatment with IFN-β. Disease started with relapsing optic neuritis and an episode of longitudinally extensive
transverse myelitis (LETM) in the absence of any brain MRI lesions or cerebrospinal fluid-restricted oligoclonal bands. After initial
misdiagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) the patient received subcutaneous IFN-β1b and, subsequently, subcutaneous IFN-β1a therapy for
several years. Under this treatment, the patient showed persisting relapse activity and finally presented with a severe episode of subacute
aphasia and right-sided hemiparesis due to a large T2 hyperintensive tumefactive lesion of the left brain hemisphere and a smaller T2 lesion
on the right side. Despite rituximab therapy two further LETM episodes occurred, resulting in severe neurological deficits. Therapeutic
blockade of the interleukin (IL)-6 signalling pathway by tocilizumab was initiated, followed by clinical and radiological stabilization. Our
case (i) illustrates the relevance of correctly distinguishing NMO and MS since these disorders differ markedly in their responsiveness to
immunomodulatory and -suppressive therapies; (ii) confirms and extends a previous report describing the development of tumefactive brain
lesions under IFN-β therapy in two Asian NMO patients; and (iii) suggests tocilizumab as a promising therapeutic alternative in highly
active NMO disease courses. Interferon-β (IFN-β) is one of the established first-line therapies for patients with relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis (MS). While the efficacy of IFN-β in MS is widely accepted, the possible benefit in non-classical MS variants has been
disputed. This is the case for neuromyelitis optica (NMO/Devic’s syndrome), considered an MS subtype until the discovery of the anti-
aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibodies (AQP4-Ab) . In both Asian and European NMO patients, IFN-β failed to show therapeutic efficacy . Of note,
Shimizu and colleagues recently reported two Asian patients with NMO spectrum disease (NMOSD) who developed extensive brain lesions
following IFN-β therapy . Here we report the case of an AQP4 Ab-seropositive NMO patient of Caucasian descent presenting with a tumefactive
lesion on IFN-β treatment. Of note, our patient did not respond to B cell depletion by the monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody rituximab but
improved upon blockade of the interleukin (IL)-6 pathway using tocilizumab. A 47-year old Caucasian female patient had been diagnosed with
MS in 1995 in an external hospital after four episodes of optic neuritis (ON) since 1989 and an episode of longitudinally extensive
transverse myelitis (LETM) in 1995 (Figure 1). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-restricted oligoclonal bands (OCBs) were repeatedly negative and
brain MRI scans did not show any abnormalities (e.g. MRI performed in 2001, Figure 1). After an initial two months azathioprine treatment in
1995, which had to be discontinued because of side effects, repeated monthly intravenous (iv) steroid pulse treatments with 250 mg
methylprednisolone (MP) were initiated and continued until April 2013. In 2001, after three further episodes of ON, subcutaneous IFN-β1b
medication was added to the ongoing steroid pulse treatment. In 2005, subcutaneous IFN-β1b was switched to subcutaneous IFN-β1a (3 × 44
μg/week). During IFN-β therapy the patient still suffered from further relapses, most of them occurring between the years 2001 and 2005
(July 2002, February 2005, and April 2005). She recovered only partially from the relapses and accumulated fixed neurological deficits such
as amaurosis of the right eye and impaired walking with an expanded disability status scale (EDSS) score of 4.0 in January 2012. Of note,
there was no chronic progression between the relapses. In 2011 persisting disease activity prompted testing for serum AQP4 antibodies (by a
cell-based assay; CBA ) which were found positive and confirmed the diagnosis of seropositive NMO. Following the patient’s wishes and in
light of the reduced relapse rate since 2005 therapy with subcutaneous IFN-β1a was continued, together with the regular monthly steroid
therapy (250 mg MP each) established since 1995. In January 2012, she suffered from a subacute aphasia and right sided hemiparesis and
presented to our department. MRI imaging showed a large T2 hyperintensive, tumefactive lesion in the prefrontal white matter of the superior
and middle frontal gyrus of the left hemisphere and smaller T2 lesions on the right side without clear evidence of a disturbed blood brain
barrier (Figure 1). MR spectroscopy showed an unchanged choline peak and thus did not give a hint to a malignant process. Analysis of CSF
was unremarkable with still no quantitative evidence for intrathecal immunoglobulin (Ig) synthesis or OCBs and a normal CSF white cell
count. AQP4-Ab serum titre was 1:1000 (CBA). Furthermore, a time-of-flight MR-angiography showed no signs of vasculitis, and laboratory
work-up revealed no clinical or serological evidence for connective tissue diseases. The patient received a high-dose methylprednisolone iv
pulse and clinically improved. The follow-up MRI one month later showed a mild regression of the large T2 hyperintense lesion. We stopped
IFN-β therapy and continued the already existing monthly steroid pulses (250 mg MP each) as the patient declined any additional medication
at that time. However, two attacks of myelitis occurred in March 2013 and April 2013. Follow-up AQP4-Ab testing in April 2013 confirmed
seropositivity (1:1000; CBA). The patient was treated with high-dose steroid iv pulse therapy and rescue plasmapheresis. Thereafter our
patient agreed to an adaptation of therapy and the monthly steroid infusions were discontinued without tapering.Figure 1 Disease course, MRI
scans and therapy in a patient with AQP4-Ab-positive NMO. The figure depicts clinical relapses (diamonds), MRI findings (T2, FLAIR), and
therapy data (methyl prednisolone (MP) 1000 mg i.v. 3–5 daily infusions; tocilizumab 8 mg/kg bodyweight once a month; rituximab 1000 mg i.v.
(single infusion), IFN (interferon)-β1a 44 μg s.c. three times a week (Rebif®); IFN-β1b s.c. daily (Betaferon®, Betaseron®);
methylpredisolone 250 mg i.v. once per month; azathioprine (AZA)). No relapses have occurred during therapy with tocilizumab (follow-up: 12
months). AQP: aquaporin, AZA: azathioprine, FLAIR: fluid attenuated inversion recovery, IFN: interferon, MP: methyl prednisolone, MRI:
magnetic resonance imaging, MS: multiple sclerosis, NMO: neuromyelitis optica. Disease course, MRI scans and therapy in a patient with
AQP4-Ab-positive NMO. The figure depicts clinical relapses (diamonds), MRI findings (T2, FLAIR), and therapy data (methyl prednisolone (MP)
1000 mg i.v. 3–5 daily infusions; tocilizumab 8 mg/kg bodyweight once a month; rituximab 1000 mg i.v. (single infusion), IFN
(interferon)-β1a 44 μg s.c. three times a week (Rebif®); IFN-β1b s.c. daily (Betaferon®, Betaseron®); methylpredisolone 250 mg i.v. once per
month; azathioprine (AZA)). No relapses have occurred during therapy with tocilizumab (follow-up: 12 months). AQP: aquaporin, AZA:
azathioprine, FLAIR: fluid attenuated inversion recovery, IFN: interferon, MP: methyl prednisolone, MRI: magnetic resonance imaging, MS:
multiple sclerosis, NMO: neuromyelitis optica. We initiated treatment with rituximab (single intravenous infusion of 1000 mg) in May 2013
and transferred our patient to a rehabilitation centre. However, further severe LETM attacks occurred shortly thereafter in June and August
2013. The patient was re-admitted to our department in September 2013 and showed persistently increased AQP4-Ab titres (1:3200, CBA).
Absolute B cell counts were normal (68/μl) while relative proportion was decreased (3% of all lymphocytes; reference value 5-24%). This
relapse was associated with a urinary tract infection (without systemic signs of inflammation, i.e. without leucocytosis, fever or elevated
C-reactive protein (CRP) levels) which we successfully treated according to local guidelines. In light of the patient’s severe clinical
deficits (EDSS of 9.0) we applied another iv steroid pulse and decided to switch to tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal anti-IL-6-receptor
antibody. Monthly infusions of tocilizumab with 8 mg/kg bodyweight were followed by clinical stabilization as no further relapses occurred
for the following 12 months (see clinical and MRI follow-up after withdrawal of IFN-β in Figure 1). We also observed a slight clinical
improvement, as reflected by an EDSS of 8.0. Of note, serum AQP4 antibodies were still detectable at high titre at last follow-up in October
2014 (1:3200, CBA). To our knowledge, we here present the first Caucasian NMO patient who developed a tumefactive brain lesion on long-term
IFN-β treatment. Our case confirms and extends similar findings in two Asian NMOSD patients recently reported by Shimizu and colleagues .
Obviously the development of a tumefactive brain lesion during IFN-β therapy of NMO is not linked to a specific ethnicity. Moreover, in line
with results obtained previously in other cohorts, our patient experienced numerous relapses under IFN-β therapy. Why NMO patients fail to
respond to IFN-β remains so far unclear. Possible explanations consider the complex immunomodulatory effects of IFN-β, including the
upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines observed in MS . Since in NMOSD higher CNS levels of IL-17 are observed than in MS , it may be
speculated that IL-17 biology may play a role in NMO unresponsiveness to IFN-β. Moreover, a recent study in NMO patients could link serum
levels of IFN-α, a type I interferon closely related to IFN-β, with clinical disease activity and severity . Independent experimental work
demonstrated that NMO-IgG-mediated astrocyte damage is reduced in the CNS of type I interferon receptor deficient mice, suggesting that type
I interferon signalling contributes to the pathogenesis of neuromyelitis optica . Of note, administration of a single intravenous infusion
of 1000 mg rituximab was followed by further relapses just one and three months later. While CD19 counts were not determined directly after
rituximab application, an investigation four months after rituximab dosing showed normal absolute B cell counts and persistently increased
AQP4-Ab levels. We may speculate that our patient belongs to individuals characterized by an early repopulation of the B cell compartment
following rituximab therapy . Our case adds preliminary evidence in favour of a possible beneficial effect of tocilizumab in NMO, even
following treatment with rituximab . However, considering that NMO is often characterized by very long periods free of any relapses, the
suggested success of tocilizumab in our patient needs to be followed up. Moreover, more studies, in particular independent controlled
trials, are required to confirm the efficacy of tocilizumab in NMO suggested by this case report and previous ones . The demonstration of
significantly increased levels of IL-6 in comparison to MS in the CSF and serum of patients with NMO , particularly in AQP4 Ab-seropositive
patients with severe disease activity , provides a rationale for the use of this drug in NMO. In an ex vivo experimental model of NMO spinal
cord slice cultures exposed to NMO-IgG and complement showed a marked loss of AQP4 and myelin which was enhanced by adding IL-6 . Moreover,
Chihara and colleagues described a specific IL-6-dependent B lymphocyte subpopulation in the peripheral blood and CSF of NMO patients: these
CD19+ CD27+ CD38+ CD180+ B cells were found to produce AQP4 antibodies and showed enhanced survival as well as AQP4 antibody secretion in
the presence of IL-6, whereas blockage of the IL-6 receptor signalling by an anti-IL-6R antibody shortened their survival in vitro . Our
report illustrates the importance of correctly diagnosing NMO and MS to avoid mistreatment with potentially severe or even fatal
consequences. Two recent studies have revealed that up to 30% of patients with NMO were falsely diagnosed with MS and, in consequence, often
treated with drugs not effective in NMO. While AQP4-IgG serum testing is certainly the most important differential diagnostic measure, other
investigations such as lumbar puncture or brain and spinal cord MRI are important as well. In the present case, the diagnosis of MS was made
in the absence of CSF-restricted OCBs. OCB negativity is extremely rare in MS (~2-5%) and should prompt physicians to question that
diagnosis; by contrast, around 70% of patients with AQP4-IgG-positive NMOSD lack OCBs . Normal CSF/serum concentration quotient values of
IgG (QIgG) in NMOSD are especially common during periods of clinical remission . Similarly, a persistently normal brain MRI as observed in
our patient should warn against the diagnosis of MS . Brain lesions are absent in most patients with NMO at disease onset, but may occur
later in the disease and may even meet MRI criteria for MS . Of note, for Asian NMO patients, independent case reports described the
occurrence of hemispheric brain lesions even without association to IFN-β therapy , while we are not aware of such observations for NMO
patients of other ethnic background. Finally, predominantly central, longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions extending over more than
three vertebral segments are extremely rare in MS while their presence is highly suggestive of NMOSD . Our case supports the conclusion that
the development of tumefactive brain lesions under IFN-β therapy for suspected MS should prompt considering NMOSD as the underlying disease,
obviously not only in Asian but also in Caucasian patients. Moreover, our report underlines – in accordance with previous reports and
recommendations – the need to treat MS and NMO, two conditions with substantial differences in pathogenesis differentially and, in
particular, to avoid treatment with IFN-β in patients with NMO. Our report adds to previous evidence indicating a potential treatment effect
of tocilizumab, an IL-6 signalling pathway blocker in NMO therapy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Competing
interests J.H. received speaker honoraria from Novartis and travel expenses from Merck Serono M.R. received speaker honoraria from Novartis
and travel reimbursement from Bayer Schering and Biogen Idec. J.I. reports no conflicts of interest. C.M. reports no conflicts of interest.
N.G. reports no conflicts of interest. H.P.H. reports having received honoraria for consulting and speaking at symposia funded by Bayer
Healthcare, Biogen Idec, GeNeuro, Genzyme, MedImmune, Merck Serono, Novartis, Roche, Teva, and Sanofi-Aventis, with approval by the Rector
of Heinrich Heine University. S.J. received travel compensation from the Guthy Jackson Charitable Foundation. The work of S.J. was directly
supported by a research grant from the European Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis (ECTRIMS) and indirectly by
research grants from the Dietmar Hopp Stiftung, from Merck Serono and from Bayer Healthcare to the Division of Molecular Neuroimmunology,
University of Heidelberg. O.A. reports having received honoraria for consulting and speaking from Bayer HealthCare, Biogen Idec, Genzyme,
Merck Serono, Novartis, Teva, Sanofi-Aventis, as well as research funding from the German Research Council (DFG), the Hertie Foundation and
the Eugène Devic European Network (BMBF/EU-FP7). Authors’ contributions JH. acquired the data, drafted the manuscript and created the
figure. MR. acquired the data and helped to draft the manuscript. JI. revised the manuscript for important intellectual content and helped
creating the figure. CM. revised the manuscript for important intellectual content and helped creating the figure. NG revised the manuscript
for important intellectual content. HPH revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. SJ revised the manuscript for important
intellectual content. OA helped to draft the manuscript, revised the manuscript for important intellectual content and updated the figure.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the patient for giving her consent to publishing this case report. We thank the
Walter-und-Ilse-Rose-Stiftung for supporting the Multiple Sclerosis Center at the Department of Neurology, Heinrich-Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany. S.J. thanks the Dietmar Hopp Foundation and Merck Serono for supporting research at the Department of Neurology,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. This work was supported by the Eugène Devic European Network (EDEN, BMBF 01GM1203A; EU-FP7).
