Pancytopenia is a rare complication of hyperthyroidism. Various mechanisms have been described such as immunological, bone marrow
suppression. The possibility of hyperthyroidism should be considered in patients with unexplained pancytopenia. There are many case reports
showing the association between hyperthyroidism and pancytopenia. All of these reports show association between Graves disease and
pancytopenia but our case shows association between Multinodular goitre and pancytopenia. Besides it is uncommon to find such association in
a surgical patient. This case report describes a 62 yr old hindu female with splenic injury and pancytopenia. On further investigations the
patient was found to have hyperthyroidism. Though the definite mechanism regarding the association of pancytopenia with hyperthyroidism
isn’t clear, various cases have been described in the literature. This case shows the diagnostic dilemma that can occur in patients with
pancytopenia. Any patient with unexplained pancytopenia should undergo thyroid function tests to rule out hyperthyroidism. Atypical
manifestations of hyperthyroidism include hematological, cardiovascular, dermatological. Hyperthyroidism can be associated with various
hematological disorders. Single lineage abnormalities such as anemia (34%), leukopenia (5.8%), thrombocytopenia (3.3%) have been reported,
but pancytopenia is a rare presentation . The suspected etiologic mechanisms include ineffective hematopoiesis, reduction in blood cell life
span, autoimmune process [5, 6], toxicity of thyroid hormone. Cases have been described which show an association between graves’ disease
and pancytopenia but no case reports have described association between multinodular goitre and pancytopenia. Also this is the first case
report describing association between hyperthyroidism and pancytopenia in a surgical patient. A 62 year old female presented to the
emergency room with history of fall from one storey building. The impact was over the trunk region. On clinical examination the blood
pressure was 90/60 mmHg, pulse rate was 110/min, temperature was 98.6 degree Farenheit and respiratory rate was 20/min. Pallor was present
and the thyroid gland was enlarged. Pansystolic murmur was present over the mitral and tricuspid regions. Fine basal crepitations were heard
over both lung fields. Left upper quadrant tenderness was present. A complete blood count showed pancytopenia with hemoglobin 7.4gm/dl
(normal: 12–16 gm/dl), WBC count 3400/μl (normal: 4000–11,000/μl) and platelet count 91,000/μl (normal 1,50,000-4,00,000/μl). Multiple
ventricular premature complexes were present in the electrocardiogram (ECG). Ultrasound of the abdomen showed splenic laceration with
splenic hematoma extending up to the hilum. Contrast enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen showed findings consistent with grade II
splenic injury. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for conservative management and further workup with the impression
of grade II splenic injury and pancytopenia. Ultrasound of the neck showed multiple heteroechoic nodules with calcification in both lobes of
thyroid, findings suggestive of multinodular goiter. Echocardiography showed severe tricuspid regurgitation and mitral regurgitation. Bone
marrow aspiration showed mixed normocellular and a few hypercellular marrow fragments. Absolute retics and peripheral blood smear were
normal. Hormonal studies showed features suggestive of hyperthyroidism (Table 1).Table 1 Thyroid function test at admission
InvestigationValues at admissionReference rangeT37.44.2-8.1 pmol/lT43510-28.2 pmol/lTSH<0.0150.4-4.6 pmol/l Thyroid function test at
admission The patients hemoglobin improved with two units of packed cells transfusion but the WBC and platelet count didn’t improve. On the
third day of admission, she developed a temperature of 102 degree Farenheit, pulse rate of 150-160/min, respiratory rate of 30/min and
oxygen saturation of 75-80% at 5 L/min of oxygen via face mask. On examination the patient was agitated and had diffuse crepitations over
both lung fields. On ECG monitoring multiple VPCs per minute was present. A Burch Wartofsky Score of 95 was calculated (Table 2). With the
impression of thyroid storm, the patient was started on hydrocortisone, oral propranolol 40 mg q6hrly (intravenous preparation not
available), and oral carbimazole 10 mg q8hrly. After 24 hours the patients pulse rate stabilized between 80–100 bpm, temperature was 99
degree farenheit and there were only few VPCs per minute. Propranolol was gradually tapered over a period of one week and her pulse rate
stabilized at 60 to 80 bpm. After starting carbimazole, her WBC and platelet counts started improving and became normal at discharge
(Table 3).Table 2 Burch Wartofsky score calculation Clinical and physical criteriaPointTemperature 102–102.9 degree F20Central Nervous
Effect (Mild Agitation)10Hepatogastrointestinal dysfunction (nausea, vomiting)10Cardiovascular Dysfunction Pulse rate > =140/min25Moderate
Bibasilar Rales10Arrythmia Present10Suggestive History Present10 Total points 95 Table 3 Investigations at admission and improvement of
pancytopenia with treatment Hematologic parametersDay of treatment123458Hemoglobin (gm %)7.499.69.611.311.6PCV
%22.926.729.229.235.135.7Total leukocyte count (/mm3)400034003100300031003900Platelets (/cumm)9100089000128000112000112000104000 Burch
Wartofsky score calculation Investigations at admission and improvement of pancytopenia with treatment The patient was advised for
radionuclide thyroid scan and further treatment. The patient had multinodular goiter (most likely toxic but radionuclide scanning wasn’t
done) with thyrotoxicosis, complicated with thyroid storm, pancytopenia and arrhythmias. All these symptoms resolved after treatment of
thyrotoxicosis. Anemia was likely due to the combined effects of both splenic injury and thyrotoxicosis. Decreased WBC and platelet counts
were most likely due to thyrotoxicosis as these resolved with treatment of the problem. The bone marrow showed mixed normocellular and few
hypercellular fragments. Thus, the bone marrow failure disorders, such as aplastic anemia and myelodysplasia could be ruled out. Drug-
induced pancytopenia was also unlikely since patient never took any drug prior to hospital visit. The peripheral blood did not show any
typical features of vitamin B12 deficiency such as macrocytosis or neutrophil hypersegmentation. Features of thyroid storm developed on the
third day of admission which improved with treatment. The pathogenesis of pancytopenia in hyperthyroidism is still poorly understood.
Immunological mechanisms have been suggested to be involved in reduction of life-span of blood cells and platelets . Two patients were
reported by Duquenne et al. who showed signs of macrophage activation with eosinophilia in their bone marrow, which were compatible with an
immuno-allergy reaction . Raina et al. described a case of pancytopenia with hypercellular bone marrow related to Graves’ disease . In
addition, antineutrophil antibodies and antiplatelet antibodies have been detected in the serum of patients with thyrotoxicosis . Shaw and
Mehta reported a case of post-bone marrow transplant pancytopenia which was related to hyperthyroidism . They postulated that thyroid
hormone may have a direct effect on hematopoiesis at a stage earlier than erythropoietic stem cell differentiation, disturb maturation and
differentiation of the pluripotent stem cells . A reduced marrow granulocyte reserve has also been described in association with
hyperthyroidism and attributed to the direct toxicity of the thyroid hormones . Pancytopenia can be a possible manifestation of
hyperthyroidism. Although the exact mechanism is still unclear, recovery from hyperthyroidism is associated with resolution of pancytopenia.
Thus any patient with unexplained pancytopenia should be investigated to rule out hyperthyroidism. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. This case describes an important though rare clinical association. Any patient with unexplained pancytopenia
should be investigated for thyroid dysfunction. Besides this is the first report which describes this association in a surgical patient.
Competing interests 1. The authors’ would like to disclose that the interpretation of data or presentation of information in this manuscript
hasn’t been influenced by their personal or financial relationship with other people or organizations. 2. The authors haven’t received
reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from an organization that may in any way gain or lose financially from the publication of the
article, either now or in the future. 3. The authors aren’t holding stocks or shares in an organization that may in any way gain or lose
financially from the publication of the article, either now or in the future. 4. The authors aren’t holding, or currently applying for,
patents relating to the content of the manuscript. 5. The authors aren’t receiving reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from an
organization that holds or has applied for patents relating to the content of the manuscript. Authors’ contributions PJ and BG carried out
the conception and design of the study. PJ and BKJ acquired the data. BKJ, BG and PJ analysed and interpreted the data. YPS critically
revised the manuscript and gave the final approval. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to express
sincere thanks to the patient and the patient party who stood tough and trusted us during the entire management period.
