Peutz–Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease with incomplete penetrance and variable expression caused by germline mutation of
serine threonine kinase 11/liver kinase B1; it is characterized by hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tract, mucocutaneous melanin
pigmentation, and increased predisposition to neoplasms. In Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, bilateral Sertoli cell testicular tumors cause endocrine
manifestations including gynecomastia and feminization. This study aimed to assess the role of breast ultrasound in the evaluation of the
effectiveness of an innovative surgical approach. This report presents a pair of European 9-year-old identical male twins with Peutz–Jeghers
syndrome, bilateral prepubertal gynecomastia, and testicular multifocal calcifications. Both twins were treated with anastrozole for 2
years. After finishing treatment, both underwent subcutaneous mastectomy performed by the “modified” Webster technique. Breast examination
and ultrasound were performed before and after the pharmacological and surgical treatment. A breast ultrasound scan before surgery showed
bilateral gynecomastia in both patients. No solid nodular or cystic formations were present on either side. After pharmacological therapy
and surgical glandular removal, a breast examination showed a significant reduction in breast volume; 1 year after surgery, a breast
ultrasound scan of both patients showed a total absence of glandular parenchyma, with muscle planes well represented. Breast examination and
ultrasound have proved to be a valid approach in the assessment of the treatment of prepubertal gynecomastia because they allow the efficacy
of the pharmacological and surgical treatment to be evaluated in a multidisciplinary approach to one of the most frequent endocrine
manifestations of Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. Peutz–Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant disease with incomplete penetrance and
variable expression [1, 2] caused by germline mutation of serine threonine kinase 11 (STK11/liver kinase B1, LKB1) [3, 4]. It is
characterized by increased predisposition to neoplasms and hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tract, and mucocutaneous melanin
pigmentation with high phenotypic variability. In PJS, high aromatase activity causes oversecretion of estrogen by bilateral Sertoli cell
testicular tumors (large-cell calcifying tumors) with advanced bone age, feminization and gynecomastia. Gynecomastia is a benign condition
characterized by enlargement of the male breast due to proliferation of glandular tissue; it is common in normal males during the neonatal
period, at early puberty, and with increasing age. Prepubertal gynecomastia is characterized by the presence of palpable uni- or bilateral
breast tissue in boys without other signs of sexual maturation. It could be related with excessive estrogen production by adrenal or
testicular tumors , also in rare syndromes such as PJS, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, or overexpression of aromatase or to the use of
drugs that affect androgen and estrogen production and metabolism. This case report describes the role of breast ultrasound in the surgical
management of prepubertal gynecomastia and subsequent follow-up in monozygotic twins with PJS and bilateral multifocal testicular
calcifications. A pair of European 9-year-old identical male twins (patients 1 and 2) with PJS presented with bilateral progressive
prepubertal gynecomastia over the course of 1 year. The family history showed that their father had PJS but no history of gynecomastia or
testicular calcification. Neither mutations nor deletions where found in the tumor suppressor gene LKB1/STK11, which is responsible for
approximately 60% of PJS cases. The twins arrived at our Department in 2008. A physical examination showed two boys with pigmented lesions
of the lips and bilateral gynecomastia with a diameter of 9cm in patient 1 and 7cm in patient 2, corresponding to a female Tanner stage B3.
Their testicular volume was 4mL bilaterally. The boys’ penises were infantile, and they had no pubic or axillary hair (pubic hair, PH1;
genitalia development, G1). The height of patient 1 was 129.2cm (25th percentile), with a growth velocity of 7cm/year (90th percentile for
age) and normal weight for height. The height of patient 2 was 125.5cm (10 to 25th percentile), with a growth velocity of 6cm/year (75 to
90th percentile) and normal weight for height. The target height was 173cm (−0.7 Standard Deviation Score, SDS). Hematic levels of sexual
hormones were constantly verified with specific reference to luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin,
testosterone, estrone and estradiol. Baseline endocrine investigations in patients 1 and 2 showed normal prepubertal serum concentrations of
testosterone, FSH, LH and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, as well as slightly elevated levels of estradiol, with normal levels of estrone.
Both boys were treated with the third-generation aromatase inhibitor, anastrozole, starting dose of 1mg orally once daily. The decision to
treat the boys with the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole had been implemented to reduce gynecomastia and to prevent the accelerating effect
of estrogen excess on skeletal maturation. Samples were obtained before the beginning of the anastrozole treatment, then after 1 and 2 years
of treatment, during 2-years follow-up evaluation, before and after 3 months subcutaneous mastectomy surgery. During the period of
anastrozole treatment, a reduction of gynecomastia was observed more in one twin than in the other. In particular, during the first year of
treatment, growth velocity decreased from 7 to 3cm and gynecomastia decreased from 9 to 4cm in diameter in patient 1, whereas growth
velocity decreased from 6.6 to 3cm/year and gynecomastia decreased from 7 to 3cm in diameter in patient 2. During the second year of
treatment, no changes in gynecomastia occurred, and growth velocity reverted to normal values for age in patient 1 (5cm/year), whereas it
remained below the normal value for age in patient 2 (3.5cm/year). After 2 years, a sharp reduction in growth velocity occurred for both
patients (although it was more pronounced in patient 2, with a growth velocity of 1.6cm/year, 3rd percentile), which prompted a reduction in
the anastrozole dose and then its withdrawal at the age of 11.5 years. After a washout period of 6 months, clinical reevaluation of both
twins showed regrowth of gynecomastia, corresponding to a female Tanner stage B3, with resumed tenderness of the breast to palpation
(Table 1, Figure 1).Table 1 Breast ultrasound monitoring of gynecomastia and growth before treatment (enrollment), during 2 years of
pharmacological treatment (first and second year), at pharmacological interruption (>2 years), and before and after surgical removal
EnrollmentPharmacological treatmentPharmacological interruptionBefore surgery1 month after surgery1 year after surgeryFirst yearSecond
year>2 years2 years 6 months Breast growth (cm/year) Patient 17355600Patient 26.633.51.63.600 Gynecomastia (cm) Patient 19444500Patient
27333600Figure 1 a) breast volume, b) breast growth in patients 1 and 2 at enrollment, first year, second year, after 2 years of medical
treatment, at 2 years and 6 months (after medical treatment interruption, before surgical treatment), and 1 month and 1 year after surgery.
In the vertical line we consider years of patients, from 0 to 18 years old. pz, patient; M, months; Y, years. Breast ultrasound monitoring
of gynecomastia and growth before treatment (enrollment), during 2 years of pharmacological treatment (first and second year), at
pharmacological interruption (>2 years), and before and after surgical removal a) breast volume, b) breast growth in patients 1 and 2 at
enrollment, first year, second year, after 2 years of medical treatment, at 2 years and 6 months (after medical treatment interruption,
before surgical treatment), and 1 month and 1 year after surgery. In the vertical line we consider years of patients, from 0 to 18 years
old. pz, patient; M, months; Y, years. To determine bone age, X-rays of each patient’s nondominant hand and wrist were analyzed by the TW2
method before anastrozole treatment was started, and after 1 year of treatment and 2 years of treatment. Bone age was 11.2 years in patient
1 and 10.9 years in patient 2, with an advance of approximately 2.5 years and an adult height prognosis of 157cm (−3 SDS) for patient 1 and
158.7cm (−2.8 SDS) for patient 2 (both below the target height). Ultrasound was performed using a Logiq S6 scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha,
WI, USA) with a multifrequency matrix-array linear transducer (7 to 14MHz) and a multifrequency convex transducer (3.5 to 5Mhz). A breast
ultrasound to assess palpable masses was performed during and after pharmacological treatment, before and after 1 month and 1 year from
subcutaneous mastectomy surgery. The examinations showed bilateral gynecomastia with typical hyperechoic fibroglandular tissue. No solid
nodular or cystic formations were present on either side. An abdominal ultrasound scan of their adrenal glands and a testicular ultrasound
scan were performed to analyze the presence of estrogen-producing adrenal tumor; a testicular ultrasound scan showed bilateral multifocal
calcifications. At the age of 13 years, the twins underwent gynecomastia surgical treatment, using the Webster technique. A skin incision
was made below the areola edge and the adipose and glandular tissues were significantly removed under direct vision from the skin at the top
and from the pectoral muscle at the bottom; the removed breast tissue was sent to a pathologist. The result was radical surgery (thus
avoiding recurrence) and a good aesthetic result. In both boys, an advancement flap of adipose tissue below the nipple–areola complex was
placed, in consideration of the underlying disorder, to avoid leaving a residual subareolar glandular parenchyma (Figures 2 and 3).Figure 2
Patient 1. Clinical preoperative breast view (a) and breast ultrasound (b,c) scan showing bilateral gynecomastia. No solid nodular or cystic
formations are present on either side; clinical postoperative breast view (d) and breast ultrasound (e,f) scan 1 year after surgery showing
a total absence of glandular parenchyma, with muscle planes well represented.Figure 3 Patient 2. Clinical preoperative breast view (a) and
breast ultrasound (b,c) scan showing bilateral gynecomastia. No solid nodular or cystic formations are present on either side; clinical
postoperative breast view (d) and breast ultrasound (e,f) scan 1 year after surgery showing a total absence of glandular parenchyma, with
muscle planes well represented. Patient 1. Clinical preoperative breast view (a) and breast ultrasound (b,c) scan showing bilateral
gynecomastia. No solid nodular or cystic formations are present on either side; clinical postoperative breast view (d) and breast ultrasound
(e,f) scan 1 year after surgery showing a total absence of glandular parenchyma, with muscle planes well represented. Patient 2. Clinical
preoperative breast view (a) and breast ultrasound (b,c) scan showing bilateral gynecomastia. No solid nodular or cystic formations are
present on either side; clinical postoperative breast view (d) and breast ultrasound (e,f) scan 1 year after surgery showing a total absence
of glandular parenchyma, with muscle planes well represented. Although the glandular tissue had been completely removed, this technique
allowed a good aesthetic result, thus avoiding depression of the nipple–areola complex, which would remain responsive to the circulating
estrogen. Both patients were satisfied with the result and had no functional impairment of their arms or reduction in nipple–areola complex
sensitivity. Wound healing was completed in 10 days, and scars were almost undetectable in both cases. The excessive removal of parenchyma
did not result in skin irregularities, avoiding any unnecessary subsequent treatment. Both patients received postoperative pain management
with painkillers according to their weight. The clinical course had no irregularities. No surgical infections or hematomas were reported.
Although the breast gland had been totally removed, both patients had good cutaneous retraction and no nipple or areola necrosis or
deformity, as confirmed by ultrasound picture control. Histologic findings confirmed their condition to be benign. After surgical glandular
removal, a breast examination showed a significant reduction in breast volume; 1 year after surgery, a breast ultrasound scan of both
patients showed a total absence of glandular parenchyma, with muscle planes well represented. A compressive medication was applied after
surgery with a chest bandage for 4 weeks. Analgesics were prescribed only in case of pain. Both boys were observed by surgeons 1 and 4 weeks
after surgery for removal of the bandage and to exclude the onset of hematomas, seromas, skin infections, keloids and pain. After surgery,
the twins were followed for an additional year for evaluation of sex hormone levels, growth curve and breast size. Gynecomastia is a
multifactorial disease, primarily dependent on the balance between free estradiol and free testosterone. Estrogen biosynthesis results from
the production of androgens from steroid precursors; therefore, an excess of endogenous estrogen can be a result of an increase in
substrate, aromatase activity, or both. An increase in the level of estrogen is the most common cause of imbalance. The most common causes
of gynecomastia are endocrinopathies, neoplasm-producing estrogens, human chorionic gonadotropin or aromatase, hyperaromatase syndrome and
only few cases of idiopathic prepubertal disease. The frequencies of some remaining causes have been estimated as follows: cirrhosis (8%),
primary hypogonadism (8%), testicular tumors (3%), secondary hypogonadism (2%), hyperthyroidism (1.5%), and renal disease (1%). Testicular
cancer (associated with both germ cell tumors and non-germ cell tumors) accounts for 1 to 1.5% of all male neoplasms. Although PJS
represents one of the genetic conditions predisposing to these types of tumors, it remains a rare condition . Our two patients with PJS with
large-cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors had prepubertal gynecomastia for approximately 1 year (Tanner stage 3) and had advanced bone age
from the increased level of serum estradiol. The treatment of prepubertal gynecomastia depends on its etiology. Medical therapy with an
aromatase inhibitor alone is not effective in reversing prepubertal gynecomastia. The initial florid stage, characterized by ductal
proliferation, can respond to medical treatment but, subsequently, glandular hyperplasia is replaced by progressive fibrosis and
hyalinization; when it causes painful or psychological disturbance, surgical removal of the breast glandular tissue is indicated [10, 14].
However, anastrozole represents the first noninvasive step of treatment in PJS and may be useful for delaying surgery in very young patients
to achieve an optimal aesthetic result. Plastic surgeons used a standard mastectomy through a semicircular incision within the margin of the
pigmented area of the areola to conceal the scar. The standard technique included positioning a 5- to 7-mm pad under the nipple to prevent
dermal adherence to the pectoralis fascia. To prevent possible recurrence, they totally removed the gland and set up an advancement flap of
adipose tissue to prevent adhesion of the nipple to the pectoralis fascia and its unaesthetic depression. In conclusion, gynecomastia is a
multifactorial disorder, and a correct evaluation must be performed to distinguish physiologic and pathologic causes. The history must
include testicular assessment symptoms of hepatic disease and alcohol consumption as well as family history. Physical examination and a
routine biochemical profile permit an acknowledgement and recognition of most underlying causes. Although severe gynecomastia is a rare
condition in the pediatric age, competence and expertise is necessary for the treatment of these patients. Breast examination and ultrasound
have proved to be a valid approach in the assessment of the treatment of prepubertal gynecomastia because they allow the efficacy of the
pharmacological and surgical treatment to be evaluated in a multidisciplinary approach to one of the most frequent endocrine manifestations
of PJS. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients’ mother for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Follicle-stimulating hormone Luteinizing hormone
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome Standard Deviation Score. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions GDG made substantial contributions to conception and design; TR made substantial contributions to acquisition of data, FDF
made substantial contributions to analysis of data, FS agrees to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions
related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved, GR made substantial contributions
to interpretation of data, RG gave final approval of the version to be published, GG has been involved in drafting the manuscript or
revising it critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We are greatly indebted to
Silvia Losco for language consultancy.
