Not available. Crystalloid inclusions are rarely encountered within the central nervous system (CNS). Aside from the more common Hirano
bodies and Rosenthal fibers, which occur within neurons and astrocytic processes, both being composed of cytoskeletal proteins, eosinophilic
crystalloid inclusions have been recently described within oligodendrocytes in a case of adult-onset, complicated form of hereditary spastic
paraplegia . However, crystalloid inclusions may also accumulate within macrophages referred to as crystal storing histiocytosis (CSH). CSH
is a rare condition, which most often occurs within the setting of lymphoproliferative disorders, in which immunoglobulins aggregate within
the cytoplasm of macrophages . Localized and generalized forms of CSH are distinguished based on the extent of organ involvement . While the
lymphoreticular system, bone marrow, kidney, and lung are most often affected, CNS presentation is extremely rare with 5 cases reported in
the literature, so far [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Herein, we add another case of a 56-year-old male patient, who presented with an intra-cerebral
tumor-like lesion. After a first stereotactic biopsy, which displayed only reactive changes including some unspecific infiltration by
macrophages, more extensive surgery was performed 8 months later. Upon histology, large collections of pleomorphic cells with
intracytoplasmic fibrillar and crystalloid inclusions (Figure 1A, B) were apparent. The immunoprofile with prominent reactivity for
macrophage-associated CD68 (Figure 1C) and lack of glial fibrillary acidic protein (Figure 1D) suggested the diagnosis of CSH. No previous
history of lymphoproliferative disease was stated in this patient. He was then referred to and treated at a foreign tertiary care center
without available clinical follow-up. In contrast to the previous cases of CNS CSH, which uniformly presented in young females, this is the
first case in a middle-aged male patient. All cases described so far share their presentation and restriction to the CNS (localized form of
CSH). Potential etiology and immunoglobulin composition of CNS CSH are discussed in detail by Orr et al . Given the hitherto limited
clinical experience with CNS CSH, the optimal treatment and prognosis remain to be defined. However, based on 4 patients with clinical
follow-up [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], a rather indolent disease course with stable disease following treatment of the underlying lymphoproliferative
disorder has been suggested . Hence, recognition of CNS CSH is important, as it warrants screening for an occult but treatable underlying
lymphoplasmacytic disorder. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
