Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 67 Final Diagnosis: Malignant fibrous histiocytoma Symptoms: Back pain • leg
weakness • weight loss Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: — Rare disease We present the extremely rare case of a 67-year-old
male with malignant fibrous histiocytoma, arising in the lumbar spine, demonstrated with radiological and pathological studies. The patient
and his relatives refused open surgical approach and we performed transpedicular vertebral corpus biopsy and vertebroplasty under spinal
anesthesia. His pathological result was malignant fibrous histiocytoma. The spine is a very uncommon site for malignant fibrous
histiocytoma. The management of malignant fibrous histiocytoma relies on the combination of maximum decompression surgery, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Total removal is unrealistic and diagnosis is difficult. The prognosis in terms of continuing neurological deficit after
surgery appears to be poor. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) is a soft-tissue sarcoma and a rare primary bone tumor that arises from
primitive mesenchymal cells, being capable of multi-directional differentiation. Usually the histiocytes are located in the metaphysis or
diaphysis of the long bones. MFH is aggressive with high rates of local recurrence and metastasis and the prognosis is poor, with 5–20 year
survival rates of 28–33% . Men are more frequently affected than women and occurrence peaks in the fifth decade . The vast majority of MFH
cases occur in the long bones such as the femur, tibia, and humerus. MFH with spinal involvement is rare, and the spine is a very uncommon
site of localization. Here we describe a case of MFH in a 67-year-old man referred for treatment of a lumbar spine mass, manifesting rapidly
progressive weakness of the legs and lower back pain. A 67-year-old man had lost 10 kg in weight in a month and presented with complaints of
back pain and rapidly progressive weakness of the legs. Neurological examination show that motor power was global 4/5 (manual test) and
sensation test scores decreased in the lower extremities. Knee and ankle jerks were increased and bilateral planter reflexes were
indifferent. The patient had anemia (Hb. 7.74 g/dl. Hct. 24.4%), hyperglycemia (blood glucose level 282 mg/dl), and he had high levels of
alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase – ALP: 209 U/L (30–128 mean), LDH 1254 U/L (0–248 mean), respectively. His symptoms were
progressive and a metastatic vertebral tumor suspected. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated compression fractures of L2-3-4 vertebral
bodies and L3 paraspinal mass (Figure 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of lumbar spine demonstrated a mass in the right paravertebral
area from L2-3-4. Axial MRI scan confirmed the extension of the tumor into the adjacent spinal canal through the neural foramina, forming an
extradural mass which resulted in the compression of right nerve roots (Figure 2A, 2B). The lumbar spine showed multifocal osteolytic
change. A meta-static vertebral tumor was first considered but systemic investigating using CT, MRI, and scintigraphy detected no extra
tumor. The patient underwent a resection of the paravertebral tumor by transpedicular vertebral corpus biopsy and vertebroplasty under
spinal anaesthesia. The tumor appeared as a whitish elastic, hard and hypovascular mass, tightly adhered to the transverse process and
compressing the foramen from the right ventrolateral side. The tumor did not bleed much. Near total resection was achieved. Vertebroplasty
was performed using calcium phosphate to palliate pain. Histological examination showed proliferation of pleomorphic spindle-shaped cells
with large irregular nuclei and hyper chromopsia with storiform pattern and collagenous stroma consistent with a diagnosis of the storiform-
pleomorphic type of MFH (Figure 3A–3C) After surgery, weakness of the lower extremities did not resolve completely and the patient could not
walk without support. He and his family refused radiotherapy and chemotherapy. He died 6 weeks later. Primary lumbar spine MFH is quite rare
. Most cases occurred in the thoracic spine and manifested as back pain . Neuroimaging showed purely lytic, expansive lesions with well-
defined margins, usually with cortical destruction and soft-tissue invasion, but without periosteal reaction or new bone formation. The
prognosis for primary spine MFH is dismal, and about half of the patients were dead within 15 months . MFH has been categorized into five
types. The histopathologic subtypes are storiform-pleomorphic, myxoid, inflammatory, giant cell, and angiomatoid variant. The MFH of the
spine tends to extensively invade paraspinal structures at multiple spinal levels, with aggressive osteolytic destruction in the vertebrae
resulting to locally huge-mass radiculopathy and myelopathy. Regardless of recent advancements in the diagnosis, treatment, and adjuvant
therapies, due to its biologically aggressive nature it frequently recurs at the primary site and metastasizes, which leads to a worse
prognosis. Differential diagnosis from metastatic lesion is always important for the vertebral tumors. However, no characteristic
neuroradiological features of spinal MFH have been reported, so histological diagnosis and exclusion of other lesions by systemic
investigation are necessary. In our case, preoperative imaging and intraoperative findings showed that the tumor was continuous with the
paravertebral soft tissue and systemic investigations for metastasis work-up detected no other lesions. Thus, our final diagnosis remained
MFH of spinal origin. This tumor is has a high propensity for local recurrence, so total resection with the vertebrectomy is the ideal.
However, in an emergency, maximum tumor resection with vertebrectomy is not always possible and decompression of the spinal cord, wide
laminectomy, stabilization, and vertebroplasty are essential to achieve a favorable neurological outcome . Maximum tumor resection is likely
to improve the prognosis . The effect of either chemotherapy or radiotherapy is presently unclear. Stabilization procedures including
vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty have further allowed palliation of pain and symptom relief from compression fractures . Prognostic factors
known to correlate with survival in patients with MFH include tumor grade, depth, size, metastatic status, patient age, and histological
subtype . Favorable prognostic factors include age less than 60 years, tumor size less than 5 cm, superficial location, low grade, the
absence of metastasis, and myxoid subtype in histology . Wide local excision of the skin for therapy is possible in most cases , but the
present case illustrates that total removal in the spine is unrealistic and diagnosis is difficult. The prognosis in terms of continuing
neurological deficit after surgery appears to be poor. Our patient presented to us in a very late stage and his general condition was very
poor. The patient refused radiotherapy an, chemotherapy. Prognostic factors of MFH are important, and early diagnosis and treatment is
important for MFH, as in other malignant tumors. We diagnosed MFH with transpedicular biopsy from the vertebral body. We think that
transpedicular biopsy may help establish the diagnosis in patients with poor general condition. Computed tomography showing compression
fractures of L2-3-4 vertebral bodies. (A, B) Magnetic resonance imaging showing the mass in the right paravertebral area from L2-3-4 and
extension of the tumor into the adjacent spinal canal through the neural foramina, forming an extradural mass. (A–C) H&E, vimentin, and
CD-68 staining showing storiform-pleomorphic type of MFH which had proliferation of pleomorphic spindle-shaped cells having large irregular
nuclei with hyper chromopsia with storiform pattern and collagenous stroma.
