Lactic acidosis is a well-known complication of the anti-hyperglycemic biguanide agent metformin, especially in peculiar but not rare
clinical conditions. Attempts to reduce the incidence of this adverse reaction have been enforced by national agencies over the years. The
Italian Medicines Agency recently released a safety recommendation on prescribing the drug and with regard to the existence of several
conditions that contraindicate drug continuation, such as dehydration, infection, hypotension, surgery or hyperosmolar contrast agent
infusion, but the recommendation does not mention the increased risk related to stoma. The present case report is, to our knowledge, the
first in the literature of metformin-associated lactic acidosis in a patient with a recently created ileostomy and low anterior resection
for rectal cancer. A 70-year-old Caucasian man who had undergone low anterior resection with total mesorectal excision and temporary loop
ileostomy creation at our institution returned to our department 30 days later because of nausea, vomiting, diffuse abdominal pain and
anuria of about 24 hours’ duration. During his physical examination, the patient appeared dehydrated and had tachypnea and a reduced level
of consciousness. His laboratory tests showed that he had acute kidney injury and severe lactic acidosis. An ileostomy puts patients at high
risk for output losses that can lead to dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities. The assessment of the losses through the stoma,
especially the ileostomy, should be added to the recommendations issued by pharmacovigilance societies. The present clinical case
illustrates the need for clinicians on surgical wards to carefully evaluate patients before resuming metformin therapy and to provide
appropriate information at discharge to patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who have undergone ileostomy. Furthermore, this case report
highlights the increasing need for more training of general physicians regarding both surgical and internal medicine problems that may arise
in the post-operative course after major surgery in patients with co-morbidities. Metformin is the recommended first-line therapy for most
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) . Despite its being generally safe and associated with a reduction of cardiovascular events,
diabetes-related endpoints and overall mortality , metformin may lead to a rare but extremely serious adverse reaction: metformin-associated
lactic acidosis (MALA). MALA is defined as a high anion gap metabolic acidosis with high circulating lactate levels and without
hypoperfusion (type B described by Cohen and Woods) . It is associated with a mortality rate up to 45% . On the basis of a suspected
increase in the incidence of MALA , the Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA) recently released and publicized a safety recommendation for
assessment of renal function in patients for whom the drug is prescribed and suspension of therapy in cases of dehydration, infection and
hypotension, as well as before surgery or diagnostic procedures involving hyperosmolar contrast agent infusion . A temporary ileostomy,
which is often created to protect low colorectal anastomoses after radical surgery for colorectal cancer (CRC), is a relatively simple
procedure and is usually well tolerated by the patient. However, it may cause loss of fluids and electrolytes, and this can be a life-
threatening condition in a patient taking metformin. In this context, we report a case of a patient with severe MALA that developed after
creation of a temporary loop ileostomy. To the best of our knowledge, no similar cases have been described in the literature. A 70-year-old
Caucasian man (weight: 75kg; height: 165cm) with T2DM, hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy was referred to our unit for CRC treatment.
His usual medications included metformin (3000mg/day), irbesartan/hydrochlorothiazide 150mg/12.5mg/day and tamsulosin (0.4mg/day). Ten weeks
after receiving pre-operative chemoradiotherapy, the patient underwent a low anterior rectal resection with a diverting ileostomy. Metformin
treatment was suspended 3 days before the operation. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. His renal function was normal; his
blood glucose was between 150mg/dl and 200mg/dl after a meal; and his stoma output was approximately 600ml/day. Metformin therapy was
resumed 5 days after surgery, when the patient returned to a normal diet. He was discharged to home in good condition on the ninth post-
operative day. Two weeks later, he returned to our department because of nausea, vomiting and diffuse abdominal pain. In the preceding days,
he had noticed an increased stoma output that required him to empty the stoma bag four or five times per day. He also referred to being
anuric for the preceding 24 hours. During his examination, the patient appeared dehydrated and had tachypnea and a reduced level of
consciousness. His blood pressure was 90/60mmHg, and his pulse rate was 90/min. His laboratory tests showed acute kidney injury (AKI)
(creatinine, 8.94mg/dl; blood urea nitrogen, 324mg/dl) with severe lactic acidosis (pH, 6.99; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 12mmHg;
base excess, -26.9 mM). Aggressive hydration with crystalloids and intravenous bicarbonate infusion was initiated. The patient’s internal
jugular vein was cannulated, and he was promptly transferred to the hemodialysis unit. Hemodialysis was performed for 6 hours and repeated
12 hours later for 3 hours using bicarbonate-buffered dialysate. His chemical profile and clinical condition then improved dramatically. His
acidosis resolved over the course of 24 hours; his spontaneous diuresis resumed after 48 hours; and his renal function recovered. The
patient was discharged 8 days after admission with a serum creatinine level of 2.5mg/dl and a blood urea nitrogen concentration of 50mg/dl.
His ileostomy was closed about 1 month later, and he did not experience any further similar episodes. At a follow-up examination almost 1
year later, he was well and disease-free. The incidence of CRC in older patients is increasing, resulting in a greater number of patients
who present with concomitant medical illnesses . In a meta-analysis published in 2005 , Larsson and colleagues showed a relationship between
T2DM and an increased risk of CRC in both women and men (relative risk: 1.30, 95% confidence interval: 1.20 to 1.40). Further studies have
shown that diabetes is associated with increased risk of CRC mortality [8, 9]. Because of the increasing incidence of its risk factors, the
global prevalence of T2DM is predicted to reach 5.4% (300 million people) by 2025 , and adverse reactions to drugs commonly prescribed for
this condition can be anticipated to increase accordingly. MALA is a rare condition. In the largest case series published in the literature
to date, the authors reported no more than dozens of episodes over years of observation . Nevertheless, taken together, all of the case
series point out the constant association of MALA with predisposing factors that in various ways affect metformin clearance or energy
metabolism, such as altered renal function, dehydration, other drug interactions, congestive heart failure, hepatic failure, respiratory
failure and drug overdose . A common feature in different case series is that the prognostic effect of drug accumulation is less important
than the seriousness of the underlying medical condition. Our present case report is, to the best of our knowledge, the first in the
literature of MALA in a patient with a recently created ileostomy and low anterior resection for CRC. After ileostomy creation, output
usually increases until the third or fourth day post-operatively. The period between the fourth and sixth days post-surgery are
characterized by stabilizing output. A 7-week period of steady decrease in volume and thickening of output ensues [11, 12]. Dehydration and
electrolyte derangements most frequently occur in the early post-operative period. In a recent study, dehydration was found to be the most
frequent indication for hospital readmission after diverting ileostomy creation . In our patient, it is likely that ileostomy output
remained high after discharge without an oral intake adequate to offset losses. The patient was also receiving diuretics, which certainly
contributed to a condition of severe dehydration and electrolyte depletion. Furthermore, the patient continued to take metformin despite
having become unwell. Dehydration led to pre-renal AKI, which was likely worsened by the concomitant consumption of irbesartan, resulting in
accumulation of the drug, hypotension and consequent severe lactic acidosis. Safety recommendations released by the AIFA in July 2011
dictate metformin contraindications and recommend assessing renal function when the drug is prescribed. They also highlight the existence of
conditions that contraindicate drug continuation, such as dehydration, infections, hypotension, surgery or hyperosmolar contrast agent
infusion, but they do not mention the increased risk related to a stoma. Surgery poses special challenges to patients with diabetes because
of the stress response and interruption of food intake. Although ileostomy cannot be considered a direct cause of MALA, it is certainly a
high-risk condition for output losses that often lead to dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, vitamin deficiencies and malnutrition. For
these reasons, the assessment of the losses through the stoma should be added to the recommendations issued by pharmacovigilance societies.
In this setting, ordinary recommendations regarding ongoing medical therapies (anti-hypertensive and diuretic treatment in our patient)
should be followed with particular attention to eventual discontinuation of drugs that put the patient at risk for dehydration or AKI. The
case that we report illustrates the need for clinicians on surgical wards to take special care in using metformin to treat patients with
T2DM who have ileostomies. A careful evaluation is advisable before the resumption of metformin therapy in these patients, and appropriate
information should be given to the patient at discharge. Another important aspect that emerges from our case report is the increasingly
urgent need for more training of general physicians regarding both surgical and internal medicine problems that may arise in the post-
operative course after major surgery in patients with comorbidities. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Italian Medicines Agency
Acute kidney injury Colorectal cancer Metformin-associated lactic acidosis Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CM personally looked after the patient and made the diagnosis of metformin-
associated lactic acidosis. She collected all clinical information necessary to prepare this case report, and she also performed the
literature search regarding the surgical aspects and contributed to the writing of the manuscript. PM made the diagnosis of metformin-
associated lactic acidosis and treated the patient. He performed the literature search regarding the medical aspects and contributed to the
writing of the manuscript. LZ was involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. MS contributed to the
writing of the manuscript. AR was involved in drafting the manuscript. FS conceived of the study, participated in its design and
coordination and helped in drafting the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Giulia Dessì
for her collaboration in the collection of data related to the hemodialysis.
