A liposarcoma is the most common type of soft tissue sarcoma, and most liposarcomas are malignant. The extremities are the most common site
for liposarcomas. There are 5 histologic types of liposarcoma, as follows: well differentiated; myxoid; round cell; pleomorphic; and
dedifferentiated. Myxoid liposarcomas (MLSs) represent a subgroup of liposarcomas. There has been no report of MLSs in the abdominal wall.
We report a rare case of a MLS of a 43-year-old male who presented with tensile force on the abdominal wall. Computed tomography (CT) found
a tumor in abdominal wall. There was no other abnormal symptom and the laboratory testing was also unusual. At last, the tumor was
successfully excised, which was diagnosed MLSs in pathology. Following standard principles, after complete excision, the patient received
radiotherapy. The patient was followed up for 8 month and no disease recurrence was identified. MLSs are rarely seen in the clinic,
irrespective of the presenting signs, but also based on histologic features. The aim of this report was to present the differential
diagnosis of an abdominal wall mass, and to remind us of MLSs. Soft tissue sarcomas (STSs) are rare mesenchymal tumors, which originate in
non-epithelial connective tissue sources; liposarcomas are the most common STS. The incidence of liposarcoma peaks between 40 and 60 years
of age.1 Five histopathologic subgroups of liposarcomas have been identified, as follows: well differentiated; myxoid; round cell;
dedifferentiated; and pleomorphic variants.2 Liposarcomas most commonly involve the extremities, especially the thighs and buttocks, and
sometimes the retroperitoneum.1 There have been no reports of liposarcomas involving the abdominal wall. A 43-year-old man presented with a
mass in the abdominal wall of 3 months duration, which increased in size rapidly from the size of a soybean. The patient experienced tensile
force on the abdominal wall as the mass enlarged; however, there was no direct pain involving the mass and no other symptoms. On physical
examination, the mass was tender and mobile, and had a diameter of approximately 7 cm. Laboratory testing (blood routine and biochemical
examination, urinalysis) revealed normal results. Tumor markers, such as CEA, CA1 9-9, and CA-125, were within the normal ranges. A computed
tomography (CT) scan showed the tumor to involve the subcutaneous to muscular layers, with a uniform density and a clear tunica. A general
surgeon collaborated with a plastic surgeon to excise the tumor widely, and the surgical margins were clear. The pathologic analysis
reported a 7 cm × 6 cm × 4 cm tumor that consisted of myxoid material and had a fish- and meat-like appearance (Figure 1); thus, the
diagnosis of a myxoid liposarcoma was made. Microscopically, the tumor had cystic changes (Figure 2). Immunohistochemistry revealed the
following: CK (−); vimentin (+); S-100 (partly +); CD34 (+); and SMA (+). The patient subsequently received adjuvant radiotherapy at a dose
of 60 Gy. There were no recurrences in the following 6 months; nevertheless, long-term follow-up in the clinic was recommended. Computed
tomography (CT) scan showed the tumor involved the subcutaneous to muscular layers, and had uniform density and a clear tunica. Tumor with
cystic changes. Liposarcomas are rare malignant tumors of mesenchymal origin and are the most common soft tissue neoplasms in adults,
accounting for 16–18% of all soft tissue tumors.3 Liposarcomas may arise in any fat region, and can be divided into 5 groups on the basis of
the histologic pattern, as follows: well differentiated; myxoid; round cell; pleomorphic; and dedifferentiated.3,4 Myxoid liposarcomas
(MLSs) are a subgroup of liposarcomas, and are the second most common subtype of liposarcoma, accounting for 40% of all liposarcomas.5 MLSs
may spread to the following tissues: serosal membranes; the enterocoelia; distant soft tissues; and bones.4 The incidence of MLSs is high
during the fourth and fifth decades of life, and there is no gender predilection. Most MLSs (more than two-thirds) occur in the lower limbs,
such as the thighs, and rarely occur in the retroperitoneum.4 In most cases (approximately 95%), karyotypic aberrations of MLSs involve t
(12; 16) (q13; p11) fusing the DDIT3 gene on 12q13 with the FUS gene on 16p11; in other cases (approximately 5%), karyotypic aberrations of
MLSs involve t (12; 22) (q13; q12) fusing DDIT3 with EWSR1 on 22q12.6 We report a rare case of a MLS in the abdominal wall, a finding, which
has not been previously reported. The tumor was not painful and progressively increased in size; nevertheless, the patient remained
asymptomatic. Based on a CT, the size of tumor was measured and a cystic space-occupying lesion was noted, which was important to know pre-
operatively; all other findings were normal. Benign masses, such as lipomas, angiolipomas, leiomyomas, or neurilemmomas, were considered and
the mass was completely excised by a general surgeon and a plastic surgeon; there was a clear surgical margin. Based on immunohistochemistry
CK (−), vimentin (+), S-100 (partly +), CD34 (+), and SMA (+), the diagnosis of a MLS was established. In the current patient, the mass was
thought to be benign pre-operatively, so an accurate diagnosis was needed. Although chest X-ray, abdominal X-ray, ultrasound, CT, and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are common examinations, surgery or biopsy is the most reliable method for making a diagnosis. Pathologic
evaluation based on the surgical specimen is the gold standard; however, it is preferred to determine the character of the tumor by biopsy
so that surgeons can evaluate the risk and difficulty involved. When diagnosing a liposarcoma, the subtypes are closely related to the
prognosis. Therefore, it is important to perform a histologic examination because liposarcomas have different probabilities of local
recurrence and distant metastasis.3 For treatment of the current patient, complete excision of the mass was the most optimal choice. MLSs
are a common subtype of liposarcoma. Local recurrences are frequent and the rate of malignancy is low.5 Excision of some MLSs does not
always yield clear surgical margins. There are some reports to demonstrate that MLSs are radiosensitive, whether pre-, intra-, or post-
operative.7 The optimal radiation dose may be 50 Gy in the neoadjuvant setting and 60 Gy in the adjuvant setting.7 In the current case,
although the tumor was completely excised, the recommendation was to undergo radiotherapy (60 Gy) to strengthen the treatment effect and
reduce the incidence of recurrence. Post-operatively, the patient has been healthy for 8 months. Follow-up surveillance will continue. MLSs
are rare soft tissue malignancies. MLSs in the abdominal wall are extremely rare tumors, and have not been previously reported. Pathologic
evaluation of the surgical specimen is the gold standard. Complete excision is the most effective therapeutic method, and radiotherapy is
also a good approach to treat patients in which clear surgical margins were not achieved. We report this case to avoid misdiagnosis and sub-
optimal treatment. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, MLSs = myxoid liposarcomas, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, STSs = soft tissue
sarcomas. Zhe Fan and Xiao Feng Tian contributed equally to this work. There is no funding supported. The authors declare that there is no
conflict of interests regarding the publication of this paper.
