Goserelin plus aromatase inhibitors (AI) have already been used in male advanced breast cancer, but the cases that fulvestrantin male breast
cancer are rare. Here we report a case of long-term (3 years) response to Goserelin plus continuing endocrine treatments given for a male
advanced breast cancer. The patient prolongs his life with high life quality, and has more time with his family. Goserelin plus endocrine
treatments may benefit male breast cancer. Breast cancer in men is relatively rare, and most breast cancers in men are estrogen
receptor/progesterone receptor positive. Tamoxifen remains the standard adjuvant treatment and is also the mainstay first-line treatment for
advanced disease. However, the role of AI and fulvestrant remains controversial. We have already used goserelin plus aromatase inhibitors
(AI) in male advanced breast cancer, but the cases in which fulvestrant has been used in male breast cancer are rare. A 44-year-old man was
diagnosed with a left breast cancer (pT1N1M0) after left modified radical mastectomy in local hospital. The tumor was ER-positive, PgR-
negative, and HER-2-negative as evaluated by immunohistochemistry. The patient received CAF(Cytoxan+doxorubicin+5-Fu) adjuvant chemotherapy
with six cycles, and tamoxifen was administered for 3 years. In 2008, metastasis was found in the sternum and scapula by skeleton
ECT(emission computed tomography) scan. Sternum dissection was carried out followed by radiotherapy (60 Gy total dose), and two cycles of
chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin were given, followed by four cycles of docetaxel and capecitabine, and monthly Zoledronic acid.
Letrozole was started as the first-line endocrine treatment, but discontinued after 7 months because of disease progression. In October
2009, the patient went to our hospital and was diagnosed with multiple bone and lung metastases on chest computed tomography (CT). He
received Goserelin plus anastrozole as a second-line endocrine treatment, which resulted in stable disease for 12 months prior to
progression. Goserelin plus exemestanewas started as a third-line endocrine treatment, which also resulted in stable disease for 11 months.
He received 10 months of medroxyprogesterone prior to further progression of lung disease. In August 2012, Goserelin plus fulvestrant(500
mg/d,1,250 mg intramuscular monthly)was initiated as the fifth-line endocrine treatment. The lung metastasis shrank after 2 months and the
patient is still on treatment. Detailed treatment information is given Table 1.Table 1 Patient’s treatment after metastasis Treatment
lineStart and stop time, year/monthSites of metastasisTherapeutic scheduleBest efficacyTTP1st2008/8 to 2008/10BoneDocetaxel + cisplatinSDTTP
= 2 months2nd2008/10 to 2008/12BoneDocetaxel + capecitabineSDTTP = 4 months3rd2009/3 to 2009/10BoneLetrozoleSDTTP = 7 months4th2009/10 to
2010/10Bone,lungGoserelin + anastrozoleSDTTP = 12 months5th2010/10 to 2011/9Bone,lungGoserelin + exemestaneSDTTP = 11 months6th2011/9 to
2012/7Bone,lungMedroxyprogesteroneSDTTP = 10 months7th2012/8 to 2013/2Bone,lungGoserelin + fulvestrantSD6+ months SD stable disease, TTP
time to progression. Patient’s treatment after metastasis SD stable disease, TTP time to progression. Male breast cancer is rare, accounting
for 1% of all breast cancer, and is also rare in male malignant tumors. Endocrine treatments are important in hormone-receptor-positive male
breast cancer. Tamoxifen remains the gold-standard adjuvant treatment. Anastrozole, letrozolea and exemestane as AI can inhibit the action
of the enzyme aromatase, which converts androgens into estrogens by a process called aromatization, therefore are used in the treatment of
breast cancer. Goserelin is an injectable gonadotropin-releasing hormone superagonist, also known as a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone
(LHRH) agonist, and is used to suppress production of the sex hormones (testosterone and estrogen). For male breast cancer, goserelin,which
suppresses production of testosterone, may be better for the effect of AI. Medroxyprogesterone is a potent full agonist of the AR(androgen
receptor) by hypothalamus pituitary adrenal axis suppression. Its activation of the AR has been shown to play an important and major role in
its antigonadotropic effects and in its beneficial effects against breast cancer. This patient was treated with goserelin plus AI and
maintained long-term clinical benefit. To date there has been little clinical study onthe subsequent treatment after disease progression
following AI treatment for male breast cancer. Fulvestrant is novel steroidal ER antagonist lacking agonist effects. By covalent binding to
the ER, receptors are rapidly downregulated, resulting in a decrease of cellular ER levels and complete abrogation of estrogen-sensitive
gene transcription .In postmenopausal women, fulvestrant has been shown to be effective and safe in patients in whom tamoxifen or AI have
failed . At present, some clinical studies of fulvestrant used in male breast cancer have been reported . However, endocrine treatment with
Goserelin plus fulvestrant for male breast cancer has not been reported in the literature so far. Our patient is a 44-year-old man, so we
thought Goserelin,which suppresses production of testosterone may be beneficial with fulvestrant. He has hormone-dependent breast cancer,
and sustainable endocrine treatments have achieved long-lasting clinical benefit (3 years). Since 2009, the patient was under easy endocrine
treatments, with good tolerability, avoiding adverse effects of chemotherapy, and improved quality of life. He had more time with his family
and work in society.Our oncologist proposes that the treatment for advanced breast cancer should prolong survival, maintain quality of life,
and make the patient happy. For male hormone-positive breast cancer goserelin plus AI or fulvestrant maybe good choices, especially the
patient is hormone-sensitive. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. aromatase
inhibitors estrogen receptor progesterone receptor. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions JH wrote the report, revised and submitted the manuscript for publication. WT helped to gather the patient’s information and
revised the manuscript. JZF helped with editing the report. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. Wang Tao (307 hospital)
helped to gather the patient’s information.
