Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 9 Final Diagnosis: Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis Symptoms: —
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Ortopantomography Specialty: Dentistry Rare disease Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (HFTC)
is to a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cutaneous and sub-cutaneous calcified masses, usually adjacent to large joints.
The aim of the current study was to report on the clinico-pathological features of a patient with HFCT, with emphasis on alterations in the
jawbones and teeth and the subsequent therapeutic interventions. A 13-year-old male patient with HFTC diagnosis came to our attention for
dental anomalies and maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. OPT highlighted multiple impacted teeth, short and bulbous teeth, and pulp chamber
and canal obliterations. Lateral cephalometric radiograms pointed out retrusion of both jaws, skeletal class II malocclusion, and deep-bite.
He underwent orthopedic, orthodontic, conservative, and surgical treatments, allowing the correction of maxillo-facial and dental
abnormalities and dysmorphisms without adverse effects. The surgical samples were sent for conventional and confocal laser scanning
microscope (CLSM) histopathological examination, which highlighted several metaplastic micro- and macro-calcifications in the soft tissues,
and typical islands of homogenous, non-tubular, dentino-osteoid calcified structures in dentinal tissues. The management of maxillo-facial
abnormalities in patients affected by HFTC is very difficult and, requires a combined therapeutic approach. To date, very few indications
have been published in the literature. Familial tumoral calcinosis (FTC) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of inherited
disorders characterized by cutaneous and sub-cutaneous calcified masses, usually adjacent to large joints, such as hips, shoulders, and
elbows . FTC is an extremely rare condition, occurring without sex predilection, which has been mainly reported in patients from Africa and
the Middle East and, to a lesser extent, in white individuals . Although it was initially reported as an inherited, autosomal, dominant
disease , more recent studies established that all forms of FTC show autosomal recessive inheritance . Smack et al. first described
normophosphatemic (NFTC) and hyperphosphatemic (HFTC) variants in 1996. NFTC seems to be caused by missense mutations in SAMD9 and initially
manifests with non-specific erythematous rash and mucosal inflammation during the first year of life . Inflammatory manifestations in the
oral cavity (e.g., gingivitis) can be particularly debilitating . The erythematous rash is usually followed by rapid development of
calcified nodules with ulceration of the overlying skin and chalky exudate. NFTC occurs in the range of normal circulating levels of
phosphate (2.5–4.5 mg/dl), as well as normal renal and intestinal resorption of phosphate . Unremitting pain and infections are the major
causes of morbidity. NFTC may resemble dystrophic calcinosis, an acquired form of skin calcinosis possibly complicating vascular diseases,
cancer, or autoimmune disorders, in which calcifications occur as a consequence of prior tissue inflammation . HFTC was initially associated
with mutations in GALNT3 (2q24-q31), a gene encoding for a glycosyltransferase that plays a major role in regulating phosphate levels
(phosphate homeostasis). The GALNT3 protein regulates the activity of the protein fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), produced by
osteocytes and inducing decreased renal phosphate resorption. More than 10 mutations have so far been reported in GALNT3, all resulting in a
loss of function. Both familial and sporadic forms of HFTC have been recognized and GALNT3 mutations having been identified in most
instances and associated with loss of function of FGF23. Recent studies in patients without GALNT3 alterations demonstrated the occurrence
of FGF23recessive mutations or missense mutations of KL, a gene encoding for the klotho protein, also involved in the FGF23 signaling
pathway. All such conditions result in clinical manifestations closely resembling HFTC . HFTC generally is characterized by relatively late
onset during the first to the third decade of life , and slowly growing calcified masses with predilection for the peri-articular tissues
overlying large joints, the hip being more frequently involved. The calcified masses are asymptomatic, but progressively grow in a pseudo-
neoplastic fashion, thus causing ulcers, pain, and secondary infections, which may occasionally become fatal. HFTC patients may also have
pulmonary hypertension and lung restrictive diseases . HFTC patients invariably have increased levels of circulating phosphate (>5–7 mg/dl)
due to decreased fractional phosphate excretion through the renal proximal tubules and increased intestinal resorption . Calcium serum
levels usually are within the normal range, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin-D levels may be normal or inappropriately increased . Dental
manifestations, including pulp calcifications and obliteration of the pulp cavity, although occasionally reported, may be clinically
prominent . HFTC may simulate metastatic calcinosis, another acquired form of calcinosis, characterized by the deposition of calcified
material and occasionally detected in patients with chronic renal failure, hyperparathyroidism, or sarcoidosis . Morphologically, pseudo-
tumoral calcification seem to develop in 2 major stages: an active phase, characterized by multinucleated giant cells and macrophages
surrounding calcified deposits in the dermis, and a subsequent chronic or inactive phase, associated with prominent collagenous deposition .
Biochemical analyses of extruded calcified masses indicated that they are mainly composed of calcium hydroxyapatite, including amorphous
calcium carbonate and phosphate . An extensive list of therapeutic approaches can be found in the literature, the efficacy of which has
never been definitively established. Steroids, colchicine, and aluminum hydroxide have been used, especially in the past , while successful
treatment with diltiazem, a calcium channel blocker, has been reported in a few cases . Bisphosphonates have also been occasionally and
effectively administered . Nevertheless, large or painful calcified masses may require surgical removal or laser therapy . The aim of the
current study was to report the clinico-pathological features of a patient with HFTC, with emphasis on alterations of the jawbones and
teeth, and the subsequent therapeutic interventions. A 13-year-old male patient, who had been diagnosed with HFTC at the age of 9, came to
our attention in the Oral Surgery Unit of the University of Bari Aldo Moro. His medical history showed the initial onset at the age of 7 and
was characterized by long-standing night leg pain that was resistant to NSAID therapy. Subsequently, the patient developed mobile calcified
masses in both hips and left elbow, which impaired joint mobility (Figure 1). Based on previous radiological and CT studies, which
highlighted intra- and peri-articular radiolucent/radiopaque lesions (Figure 2), the provisional diagnoses of ossifying fibroma,
osteogenesis imperfecta, and chronic osteomyelitis had been proposed. Following biochemical blood tests showing increased levels of
phosphate (7,6 mg/dl) and parathyroid hormone (77.4 pg/ml), the diagnosis of HFTC was proposed and subsequently confirmed by the genetic
test, which detected a homozygous transition mutation of the first GALNT3 intron in which the original A-T base pair was replaced by G-C.
Molecular analyses extended to the parents showed that both the mother and father presented the same heterozygous mutation of the GALNT3
gene. The patient was subsequently treated by lanthanum carbonate hydrate (750 mg/die) and sodium ibandronate (150 mg once a month), which
considerably reduced the size of the calcified nodules that were surgically removed. Following hospital admission, at oral examination we
noticed several dental anomalies, such as enamel hypoplasia, maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia, and crossbite (Figure 3).
Orthopantomography (OPT) highlighted multiple impacted teeth (teeth 13, 23, 33, and 43), short and bulbous teeth, and pulp chamber and canal
obliterations (Figure 4). Lateral cephalometric radiogram and Roth-Jarabak cephalometric analysis revealed retrusion of both jaws (SNA
angle: 79°, SNB angle: 74.8°), skeletal class II malocclusion (ANB angle: 4.2°), and dental deep-bite. The patient, after providing informed
consent for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures and possible use of biologic samples for research purposes, underwent conservative
treatment consisting of dental composite sealing because to possibly decreased tooth decay risk due to enamel anomalies. Subsequently, we
performed orthopedic treatments consisting of rapid palatal expansion to correct maxillary hypoplasia on the coronal plane and orthodontic
treatments using a lingual arch to protrude the lower incisors and brackets on teeth buccal surfaces with the Straight Wire technique, using
round nickel-titanium wires with small diameter. During orthodontic treatment and after bisphosphonates therapy discontinuation, the patient
underwent surgical dental extraction (teeth 38, 48, and the impacted 43) and buccal gingivectomy in 43 region after extraction to restore
gingival anatomy. Both dental and soft tissue surgical samples were sent for histological examination. The orthodontic treatment lasted
about 3 years and, at the end, retainers were applied on both the upper and lower jaws to hold tooth position. At the end of the orthodontic
therapy, extraction of both the impacted upper canines with associated cysts, enucleation, and extraction of decayed 47 were performed; the
patient had 37 spontaneous exfoliations due to the presence of root anomalies; these specimens were also sent for histological examination.
All samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 48 h; subsequently, the teeth were divided into 2 parts, one of which was decalcified in
Mielodec™, paraffin-embedded, and stained with hematoxylin-eosin and Picrosirius red, along with soft tissue samples. Undecalcified teeth
were dehydrated in an ascending series of ethanol, infiltrated with propylene-oxide and Epon-Araldite resin, embedded in Epon-Araldite, and
cut in 8–12-µm–thick sections with both an automatic rotative and a manual system of grinding, with water cooling. Histological examination
was done using a Nikon Eclipse E600 microscope (Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with Argon-ion and Helium-Neon lasers emitting at
488 and 543 nm wavelengths, which allows both optical and confocal laser scanning analyses. The Nikon EZ C1 software (Nikon Corporation,
ver. 2.10 Coord Automatisering) was used for bi-dimensional image processing. Orthopedic-orthodontic treatments associated with extraction
of impacted or abnormal teeth allowed the correction of skeletal class II by extension of the mandible and teeth alignment, thus achieving
dental class I (Figures 5 and 6). Relevant adverse effects such as root resorption or osteonecrosis of the jaws were not noticed.
Conventional histological examination of soft tissue specimens showed several metaplastic micro and macro-calcification with different
grades of mineralization and aggregates in spherules in the surrounding connective tissue. At higher magnification we noticed the presence
of calcified deposits in the context of minute nerve bundles of the buccal mucosa (Figure 7A, 7B). Microscopically, dental samples were
characterized by typical islands of homogenous, non-tubular, dentino-osteoid calcified structures in dentinal tissues (Figure 8A). CSLM
showed dentinal dysplasia with osteoid-like material intermingled with remnants of mature mucous connective tissue (Figure 8B). Familial
tumoral calcinosis (FTC) is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by progressive deposition of calcium phosphate
crystals in periarticular spaces and soft tissues . Teutschlaender mentioned 2 French dermatologists, Giard and Duret, as the first to
clinically describe FTC in 1898 and he himself described the same condition under the name of lipocalcinogranulomatosis in 1935. The current
term, tumoral calcinosis, was proposed by Inclan et al. in 1943 and subsequently was widely adopted. FTC can occur in the setting of
hyperphosphatemia (HFTC) or normophosphatemia (NFTC), the former resulting from distinct gene mutations involving FGF23, the FGF-23
glycosylating enzyme GALNT3, and the FGF23 co-receptor α-klotho (αKL) . Clinically, HFTC is characterized by slowly growing calcified
masses, mainly developing at periarticular sites, with predilection for the skin areas overlying large joints, particularly the hips. These
lesions initially are asymptomatic but then become painful and may cause limitation of joint movements following increase in size (up to 1.5
kg). Ulceration may induce pain and is occasionally associated with secondary infections . In the case reported here, the patient had long-
standing night leg pain resistant to NSAID therapy, a still unreported sign of this disease. Furthermore, we also noticed maxillary and
mandibular hypoplasia associated with dysmorphisms on coronal, axial, and sagittal planes, impacted teeth and other tooth anomalies such as
short and bulbous shape, and pulp chamber and canal obliteration. While teeth anomalies have been occasionally reported , we were unable to
find previous descriptions of the complex dysmorphic features detected in the current case. Patients affected by HFTC usually manifest
hyperphosphatemia (7 mg/dl in the current case) due to increased intestinal and renal phosphate resorption , normo-calcemia, and normal or
increased levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin-D . The differential diagnosis of HFTC includes: NFTC, in which the phosphate serum levels are
lower and the calcium deposits are smaller; metastatic calcinosis, in which patients also show chronic renal failure, hyperparathyroidism
and sarcoidosis; and hyperostosis-hyperphosphatemia syndrome (HHS). As GALNT3 mutations are present also in HHS , it may represent a
different phenotypic expression of HFTC showing preferential bone involvement and lack of ectopic calcifications due to extra-articular
calcium deposits. Nevertheless, the skeletal and extra-skeletal manifestations and the biochemical alterations of the previously mentioned
diseases are rather unspecific, thus suggesting that genetic analyses may be necessary to distinguish HFTC from related disorders.
Morphologically, calcified pseudo-tumoral masses in HFTC seem to develop in a 2-step process: a phagic phase, involving multinucleated giant
cells and macrophages surrounding the calcified deposits in the peri-articular soft tissues; and a chronic or inactive phase associated with
dense fibrous tissue deposition . Conventional histological examination of the soft tissue specimens showed several metaplastic micro-and
macro-calcifications, with variable mineralization, and aggregates in spherules in the surrounding connective tissues. At higher
magnification, we noticed calcified deposits in the small nerve bundles of the buccal mucosa. Microscopically, the dental samples were
characterized by typical islands of homogenous, non-tubular, dentino-osteoid calcified structures in dentinal tissues. CSLM showed dentinal
dysplasia with osteoid-like material, intermingled with remnants of mature mucous connective tissue. Surgical removal or laser therapy may
be indicated for cosmetic purposes or pain relief . Medical treatments are mostly based on limited clinical evidence and may be inconsistent
or frustrating . They are generally aimed at decreasing intestinal absorption of phosphates and mostly consist of dietary phosphate
deprivation combined with aluminum and magnesium-based phosphate binders. Long-term treatments with acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase
inhibitor with phosphaturic effects , resulted in inconstant resolution of larger HFTC lesions [35, 36], while successful treatments with
diltiazem, a calcium channel blocker, or bisphosphonates have been reported in a few cases . In addition, experimental medical treatments
consisting of FGF23 or FGF23-agonists have been proposed in animal models to possibly increase phosphate renal excretion and lower serum
phosphate; if proven effective, such treatments may be used in subjects with GALNT3 or FGF23 mutations . Based on the case reported here,
the administration of lanthanum carbonate hydrate (750 mg/die) and sodium ibandronate (150 mg once a month) induced decrease in size of the
calcified nodules, which required subsequent surgical removal to achieve proper articular function. The management of maxillo-facial
abnormalities in patients with HFTC was made difficult by the multiplicity and diversity of tooth alterations, the simultaneous
disregulation of bone metabolism, and the concurrent drug therapies. The presence of enamel anomalies increased caries risk, bulbous roots,
and pulp calcifications did not allow endodontic treatments of caries complications and the young age of the patient contraindicated the
extraction of permanent teeth, thus suggesting the application of dental sealants for caries prevention as a better treatment option. In
addition, orthopedic-orthodontic treatments were difficult as the shorter bulbous dental roots hindered the use of conventional forces and
promoted the use of continuous forces of lower strength to possibly avoid adverse effects such as root resorption. Finally, surgical
treatment, including the extraction of impacted teeth, required discontinuation of oral bisphosphonates therapy to avoid severe, well-known,
and frequent complications such as osteonecrosis of the jaws. In our patient we did not observe surgical treatment failure or adverse
effects by observing a “drug-holiday” of at least 3 months before and after surgery. The management of maxillo-facial abnormalities in
patients with hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis is very difficult, requires a combined therapeutic approach and, to date, very few
indications have been published and accepted in the literature. Nevertheless, treatment guidelines are a major goal to possibly improve
quality of life for these patients. We acknowledge the participation of the study patient and his family. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no conflicting financial interests. Clinical examination. Mobile calcified masses in both hips. Right hip
radiological examination. Intra- and periarticular radiolucent/radiopaque lesions. Oral examination. Dental anomalies such as enamel
hypoplasia, malocclusion as lower dental overcrowding and crossbite of the 2.2. Pre-treatment OPT. Multiple impacted teeth (1.3, 2.3, 3.3,
and 4.3), short and bulbous roots, and pulp chamber and canal obliterations. Clinical photograph at the end of the orthopedic, orthodontic,
conservative, and surgical treatments. Teeth alignment and achievement of dental class I. Post-treatment OPT. Teeth alignment and post-
orthodontic canine-to-canine bonded retainer on the lower jaw. Soft tissues conventional histological examination. (A) Metaplastic micro-
and macro-calcification with different grades of mineralization and aggregates in spherules in the surrounding connective tissue. (B) At
higher magnification we noticed the presence of calcified deposits in minute nerve bundles of the buccal mucosa. Hard tissues conventional
histological and confocal laser scanning analyses. (A) Typical islands of homogenous, non-tubular, dentino-osteoid calcified structures in
dentinal tissues. (B) Dentinal dysplasia with osteoid-like material, intermingled with remnants of mature mucous connective tissue.
