Anaplastic transformation of well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma at distant metastasis sites is rare. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of an autopsy case of anaplastic transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in multiple lung
metastases presenting with a malignant pleural effusion. We report an autopsy case of a 61-year-old Japanese man with anaplastic
transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma with multiple lung metastases presenting with a malignant pleural effusion, which was
difficult to diagnose by cytological examination before the autopsy. He presented with a 1-month history of progressive dyspnea, and
examination of the left pleural effusion revealed a bloody exudate with an increase in thyroglobulin; however, malignant cells in the
pleural fluid were negative for thyroglobulin. It is important to be aware that anaplastic transformation of differentiated thyroid
carcinoma could develop in lung metastases and could be a cause of a malignant pleural effusion. Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most
common malignant tumor of the thyroid and has a relatively favorable prognosis. However, anaplastic transformation of well-differentiated
papillary thyroid carcinoma is considered rare and is associated with a very poor prognosis . Anaplastic transformation of differentiated
papillary thyroid carcinoma at distant metastasis sites is extremely rare. To date, to the best of our knowledge, only one case of
anaplastic transformation of metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma in the lung has been reported in the English-language literature, and
that patient did not have a malignant pleural effusion . Our present report is, to the best of our knowledge, the first description of an
autopsy case of anaplastic transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in multiple lung metastases with a malignant pleural effusion,
which was difficult to diagnose before the autopsy. A 61-year-old Japanese man who had a 1-month history of progressive dyspnea was referred
to our hospital in April 2011. He had undergone a total thyroidectomy in 2001 for well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma that
showed no evidence of anaplastic transformation. He had then been treated with radioactive iodine-131 (131I) until 2003 for multiple lung
nodules that were diagnosed as metastases of thyroid carcinoma. A chest X-ray obtained upon his admission to our hospital revealed a massive
left-sided pleural effusion (Figure 1A). Multiple lung nodules had increased in size very slowly as visualized by computed tomography since
2003 (Figure 1B). Serum thyroglobulin and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide were elevated (93.2ng/mL and 75.2pg/mL, respectively), whereas other
tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9), sialyl Lewis X and neuron-specific enolase,
were all negative. A transbronchial biopsy of one of the lung nodules in the left upper lobe was attempted, but the biopsy instrument could
not be properly inserted to the target lesion. Examination of the left pleural effusion by thoracentesis revealed bloody exudate (total
protein 4.6g/dL, albumin 2.8g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 191U/L) with an increase in thyroglobulin (198.9ng/mL). CEA, CA19-9 and adenosine
deaminase were negative in the pleural fluid. The pleural fluid cytology was positive for adenocarcinoma (Figure 1C). A cell block made from
the effusion also showed evidence of adenocarcinoma, which included papillary cell clusters with peripherally located irregular nuclei and
cord-like structures, and the tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) but negative for surfactant apoprotein A
and thyroglobulin on immunohistochemistry. At that time, the origin of the malignant pleural effusion was considered not to be from
papillary thyroid carcinoma but from primary lung adenocarcinoma, because of the pathological findings of the malignant pleural effusion and
the appearance of a massive pleural effusion despite the very slow progressive nature of the lung nodules. The patient could not undergo any
systemic chemotherapy, because his general condition worsened due to pneumonia and hemoptysis, and he died in October 2011. During the
autopsy, multiple nodules were found in both lungs, and some of the tumors in the left lung directly invaded the pericardium and the pleura.
Furthermore, metastatic lesions were found in the peritoneum, liver, pancreas, spleen, both adrenal glands, para-aortic lymph nodes and bone
marrow. The histologic examination revealed that the lung nodules in both lungs partly contained typical papillary thyroid carcinoma
morphology with a papillary pattern, ground-glass nuclei and nuclear inclusions. However, the largest part of the tumors showed a
pleomorphic and undifferentiated component, without follicular structures, that was negative for thyroglobulin. These two different
histological areas showed transitional zones between them (Figure 2A). The differentiated tumor cells consisted of thyroglobulin-positive
and thyroglobulin-negative components (Figures 2B and 2C), and the undifferentiated tumor cells were negative for thyroglobulin (Figure 2D).
TTF-1 was partially positive in both differentiated and undifferentiated areas (Figures 2E and 2F), which was compatible with the pleural
effusion specimens. Taken together, these findings suggested anaplastic transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in multiple lung
metastases.Figure 1 Clinical findings of the case. (A) Chest X-ray obtained on admission in 2011 shows a massive left-sided pleural
effusion. (B) Multiple lung nodules (yellow arrows) are visible on computed tomographic scans obtained in 2003 (left images) and on
admission in 2011 (right images, after drainage of pleural effusion). (C) Cytological findings of the pleural effusion. Cell clusters with
peripherally located irregular nuclei (red arrows) are shown. Scale bar: 100μm.Figure 2 Microscopic findings of the lung metastatic tumor at
autopsy. (A) Hematoxylin and eosin stain. A transitional zone between the differentiated papillary pattern (left side of the image) and the
undifferentiated component (right side of the image) is shown. (B, C, D) Immunohistochemical staining for thyroglobulin. Differentiated
papillary carcinoma positive (B, arrowheads) and negative (C) for thyroglobulin and an undifferentiated component negative for thyroglobulin
(D) are shown. (E, F) Immunohistochemical staining for thyroid transcription factor 1. Differentiated papillary carcinoma positive for
thyroid transcription factor 1 (E) and an undifferentiated component positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (F) are shown. Scale bars:
200μm (A-D), 50μm (E, F). Clinical findings of the case. (A) Chest X-ray obtained on admission in 2011 shows a massive left-sided pleural
effusion. (B) Multiple lung nodules (yellow arrows) are visible on computed tomographic scans obtained in 2003 (left images) and on
admission in 2011 (right images, after drainage of pleural effusion). (C) Cytological findings of the pleural effusion. Cell clusters with
peripherally located irregular nuclei (red arrows) are shown. Scale bar: 100μm. Microscopic findings of the lung metastatic tumor at
autopsy. (A) Hematoxylin and eosin stain. A transitional zone between the differentiated papillary pattern (left side of the image) and the
undifferentiated component (right side of the image) is shown. (B, C, D) Immunohistochemical staining for thyroglobulin. Differentiated
papillary carcinoma positive (B, arrowheads) and negative (C) for thyroglobulin and an undifferentiated component negative for thyroglobulin
(D) are shown. (E, F) Immunohistochemical staining for thyroid transcription factor 1. Differentiated papillary carcinoma positive for
thyroid transcription factor 1 (E) and an undifferentiated component positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (F) are shown. Scale bars:
200μm (A-D), 50μm (E, F). Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive form of thyroid cancer and accounts for only 1% to 2% of all
thyroid tumors . The prognosis of anaplastic thyroid cancer is very poor, with a median survival of 4 to 12 months and a 5-year survival
rate of 1.0% to 7.1% . Although the pathogenesis of anaplastic thyroid cancer remains unclear, anaplastic transformation from pre-existing
differentiated thyroid cancer has become a well-accepted process . In fact, it has been reported that 23% to 90% of anaplastic thyroid
cancer has an associated differentiated component . Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer associated with
anaplastic transformation . Anaplastic transformation most commonly occurs in the thyroid gland and regional lymph nodes, whereas anaplastic
transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in several distant metastatic sites has been reported, including the submandibular space ,
retroperitoneum , liver , breast , shoulder and lung . In these cases and in the present case, it took 5 to 20 years for anaplastic
transformation to develop after the primary diagnosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Therefore, it should be noted that anaplastic
transformation can occur in metastatic sites even after long-term follow-up. In our patient, it was difficult to diagnose anaplastic
transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma before the autopsy. In general, metastatic thyroid carcinoma is not considered in the
differential diagnosis of malignant pleural effusion, because primary thyroid cancer is an extremely rare cause of pleural effusion. The
prevalence of malignant pleural effusion in all thyroid cancers is reported to be 0.25% . Moreover, in our patient, tumor cells in the
pleural effusion were positive for TTF-1 but negative for thyroglobulin on immunohistochemistry, which made it even more difficult to
identify the origin of the malignant pleural effusion as being the thyroid. Cytomorphological studies have demonstrated that the tumor cells
in the malignant pleural effusion with metastatic well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma are immunoreactive for thyroglobulin,
whereas anaplastic carcinoma is known for losing thyroglobulin expression . In our patient, the tumor cells in the pleural effusion showed
evidence of adenocarcinoma but were negative for thyroglobulin, suggesting that the cells were from thyroglobulin-immunonegative elements of
papillary thyroid carcinoma. However, the pleural fluid in our patient contained high levels of thyroglobulin. Although the elevated level
of thyroglobulin in the pleural fluid might just reflect high serum thyroglobulin levels, it has been reported that elevated pleural fluid
thyroglobulin could be a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of metastatic thyroid cancer as a cause of pleural effusion . The presence of
transitional zones between the differentiated and undifferentiated components suggests the anaplastic transformation of pre-existing
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Although the molecular pathogenesis of anaplastic transformation is not completely understood, some gene
mutations, including the BRAF, RAS, CTNNB1 (β-catenin), TP53 and PIK3CA, has reportedly been associated with anaplastic carcinoma, and
chromosomal abnormalities are also common . In addition, 131I therapy has been considered to be associated with an increase in the
probability of anaplastic transformation [6, 12, 13]. It has also been reported that insufficient accumulation of 131I in the metastatic
sites was associated with development of anaplastic changes . Post-operative 131I therapy was performed in five of seven cases of anaplastic
transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in distant metastatic sites, including our patient [2, 5, 6, 8]. However, it remains unclear
at this time whether 131I therapy is definitely associated with the pathogenesis of anaplastic transformation, so further clinical cases
need to be examined. To the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of anaplastic transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in
multiple lung metastases presenting with a malignant pleural effusion. It should be kept in mind that anaplastic transformation of
differentiated thyroid carcinoma could develop in lung metastases and could also be a cause of malignant pleural effusion. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase Carbohydrate antigen
19–9 Carcinoembryonic antigen Catenin (cadherin-associated protein), β1, 88kDa Lactate dehydrogenase Neuron-specific enolase
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit α RAS, Rat sarcoma Tumor protein p53 Thyroid transcription factor 1
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TA and MS analyzed and interpreted the
patient’s clinical data and autopsy report and were major contributors to the writing of the manuscript. KS, NS, SO and MN contributed not
only to the treatment of the patient but also to the analysis and interpretation of the case. YM performed pathological analysis of the case
before the autopsy and interpreted the pathological findings. MM, MT and ST performed the autopsy of the case and interpreted the
pathological findings. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We are grateful to our patient’s family, who agreed to the
publication of this case report.
