The spleen is one of the most commonly involved organs of visceral leishmaniasis (VL). However, there were few reports about imaging
findings of splenic leishmaniasis, especially regarding MRI findings. This case report describes a 45 years old male patient from Zhejiang
province of southeastern China, who was admitted for persistent fever of unknown origin, with splenomegaly and multiple hypodense/low echo
nodules on CT/ultrasonography (USG) studies. MRI showed multiple nodules with concentric rings in the spleen on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI),
with no obvious diffusion restriction on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), and gradual ring-like enhancement after intravenous
administration of contrast medium. So MRI suggested necrotic granulomatous lesion. By reviewing the clinical history and following positive
serological leishmania antibody test, the patient was finally confirmed a recent infection with VL. The patient received antimony gluconate
therapy intravenously. At 4 months follow-up, the contrast-enhanced abdominal MRI showed that the size of the spleen was returned to normal
and the splenic lesions were completely resolved except for reduced infarction compared with the previous MRI. This is the first case which
was performed MRI examination completely. Meanwhile, it is the second case which MRI findings were reported. As for the characteristics of
MRI in this case, there are several features, which are helpful for giving the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of VL. Leishmaniasis, a
chronic endemic zoonotic or anthroponotic diseases caused by an obligate intracellular protozoan and transmitted by sandfly bites, is spread
over 80 countries in Africa, Asia, south and central America, and Europe.1There are 400,000 to 500,000 new cases annually worldwide, with
40,000 to 50,000 deaths.2–4 This epidemic disease is prevalent in northwest of China. Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) or kala azar is the most
insidious form of infection in which the parasites migrate to internal organs such as liver, spleen and bone marrow and is characterized by
fever, cachexy, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and hypergammaglobulinemia.5 VL is often misdiagnosed as long incubation period and no
special clinical findings, especially in non-endemic areas. It is usually fatal if the patient was not given timely diagnosis and treatment.
The diagnosis for this kind of disease mainly depends on bone marrow and serological examination. Imaging modalities are rarely used in the
diagnosis of VL,6–8 especially MRI. So far as we know, there is only one article about the MRI findings of splenic lesion associated with
VL.8 Now we present another one confirmed clinically whose MRI findings have certain characteristics that can be helpful for the final
diagnosis. In January 2014, a 45-year-old male enterprise administrator from Zhejiang province of southeastern China was admitted to our
hospital due to fever of unknown origin and post prandial abdominal distension for a month. The temperature was 38.5 to 39.5 °C and higher
in the evening accompanied by obvious night sweats and weight loss. The patient was once admitted to local hospital with fever for a week.
Physical examination had no positive signs except for the mild epigastric pain. Labboratory findings indicated pancytopenia and increased
C-reaction protein (CRP). An abdominal ultrasonography (USG) revealed slight enlarged spleen with heterogeneous parenchyma due to multiple
hypoechoic nodules. CT showed mild splenomegaly on plain scan, after intravenous administration of contrast medium, multiple hypodense
nodular lesions with mild ring-like enhancement were displayed in the spleen, in which was unenhanced dot (Figure 1). There was increased
metabolism of 18F-FDG in the spleen on PET-CT. No other anomalies were found on USG, CT and PET-CT. Lymphoma was suspected at first.
However, there was no evidence of lymphoma found by USG guided biopsy of lymph node in the left popliteal space. Post-contrast CT at late
portal phase. There was mild splenomegaly and multiple hypodense nodular lesions with slight ring-like enhancement. When the patient entered
our hospital, further examination of contrast-enhanced upper abdominal MRI was implemented. The scans were taken on Siemens verio 3.0T MR
(Figure 2). MRI demonstrated mild splenic enlargement and multiple inhomogeneous parechymal lesions besides infarction in the anterior
aspect of spleen. There was only slight heterogeneous intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI). On T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), the nodules
were demonstrated as multiple concentric rings. The central area in some nodules was a dot of hyperintensity, and the middle part was ring-
like hypointense within which was another ring with slight hyperintense in part of the nodules, and the most outer ring was hyperintensity
surrounding the nodule. Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) with b value 1000 showed the lesions as slightly hypointensity and sometimes a dot
of lower hypointensity in center. The middle ring of the nodule on T2WI was gradually enhanced after contrast administration, and finally
demonstrated as higher intensity than the surrounding normal splenic parenchyma at late delayed phase, while the central and the most outer
area which was hyperintensity on T2WI had no enhancement. According to MRI findings, splenic necrotic granulomatous disease was considered,
and lymphoma, metastasis, and hemangioma could be ruled out as well. MRI The spleen was mildly enlarged. Multiple nodules through the
splenic parenchyma were seen besides infarction in the anterior aspect of spleen. The lesions were displayed as concentric rings with dot
hyperintensity in central area, hypointensity in the outer ring within which was another ring with slight hyperintense in part of the
nodules, and the most outer ring was hyperintensity surrounding the nodule on T2WI (A), slightly hypointensity and sometimes a dot of lower
hypointensity in center on DWI (B). After contrast administration, the lesions slightly enhanced as ringlike in shape at portal phase (C),
and finally became relative higher intensity than surrounding normal splenic parenchyma at late delayed phase (D). The central and the most
outer area, which was hyperintensity on T2WI had no enhancement. The repeated diagnostic tests for plasmodium, bacterial abscess and
tuberculosis were negative, and parasitic disease was suspected. Further reviewing the travel history reminded the patient that he had been
to Xinjiang autonomous region of northwestern China early. The tests of peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate for parasitic antibody
were detected in the specialized institute, and the serological leishmania antibody test was positive. Then, the clinical diagnosis of
leishmaniasis was made. The following treatment was given at once, with intravenous administration of 0.6 g antimony gluconate per day for
17 days. During and after the former treatment, the temperature was significantly declined and came to normal, blood cells and CRP came to
normal ranges. No side effect, adverse and unanticipated event occurred. The contrast-enhanced abdominal MRI was repeated 4 months later
after treatment. The size of the spleen was returned to normal and the splenic lesions were completely resolved except for reduced
infarction compared with the previous MRI (Figure 3). The final diagnosis was made: lesions in spleen associated with VL. Post-contrast T1WI
at portal phase 4 months later after treatment Spleen shrinked to normal size, the nodules seen on previous MRI had been absorbed, and
infarctment in anterior aspect of spleen also reduced. The diagnosis of VL is based on clinical, epidemiological, and laboratory
approaches.9,10 The main clinical symptoms are fever, splenomegaly, weight loss, anemia, cough, hepatomegaly, and so on. However, these
findings are non-specific.11 Definitive diagnosis of the disease relies on the detection of amastigotes in an aspirate of the spleen or bone
marrow. The diagnosis could be easily missed because of few donovani on bone marrow smear and their atypical shape. Spleen biopsy is rarely
used due to certain risks. Serological testing is available but not specific, as cross-reactions do exist with granulomatous disease
(tuberculosis, cat-scratch disease). USG is frequently used to investigate the splenic involvement of VL. The common manifestations are mild
to remarkable splenomegaly and heterogeneous echotexture with multiple focal hypoechoic lesions, which are neither characteristic nor
specific. In recent years, CT and MRI are becoming good auxiliary examinations to diagnose abdominal diseases within solid organs. However,
as for the imaging manifestations of CT or MRI, there were few case reports of splenic involvement associated with VL6–8 (Table 1). There
were only 3 cases of leishmaniasis reported in English literatures regarding CT findings. Splenomegaly was seen in all 3 cases and multiple
small hypodense nodular lesions in 2 cases on post-contrast CT. Multiple splenic nodules with hypoecho on USG or hypodensity on CT are
commonly seen in a variety of diseases, such as lymphoma, metastases, hemangiomas, abscesses and granulomatous diseases etc. In 2012, Steven
Raeymaeckers et al8 first reported the MRI features of a 15-month-old Moroccan girl with lesions of VL in spleen. MRI demonstrated markedly
enlarged spleen as well as multiple ill-defined and heterogeneous hypointense nodules on T2WI. However, DWI and dynamic contrast enhanced
series were not performed. Multiple hypointense lesions on T2WI are most often seen in case of healed granulomas or infections, or less
frequently in case of sarcoidosis, lymphoma, metastasis, and sickle cell disease.12 Splenic hemangioma appears very high intensity or “bulb”
on T2WI, and progressive centripetal enhancement after contrast administration on MRI or CT. Splenic metastases and lymphoma appears high
intensity on T2WI, mild enhancement and relatively low intensity comparing with normal splenic parenchyma after contrast administration, and
no necrosis, calcification and bleeding in lesions of lymphoma. Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease, often involving the hilus pulmonis and
mediastinal lymph nodes and systemic multiple organs. CT and MRI Findings in Literatures and Our Case In our case, CT demonstrated mild
splenomegaly and multiple hypodense nodules with faint ring-like enhancement after contrast administration, from which malignant tumors
still should be considered. MRI revealed the splenic lesions as multiple nodules with concentric rings on T2WI, no obvious diffusion
restriction on DWI and gradually increasing ring-like enhancement, which indicated benign lesions with fibrous tissues, surrounding edema
and central necrosis. The characteristics suggested inflammatory granuloma, which could rule out malignant tumors and hemangioma. The
repeated diagnostic tests for plasmodium, bacterial abscess and tuberculosis were negative, and parasitic disease then was suspected. By
reviewing travel history, and following positive serological leishmania antibody test, the final clinical diagnosis was confirmed splenic
involvement of VL. MRI findings in this case contributed to the diagnosis of leishmaniasis. To our knowledge, this is the first case
reported a complete MRI examination. The other one report of MRI findings was merely about T2WI without DWI and post-contrast studies. In
conclusion, for patients with long-term unexplained fever, MRI examination may provide more information to help differentiating from
lymphoma, and metastasis etc. When MRI demonstrates multiple ring-like lesions on T2WI, with gradually increasing contrast-enhancement, and
no restricted diffusion, VL should be considered. Combining MRI features with clinical history, bone marrow biopsy and specific serological
antibody test, early clinical diagnosis can be made and timely treatment can be undertaken. Ethical approval was obtained from the ethics
committee of the Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. Abbreviations: 18F-FDG = fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose, CRP = C-reaction protein, CT = computed
tomography, DWI = diffusion weighted imaging, MRI = Magnetic resonance imaging, PET = positron emission tomography, T1WI = T1 weighted
imaging, T2WI = T2-weighted imaging, USG = ultrasonography, VL = visceral leishmaniasis. The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.
