Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 44 Final Diagnosis: Acral peeeling skin syndrome Symptoms: Recurrent skin
exfoliation Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Skin biopsy Specialty: Dermatology Rare disease Acral peeling skin syndrome is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder in which skin exfoliation is limited to the hands and feet. While it typically manifests from early childhood,
in this first reported case from South Africa, the patient did not manifest clinically until the fourth decade of life. A 44-year-old woman
of African descent, 1 of a set of non-identical twins, presented with recurrent episodes of skin peeling of the upper and lower limbs. The
first episode occurred 4 years prior, followed by perennial skin peeling during the spring seasons. She was not on treatment for any chronic
disease and reported no exposure to chemicals or other irritants. The family, including the non-identical twin sister, has no history of
skin disorders and the patient’s HIV antibody test was negative. At presentation, physical examination revealed ongoing exfoliation with new
skin formation on the palms and soles. The mucous membranes and nails were spared. Other systems were normal. Skin biopsy taken from the
palms confirmed peeling skin syndrome. The patient was managed with topical aqueous cream and analgesics. She was briefly counseled on the
nature and prognosis of the disease, and referred for genetic testing and counseling. On follow-up, she continues to have skin peeling once
or twice a year. This first reported case of this rare disease in South Africa contributes to the growing body of literature on the disease
and highlights the need for clinicians to be aware of its variable clinical onset. Acral peeling skin syndrome is a clinical variant of the
rare, genetic, and recurrent exfoliative dermatosis known as peeling skin syndrome. It is an autosomal recessive disorder in which, unlike
the generalized form, skin peeling is limited to the hands and feet . The overwhelming majority of reported cases started manifesting
clinically from early childhood and occurred in singleton patients. In addition, no variant of peeling skin syndrome has ever been reported
in South Africa. In this article, we report the first documented case of acral peeling skin syndrome in South Africa, in a female non-
identical twin, whose first episode of skin peeling was in the fourth decade of life. A 44-year-old woman of African descent presented with
recurrent episodes of skin peeling of the upper and lower limbs. The first episode occurred at the age of 40 and was followed by perennial
skin peeling, mostly during the spring seasons. She reported no exposure to chemicals or other skin irritants that could suggest contact
dermatitis. She was not on any treatment for chronic diseases and her HIV antibody test was negative. Prior to presentation at our clinic,
no definitive assessment had been made, and treatments received elsewhere were largely unsuccessful. The patient is an academic support
staff at a University and is 1 of a set of non-identical twins. She is a mother of 2 children and neither the twin sister nor any of her
family reported any history of skin diseases. Her episodes of skin exfoliation usually start with pain and swelling of the limbs, followed
by peeling and new skin growth underneath the peeled skin. The peeling starts from the elbows and extends towards the tip of the fingers,
and from the buttocks, extending to the toes. The nail beds were spared. Physical examination at presentation revealed ongoing exfoliation
with new skin formation on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. There were areas of thickened and keratinized skin with mild non-
pitting swelling in the hands and feet (Figures 1 and 2). The mucous membranes were spared and other organ systems were normal. A probable
assessment of acral peeling skin syndrome was initially made, which was later confirmed on histology of skin biopsies taken from the palms
(Figure 3). The patient was managed with topical aqueous cream and analgesics. She was briefly counseled on the nature and prognosis of the
disease, and referred for genetic counselling and testing at a tertiary unit. Follow-up shows that she continues to have recurrent
exfoliation, the last episode being early 2014. Peeling skin syndrome was first described by Fox as congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma in
1921 . However, in 1982, Levy and Goldsmith introduced the term “peeling skin syndrome” . There are 2 clinical variants of peeling skin
syndrome, namely: Generalized and Acral peeling skin syndrome . All variants are autosomal recessive and a detailed family history of skin
exfoliation is therefore crucial. Depending on type, mutations in the CDSN or TGM5 or CSTA genes are implicated . These genes play roles in
the adhesive interactions between corneocytes and their mutation results in cleavage of the stratum corneum from the stratum granulosum, a
phenomenon that explains the skin exfoliation. Unlike the generalized variants, which involve most parts of the body , skin peeling in the
acral variant is limited to the hands and feet . Clinically, peeling may be accompanied by burning sensation, tenderness, and erythema of
the limbs. However, there are no nail changes or blister formation. Environmental factors such as high temperature and humidity may
aggravate the symptoms , as seen in this patient, in whom peeling episodes occur just after winter. Although the palms of the hand and soles
of the feet may be hyperkeratotic in the generalized variant, the limbs are usually spared from peeling . Most cases of acral peeling skin
syndrome manifest in early childhood and our patient is one of the few adult-onset cases ever reported, confirming suggestions that the
onset of clinical presentation may be variable . Apart from differentiating acral peeling skin syndrome from contact dermatitis, in which
there is a history of exposure to a skin irritant, it is important to exclude other exfoliative skin disorders such as Keratolytic winter
erythema (Oudtshoorn disease), Netherton syndrome, and Epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Oudtshoorn disease is an autosomal dominant disorder
that causes peeling of the palms and soles of the feet during winter and occurs exclusively among the Afrikaner settler population of the
Western Cape in South Africa . However, our patient is a black South African woman and has no mixed ancestry. She also has no family history
of exfoliative skin diseases, contrary to expectations in an autosomal dominant disease. Netherton syndrome is an autosomal recessive,
exfoliative skin disorder usually diagnosed in early childhood like peeling skin syndrome. However, it is characterized by increased risks
of fatality in early childhood and patients with this syndrome are highly unlikely to survive to adulthood . Its clinical features include:
atopy, raised IgE, eosinophilia, generalized erythema, susceptibility to recurrent infections, poor thermoregulation, scaling, and the
typical hair follicle anomalies referred to as “Bamboo hair” . Except for the skin peeling and erythema, other clinical features of
Netherton syndrome were absent in our patient. Although epidermolysis bullosa simplex has been reported to resemble acral peeling skin
syndrome, the later is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by bullae or blisters formation and the genetic mutations implicated are
in the KRT5, KRT14, or PLEC genes . Our patient did not present with bullae. History and physical examination are only suggestive, and
diagnosis of acral is only confirmed by histology of skin biopsy and genetic studies. Histology typically shows hyperkeratosis, psoriasiform
hyperplasia, hypergranulosis with keratinohyalin granules and cleavage of the stratum corneum from the stratum granulosum – a key
histological feature of peeling skin syndrome. Genetic studies and testing show an autosomal recessive pattern and are important for
identifying mutations and for profiling risks of transmitting mutant genes to future generations. This is especially crucial in populations
where consanguineous marriages are practiced. Genetic mutations in the TGM5 or CSTA genes are implicated in acral peeling skin syndrome,
while of the 2 generalized variants, only the type B, inflammatory generalized type, has been associated with a homozygous non-sense
mutation in the CSDN gene (which encodes corneodesmosin) . There is currently no effective treatment for acral peeling skin syndrome .
Treatments with analgesics, emollients, anti-histamines, keratolytics, methotrexate, steroids, isotretinoin, and ultraviolet rays have all
been tried with limited successes . Until there is adequate understanding of the etiology of peeling skin syndrome sufficient to inform the
development of effective treatment, management remains symptomatic. Considering the current lack of an effective treatment, genetic
counseling is mandatory, as this promotes patient understanding of the condition and helps patients to cope . This first reported case of
acral peeling skin syndrome in South Africa highlights the variable clinical onset of this rare skin disease. While its rarity and
similarities with other exfoliating skin disorders may pose a challenge to prompt diagnosis, a history of recurrent spontaneous exfoliations
limited to the limbs should raise the possibility of acral peeling skin syndrome. Photograph of both hands. Note the erythema, swelling and
remnant peeling of the skin of both hands. Photograph of both feet. Note the erythema and remnant peeling of the toes. Histology report.
