An 82-year-old female with a history of situs inversus totalis visited our hospital with complaints of abdominal pain and fever for 2 days.
She had history of diabetes mellitus, cerebral infarction, and Alzheimer’s disease, and underwent Billroth-ll (B-II) gastrectomy due to
stomach cancer 15 years previously. General appearance was acute ill looking and there was tenderness on right upper quadrant of abdomen.
Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell, 22,120/mm3; total bilirubin, 3.63 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 3.57 mg/dL; aspartate
aminotransferase, 625 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 629 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 2,132 IU/L; and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 363 IU/L.
An abdominal computed tomography scan revealed transposition of the visceral organs from the right to left side and a stone in the dilated
common bile duct (CBD) (Fig. 1). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed with a cap-assisted forward-viewing
endoscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) in patient with gastrojejunostomy (Fig. 2). A cholangiogram revealed transposition of the pancreatic duct
oriented to the right side and the gallbladder and dilated CBD with a floating stone to the left side (Fig. 3). After biliary cannulation
using catheter with a straight end at the 7 o’clock direction of major papilla, a guidewire was placed across the ampullary orifice (Fig.
4). Following endoscopic papillary balloon dilatation (EPBD) using a controlled radial expansion balloon (10 mm; Boston Scientific
Microvasive, Cork, Ireland), a CBD stone was successfully retrieved using a basket (Fig. 5). Although a few cases of modified ERCP
techniques in situs inversus have been reported,1–5 this is the first report of ERCP in situs inversus totalis combined with B-II
gastrectomy. Comparing ERCP using conventional duodenoscope in situs inversus totalis, access to the major papilla with forward-viewing
endoscope in situs inversus with B-ll gastrectomy status seems to be technically safer and easier. In this case, neither a patient nor an
endoscopist require any positional change during ERCP. Our case demonstrates that CBD stone removal by EPBD can be safely performed, even in
a case of B-II gastrectomy combined with situs inversus totalis. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflict of interest relevant to this
article was reported. Abdominal computed tomography scan (coronal view) showing situs inversus totalis and a bile duct stone (white arrow)
and multiple gall bladder stones. A cap-fitted forward-viewing endoscope demonstrating Billroth-II gastrectomy with gastrojejunostomy
status. A cholangiogram of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography demonstrating transposition of pancreatic duct oriented to the
right side and gallbladder and dilated common bile duct with a movable filling defect to the left side. A cap-fitted forward-viewing
endoscope showing guide wire placed in orifice of bile duct at 7 o’clock position. A complete stone removal using endoscopic papillary
balloon dilatation.
