Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 45 Final Diagnosis: Spice/K2 induced liver injury Symptoms: Lethargy •
somnolence • fatigue Medication: N-acetylcysteine Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Gastroenterology Rare disease Spice/K2 is one of several
street names for synthetic marijuana. These hallucinogens are increasingly sold over the internet and in “head” shops. They are usually
household herbs that are sprayed with chemicals that become centrally active compounds when burned together and inhaled by smoking. We
present a case of a 45-year-old male substance abuser who was admitted with evidence of hepatocellular necrosis and worsening liver failure.
Tests for acetaminophen were negative, as were tests for alcohol. The patient was empirically treated with N-acetylcysteine. Hepatocellular
damage was abated and the patient made a full recovery. Upon regaining consciousness, the patient admitted to smoking Spice/K2. Other
toxicities have been reported with synthetic marijuana use, but not liver toxicity. Physicians need to have a high index of suspicion for
unknown hepatotoxins in substance abusers. N-acetylcysteine can be given if there is no contraindication. Ethanol and anabolic steroids are
the most frequent drugs of abuse that are associated with hepatocellular injury . Patients do not often report use of alternative therapies,
supplements, and drugs of abuse to their physicians. Abuse of synthetic khat (bath salts) and synthetic marijuana (Spice/K2) is on the rise
. Toxicities reported with these synthetic hallucinogens include chest pain, cardiac arrhythmias, and acute kidney injury. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first case of toxic hepatitis due to use of Spice/K2. A 45-year-old Hispanic man presented to the emergency room
with somnolence, fatigue, and lethargy. The patient was not coherent enough to answer questions at length on the initial encounter. The
medical record confirmed his current active medications. There was no history of blood transfusion, recent alcohol abuse, herbal
supplementation, or recent travel. His comorbid medical conditions included remote heroin abuse. He was enrolled in a methadone maintenance
treatment program. He had received 90 mg of methadone daily for the past 9 years. He also had a diagnosis of bipolar disorder and seizure
disorder, both of which were well controlled over the past 2 years with sertraline 100 mg daily, trazodone 50 mg daily, and gabapentin 300
mg 3 times a day. No recent change in medication or drug dosage was noted. On physical exam, vital signs were stable, with blood pressure
123/71 mmHg, temperature 97.4°F, and oxygen saturation of 100% in ambient air. He was anicteric. There was no jugular venous distention and
no axillary or neck lymphadenopathy. He was oriented to his name and place but not to time. He could not cooperate for testing of asterixis.
No nuchal rigidity could be elicited. Heart sounds were regular, with good-volume pulses throughout. The chest was clear to auscultation.
The abdomen was soft with no organomegaly or abdominal tenderness. Bowel sounds were present. There were no stigmata of chronic liver
disease. No peripheral edema was noticed. There were some “track” marks on the upper extremities, suggestive of remote intravenous drug
abuse. Initial laboratory studies revealed hemoglobin and hematocrit of 16 g/dL and 48%, respectively. White blood cell count was 9300
cells/L with 85.1% neutrophils, 8% lymphocytes, 1.4% eosinophils, and 0.2% basophils. The platelet count was 256 000 cells/L. Blood urea
nitrogen and creatinine was normal at 10 and 0.6 mg/dL, respectively. There were no electrolyte abnormalities. Transaminases were elevated:
AST 793 IU/L (normal <37 IU/L) and ALT 799 IU/L (normal <45 IU/L), and gamma glutamyl trans-peptidase 260 IU/L (normal <200 IU/L). Total
bilirubin was normal at 0.7 mg/dL (normal <1 mg/dL) and direct bilirubin was 0.2 mg/dL (normal <0.5 mg/dL). Alkaline phosphatase was
elevated at 260 U/L (normal <136 U/L). INR was 1.0 (normal <1.1). Blood alcohol levels were less than 3 mg/dL (normal <3 mg/dL),
acetaminophen level was 0.0 μg/mL, and the ammonia level was 24 μmol/L (normal <32 μmol/L). His urine toxicology was positive only for
methadone and negative for all other toxins, including opiates, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and marijuana. Given his clinical status, he
was admitted to the medical ward for further management. All of his current medications were stopped. He was volume expanded with normal
saline. Hepatic profile worsened as hospitalization progressed: AST 3935 IU/L, ALT 4136 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase 390 U/L, total
bilirubin 3.1 mg/dL, and direct 2.3 mg/dL. The INR was 1.3. Viral serologies revealed immunity to hepatitis A virus and hepatitis B virus.
Antibody against hepatitis C virus was negative. Further hepatic evaluation for metabolic parameters also did not reveal any pathology.
Transferrin saturation was 7%. Alpha-1 antitrypsin levels and ceruloplasmin levels were also within normal limits. Autoimmune parameters,
including anti-nuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-liver kidney microsomal antibody, and anti-mitochondrial antibody, were
all negative. PCR assays for hepatitis B DNA and hepatitis C viral RNA did not detect any virus. Creatine kinase levels were normal at 42
IU/L. Ultrasound of the right upper quadrant did not reveal any pathology. The common bile duct was normal in caliber (4 mm) with no intra-
or extra-hepatic biliary duct dilation. No noticeable fluid was seen around the porta hepatis. Due to concern for worsening liver failure
without a clear etiology, intravenous N-acetylcysteine was initiated as per 20-h protocol. The patient received an initial loading dose of
150 mg/kg IV over 60 min, followed by a 4-h infusion at 12.5 mg/kg per h, with a 16-h infusion at 6.25 mg/kg per h at the end. Intravenous
hydration with normal saline was continued at 100 mL/h. As the patient’s hospitalization progressed, bilirubin and transaminase levels began
to normalize (Figure 1A, 1B) and his mental status improved. The INR peaked at 1.34 on Day 3 and returned to 0.90 on discharge. Upon
awakening, the patient admitted using 2 grams of Spice/K2 regularly for 7 days prior to this presentation. On hospital Day 10, his regular
medications were restarted with no significant change in the hepatic profile (Figure 1A, 1B). The patient was discharged in stable clinical
condition. A follow-up telephone call was made and the patient reported no further symptoms and endorsed complete abstinence from Spice/K2.
A search of the medical literature (PubMed from 1966 through 2014) produced no previously reported case of Spice/K2-induced hepatotoxicity.
Our patient had evidence of hepatocellular toxicity. There were no other identifiable agents that could explain his hepatic injury except
Spice/K2 ingestion. There had been no change in the dose or frequency of his regular medications. Extended urine toxicology did not detect
any other substance of abuse. Unfortunately, like most conventional laboratories, our hospital did not have any assay that would confirm the
ingestion of Spice/K2. Nevertheless, our patient’s admission of its use was accepted as verification. We also assessed the degree of
causality using the validated Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) scale for causality assessment . In our
patient, the time of onset of symptoms from the beginning of drug use was about 1 week (2 points). Clinical chemistries altered to greater
than 50% within 8 days (3 points). The patient endorsed alcohol use (1 point). Search for non-drug-related causes of abnormal liver function
tests did not reveal a cause (1 point) (Table 1). Our patient’s ingestion of Spice/K2 suggests its pathogenic role in liver toxicity.
Spice/K2 abuse has previously been reported to be associated not only with appetite stimulation, but, paradoxically, also with nausea and
vomiting . There are no randomized controlled trials of Spice/K2 and available human information is anecdotal (internet blogs, self-reported
stories). Symptoms may occur immediately, minutes, or hours after use. Symptoms may be transient or last for hours. The association of
symptoms with Spice/K2 use therefore is easily missed . Synthetic cannabinoids, which were introduced in the United States in 2009 to
facilitate the study of cannabinoid receptor pharmacology, have recently been implicated as drugs of abuse . These drugs are becoming more
popular because they are thought to produce a better “high”, be cheaper than regular marijuana, and lack detectability by routine toxicology
screening . NIDA reports that in the United States, Spice/K2 has become the second most frequently used illicit substance after cannabis.
The synthetic drug industry that includes Spice/K2 is growing at an estimated $5 billion a year, according to Rick Broider, president of the
North American Herbal Incense Trade Association . “Synthetic marijuana” is an oversimplification for this group of psychoactive designer
drugs with the brand names K2 or Spice. These drugs are made by spraying dried natural herbs with 1 or more compounds from several classes
of drugs including: cannabinoids, benzoylindoles, naphthoylindoles, phenylacetylindoles, and/or cyclohexylphenoles . The chemicals become
centrally active compounds when burned together and inhaled by smoking. The composition of Spice/K2 is therefore not unique and depends on
the manufacturer. The constituents of Spice/K2 also change with time, mainly because the producers want to be one step ahead of legislation.
Unlike (–)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) present in the Cannabis sativa plant, the compounds in Spice/K2 act as high-potency full
agonists at the brain cannabinoid type 1 receptor (CB1) . Spice/K2 causes changes in mood, perception, thinking, memory, and attention, as
well as changes in neurological, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal function. These effects are similar to those caused by THC, but they
vary in both spectrum and intensity. On-site laboratory tests for the constituents of Spice/K2 in urine, oral fluid, or serum samples are
not available at most institutions. Lack of detectability is one of the reasons why people use Spice/K2 rather than cannabis. The other
reason is that it is considered a safe and legal drug that can give its user similar if not stronger satisfaction than natural cannabis.
Management of Spice/K2 ingestion is mainly supportive. The exact mechanism of liver injury is not known. However, the occur-rence after
several days of use and response to N-acetylcysteine suggests a dose-related cumulative oxidative hepatocellular necrosis. The low
eosinophil count argues against an immune-mediated idiosyncratic reaction. There may be a risk for long-term hepatic injury with the use of
Spice/K2 due to post-necrotic cirrhosis. Our patient was treated with N-acetylcysteine because it acts as a hepato-protective agent by
restoring hepatic glutathione, serving as a glutathione substitute, and enhancing the nontoxic sulfate conjugation of hepatotoxins. It also
has the ability to scavenge oxygen-derived free radicals and improve endothelium-dependent vasodilation, which offers protection from
ongoing injury . Healthcare providers should suspect Spice/K2 as a possible cause of unexplained liver injury and failure, especially when
caring for individuals with a history of substance abuse. More data is needed to better understand the mechanism of hepato-cellular injury,
course of action, and best treatment for Spice/K2-induced hepatotoxicity. Empiric use of N-acetylcysteine should be considered because it is
relatively safe, and, as with our patient, leads to a favorable clinical outcome. Change in levels of AST, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase
(ALK-PHOSP) (A), and total and direct bilirubin (T-BILLI, and D-BILLI, respectively) (B) with time (days). AST and ALT are given in
international units (IU) per liter, while ALK-PHOSP is in units (U) per liter. Arrows indicate the administration of selected medications.
Validating Spice/K2 as probable cause of hepatotoxicity according to the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences scale
for causality assessment (the CIOMS scale) . The total score in our case is 7, indicating Spice/K2 as ‘probable’ cause of hepatotoxicity.
Group I Recent viral infection with HAV (IgM anti HAV) or HBV (IgM anti HBV) or HCV (anti HCV/RNA PCR); Biliary obstruction
(ultrasonography); Alcoholism (AST/ALT ≥2); Group II context suggesting CMV, EBV or Herpes virus infection, Acute recent hypotension history
(particularly if heart disease).
