*These two authors contributed equally to this work. The acquisition of multidrug resistance in nosocomial pathogens such as Serratia
marcescens has been reported in the absence of antibiotic selection pressure. The broad antimicrobial spectrum of aminoglycosides and their
synergistic antimicrobial effect in association with other drugs (such as β-lactams and fluoroquinolones) suggest the possible use of these
antibiotics as a therapy for life-threatening infections. One of the most important mechanisms of aminoglycoside resistance is
posttranscriptional methylation of 16S rRNA conferred by methyltransferases. To date, 10 kinds of 16S rRNA methyltransferase genes (armA,
rmtA, rmtB, rmtC, rmtD, rmtE, rmtF, rmtG, rmtH, and npmA), whose products confer high-level resistance to aminoglycosides, have been
reported in various Enterobacteriaceae strains . The rmtB gene was first identified in S. marcescens in Japan, but has not been reported in
S. marcescens elsewhere . In the present study, we described an isolate of S. marcescens harboring rmtB, together with quinolone resistance
genes and various β-lactamase genes, for the first time in China. A strain of S. marcescens, designated GN1384, was isolated from the urine
of a 81-yr-old male patient who suffered from urinary tract infections in September 2009 and was admitted to the second hospital of Hefei,
China. Species identification was performed with the Vitek2 system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Étoile, France) and confirmed with API 20E
(bioMérieux). The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics were determined by using the agar dilution method, and
susceptibility data were interpreted by using the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines . The isolate showed a multiple
drug resistant pattern, including some β-lactams, all the aminoglycosides, and fluoroquinolones (Table 1). Then, genomic and plasmid DNA of
strain GN1384 was extracted. Using primers described previously, we identified the resistance genotype of this strain by detecting the
following resistance determinants through PCR, based on the above resistance phenotypes: 16S rRNA methyltransferase genes (armA, rmtA, rmtB,
rmtC, rmtD, rmtE, and npmA); plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance determinants (qnrA, qnrB, qnrS, qnrC, qnrD, aac (6')-Ib-cr, and qepA);
chromosome mutations associated with fluoroquinolone resistance (gyrA, parC, and parE); and genes coding for β-lactamases (TEM, CTX-M, SHV,
OXA-1) . The positive amplicons were subsequently sequenced, and the results indicated the presence of rmtB, aac(6')-Ib-cr, blaCTX-M-14,
blaTEM-1, and blaOXA-1. In addition, two amino acid changes (Ser83Leu and Asp87Asn) in GyrA and five amino acid changes (Thr57Ser, Ser80Ile,
Ala129Ser, Val131Leu, and Gly134Ser) in ParC were observed. Conjugation experiments were performed with Escherichia coli J53 as the
recipient, as previously described . The transconjugants were selected on agar plates containing sodium azide (100 mg/L) supplemented with
amikacin (128 mg/L). Conjugation experiments showed that aac(6')-Ib-cr, blaTEM-1, blaCTX-M-14, and blaOXA-1 were cotransferred with rmtB to
the recipient. The MIC results revealed that it simultaneously exhibited an elevated level of resistance to β-lactams, aminoglycosides, and
fluoroquinolones (Table 1). The extremely high MICs of all aminoglycosides tested against the multidrug-resistant S. marcescens were likely
due to the presence of the rmtB gene. In contrast to the rmtB plasmid isolated by Doi et al. , the plasmid bearing rmtB in our study was
self-transferable, as observed by Bogaerts et al. . In accordance with a previous study, the close linkage between 16S rRNA
methyltransferase and β-lactamase as well as plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance determinants revealed the significant relationship of
these genes amongst Enterobacteriaceae . It was also observed that the plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance gene together with the
mutations in gyrA and parC contributed to the high-level quinolone resistance in S. marcescens GN1384. Further studies are required to
assess the genetic environment of these genes and the role of these new substitutions in resistance to fluoroquinolones. The continuous and
widespread use of aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and β-lactams in human or animal infection is the major driving force leading to these
sophisticated resistance gene linkages. The dissemination of these linked genes by horizontal transfer simultaneously is very worrisome, and
continuous monitoring should be reinforced. The sequence of the parC gene reported in this work has been deposited in the GenBank database
and assigned the accession number JQ034319. This work was supported by a research grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (no. 81101288 and 8117 2737). No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Characteristics of clinical
isolate S. marcescens GN1384 and its transconjugant *Sodium azide-resistant Escherichia coli J53; †Indicates no genes or no information
needed. Abbreviations: AMK, amikacin; GM, gentamicin; KAN, kanamycin; TOB, tobramycin; NET, netilmicin; AMP, ampicillin; CSL, cefoperazone-
sulbactam; TZP, piperacillin-tazobactam; FEP, cefepime; CTX, cefotaxime; CRO, ceftriaxone; FOX, cefoxitin; CAZ, ceftazidime; CZ, cefizoxime;
IMP, imipenem; MEM, meropenem; ATM, aztreonam; GAT, gatifloxacin; CIP, ciprofloxacin; LVX, levofloxacin.
