Sir, We present a PM patient refractory to standard therapy, who showed effective clinical remission after a single treatment cycle with
alemtuzumab for >3 years of follow-up. This is, to our knowledge, the first report of long-term efficacy of alemtuzumab in the treatment of
PM. This Caucasian male patient was born in 1957. PM manifested at the age of 52 with progressive symmetrical muscle weakness and myalgia of
proximal limb musculature starting in 2009. At first consultation the patient showed a positive Gower’s sign and maximum walking distance
was reduced to 500 m. The diagnosis of PM was established in May 2009 and was based on typical clinical presentation, elevated creatine
kinase (CK) levels (3237 U/l), myopathic changes in the electromyogram and muscle biopsy showing endomysial CD8+ T cell infiltration (Fig.
1A). Ro-52 autoantibodies were positive; other myositis-specific autoantibodies (anti-Jo-1, ant-Mi-2 or anti-SRP) could not be detected.
Therapy with oral prednisolone (80 mg/day) in combination with azathioprine (start dose 50 mg/day, end dose 225 mg/day) was initiated,
significantly ameliorating muscle weakness and myalgia. Azathioprine therapy had to be withdrawn in August 2009 due to extremely elevated
liver enzymes. Under subsequent therapy with ciclosporin (200 mg/day), it was not possible to further taper the prednisolone dose (<40
mg/day). The disease course showed sustained progression, as CK levels were still considerably elevated. Thus we started i.v.
cyclophosphamide (monthly cycles at 2 × 1000 mg, followed by 2 × 1300 mg), which was not able to slow disease progress, decrease CK level or
spare corticosteroid therapy. Walking distance further deteriorated to 150 m. A combination therapy of IVIG (start dose 5 × 40 g/day,
followed by monthly cycles of 3 × 30 g/day) and MTX (start dose 7.5 mg/day, end dose 30 mg/day) was initiated in September 2010. After an
initial favourable response, the disease progressed further despite increasing MTX doses to 30 mg/day, with CK levels increasing to 5242
U/l, and the patient reported significant deterioration of muscle strength. IVIG and MTX were subsequently withdrawn. After giving informed
consent, the patient received alemtuzumab (one cycle at 5 × 30 mg) under premedication with clemastine, ranitidine, paracetamol, ondansetron
and i.v. methylprednisolone (250 mg/day) in May 2011 (Fig. 1B). Alemtuzumab led to a rapid and long-lasting depletion of T cells, B cells
and NK cells (supplementary Fig. S1, available at Rheumatology Online). At first application, the patient suffered from infusion-related
reactions with fever and chills, while subsequent infusions were well tolerated. Afterwards the patient received famciclovir, fluconazole
and cotrimoxazole for infection prophylaxis until CD4+ T cells reached >200 cells/µl. Approximately 12 weeks later the patient noticed an
improvement in muscle strength, which was confirmed on physical examination and was slightly preceded by a continuous decrease in CK level.
In addition, constant improvement of walking distance and prednisolone tapering to 7.5 mg/day was achieved. Until the beginning of July 2014
the disease course remained stable, when the patient reported progressive myalgia and deterioration of walking distance. No severe adverse
events have been observed so far. We decided to administer another cycle of alemtuzumab. Fig. 1Histology, clinical disease course and
creatine kinase levels in a patient with PM(A) Immunohistochemical staining for CD3 (left) and CD8 (right) showing endomysial inflammatory
infiltrates as well as single CD8+ T cells within muscle fibres. (B) Time course of creatine kinase levels, prednisolone dose and maximum
walking distance under different treatment regimes. The time period of stable disease after alemtuzumab infusion is highlighted. Histology,
clinical disease course and creatine kinase levels in a patient with PM (A) Immunohistochemical staining for CD3 (left) and CD8 (right)
showing endomysial inflammatory infiltrates as well as single CD8+ T cells within muscle fibres. (B) Time course of creatine kinase levels,
prednisolone dose and maximum walking distance under different treatment regimes. The time period of stable disease after alemtuzumab
infusion is highlighted. Current therapeutic options of PM consist of corticosteroids, IVIG and immunosuppressants such as AZA or MTX .
These therapies are mainly non-specific, have various adverse effects and often show limited efficacy. Monoclonal antibodies are emerging as
new therapeutic strategies for autoimmune myopathies, however, to date only limited evidence exists for their use . Alemtuzumab is a
monoclonal anti-CD52 antibody leading to rapid, long-lasting depletion of immune cells, but not of haematopoietic stem cells. After
depletion, the reconstitution of immune cells follows a certain pattern, with T cells being the last to recover after years . Here, anti-
CD52 treatment was initiated under the rationale that CD8+ T cells are critically involved in the progressive destruction of muscle cells in
PM and are found clonally expanded in the muscle of PM patients . In our standard therapy–refractory patient, we observed a stable disease
course with constant improvement of muscle strength lasting for ∼3 years, adding to previous reports providing short-term observations of
alemtuzumab efficacy in PM [5, 6]. It should be kept in mind, however, that interpretation of our data is limited by previous
immunosuppressive medication. The high incidence of secondary autoimmunity (∼30%) in alemtuzumab-treated patients should always be
considered in therapeutic decisions . Thorough surveillance is needed to prevent serious adverse events after alemtuzumab infusion. In
conclusion, we present the first long-term follow-up case of adult PM effectively treated with alemtuzumab. Therefore alemtuzumab might be a
new, promising alternative in long-term PM therapy. However, randomized and controlled trials are required to draw definite conclusions.
T.R. wrote the initial draft of the manuscript, which was proofread by S.B., T.K., S.G.M. and H.W. T.R. and S.B. treated the patient in
Münster, Germany, under the supervision of S.G.M. and H.W. T.K. analysed the immunohistochemistry. This work was supported by Innovative
Medizinische Forschung (I-BI111316 to S.B. and S.G.M.) and by the Genzyme Neuroimmunology Fellowship Program (to T.R.). Funding: No specific
funding was received from any funding bodies in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors to carry out the work described in this
article. Disclosure statement: S.G.M. has received honoraria for lecturing and travel expenses for attending meetings and has received
financial research support from Bayer, Biogen Idec, Sanofi-Aventis, Bayer Schering, Merck Serono, Novo Nordisk, Genzyme, MSD and Teva. T.R.
has received travel expenses and financial research support from Genzyme and has received honoraria for lecturing from Teva and Biogen Idec.
H.W. has received compensation for serving on scientific advisory boards/steering committees for Bayer Healthcare, Biogen Idec, Genzyme,
Merck Serono, Novartis and Sanofi Aventis; has received speaker’s honoraria and travel support from Bayer Vital, Bayer Schering, Biogen
Idec, CSL Behring, Fresenius Medical Care, Genzyme, GlaxoSmithKline, GW Pharmaceuticals, Lundbeck, Merck Serono, Omniamed, Novartis and
Sanofi Aventis; has received compensation as a consultant from Biogen Idec, Merck Serono, Novartis and Sanofi Aventis and has received
research support from Bayer Vital, Biogen Idec, Genzyme Merck Serono, Novartis, Sanofi Aventis Germany and Sanofi US. S.B. has received
financial research support from Novartis and has received honoraria for lecturing from Biogen Idec and Teva. The other author has declared
no conflicts of interest. Supplementary data are available at Rheumatology Online.
