Megalocytic interstitial nephritis is a rare form of kidney disease caused by chronic inflammation. We report a case of megalocytic
interstitial nephritis occurring in a 45-yrold woman who presented with oliguric acute kidney injury and acute pyelonephritis accompanied by
Escherichia coli bacteremia. Her renal function was not recovered despite adequate duration of susceptible antibiotic treatment, accompanied
by negative conversion of bacteremia and bacteriuria. Kidney biopsy revealed an infiltration of numerous histiocytes without Michaelis-
Gutmann bodies. The patient's renal function was markedly improved after short-term treatment with high-dose steroid. Megalocytic
interstitial nephritis is a rare form of chronic renal inflammatory disease associated with defect in intracellular destruction of invading
foreign organisms by macrophages (1). These unusual inflammatory disorders are often associated with chronic urinary tract infection by
Gram-negative bacteria (2). Although the pathogeneses of these diseases are unclear, macrophage bactericidal dysfunction has been presumed
as a possible pathogenic mechanism (3). We report an extraordinary case of a 45-yr-old woman who had oliguric acute kidney injury (AKI) and
acute pyelonephritis with Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteremia, accompanied by megalocytic interstitial nephritis. A 45-yr-old woman was
hospitalized for abdominal pain, watery diarrhea, and jaundice of one-week duration on October 28, 2013. One day before admission, she
noticed a marked reduction in her urine output. Her past medical history was unremarkable except for a two-year history of alcoholism. At
the time of admission, her blood pressure was 134/84 mmHg, and heart rate was 93 beats per minute. Her respiratory rate and body temperature
were 20 breaths/min and 36.5℃, respectively. The patient was icteric and confused. She was unable to state her precise complaints. Physical
examination was unremarkable except distended abdomen. Laboratory findings included leukocytosis of 24,300/µL, high serum creatinine level
of 6.80 mg/dL, high C-reactive protein level of 24.61 mg/dL, and high procalcitonin level of 39.05 ng/mL. Liver function test showed
abnormalities including low albumin level of 2.9 g/dL, high aspartate aminotransferase level of 139 U/L, but alanine aminotransferase of 31
U/L. Coagulation time was prolonged to a PT INR of 1.46. Urinary findings showed hematuria and pyuria. Physical examinations and laboratory
results suggested urosepsis with underlying alcoholic liver cirrhosis. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed diffuse
swelling of both kidneys with perinephric infiltration, suggestive of acute pyelonephritis. Additionally, hepatic nodularity and atrophic
change as features of liver cirrhosis were observed. The patient was diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis (APN) accompanied by oliguric AKI.
Antibiotic treatment using cefotaxime (third-generation cephalosporin) and azithromycin was administered for a presumed diagnosis of APN,
Weil's disease, and rickettsial infection. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated for septic shock with oliguric AKI.
After recovering from septic shock, the patient was switched to conventional hemodialysis for the treatment of AKI. Later, E. coli
susceptible to all feasible antibiotics were isolated from initial urine and blood cultures. Azithromycin administration was discontinued
because there was no evidence of elevation of tsutsugamushi and leptospira antibodies. Although there was no microorganism in subsequent
blood and urine cultures with improving parameters of infection such as fever, CRP, and procalcitonin, there were persistent severe
leukocytosis with atypical lymphocytes and high level of lactate dehydrogenase over 1,000 IU/L. Serum protein electrophoresis (PEP) revealed
increased gamma-globulin (34.5%), and serum immunofixation (IF) showed an abnormal band against anti-immunoglobulin G (IgG) and anti-lambda.
To evaluate hepatosplenomegaly and blood cell abnormalities including leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and monoclonal gammopathy (<3 g/dL),
bone marrow examination was performed. Bone marrow examination showed hemophagocytic histiocytes and increased plasma cells (below 10%).
These results suggested the possibility of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance because there was no evidence of bone lesion
and hypercalcemia. After one month, kidney biopsy was performed to clarify the cause of persistent oliguric AKI despite adequate
conservative treatment. Light microscopic examination showed extensive interstitial inflammation with a massive infiltration of histiocytic
cells without Michaelis-Gutmann bodies. Special staining showed CD68 positivity in infiltrated histiocytes, Von Kossa (for calcium)
negativity, and Prussian blue (for iron) negativity. Additionally, C1q staining and electron dense deposits were shown in mesangial matrix
without clinical and serological evidence of systemic lupus erythematosus. The final pathologic diagnosis was megalocytic interstitial
nephritis accompanied by C1q nephropathy (Fig. 1). Intravenous administration of methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg was initiated for megalocytic
interstitial nephritis and severe infection-related hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis that was seen in the histological examination of the
patient's kidney and bone marrow, respectively. High-dose steroid treatment was performed for one week, and steroid was halved every 3 days
for 2 weeks. Both oliguric AKI and severe leukocytosis were dramatically improved after steroid treatment (Fig. 2). After using steroids for
12 days, her kidney function had improved enough to stop dialysis. On the day of discharge, her serum creatinine level was 2.48 mg/dL. Her
renal function had improved further by her first visit to the outpatient clinic; the serum creatinine level was 1.95 mg/dL. Megalocytic
interstitial nephritis is an uncommon form of interstitial nephritis affecting mainly the renal cortex in an otherwise normal kidney. This
disease was first described by Zollinger in 1945 (4). The diagnosis of megalocytic interstitial nephritis must be histologically
distinguished from two other inflammatory conditions: renal parenchymal malakoplakia and xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis (5). All of
these conditions represent histological variant expression of chronic inflammation and are associated with Gram-negative bacterial infection
(4, 6). Although inflammation is caused by infiltration by various inflammatory cells, histiocytes (a type of immune cell that eliminates
foreign materials as a part of the host defense) were reported to play a key role in the pathogenesis of megalocytic interstitial nephritis
(6). The pathogenic mechanism is suspected to be associated with impairment of bacterial clearance by neutrophils and macrophages,
especially in immunodeficient patients (7). Alcohol abuse, as in our patient, was reported as another risk factor of this disease. Göttz et
al. (8) previously reported an alcoholic patient with E. coli bacteremia and biopsy-proven megalocytic interstitial nephritis. In that
paper, chronic alcohol consumption was reported to cause immune system damage and subsequently facilitate the development of the disease.
There is no clear clinical distinction between megalocytic interstitial nephritis and malakoplakia (9). Megalocytic interstitial nephritis
might be an early stage or a morphologic variation of malakoplakia. Malakoplakia is an uncommon form of chronic inflammatory granulomatous
disease that most frequently affects the urinary tract. Various organs such as the genitourinary tract, skin, retroperitoneum, lung,
gastrointestinal tract, testis, thyroid, and bone also can be involved (10). Kidney parenchymal involvement was reported in only 15% of
patients with malakoplakia (3). The typical histologic finding of renal malakoplakia shows many histiocytes with Michaelis-Gutmann (MG)
bodies, a distinctive basophilic inclusion containing calcium, phosphate, and often iron. These MG bodies are indicative of malakoplakia and
will stain with von Kossa stain (for calcium), Perls' stain (for iron), Prussian blue (for iron), and alizarin red (for calcium) (11). The
histology of megalocytic interstitial nephritis also reveals a polymorphous cellular infiltrate with predominant histiocytes containing
crystalloid material called von Hansemann cells but no MG bodies (12). The histological features were compatible with megalocytic
interstitial nephritis. The coexistence of C1q nephropathy which is characterized by dominant or codominant C1q staining (≥2+ intensity)
primarily in the mesangium was also reported. Because C1q molecules have affinity to monocytes, macrophages, and lymphocytes, and C1q
receptors are present in the mesangial matrix, the attachment of C1q molecules to histiocytes abundant in megalocytic interstitial nephritis
may lead to the co-existence of C1q nephropathy in our case (13, 14). Our patient required hemodialysis for one month and had poor renal
function recovery despite clearing the bacteria. The reason for the delayed recovery of renal function was probably a systemic infection so
severe that hemophagocytic histiocytes were seen in the bone marrow. Despite appropriate use of antibiotics, serious systemic inflammation
as shown by hemophagocytic histiocytosis and megalocytic interstitial nephritis could not be controlled, and thus steroids were used.
However, there are no established steroid treatment regimens in megalocytic interstitial nephritis or renal malakoplakia. Jo et al. (15)
used methylprednisolone 500 mg/day from the second hospital day, and Al-Sulaiman et al. (5) prescribed pulse methylprednisolone daily for
three days after admission. In these two patients, a high-dose steroid was administered early in the disease course, and the prognosis was
excellent. Our patient also was given high-dose steroids late in the disease course and she eventually achieved renal functional
improvement. Prompt and sufficient use of appropriate antibiotics is the most important treatment for megalocytic interstitial nephritis.
Also, steroid administration is worthwhile with regard to prevention of interstitial inflammation progression (16). In summary, megalocytic
interstitial nephritis is difficult to diagnose without histologic examination. Therefore, megalocytic intersitital nephritis should be
considered in patients with poor recovery from acute kidney injury following urinary tract infection. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose. Conception and coordination of the study: HR Jang. Design of ethical issues: JE Lee, WS Huh, YG Kim, DJ Kim, HY Oh.
Acquisition of data: GY Kwon. Manuscript approval: all authors. Features of the renal biopsy. (A) Under light microscopy (×200), the
mesangial matrix was mildly increased and the interstitium was multifocally infiltrated by histiocytic collection. (B) Tubules revealed
diffuse acute damage and minimal atrophy accompanied by mild interstitial fibrosis. Immunohistochemistry studies showed CD68 positivity in
infiltrated histiocytes. But stain for iron and calcium were negative. (C) Using immunofluorescence microscopy (×400), mesangial staining
was positive for C1q (2+). (D) Electron microscopy showed moderate effacement of epithelial foot processes. The mesangial matrix is
moderately increased with a few electron dense deposits. Change in serum creatinine level (A), WBC count (B), and clinical course during
hospitalization. After administration of methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg for megalocytic interstitial nephritis and severe HLH on the 38th
hospital day, both oliguric AKI and severe leukocytosis were dramatically improved. S-M, Solu-Medrol® (methylprednisolone sodium succinate);
BM, bone marrow.
