The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are heritable lysosomal storage diseases characterized by progressive neurological impairment and the
accumulation of autofluorescent storage granules in neurons and other cell types. Various forms of human neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis have
been attributed to mutations in at least 13 different genes. So far, mutations in the canine orthologs of 7 of these genes have been
identified in DNA from dogs with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. The identification of new causal mutations could lead to the establishment
of canine models to investigate the pathogenesis of the corresponding human neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses and to evaluate and optimize
therapeutic interventions for these fatal human diseases. We obtained blood and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded brain sections from a
rescue dog that was reported to be a young adult Chinese Crested. The dog was euthanized at approximately 19 months of age as a consequence
of progressive neurological decline that included blindness, anxiety, and cognitive impairment. A diagnosis of neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis was made based on neurological signs, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, and fluorescence microscopic and electron
microscopic examination of brain sections. We isolated DNA from the blood and used it to generate a whole genome sequence with 33-fold
average coverage. Among the 7.2 million potential sequence variants revealed by aligning the sequence reads to the canine genome reference
sequence was a homozygous single base pair deletion in the canine ortholog of one of 13 known human NCL genes: MFSD8:c.843delT.
MFSD8:c.843delT is predicted to cause a frame shift and premature stop codon resulting in a truncated protein, MFSD8:p.F282Lfs13*, missing
its 239 C-terminal amino acids. The MFSD8:c.843delT allele is absent from the whole genome sequences of 101 healthy canids or dogs with
other diseases. The genotyping of archived DNA from 1478 Chinese Cresteds did not identify any additional MFSD8:c.843delT homozygotes and
found only one heterozygote. We conclude that the neurodegenerative disease of the Chinese Crested rescue dog was neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis and that homozygosity for the MFSD8:c.843delT sequence variant was very likely to be the molecular-genetic cause of the
disease. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12917-014-0181-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users. The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are heritable lysosomal storage diseases characterized by progressive cognitive
decline, motor impairment, vision loss, seizures, and progressive brain atrophy together with the accumulation of autofluorescent lysosomal
storage bodies in the brain, the retina and other tissues . Human NCLs have been attributed to mutations in at least 13 different genes . As
indicated in Table 1, mutations in the canine orthologs of 7 of these genes have been associated with NCL in various dog breeds . In
addition, a neurodegenerative disease in American Staffordshire Terriers with an ARSG mutation was initially described as an NCL ; however,
based on a recent description of Arsg-knockout mice , the American Staffordshire Terrier disease was more likely a
mucopolysaccaridosis.Table 1 Human genes known to harbor NCL-causing mutations and their orthologs known to cause NCL in dogs Human disease
Mutant gene Mutant protein Canine disease described? CLN1 PPT1 Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1Yes CLN2 TPP1 Tripeptidyl peptidase 1Yes CLN3
CLN3 CLN3NoCLN4 DNAJC5 DNAJC5NoCLN5 CLN5 CLN5Yes CLN6 CLN6 CLN6Yes CLN7 MFSD8 MFSD8Yes [Current report]CLN8 CLN8 CLN8Yes CLN10 CTSD
Cathepsin DYes CLN11 GRN GranulinNoCLN12 ATP13A2 ATP13A2Yes CLN13 CTSF Cathepsin FNoCLN14 KCTD7 KCTD7No Human genes known to harbor NCL-
causing mutations and their orthologs known to cause NCL in dogs With written consent from the owner we obtained blood and formalin-fixed
brain tissue from a young adult Chinese Crested that was euthanized due to progressive neurological decline accompanied by brain atrophy.
The clinical signs suggested that neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis was the underlying disease. The fixed tissue was evaluated for the presence
of the autofluorescent storage material that is characteristic of the NCLs. DNA was extracted from the blood and used to generate a whole
genome sequence (WGS) which provided an opportunity to identify the disease-causing mutation. An approximately 1.5-year-old, male neutered
Chinese Crested presented for disorientation, blindness and fearful behavior. The dog had been adopted as a rescue at approximately 4 months
of age. The dog had always licked compulsively. At about 1 year of age, he became withdrawn, less playful, nervous, and fearful. One month
prior to admission, he developed dilated pupils and began bumping into objects. He also had episodes of behavioral arrest. Ophthalmologic
examination revealed an absent menace response, a positive dazzle reflex, and a sluggish, incomplete pupillary light reflex. Ocular exam
revealed no abnormalities, and an ERG was within normal limits. Imaging of the brain was performed with a 1.5 T GE MRI which included T2,
FLAIR, GRE T1*, and T1 pre- and post-contrast sequences. T2 weighted images showed a lack of distinction between grey matter and white
matter. Enlarged ventricles and increased prominence of sulci of the cerebrum and cerebellum suggested diffuse brain atrophy
(Figure 1).Figure 1 T2 weighted MRI from the affected dog. In the sagittal plane (A) prominent sulci in the cerebellum (asterisk) and the
prominent fourth ventricle below the cerebellum indicates atrophy. In the transverse plane (B), prominent sulci in the cerebrum (arrows) and
dilated lateral ventricles (asterisks) indicate atrophy. The distinction between grey matter and white matter in the remaining cerebral
cortex is obscured. T2 weighted MRI from the affected dog. In the sagittal plane (A) prominent sulci in the cerebellum (asterisk) and the
prominent fourth ventricle below the cerebellum indicates atrophy. In the transverse plane (B), prominent sulci in the cerebrum (arrows) and
dilated lateral ventricles (asterisks) indicate atrophy. The distinction between grey matter and white matter in the remaining cerebral
cortex is obscured. Over the next few weeks, the Chinese Crested became more disoriented and stopped responding to the owner. He would yelp
in fear randomly and resisted being held. He was sleeping more and developed pica. On presentation, he was agitated and hyper-responsive to
stimuli. He showed a sensory ataxia in all 4 limbs, with normal proprioceptive positioning. Other than the previously described
ophthalmologic abnormalities, cranial nerves were normal, as were the spinal reflexes. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was within normal
limits. A progressive neurodegenerative disease was suspected, and the dog was euthanized. At necropsy, slices of the cerebellum and
cerebral cortex were fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin for routine histological examination. Unstained sections of these tissues
were deparaffinized and examined with fluorescence microscopy as previously described . Both the cerebellum and the cerebral cortex
exhibited massive intracellular accumulations of autofluorescent material with a golden yellow emission under blue light illumination
(Figure 2). In the cerebellum storage material was most prominent in the Purkinje cells, but substantial amounts of this material were also
present in the granular layer (Figure 2A and B). Perinuclear accumulations of autofluorescent storage granules were observed in neurons
throughout the cerebral cortex (Figure 2C). Additional sections of the cerebellum were immunostained for glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) as previously described . In the cerebellar medulla there was a dramatic increase in GFAP staining intensity with concentration of
the staining in glial cell perinuclear cytoplasm as well as in the cell processes (Figure 3A). By comparison, GFAP staining in the
cerebellar medulla from a normal 12-month-old Beagle was much less intense and was more diffuse (Figure 3B). The GFAP staining pattern
observed in the affected dog is characteristic of the astrogliosis that occurs in many neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory conditions
.Figure 2 Fluorescence micrographs of brain sections of cerebellum (A and B) and cerebral cortex (C) demonstrating the massive intracellular
accumulation of yellow-emitting autofluorescent storage bodies. In the cerebellum the storage body accumulation was most pronounced in the
Purkinje cells (arrows in A and B). The section in (A) was cut perpendicular to the plane of the Purkinje cell layer and the section in (B)
was cut parallel to the plane of the Purkinje cell layer. The storage body accumulation in the neurons of the cerebral cortex was
perinuclear and asymmetric. Bar in (C) indicates the magnification for all 3 micrographs.Figure 3 Micrographs of sections of the cerebellar
medulla from the Chinese Crested with signs of neuronal ceroid lipofuscdinosis (A) and from a normal 12-month-old Beagle (B). The sections
were immunostained for GFAP (brown stain) and were counterstained with hematoxylin (blue). Bar in (B) indicates the magnification of both
micrographs. Fluorescence micrographs of brain sections of cerebellum (A and B) and cerebral cortex (C) demonstrating the massive
intracellular accumulation of yellow-emitting autofluorescent storage bodies. In the cerebellum the storage body accumulation was most
pronounced in the Purkinje cells (arrows in A and B). The section in (A) was cut perpendicular to the plane of the Purkinje cell layer and
the section in (B) was cut parallel to the plane of the Purkinje cell layer. The storage body accumulation in the neurons of the cerebral
cortex was perinuclear and asymmetric. Bar in (C) indicates the magnification for all 3 micrographs. Micrographs of sections of the
cerebellar medulla from the Chinese Crested with signs of neuronal ceroid lipofuscdinosis (A) and from a normal 12-month-old Beagle (B). The
sections were immunostained for GFAP (brown stain) and were counterstained with hematoxylin (blue). Bar in (B) indicates the magnification
of both micrographs. To investigate the ultrastructural appearance of the storage material, deparaffinized and rehydrated tissue from the
cerebellum was post-fixed in osmium tetroxide and processed for electron microscopic examination using established procedures . The storage
material consisted primarily of aggregates of lamellar structures organized in various patterns similar to those previously described as
fingerprint in appearance (Figure 4). However, none of the crystalline cross-hatched structures of classical fingerprint inclusions
characteristic of some NCLs were seen .Figure 4 Electron micrographs of the storage material from cerebellar Purkinje cells. The storage
bodies contained spherical aggregates of lamellar material that were condensed in some storage bodies (A) and more loosely organized in
others (B). Electron micrographs of the storage material from cerebellar Purkinje cells. The storage bodies contained spherical aggregates
of lamellar material that were condensed in some storage bodies (A) and more loosely organized in others (B). DNA was isolated from the
blood as previously described and submitted to the University of Missouri DNA Core Facility for library preparation and sequencing. Two PCR-
free paired-end libraries were created with the Illumina TruSeq DNA PCR-Free Sample Preparation Kit. One had a fragment size of
approximately 350 bp and the fragment size of the other was approximately 550 bp. Each library was sequenced on a flow-cell lane of an
Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencer. The adaptors were trimmed with custom Perl scripts and the adaptor-trimmed reads were deposited in the
Sequence Read Archive (accession SRR1594157). MaSuRCA v2.2.2 software was used to error correct the adapter-trimmed reads. The trimmed and
error-corrected reads were aligned to the CanFam3.1 reference genome assembly with NextGENe software (SoftGenetics), which was also used for
the identification and initial categorization of the sequence variants. Likely false positive variant calls were identified and removed with
custom Perl scripts. The genome-wide average coverage was 33 fold. The 7.2 million potential sequence variants were uploaded to a custom
PostgreSQL database that also contained the variant calls from another 101 canid WGSs. Forty-three of these control WGSs were from our group
and 58 were from others listed in the Acknowledgements. Almost all of the NCLs are rare, recessively inherited diseases, so we used an
algorithm that identifies variants that were homozygous in the affected dog, absent from the 101 control WGS and predicted to alter the
primary structure of the gene products. Sixty seven of the sequence variants met these criteria (Additional file 1: Table S1); however, none
of them were from any of the 13 known human NCL genes. One of the 67 homozygous, unique, coding variants in the Chinese Crested’s WGS was
PCYOX1:c.1064C>T (Figure 5A). This missense mutation predicts a p.T355I amino acid substitution in the gene product, prenylcysteine lyase.
We considered PCYOX1:c.1064C>T to be a candidate for causality because earlier investigators had predicted that prenylcysteine lyase
deficiencies might cause NCL . Thus, we used flanking PCR primers 5’-TCTCCTGTTTATTATAGCAAG-3’ and 5’-TTTGAGAACATTGATATGCTT-3’ to amplify and
verify the sequence variant by automated Sanger sequencing (Figure 5B). We next devised a TaqMan allelic discrimination assay to genotype
archived DNA samples at PCYOX1:c.1064C>T. For this assay the PCR primers were 5’-CCATCAGTATTACCAACATATAGTGACAACT-3’ and
5’-GGTGGTTAAGATTGTACTGAGATCGA-3’ and the competing probes were 5’-VIC-AGCTAAAAAGAATTGAATTC-MBG-3’ (variant allele) and 5’-FAM-
AGCTAAAAAGAGTTGAATTC-MBG-3’ (reference allele). We used this assay to genotype archived samples from 325 randomly selected Chinese Cresteds
and found that 219 samples were homozygous for the reference c.1064C allele, 86 samples were heterozygous and 20 samples were homozygous for
the variant c.1064T allele. Thus, the T allele frequency for this random cohort of Chinese Cresteds was 0.19 – much higher than would be
expected if c.1064T homozygosity were the cause of this rare NCL. A check of the clinical records indicated that 2 of the c.1064T
homozygotes were over 10 years old and considered by their owners to be healthy. It is, therefore, unlikely that the PCYOX1:c.1064T allele
causes or contributes to the Chinese Crested’s NCL. This conclusion is consistent with a report that nullizygous Pcyox1 knockout mice do not
show clinical signs of disease .Figure 5 Nucleotide sequence of NCL-affected Chinese Crested around PCYOX1:c.1064C > T . (A) Shows the
alignment of sequence reads from the WGS as presented by the NextGENe Viewer. Starting at the top the features include the nucleotide
coordinates on CFA10, the gene (in this case PCYOX1), the codon number, the predicted amino acid sequence translated from the canine genome
reference sequence, the predicted amino acid sequence translated from the aligned WGS reads, the genome-wide nucleotide coordinates, the
regional reference canine genome sequence, the corresponding nucleotide sequence derived from the aligned WGS reads, and the sequences of
the individual reads. The symbols “>” and “<” before or after the reads point in the directions that the reads were generated. Nucleotide
differences between the reference sequence and the aligned sequence are highlighted. In this case, a homozygous C>T transition that predicts
a T355I amino acid substitution is supported by 42 reads. (B) Automated Sanger sequencing confirmed the C>T transition. Nucleotide sequence
of NCL-affected Chinese Crested around PCYOX1:c.1064C > T . (A) Shows the alignment of sequence reads from the WGS as presented by the
NextGENe Viewer. Starting at the top the features include the nucleotide coordinates on CFA10, the gene (in this case PCYOX1), the codon
number, the predicted amino acid sequence translated from the canine genome reference sequence, the predicted amino acid sequence translated
from the aligned WGS reads, the genome-wide nucleotide coordinates, the regional reference canine genome sequence, the corresponding
nucleotide sequence derived from the aligned WGS reads, and the sequences of the individual reads. The symbols “>” and “<” before or after
the reads point in the directions that the reads were generated. Nucleotide differences between the reference sequence and the aligned
sequence are highlighted. In this case, a homozygous C>T transition that predicts a T355I amino acid substitution is supported by 42 reads.
(B) Automated Sanger sequencing confirmed the C>T transition. Because a plausible relationship between NCL and the other homozygous, unique,
coding variants was not apparent, we tried a different strategy for mutation discovery. We used the NextGENeViewer to observe the Chinese
Crested alignment and identified sequence variants by scanning through all 130 coding exons in the canine orthologs of the 13 genes
associated with human NCL (Table 1). The results are summarized in Table 2. No variants were found in the coding exons of PPT1, DNAJC5,
CLN5, CTSD, or KCTD7. In and around the coding exons of the other 8 candidate genes, we found 26 sequence variants including 14 synonymous
mutations that are unlikely to cause disease. In addition, we found 6 missense mutations, 4 intronic variants within 8 bp of an exon where
they could affect exon splicing, one complex deletion-insertion that results in the deletion of 7 codons and the insertion of 2 codons, and
a single-base deletion and frame shift. The missense mutations, the intronic variants and the complex deletion-insertion were all common
among the control WGSs from healthy dogs or dogs with unrelated diseases and thus are unlikely to cause the Chinese Crested’s rare NCL. In
contrast MFSD8:c.843delT, the single-base deletion and frame shift, occurred as a homozygous sequence variant in the affected Chinese, but
was absent from the 101 control WGSs in our data set.Table 2 Homozygous variants in the coding exons of NCL genes in the WGS of the Chinese
Crested with NCL Gene Exons with no variants Variants Exon cDNA change A.A. change Comment TPP1 1-6, 8-127c.711A>Gp.A237ASilent
mutation7c.885C>Tp.P295PSilent mutation PPT1 1-9 CLN3 1,2,4-133c.209A>Gp.E70GCommon allele14c.1057-3 T>CCommon
allele15c.1309C>Tp.L437LSilent mutation DNAJC5 1-4 CLN5 1-4 CLN6 2,3,5-71c.86A>Gp.R29KCommon allele4c.327G>Tp.L109LSilent mutation MFSD8
1-7,9-128c.846delTp.F282fsUnique allele CLN8 21c.327A>Gp.T109TSilent mutation CTSD 1-9 GRN 1-9,1110c.1326_1344delinsp.LPPAPTH
442_448FCCommon alleleCTGC ATP13A2 2,4,6,7, 9,10,12-14,16-18,20-23,26,271c.208G>Ap.A70TCommon allele3c.509A>Gp.H170RCommon
allele5c.606-8A>GCommon allele5c.639C>Tp.D213DSilent mutation6c.726T>Gp.R242RSilent mutation6c.728T>Cp.M243TCommon
allele8c.891T>Cp.Y297YSilent mutation11c.1206T>Cp.P402PSilent mutation15c.1596-8_-6TCT> CCGCommon allele15c.1692T>Cp.Y564YSilent
mutation19c.2369+5_+8CCCT> GCTGCommon allele24c.3012>TCp.L1004LSilent mutation25c.3120C>Tp.F1040FSilent mutation25c.3156A>Gp.A1052ASilent
mutation28c.3763A>Gp.M255VCommon allele CTSF 2-131c.169A>Cp.R57RSilent mutation KCTD7 1-4 Homozygous variants in the coding exons of NCL
genes in the WGS of the Chinese Crested with NCL Figure 6A shows the affected Chinese Crested alignment around MFSD8:c.843delT. This
sequence variant was filtered from our earlier search for unique, homozygous, coding variants because it was classified as a heterozygous
variant. Visual inspection of the alignment indicated that one of three consecutive deoxythymidines (or Ts) was deleted. For all reads that
spanned this TTT segment the alignment algorithm positioned the deletion at the third (or 3’ most) T. However, 1 read was initiated within
the TTT region and extended in the 3’ direction and another read was initiated from the 3’ direction and ended within the TTT region. Both
of these reads could be perfectly aligned to the reference sequence with a T at position MFSD8:c.843, so the NextGENe software classified
the variant at this position as a heterozygous T deletion. In our experience, homozygous partial deletions of tandem repeats have often been
misclassified as heterozygous. We now recognize these errors because the reads supporting the deletion alleles are much more numerous than
the reads supporting the reference sequence alleles.Figure 6 Nucleotide sequence of NCL-affected Chinese Crested around MFSD8:c.843delT .
(A) Shows the NextGENe Viewer display of the alignment of WGS reads around MFSD8:c.843delT. All 30 reads that span the 3 consecutive Ts that
make up codon 282 show a highlighted 1 bp deletion. The read that is the third from the top starts within the TTT sequence and the read at
the bottom ends within the TTT sequence. Because these 2 reads aligned with a T at the position corresponding to MFSD8:c.843, the NextGENe
software scored the variant at C.843 as a heterozygous T deletion. (B) Automated Sanger sequencing indicated that the NCL-affected Chinese
Crested had a homozygous T deletion. Nucleotide sequence of NCL-affected Chinese Crested around MFSD8:c.843delT . (A) Shows the NextGENe
Viewer display of the alignment of WGS reads around MFSD8:c.843delT. All 30 reads that span the 3 consecutive Ts that make up codon 282 show
a highlighted 1 bp deletion. The read that is the third from the top starts within the TTT sequence and the read at the bottom ends within
the TTT sequence. Because these 2 reads aligned with a T at the position corresponding to MFSD8:c.843, the NextGENe software scored the
variant at C.843 as a heterozygous T deletion. (B) Automated Sanger sequencing indicated that the NCL-affected Chinese Crested had a
homozygous T deletion. MFSD8:c.843delT was predicted to encode MFSD8:p.F282Lfs13*, a truncated variant of the gene product, MSFD8. MFSD8 is
member 8 in the family of mammalian major facilitator superfamily (MFS) domain-containing proteins. The MFS domain consists of 12
transmembrane helices. Although the function of MFSD8 has not been established, other MFS domain-containing proteins transport a diverse
variety of substances across biomembranes . MFSD8 is expressed throughout the body . An N-terminal dileucine motif targets the MFSD8 protein
to lysosomal membranes where it may control the passage of unknown substrates into or out of the lysosomes. The MFSD8:p.F282Lfs13* frame
shift was predicted to occur within the 7th transmembrane helix and would delete 239 C-terminal codons. The resulting truncated protein
would lack the 5 C-terminal transmembrane helices of the MFS domain and thus be very unlikely to retain function. In 2007, MFSD mutations
were first reported to cause a subtype of human NCL , now referred to as CLN7. Since then, a total of at least 22 MFSD mutations have been
identified in CLN7 patients . In most CLN7 patients, the initial signs occurred between 2 and 5 years of age. Typically, the initial signs
were one or more of the following: developmental delay or regression, stereotyped hand movements, seizures, ataxia, and loss of vision. The
disease progressed rapidly and most CLN7 patients exhibited myoclonus and mental regression and became wheelchair bound before their 7th
birthday. Serial magnetic resonance images from one CLN7 patient showed progressive cortical and cerebellar atrophy . Most CLN7 patients
have died before their 13th birthday . The vision loss, ataxia, brain atrophy, and cognitive decline in the Chinese Crested were comparable
to the signs reported in children. These signs, however, were not apparent until the dog reached young adulthood. Nonetheless, the earlier
onset of excessive licking may have been comparable to the stereotyped hand movements reported in children. No seizures or myoclonus were
reported in the dog. Seizures and myoclonus occur late in the course of disease in other canine NCLs , and the Chinese Crested may have been
euthanized before those signs would have developed. A recent report described the creation and characterization of an Mfsd8 knockout mouse
model . The Mfsd8 nullizygous mice had a depletion of retinal photoreceptors and an accumulation of neuronal autofluorescent storage bodies.
The ultrastructural appearance of the storage material in these mice was similar to that observed in the affected Chinese Crested dog.
However, unlike the human CLN7 patients and our dog, the Mfsd8 nullizygous mice did not exhibit any neurologic signs, behavior changes,
brain atrophy or premature death . We were eager to confirm our findings in other dogs and, if possible, to establish an MFSD8-deficient
animal model that, like the human CLN7 patients, develops neurodegeneration and progressive neurological impairment. We, therefore, devised
a TaqMan allelic discrimination assay to genotype archived DNA samples at MFSD8:c.843. The PCR primers for this assay were
5’-CTGTTGTGGCCACTAATATTGTGTT-3’ and 5’-TGAAGACAGAATAAAACTTACGTTTCAAAAAGG-3’ and the competing probes were 5’-VIC-CGTGATTCTATTATCTTTG-MBG-3’
(variant allele) and 5’-FAM-CGTGATTCTATTTATCTTTG-MBG-3’ (reference allele). With this assay we genotyped archived DNA samples from 1,478
Chinese Cresteds. All but one of these samples were homozygous for the reference MFSD8:c.843T allele. A single sample was heterozygous for
c.843delT. That sample was obtained for an unrelated analysis in 2010 from a 10-year-old Chinese Crested that lived in Sweden. This
indicates that although the mutant allele is rare, it has a widespread geographic distribution. Based on the clinical neurological signs,
the brain atrophy, the massive accumulation of autofluorescent storage bodies in the brain, and the lamellar ultrastructure of the material
within the storage bodies, we conclude that the Chinese Crested’s disease should be classified as an NCL. Also, we conclude that the
homozygous MFSD8:c.843delT deletion is very likely to be the molecular genetic cause of this NCL. The second conclusion was reached because
a variety of mutations in the human ortholog have caused a clinically similar disease in CLN7 patients and because the deletion of c.843T
creates a frame shift predicted to cause the mutant gene to encode a severely truncated protein without function. Because the
MFSD8:c.843delT allele appears to be quite rare even among Chinese Cresteds, we do not believe that commercial DNA testing for the deletion
is warranted. Nonetheless, the identification of additional MFSD8:c.843delT homozygous dogs with NCL would be strong added support that this
deletion can cause recessive canine NCL. Furthermore, if reproductively intact dogs with this deletion could be identified, they could be
the foundation for a research colony to provide an animal model with a disease phenotype that mirrors CLN7 more closely than the current
homozygous Mfsd8 knockout mouse. The potential value of canine NCL models is illustrated by the canine model for human CLN2 . Preclinical
studies using this model served as the basis for an ongoing human clinical trial of enzyme replacement therapy . We have described a
distinct young-adult-onset neurodegenerative disease of Chinese Cresteds and have used whole-genome sequencing to identify its molecular
genetic cause (manuscript in preparation). If veterinarians or researchers have access to unexplained cases of neurodegenerative diseases of
Chinese Cresteds (or dogs of other breeds), we would like to help establish molecular genetic diagnoses. Additional file 1: Table S1.
Homozygous, unique coding variants in whole genome sequence of Chinese Crested with NCL. Homozygous, unique coding variants in whole genome
sequence of Chinese Crested with NCL. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis Whole genome sequence Major facilitator superfamily Glial fibrillary
acidic protein Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JG identified the
causal allele in the sequence alignment, genotyped and sequenced samples from individual dogs, and helped to draft the manuscript. DPO
analysed the clinical record and helped to draft the manuscript. TM prepared the samples for whole genome sequencing. NJO recognized that
the clinical history of the Chinese Crested was consistent with NCL. JFT conceived of our overall strategy for WGS analysis and guided the
development of the data analysis pipeline. RDS developed the data analysis pipeline, used the pipeline for pre-alignment sequence
manipulation, alignment, and post-alignment variant prioritization, and deposited the sequence data in the Sequence Read Archive. MLK
conducted the fluorescence microscopy and the electron microscopy studies and helped to draft the manuscript. GSJ supervised the preparation
of the samples for whole genome sequencing and the genotyping and Sanger sequencing of samples from individual dogs and drafted the
manuscript with input as previously indicated. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported in part by Mizzou
Advantage, the University of Missouri Research Board, and the Batten Disease Support and Research Association. We thank Stacey Sullivan of
the Animal Specialty Group, Los Angeles, CA for bringing the case to our attention and Dr. Joan Coates, University of Missouri, for
supplying us with tissue from a normal healthy dog. We also thank Robert Wayne of the University of California Los Angeles, Matt Huntelman
of the Translational Genomics Research Institute, Kate Meurs and Josh Stern of North Carolina State University and Paula Henthorn of the
University of Pennsylvania for providing genome sequence data for use as controls.
