Dear Editor, Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) (OMIM 209900) is an autosomal recessive, clinically and genetically heterogeneous ciliopathy [1,
2]. The prevalence of BBS is relatively low, ranging from 1:100,000 in the North American to 1:160,000 in the European population, and is
rarely found in East Asia [3, 4]. To date, at least fifteen BBS genes (BBS1-14, SDCCAG8) have been identified, accounting for 70-76% of BBS
cases. Among them, BBS 1, 2, 10, and 12 are considered the major causative genes [3, 4, 5]. Correlation between the BBS genotype and
phenotype varies among and within families [1, 3]. Here, we report the first genetically confirmed BBS case in a Korean family with a
compound heterozygous mutation of the BBS7 gene. A 26-yr-old Korean male (proband) was the second son of non-consanguineous Korean parents.
He was blind, mentally retarded, and truncally obese. Past history showed that he had undergone an operation for an atrial septal defect at
the age of four. A chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema. Renal sonogram revealed bilateral small-sized kidneys, increased
renal parenchymal echogenicity, and poor corticomedullary differentiation, together with laboratory findings, were indicative of an end-
stage renal disease. Fundus examination revealed pigmentary changes as typically observed in retinitis pigmentosa with optic disc atrophy
(Fig. 1). The proband was treated with maintenance hemodialysis and antihypertensive medications. The proband's 28-yr-old brother showed
similar clinical findings, but his parents, younger sister, and other blood relatives presented as non-specific (Fig. 2A). Clinical
characteristics of the proband and his brother are summarized in Table 1, and both of their diagnoses were consistent with the BBS
diagnostic criteria [1, 2]. However, his brother showed some different phenotypes: unilateral kidney agenesis with milder renal symptoms, no
atrial septal defect with milder cardiovascular symptoms, and deep vein thrombosis of the left lower extremity. Genetic studies conducted on
the fourteen known BBS genes (BBS1-BBS14) from all family members by Sanger sequencing revealed that the proband and his brother shared the
same compound heterozygous variants of the BBS7 gene (NM_176824.2) (Fig. 2B). One of which was a novel variant (c.103-1G>A) in the consensus
splice acceptor site, which altered the splicing recognition site of 'AG' to 'AA' at the BBS7 gene intron 2 and exon 3 boundary. In silico
analysis of the mutant splice site using a neural network splice site scoring program (NNSPLICE 0.9 version) predicted that the splice site
would be abolished. The other variant was a c.728G>A (p.Cys243Tyr) missense mutation, which has been reported in a case describing juvenile
retinitis pigmentosa, by Wang et al. . The father was a heterozygous carrier for c.103-1G>A, and the mother was a heterozygous carrier for
c.728G>A. Additionally, array comparative genomic hybridization analysis using the NimbleGen 3×720 K array (Roche NimbleGen Inc., Madison,
WI, USA) revealed a normal hybridization pattern with no evidence of any significant chromosomal imbalance. BBS is a ciliopathy involving
multiple systems, characterized by a primarily autosomal recessive inheritance, but three mutational alleles in two BBS genes have been
implicated (trialleic inheritance) in some families [4, 7]. No additional pathogenic allele was found in other BBS genes, from BBS1 to
BBS14, in this case. BBS proteins are known to play an important role in ciliary biogenesis and signaling [2, 8], and BBS7 protein
dysfunctions or abnormalities can cause structural and functional defects in cilia, and as a result, affect variable organs in the body [9,
10]. The present case showed neither polydactyly, as usually seen in 69-82% of affected individuals, nor hypogonadism, usually seen in
16-96% of affected individuals according to previous reports (Table 1) [1, 3]. Interestingly, minor phenotypic variabilities, including
renal and cardiac anomalies were also identified within the family. Therefore, further work is required to differentiate BBS from the other
ciliopathies, because the spectrums of BBS can overlap with the other ciliopathies such as the McKusick-Kaufan syndrome, which involves the
limb, cardiac and associated urogenital systems, with BBS6 as the causative gene; or the Alström syndrome, which leads to obesity, retinal
and endocrine systems with ALMS1 as the causative gene [1, 2, 3]. Nevertheless, 24-30% of BBS cases show no mutations in BBS genes [3, 4,
5]. BBS phenotype could be affected not only by transcription of DNA mutations, but also by other etiologies not addressed in this study,
such as protein defects associated with noncoding RNA regulatory mechanisms or methylation. Further studies are warranted to clarify these
issues. This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by
the Ministry of Education (NRF-2013R1A1A2006801). No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Fundus
photograph of the proband with Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Fundus examination showed optic disc atrophy with indistinct margins. Marked
arteriolar narrowing is observed, and bone spicule pigmentations are present in the mid-periphery of the retina. Macular dystrophy is also
observed in both eyes. Characterization of the family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome. (A) Pedigree showing the segregation of c.103-1G>A and
c.728G>A variants. The arrow indicates the proband of the family. (B) Sequencing analysis revealed a compound heterozygous mutation of
c.103-1G>A (a consensus splice acceptor site) at the intron 2 and the exon 3 boundary, and c.728G>A (p.Cys243Tyr) at the exon 8 of the BBS7
gene. Features of the proband and his brother per the diagnostic criteria of Bardet-Biedl syndrome
