Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Combination treatment of pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) plus ribavirin for renal
transplant recipients (RTRs) with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection remains controversial, as it has been associated with a high risk of
rejection, resulting in graft loss and a reduction in patient survival. We present a special case of an elderly RTR who experienced
treatment of HCV infection 8 years after renal transplant. There was no rejection episode during or after PEG-IFN treatment. The patient
first received a 24-week therapy and a further 60-week course due to relapse. Cessation of both courses corresponded to an achieved end-of-
treatment response. However, HCV infection reappeared shortly after cessation of the 60-week treatment period. This case highlights the
safety of PEG-IFN therapy for elderly RTR and the potential importance of combination pretreatment for patients undergoing renal
transplantation. Authors’ contributions: M-HZ planned the article and contributed to data collection, discussing content, writing and
reviewing the article. Y-PC conceived the study and participated in its design, study supervision and helping to writing the article. There
was no financial support or funding for this case report. Informed patient consent was obtained for publication of this case report. It is
well known that hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is the major cause of chronic liver disease after renal transplantation. The prevalence of
anti-HCV varies between 10% and 49% in patients who undergo renal transplantation.1 Age, particularly >50 years, is considered to be an
independent risk factor for the progression of fibrosis and development of cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC), which
results in worse patient- and allograft-survival rates than observed in younger patients.2 However, treatment with pegylated interferon
(PEG-IFN) plus ribavirin for renal transplant recipients (RTRs) with HCV infection remains controversial, as it has been associated with a
high risk of rejection, resulting in graft loss and reduced patient survival.3 A 60-year-old man presented to the First Affiliated Hospital
of Wenzhou Medical University for routine examination. The patient suffered from uremia secondary to chronic renal failure at the age of 50
years in May 1998. Afterwards, he underwent renal transplantation in November of the same year. Following the procedure, immunosuppression
was performed with ciclosporin with a follow-up as an outpatient every 2 weeks. Subsequently, the patient acquired HCV infection through
hemodialysis perioperatively; the renal allograft showed stable function and liver function remained stable after the transplantation
procedure. Clinical data of renal and liver function and the concentration of ciclosporin during the follow-up from 2000 to 2007 are
summarized in Figure 1. A renal biopsy was performed in 2004 and 2008 and both biopsies showed slight IgA nephropathy with no evidence of
allograft rejection. Major laboratory results during 8-year follow-up after renal transplantation. The green line represents the level of
creatinine, the brown line the level of alanine aminotransferase, and the purple line the level of ciclosporin. All findings of physical
examination were unremarkable. However, results from laboratory tests showed aspartate aminotransferase was 66 IU/L (normal range 5–60 IU/L)
and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) rose to 103 IU/L (normal range 5–55 IU/L). The ALT level showed elevation at subsequent follow-ups, which
was suggestive of progressive liver dysfunction. Suspecting iatrogenic hepatitis, the immunosuppressant was changed from ciclosporin to
FK-506 (tacrolimus); however, there was no improvement in liver function. The HCV-RNA assay showed the presence of an HCV genotype 1b
infection with a serum virus load of 7.7 × 106 IU/mL (normal range ≤5 × 102 IU/L). He was diagnosed with CHC and started receiving PEG-
IFN-α-2a therapy. Written informed consent was obtained before treatment. The patient's pretreatment laboratory tests, including thyroid
function and white blood cell count, were all in the normal range (see Supplementary online file, http://links.lww.com/MD/A137). On February
27th, 2008, the patient was started on a 24-week course of PEG-IFN-α-2a, 135 μg/wk administered subcutaneously. Ribavirin was added at a
dose of 400 mg/d. However, consistent with the association of hemolytic anemia as a known severe adverse effect (AE) of ribavirin use, the
patient's hemoglobin level decreased to 72 g/L (normal range 120–160 g/L) at week 2. Ribavirin therapy was stopped and PEG-IFN-α-2a therapy
continued. The level of hemoglobin subsequently stabilized at 110 g/L by week 7. At week 12, HCV-RNA was undetectable and remained negative
until week 24. Given the time taken to attain undetectable HCV-RNA, the patient achieved early virus response (defined as ≥2 log10 reduction
of serum HCV RNA after 12 weeks of antiviral therapy3) and end-of-treatment response (ETR, which was defined as undetectable HCV RNA by
qualitative assay at the end of 24 or 48 weeks of treatment).3 There was a remarkable improvement in the ALT level (23 IU/L) at week 24 and
allograft function was steady with creatinine of 97 μmol/L. FK-506 was used as maintenance immunosuppression therapy throughout the
duration. In spite of this satisfactory profile, a viral relapse with HCV-RNA of 6.3 × 107 IU/mL occurred 4 months after the end of PEG-
IFN-α-2a therapy (Figure 2) and the patient was admitted to the hospital for treatment of recurrent hepatitis. PEG-IFN-α-2a 135 μg/wk was
reinitiated. Ribavirin was not administered due to the patient's history of hemolytic anemia. The patient was difficult to treat, as he was
60 years’ old presenting with HCV genotype 1b relapse. Therefore, the treatment duration was extended to 72 weeks and he attained
undetectable HCV-RNA level at week 8. PEG-IFN-α-2a monotherapy continued until week 60, when the patient presented with severe depression
and anxiety, and PEG-IFN-α-2a treatment was stopped. Viral relapse occurred 3 weeks after the cessation of PEG-IFN-α-2a treatment. However,
he maintained normal renal function with a creatinine level of 97 μmol/L in spite of prolonged PEG-IFN-α-2a therapy. Clinical data from both
24-week and 60-week treatment regimes are summarized in Figure 2. Major laboratory results during 2-year pegylated interferon-α-2a
treatment. (A) Creatinine, (B) alanine aminotransferase, (C) FK-506, (D) HCV-RNA. Pageaux et al4 demonstrated that PEG-IFN-α-2a/2b may be a
safe and effective treatment in RTRs with HCV. The ETR was 75% and the sustained virological response (SVR) was 50%. Most importantly, there
was no renal graft rejection reported in any of the patients included, as the mean delay between transplantation and PEG-IFN-α-2a/2b
administration was about 16 years. It suggested that the graft was well-tolerated and likely reduced the risk of rejection related to PEG-
IFN use. There also appeared to be a steady reduction in the incidence of acute rejection with elderly RTRs. It is possible that age-related
immunosenescence may make elderly patients more vulnerable to the effects of immunosuppression and long-time graft survival.5 This patient
described here was a 60-year-old man, who received PEG-IFN-α-2a therapy 8 years after transplantation and FK-506. The drug was well
tolerated and he remained well controlled during the treatment period. His creatinine values at time of biopsy and throughout follow-up
periods prior to treatment with PEG-IFN-α-2a suggested normal renal function. A limited number of studies describing the efficacy of
antiviral treatment in elderly patients with CHC showed that age was a negative predictive factor regarding SVR. Antonucci et al6 suggested
that the probability of a good response to PEG-IFN plus ribavirin combined therapy was decreased for patients around 40 years old who were
infected with genotype 1 HCV. Moreover, Dai et al7 performed a prospective study in 210 chronic HCV patients aged 50 years or more: 140 in
the 50–64 years group and 70 in the older group, confirming that the SVR was lower in the older patient group. HCV genotype was also a major
predictor of SVR in elderly patients. Huang et al2 investigated 70 elderly patients (Group A) with HCV infection and 140 sex- and HCV
genotype-matched controls (Group B). They were allocated to receive PEG-IFN-α-2a therapy. The SVR was substantially lower in group A than in
group B (67.1% vs 78.6%; P = 0.07). The inferiority of the SVR in group A was observed among patients with HCV genotype 1 (51.9% vs 75.9%;
P = 0.03), but not among patients with HCV genotype 2 or 3 (76.7% vs 80.2%; P = 0.65). This study suggests that older patients with HCV
infection, especially those in the subgroup infected with HCV genotype 1, had a lower SVR. Other reasons that may contribute to a reduced
treatment response rate may be associated with a greater frequency of AE and reduced tolerance to the standard-of-care regimen. PEG-IFN-
related AE was the principal cause for patients to decline or stop treatment. Almost all patients treated with PEG-IFN had experienced ≥1
AEs during the course of therapy. The most common AEs were influenza-like side effects such as fatigue, headache, fever, and rigors, which
occurred in more than half of the patients, and psychiatric side effects (eg, depression, irritability, and insomnia), which occurred in 22%
to 31% of patients.3 Preexisting underlying diseases, such as diabetes mellitus and chronic kidney disease, further reduced the tolerance to
PEG-IFN-related AEs in elderly patients. Elderly patients tend to have lower hemoglobin levels and poorer creatinine clearance, 2 factors
that must be taken into account in the context of ribavirin administration. It has been well established that older patients have a
statistically significant higher ribavirin dose reduction and discontinuation rate. The superior efficacy of the combination therapy
compared with PEG-IFN monotherapy in nontransplantation patients has supported its preferred use in RTRs with acceptable renal function.8
The recurrence of HCV infection in the patient may be partially explained by cessation of ribavirin treatment. Compared with the limited
experiences in elderly RTRs with CHC,2,4,7 this case report adds 2 valuable points. First, reducing the dose of PEG-IFN is the key measure
to increase the safety profile of the treatment during the long-term treatment for elderly CHC patients. Dose reduction of PEG-IFN is
associated with a reduction of the AEs and improved tolerance in this special patient population. Second, it appears that as the duration of
the stability of transplanted renal function prior to PEG-IFN treatment increases, the possibility of rejection or graft loss is reduced in
RTR patients. In summary, this case study reports on the safety of PEG-IFN therapy for elderly RTRs. However, older patients tend to
experience AEs more frequently and consequently present with reduced tolerance to treatment, leading to suboptimal efficacy, particularly in
patients infected with HCV genotype 1. Thus, it is important to take into account favorable and unfavorable indicators of response to
optimize the treatment dose and duration. Large-sample, prospectively designed randomized controlled trials are needed in this special
population. Abbreviations: AE = adverse effect, ALT = alanine aminotransferase, CHC = chronic hepatitis C, ETR = end of treatment response,
HCV = hepatitis C virus, PEG-IFN = pegylated interferon, RTR = renal transplant recipient, SVR = sustained virological response. The authors
have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the
printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's Website (www.md-journal.com).
