Benign notochordal cell tumors (BNCTs) are tumors originating in the axial skeleton, where chordomas occur. Although very rare, some cases
of extraosseous chordoma, such as in the soft tissue and lungs, have been reported. We report a case of a primary tumor showing the
notochordal characteristics of BNCTs within the axial skeleton. An asymptomatic 57-year-old woman presented with an abnormal shadow on her
chest radiograph; chest computed tomography revealed a well-defined round nodule. The resected sample tissue contained a jelly-like small
nodule. Histologically, it was identified as a BNCT, based on minimal nuclear atypia, extremely low mitotic activity within the tumor cells
lying in a sheet-like arrangement, and focal immunopositivity for brachyury. This is the third case report of BNCT originating in the lungs;
BNCTs are considered asymptomatic tumors that are identified by using highly developed chest imaging technology; however, our findings also
suggest that these notochordal tumors may potentially originate from extraosseous sites that lack ideal precursor cells. Our case suggests
that notochordal tumors can arise from organs that are unrelated to known notochordal development. Benign notochordal cell tumors (BNCTs)
are tumors that originate from notochordal cell remnants,1 and they have been recently identified as a benign counterpart and possible
precursor lesion of chordomas.2 Notochordal tumors typically originate in the axial skeleton, where notochordal remnants exist; however, a
few extremely rare cases of notochordal tumors have been shown to arise primarily from the soft tissue and visceral organs.3 Interestingly,
to date, organ-derived notochordal tumors are only confined to the lungs; the reason for this finding remains to be elucidated because of
the rarity of the tumor. Herein, we report a case of extraosseous BNCT originating in the lung that was confirmed by comprehensive
pathological findings and the immunohistochemical expression of brachyury, a reliable marker for notochordal tumors. A 57-year-old,
asymptomatic woman with no history of smoking was referred to our hospital after a chest radiograph revealed a nodular shadow in the right
middle lung field (Figure 1A). Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a well-defined, round, solid nodule, which was 10 mm in diameter, in
segment 6 of the right lung (Figure 1B). Positron emission tomography/CT did not demonstrate any other lesions in other parts, including the
bones or the soft tissue. Physical and laboratory examinations revealed no significant abnormalities. Furthermore, the levels of serum tumor
markers were not elevated. Imaging analysis revealed that the pulmonary nodule was adjacent to the visceral pleura; however, it was
difficult to use the endobronchial approach to obtain adequate samples for histological diagnosis. Therefore, we performed thoracoscopic
wedge resection of the right lower lobe for diagnostic purposes; no other pulmonary nodules were found intraoperatively. (A) Chest
radiograph upon admission to our hospital showing a well-defined nodular shadow in the right middle lung field. (B) Chest computed
tomography scan showing a well-defined, round, solid nodule of 10 mm size, located in the right segment 6. Macroscopically, the resected
sample contained a homogeneous, jelly-like transparent tumor, 10 mm in maximum diameter, in the lung parenchyma (Figure 2A). Histologically,
the tumor was well demarcated and paucicellular and it consisted of large tumor cells with a low nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and prominent
intracellular vacuolation (Figure 2B). The tumor, which lacked a fibrous stroma, was also devoid of blood and lymphatic vessels. Instead,
the tumor cells had proliferated in a prominent myxoid background. Cuffs of lymphocytes and minimal destruction of the alveolar structure
were observed at the periphery of the tumor (Figure 2C and D). Adipocyte-like, univacuolated, and multivacuolated cells were intermingled
within the tumor; the latter resembled physaliphorous cells that are typically observed in chordomas. Moreover, most of the tumor cell
nuclei were small and round, with fine chromatin and less conspicuous nucleoli. However, some of the tumor cells were irregular in shape and
had larger nuclei (Figure 2E); neither mitotic figures nor vascular invasion was observed. A myxoid substance was observed in the cytoplasm
of vacuolated tumor cells and microcystic space on alcian-blue staining, which also stained the adjacent alveolar spaces (Figure 2F). (A)
Macroscopically, a jelly-like tumor is located in the lung parenchyme. (B) A paucicellular and avascular tumor with cuffs of inflammatory
cells observed in the alveolar space. (C) Multivacuolated tumor cells with microcytic change and lymphoid cuffs are visible. (D) The tumor
shows minimal destruction of the alveolar structure (elastic Van-Gieson staining). (E) The nuclei of the tumor cells show minimal atypia,
with focal and mild pleomorphism (hematoxylin and eosin staining). (F) Intracellular and intracystic mucin accumulation is noted (alcian-
blue/periodic acid–Schiff staining). On immunohistochemical staining, brachyury, a highly specific diagnostic marker of notochordal
differentiation, was focally but undoubtedly positive in the nuclei of the tumor cells (Figure 3A). We compared the ratio of the brachyury-
positive cells from the present case with 3 other conventional chordomas of the axial bone by counting 100 nuclei. This analysis was
approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee (KH-1460) and the written informed consent was obtained from the patients. The results
showed that the ratio of brachyury-positive cells in the present case (14%) was much lower than that of the control chordoma cases (90%–98%,
mean 93.3%) (Figure 3B). The tumor was also positive for immunohistochemical markers for chordomas and BNCTs arising from the axial
skeleton, including cytokeratins (CKs) AE1/AE3 (pan CK), CAM5.2 (low-molecular-weight CK), vimentin, S100 protein, CK7, CK18, and CK19
(Figure 3C and D). Conversely, the tumor cells were negative for CK5/6, CK20, thyroid transcription factor-1, napsin A, cluster of
differentiation (CD) 68, and CD163 (Figure 3E and F). The ratio of MIB1 (Ki-67)-positive cells within the tumor was extremely low (2.2%).
(A) Brachyury immunostaining showing focal expression and brachyury-positive expression in the tumor cell nuclei. (B) Referenced
conventional axial chordomas showing diffuse brachyury-positive expression in the nucleus. (C) Similar to axial benign notochordal cell
tumors, tumor cells showing diffuse positive expression for epithelial markers including cytokeratin AE1/AE3. (D) Vimentin expression is
diffusely positive in tumor cells. (E) Positive expression of thyroid transcription factor-1 is only visible in pneumocytes entrapped at the
margin of the tumor. (F) Cluster of differentiation 68 expression was completely negative in tumor cells, but infiltration in the alveolar
macrophages at the periphery can be observed. In order to exclude the possibility of the lung tumor having metastasized from an unknown
primary site, an extensive radiographic examination that included whole body CT, magnetic resonance imaging of the whole spine, and bone
scintigraphy was performed. The results showed an absence of tumors throughout the body. Five years after surgery, the patient is alive
without tumor recurrence or metastasis. Notochordal tumors, which comprise both chordomas and BNCTs, are generally considered to originate
from notochordal remnants.1 Chordomas are malignant tumors that account for approximately 1% of primary malignant bone tumors, with an
incidence of 0.08 per 100,000 people.4 In contrast, BNCTs are benign tumors of notochordal origin whose distribution is similar to that of
chordomas; however, their incidence is still unknown.5 BNCTs tend to present as small tumors, measuring approximately 4 mm in size.5
Moreover, cases of coexistent chordomas and BNCTs have been reported, suggesting the sequential progression of BNCTs to chordomas.6 Although
rare, chordomas may arise from extra-axial locations, which are mostly of soft tissue origin.3,7,8 Besides soft tissue, there are a few
reports of chordomas that originate in the lungs, which is currently the only reported visceral organ where extraosseous chordomas
occur.9,10 Interestingly, Kikuchi et al11 recently reported 2 cases of incidental notochordal tumors of the lung that were indicative of
BNCTs, as evidenced by brachyury expression. Furthermore, Lee et al12 reported an additional case of BNCTs in both the lungs. The
histological and immunohistological findings from our case are quite similar to the previously reported tumors, except for the lack of a
central cyst formation in our case. Of note, the tumor in this case showed mucin production as evidenced by alcian-blue staining, which is
an uncommon finding in typical BNCTs, but not in chordomas. However, destruction of the alveolar structure, nuclear atypia, and mitotic
activity of the tumor cells remained minimal, suggesting the benign nature of the tumor in this case. The histological and
immunohistochemical profiles of the 3 lung BNCTs, including ours, revealed almost identical characteristics with BNCTs from the axial
skeleton and showed brachyury expression. In contrast, no soft-tissue BNCTs have been reported thus far. This may be partly explained by the
use of highly developed chest imaging technologies that can detect incidental small tumors such as BNCTs, rather than the fact that the lung
is considered a specific source of notochordal tumors. Brachyury has been identified as a key transcription factor in the early phase of
posterior mesoderm development, which includes the development of hemangioblasts and the notochord.3,13,14 Brachyury was recently
established as a highly sensitive and specific immunohistochemical marker of notochordal differentiation, and it has enabled the accurate
diagnosis of notochordal tumors by differentiating them clearly from other histological mimics.11–13 Although the tumor was brachyury
positive in our case, the positive signal was only focal. As almost all chordoma tumor cells are reported to be diffusely positive for
brachyury, we compared the ratio of brachyury-positive cells of our tumor with that of 3 conventional chordomas. The ratio of cells that
were brachyury positive was dramatically lower in our case than the referenced chordomas. To the best of our knowledge, no other study has
analyzed the differences in brachyury-positive expression between BNCTs and chordomas. However, it should be noted that brachyury-positive
immunostaining was limited to focal expression, at least in a subset of BNCTs. It is unclear whether this phenomenon is specific for this
case or is a common characteristic of all BNCTs. Further studies will need to be conducted to confirm this expression pattern of brachyury
in notochordal tumors. After excluding the possibility of a metastatic tumor, differential diagnosis of the primary tumor included several
possible types of tumors: chordoma, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, myoepithelioma/mixed tumor, benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor
showing myxoid change, chondrosarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with EWSR1–CREB1 fusion, pleomorphic adenoma,
chordoid meningioma, and mucinous carcinoma. Based on the histopathological diagnostic analysis, malignant tumors were excluded by the
characteristic benign appearance, which included minimal destruction of the alveolar structure, absence of nuclear atypia, and extremely low
mitotic activity of the tumor cells. Moreover, the tumor was devoid of expression of other specific immunohistochemical markers, with the
exception of brachyury, which is highly specific marker for chordoma and BNCT. Indeed, the tumor cells in our study were almost identical in
histological appearance to BNCT of bones. In agreement with the previous reports, BNCTs of the lung are benign tumors that are detected on
imaging examinations; however, it is still unknown whether they can be considered as precursors of chordomas. Moreover, it may be difficult
to differentiate these tumors from other primary and metastatic myxoid tumors, based solely on imaging analyses. Therefore, tumor resection
followed by brachyury detection for pathological diagnosis may be appropriate for treatment. Furthermore, the existence of primary BNCTs of
the lung suggests that notochordal tumors can arise from organs that are unrelated to known notochordal development. The authors would like
to thank the editors and anonymous reviewers for the helpful discussions. Abbreviations: BNCTs = benign notochordal cell tumors, CD =
cluster of differentiation, CK = cytokeratin, CT = computed tomography. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
