Communicated by: Michal Witt Connexins belong to the family of gap junction proteins which enable direct cell-to-cell communication by
forming channels in adjacent cells. Mutations in connexin genes cause a variety of human diseases and, in a few cases, result in skin
disorders. There are significant differences in the clinical picture of two rare autosomal dominant syndromes: keratitis–ichthyosis–deafness
(KID) syndrome and hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (Clouston syndrome), which are caused by GJB2 and GJB6 mutations, respectively. This is
despite the fact that, in both cases, malfunctioning of the same family proteins and some overlapping clinical features (nail dystrophy,
hair loss, and palmoplantar keratoderma) is observed. KID syndrome is characterized by progressive vascularizing keratitis, ichthyosiform
erythrokeratoderma, and neurosensory hearing loss, whereas Clouston syndrome is characterized by nail dystrophy, hypotrichosis, and
palmoplantar keratoderma. The present paper presents a Polish patient with sporadic KID syndrome caused by the mutation of p.Asp50Asn in
GJB2. The patient encountered difficulties in obtaining a correct diagnosis. The other case presented is that of a family with Clouston
syndrome (caused by p.Gly11Arg mutation in GJB6), who are the first reported patients of Polish origin suffering from this disorder.
Phenotype diversity among patients with the same genotypes reported to date is also summarized. The conclusion is that proper diagnosis of
these syndromes is still challenging and should always be followed by molecular verification. Two rare congenital disorders,
keratitis–ichthyosis–deafness (KID) syndrome [OMIM 148210] and Clouston syndrome (hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 2) [OMIM 129500], are caused
by mutations in genes coding connexin proteins (GJB2 and GJB6, respectively), and both of them have skin manifestation. Despite the
malfunctioning of proteins from the same family and some overlapping of such clinical features as nail dystrophy, hair loss, and
palmoplantar keratoderma, the clinical picture of these syndromes differs significantly. KID syndrome is a very rare congenital autosomal
dominant disorder of keratinization with abnormal differentiation of the epidermis and aberrant formation of the cornified layer. The
illness is characterized by progressive vascularizing keratitis, ichthyosiform erythrokeratoderma, and neurosensory hearing loss. Most
patients with KID syndrome are sporadic; only about 100 have been reported so far. The syndrome was first described in 1915 by Frederick S.
Burns in a 16-year-old boy with congenital atypical ichthyosiform erythrokeratoderma, palmoplantar keratosis, and sensorineural hearing loss
(Burns 1915). The term “KID syndrome” was later introduced as an acronym of the first letters of the main clinical symptoms. There are,
however, arguments that this acronym does not define the disorder precisely; for example, changes in the skin are not ichthyosis but
ichthyosis-like erythrokeratoderma, and keratitis can be absent at the onset of the illness (Skinner et al. 1981). Clouston syndrome, or
hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, is another autosomal dominant rare disorder characterized by nail dystrophy, hypotrichosis, and palmoplantar
keratoderma. The clinical expression can vary, but nails are predominantly affected. They are thick, hyperplastic, and deformed with
onycholysis. Hair is dry, fine, and brittle, and may be absent from the scalp, axillary, and pubic region. Moderate to severe hyperkeratosis
is often present, with reduced keratinocytes desquamation (Kibar et al. 1996). Sweating and the teeth are normal (Hassed et al. 1996). Two
cases are described in the present paper: that of a Polish patient with sporadic KID syndrome who encountered difficulties in obtaining a
correct diagnosis and a family with Clouston syndrome who are the first reported patients of Polish origin. The proband is the first and
only child of nonconsanguineous parents. He was born at 35 weeks of gestation after pregnancy complicated by the mother’s hypertension and a
herpes simplex infection. His birth weight was 2,630 g (25th–50th centile), length 51 cm (95th centile), head circumference 32 cm (25th–50th
centile), the Apgar score was 6 points in the 1st minute and 8 points in the 5th minute. The audiologic screening after birth revealed
deafness. He was noted to have generally hyperkeratotic skin, especially thick on the back, and congenital ichthyosis was suspected. In the
second week, a very thick hyperkeratotic layer of the skin on the back was removed by the parents during his bath. Histopathologic
investigation of skin biopsy did not confirm ichthyosis. The next suspected disease was Netherton syndrome, but the patient’s hair
evaluation did not reveal bamboo hair, which is typical for this syndrome. Menkes syndrome was also considered in the differential diagnosis
elsewhere. The boy was examined for the first time in the Genetics Department of the Institute of Mother and Child in Warsaw (Poland) in the
4th year of his life (Fig. 1). He had hyperkeratotic skin all over the body but especially over his joints, reticulated hyperkeratosis on
the hands and feet, with normal nails. Wart-like hyperkeratotic plaques on an erythematous base, which were initially interpreted as
ichthyotic but, in fact, turned out to be ichthyosis-like erythrokeratoderma, were symmetrically located on the cheeks, ears, and chin. He
also had deep furrows around the mouth and eyes. Eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair were absent. His scalp hair was stiff and dry.
Acanthosis nigricans in the axillary and inner elbow regions and also around the nipples was observed. The patient manifested sensorineural
hearing loss, photophobia, hypohidrosis, and increased susceptibility to cutaneous infections. His dentition was regular. Ophthalmologic
examination at the age of 5 years did not reveal keratitis. Somatic and psychomotor development was normal. The diagnosis of KID syndrome
was suggested.Fig 1Phenotype characteristics of patient 1: a, d wart-like hyperkeratotic plaques on an erythematous base on the cheek, ears,
and chin; b reticulated hyperkeratosis on the hands with normal nails; c hyperkeratotic skin over elbow; e acanthosis nigricans in the
axillary region and around the nipple Phenotype characteristics of patient 1: a, d wart-like hyperkeratotic plaques on an erythematous base
on the cheek, ears, and chin; b reticulated hyperkeratosis on the hands with normal nails; c hyperkeratotic skin over elbow; e acanthosis
nigricans in the axillary region and around the nipple The proband is the first and only child of nonconsanguineous parents. He was born at
41 weeks of gestation after an uncomplicated pregnancy. His birth weight was 3,820 g (75th centile), length 56 cm (>95th centile), head
circumference 32 cm (5th centile), the Apgar score was 9 points in the 1st minute. and 10 points in the 3rd minute. At the age of 8 months,
he was admitted to the Genetic Counseling Department of the Institute of Mother and Child in Warsaw because of hypotonia and retardation in
motor development. Physical examination showed dysplastic nails of the fingers and toes, but the hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes were normal
(Fig. 2). His head circumference was within the normal range. Cerebral ultrasound at the age of 6 months was described as normal and the
psychomotor development of this child at the age of 4 years was normal.Fig. 2Phenotype characteristics of patients 2, a, b dysplastic nails
and toes, and 3, c thickened, dysplastic nails, d plantar hyperkeratosis, d partial alopecia, sparse eyebrows and eyelashes, normal teeth
Phenotype characteristics of patients 2, a, b dysplastic nails and toes, and 3, c thickened, dysplastic nails, d plantar hyperkeratosis, d
partial alopecia, sparse eyebrows and eyelashes, normal teeth The patient was the 30-year-old father of patient 2 who had never been
diagnosed previously. He had partial alopecia and sparse eyebrows and eyelashes. His nails were thickened and dysplastic, with subungual
hyperkeratosis, severe curvature, and yellow discoloration. The skin of his palms and soles was hyperkeratotic and mildly hyperpigmented on
the joints. Sweating and teeth were normal. The patient had normal eyebrows and eyelashes in his early childhood, and then he lost them.
Progressive hair loss began after the age of 22 years. Several members of this family were also affected (his brother, mother, and uncle)
(Fig. 3). His mother has similar signs, apart from hair, which was present (it was, however, always sparse). The diagnosis of familial
Clouston syndrome was suggested.Fig. 3Pedigree of the family of patients 2 and 3 with Clouston syndrome. Affected males are represented with
filled squares and affected females with filled circles Pedigree of the family of patients 2 and 3 with Clouston syndrome. Affected males
are represented with filled squares and affected females with filled circles In the three patients described herein, DNA was isolated from
peripheral blood leukocytes using Genomic Maxi AX (A&A Biotechnology). A mutation analysis based on Sanger sequencing of the coding exon of
the GJB2 gene was performed in patient 1 and of the GJB6 gene in patients 2 and 3 (primer sequences available on request).
Fluorochromatograms were analyzed in Mutation Surveyor software (SoftGenetics) using NM_004004.5 and NM_006783.4 as reference sequences. The
parents of patients 1 and 2, and patient 3 gave informed consent to participate in the study and to publish the patient photographs. The
results of DNA analysis in the three patients confirmed the clinical diagnosis of KID syndrome in patient 1 [heterozygous mutation
p.Asp50Asn (c.148G>A) in GJB2] and Clouston syndrome in patients 2 and 3 [mutation p.Gly11Arg (c.31G>C) in GJB6]. The present study
describes patients with very rare genetic disorders caused by mutations in the connexin genes: KID syndrome caused by a de novo mutation
p.Asp50Asn in the GJB2 gene and familial Clouston syndrome caused by a mutation of p.Gly11Arg in the GJB6 gene inherited from the proband’s
father. The clinical manifestations of both syndromes vary, but manifestations in the skin and its appendages are predominant (Table 1)
(Caceres-Rios et al. 1996).Table 1Diagnostic criteria for keratitis–ichthyosis–deafness (KID) syndrome (minor criteria may not be present)
(Caceres-Rios et al. 1996) Major criteria Erythrokeratoderma (100 %) Neurosensorial deafness (100 %) Vascularizing keratitis Reticulated
palmoplantar hyperkeratosis Alopecia Minor criteria Susceptibility to infections Dental dysplasia Hypohidrosis Growth delay Diagnostic
criteria for keratitis–ichthyosis–deafness (KID) syndrome (minor criteria may not be present) (Caceres-Rios et al. 1996) Skin lesions in KID
syndrome can be seen from birth as red, dry, wrinkled skin with wart-like or hyperkeratotic plaques of erythrokeratoderma. The natural
history of this syndrome is characterized by chronic bacterial and fungal skin and mucous membrane infections, with a sometimes fatal course
in the first year of life (Gilliam and Williams 2002; Janecke et al. 2005) and later by a higher risk of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of
the skin and oral mucosa (Hazen et al. 1989). Despite being the major symptoms in KID syndrome, erythrokeratoderma and deafness are also
characteristic for the other disorder caused by mutations in genes coding connexin Cx31 (GJB3; OMIM 603324) and Cx30.3 (GJB4; OMIM
605425)—erythrokeratoderma variabilis of Mendes da Costa; however, keratitis is not part of this syndrome. In KID syndrome, keratitis and
corneal vascularization may appear later in life (at the onset of puberty) and can progress to blindness (Gómez-Faiña et al. 2006).
Moreover, KID syndrome is the only connexin disorder which is associated with a risk of at least 12 % that SCC can develop. An early
diagnosis of this syndrome is, thus, essential to avoid irreversible eye damage and to support patients with regular oncological monitoring
(Avshalumova et al. 2014). Several mutations in the GJB2 gene causing KID syndrome are known: p.Gly11Arg, p.Gly12Arg, p.Asn14Tyr,
p.Ser17Phe, p.Ala40Val, p.Asp50Asn, and p.Gly54Glu localized in the N-terminus or in the first extracellular domain (Xu and Nicholson 2013).
The mutation p.Asp50Asn of highly conserved aspartic acid in codon 50 responsible for “classical” KID features is identified in most KID
patients (Xu and Nicholson 2013). The p.Asp50Asn substitution results from spontaneous methylation and deamination of cysteine in the
hypermutable CpG dinucleotide of codon 50. Although phenotype changes vary over time and manifest different symptoms (even within one
family), which results in difficulties in making the correct clinical diagnosis, several patients with p.Asp50Asn mutation in GJB2 have
common leading clinical signs (Table 2). The median age of 25 (out of 26) patients with this mutation presented in the literature is
20 years old (range 10 months to 54 years). In 18 of them, skin manifestation was reported to be present at birth. Hearing impairment
developed in all the patients and was designated as profound except for three of them (aged 10, 13, and 42 years old, respectively), in whom
it was reported as mild or moderate. Among the skin findings most abundant were: generalized thickened skin, palmoplantar keratoderma,
erythematous verrucous plaques, epidermal cysts, and hyperkeratotic lesions (scalp). In 27 % (6/26) of the patients, skin carcinomas were
observed, although in the group of adult patients, skin carcinomas were observed in 54 % of patients. Irrespective of age, ocular findings
were reported in at least 70 % (18/26) of the patients.Table 2The phenotypes of all the published patients with p.Asp50Asn mutation in the
GJB2 geneSex/age (years)EthnicitySkin abnormalities at birthMajor skin findingsRecurrent skin infectionsHairEyelashes/eyebrowsNail
dystrophyDental abnormalitiesHearing impairment (bi-/unilateral; severe/moderate)Ocular signsOtherReferencesF/<1ndCongenital
dermatosisDermatosisndAlopeciand+nd+ (profound)PhotophobiandArndt et al. (2010)F/3JapanesendGeneralized skin dryness with hyperkeratotic
plaques on knees, white papules on scalp, angulus oris fissuresndSparse, curly hair−+ (middle finger only)nd+Corneal opacityndYotsumoto et
al. (2003)M/4PolishGenerally hyperkeratotic skin, especially thick on the backGeneralized thickened skin, especially over joints,
ichthyosis-like erythrokeratoderma on cheeks, ears, and chin, reticulated PPK, EVP, deep furrows around the mouth and eyes+Stiff and dry−−−+
(profound)PhotophobiaAcanthosis nigricans in axillary and inner elbow regions and around the nipples, hypohidrosisThis
workF/5EgyptianndGeneralized skin lesions, hyperkeratotic brown color plaques, hypotrichosisndSparseSparse−++Corneal opacitiesndElsayed et
al. (2011)M/6French−Generalized thickened skin, PPK, EVP+Sparsend+nd+ (profound)−ndMazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2007)F/10FrenchHyperkeratosis
(nose)Generalized thickened skin, PPK, EVP, epidermal cysts, hyperkeratotic lesions (scalp)−ndnd+nd+
(mild)+ndF/11AlgerianErythrodermaGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, EVP−Sparsend+nd+ (profound)ndndF/12UKDry and scaly skin,
alopecia+Alopeciand+nd+ (profound)ndndM/12AustrianndPPK, joint contractures of cubita and anklesndSparse and depigmentedndndnd+
(profound)+ndJanecke et al. (2005)M/13JapanesendIchthyosiform eruption, generalized erythrokeratoderma+Scarring alopeciand+nd+Vascularizing
keratitisPannus formationYotsumoto et al. (2003)F/13nd−Diffuse hyperkeratosis, mainly of extremities and external ears+ndndndnd+
(mild/moderate)ndndJanecke et al. (2005)M/14GreekDry and scaly skinGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, EVP, hyperkeratotic lesions
(scalp)+Sparsend+nd+ (profound)+ndMazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2007)F/17ndTotal scalp alopeciaKeratotic scaling, EVP on hands and feet, PPK
with reticulated patternndSparse, brittle hairXerodermic and cracked eyelidsBrittle toenails with severe dyskeratosisDelayed
eruptionProfoundActive keratitis and blepharitis and photophobiandAlvarez et al. (2003)F/18Dutch−Thickening and scaling of the
skinndBrittle, no pubic and axillary hairSparse+++ (profound)Keratitis, corneal dystrophySpinocellular carcinoma, problems with sweatingvan
Steensel et al. (2002)M/21ndndGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, inflammatory nodules, perioral plaques+Sparse−+ (only toenails)nd++−Gonzalez
et al. (2009)F/23French−Generalized thickened skin, PPK, EVP, epidermal cysts−Sparsend+nd+ (profound)−ndMazereeuw-Hautier et al.
(2007)F/30FrenchDry and scaly skinGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, EVP, hyperkeratotic lesions (scalp)−Partialnd+nd+
(profound)+CarcinomaM/31GermanPresentSpiky hyperkeratosis, sharkskin-like ichthyosis on the face and scalp, generalized hyperkeratosis, and
erythrodermandHypotrichosisHypotrichosisndndProfound−Multiple SCCs since the age of 31 yearsvan Geel et al. (2002)F/33FrenchndGeneralized
thickened skin, PPK, EVP, inflammatory nodules+Alopeciand+nd+ (profound)+ndMazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2007)F/35FrenchDry and scaly
skin+Alopeciand+nd+ (profound)+ndM/39UKDry and scaly skin, erythrodermaGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, EVP, hyperkeratotic lesions
(scalp)+Sparsend+nd+ (profound)+CarcinomaF/40JapanesendMutilating palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, hypotrichosis+ndnd+nd+ndTumors on the skin of
lower limbs and buttocks, mutation in KRT17: c.177C>ANatsuga et al. (2012)F/42FrenchDry and scaly skinGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, EVP,
epidermal cysts, hyperkeratotic lesions (scalp)−Sparse hairnd+nd+ (profound)+CarcinomaMazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2007)F/42nd−Diffuse
hyperkeratosis, mainly of extremitiesndndTrichiatic eyelashesndnd+ (mild/moderate)+Sensory neuropathy of the fingers and hands, recurrent
axillary and anal fistulaJanecke et al. (2005)F/54FrenchPPKGeneralized thickened skin, PPK, EVP, inflammatory nodules, epidermal
cysts+Sparsend+nd+ (profound)+ndMazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2007)nd/ndndndErythrokeratotic cutaneous plaquesndndndndndndndSCCBergman et al.
(2012) PPK palmoplantar keratoderma, EVP erythematous verrucous plaques, nd no data, “−” not present and “+” present The phenotypes of all
the published patients with p.Asp50Asn mutation in the GJB2 gene PPK palmoplantar keratoderma, EVP erythematous verrucous plaques, nd no
data, “−” not present and “+” present The degree of difficulty in recognizing KID and in distinguishing the overlapping clinical signs in
various skin disorders is well illustrated by the history of patient 1 described in the present study. Over a period of four years from his
birth, he had four different clinical diagnoses (X-linked ichthyosis, Netherton syndrome, Menkes syndrome, and ichthyosis again) before the
correct diagnosis when KID was finally confirmed. In the differential diagnostics of KID syndrome, other disorders should also be
considered: the classic form of Vohwinkel syndrome (OMIM 124500) with congenital deafness, keratopachydermia, constrictions of fingers and
toes, and palmoplantar keratoderma with deafness (OMIM 148350), which are also caused by GJB2 mutations. Nevertheless, despite the
substantial clinical overlap, some differences exist between them as well: keratitis is absent in both of them and keratoderma is limited to
the hands, feet, elbows, and knees in the former and to the palms and soles only in the latter syndrome. Furthermore, according to the
observation of van Geel et al. (2002) the p.Asp50Asn mutation in GJB2 can also cause hystrix-like ichthyosis with deafness (HID), where
keratitis is not observed either. Such phenotypic discrepancy between KID and HID and the other GJB2-caused disorders is poorly understood,
but may cause further prolongation of the diagnostic process. In the case of patient 2, the diagnostic process was shorter, but not very
easy, because at the age of 8 months, the patient had only mild clinical expression of the disease—mildly dystrophic nails which could
easily have been mistaken for pachyonychia congenita. Immediate correct diagnosis was only possible after clinical examination of the
patient’s father, who has, unlike other relatives, severely dysplastic nails, palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, alopecia, and lack of eyebrows
and eyelashes. It should be noted, however, that, despite those symptoms, Clouston syndrome had never previously been suggested in the
patient’s father. Indeed, only around 30 patients with Clouston syndrome have been published, with very limited phenotypic data available,
which makes diagnostics more challenging. Furthermore, several other rare hair–nail ectodermal dysplasias have been identified, which should
also be taken into consideration in the diagnostic process, e.g., autosomal recessive “pili torti and onychodysplasia” (OMIM 602032;
Calzavara-Pinton et al. 1991), congenital nail dystrophy, hypotrichosis of the scalp with folliculitis decalvans (Barbareschi et al. (1997),
and pachyonychia congenita (OMIM 167200). The latter has recently been shown to be falsely recognized in seven patients instead of Clouston
syndrome (Hale et al. 2014). Last but not least, KID syndrome diagnosis should also be excluded (van Steensel et al. 2004). KID and Clouston
syndromes are caused by mutation in different connexin genes; however, their symptoms partially overlap (nail dystrophy, hair loss, and
palmoplantar keratoderma). This can be due to their function, structure, and ability to cooperate, forming heteromeric (composed of more
than one connexin type) connexons. Connexins belong to the family of gap junction proteins, which enable direct cell-to-cell communication
by forming channels in adjacent cells. Hence, they are crucial for maintaining tissue homeostasis, growth control, development, and
synchronized response of cell stimuli. Up to now, at least 20 genes of human connexins are known, but skin disorders are only connected with
mutations in GJB2 (Cx26), GJB6 (Cx30), GJB3 (Cx31), GJB4 (Cx30.3), and GJA1 (Cx43). Cx26 and Cx30 share a 76 % identity and have a structure
typical for connexins: four transmembrane hydrophobic domains, two extracellular highly conserved hydrophilic loops, and three relatively
variable cytoplasmic domains (Jan et al. 2004). Mutations p.Gly11Arg in GJB6 and p.Asp50Asn in GJB2 are located in the N-terminus of Cx30
and in the first extracellular domain of Cx26, respectively. Both domains face pore channels and, thus, mutations in these regions can lead
to changes in connexon conductance or even loss of channel function (for details, see Oshima et al. 2011, Levit et al. 2012, and Essenfelder
et al. 2004). While the GJB2 gene mutations associated with skin symptoms all cause deafness, mutations in the GJB6 gene result in skin
disease, usually without hearing impairment (van Steensel et al. 2004). This can be explained by connexin redundancy. In the inner ear, the
wild type of connexin 26 can compensate for the lack of activity of mutated connexin 30, but not in the skin. Such compensation is not
possible in the opposite direction, either in the skin or in the inner ear. The key to clarifying this phenomenon is different permeability
for ions for both the homotypic (composed of one connexin type) and heterotypic (composed of more than one connexin type) connexons.
Therefore, mutated Cx26 exerts a dominant negative effect on the wild type of other co-expressed connexins, like, for example, on Cx30 in
the skin. Cohen-Salmon et al. (2002) concluded that epithelial gap junctions containing Cx26 are essential for the cochlear function and
cell survival. This observation and explanation is complicated by the finding of Jan et al. (2004), who described a case of KID syndrome
with sensorineural hearing loss and congenital atrichia caused by mutation in the gene GJB6 (Cx30), which is usually connected with Clouston
syndrome. Similarly, Sugiura et al. (2013) described a patient with Clouston syndrome and sensorineural hearing loss and photophobia, but in
this patient, apart from mutation in the GJB6 gene, the GJB2 gene variant was found. Another patient with a phenotype resembling Clouston
syndrome but with deafness and mutation in the GJB2 gene was described by van Steensel et al. (2004). To establish a genotype–phenotype
correlation in gap junction skin syndromes, further studies and observations are needed. New gap junction syndromes of the skin are still
being described, which can have a great significance for establishing this correlation (de Zwart-Storm et al. 2011). It seems that there are
still some unrecognized disorders of the skin to be discovered by inquisitive geneticists and dermatologists, who should also clinically
evaluate the pedigree of family members and verify clinical recognition using molecular techniques. Similarly, the genetic background of
several clinically distinguished disorders, including around 70 % of about 170–200 known ectodermal dysplasias, still lacks genetic
explanation (Visinoni et al. 2009; Irvine 2009). The conclusion was drawn that the proper diagnosis of gap junction syndromic skin disorders
is still a challenge, especially due to the extremely low incidence of this disorder [no patient of Polish origin with Clouston syndrome and
only one with KID-like syndrome (de Zwart-Storm et al. 2011) had been described in the literature before]. However, it can be neither
neglected nor underestimated due to variable prognosis and highly differing health complications that may occur (like SCC in KID syndrome).
The study was supported by grant 2014/13/D/NZ5/03304.
