Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 47 Final Diagnosis: Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis Symptoms:
Nephrotic syndrome Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Renal biopsy Specialty: Nephrology Rare disease Visceral leishmaniasis is an important
opportunistic disease in HIV-positive patients. The information available on the effects of such co-infection in the kidney is limited. We
describe a patient with HIV/leishmania coinfection who developed nephrotic syndrome and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. As far as
we know, only 2 cases of this nephropathy in HIV/leishmania coinfection have been reported. A 47-year-old man developed nephrotic syndrome.
He had been diagnosed with HIV infection and visceral leishmaniasis and was treated with antiretroviral therapy, antimonial compounds,
liposomal amphotericin B and miltefosine, but the leishmania followed a relapsing course. Renal biopsy disclosed membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis and leishmania amastigotes were seen within glomerular capillary lumens. He was given miltefosine and liposomal
amphotericin B but the leishmaniasis persisted. Stage 3B chronic renal disease and nephrotic range proteinuria tend to become stable by
15-month follow-up. Our case illustrated some aspects of leishmaniasis in HIV patients: its relapsing course, the difficulties in therapy,
and the renal involvement. Many types of glomerulonephritis may appear in HIV patients, such as collapsing focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis, immune-complex glomerulonephritides, and thrombotic microangiopathy. Immune-complex glomerulonephritides include those
associated with HIV (HIV RNA usually over 400 copies/mL), and other types of infectious glomerulonephritis . Leishmaniasis is an important
opportunistic infection in HIV, and visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is the most common clinical form. Renal involvement by leishmania has been
well documented in immunocompetent subjects, but in HIV patients the information available is limited . We describe an HIV patient with
nephrotic syndrome and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) associated with VL. A 47-year-old man was admitted for lower-
extremity edema of about 3–4 weeks evolution and proteinuria. He had presented hypertension for the previous 18 months, which had been
treated with a thiazide and an angiotensin receptor blocker. He had been diagnosed with HIV infection Stage C3 at another hospital in
October 1999 and received antiretroviral treatment. In November 2002 he was diagnosed with VL and treated with antimonials. He was referred
to our hospital in October 2004; the patient had ceased receiving the antiretroviral treatment and was asymptomatic, except for nodular skin
lesions on the trunk and extremities. A skin biopsy and bone marrow aspiration revealed leishmania, which was treated with antiretrovirals
and antimonials. There were several recurrences of leishmaniasis (cutaneous lesions and cytopenias) in the following years, and the patient
received liposomal amphotericin B and miltefosine as treatment and prophylaxis. Physical examination on the current admission to hospital
(June 2012) revealed blood pressure 130/80 mm Hg, no fever, edema in the legs up to the knees; other results were normal. The laboratory
examinations showed fibrinogen 7.88 g/L, hemoglobin 85 g/L, leukocytes 1.78×109/L, CD4 count 93/μL, platelets 110×109/L, urea 12.5 mmol/L,
creatinine 123.76 μmol/L, albumin 19 g/L, GGT 83 U/L, and C-reactive protein 16.7 mg/L; electrolytes, other coagulation parameters, and
routine biochemistry results were normal. The following results were normal/negative: immunoglobulins, RF, C3, C4, ANA, anti-DNA, anti-GBM,
ANCA, cryoglobulins, and anti-TPO. The blood/urine study for monoclonal proteins was negative. The 24-hour proteinuria was 8 g (high-
resolution electrophoresis: non-selective glomerular pattern) and the urine sediment analysis showed 40–60 RBC/HPF. The result of a urine
culture was negative. Serology for hepatitis B and C, and HIV RNA PCR and RPR results were negative. The chest x-ray and ECG findings were
normal. Abdominal ultrasound revealed mild splenomegaly and normal kidney size, with increased cortical echogenicity. Bone marrow aspiration
showed abundant intra- and extracellular leishmania. RBCs were transfused, desmopressin was administered, and percutaneous renal biopsy was
performed with no technical difficulties (3 needle passes with 3 tissue cores). The glomeruli (9) were of lobular appearance, with diffuse
mesangial proliferation and thickened capillary walls with double contours. Leishmania amastigotes were identified in the glomeruli (Figure
1), there were calcium deposits in the interstitium, and the vessels were normal. Immunofluorescence showed mesangial deposits of C3 (+++)
and C1q (++); IgG, IgA, IgM, C4, kappa and lambda were negative. These findings were consistent with MPGN. After the biopsy, the patient
presented severe pain in the left lumbar fossa. The CT showed a large left perirenal hematoma; the angiography revealed no bleeding point.
RBCs were transfused, tranexamic acid was administered, and the subsequent evolution was positive. The patient was discharged with
symptomatic treatment, antiretroviral therapy, interferon-gamma, and Glucantime. He was readmitted a week later with multi-organ dysfunction
with involvement of the kidneys (creatinine 654.16 μmol/L), liver, and pancreas; blood cultures and urine culture were negative. Interferon-
gamma and/or Glucantime toxicity was considered probable, and was treated with supportive measures and hemodialysis; evolution was
satisfactory and renal function improved to a creatinine level of 143.20 μmol/L. During the subsequent 15 months of follow-up, creatinine
remained at 167.96–176.8 μmol/L, proteinuria at 4–6 g/24 hours with normal albumin, CD4 count at 100/μL, HIV RNA at <50 copies/mL, and PCR
for leishmania in the blood was positive. The patient was treated with angiotensin receptor blocker, nifedipine GITS, darbepoetin,
allopurinol, omeprazole, oral iron and vitamins, antiretroviral therapy, miltefosine, and liposomal amphotericin B every 15 days. VL in HIV
patients is a relapsing disorder characterized by a low cure rate, increased toxicity of anti-leishmania drugs, and the parasite’s location
in unusual places such as the kidney ; these characteristics were apparent in this patient. Leishmania and HIV affect similar immune cells
such as macrophages and dendritic cells and have a synergistic effect. Leishmania facilitates the replication and progression of HIV and the
virus contributes to the development of VL . Both leishmania and HIV alter the Th1/Th2 balance in favor of Th2, and this response
facilitates the progression of the parasite . Moreover, leishmania induces chronic activation of the immune system, despite the simultaneous
immunosuppression against its antigens, which causes chronic depletion of CD4 T cells and progression of the virus . Even in patients like
ours, who are receiving antiretroviral treatment and have a low HIV RNA load, there is immune failure that prevents the elimination of
leishmania . Glomerulopathy in VL has been associated with immune complex deposition, dependent on the polyclonal activation of B
lymphocytes by the parasite. However, studies in animals and humans suggest that other components of the immune system – macrophages, T
cells, and cytokines – in some cases play a greater role than immune complexes . Leishmania may also be found in the kidney and cause direct
local damage . Besides, secondary bacterial skin infection is a frequent complication of cutaneous leishmaniasis. In such cases, the
contribution of the bacterial superinfection in the pathogenesis of the glomerulopathy is unclear . Table 1 shows the cases reported, with
details of nephropathy, VL, and HIV. The common findings are CD4 count under 200/μL and an undetectable or positive low-titer HIV RNA. In
this patient, the VL was apparent long before the diagnosis of MPGN, but the nephropathy may also be the first manifestation of VL in the
HIV infection . In this case, the renal biopsy showed MPGN with mesangial deposits of C3 and C1q. In our patient, negativity for HIV RNA and
other parameters (cryoglobulins, hepatitis C and B viruses, monoclonal proteins) and the existence of VL suggest that the latter was linked
to the glomerulopathy. The predominance of C3 would suggest a C3 glomerulopathy. However, the presence of dominant or codominant C3 is not
uncommon in infectious glomerulonephritis and C1q was also present only in 1 order of magnitude less than C3 . Electron microscopy study
would have been helpful, but could not be performed. Moreover, MPGN has been shown to be capable of evolving from a predominance of IgG to a
predominance of C3 . However, there remains the possibility that leishmania triggers C3 glomerulopathy in subjects with genetic alterations
in the alternative complement pathway. Two other cases of MPGN, VL, and HIV, in addition to the present one, have been reported. One of them
was also affected with the hepatitis C virus, although neither the cryoglobulins nor the immunofluorescence were specified ; in the other,
hepatitis C and cryoglobulins were negative and the immunofluorescence showed IgG and C3 . The treatment of nephropathy associated with VL
in HIV infection is the same as for leishmania. Even if the leishmania is counteracted, the evolution of the nephropathy may be negative .
Corticosteroids have been used in immunocompetent patients , but to the best of our knowledge, not in cases with HIV coinfection. Renal
biopsy is important for establishing a diagnosis but is of limited therapeutic use in patients with glomerulopathy and HIV/leishmania
coinfection. Furthermore, there is an increased risk of hemorrhagic complications in VL, as we found in this case. In conclusion, VL in HIV
infection is a relapsing disease, with difficult therapeutic approach; renal involvement increases the morbidity and mortality of this
condition. This case report stresses these important aspects of great relevance in clinical practice. Conflict of interests The authors
declare that there is no conflict of interests concerning the publication of this paper. Glomerulus showing lobulation of the capillary
tuft, mesangial hypercellularity, and thickening of the capillary walls. Leishmania amastigotes are seen within capillary lumens (arrows).
HE ×400. Nephropathy in patients with VL/HIV coinfection. M – male; F – female; n.a. – not avalaible; ARF – acute renal failure; NS –
nephrotic syndrome; HD – hemodialysis; CRF – chronic renal failure; NP – nephrotic proteinuria.
