Gastrojejunocolic fistula (GJF) is a late and very rare complication of gastroenterostomy performed for recurrent peptic ulcer disease. The
occurrence of perforation in a GJF is even more a rare complication because long evolution time or latent period is required for its
appearance. Patients with this condition usually present with diarrhea, weight loss, feculent vomiting, under-nutrition and features of
peritonitis that require immediate surgical intervention. Herewith we report a case of 60 year old male with perforation in a
gastrojejunocolic fistula and its management. Gastrojejunocolic fistula is a rare complication of surgery for peptic ulcer disease. Free
perforation of a primary, benign, gastrocolic fistula is extremely rare; perforation of a gastrojejunocolic fistula has not been reported
previously in the English medical literature. As per the experience with Schein M, two such cases were presented and the surgical management
of this condition was emphasized . Most patients with GJF present with a symptom triad of fecal vomiting/breath, chronic diarrhea, and
weight loss [2, The causes for a Gastrojejunocolic fistula (GJF) include - post peptic ulcer disease surgery - inadequate gastric resection
or incomplete vagotomy, malignancy, tuberculosis, trauma, diverticulitis: With today's improved surgical technique and equipment, the
incidence of GJF has gone down and now only occurs in approximately one out of seven individuals with marginal or recurrent ulceration . A
60 year old male presented to casualty with complaints of pain abdomen and feculent/bilious vomiting over the last four days in the
background of anorexia and significant weight loss over the preceding 6 months. There was history of diarrhea on and off. No malaena or
haematemesis. He had undergone surgery for Acid Peptic Disease in 1994. He had no other significant co-morbidities and was on Tab.
Ranitidine 150 mg BD. On examination he was conscious, co-operative and well oriented but seemed poorly nourished. He presented in a setting
of hypovolaemia with a weak pulse of 90/min and a BP of 100/70 mmHg, random blood sugar was 100mg/dl. A vertical midline scar was present
over the abdomen and he had mild tenderness in RIF and rt. lumbar region and other systems were normal. Preliminary investigations sent-
Blood counts, renal function tests, X-Ray abdomen erect, chest X-Ray, Ultrasound of abdomen were all found to be within normal limits. He
was resuscitated with IV fluids and was put on intra-venous antibiotics and Pantoprazole. The patient started to improve over the next
couple of days in the wards and a endoscopy was scheduled which showed stomach filled with fecal matter and an opening suggestive of
fistulous communication to colon (Figure 1). Endoscopy also revealed gastrojejunostomy with multiple stomal ulcers. A biopsy was also taken
at this point and malignancy was ruled out. After a week, he developed severe diarrhea, vomiting, appeared dehydrated and had tachycardia
(104bpm) with a low volume pulse, BP was 90/70mmhg. Abdomen was diffusely tender and tense. X-Ray abdomen was repeated and it revealed gas
under the diaphragm s/o pneumoperitoneum. The patient was prepared for an exploratory laparotomy. Endoscopic view of the fistulous
communication between stomach and colon. Stomach filled with feculent matter Intra-operative findings: Previous GJ stomal ulcer had given
way and had extended to involve the colon (Figure 2) Peritoneal contamination in pelvis and paracolic gutters. Gastrojejunostomy was undone
and transverse colon found to be involved. Fistula dissected circumferentially and wide excision of stomal ulcer and involved colon done
(Triple Resection). Bowel continuity was restored with Colocolostomy, Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy with feeding jejunostomy. Post operative
period was uneventful. Gradually the patient improved and was started on a high protein diet and was discharged on the post operative day
27. Patient is on regular follow up. Intraoperative picture of the fistulous track between stomach, jejunum, and transverse colon Gastric
surgery for peptic ulcer disease is now rarely performed due to the development of medical therapies including H2-receptor antagonists,
proton pump inhibitors, and regimens for Helicobactor pylori eradication. Gastrojejunocolic fistula is thought to be the late complication
of inadequate surgery resulting from simple gastroenterostomy, inadequate gastric resection, or incomplete vagotomy . The diagnosis for GJF
is usually fairly simple and can be made on history and clinical examination in most cases. Investigations to aid in diagnosis today include
UGI endoscopy (usually enough), Barium enema (used to be the mainstay), NG tube aspiration of faeculent material, CT with oral contrast
(rarely needed), Biopsy showing colonic mucosa in the fistula is confirmatory . In the above case, the initial differential diagnosis
included Recurrent ulcer, Stump Carcinoma and Retrograde jejunogastric intussusception. Over the years the surgical management of
gastrocolic and gastrojejunocolic fistulae has varied a great deal, ranging from - simple colostomy to three-stage procedures. It should be
noted that all of these procedures have one thing in common - the diversion of the fecal stream away from the upper gastro- intestinal
tract, which allows the small intestine to function normally. An important aspect of the management of these patients is total parenteral
nutrition or total enteral nutrition. Due to the poor nutritional status of patients with GJF, operative mortality following surgical repair
used to be as high as 40%. Staged repair of GJF, with preliminary diversion colostomy, was favored to minimize mortality [2, 3, 6, 7]. This
cannot be overemphasized that, it is important to remember that in parts of the world where these therapies arrived late on the scene,
gastric surgery was the mainstay of therapy even well into the 1990's. With the natural history of GJF usually requiring a few years to
develop, it is not hard to imagine that these cases can appear in today's practice in the 3rd world countries especially although even in
these areas these cases are quite rare. The majority of these patients will present with the classic symptoms of diarrhea, weight loss and
feculent vomiting and will have some previous history of gastric surgery for peptic ulcer disease. Laboratory findings commonly reflect a
state of severe malnutrition and dehydration with electrolyte imbalance, diminished serum proteins and vitamin deficiencies. A mild to
moderate anemia may be present which may not be observed because of hemoconcentration . Today the most common modality of treatment is a
single stage Triple Resection procedure involving the entire involved area with an adequate margin followed by primary anastomosis and
thorough peritoneal lavage. Patient must be put on long term PPIs or H2-antagonists post-operatively. A high recurrence rate is common if
the predisposing factors for stomal ulcer are not addressed . Hence the treatment must include the treatment of these risk factors. Since
the fistula formation needs a 20 to 30 years of latent period after initial surgery, this complication is seen now a days . Although plenty
of literatures on GJF have been published, but only few cases of perforation in GJF and its management are described. Modern management of
GJF is via a one-stage resection. Masashi Takemura and all have concluded that today, laparoscopic-assisted one-stage en bloc resection may
be feasible for patients with GJC fistula . GJF is a rare complication of gastric surgery for APD and must be kept in mind whenever a
patient comes with a history of faeculent vomiting, significant weight loss and diarrhea. Diagnosis is almost always made by a UGI endoscopy
and can be confirmed by histological examination of the fistula. Perforation in GJF is extremely rare condition and presents with features
of peritonitis. High index of suspicion is required to diagnose perforation in GJF. The patient almost always has severe nutritional and
electrolyte imbalances and thus these must be corrected along with the reparative surgery, which involves adequate resection and primary
anastomosis in a single-stage procedure. In our case the final histopathology report showed chronic peptic ulcer at GJ stoma with
perforation, with chronic inflammatory changes in adherent small intestine and colon, with no e/o malignancy. Off-late the incidence of GJF
is becoming increasingly rare due to the advances in medical management of APD. GJF still remains a rare and interesting complication
particularly in areas where gastric surgery was the primary modality of treatment few years back. The authors declare no competing interest.
Sundeep Ashokkumar Naik: Clinical work-up of the patient, preparation, literature search and review, write -up of manuscript. Srinivas Pai:
Clinical work-up of the patient, operating surgeon.
