Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with rhabdoid features is a rare histology and exhibits clinically aggressive behavior. We report a case of a
married couple in whom RCC with rhabdoid features concurrently occurred. The rarity of this event suggests that environmental factors may
contribute to the etiology of RCC with rhabdoid features. A 76-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with a hypervascular mass in the right
kidney and tumor thrombus extending into the right atrium by enhanced computed tomography (CT). She underwent radical nephrectomy and tumor
thrombectomy following systemic therapy with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib. The histological evaluation denoted clear cell RCC
with rhabdoid features. The patient died of cancer 12 months postoperatively. A 76-year-old man, her husband, presented with gross hematuria
2 weeks after his wife had undergone surgery. He had a long history of asbestos exposure. An abdominal CT scan revealed a hypervascular mass
in the right kidney and tumor thrombus extending into the inferior vena cava. He also underwent radical nephrectomy and tumor thrombectomy.
The histological evaluation also showed clear cell RCC with rhabdoid features. Bone metastasis occurred 12 months postoperatively, but he
died of an unrelated cause 18 months after surgery. Concurrent occurrence of RCC with rhabdoid features may not to be coincidental. Although
further studies are warranted, asbestos exposure may contribute to the etiology of clear cell RCC with rhabdoid features. In large
consecutive series of patients with malignant renal tumors, approximately 3–5% of RCCs showed rhabdoid features . Generally, RCCs with
rhabdoid features are highly aggressive malignant tumors and are associated with a poor prognosis. Compared with non-rhabdoid RCCs, these
tumors are more likely to present at higher grades, twice as likely to undergo extrarenal invasion, and more likely to metastasize .
Microscopically, rhabdoid cells are usually associated with a clear cell RCC component and sometimes linked to sarcomatoid changes .
Rhabdoid cells have large, eccentric nuclei and abundant cytoplasm containing eosinophilic inclusions that are strongly positive for
vimentin. In this article, we present very rare cases of a married couple in whom clear cell RCC with rhabdoid features and sarcomatoid
change concurrently occurred. Coincidental concurrent occurrence is unlikely, suggesting that environment may be an etiologic factor for
such a tumor. A 75-year-old womanwas referred to our hospital in May 2009 because enhanced computed tomography (CT) had confirmed the
presence of a 70 mm mass on the upper pole of her right kidney and tumor thrombus extending into the right atrium (Figure 1a). Based on a
chest CT scan, the patient was initially suspected of having lung carcinoma. Because additional diagnostics were needed to exclude lung
carcinoma, systemic therapy was initiated with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib. After 4 cycles of sunitinib therapy, tumor
regression was observed and the lung tumor had not changed. In December 2009, she underwent right radical nephrectomy and tumor
thrombectomy.Figure 1 Right renal tumor and tumor thrombus in a married couple. (a) Case 1: Abdominal CT revealed that the tumor thrombus
extended into the right atrium. (b) Case 2 (the husband of Case 1): The tumor thrombus extended into the intrahepatic inferior vena cava.
Right renal tumor and tumor thrombus in a married couple. (a) Case 1: Abdominal CT revealed that the tumor thrombus extended into the right
atrium. (b) Case 2 (the husband of Case 1): The tumor thrombus extended into the intrahepatic inferior vena cava. Postoperatively, the
patient developed acute renal failure secondary to circulatory insufficiency, and she received hemodialysis for about a month. The
pathological diagnosis of the tumor was clear cell carcinoma with rhabdoid features and sarcomatoid change (assessed in the post-sunitinib
therapeutic state; Figure 2a, b, and c). Immunohistochemically, the intracytoplasmic globular structures of rhabdoid cells were positive for
vimentin (Figure 2d), and the tumor cell nuclei were mostly negative for BAP1 (Figure 2e and f: positive control of BAP1 in clear cell RCC).
In March 2010, pulmonary and abdominal CT scans revealed pulmonary and liver metastasis; therefore, systemic therapy with the tyrosine
kinase inhibitor sorafenib was administered. Nevertheless, the patient died of cancer 12 months postoperatively.Figure 2 Pathological
findings in Case 1. (a) Histological section displaying typical clear cell RCC and an area of necrosis, (b) neoplastic cells with rhabdoid
features, (c) spindle neoplastic cells, and (d) strong cytoplasmic positivity for vimentin. (e) BAP1 immunohistochemistry showed loss of
nuclear staining in tumor cells and (f) positive control for BAP1 in clear cell RCC. Pathological findings in Case 1. (a) Histological
section displaying typical clear cell RCC and an area of necrosis, (b) neoplastic cells with rhabdoid features, (c) spindle neoplastic
cells, and (d) strong cytoplasmic positivity for vimentin. (e) BAP1 immunohistochemistry showed loss of nuclear staining in tumor cells and
(f) positive control for BAP1 in clear cell RCC. In December 2009, the above patient’s 76-year-old husband with gross hematuria and was
referred to our hospital. Enhanced CT scans of the abdomen revealed an 80 mm mass in his right kidney and tumor thrombus into the inferior
vena cava (Figure 1b). In January 2010, right radical nephrectomy with vena caval thrombectomy was performed without any intraoperative or
postoperative complications. Histological evaluation of the tumor denoted Fuhrman nuclear grade 4 clear cell RCC with rhabdoid features and
sarcomatoid change (Figure 3a, b and c). Immunohistochemically, the rhabdoid cells were positive for vimentin, whereas the tumor cell nuclei
were mostly negative for BAP1 (Figure 3d and e). In January 2011, the patient complained of lower back pain and neurological disorder of the
lower extremity. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed vertebral metastasis at the L1 level and compression of the spinal cord. The patient
died of an unrelated cause in April 2011.Figure 3 Pathological findings in Case 2 (the husband of Case 1). (a) Histological section
displaying typical clear cell RCC area, (b) neoplastic cells with rhabdoid features, (c) spindle neoplastic cells, and (d) strong
cytoplasmic positivity for vimentin. (e) BAP1 immunohistochemistry showed loss of nuclear staining in tumor cells. Pathological findings in
Case 2 (the husband of Case 1). (a) Histological section displaying typical clear cell RCC area, (b) neoplastic cells with rhabdoid
features, (c) spindle neoplastic cells, and (d) strong cytoplasmic positivity for vimentin. (e) BAP1 immunohistochemistry showed loss of
nuclear staining in tumor cells. The man and women whose medical cases are described above have been married for >40 years. Neither of them
had any remarkable medical history. Their daughter had died of pancreatic cancer, but parents, siblings, and their son had no history of
malignancy. The husband was a shipyard worker and had been exposed to asbestos for >30 years. Additionally, the chest CT scan revealed that
he had slight light pleural thickening. Although his wife was not employed, she routinely came into contact with his hair and clothing and
could have been exposed to asbestos. The couple did not report any other unusual occupational exposures, such as organic solvents or
cadmium. The couple had lived in Hokuto city for 50 years, and there was no report of significant increases in the incidence of RCC within
that area. Familial RCC is well known, including von Hippel-Lindau disease and Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. However, spousal RCC has not been
reported previously. The synchronous occurrence of RCC with rhabdoid features in this married couple is unlikely to have been purely
coincidental. Exposure to asbestos has generally been associated with malignant mesothelioma in humans. It has long been recognized that
some patients with mesothelioma result from household exposure to asbestos that is brought home in workers’ hair, clothing, and personal
effects . In a study of the wives of asbestos-exposed workers, Miller reported a mean latency of 45.4 years between the year of first
exposure and the onset of symptoms of malignant mesothelioma . RCC is also considered an occupationally associated tumor, but the existence
of an association between RCC and asbestos exposure is currently controversial . A recent genetics study of RCC found that rhabdoid features
and high grade were associated with loss of BAP1, a nuclear deubiquitinase that regulates cell proliferation . BAP1 copies are also lost in
mesothelioma . Furthermore, Carbone et al. have speculated that BAP1 may help prevent environmental carcinogenesis caused by asbestos .
Additionally, a few patients with concomitant RCC and malignant mesothelioma have been reported in Japan, although the reports of these
cases have not indicated whether the RCC histologies were clear cell carcinoma with rhabdoid features . In these cases, the development of
RCC also occurred several decades after asbestos exposure. However, pathogenesis was not discussed in the associated case reports. Jiang et
al. identified several novel characteristics of asbestos fibers in asbestos-induced oxidative DNA damage. By studying intraperitoneal
administration of asbestos fibers in rats, Jiang et al. also found that the kidney was oxidatively stressed by asbestos fibers . These
results indicate that oxidative DNA damage by asbestos is a potential cause of RCC onset. In consideration of these findings, asbestos
exposure and BAP1 loss appeared to result in very rare cases of spousal RCC. Although other environmental exposures, including infection,
cannot be completely ruled out and limited epidemiological evidence exists for the occurrence of asbestos-triggered RCC, asbestos exposure
and BAP1 loss might have contributed to concurrent occurrence of RCC with rhabdoid features in this married couple. Future studies are
necessary to elucidate the role of asbestos in the pathogenesis and progression of RCC with rhabdoid features. Written informed consent was
obtained from a son of the patients (married couple) for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Renal cell carcinoma Computed tomography Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RM treated the patients and was responsible for concept, design,
acquisition and interpretation of data. NS contributed to design and critical revision of the manuscript. KCH and NK contributed to
pathological diagnosis. KT, SM, TA were treated the patients and participated in the discussions on the study concept. KN was responsible
for the critical revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
