A 34-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of anterior midline neck swelling. The physical examination revealed a soft, mobile,
nontender, 2 × 1 cm, anterior midline neck mass. Ultrasonography showed a heterogeneously isoechoic mass (2.23 × 1.18 cm) in the subhyoid
region, while a thyroid gland was not seen in the normal position (Fig. 1A). A 99mTc-pertechnetate scan demonstrated two distinct focal
areas of radiotracer uptake in the sublingual and subhyoid regions, without uptake in the region of the normal thyroid gland (Fig. 1B). Neck
computed tomography (CT) revealed two heterogeneous hyperdense enhancing masses, one in the sublingual region and the other in the subhyoid
region (Fig. 1C). The thyroid function tests suggested subclinical hypothyroid status with a T4 level of 4.95 µg/dL (normal range, 4.7 to
12.5) and thyroid stimulating hormone level of 15.26 mIU/L (normal range, 0.17 to 4.65). Anti-microsomal antibody and anti-thyroglobulin
antibody were negative. A dual ectopic thyroid was diagnosed based on the radiological findings and replacement therapy with levothyroxine
was initiated. Ectopic thyroid tissue is an uncommon congenital aberration resulting from abnormal migration of the thyroid gland. The most
frequent ectopic positions of thyroid tissue include the lingual, sublingual, and subhyoid areas. It is very rare for two ectopic foci to be
present simultaneously. The mean age of the reported cases with a dual ectopic thyroid was 15 years. Most cases are diagnosed when they are
younger than 30 years and are euthyroid or mildly hypothyroid. When assessing an anterior neck mass, it is important to differentiate
ectopic thyroid tissue from other causes, such as a thyroglossal duct cyst, lipoma, lymph node, epidermoid cyst, and malignancies, to
prevent inappropriate excision. Thyroid scintigraphy, along with either neck CT or ultrasonography, should be considered in cases of
anterior midline neck swelling. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. (A) Neck ultrasonography shows a
heterogeneously isoechoic neck mass in the subhyoid region. (B) 99mTc pertechnetate thyroid scan shows two focal areas of uptake in the
sublingual (upper arrow) and subhyoid regions (lower arrow). (C) Sagittal computed tomography of the neck reveals two heterogeneous
enhancing masses, one in the sublingual region (upper arrow) and the other in the subhyoid region (lower arrow).
