Condyloma acuminatum are caused by human papillomavirus. Giant condyloma acuminatum is a locally invasive, destructive, and large sized
mass. Risk factors for the development of giant condyloma acuminatum include an immunodeficient state, such as human immunodeficiency virus
infection, post-organ transplantation, or post-allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. However, reports of giant condyloma after bone marrow
transplantation are extremely rare (0.3 to 1.3%). The standard treatment for giant condyloma acuminatum is recommended as wide surgical
resection due to its high rate of success and low rate of recurrence. A 31-year-old Korean man presented to our hospital with anal
discomfort for more than one month due to a protruding mass. He had a history of BCR-ABL-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia and had
undergone an allogenic stem cell transplantation. Gross findings revealed a large perianal cauliflower-like mass over 7cm in size with
invasion of the anal orifice. He was diagnosed with giant anal condyloma occurring after an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. However,
we achieved successful treatment using a combination of topical podophyllin and cryotherapy and transanal surgical excision, followed by
bleomycin irrigation. We report an extremely rare case of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus due to human papillomavirus type six in a
patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia following an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. The tumor was successfully treated with a
combination of topical podophyllin and cryotherapy and transanal surgical excision, followed by bleomycin irrigation. Rapid proliferation of
human papillomavirus (HPV) in immunodeficiency patients leads to larger size and locally invasive tumors with or without dysplasia. Risk
factors for giant condyloma acuminatum (GCA) include an immunodeficient state, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, post-
organ transplantation, and post-allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. However, reports of giant condyloma after bone marrow
transplantation are extremely rare (0.3 to 1.3%) . There are various treatment methods including wide surgical resection, however, no
definitive therapeutic guideline has yet been established [4, 5]. A 31-year-old Korean male presented to our hospital with anal discomfort
for more than one month due to a protruding mass. He had a history of BCR-ABL-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and had undergone
an allogenic stem cell transplantation from a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 1 locus-mismatched unrelated donor approximately 70 days prior.
The conditioning regimen was busulfan, fludarabine, antithymocyte globulin (BU-FLU-ATG), and he had been tapered on cyclosporine for
prophylaxis of graft versus host disease (GVHD). He was at an especially high risk of GVHD, therefore we used total 9mg/kg of ATG for strong
immunosuppression. On post-transplant day 69, he complained of discomfort due to an anal mass, which gradually grew over the course of one
month.Gross findings revealed a large perianal cauliflower-like mass over 7cm in size with invasion of the anal orifice (Figure 1-A). He was
not married and did not have a history of anal intercourse, furthermore he had not any intercourse within one year due to induction and
consolidative chemotherapy for ALL. He tested negative for HIV and venereal disease research laboratories test (VDRL). Based on the data, he
was diagnosed with giant anal condyloma of anus occurring after an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.He was initially treated with
podophyllin and cryotherapy under the care of a dermatologist. Because of the unusual size of the mass, he was treated a total of six times
per week (Figure 1B, C, D). After treatment, the mass markedly decreased and was only present in the anal canal (Figure 2A). The mass was
removed by surgical excision using scissors and electrocautery under general anesthesia. Postoperative histopathologic examination confirmed
a condyloma without malignant transformation or dysplasia (Figure 3). He tested positive for HPV 6 and negative for HPV 11, 16, and 18.
Following removal of the condyloma mass, thereafter followed a bleomycin local injection into the small remnant lesion. We performed the
irrigation twice with bleomycin mixed with 0.9% normal saline, at a final concentration of 1.0U/mL (Figure 2B). On post-transplant day 90,
cyclosporine treatment was stopped. After seven months, there was no mass present in the perianal and anal orifices, and there were no
problems in defecation. He continues to have normal anal function. (Figure 2C).Figure 1 Gross finding of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus.
(A) there was large cauliflower-like mass over 7cm in size with invasion of the anal orifice in perianal lesion. (B) One week after local
therapy, (C) two weeks after local therapy, (D) four weeks after local therapy.Figure 2 Gross finding of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus.
(A) Six weeks after local therapy, the mass markedly decreased and was only present in the anal canal. (B) The mass was removed by local
surgical excision under general anesthesia, and then bleomycin irrigation was done twice. (C) At seven months, there was no mass in the
perianal and anal orifices.Figure 3 Pathologic finding of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus. (A), (B) The epithelium shows considerable
superficial hyperkeratosis with koilocytosis (hematoxylin and eosin staining magnification ×100). (C) There is distinct perinuclear clear
vacuolization of the prickle cells (koilocytosis) (hematoxylin and eosin staining; magnification ×200). (D) Koilocytosis characteristic of
HPV infection (hematoxylin and eosin; magnification ×400). Gross finding of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus. (A) there was large
cauliflower-like mass over 7cm in size with invasion of the anal orifice in perianal lesion. (B) One week after local therapy, (C) two weeks
after local therapy, (D) four weeks after local therapy. Gross finding of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus. (A) Six weeks after local
therapy, the mass markedly decreased and was only present in the anal canal. (B) The mass was removed by local surgical excision under
general anesthesia, and then bleomycin irrigation was done twice. (C) At seven months, there was no mass in the perianal and anal orifices.
Pathologic finding of giant condyloma acuminatum of anus. (A), (B) The epithelium shows considerable superficial hyperkeratosis with
koilocytosis (hematoxylin and eosin staining magnification ×100). (C) There is distinct perinuclear clear vacuolization of the prickle cells
(koilocytosis) (hematoxylin and eosin staining; magnification ×200). (D) Koilocytosis characteristic of HPV infection (hematoxylin and
eosin; magnification ×400). Successful treatment included a combination of topical podophyllin and cryotherapy and transanal surgical
excision, followed by bleomycin irrigation. GCA is a slow growing cauliflower-like tumor, however, it is locally invasive, destructive, and
may exceed 10cm in diameter . It is a rare sexually transmitted disease that affects the anogenital region, with an incidence of
approximately 0.1% in the general population [5, 6]. HPV (6, 11, 16, and 18) has been found in biopsied tissue from condylomata acuminata.
HPV 6 and 11 are the two most common subtypes and are usually nononcogenic or low risk. The presence of HPV 16 and 18 within a condyloma
increases the oncogenic potential and is typically associated with carcinomas of the penis and anus [7, 8]. HPV can be transmitted via
several pathways: sexual contact, autoinoculation, or contact with infected materials. The incubation period is usually two to three months,
but can last for up to 20 months. The anal region can be used for sexual satisfaction, especially for homosexual men. The prevalence of
homosexual intercourse has increased, as has the practice of receptive anal intercourse . Other risk factors for the development of anal
and/or perianal giant condyloma are immunosuppression, such as HIV infection, post-transplantation, chronic irritation due to perianal
fistula and ulcerative colitis, and poor personal hygiene . These lesions start as keratotic plaque and slowly expand into a cauliflower-
like mass, forming a locally invasive, non-metastasizing growth that can nearly obliterate the anal canal. The symptoms at first
presentation are primarily a mass or multiple masses. Macroscopically, the mass appears to be polypoid, cauliflower-like, and exophytic. It
is characterized by slow growth, local infiltration, and contiguous tissue destruction, and has a high tendency to recur and produce
fistulas or abscesses around the affected area. The most frequent areas of localization are the surface of vulva, the scrotum, the penis,
the perineum, and the perianal region. Other symptoms including pain, fistula, abscess, persistent drainage, bleeding, pruritus, and
difficulty walking and defecating may present alone or combined. Clinical examination has shown masses that are mobile toward the deep
fascia and tissues. While both giant condyloma acuminatum and simple condylomas have a benign histology, the former is differentiated by a
thicker stratum corneum, marked papillary proliferation, and a tendency to invade deep and displace underlying tissue with an intact
basement membrane. As such, it is considered as an intermediate lesion between condyloma acuminatum and invasive squamous cell carcinoma .
In our case report, the giant condyloma was due to immunodeficiency (post-allogeneic transplantation). Immunosuppressed solid organ
allograft recipients rarely develop anogenital lesions (2.3%), and giant condyloma after bone marrow transplantation is extremely rare (0.3
to 1.3%) [2, 3, 10]. Immunodeficiency is common after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. CD31 and CD41 T-cell counts remain depressed
until two to three years post-transplant, whereas CD81 T-cell counts normalize by 18 months. Furthermore, human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-mismatching between the donor and the recipient and T-cell depletion can delay immune recovery. Ongoing immunosuppression in patients
undergoing transplantation provides fertile ground for untamed proliferation of the HPV virus, which leads to a higher chance of
dissemination, local invasion, and oncogenesis [2, 3, 11, 12]. To date, no definitive therapeutic strategies have been established [4, 5].
The majority of authors agree that surgery is the treatment of choice and is efficient in the early stages of the disease. Surgical excision
is the first line of treatment for giant condyloma because of a relatively high success rate (63 to 91%) and low risk of recurrence.
Excision of the surrounding area must be comprehensive [4, 5, 12]. However, other practitioners support conservative surgery as the best
choice, mainly in terms of the patient’s quality of life . Simple excision alone has been reported as a sufficient therapeutic strategy in
several GCA cases without evidence of disease recurrence . Podofilox solution and gel are other treatment options for condyloma acuminata.
With the 0.5% solution, recurrences were found in one third of patients during the first month after treatment. A high risk of recurrence
has been reported, likely because of the presence of the virus in adjacent, normal-appearing tissues . Cryotherapy alone or in combination
with topical 5-fluorouracil has been reported with good results in relatively small Buschke-Löwenstein tumors . The use of radiotherapy is
controversial, as verrucous carcinoma may transform into poorly differentiated carcinoma with subsequent metastases. CO2 laser therapy has
been successfully applied [5, 17]. The antimetabolite 5-fluorouracil, bleomycin combined with cisplatin or methotrexate, and α-interferon in
topical or systemic administration are possible management options to reduce the size of giant condylomas [5, 18, 19]. However, there are no
guidelines or standard doses and treatments are expensive and require multiple administrations. We report an extremely rare case of GCA
after an allergenic stem cell transplantation. We presume that the risk factor of rapid progression in our case report was strong
immunosuppression due to post-allogeneic transplantation using a relative high dose of T lymphocyte depletion agent (ATG) and cyclosporine.
Especially, another presumed risk factor may have been prolonged chronic irritation due to sitz baths with betadine solution over three
times per day, leading the tumor to become giant in size. Although most case reports suggest broad excision as the initial standard
treatment of giant condyloma, we successfully preserved anal function using a step-by-step combined modality with topical podophyllin and
local cryotherapy and transanal surgical excision, followed by bleomycin irrigation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. human papillomavirus giant condyloma acuminatum human immunodeficiency virus acute lymphoblastic leukemia busulfan,
fludarabine, antithymocyte globulin graft versus host disease venereal disease research laboratories test leukocyte antigen. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HJS was a major contributor in writing the
manuscript. KGB and CBS were involved in drafting, writing and editing the manuscript. KMS performed the procedure. PSG was involved in
drafting, writing and editing the manuscript, and reviewed the manuscript as corresponding author. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This study was supported by a research fund from Chosun University, 2013.
