Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 36 Final Diagnosis: Dietrich’s disease Symptoms: — Medication: — Clinical
Procedure: — Specialty: Orthopaedics Rare disease Isolated avascular necrosis of the metacarpal head, also known as Dietrich’s disease, is a
rare entity with few cases reported previously in the literature. It has been associated with steroid use, lupus, and trauma. We describe
the clinical presentation, pathogenesis, and treatment options associated with this uncommon condition. A 36-year-old man presented with a
1-year history of a painful right middle finger metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ). There was no preceding history of trauma. Routine blood
investigations and plain-film imaging were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a focus of osteonecrosis in the middle
finger MCPJ consistent with Dietrich’s disease. Given the patient’s excellent functional status, conservative therapy was been successfully
undertaken. Dietrich’s disease, although a rare entity, must be considered in the differential diagnosis of painful MCPJ, where routine
blood investigations and plain-film imaging studies are unremarkable. There have been few reports in the literature of avascular necrosis of
the metacarpal head, also called Dietrich’s disease. The earliest description of the disease process appeared in the early 1930s .
Dietrich’s disease has been associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) , steroid use , and trauma , although it is more commonly
idiopathic. The disease process is generally a diagnosis of exclusion, and more commonly affects men. Here we report a case of Dietrich’s
disease in a young patient, and emphasize the importance of considering this unusual diagnosis in cases of unexplained metacarpal pain. We
present an overview of the presentation, pathogenesis, investigation and treatment of this uncommon entity. A 36-year-old male electrician
presented with a 1-year history of pain associated with crepitation involving his right middle finger metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ).
Stretching his finger afforded him only short-term pain relief. Clinical examination was unremarkable except for subtle crepitation
involving his dorsal right middle MCP joint. There was no visible asymmetry, and he had normal range of motion in the joint. His flex-or and
extensor mechanisms were uninvolved. Routine blood investigations, including full blood count and renal profile were normal. Markers of
acute inflammation including C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were within normal limits. Serology for
rheumatoid factor, smooth muscle, mitochondrial, and antinuclear antibodies were also negative. Initial plain-film radiographs of his right
hand were non-contributory (Figures 1–3). Subsequent MRI demonstrated a 7-mm focus of osteonecrosis in the distal end of the head of the
third metacarpal on the volar surface (Figure 4). A diagnosis of idiopathic Dietrich’s disease was made. Further imaging, including bone
scan and SPECT computed tomography (CT), demonstrated secondary multi-focal low-grade arthropathy involving bilateral first carpometacarpal
articulations, and the third MCP joints bilaterally, more marked on the right side. Arthropathy was also noted in several of the proximal
and distal interphalangeal joints bilaterally. Given his excellent functional status, a conservative approach to treatment was preferred. He
responded to rest, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, and hand therapy. An MRI done at 6-month follow-up demonstrated no interval
progression of disease. Dietrich’s disease is an uncommon condition affecting the metacarpal bones. Although any of the metacarpals may be
involved, the middle (or long) finger metacarpal head, as in our case, has been recognized as the most common site of avascular necrosis
(46%). The index (19%), ring (19%), and little fingers (12%) are less commonly involved. The thumb is only involved in 5% of cases. There is
a slight male preponderance, with the male-to-female ratio of 3:2 quoted in the literature. Patients usually present in the 3rd decade of
life, but may present at any age . Flattening and collapse of the metacarpal head may be seen on plain-film radiography, although additional
scintigraphy or MRI may be required for diagnosis . The underlying pathogenesis of Dietrich’s disease is not clearly understood. Wright and
Dell report that in 35% of specimens in their cadaveric study, the metacarpal head lacked a central arteriole. As such, the metacarpal head
must derive its blood supply from small circumferential pericapsular blood vessels, with the situation more pronounced in the middle finger.
It is thought that any compromise to these small pericapsular vessels may contribute to necrosis of the metacarpal head. In cases of SLE,
vasculitis of these end-vessels is thought to lead to necrosis . The condition may also share the same underlying pathogenesis as Freiberg
disease, and simultaneous presentation of the two conditions has been recently reported . This case demonstrates avascular necrosis of the
metacarpal head, which in itself is an unusual radiological finding. The patient presents with no prior history of steroid use, SLE, or
trauma. It is suggested that, in his work as an electrician, an element of repetitive stress or microtrauma to his MCP joint may possibly
have contributed to developing the condition. Given the rarity of the condition, there is no clear consensus on treatment. Rest, and use of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications may be sufficient to control symptoms, and conservative treatment has been reported to be
successful . When conservative treatment fails, surgery may be considered. Curettage and cancellous bone graft from the distal radius to
fill the subchondral defect has been described . Other novel techniques, including osteochondral mosaicplasty , flexion osteotomy of the
metacarpal head , and arthroplasty , have also been reported. Whether this patient will be at an increased risk of early arthritic
involvement of his MCP joint in the future remains to be seen. Nevertheless, his excellent functional status and resolution of pain
demonstrate that conservative therapy can be successful. Surgery can be considered if symptoms return and become refractory to conservative
measures. This report describes the presentation, investigation, and treatment of a rarely described entity. Although uncommon, Dietrich’s
disease should be considered as a possible diagnosis in cases of unexplained metacarpal pain, when routine blood investigations and plain-
film imaging studies are unremarkable. Conflicts of interest The authors report no conflicts of interest. Plain film radiograph of the
patient’s right hand (antero-posterior view). Plain film radiograph of the patient’s right hand (lateral view). Plain film radiograph of the
patient’s right hand (oblique view). Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of right hand demonstrating focal area of osteonecrosis in the third
metacarpal head.
