The sandwich sign is used to describe mesenteric lymphoma in which mesenteric vessels and fat are enveloped by enlarged mesenteric lymph
nodes. We present two cases of primary pleural lymphoma demonstrating the "pleural sandwich sign". Contrast-enhanced computed tomography
showed conglomerated parietal pleural and extrapleural masses encasing the intercostal arteries. Histopathological examinations confirmed
low grade marginal zone B-cell lymphoma in an 80-year-old man and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in a 68-year-old man. The pleural sandwich
sign may suggest the diagnosis of primary pleural lymphoma. The sandwich sign refers to the sandwiching of mesenteric vessels and fat by
enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes on cross-sectional imaging (1). Although sandwich sign could occur in metastatic carcinoma, Mycobacterium
avium complex, and tuberculosis, it commonly occurs in mesenteric lymphoma (1, 2). Here we present two cases of primary pleural lymphoma.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) images showed intercostal arteries enveloped by conglomerated parietal pleural and extrapleural
masses, representing a type of "sandwich sign". Sandwich sign has not been reported in pleural diseases. This report is the first
description of "pleural sandwich sign" as a characteristic CT finding in primary pleural lymphoma. This case report was approved by our
Institutional Review Board. Patients' informed consent was waived. An 80-year-old man presented with cough for one month. He had undergone
surgery for colon cancer 10 years earlier. He had no recurrent or metastatic disease. Additionally, he had been treated for hypertension and
atrial fibrillation for 10 years. Laboratory tests including serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) revealed no
abnormality. Chest radiography showed right pleural effusion and cardiomegaly. Pleural effusion and diffuse parietal pleural mass extending
into the extrapleural space were observed on contrast-enhanced CT of the thorax. The intercostal arteries enveloped by the mass were well
visualized on axial CT images showing the sandwich sign (Fig. 1A). There were a few enlarged lymph nodes at the right cardiophrenic angle.
F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed hypermetabolism in the right pleural mass (Fig. 1B). Cytological
examination of the pleural fluid and pleural biopsy using an Abram's needle was non-diagnostic. He underwent ultrasonography-guided
percutaneous needle biopsy using an 18-gauge automated cutting needle (Pro·Mag Biopsy Needle, Argon Medical Devices, Plano, TX, USA).
Multiple biopsies of the pleural mass were performed. Histopathological and immuno-histochemical examinations revealed monotonous
infiltration of small B-cells expressing CD-20 antigen (Fig. 1C). A diagnosis of low grade marginal zone B-cell lymphoma was made. Epstein-
Barr virus (EBV) was negative in the specimen. No testing for human herpes virus 8 (HHV8) infection was performed. Chemotherapy was started.
He was undergoing chemotherapy at the time of writing. A 68-year-old man was admitted due to dyspnea for 2 weeks. He had no medical history.
His laboratory findings were normal. Testing for HIV virus was not performed. Chest radiography showed right pleural effusion. CT revealed
right pleural effusion with a diffuse pleural mass and a few small lymph nodes in the mediastinum and left axilla. The pleural mass was
homogeneous. It invaded into the extrapleural space with encasement of the intercostal arteries, demonstrating a sandwich sign (Fig. 2A). On
FDG-PET, hypermetabolism was noted in the pleural mass. He underwent thoracentesis. Cytological examination of the pleural fluid showed many
large atypical lymphoid cells (Fig. 2B). Pleural biopsy was performed using an Abram's pleural biopsy needle. The biopsy specimen showed
infiltration of lymphoid cells with a marked squeezing artifact. Ultrasonography-guided pleural biopsy was performed using an 18-gauge
automated cutting needle. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was confirmed by histopathological and immuno-histochemical examinations. Research
for HHV8 and EBV infection was not performed. He underwent chemotherapy. Follow-up CT showed complete resolution of the pleural mass and
effusion. He died of pneumonia 18 months after the diagnosis of primary pleural lymphoma. At that time he was still in complete remission.
Primary pleural lymphoma is rare, although pleural effusion and pleural mass are common manifestations of secondary lymphoma. Primary
pleural lymphoma, accounting for only 7% of primary lymphoma cases (3), usually affects patients with HIV infection or chronic pyothorax
(4). Primary pleural lymphoma occurring in immunocompetent patients without history of chronic tuberculous empyema is extremely rare (5, 6).
Primary pleural lymphoma appears as diffuse nodular pleural thickening and localized mass. Occasionally it appears as isolated pleural
effusion prior to the development of a demonstrable mass. CT findings of primary pleural lymphoma are similar to those of pleural metastasis
or malignant mesothelioma (6, 7). For lymphoma occurring in the thorax, Kunimasa et al. (8) described the "thoracic sandwich sign" as an
anterior mediastinal mass encasing the superior vena cava and brachiocephalic vein that is unlikely to be caused by other mediastinal
malignancies (such as lung cancer, metastatic cancer, germ-cell cancer, and thymoma) because they often quickly invade large mediastinal
vessels. In a series of patients with lymphoma and pleural effusion, Aquino et al. (9) reported that extrapleural involvement was commonly
(30%) presented as a tumor, enlarged lymph nodes, or direct invasion by the adjacent parietal pleural mass. In the present cases, both
patients had extrapleural space involvement by direct invasion of the parietal pleural masses. Intercostal arteries were well visualized in
the conglomerated pleural and extrapleural masses on axial contrast-enhanced CT images, representing the "pleural sandwich sign". This sign
has not been reported in other pleural tumors, including metastases, malignant mesothelioma, and solitary fibrous tumors that usually do not
have extrapleural lesion at the initial presentation or quickly invade intercostal vessels when they invade the extrapleural space.
Therefore, this characteristic CT sign would be helpful to differentiae primary pleural lymphoma from other pleural tumors. Pleural fluid
cytological examination or pleural biopsy using an Abram's or fine needle is non-diagnostic in most cases of primary pleural lymphoma.
Therefore, minimally invasive surgical biopsy via thoracoscopy or video-assisted thoracoscopy is recommended for early diagnosis (5).
However, in cases with large pleural masses, enough specimens for the diagnosis of lymphoma can be obtained by multiple biopsies using a
cutting needle (6). In the present two cases, we performed ultrasonography-guided percutaneous needle biopsy using 18-gauge automated
cutting needle since the pleural masses were large. Biopsies were performed twice in each patient which provided enough samples for the
diagnosis of lymphoma. However, samples obtained by Abram's needle pleural biopsy were non-diagnostic due to squeezing artifact. Therefore,
the pleural sandwich sign may suggest the diagnosis of primary pleural lymphoma. When patients show this sign, an aggressive biopsy
procedure including multiple cutting-needle biopsies would be helpful for early diagnosis and treatment. 80-year-old man with primary
pleural lymphoma (marginal zone B-cell lymphoma). A. Contrast-enhanced CT showing pleural effusion and diffuse homogeneous pleural mass
invading into extrapleural space in right hemithorax. Intercostal artery is enveloped by parietal pleural and extrapleural masses,
demonstrating sandwich sign (arrows). B. F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showing diffuse hypermetabolism in right
pleural mass. C. Pleural biopsy revealing diffuse infiltration of small to medium-sized lymphoid cells with scant to moderate amount of
clear cytoplasm which is consistent with marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (hematoxylin and eosin stain, 400 × magnification). Sandwich sign in
68-year-old man with primary pleural lymphoma (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma). A. Axial image of contrast-enhanced CT showing right pleural
effusion and diffuse pleural mass extending into extrapleural space and paraspinal region. Sandwiching of intercostal artery by
conglomerated pleural and extrapleural masses is noted by arrows. B. Pleural fluid cell block specimen showing numerous large atypical
lymphoid cells (hematoxylin and eosin stain, × 400 magnification).
