Repeat hepatic resection has previously been reported as the most effective treatment for recurrence of intrahepatic carcinoma. To the best
of our knowledge, en bloc resection of recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma directly invading the abdominal wall has not been previously
reported. In September 2012, a 64-year-old Chinese male patient was referred to our hospital because of primary hepatocellular carcinoma
located in Couinaud’s segments III and V. Our patient first had a hepatectomy of the liver. Ten months later, he presented with an abdominal
wall mass and upper abdominal pain. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans demonstrated a 10cm tumor in his left liver
with extrahepatic metastases in his abdominal wall. It was determined that he had recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma associated with direct
invasion into his abdominal wall. He had an en bloc left hepatectomy with resection of the tumor in his abdominal wall. A pathological
examination of the resected specimen confirmed the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma involving the abdominal wall. Disease-free margins
of resection were achieved. Our patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Eight months after the last surgery, our patient died owing
to recurrence and distal metastasis. Direct invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma into the abdominal wall is rarely encountered. Complete
surgical resection should be considered in patients with an appropriate hepatic functional reserve, with consideration of the technical
difficulty relating to tumor involvement with surrounding tissues. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers
worldwide, especially in China. Hepatocellular carcinoma directly invading the abdominal wall is rarely reported [1, 2]. To the best of our
knowledge, en bloc resection of recurrent HCC invading the abdominal wall has never been reported. A 64-year-old Han Chinese male patient
presented with primary multi-HCC. He had tumors located in Couinaud’s segments III and V, which were treated with local resection. After
surgery, he received transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE). After 10 months, he was referred to our hospital in September 2012
with right upper abdominal pain and an abdominal wall mass (Figure 1). He tested negative for the hepatitis B virus but was positive for
hepatitis B core antibody. A physical examination revealed the abdominal wall mass to be 7×8cm. Results from routine blood chemistry tests
were normal. Levels of tumor markers, such as alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9, were all within the
normal range. The functional status of his liver was assessed as class A on the Child-Pugh scale. Abdominal computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging scans demonstrated a mass with ill-defined borders in the left lobe of his liver and revealed abdominal wall invasion
(Figure 2). The maximum diameter of the lesion was 10cm. Because of the extrahepatic tumor invasion and the recurrence of the HCC directly
invading his abdominal wall, a hepatectomy and surgical resectioning of his abdominal wall were considered as the procedure of choice.Figure
1 The original surgical incision with a colored mass in the abdominal wall. Figure 2 Magnetic resonance image showing recurrence of the
carcinoma in segment IV after 10 months. The original surgical incision with a colored mass in the abdominal wall. Magnetic resonance image
showing recurrence of the carcinoma in segment IV after 10 months. The second surgery was performed in July 2013. An incision was made
between the original incisions, over a colored mass in the abdominal wall (Figure 3). Intra-operative findings included a 10cm tumor
involving the left lobe (Couinaud’s segment IV) of his liver. The tumor was invading his abdominal wall. The trunk of his left portal vein,
left hepatic artery and left bile duct were divided and ligated. The common venous trunk of his left and middle hepatic veins were then
divided and ligated. A liver parenchymal transection was performed without using Pringle’s maneuver. Liver resection was carried out by a
clamp-crushing method. Great care was taken to protect his stomach and intestinal wall. Subsequently, a left lobectomy with en bloc removal
of the abdominal wall was performed. The cut surfaces of his liver were immediately covered by the greater omentum and absorbable hemostatic
gauze; because of the large wound (the cut surface), local gauze packing was applied to avoid postoperative bleeding. The operation lasted 2
h. The intra-operative blood loss was 1200mL with six units of red blood cells and four units of fresh plasma transfused during the
operation. Continuous abdominal double cannula lavage and low negative pressure drainage were used to drain his abdominal cavity. The
abdominal drain and gauze packing were loosened and removed on the third and fifth day after the operation respectively.His postoperative
course was uneventful. There were no postoperative complications. Histologic findings were consistent with moderately differentiated HCC
invading the abdominal wall. Our patient had a recurrence six months after the second surgery, refused treatment, and died two months later
(Figure 4).Figure 3 The incision between the original incision (over a colored mass in the abdominal wall). Figure 4 Imaging showing
successful left hepatectomy and resection of the extended skin during the liver operation. The patient had no recurrence for one month after
the second operation. The incision between the original incision (over a colored mass in the abdominal wall). Imaging showing successful
left hepatectomy and resection of the extended skin during the liver operation. The patient had no recurrence for one month after the second
operation. Tumor recurrence rates in HCC remain high, at 50% to 60% , and have even been reported to be over 80% . The main cause of poor
survival after liver resection is recurrence. Many authors have suggested that repeat hepatic resection might be the most effective
treatment for intrahepatic recurrence, and the five-year survival rate following re-resection ranges from 31% to 69% [17, 18]. Hanazaki et
al. reported that a curative repeat hepatectomy may be considered the most effective therapeutic modality for recurrent HCC. This was based
on the fact that survival was significantly longer in patients with recurrence who had repeat hepatic resection than those who had TACE or
percutaneous ethanol injection. Roayaie et al. state that a second hepatic resection for recurrent HCC is applicable in about 15% of
patients. The procedure is safe and can achieve excellent results in carefully selected patients . Therefore, repeat hepatic resection is
accepted as the best treatment for intrahepatic tumor recurrence. A second surgery is difficult for intrahepatic recurrence and extrahepatic
metastasis. Repeat hepatic resection is more difficult than primary resection because of the impaired liver function due to the progression
of hepatitis, the presence of adhesions, and modifications in the anatomy caused by the previous operation . In our case, local gauze
packing was applied to manage the wound bleeding, which can achieve good outcomes. With removal three to five days after the operation,
there is no infection. In this case we had to carefully consider the design of the incision for the second surgery. Tumors on an incision
site will grow quickly and rupture, so surgery is necessary. Sometimes the incision will need a skin flap or graft, particularly if the
abdominal wall mass is large and a large defect in the incision is left post-surgery. If a skin flap is not sufficient, reconstruction with
further skin replacement for the abdominal wall is required. In our patient, after combined resection of the intrahepatic recurrence and
abdominal wall mass, his abdominal tension was reduced. This allowed us to suture the incision so a flap was not required. We selected to
treat our patient’s extrahepatic tumor invasion of the abdominal wall and HCC recurrence with combined resection. Our experience may be
useful in improving the cure and resection rates for liver cancer that is unresectable. We have reported a rare case of a patient who
successfully underwent repeat resections for hepatic recurrences directly invading his abdominal wall after hepatectomy for HCC. To prevent
postoperative recurrence of HCC, patients require comprehensive treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of
kin for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. hepatocellular carcinoma transcatheter arterial chemoembolization. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AL conceived and designed the surgery, and drafted the manuscript. BW and LC
participated in the surgery and performed the acquisition of data and statistical analysis. MW carried out a critical revision of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Special thanks to Professor Michael G Sarrh at the Mayo Clinic for his
contribution to this article; he provided great help and guidance for determining the incision in the second surgery. This study was
supported by the Chinese Key Project for Infectious Diseases (2008ZX10002-025) and the Shanghai Natural Science Foundation (14ZR1409300).
