Presented at Small Animal Medicine Society (SAMSoc) Winter Meeting Case Report Competition, Loughborough, UK; 19th October 2013. alanine
transaminase activated partial thromboplastin time aspartate transaminase creatine kinase extracellular fluid enzyme‐linked immunosorbent
assay immune‐mediated thrombocytopenia intravenous fluid therapy magnetic resonance imaging one stage prothrombin time parathyroid hormone
Queen's Veterinary School Hospital A 1‐year‐old, male intact, miniature poodle was presented as an emergency referral to the Queen's
Veterinary School Hospital, University of Cambridge, with 24 hours of inappetence and lethargy, followed by acute collapse, seizures, and
muscle twitching. The clinical onset was 3 weeks after routine (first) annual vaccination; the dog had no history of other drug or toxin
exposure. On presentation, the dog showed weakness, muscular twitching, and tetany. The dog also had petechiation of the hard palate and
oral mucosa, and lingual bleeding. The referring veterinarian reported hyperthermia (40.5°C, 105°F), but body temperature had decreased by
the time the dog reached the hospital because the referring veterinarian had induced cooling with wet towels; temperature on arrival at QVSH
was 36.3°C (97.3°F). Body condition was normal (4/9) at presentation with a weight of 7.6 kg. Serum biochemistry disclosed total
hypocalcemia (5.32 mg/dL; reference range, 8.6–11.8; 1.33 mmol/L, reference range, 2.15–2.95) and hyperphosphatemia (7.03 mg/dL, reference
range, 2.91–6.59; 2.27 mmol/L, reference range, 0.94–2.13). Azotemia was detected, with serum urea concentration of 60.8 mg/dL (reference
range, 7.0–24.9; 21.7 mmol/L, reference range, 2.5–8.9) and creatinine concentration of 1.98 mg/dL (reference range, 0.3–1.4; 175 μmol/L,
reference range, 27–124); these reduced within 24 hours after IV crystalloid fluid therapy,1 with serum creatinine concentration normalizing
(1.44 mg/dL, reference range, 0.38–1.54; 127 μmol/L, reference range 34–136), suggesting a prerenal azotemia. Muscle enzyme activities also
were found to be increased, with CK > 2,000 IU/L (reference range, 42–206), AST > 1,000 IU/L (reference range, 12–49), and ALT 901 IU/L
(reference range, 14–67); these increases in nonspecific markers of muscle injury were considered likely to be secondary to the seizures and
tetany. Muscle disease was not otherwise investigated. Hematology disclosed severe thrombocytopenia (7 × 109 cells/L reference range,
175–500), which was confirmed by blood film examination. Coagulation times were normal (OSPT 9.1 seconds reference range, 7.6–11.6; APTT
14.3 seconds reference range, 12.5–25). Urine sediment examination showed no abnormalities. While awaiting results of serum parathyroid
hormone (PTH) measurement, hypocalcemia was treated with IV calcium gluconate2 (50 mg/kg IV over 20 minutes, as required) followed by a high
initial dose of alfacalcidol (0.06 μg/kg PO q12h),3 and calcium carbonate (15 mg/kg elemental calcium PO q12h)4 after acute clinical signs
resolved. Immunosuppressive dosages of prednisolone (2.5 mg/kg PO q24h)5 and cyclosporine (4 mg/kg PO q24h)6 were prescribed for suspected
immune‐mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT). The thrombocytopenia was not extensively investigated, but considering its severity, IMT was
considered the most likely cause. Infectious causes of thrombocytopenia are uncommon in the United Kingdom, and the dog had no history of
tick exposure nor had it lived in or traveled to an area where Anaplasma phagocytophilum was prevalent; Ehrlichia platys does not occur in
the United Kingdom, and Angiostrongylus vasorum infection was considered unlikely given that the dog did not show any respiratory signs or
abnormalities on thoracic radiographs. Platelet count increased to 178 × 109 cells/L within 8 days and this rapid response to treatment
provided further support for the suspected diagnosis of IMT. Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound examination were normal. Because
no precipitating factors were found on screening medical testing, the diagnosis of suspected primary (idiopathic) IMT was made. Over the
48 hours after admission, 5 IV boluses of 100 mg/kg calcium gluconate (5% solution) were administered, but an IV infusion (5% solution) was
necessary to control clinical signs (10–15 mg/kg/h initially, but variable depending on serum calcium concentration and clinical signs). The
infusion was maintained, gradually decreasing over 72 hours. Concurrent with hypocalcemia (serum ionized calcium concentration 2.88 mg/dL;
0.72 mmol/L), serum PTH concentration was <10 pg/mL (reference range, 20–65), confirming a diagnosis of hypoparathyroidism. Because no
precipitating factors were found on screening medical testing, the diagnosis of primary (idiopathic) hypoparathyroidism was made.
Parathyroid hormone measurement was performed by an ELISA technique validated in dogs,7 and the sample was carefully processed, including
immediate separation of plasma and freezing before shipping to the laboratory,8 which confirmed that the sample arrived in suitable
condition (ie, frozen). Despite resolution of overt clinical signs, hypocalcemia remained until the 18th day of hospitalization. Magnesium
measurement was undertaken owing to failure of treatment to normalize serum calcium concentration after a week of treatment. Serum total
magnesium concentration was within the reference interval (1.38 mEq/L reference range, 1.30–2.04; 0.69 mmol/L, reference range, 0.64–1.02)
with concurrent hypocalcemia (ionized 2.8 mg/dL; 0.7 mmol/L). The prednisolone dose was tapered, and prednisolone was stopped after 12 days
of treatment because of concern that hypercalciuria was preventing adequate control of the hypocalcemia. Extravasation of calcium gluconate
during the initial emergency treatment caused extensive skin necrosis of the right hindlimb. This complication was successfully treated with
repeated surgical debridement, wound dressing, antibiotics, pain relief and when appropriate, surgical wound closure, over the next 4 weeks.
Three days after cessation of prednisolone, serum ionized hypercalcemia (6.4 mg/dL; reference range, 4.72–5.6; 1.6 mmol/L, reference range,
1.18–1.4) developed. Alfacalcidol was decreased (0.02 μg/kg PO q12h, and subsequently 0.01 μg/kg PO q12h) and calcium carbonate was stopped.
Alfacalcidol was stopped after a further week of worsening hypercalcemia despite the lower dosage. Tests of renal function (serum urea and
creatinine concentrations) were normal throughout this period. The dog was discharged after 4 weeks, once the hindlimb wound had been
closed. At discharge, the dog was receiving only cyclosporine (5 mg/kg PO q24h), meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg PO q24h),9 and co‐amoxicillin
clavulanate (18 mg/kg PO q12h).10 The dog's serum ionized calcium concentration at discharge was 5.64 mg/dL (1.41 mmol/L). Three days after
discharge, the ionized calcium concentration was 4.92 mg/dL (1.23 mmol/L). With the intent of avoiding hypocalcemia, the alfacalcidol was
restarted (0.02 μg/kg PO q12h), but doing so once again led to hypercalcemia 6.4 mg/dL (1.6 mmol/L) within 1 week, and supplementation was
stopped. Despite no further treatment with calcium supplementation or alfacalcidol treatment, over the next 12 months clinical signs did not
recur, and monthly measurements have confirmed continued normocalcemia (serum ionized calcium concentration ranging between 5.52 and
5.64 mg/dL (1.38 and 1.41 mmol/L). Over the months after discharge, the dog gained a substantial amount of weight. The weight‐adjusted
cyclosporine dosage decreased to 2.5 mg/kg PO q24h over 3 months, whereas the total dose administered was not altered. The dosage was then
tapered over the next 6 months to 1 mg/kg PO q24h followed by q48h before stopping. At the time of writing, the dog had not received
cyclosporine for 6 months, with continued stable serum calcium concentrations and no recurrence of clinical signs. Hematology also was
normal. Because of apparent resolution of the hypoparathyroidism, serum PTH concentration was measured after 3 months and was within
reference range (61 pg/mL; reference range, 20–65; concurrent serum ionized calcium concentration: 5.56 mg/dL, 1.39 mmol/L). Calcium
regulation is vital for normal physiology, with roles in muscle contraction, neuronal activity and other cellular functions such as
exocytosis and enzyme activation. The dog's clinical signs all can be explained by the documented hypocalcemia; the mucosal petechiation
likely was because of the thrombocytopenia, but may also be related to hypocalcemia because calcium is required for normal platelet function
and the coagulation cascade. Although the main store of calcium in the body is the skeletal system, the most important control point is the
concentration of calcium in the extracellular fluid (ECF) pool. Regulation of the ECF calcium depends on movement between the ECF and 3
organs: bone, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys. The parathyroid glands provide the main control of calcium and phosphate, by producing
parathyroid hormone (PTH) with effects of increasing calcium and decreasing phosphate concentrations in the ECF pool. The parathyroid gland
responds directly to extracellular calcium concentrations, and therefore the concurrent finding of low serum calcium concentration and
undetectable PTH confirms the inappropriate response of the parathyroid glands to hypocalcaemia, which characterizes hypoparathyroidism.1
Potential causes of hypoparathyroidism, which have been previously reported in dogs, are listed in Table 1. In this case, the diagnosis of
primary hypoparathyroidism was reached due the combination of low serum total and ionized calcium concentrations, high serum phosphate
concentration, undetectable PTH, normal renal function, and a lack of any other causes.2 Renal function was considered normal because of the
rapid resolution of azotemia with IVFT, indicating prerenal azotemia. The dog had no history of trauma, surgery, or drug administration
(aside from vaccination). Magnesium deficiency is uncommon in healthy dogs, but incidence is much higher in the critical care setting, with
reports of up to 54% of dogs in intensive care having low serum magnesium concentrations at admission.3 Hypomagnesemia can cause both
disorders of PTH production and end organ resistance to PTH.4 Causes of hypoparathyroidism in dogs Adapted from Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XIV.2 The optimal method for measuring magnesium concentration has not been established, and it is possible to have normal serum
total magnesium concentration despite a total body magnesium deficit because of the intracellular location of 99% of the body's magnesium.5
In this case, magnesium concentration was not measured until day 7 after admission, and only serum total magnesium concentration was
measured. Ionized magnesium concentration may have provided additional information, and the possibility that the dog was suffering from a
magnesium deficit cannot be excluded by the single magnesium measurement available. However, hypomagnesemia is unlikely to have been the
cause of the hypoparathyroidism in this dog because it would only be expected to have this effect if it was severe; mild hypomagnesemia
actually increases PTH secretion.6 In addition, the hypocalcemia remained for 10 days after documentation of a normal serum magnesium
concentration. To the authors' knowledge, the speed of recovery of calcium concentration with magnesium supplementation in hypocalcemic,
hypomagnesemic dogs has not been documented, but it would be expected to be rapid. In humans, PTH recovery occurred within 1 minute of
magnesium infusion, and calcium normalized after approximately 4 days.4 Canine primary hypoparathyroidism is an idiopathic condition thought
to be caused by immune‐mediated lymphocytic parathyroiditis and destruction of the parathyroid gland.7 Although no consensus has been
reached on optimal management, it requires lifelong treatment with vitamin D analogs with or without calcium supplementation.2 Some cases of
canine hypoparathyroidism may resolve, but reports in the veterinary literature are limited to cases induced by temporary damage to or
suppression of the parathyroid glands, such as those caused by magnesium deficiency, trauma or iatrogenically by thyroidectomy8 or after
treatment of hypercalcemia after parathyroidectomy9 or treatment of a malignancy.10 To the authors' knowledge, this is the first reported
case of naturally occurring canine primary hypoparathyroidism to resolve without lifelong vitamin D and calcium supplementation.
Conventional management does not include immunosuppressive treatment, but this approach was used because of the concurrent occurrence of
IMT. To the authors' knowledge, there are no reports of the use of immunosuppressive treatment in dogs with primary hypoparathyroidism. In
humans, there are occasional reports of other causes of hypoparathyroidism resolving. Alcohol consumption is a reported trigger for
hypoparathyroidism, and moderate alcohol consumption caused transient but clinically unimportant hypoparathyroidism in human volunteers.11
In 1 case report, a person who developed transient hypoparathyroidism, thought to be secondary to pyrexia, experienced resolution after
correction of body temperature.12 In the medical literature, there is a single case report of resolution of primary hypoparathyroidism in a
human patient, in whom hypoparathyroidism spontaneously resolved after 2 years of treatment with vitamin D analogs and calcium
supplementation; the cause of resolution was unknown.13 The role of vaccination in this dog is unknown. Vaccinations have been linked to the
occurrence of immune‐mediated diseases, but adequately powered studies are lacking to prove causation in dogs. A recent study designed to
investigate the link between vaccination and immune‐mediated thrombocytopenia failed to demonstrate increased risk in affected dogs,
although this study likely was underpowered.14 In humans, recent vaccination has been implicated in the development of several autoimmune
conditions, but the evidence is only considered strong in a few conditions, including IMT, arthritis, diabetes mellitus, Guillain Barré
syndrome (polyradiculoneuritis), and transverse myelitis.15 To the authors' knowledge, hypoparathyroidism has not been reported to be
associated with vaccination in humans or dogs. The possibility remains that the hypoparathyroidism was transient or self‐resolving,
potentially related to critical illness and pyrexia. In humans, hypocalcemia is documented commonly during sepsis, but the mechanism of its
development has not been definitively established. In many cases, PTH concentrations are appropriately increased.16 In a small number of
cases, concurrent hypocalcemia and hypoparathyroidism are detected, but the finding of an extremely low PTH concentration, rather than a
relative, inappropriate hypoparathyroidism was rare.17 These changes are related to proinflammatory cytokines, particularly IL‐6 and IL‐1β,
which lead to increased transcription of the calcium‐sensing receptor and a lowered calcium set point.18 Hypoparathyroidism related to
sepsis has not been documented in dogs. In this dog, it seems unlikely that the hypoparathyroidism was related to a state of sepsis because
the dog's clinical signs all could be explained by the hypocalcemia, and were not consistent with sepsis. Furthermore, the hypocalcemia did
not resolve without intense intervention over the following 3 weeks, and despite resolution of the dog's thrombocytopenia within a much
shorter period. Also, the severity of the hypoparathyroidism was more extreme than is seen in humans, where relative hypoparathyroidism is
more commonly recorded. A final plausible explanation for the transient nature of the disease would be parathyroid hemorrhage, secondary to
the IMT. In addition to a lack of previous reports, it is unlikely that hemorrhage would affect sufficient parathyroid tissue to have a
clinically relevant effect on parathyroid function, given the presence of 4 parathyroid glands, located at the poles of the thyroid glands,
without other concurrent clinical signs. Given the apparent successful use of immunosuppressive treatment in a suspected immune‐mediated
condition, it is possible that this treatment was responsible for the response seen. Both prednisolone and cyclosporine were used in the
management of the case. Although it is possible that prednisolone contributed to the response, the short treatment time and apparent
clinical resolution after the cessation of prednisolone treatment, makes it more likely that cyclosporine contributed to resolution.
Cyclosporine is a naturally occurring fungal compound with profound immunosuppressive properties. Its main activity is to inhibit T‐cells by
inhibition of calcineurin, preventing activation of T‐helper cells and the production of IL‐2, which in turn prevents clonal expansion of
T‐cells, particularly CD8 + cytotoxic T‐cells.19 Its use is licensed for dogs with atopic dermatitis, and it has been used in other
immune‐mediated conditions,20 but not in hypoparathyroidism. Aside from the immunosuppressive effects of cyclosporine, it is known to affect
calcium and parathyroid metabolism in humans and dogs. A study of dogs with atopic dermatitis showed that, while calcium concentrations were
only mildly affected, treatment with cyclosporine increased PTH concentrations.21 The clinical relevance of this effect in the dog of this
case report is questionable given that in atopic dogs the parathyroid gland would be functioning normally, whereas here the concurrent
undetectable PTH and profound hypocalcemia indicated parathyroid gland failure. The effects on PTH concentrations are complex owing to
cyclosporine's ability to increase urinary calcium excretion in some animals. The main limitation of this case report is the lack
of histopathology to confirm lymphocyte‐mediated destruction of the parathyroid glands, but biopsy of the parathyroid gland is not normally
indicated in the management of primary hypoparathyroidism in the dog. In retrospect, additional imaging of the parathyroid glands with
ultrasound or MRI would have been desirable, but were not considered necessary at the time of initial diagnosis. The unique nature of the
case only became apparent over the subsequent months. Whether or not treatment was responsible for resolution, this report still represents
a unique finding of transient primary hypoparathyroidism. Conflict of Interest Declaration: The authors disclose no conflict of interest.
Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: The authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials. Hartmann's Solution, Dechra, Stoke on Trent, UK
Calcium Gluconate 10%, Hameln Pharmaceuticals, Brockworth UK, diluted with equal volume 0.9% NaCl One‐Alpha, Leo Laboratories Ltd, Hurley UK
Calcium 500, Martindale Pharmaceuticals, Brentwood UK Prednidale, Dechra, Stoke on Trent UK Atopica, Novartis, Camberley UK Canine Intact
PTH ELISA, Immutopics International, San Clemente, CA, USA Nationwide Specialist Laboratories, Cambridge, UK Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Ingelheim am Rhein Germany Clavaseptin, Vetoquinol, Magny Vernois France
