Funding Information None declared. Guanine-adenine-thymine-adenine 2 (GATA2) mutated disorders include the recently described MonoMAC
syndrome (Monocytopenia and Mycobacterium avium complex infections), DCML (dendritic cell, monocyte, and lymphocyte deficiency), familial
MDS/AML (myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia) (myeloid neoplasms), congenital neutropenia, congenital lymphedema (Emberger's
syndrome), sensorineural deafness, viral warts, and a spectrum of aggressive infections seen across all age groups. While considerable
efforts have been made to identify the mutations that characterize this disorder, pathogenesis remains a work in progress with less than 100
patients described in current literature. Varying clinical presentations offer diagnostic challenges. Allogeneic stem cell transplant
remains the treatment of choice. Morbidity, mortality, and social costs due to the familial nature of the disease are considerable. We
describe our experience with the disorder in three affected families and a comprehensive review of current literature. The guanine-adenine-
thymine-adenine (GATA) family is comprised of six zinc-finger transcription factors that recognize approximately 7 million GATA motifs in
the human genome 1,2. GATA1 is instrumental in development of erythrocytes, mast cells, eosinophils, and megakaryocytes 3–8 and is
implicated in Down syndrome-related acute megakaryocytic leukemia and transient myeloproliferative disorder 9,10. GATA1 is also associated
with X-linked thrombocytopenia and dyserythropoeitic anemia (Diamond–Blackfan anemia) 75–77. GATA2, located on 3q21 11 is pivotal in
proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and mutations were first described in aplastic anemia 12–15. Pedigree studies have initially
recognized two mutations in GATA2 in familial AML, p.T354M, and p.T355del, both in the second zinc finger (ZF-2) of GATA2 16–18, while two
other mutations; p.R308P and p.A350-N351ins8 are associated with de novo AML 78. During erythropoiesis; GATA switching results in
displacement of GATA2 by GATA1 from chromatin causing inhibition of GATA2, promoting downstream erythroid differentiation 5,19. In contrast,
GATA2 overexpression induces megakaryocytic differentiation in cell lines 20. GATA2 exerts an inhibiting influence on the PU.1 gene which is
essential for monocytic, granulocytic, and lymphoid differentiation 21. In contrast to RUNX1, which is essential for generation of HSC,
GATA2 appears to be essential for HSC generation and subsequent survival 22. Other GATA genes perform a diverse array of functions. GATA3
promotes T-cell lymphopoiesis 23–28 but deficiency has been associated only with hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal disease. GATA4 has
recently been implicated in childhood onset diabetes 29. GATA 5 CpG island hypermethylation in renal carcinoma appear to identify aggressive
phenotypes with poor outcomes 30. In animal models, GATA6 has been shown to orchestrate cardiac muscle hypertrophy in response to pressure
stress and increase hepcidin expression in inflammatory states 31,32. In summary, GATA factors 1–3 appear to be involved in hematopoiesis,
while GATA 4–6 appear to be more important for cardiac development and function 33 although expression has been demonstrated in other
endodermal and mesodermal organs such as lung, liver and gonads and gut 34. The study of germline mutations such as GATA2 provides profound
insights into leukemogenesis, immune dysfunction and cross-talk of seemingly diverse genetic pathways such as CEBPA, PU.1 35–38, and RUNX1
39–43. The clinical phenotype of germline GATA2 mutations include, but is not limited to, spectrum of immune deficits such as MonoMAC
syndrome 44–46, dendritic cell, monocyte and lymphoid deficiency (DCML) 47, familial MDS (myelodysplastic syndrome)/AML (acute myeloid
leukemia), and Emberger's syndrome 48. Of note, sporadic mutations in GATA2 are described and may have no familial implications as described
below. Our focus in this article is the haploinsufficiency induced by spontaneous germline mutations in GATA2 resulting in an autosomal
dominant inheritance of diverse phenotypes 44,46,49. The differential diagnosis of GATA-2 deficiency includes other related disorders with
overlapping features and are summarized in Table1. Mutations/disorders in differential diagnosis of GATA2 deficiency MDS, myelodysplastic
syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; HPV, human papillomavirus. The proband is a 38-year-old Caucasian male, who presented with
progressive dyspnea and fatigue of 3 months duration and was found to have pancytopenia. A bone marrow biopsy revealed hypocellular marrow
but demonstrated acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with the following cytogenetic abnormalities: t (1; 21) (q10; q10) /46XY . He received
standard induction chemotherapy with idarubicin and cytarabine, and his course was complicated by an orbital fungal infection with Absidia
lithemia, medically and surgically managed, following which he underwent a reduced-intensity conditioning-matched unrelated donor allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (MUD-Allo-HCT). Posttransplant course was complicated by severe refractory immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia requiring a splenectomy and an orbital relapse of AML. Due to history of multiple family members being affected (Fig.2) by
AML and extra genital warts (sister, son, and daughter), congenital lymphedema (son), and cytopenias (sister) a work-up for familial bone
marrow failure syndromes was carried out. GATA2 mutation analysis performed at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) confirmed the
presence of a missense mutation (1339A>C, p S447R) in the patient, a female sibling, a son, and a daughter. The female sibling with MDS and
viral warts also underwent MUD-Allo-HSCT (hematopoietic stem cell transplant) and remains symptom-free 14 months posttransplant. The
probands son and daughter also underwent MUD allogeneic HSCT and are doing very well more than 12 months posttransplant. Patient
characteristics and outcomes are shown in Table2. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients with GATA2 mutations that underwent
allogeneic stem cell transplantation MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia. Genotype/phenotype relations of GATA2
mutations. Family 2 was discovered by the birth of a newborn with dysmorphic features (head size larger than stomach) resulting in a
cytogenetic examination in infancy with identification of deletion 3q13.2-q21.3, which includes the GATA2 gene. The child exhibited
monocytopenia without lymphopenia or neutropenia. Dendritic cell activity was not assessed for. The parents were tested and did not have the
same gene defect. She is being followed with monthly blood tests and has not demonstrated any systemic infections or signs of MDS/AML
although cognitive development appears to be delayed. Family Tree of Proband 1 with the GATA2 c.1339A>C.pS447R mutation. Years post
allogeneic HSCT for GATA2 mutation Spinner et al. HSCT, 5 hematopoietic stem cell transplant. In Family 3, the proband is a Caucasian female
who presented at age 17 years with abdominal pain, hemoptysis, and mild pancytopenia. A CT scan revealed mild diffuse thoracic and abdominal
lymphadenopathy. A detailed evaluation found acute Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection. A bone marrow biopsy was mildly hypocellular with
mild erythroid hypoplasia and megakaryocytic hyperplasia with atypia. The cytogenetics were 46, XX 20. She had a history of recurrent
episodes of hidradenitis suppurativa, skin abscesses, folliculitis, otitis media, and throat infections. Several years later, she was
initiated on therapy with pegylated G-CSF. In spite of this, otitis media and abscesses continued. Two years later, she presented with a
hypercatabolic state, with progressive hepato-splenomegaly and constitutional features. A bone marrow biopsy demonstrated progressive
megakaryocytic atypia. While cytogenetics were once again normal, however, a MDS-fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) panel identified
a deletion of -3q21 in 99% of analyzed nuclei. A phytohemagglutinin-stimulated karyotyping of peripheral blood lymphocytes also demonstrated
the -3q21 (RPN1 deletion) in 99% of analyzed nuclei. GATA2 is located within this region, Expression studies confirmed GATA2
haploinsufficiency. She is awaiting a donor for a MUD-HSCT. The terms MonoMAC and DCML are synonymous, in terms of the genetic etiology, and
refer to a primary immunodeficiency with predisposition to MDS/AML. MonoMAC refers to a recently described syndrome of MONOcytopenia and
Mycobacterium Avium Complex infections characterized by germline GATA2 mutations 44,46. DCML, also caused by germline GATA2 mutations refers
specifically to the cytopenias frequently seen in most patients—DCML deficiency (both B and NK cell) 50. Two independent groups studied 24
individuals with these syndromes and reported similar mutations noted above in familial syndromes (T354M and T355 del). The scope of immune
deficiency in this group is vast and not limited to mycobacterial infections. Opportunistic viral (disseminated human papillomavirus and
HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma) 51, parasitic and fungal infections, as well as pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (GATA2 is known to
influence the phagocytic activity of pulmonary alveolar macrophages) can be seen 52. A majority of patients with GATA2 mutations eventually
show deficiency of B lymphocytes, NK cells, CD4 lymphocytes, and monocytes 53. Emberger's Syndrome is primary lymphedema with cutaneous
warts, deafness, and a propensity to develop MDS/AML. Intact GATA2 function is required for proper lymphatic vascular development during
embryogenesis in mice 54. Ostergaard and colleagues identified eight mutations in GATA2 in three patients with this syndrome by whole-exome
sequencing identifying this mutation as the only common denominator between the group 48. At least 1 other patient with propensity to
varicella zoster and salmonella infections has been reported 48. Complications secondary to prolonged lymphedema such as secondary
cellulitis and deep vein thrombosis (DVT) are frequent 53. Null mutations in GATA2 appear to be associated with severe viral infections and
lymphedema 52. GATA2 overexpression has been documented in one-third to one half of nonfamilial AML and correlates with a poor prognosis
with shorter overall and event-free survival when treated with standard chemotherapy 55,56. Of the original four families with GATA2
mutations, described by Hahn et al. with MDS/AML, three had the T354M mutation, and one had deletion T355. Both mutations occurred in the
second zinc finger (ZF) of GATA2 (Fig 1). In the T354 mutation families, all members had the mutation but not all had developed
hematological disease at least by the time of reporting 16. Bone marrow biopsies are typically hypocellular in contrast to the common MDS
marrow picture, with abundant atypical megakaryocytes in >90% patients 53. Some patients have also fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for
CMML (chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) and LGL (large granular lymphocytic leukemia) suggesting overlap syndromes 53. Other acquired
mutations such as ASXL1 may herald the development of AML 57. Increased levels of FLT3 ligand have also been reported to be associated with
clinical progression 58. A novel GATA2 mutation L359V has been found in nearly 10% of patients with accelerated or blast phase CML, but not
CLL or ALL 59,60. This is thought to be mediated through PU.1 inhibition. It is interesting to note that GATA2 overexpression or the L359V
gain-of-function mutation have been associated with AML and CML, respectively; whereas loss-of-function mutation of GATA2 such as T354M have
been linked to MDS. L359 and T354 located in the same region on the second zinc finger of GATA2 thus highlighting the vital role GATA2 plays
in hemostasis of myeloid precursors. Expression of GATA-2 mRNA in purified CD34-positive cells was significantly decreased in aplastic
anemia compared with normal subjects when examined by immunocytochemical analysis 61. The changes extend further to stromal cells, with
lower expression of GATA2 in patients with aplastic anemia when compared to controls by RT-PCR-ELISA 62. GATA-2 is instrumental in both
hematopoiesis and adipogenesis. Overexpression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-γ, an adipogenic factor) and
underexpression of GATA2 by mesenchymal stem cells may explain fatty marrow replacement in AA patients 63. A high frequency of GATA2
mutations has been reported in pediatric patients with mild chronic neutropenia 64. Analysis of French Neutropenia registry data revealed
chronic familial neutropenia in seven families predisposing to MDS/AML associated with GATA2 mutations that included a complete deletion of
GATA2 locus as well as additional mutations (p.R396Q, R204X, R330X, E224X, A372T, and M388V) 64. Ventilation-diffusion defects can be
demonstrated in about two-thirds of GATA2-deficient patients while pulmonary hypertension (PAH) and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) are
some of the rare manifestations occurring in <20% in one series 53. PAP in GATA2 deficiency is not due to GM-CSF-(Granulocyte Monocyte-
Colony Stimulating Factor) autoantibodies and is refractory to GM-CSF inhalational and subcutaneous therapy 53. Allogeneic HSCT remains the
main therapy for GATA2-deficient patients with immunodeficiency. Timing of HSCT for immune deficiency alone is less well defined as compared
to MDS/AML and should focus on risk-benefit ratios for the individual and the family. The incidence of HPV, mycobacterial, and fungal
infections decreases considerably after successful allogeneic HSCT 53,65. Notably, it may take more than 3.5 years for reversal of phenotype
and full immune reconstitution of B, NK, and monocyte populations 66. This may be especially problematic with delayed engraftment typical of
umbilical cord grafts. Both PAP and PAH also respond well to HSCT and repeated lung infections or declining lung function should be
considered an indication in clinical context 53. Earlier transplantation, before organ dysfunction ensues, results in less morbidity and
mortality. Allogeneic HCT remains the only treatment with favorable responses in GATA2-mutated MDS/AML (Fig.3). In the NIH experience, 21
patients were transplanted for either hematological (MDS/AML) or immunological indications (age 15–49 years) with good responses (Fig.1). Of
note, half the patients who were not transplanted passed away by age 40 51. A similar NIH experience further outlined use of conditioning
regimens for nonmyeloablative allogeneic HCT 66. Donors included fully matched related and unrelated donors (conditioning-
fludarabine + total body radiation 200 cGy) and alternative sources such as umbilical cord blood and haploidentical bone marrow
(fludarabine + cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation 200 cGy, with posttransplant cyclophosphamide for T-cell replete grafts).
Busulfan was later added for a more robust eradication of the GATA2 clone. Azithromycin was started before and continued for 1 year
posttransplant due to increased propensity to nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) infections, in addition to standard prophylaxis. No NTM
infections during or after transplant were reported using prophylaxis. Overall survival was 57% at 36 months. Our patient characteristics
and outcomes are shown in Table2. Tacrolimus was used for graft versus host disease prophylaxis. All four patients have engrafted with 100%
donor chimerisms (CD3 and CD33 fractions). One patient had CMV-Cytomegalovirus reactivation and refractory thrombocytopenia which failed to
improve despite splenectomy. Three developed acute GVHD and one had chronic GVHD involving esophagus with dysphagia and strictures that
improved with steroids. Two clinical trials are currently recruiting patients for myeloablative and reduced-intensity conditioning
allogeneic HSCT for GATA2 mutations and enrollment is encouraged whenever feasible (NCT01861106 and NCT00923364 at www.clinicaltrails.gov).
Early genetic diagnosis and screening is paramount 53. Patients and families should be seen in conjunction with a geneticist. Suggested
screening categories are listed in Table3. Variable phenotypes resulting from different GATA2 mutations are listed in Table4. Suggested
screening categories for GATA2 mutation Modified from Spinner et al. 53. MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; HPV,
human papillomavirus; PAP, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; EBV, Epstein–Barr virus. Mutations of GATA2 resulting in variable phenotypes
(Fig.3) 78 MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; DCML, dendritic cell, monocyte, and lymphocyte. None declared.
