There are several techniques for creation of a neovagina in male-to-female reassignment surgery. Although vaginoplasty with the sigmoid
colon is not a common procedure, it is becoming more common. Perforation of the recto-sigmoid neovagina after sex reassignment surgery is
very rare. We hereby report a case of perforation of the neovagina that presented as acute peritonitis, with a massive abscess in the intra-
abdominal cavity. This case report describes a 33-year-old Asian woman presenting with mild persistent abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting
who had undergone male-to-female sex reassignment surgery four years prior. Physical examination revealed mild abdominal pain without
rebound tenderness. An abdominal computed tomography scan showed a massive abscess that occupied a significant portion of the intra-
abdominal cavity. Perforation of the neovagina was confirmed by exploratory laparotomy and surgical drainage with primary closure was
performed without any complications. This is a rare case involving perforation of the neovagina that was successfully treated with surgical
intervention. This case emphasizes the importance of taking a detailed medical history and to make physicians and patients aware that bowel
vaginoplasty can result in a weak vagina. Vaginal reconstruction is indicated in several conditions including vaginal agenesis, gender
dysphoria in biological males, and genital trauma. There are several techniques for construction of the neovagina in male-to-female
reassignment surgery. The penile-scrotal skin flap technique is considered the standard in vaginoplasty, however, use of the sigmoid colon
for reconstruction is becoming more common because of good sexual and psychosocial outcomes . Although complications have been reported,
including neovaginal prolapse, introital stenosis, and unsatisfied female sexual function [7, 8], perforation of the neovagina is very rare
[9, 10]. We hereby report a case of perforation of the neovagina that presented as acute peritonitis with a massive abscess in the intra-
abdominal cavity. The perforation of the vaginal vault was confirmed intraoperatively, and surgical drainage was performed successfully
without any complications. A 33-year-old Japanese female who underwent male-to-female sex reassignment surgery four years prior presented to
our clinic with persistent abdominal pain that had gradually worsened over seven days. She also complained of nausea and vomiting, but
otherwise claimed to be healthy. She had visited her primary care physician five days earlier, but no definite diagnosis was made. Upon
presentation, the patient was alert and vital signs were unremarkable except for a fever of 38°C. Physical examination revealed mild
abdominal tenderness without rebound tenderness. There were no other remarkable findings. A blood test revealed an increased white blood
cell count (12,600/μL) and C-reactive protein level (26.64mg/dL), and liver and kidney function tests were normal. An abdominal X-ray showed
signs of bowel obstruction with bowel distention and multiple gas-fluid levels. An abdominal computed tomography scan revealed partial bowel
obstruction and a massive abscess, which occupied a significant portion of the intra-abdominal cavity (Figure 1), but no free air was
apparent. Further history taking revealed that the sigmoid colon was used to construct the neovagina. The patient had no major complications
other than mild stenosis of the neovagina and was advised by her primary surgeon to undergo vaginal dilation via daily insertion of plastic
stents (2–4×20cm) 10cm into her neovagina. The patient stated that she had vaginal intercourse and vaginal dilation a few days prior to the
onset of her symptoms.Figure 1 Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. An abdominal CT scan showed a massive abscess occupying a
significant portion of the intra-abdominal cavity. A well-circumscribed abscess fluid collection with enhanced walls are seen as pointed by
the white arrows. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. An abdominal CT scan showed a massive abscess occupying a significant portion of
the intra-abdominal cavity. A well-circumscribed abscess fluid collection with enhanced walls are seen as pointed by the white arrows.
Although free air was not observed in radiographic images, bowel perforation was suspected. However, considering the discrepancy between the
mild clinical manifestations and the abdominal imaging, we suspected a perforation of the neovagina rather than of the intestinal tract.
Intravenous antibiotics were immediately administered, and surgical intraperitoneal drainage was conducted five hours after initial
presentation to our hospital. During the procedure, 10L of saline was used, and the perforation was confirmed at the top of the neovagina
(Figure 2). Primary closure using slow absorbable 3-0 sutures was performed. The exact volume of the neovagina was not measured, but it was
at least 10cm in length and there was no obvious introital stenosis at the time of operation. No perforation of the intestinal tract was
found during the operation, and the relationship between the perforation and vaginal dilation could not be determined. Although we observed
adhesion in the small intestine over a broad range, we were able to completely drain the intra-abdominal abscess and the surgical
intervention itself was uneventful. There were no complications related to the surgery, though eight weeks of intravenous antibiotics for
multidrug resistant bacteria were continued in case of a residual abscess. Figure 2 Exploratory laparotomy. Perforation of the neovagina was
confirmed and primary closure was performed. Exploratory laparotomy. Perforation of the neovagina was confirmed and primary closure was
performed. Perforation of the neovagina after sex reassignment surgery is very rare. In 2001, Liguori et al. reported a case of acute
peritonitis due to introital stenosis that subsequently caused perforation of the neovagina constructed from bowel. A second case was
reported by Amirian et al. in 2011, involving a patient that was conservatively treated with antibiotics. In the present case, a neovaginal
perforation was the suspected cause of the intra-abdominal abscess because of the discrepancy between the symptomology and the radiologic
findings. Although conservative treatment with antibiotics was considered in our case, we performed surgical intraperitoneal drainage based
on the clinical judgment that the abscess may be refractory to antibiotic treatment. As a result, the patient recovered quickly without any
perioperative complications. Spontaneous rupture of the neovagina with introitus occlusion has been reported, however, perforation without
introital stenosis has not been described. In contrast to previous literature that emphasizes the importance of regular sexual intercourse
and vaginal dilation to avoid complete introital stenosis , we speculate that these practices may have caused the perforation, allowing
colonic bacteria to leak into the abdominal cavity, and resulting in the formation of an abscess. We report a case involving perforation of
the neovagina that was successfully treated with surgical intervention. Rupture of the neovagina is a very rare origin of an acute abdominal
syndrome, and this case emphasizes the importance of taking a detailed medical history and making physicians and patients aware that bowel
vaginoplasty can result in a weak vagina. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests All
authors declare that they have no competing interests. There was no financial support or any potential financial or other conflicts of
interest. Authors’ contributions YS and AF drafted the manuscript; KK, NI, and YF participated in critical revision of the article; All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
