These authors contributed equally towards this work. Present address: Institute of Vegetative Physiology, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany. Complex I (CI) is the largest of the five multi-subunit complexes constituting the human oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system.
Seven of its catalytic core subunits are encoded by mitochondrial DNA (ND (NADH dehydrogenase)1–6, ND4L (NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4L)),
with mutations in all seven having been reported in association with isolated CI deficiency. We investigated two unrelated adult patients
presenting with marked exercise intolerance, persistent lactic acidaemia and severe muscle-restricted isolated CI deficiency associated with
sub-sarcolemmal mitochondrial accumulation. Screening of the mitochondrial genome detected novel mutations in the MTND1 (NADH dehydrogenase
subunit 1) gene, encoding subunit of CI [Patient 1, m.3365T>C predicting p.(Leu20Pro); Patient 2, m.4175G>A predicting p.(Trp290*)] at high
levels of mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy in skeletal muscle. We evaluated the effect of these novel MTND1 mutations on complex assembly
showing that CI assembly, although markedly reduced, was viable in the absence of detectable ND1 signal. Real-time PCR and Western blotting
showed overexpression of different CI assembly factor transcripts and proteins in patient tissue. Together, our data indicate that the
mechanism underlying the expression of the biochemical defect may involve a compensatory response to the novel MTND1 gene mutations,
promoting assembly factor up-regulation and stabilization of respiratory chain super-complexes, resulting in partial rescue of the clinical
phenotype. We describe the clinical, biochemical and molecular characterization of two adults with progressive exercise intolerance and
severe isolated mitochondrial complex I (CI) deficiency due to novel MTND1 mutations. We demonstrate compensatory CI assembly factor up-
regulation probably partially rescuing the clinical phenotype. We sought to assess in vivo and vitro mitochondrial function and evaluate the
molecular mechanisms underlying a purely muscular phenotype in two adults whose clinical pictures were dominated by progressive exercise
intolerance, lactic acidaemia and severe isolated mitochondrial CI deficiency in muscle. We describe the detailed clinical, physiological,
biochemical and molecular characterization of these patients who we show to harbour novel heteroplasmic mutations in the mtDNA-encoded MTND1
gene. We demonstrate for the first time that mitochondrial super-complex reorganization occurs as a response to a compensatory mechanism to
partially extricate the clinical phenotype involving up-regulation of CI assembly factors, a phenomenon not previously reported with MTND1
mutations. Isolated deficiencies of human complex I (CI) often cause severe early-onset progressive disease, but the spectrum of disorders
associated with this biochemical abnormality is expanding. In particular, mutations in the ND1 subunit of CI [MIM #252010] are associated
with Leigh syndrome [MIM #256000]; cardiomyopathy; epilepsy; encephalopathy; mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-
like episodes (MELAS) [MIM #54000]; Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) [MIM #535000] and an overlap syndrome comprising clinical
features of both LHON and MELAS . Exercise intolerance is a common symptom of mitochondrial disorders that can occur in isolation or as part
of a multi-system disorder and has been associated with mutations in many genes encoding subunits of various complexes . However, the
relationship between the pathogenic mtDNA mutation and the biochemical and phenotypic expression of the defect remains poorly understood. In
the present paper, we describe two unrelated adult patients with severe isolated CI deficiency in skeletal muscle, progressive exercise
intolerance, myopathy (without cardiomyopathy) and persistent lactic acidaemia. Both patients harbour novel heteroplasmic MTND1 (NADH
dehydrogenase subunit 1) gene [MIM #516000] mutations. We have characterized VO2 (oxygen uptake) kinetics during graded aerobic exercise,
assessed in vivo mitochondrial function using phosphorus MR spectroscopy and evaluated the molecular mechanisms underlying this purely
muscular phenotype to understand the impact of both mutations on CI biogenesis. Local study approval was granted (NRES Committee North East-
Newcastle & North Tyneside 1) and written informed consent from both patients was obtained prior to study inclusion. All clinical
investigations were evaluated according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Patient 1 presented at age 16 years with mild exercise intolerance
and prominent fatigue following a viral illness. She was diag-nosed with chronic fatigue syndrome. At age 25 years she presented with
progressive exertion-related dyspnoea and palpitations and was provisionally diagnosed with asthma. By 28 years of age, muscle weakness and
fatigue with exercise-induced headache, vomiting, cardiac palpitations and syncope were prominent and a metabolic acidosis with elevated
serum lactate was detected (Table 1). At this stage a neuromuscular opinion was sought. The clinical picture has progressed rapidly over the
last 2 years with exercise tolerance reduced to less than 50 m. She has developed alcohol intolerance and postural orthostatic tachycardia
syndrome (POTS). Patient 2 presented at age 22 years of age to a neurologist with life long indolent exertion-related muscle weakness and
pain, dyspnoea, cardiac palpitations and syncope. There was no family history of muscle disease or parental consanguinity in either case.
BPM, beats per min; DCPIP, 2,6-dichlorophenol-indophenol; n/a, not available; t1/2 PCR (s), half time for PCR recovery from end exercise to
baseline concentrations; VO2, oxygen uptake. Enzyme activities are expressed as nmol of NADH oxidized/min per unit of citrate synthase (CS)
for CI, nmol of DCPIP reduced/min per unit of CS for CII (succinate:ubiquinone-1 reductase) and the apparent first-order rate constant/s per
unit of CS for CIII and CIV (×103). Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) was performed in both subjects as described elsewhere .
Anaerobic threshold (AT) was determined using the V-slope method, as previously described . Muscle phosphorus magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (31P-MRS) was performed on the left calf, as detailed previously, in Patient 1 to evaluate in vivo mitochondrial function
relative to an age matched reference group . Standard histological [H&E (haematoxylin and eosin), modified Gomori trichrome] and
histochemical analyses of skeletal muscle biopsies were performed on fresh-frozen skeletal muscle sections (10 μm) . Mitochondrial
respiratory chain complex activities were determined in skeletal muscle homogenates and expressed relative to the activity of the matrix
marker enzyme citrate synthase . Total DNA was extracted from available tissues including muscle, blood, buccal epithelia, urinary
sediments, cultured myoblasts and fibroblasts. Muscle mtDNA rearrangements were investigated by long-range PCR strategies . Direct
sequencing of the entire mtDNA genome was undertaken ; alignment and variant calling were performed using SeqScape software (v2.1.1, Applied
Biosystems) comparing changes to the GenBank reference sequence for human mtDNA (accession number NC_012920.1). Heteroplasmic levels of the
m.3365T>C and m.4175G>A mutations were determined in homogenate tissue and individual laser-microcaptured COX-positive and COX-positive
ragged-red fibres (RRFs) by quantitative pyrosequencing. Quantification of the heteroplasmy level of each variant was achieved using
Pyromark Q24 software . Complex subunit immunohistochemistry was carried out on frozen tissue sections as described previously . Primary
antibodies and their dilutions used were: CI ND1, 1:200 (gift from Dr Anne Lombes), CI NDUFB8 1:50, CII SDHA (succinate dehydrogenase
complex subunit A; 70 kDa flavoprotein subunit) 1:1000, CIII UQCRC2 (ubiquinone: cytochrome c reductase core protein 2) (Core 2) 1:1000, CIV
MTCO1 (mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1) 1:1000, CIV MTCO4, 1:1000, Porin, 1:1000; all commercially available antibodies were
purchased from Abcam. Primary antibodies were detected using a polymer detection system (Menarini Diagnostics) as per the manufacturer's
instructions and visualized with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB; Sigma). For BN (blue native)/PAGE, frozen skeletal muscle (10–50 mg) was
homogenized and solubilized with 2% dodecylmaltoside (individual complexes and smaller super-complexes) or 4% digitonin (super-complexes)
and electrophoresed through precast 4–16% (dodecylmaltoside) or 3–13% gels (Invitrogen). Activities of CI, CII and CIV were estimated by in-
gel assays as described in . For 2D analysis, 1D lanes were incubated for 15 min in 1% SDS and 1% β-mercaptoethanol and separated in a 16%
Tricine/SDS gel (BN-SDS/PAGE). For SDS/PAGE, proteins were extracted from enriched membranes (muscle) and separated by standard SDS/PAGE
procedures. Proteins were transferred onto PVDF membranes (GE Healthcare) and processed for immunoblotting. Primary antibodies used were:
NDUFB8 [NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1β sub-complex 8], NDUFA9 [NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1α sub-complex 9], Core2 (complex III
Core protein 2), COXI, COXII, SDHA, CV subunits, TOM20 (translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20 kDa subunit) and porin
(MitoSciences); AFG3L2 (AFG3-like AAA ATPase 2; Proteintech); LonP1 (Lon peptidase 1) and NDUFAF3 [NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) complex I
assembly factor; Sigma Life Science]; HSP60 (heat shock protein 60; BD Biosciences); NDUFAF1 and NDUFAF2 (gifts from Professor Leo Nijtmans)
and ND1 (gift from Dr A. Lombes). Antibodies were detected with appropriate horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated immunoglobulins (Dako)
and chemiluminescence detection reagents (GE Healthcare). Total RNA from control (n=4) and patient muscle was extracted using TRIrizol
Reagent (Life Technologies) and reverse transcribed (0.5–1 μg) with random hexamers (Superscript III First Strand Synthesis System, Life
Technologies). Levels of mRNA expression of NDUFAF1 [MIM #606934], NDUFAF2 [MIM #609653], NDUFAF3 [MIM #612911] and ACTB (β-actin)
[MIM #102630] were assessed in triplicate by real-time PCR using commercially-available TaqMan assays (assay IDs Hs00211245_m1,
Hs02380072_u1, Hs00404252_g1 and Hs01060665_g1 respectively; Life Technologies). After normalization to ACTB, average expression levels of
the CI assembly factor genes in patients were reported relative to control values, with differences assessed using a two-tailed Student's t
test. Patient 1 was of normal intelligence (Wechsler test of adult reading: thirty-seventh percentile), normal stature (1.7 m) and body
habitus (68.7 kg). She had no ptosis and eye movements were normal. She did not have significant demonstrable clinical weakness at rest
[Medical Research Council (MRC) 5/5]; however, subtle upper and lower limb proximal weakness (MRC 4+/5) was evident following minimal
exertion (marching in place ten times). She also displayed marked evidence of increased ventilator rate (>30 breaths/min), sinus tachycardia
(>120 beats/min) and bluish-hue discolouration to her digits. There was no evidence of a dysautonomia and no cardiac or respiratory muscle
involvement. There was a persistent metabolic acidosis (serum bicarbonate 9–19 mmol/l; normal range 22–29 mmol/l), a high random serum
lactate concentration [7.2–8.9 mmol/l; normal range < 1.7 mmol/l), markedly increasing post exertion up to 15.5 mmol/l and normal total
creatine kinase activity (52–76 units/l; normal range <200 units/l). At the age of 27 years, there was electrophysiological evidence of a
significant proximal myopathy with no findings of neuropathy. Conventional echocardiogram and cardiac MRI revealed no cardiac muscle
abnormalities. She was treated with riboflavin (50 mg three times a day), high dose co-enzyme Q10 (500 mg/day) and L-carnitine supplements
with minimal symptomatic or objective improvement. Current treatment strategies include energy conservation with the use of a wheelchair and
pharmacological management with ivabradine for POTS. Patient 2 was of normal height (1.68 m) but thin body habitus (47 kg). He had subtle
unilateral ptosis and eye movements were normal. His skeletal muscles were generally poorly developed but he did not have significant
demonstrable clinical weakness at rest (MRC 5/5); however, subtle upper and lower limb proximal weakness (MRC 4+/5) was evident following
moderate exertion (marching in place 20 times). There was no evidence of cardiac or respiratory muscle involvement. There was a persistently
high resting serum lactate concentration (4.1–6.8 mmol/l; normal range <1.7 mmol/l), increasing post exertion [15.4 mmol/l; cycling for
5 min; peak power 53W; peak oxygen consumption (VO2 peak) 14 ml/min per kg; AT 22% predicted VO2 peak] and raised total creatine kinase
activity (351–486 units/l; normal range < 320 units/l). Electrophysiological changes at the age of 11 years were compatible with a myopathy
with no findings of neuropathy. VO2 peak, peak work capacity (power; W), AT and absolute AT (expressed as a percentage of predicted peak
VO2; ATVO2), were markedly decreased in both subjects (Table 1). Plasma lactate concentrations were concomitantly raised during CPET
(Patient 1: resting lactate: 4.4 mmol/l, peak lactate: 13.2 mmol/l; Patient 2: resting lactate: 6.8 mmol/l, peak lactate: 15.4 mmol/l), with
slow lactate decay time to baseline (Patient 1: 60 min, Patient 2: 40 min). 31P-MRS examination showed that the ability of Patient 1’s
muscle to reduce phosphocreatine (PCr) and accumulate ADP during exercise was normal. However, in recovery from muscle contraction, the main
indicators of mitochondrial function demonstrated a severe impairment in oxidative metabolism (Table 1). Oxidative enzyme reactions
[succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and cytochrome c oxidase (COX)] revealed numerous fibres with increased activity at the fibre periphery,
confirmed by modified Gomori trichrome staining which showed sub-sarcolemmal accumulations typical of ‘ragged-red’ changes affecting >25% of
all fibres in both patients (Figure 1A). Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme studies revealed isolated CI deficiency in skeletal muscle
from both patients (Table 1), including a repeat muscle biopsy obtained from Patient 1 taken 2 years after her initial diagnostic biopsy.
The biochemical defect in this patient was not expressed in cultured myoblasts (results not shown). Muscle analyses of Patient 1, shown in
the present study, were performed on the first muscle biopsy. The activities of all other respiratory chain complexes were normal,
confirming an isolated CI deficiency (Table 1). This was further confirmed by muscle immunohistochemistry in Patient 1 in which expression
of both mtDNA-encoded (ND1) and nuclear-encoded (NDUFB8) CI structural components was markedly decreased in or absent from a vast number
(>80%) of all muscle fibres (see Figures 1B,i and 1B,ii); protein components of CII, CIII and CIV showed normal expression (Figure 1B). (A)
Serial cryosections from both patients were assessed histologically (H&E and modified Gomori trichrome) and histochemically for oxidative
enzyme activities including SDH and COX. Histological analysis of Patient 2’s biopsy revealed moderate variation in fibre size with
abundant, slightly hypotrophic, fibre clusters showing sub-sarcolemmal and granular sarcoplasmic basophilia and occasional fibres with
internal nuclei. Both the histochemical reaction and the modified Gomori trichrome staining confirmed sub-sarcolemmal mitochondrial
accumulation typical of RRF ‘ragged-red’ fibres in both subjects. (B) i, CI ND1 subunit; ii, CI NDUFB8 subunit; iii, CII 70 kDa flavoprotein
subunit; iv, CIII core protein 2; v, CIV subunit 1; vi, CIV subunit 4; viii, porin; viii, no primary antibody control. Immunocytochemical
studies confirm very low expression of both CI-encoded subunits (NDUFB8 and ND1), whereas there was normal immunoreactivity to the
structural components of all other mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes. Having excluded mtDNA rearrangements, we determined the mtDNA
sequence in muscle from both patients identifying novel candidate pathogenic MTND1 mutations; Patient 1 harboured a novel m.3365T>C variant
[predicting p.(Leu20Pro)] which was present at high levels of heteroplasmy (82% in biopsy 1; 86% in biopsy 2) in skeletal muscle, but
undetectable in all other tissue samples tested (Figures 2A and 2B). Patient 2 was shown to harbour a novel m.4175G>A MTND1 variant
predicting p.(Trp290*) and premature truncation of the ND1 protein. Quantitative pyrosequencing showed that the m.4175G>A mutation was
present at high levels of heteroplasmy in skeletal muscle (90% mutant load); at low levels (5% mutant load) in a urinary sediment-derived
DNA sample, but undetectable in all other DNA samples (Figure 2C). Concurrent studies in the mothers of both patients failed to detect the
respective mtDNA mutation suggesting de novo mutation events. (A) Sequencing of the mitochondrial genome identified an m.3365T>C mutation in
Patient 1 predicting a p.(Leu20Pro) amino acid substitution. The mutation was present at high levels in patient muscle, but undetectable in
all other tissue samples and maternal samples, consistent with a de novo mutation event. (B) Evolutionary sequence alignment of the relevant
portion of the ND1 protein confirms p.Leu20 to be a highly conserved residue. (C) Sequencing of the mitochondrial genome identified an
m.4175G>A mutation in Patient 2 predicting a p.(Trp290*) truncating event. This heteroplasmic mutation was present at high levels in patient
muscle and at low levels in urinary sediment, but was also undetectable in available maternal DNA samples. (D) Predicted structure of human
ND1 showing the eight transmembrane domains (http://sosui.proteome.bio.tuat.ac.jp) and the location of the p.(Leu20Pro) and p.(Trp209*)
mutations, one within a transmembrane region and one within a conserved hydrophilic extra-membrane loop. The m.3365T>C and m.4175G>A
mutations were not previously reported on online databases of pathogenic mtDNA mutations or within our own database of >980 human mtDNA
sequences. Using quantitative pyrosequencing, we detected a trend towards higher levels of the m.3365T>C mutation in RRF (72.2±24.4%, n=10)
than non-RRF (56.5±28.8%, n=10, P=0.2049, two-tailed Student's t test). For the m.4175G>A mutation, significantly higher levels of mutation
were detected in COX-positive RRF (89.0±24.2% n=21) than in COX-positive non-RRF (39.6±44.2%, n=11) (P=0.0025, two-tailed Student's t test),
confirming segregation of the m.4175A genotype with a histopathological abnormality. The m.3365T>C; p.(Leu20Pro) mutation is located within
the first transmembrane domain of the ND1 protein, whereas the m.4175G>A; p.(Trp290*) mutation occurs within the hydrophilic loop that faces
the mitochondrial matrix between transmembrane domains G and H (Figure 2D). Western blot analysis of muscle from both patients failed to
detect ND1 protein and identified markedly decreased levels of the nuclear-encoded CI subunit NDUFB8, whereas steady-state levels of other
respiratory chain complex structural subunits were unaffected (Figures 3A and 3B). BN/PAGE analysis with subsequent Western blot analyses
showed a fully assembled CI could be detected in both patients, albeit at very low levels, whereas steady-state levels of fully-assembled
CII, CIII and CIV appeared unchanged (Figure 3C). This observation was accurately reflected in the in-gel activity assays which indicated
some residual CI activity (Figure 3D), in agreement with immunocytochemical studies (Figure 1B). (A) SDS/PAGE and Western blot analysis of
muscle lysates (20 μg) from two controls (Co1, Co2) and two patients (P1, m.3365T>C mutation; P2, m.4175G>A mutation). Membranes were probed
with antibodies directed against mitochondrial respiratory chain subunits and porin as a loading control. (B) Relative protein expression
levels. Band intensity of indicated protein is normalized to band intensity of the loading control porin. Shown are mean values of three
independent experiments ± S.D. *P<0.05 relative to controls; ns, not significant. (C) BN/PAGE of dodecyl maltoside (DDM)-solubilized muscle
samples (75 μg) from two controls (Co1, Co2) and both patients with MTND1 mutations (P1, P2) followed by Western blot analysis. Membranes
were probed with anti-NDUFA9 for CI, SDHA for CII, CORE2 for CIII2 and COX4 for CIV. Blots are representative of two independent
experiments. (D) In-gel enzyme activity (IGA) assay of respiratory chain complexes. BN/PAGE was performed on DDM-solubilized muscle samples
(150 μg) from two controls and both patients. Enzyme activities for CI, CIV and CII were examined. (E) BN/PAGE of digitonin-solubilized
muscle samples (100 μg) from two controls (Co1, Co2) and both patients (P1, P2) followed by Western blot analysis. Membranes were probed
with anti-NDUFA9 and with anti-CORE2. SC1, CIII2 + CIV; SC2, CI + CIII2; SC3, CI + CIII2 + CIV. Blots are representative of two independent
experiments. (F) IGA assay of mitochondrial super-complexes. BN/PAGE was performed on digitonin-solubilized muscle samples (200 μg) from two
controls and the two patients with MTND1 mutations (P1, P2). Enzyme activities for CI and CII were examined. SC1, CIII2 + CIV; SC2, CI +
CIII2; SC3, CI + CIII2 + CIV. BN/PAGE, followed by Western blot and in-gel-activity analyses of control muscle samples, showed a small
amount of fully assembled CI in its monomeric form, whereas the majority of assembled complex was associated with other complexes building
the SC2 (supercomplex 2) [CI + CIII2 (CIII dimer)] and SC3 (CI + CIII2 + CIV(1–4)) super-complexes (Figure 3E). Levels of fully assembled CI
were strongly decreased in patient samples, with residual CI associated, in the most part, with CIII in the SC2 (CI+CIII2) super-complex
(Patient 1) and with CIV in the SC3 (CI + CIII2 + CIV(1–4)) super-complex (Patient 2; Figures 3E and 3F). We evaluated the steady-state
levels of different CI assembly factors including NDUFAF3 (early-stage factor), NDUFAF1 (involved in the middle stages) and NDUFAF2
(involved in the late stages of CI assembly) and mitochondrial proteases including AFG3L2, LonP1 and HSP60. We observed no changes in the
expression levels of any proteases; however, steady-state levels of all three CI assembly factors were markedly increased in patient muscle
samples suggestive of a compensatory response to the ND1 defect (Figure 4A). Confirmatory real-time PCR analy-ses showed increased NDUFAF1
[MIM #606934], NDUFAF2 [MIM #609653] and NDUFAF3 [MIM #612911] transcript levels in patient muscle (Figure 4B). (A) SDS/PAGE and Western
blot analysis of muscle lysates (20 μg) from two controls (Co1, Co2) and both patients (P1, m.3365T>C mutation; P2, m.4175G>A mutation).
Membranes were probed with antibodies directed against the CI assembly factors NDUFAF1, NDUFAF2 and NDUFAF3, the mitochondrial AAA protease
AFG3L2, the LonP1 protease, the HSP60 and porin as a loading control. Blots are representative of two independent experiments. (B) Relative
mRNA expression levels of three CI assembly factor genes. The mRNA expression levels of NDUFAF1, NDUFAF2 and NDUFAF3 were measured by real-
time PCR in Patients 1 and 2 and controls (n=4) and normalized to ACTB mRNA levels. Average patient data from three replicate experiments
are expressed relative to control values ± S.D. *P<0.015; **P<0.001 relative to controls. (C) Digitonin-solubilized mitochondrial complexes
were separated by 1D BN/PAGE, followed by 2D Tricine-SDS/PAGE and Western blot analysis. Membranes were probed with SDHA for CII, α subunit
for CV, NDUFA9 for CI and NDUFAF1 and NDUFAF2. SC1, CIII2 + CIV; SC2, CI + CIII2; SC3, CI + CIII2 + CIV. The smaller sub-complexes observed
in both patients are highlighted by the ellipses; NDUFAF1 was associated with two CI intermediates of ∼500 and ∼800 kDa, whereas NDUFAF2 was
detected within higher-molecular-mass associations corresponding to complexes of 800 and 1500 kDa in the muscle of Patients 1 and 2. BN-
SDS/PAGE analysis of digitonin-solubilized control and patient muscle samples showed that the majority of NDUFA9 was associated with the SC2
(CI + CIII2) and SC3 (CI + CIII2 + CIV(1–4)) super-complexes in controls (Figure 4C). Both NDUFAF1 and NDUFAF2 were undetectable in control
muscle. In the patient muscle samples, the majority of NDUFA9 was detected in association with the SC2 (CI + CIII2) and SC3 (CI + CIII2 +
CIV(1–4)) super-complexes. However, smaller sub-complexes were also observed in both patients. We found that NDUFAF1 was associated with two
complex I intermediates of ∼500 and ∼800 kDa, whereas NDUFAF2 was detected within higher-molecular-mass associations corresponding to
complexes of 800 and 1500 kDa in muscle of both patients (Figure 4C). In the patient samples, we observed higher amounts of CV in higher
supramolecular organizations (as dimer V2 and tetramer V4; Figure 4C), whereas the majority of mt-ATP synthase was found as monomers in
controls. We describe novel sporadic MTND1 mutations in two unrelated patients with isolated CI deficiency characterized clinically by
marked exercise intolerance and in vivo mitochondrial dysfunction. The clinical phenotypes, severity of the biochemical defect and the
relatively indolent nature of the disease are conspicuously similar in both patients. Neurological examination was essentially normal in the
resting state; however, response to exercise in both cases was indicative of a mitochondrial myopathy. Both cases highlight the importance
of serum lactate testing in cases of persistent unexplained exertional weakness or dyspnoea. Indeed, mitochondrial disorders are recognized
as a common cause of referral for unexplained dyspnoea, with a period prevalence of up to 8.5% . Several strands of evidence indicate that
the MTND1 mutations are pathogenic, causing the clinical phenotype. The m.3365T>C and m.4175G>A mutations are novel and absent from
available databases of characterized mtDNA mutations, whereas both MTND1 variants were heteroplasmic and segregate with disease in muscle
and, for Patient 2, with the histopathological abnormality (COX-positive RRF). The undetectable steady-state levels of ND1 protein suggest
that both MTND1 mutations affect production and/or stability of the protein with dramatic effects on CI assembly and degradation of other CI
subunits, including NDUFB8. Intriguingly, ND1 protein deficiency does not totally preclude assembly of the holocomplex, similar to that
observed in a patient with progressive encephalopathy due to a B17.2L (NDUFAF2) [MIM #609653] null mutation . Smaller CI subunits were also
detectable with several intermediate complexes clearly seen in association with CI assembly factors. Accumulation of stalled intermediates
of ∼500 kDa and ∼800 kDa has previously been reported in patients with various CI assembly pathway mutations who also exhibit reduced
assembly of the holoenzyme complex . Steady-state levels of the mitochondrial quality-control machinery including the AAA protease AFG3L2,
LonP1 protease and HSP60 remained unchanged in association with up-regulation of assembly factor for intermediate-stage (NDUFAF1) and late-
stage (NDUFAF2) CI assembly in patient muscle, suggesting a shift in this dynamic equilibrium state that favours assembly and stability of
respiratory complex formation over degradation. We speculate that mutation load and tissue-specific effects in CI formation and stability,
mediated through assembly factor up-regulation, act as a compensatory response to the deleterious MTND1 genetic defect, with an absence of
secondary defects in CII, CIII and CIV further facilitating complex stabilization. Taken together, our findings all support assembly factor
up-regulation in isolated CI deficiency as an adaptive process to stabilize the respiratory complexes, a phenomenon not previously reported
with MTND1 mutations and that the pathogenic role of these mutations at a molecular level is dependent on the stage of CI assembly. Mitotic
segregation has long been recognized to contribute to phenotypic variability that may explain the isolated muscle defects in these patients,
although we concede that definitive exclusion of CNS involvement cannot be definitively made based on current evaluations. In summary, we
report two novel MTND1 mutations that clinically manifest as isolated exercise intolerance and at a molecular level cause assembly factor
up-regulation and sub-complex assembly acting to stabilize respiratory chain complexes and salvage assembly of the holoenzyme complex. We
thank the patients who have participated in this study. We also thank Ms Sarah J. Dowson and Ms Charlotte Blackburn for excellent technical
support. phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy β-actin AFG3-like AAA ATPase 2 anaerobic threshold blue native complex I/II/III/IV/V
CIII dimer cytochrome c oxidase cardiopulmonary exercise testing haematoxylin and eosin heat shock protein 60 Leber hereditary optic
neuropathy Lon peptidase 1 mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes Medical Research Council NADH
dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1α sub-complex 9 NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) complex I assembly factor NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1β
sub-complex 8 phosphocreatine postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome ragged-red fibre succinate dehydrogenase succinate dehydrogenase
complex subunit A peak, peak oxygen consumption oxygen uptake The study was conceptualized and designed by Grainne Gorman, Emma Blakely,
Hue-Tran Hornig-Do, Doug Turnbull, Robert McFarland and Robert Taylor. Acquisition of data was performed by Grainne Gorman, Emma Blakely,
Hue-Tran Hornig-Do, Helen Tuppen, Laura Greaves, Langping He, Angela Baker, Gavin Falkous, Jane Newman, Michael Trenell, Bryan Lecky,
Richard K. Petty, Doug Turnbull, Robert McFarland and Robert Taylor. Analysis and interpretation of data was done by Grainne Gorman, Emma
Blakely, Hue-Tran Hornig-Do, Helen Tuppen, Laura Greaves, Langping He, Angela Baker, Gavin Falkous, Jane Newman, Michael Trenell, Bryan
Lecky, Richard K. Petty, Doug Turnbull, Robert McFarland and Robert Taylor. The manuscript was drafted by Grainne Gorman, Emma Blakely, Hue-
Tran Hornig-Do, Helen Tuppen, Laura Greaves and Robert Taylor. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content was
done by Grainne Gorman, Emma Blakely, Hue-Tran Hornig-Do, Helen Tuppen, Laura Greaves, Michael Trenell, Bryan Lecky, Richard K. Petty, Doug
Turnbull, Robert McFarland and Robert Taylor. The study was supervised by Grainne Gorman, Robert McFarland and Robert Taylor. This work was
supported by the Wellcome Trust [grant number 096919Z/11/Z (to D.M.T. and R.W.T.)]; the Medical Research Council [grant numbers 0800674 and
M501700 (to D.M.T., R.M.F. and R.W.T.)]; the U.K. National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre for Ageing and
Age-Related Diseases award to the Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (to D.M.T. and G.S.G.); the U.K. NHS Highly Specialized
Rare Mitochondrial Disease of Adults and Children Service; the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for a postdoctoral fellowship (to H.-T.
H.-D.); the U.K. Senior Fellowship (to M.I.T.); the Newcastle NIHR Biomedical Research Centre; and the North Tyneside Comprehensive Local
Research Network.
