To the Editor: Ossifying fibroma is a benign but rare fibro-osseous tumor in the craniofacial region. Complete resection is the only way to
treat it. Here, we reported one case of maxillary juvenile ossifying fibroma operated with intranasal endoscopic prelacrimal recess approach
in which nasolacrimal duct (NLD) and inferior turbinate (IT) were spared. A 9-year-old girl presented left facial asymmetry for 2 months and
was hospitalized in the Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital in June 2013. A paranasal sinus
computed tomography (CT) scan showed a lesion in left maxillary sinus (MS). No nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, decreased vision, proptosis or
epistaxis was ever complained. No abnormal finding was noted in and out of her nose during the physical examination and nasal endoscopy.
Imaging study revealed that the left MS expanded to 2.4 cm × 2.8 cm × 3.0 cm. Soft tissue density was present inside the sinus surrounded
with a clear boundary and intact bone wall [Figure 1a and 1b]. Tumor resection was performed with intranasal endoscopic prelacrimal recess
approach under general anesthesia. First, we chiseled off the anterior bony portion of the medial wall of the MS to expose the NLD
posteriorly and mucosa of MS interiorly. The sinus was filled with a solid, encapsulated and sand like mass, about 2.4 cm × 2.8 cm × 3.0 cm
in size. Surrounding bone walls appeared as stalactite, and the surface was rough. Second, the tumor was removed completely. On the 2nd day
after operation, the nasal packing was taken away, and the postoperative CT scan was carried out at the same time [Figure 1c and 1d].
Pathological finding was ossifying fibroma [Figure 2]. During the 6 months follow-up, there was no recurrence or complications. Preoperative
paranasal sinus computed tomography (CT) in coronal position (a) and horizontal position (b) showed ossifying fibroma in left maxillary
sinus (triangles). Postoperative paranasal sinus CT in coronal position (c) and horizontal position (d) showed that the ossifying fibroma
has been resected (stars). Pathological finding showed ossifying fibroma (HE, original magnification ×200). For ossifying fibroma, early
surgery is necessary to achieve a complete tumor resection. There are many procedures available depending on the involvements of lesion,
such as midfacial desgloving approach, Denker or modified Dener operation, Caldwell-Luc operation, medial maxillectomy, etc. In all the
above procedures, IT and/or NLD is to be sacrificed, and dry nose, epiphora or facial numbness may occur after operation. To improve the
quality of life, Zhou et al. introduced intranasal endoscopic prelacrimal recess approach to treating such disease. Without ablation of IT
and NLD, the function of the nasal cavity and lacrimal aperture are preserved. Meanwhile, hospital stay can be shortened. This was first
reported to use this approach to remove ossifying fibroma in MS. The surgery went smoothly and follow-up results showed no postoperative
complications. In short, juvenile ossifying fibroma of MS may be the potential indications for prelacrima recess approach. Edited by: Xin
Chen Source of Support: This work was supported by a grant from Independent Innovation Foundation of Shandong University, IIFSDU (No.
2012TS175). Conflict of Interest: None declared.
