To the Editor: A 36-year-old man with intermittent migraine-like headache with aura for 20 years underwent cerebrovascular computed
tomography angiography (CTA) revealing very small calibers of bilateral internal carotid arteries (ICAs) in other hospital. He was admitted
to our hospital for further examination several days later. He had no vascular risk factors, and no family history of atherosclerotic or
cerebrovascular diseases. On admission, general physical and neurological examinations were normal and vascular systolic murmur was not
detected in the neck. Blood tests, including items relevant to diabetes, dyslipidemia, and vasculitis, were unremarkable. Carotid ultrasound
[Figures 1a and 1b] showed small diameters of the bilateral extracranial carotid arteries without arterial wall thickening or
atherosclerotic plaque, consistent with CTA findings. Transcranial doppler examination showed increased mean flow velocities (MFVs) in the
bilateral posterior cerebral arteries (right, 75.5 ± 1.3 cm/s; left, 73.5 ± 1.3 cm/s) compared with the bilateral middle cerebral arteries
in the headache-free period (right, 54.5 ± 2.4 cm/s; left, 57.2 ± 1.9 cm/s) and during the attacks (right, 43.8 ± 1.5 cm/s; left, 46.5 ± 1.3
cm/s). Catheter angiography [Figure 1c–1e] revealed symmetrical hypoplasia along the entire course of bilateral ICAs and development of
collateral circulation by the bilateral posterior communicating arteries (PCOMAs). CT of skull base [Figure 1f] revealed hypoplasia of
bilateral carotid canals (CCs). Cranial MRI, electroencephalogram, and aortic, renal, and lower extremity angiography were normal. Carotid
ultrasound (a, b) showed thin calibers of bilateral carotid arteries [right common carotid artery (CCA), 3.9 mm; Left CCA, 4.1 mm; right
internal carotid artery (ICA), 1.6 mm; Left ICA, 1.5 mm]. Catheter angiography (c-e) revealed symmetrical hypoplasia of bilateral internal
carotid arteries (arrows) along the entire course and the collateral circulation established from posterior circulation into anterior one by
development of bilateral posterior communicating arteries (arrows). Computerized tomography of skull base (f) showed hypoplasia of bilateral
carotid canals (arrows). Hypoplasia of the ICA is a rare arterial anomaly with an incidence below 0.01%, whose exact cause of is not known.
The probable cause is due to some insult sustained by the growing embryo during the 4th–8th weeks of gestational life. The CC is closely
linked to the development of the ICA during embryonic life. Thus the CC is small and not well developed in cases of hypoplasia. The
diagnosis of our patient, congenital hypoplasia of the bilateral ICAs is based on its characteristic angiographic findings and the presence
of hypoplastic CCs by CT of the skull base. Most patients with this anomaly are asymptomatic, and it is identified only incidentally due to
sufficient cerebral collateral circulation, commonly through the bilateral PCOMAs. Symptomatic patients often present with ischemic or
hemorrhagic stroke. However, to our knowledge migraine-like headache with aura has not been reported as a symptom of the hypoplasia. The
migraine-like headache in our patient may be associated with hypoplastic ICAs. Lovrenciζ et al., suggested that cerebral hypoperfusion in
the posterior circulation due to vertebral artery hypoplasia may induce a migraine aura. Agostoni et al., noted that migraine with aura may
be the outcome rather than the cause of cerebral ischemia, and cerebral hypoperfusion could reduce the threshold for developing spreading
depression preceding a migraine aura. An association between decreased cerebral blood flow and migraine or migraine-like headache had been
reported. MFVs in the anterior circulation of our patient were obviously decreased owing to hypoplasia of bilateral ICAs, which were lower
during the attacks, and therefore we speculated that this might have induced his migraine-like headache with aura. In conclusion, bilateral
ICA hypoplasia is a very rare condition. Many cases are probably asymptomatic, being identified only incidentally. However, migraine-like
headache with aura may be the sole clinical symptom because of seriously reduced cerebral blood flows. Edited by: Huan Liu Source of
Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
