Infective endocarditis (IE) is associated with poor prognosis and higher mortality. IE-induced glomerulonephritis, especially crescentic
glomerulonephritis (IE-CGN) with renal dysfunction, is an independent risk factor for mortality. For the treatment of IE-CGN, many
therapeutic strategies including antibiotics alone, antibiotics combined with corticosteroid, immunosuppressive agents, plasmapheresis, or
cardiac surgery have been applied and obtained various results. Here, we reported a case of CGN with progressive renal failure secondary to
IE in which the renal function was dramatically improved by the treatment of surgical valve replacement and antibiotics. A 68-year-old woman
was admitted to the Beijing Anzhen Hospital on July 28, 2011 with lower extremity edema and pink urine over 1 month. Four months ago, she
had a fever about 38°C about 2 weeks, and then her body temperature gradually came back to normal after antibiotics therapy. She has been
diagnosed having “rheumatic heart disease with mitral regurgitation” about 50 years, but her heart function was relatively good. On physical
examination, her temperature was 36.8°C, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, and pulse rate was 80 beats/min. A Grade IV/VI systolic murmur at
the cardiac apex with radiation to left armpit, a Grade IV/VI systolic murmur in the second right intercostal space with radiation to
carotid artery, and a diastolic murmur in the third left intercostal space was heard. The patient had clubbed fingers. Laboratory tests
showed that the white cell count (WBC) count was 11,330 /μl with 85% neutrophils, and the hemoglobin level was 81 g/L in the peripheral
blood. Urinalysis found >100 red blood cells (RBCs)/hpf and 15–25 WBCs/hpf. Urinary protein excretion was 2.0 g/d. The serum creatinine
level was 263 μmol/L, which was 62 μmol/L one month ago. Urine osmolality after 12 hours of water deprivation was 275 mOsm/kg·H2O. Serum IgG
level was 27.4 g/L, IgM 3.2 g/L, C3 0.27 g/L. Serum ASO level was 88 U. RF was negative. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 32 mm/h. Blood
culture of 3 times showed no bacterial growth. Echocardiogram revealed two very large vegetations (both 16 mm) on aortic valve and two small
vegetations (both 8.9 mm) on mitral valve, with moderate mitral regurgitation, moderate aortic stenosis, and regurgitation [Figure 1]. The
vegetations on aortic valve moved back and forth between aorta and left ventricle accompanied heartbeat. Hence, infection endocarditis
associated with renal lesion was diagnosed. Since the blood culture was negative, according to the literature, it maybe culture-negative
endocarditis. Vegetation on aortic valve by echocardiography. Arrow denotes the vegetation On hospital day 6, the patient's serum creatinine
level was increased to 365.4 μmol/L. In order to understand the nature of renal lesion, thereby more accurately evaluate the possible risks
of deterioration of renal function after cardiac surgery, a renal biopsy was performed. Immunofluorescent examination showed IgM (3+), C3
(3+) and C1q (3+) deposition in the mesangial area and peripheral capillary wall. Under light microscope, the specimen contained 18
glomeruli, in which there were 11 glomeruli with large cellular crescents, one with large fibrocellular crescent, three with small cellular
crescents, and two with global sclerosis. Fibrin deposits were found in some large cellular crescents. Focal interstitial infiltration of
mononuclear cells was observed. Hence, the renal pathological diagnosis was crescent glomerulonephritis type 2 [Figure 2a and 2b].
Pathological findings of renal tissue and infected vegetations on aortic valve. (a) Large cellular crescent with fibrin deposition in
glomerulus (PASM and Masson staining, ×400); (b) IgM deposition in mesangial area and peripheral capillary wall (Immunofluorescence, ×200);
(c and d) Many scattered colonies of bacteria which were stained blue, can be observed in the vegetation (H and E staining, ×100; ×1000).
Treatment with intravenous piperacillin sulbactam and linezolid was initiated soon after admission. According to the guidelines for
treatment of IE the patient had definite indicators for cardiac surgery, so she received valve replacement operation of aortic valve and
mitral valve on August 10, 2011. Pathological examination showed mitral and aortic valvular fibrosis with hyaline degeneration and
calcification, multifocal fibrinoid necrosis, bacterial colonies, tissue infiltration of many neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells as
well as granulation tissue formation [Figure 2c and 2d]. The pathological diagnosis was IE, which further confirmed the clinical diagnosis,
but the bacterial culture of vegetations was still negative. After cardiac surgery, the patient continuously accepted antibacterial therapy
with meropenem and vancomycin hydrochloride for 3 weeks and continuous renal replacement treatment for 1 week. To our surprise, the
patient's renal function was dramatically improved and discharged from hospital on September 10, 2011. At discharge, her urinalysis showed
10–20 RBCs/hpf and 0–1 WBCs/hpf. Urinary protein excretion was 1.59 g/d. The serum creatinine level was 87 μmol/L and the urine osmolality
after 12 hours of water deprivation was 488 mOsm/kg·H2O. Six months later, the patient was readmitted to our hospital for a second renal
biopsy to assess the recovery state of renal tissue. Pathological examination found 34 glomeruli in the specimen. There were 11 glomeruli
with large fibrous crescent, three with large fibrocellular crescent and six with global sclerosis. The rest glomeruli only displayed mild
mesangial cell proliferation and matrix increase. However, multifocal mononuclear cell infiltration still existed in the interstitium
besides focal interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Because of the active inflammatory reaction in interstitium, the patient was given
oral prednisone and cyclophosphamide for 3 months. The patient has been followed-up by us for 2 years. At present, her general state and
heart function were quite good. Urinalysis showed trace or negative protein, 0–3 or 3–8 RBCs/hpf and 0–1 WBCs/hpf. The serum creatinine
levels fluctuated in 113–127 μmol/L and the urine osmolality after 12 hours of water deprivation was in the range of 316–430 mOsm/kg·H2O. Up
to now, effective therapeutic strategies for IE-CGN have not been established. IE-CGN is considered as an immune complex-mediated disease,
so theoretically it should be reasonable to apply corticosteroid, immunosuppressive agents and/or plasmapheresis treatment in combination
with antibiotics. In clinical practice, however, these therapeutic strategies are controversial because of the possible risk of the
aggravating the infection responsible for the IE. Another therapeutic choice that might block the pathogenic immune reaction is eradication
of immunogen, that is, infection foci. Although there were a few reports in which the resolution of IE-CGN was achieved by antibiotics
therapy alone, many reports considered that the antibiotics alone might not be enough for IE-CGN treatment. The favorable outcome of our
case suggests that the early surgical valve replacement with antibiotics therapy is a satisfactory therapeutic strategy that can eradicate
immunogen and therefore induces IE-CGN resolution. In 1996, Gao et al. reported a similar case in which clinical resolution of IE-CGN was
successfully achieved after valve replacement and antibiotic therapy. To confirm the efficiency of this therapeutic strategy, more clinical
observations are necessary for the future. Second renal biopsy was performed 6 months later. Besides obsolescent glomeruli, there was still
active inflammatory reaction in the interstitium. The residual interstitial inflammation is often observed in the recovery process of
crescent glomerulonephritis and may exert adverse effects on the disease outcome. Therefore, the patient was given oral prednisone and
cyclophosphamide treatment for a short course, which might be helpful in strengthening the previous therapeutic efficacy. In conclusion, we
suggest that patients with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis associated with IE might be treated with early surgical valve replacement
and antibiotics treatment and therefore induce IE-CGN resolution, although in the case of immune-mediated pathogenesis. We acknowledge Dr.
Hong-rui Dong and Li-jun Sun by making substantial contributions to staining of the tissue section. Written consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of the study in the BMC nephrology. Edited by: Yi Cui Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
