Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) rarely induces cerebral hemorrhage, and CVST with cerebral hemorrhage during early pregnancy is
extremely rare. Upon literature review, we are able to find only one case of CVST with cerebral hemorrhage in early pregnancy. In this
paper, we report another case of a 27-year-old patient who developed CVST with cerebral hemorrhage in her fifth week of pregnancy. Although
the optimal treatment for this infrequent condition remains controversial, we adopted anticoagulation as the first choice of treatment and
obtained favorable results. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) accounts for 0.5-1.0% of all strokes.1 During late pregnancy and
puerperium, CVST is an uncommon but important cause of stroke.2 Hemorrhagic infarction can occur in the acute stage of CVST. However, CVST
with cerebral hemorrhage is extremely rare in early pregnancy. Upon literature review, we are able to find only one case of CVST resulting
in cerebral hemorrhage in early pregnancy.3 Here, we present another case of CVST with cerebral hemorrhage in early pregnancy, the patient
received a favorable outcome by use of anticoagulation therapy. Our objective in presenting this particular case is to discuss its
diagnosis, and treatment, and review the related literature. A 27-year-old woman presented with acute onset of severe diffuse headache for
one day and slurred speech for 4 hours. She was 5 weeks into her second pregnancy. She had not previously been on contraceptive pills, and
did not have any personal or family history of venous thrombosis, autoimmune disease, or hematologic disease. She was fully conscious and
afebrile, with no focal neurological deficits. Laboratory examination showed a normal complete blood count and normal renal, hepatic, and
coagulation profiles. Urgent brain CT revealed temporal hemorrhage surrounded by an extensive hypodense area (Figure 1). Therefore, tumor
apoplexy or cerebrovascular disease was suspected. An MRI using a 3.0 T scanner revealed a hyperintense lesion surrounded by a large
hypointense area on T1-weighted images (Figure 2A), and a hypointense lesion surrounded by a large hyperintense area on T2-weighted and
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images (Figures 2B & 2C). After administration of gadopentetic acid dimeglumine salt, no obvious
contrast enhancement was seen on T1-weighted images. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) showed that the left transverse and sigmoid sinuses
were completely occluded (Figure 2D). A brain digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed thrombosis of the left transverse and sigmoid
sinuses with engorgement of the superficial veins in the left hemisphere (Figure 3), but was negative for vascular malformations such as
aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation (AVM), and dural arteriovenous fistula. Transvaginal sonography revealed an early intrauterine
pregnancy, the gestational sac was 5×5×5 mm in size, and the fetal germ, or fetal heart could not be detected. A CVST with cerebral
hemorrhage was diagnosed according to clinical data. To control intracranial hypertension, treatment with mannitol was commenced
immediately, and dose-adjusted low-molecular-weight heparin (9600 units/day for 10 days) was started 3 days after the onset of CVST to
maintain activated partial thromboplastin time between 1.5 and 2.0 times of control value. When a repeat CT showed that the cerebral
hemorrhage had regressed, heparin was substituted with oral warfarin. Abortion was also performed 20 days after the onset. Two months later,
MRV showed recanalization of the left transverse and sigmoid sinuses (Figure 4), and remained asymptomatic in the following years. Computed
tomography (CT) upon admission. Non-contrast axial scan reveals temporal hemorrhage surrounded by a large hypodense area. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) upon admission showing: A) The lesion appears hyperintense surrounded by a large
hypointense area on T1-weighted MRI, B) hypointense surrounded by a large hyperintense area on T2-weighted MRI, C) fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery MRI. D) MRV shows complete occlusion of the left transverse and sigmoid sinuses. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA)
upon admission. Anteroposterior view reveals complete thrombosis of the left transverse and sigmoid sinuses as well as engorgement of the
superficial veins in left hemisphere. Follow-up magnetic resonance venography (MRV) at 2 months after treatment. Axial view shows
recanalization of the left transverse and sigmoid sinuses. A CVST is an uncommon but serious neurological emergency, the overall death, and
dependency rate are approximately 10-15%.4 Pregnancy and puerperium induces changes in the coagulation system, increasing the risk of CVST.
The period of greatest risk for CVST includes the third trimester of pregnancy, and the first 4 postpartum weeks.5 Only a few cases of CVST
in early pregnancy have been reported.3,5,6-8 A CVST with cerebral hemorrhage in early pregnancy is extremely rare, Lavin et al3 reported
the first case of CVST with cerebral hemorrhage at 8 weeks of pregnancy, the patient died because of massive cerebral venous infarction with
edema.3 The clinical manifestations of CVST are non-specific. The most frequent symptoms are headache, seizures, neurological deficit, and
decreased level of consciousness.9 Signs of cerebral hernia can appear in patients with mass effects, such as edema, infarction, and
hemorrhage. Because of the wide spectrum of symptoms and signs of CVST, it can be difficult to arrive at the correct diagnosis based on
clinical assessment alone. Imaging findings are very important in the diagnosis of CVST. Hemorrhage, edema, and infarction can be detected
on CT, a hyperdense lesion can be found occasionally in the venous sinus indicating thrombosis. However, CT is detrimental for pregnant
women due to the radiation involved. An MRI can differentiate CVST from tumor apoplexy, and MRV can reveal sinus occlusion. Cerebral
angiography is invasive and involves radiation; however, this method allows the detection of sinus thrombosis. Other vascular abnormalities
such as aneurysm, arteriovenous fistula, and AVM can also be excluded by DSA. An MRI and MRV are non-invasive and do not involve radiation,
we therefore, consider that the combination of MRI and MRV is the best choice for the investigation of suspected CVST in pregnant women. The
CVST is an increasingly recognized neurological emergency. There have been no large trials of anticoagulation in pregnancy, and
recommendations are based on case series and the opinions of experts. Nonetheless, anticoagulation is believed to be beneficial for patients
with CVST and hemorrhagic complications. Among 29 patients with intracranial hemorrhage and CVST treated with low-molecular-weight heparin
(180 anti-factor Xa units/kg/day for 3 weeks), de Bruijn et al10 reported 6 deaths, none of which were attributable to fresh or exacerbated
cerebral hemorrhage. Although the best time to start anticoagulation treatment is not known, repeating CT or MRI to confirm that the
intracranial hemorrhage is regressing or at least not progressing is advisable before starting anticoagulation. The use of local
thrombolysis for CVST was first reported by Weatherby8 in 2003, who achieved a successful outcome in a patient who developed CVST in early
pregnancy. The use of endovascular treatment for CVST should be considered in patients who are resistant to anticoagulation therapy, have
worsening symptoms, do not have intracranial hemorrhage, and are not at risk for impending herniation.11 Decompressive hemicraniectomy could
be life-saving and even lead to an excellent outcome in CVST patients with impending transtentorial herniation because of large hemorrhagic
venous infarcts.12 In patients with CVST in early pregnancy, early management of the embryo to eliminate the triggered spontaneous
coagulation might also contribute toward recovery.5 In conclusion, CVST with cerebral hemorrhage can occur in early pregnancy. Its clinical
manifestations are non-specific. An MRI combined with MRV may be the best choice for the investigation of a suspected CVST in a pregnant
woman. Anticoagulation therapy may be beneficial in curing CVST, even in pregnant patients with intracranial hemorrhage. In our patient,
anticoagulation was successful when administered 3 days after the onset of the disease. DisclosureThe authors declare no conflicting
interests, support or funding from any drug company. The authors declare no conflicting interests, support or funding from any drug company.
Algahtani HA, Aldarmahi AA. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. Neurosciences 2014; 19: 11-16. Algahtani HA, Abdu AP, Shami AM, Hassan AE,
Madkour MA, Al-Ghamdi SM, et al. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis in Saudi Arabia. Neurosciences 2011; 16: 329-334. Kajtazi NI, Zimmerman
VA, Arulneyam JC, Al-Shami SY, Al-Senani FM. Cerebral venous thrombosis in Saudi Arabia. Clinical variables, response to treatment, and
outcome. Neurosciences 2009; 14: 349-354.
