Bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation (BDUMP) is a paraneoplastic ocular syndrome occurring in patients with systemic, often
occult but advanced carcinoma and is the hallmark of poor prognosis. Ocular signs precede manifestation of systemic carcinoma by 3–12
months, highlighting the need for appropriate index of suspicion and prompt evaluation. Treatment options for BDUMP are limited.
Investigations are aimed at finding the occult primary malignancy, which can be challenging. Modalities for treatment of the ocular findings
include corticosteroids, surgery, external beam radiotherapy, and treatment of the underlying malignant neoplasm. However, it is uncertain
whether earlier intervention for the systemic malignancy will impact survival, as this paraneoplastic phenomenon is thought to occur in
advanced malignancy. We report a unique rare atypical case with BDUMP causing visual loss in a 62-year-old female as the presenting sign of
central nervous system (CNS) B-cell lymphoma. Multiple grey or grey brown subretinal lesions with pigment clumps were present in both eyes
on fundoscopy and multimodal imaging demonstrated multiple discrete lesions at the level of retinal pigment epithelium. Neuroimaging
revealed presence of brainstem and cerebellopontine lesions suggestive of CNS lymphoma, which was further confirmed on biopsy. In the
current atypical case, prompt diagnosis and immediate referral was key, with detailed systemic evaluation by an internist and oncologist.
The reported case is distinct for the reason that BDUMP occurred secondary to primary CNS lymphoma, a hitherto unreported association.
Bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation (BDUMP) is a paraneoplastic ocular syndrome occurring in patients with systemic, often
occult but advanced carcinoma and is the hallmark of poor prognosis . There are a total of less than 30 cases reported in world literature .
It is rarely reported in non-carcinomatous conditions, such as cervical leiomyoma . The main characteristics are multiple round, red patches
at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), a striking pattern of multifocal areas of early hyperfluorescence corresponding with
these patches, proliferation of choroidal nevus-like lesions as well as diffuse thickening of the uveal tract, exudative retinal detachment,
and rapidly developing cataract . In addition glaucoma, dilated episcleral vessels, iridocyclitis, shallow anterior chamber, ciliary body
cysts, and iridodonesis have been reported . Treatment options for BDUMP are limited. Investigations are aimed at finding the occult primary
malignancy, which may be challenging. Treatment options for ocular involvement include corticosteroids, surgery, external beam radiotherapy,
and management of the underlying malignant neoplasm . Herein we report a unique rare case of BDUMP causing visual loss in an immunocompetent
patient diagnosed with central nervous system (CNS) B-cell lymphoma -- a mode of atypical presentation that, to the best of our knowledge,
has not been reported before. A 62-year-old female presented with a one-year history of visual disturbances and six-month history of
reduction of vision in the left eye. Best corrected visual acuities were 6/6 in the right eye and 6/18 in the left eye with no signs of
active or old inflammation in the anterior and posterior segments of both eyes. Mild posterior subcapsular cataract was noted in the left
eye. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits. Gray or gray-brown lesions were noted at the level of the RPE with diffuse distribution
in the fundus of both eyes (Figure 1). In addition, non-specific pigment clumps were present in the posterior pole of the left eye.
Fluorescein angiography (FA) of both eyes showed the presence of multiple discrete and partially confluent hyperfluorescent lesions due to
window defects (Figure 2). In the right eye these lesions were multiple hyperfluorescent areas involving the macula in both early (2A) and
late (2B) arteriovenous phase. However, the lesions became more discrete and also reduced in number in late phase. A similar pattern was
observed in the left eye (Figure 2C and 2D) but the number of lesions remained the same in the late phase. Indocyanine green angiography
(ICG) demonstrated hypofluorescent spots from early to late phase, corresponding with multiple choroidal nevus-like lesions (Figure 3).
There were fewer lesions in the right eye as compare to the left eye. Ultrasound B-scan did not show any elevated lesions.Figure 1 Color
fundus photograph showing presence of multiple round oval diffuse subretinal faint grey brown lesions in right (A) and left (B) eye. Figure
2 Fundus fluorescein angiogram showing presence of hyperfluorescent lesions in right (A and B) and left (C and D) eye in early and late
arteriovenous phase. Figure 3Indocyanine green angiogram showing presence of numerous hypofluorescent lesions in right (A and B) and left (C
and D) eyes. The lesions remained hypofluorescent in very late frames as well (B and D). Color fundus photograph showing presence of
multiple round oval diffuse subretinal faint grey brown lesions in right (A) and left (B) eye. Fundus fluorescein angiogram showing presence
of hyperfluorescent lesions in right (A and B) and left (C and D) eye in early and late arteriovenous phase. Indocyanine green angiogram
showing presence of numerous hypofluorescent lesions in right (A and B) and left (C and D) eyes. The lesions remained hypofluorescent in
very late frames as well (B and D). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated significant subfoveal fluid in the left eye as well as
disruptions of the RPE in both eyes, corresponding to the plaque like areas on the fundus photographs and the areas of window defects on FA
(Figure 4). Increased choroidal thickness (458 μm) was noted on OCT. Fundus autofluorescence showed complete absence of signals in these
multiple nummular areas and also showed many more lesions as compare to angiographic images (Figure 5A and 5B). No electrodiagnostic studies
were done, and also no serologic tests for paraneoplastic autoantibodies. HIV serology was negative.Figure 4 Spectral domain OCT
(Heidelberg) scans of right (A) and left (B) eyes showing presence of retinal pigment epithelial disturbances with excrescences at level of
retinal pigment epithelium and presence of subretinal fluid in the left eye. Figure 5 Fundus autofluorescence of the right (A) and left (B)
eye showing a greater number of hypofluorescent lesions as compared to the angiogram. Spectral domain OCT (Heidelberg) scans of right (A)
and left (B) eyes showing presence of retinal pigment epithelial disturbances with excrescences at level of retinal pigment epithelium and
presence of subretinal fluid in the left eye. Fundus autofluorescence of the right (A) and left (B) eye showing a greater number of
hypofluorescent lesions as compared to the angiogram. The differential diagnosis included metastasis from occult primary or one of the forms
of a white dot syndrome. The widespread lesions in both eyes were not typical of any of the inflammatory choriocapillaritis or stromal
choroiditis disorders. Birdshot retinochoroidopathy was the closest of the inflammatory conditions but there was no retinal involvement to
justify this entity and serum HLA29 was negative. Lesions were large for multiple evanescent white dot syndrome and too small for acute
placoid multifocal pigment epitheliopathy. The differential diagnosis of bilateral primary intraocular lymphoma was also considered, though
the characteristic subretinal and subretinal pigment epithelial deposits were absent. Systemic evaluation revealed the presence of
cerebellar symptoms. Neuroimaging showed brainstem and right cerebellopontine lesions suggestive of CNS lymphoma, which prompted MRI guided
posterior fossa biopsy from the cerebellar peduncle. The biopsy showed large B cells that were CD20 positive, CD3 negative, CD79a positive,
CD10 negative, bcl-6 positive, MUM1 positive, bcl-2 positive and EBER negative. Ki67 expression, which is an index of proliferation, showed
60% proliferation fraction in this area of biopsy. The histopathological findings confirmed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the brain with
non-germinal centre subtype. The patient responded to a methotrexate-based systemic chemotherapy regimen, under the care of the oncologists.
At 6 months, her ophthalmic condition remained stable on topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drops. Though the ocular lesion remains
unresolved, the left macular oedema improved to give a final visual acuity of 6/12. This unique case illustrates that BDUMP should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of patients with atypical diffuse pigmented fundus lesions. The five cardinal signs of BDUMP
described by Gass et al. are: (1) multifocal, faintly visible, round or oval, red, subretinal patches, with (2) associated striking pattern
of associated hyperfluorescence during the early phases of angiography; (3) development of multiple, slightly elevated, pigmented and non-
pigmented uveal melanocytic tumors, as evidence of diffuse thickening of uveal tract; (4) exudative retinal detachment; and (5) rapid
progression of cataract . Our case demonstrated some of these features, indicating an earlier stage of BDUMP, before the onset of exudative
retinal detachment and progression of cataract. However, multifocal, faintly visible, roundish oval subretinal lesions, which were
hyperfluorescent on FA suggested the diagnosis of BDUMP. The precise correspondence of the focal areas of early hyperfluorescence and the
subretinal patches suggest that they are fenestrations of the pigment epithelium caused by its depigmentation and focal destruction in the
absence of RPE and excrescences in inner segment-outer segment (IS-OS) junction demonstrated the level of lesions in the RPE. The same was
also demonstrated in our case on spectral-domain OCT scan. To our knowledge, this case is distinct in the literature in demonstrating those
changes in RPE on real time non-invasive scans. The other possible differential diagnoses of choriocapillaritis or stromal choroiditis were
less likely as there were no classical clinical signs of any of those entities. Birdshot retinochoroidopathy was the closest differential
diagnosis but due to lack of classical clinical and angiographic signs, the diagnosis of masquerade syndrome was kept and hence the patient
was investigated for possible systemic association. Lymphoma-associated retinopathy as described by To et al. , was a pigmentary retinopathy
occurring on the onset of chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma. Our case had pale gray brown nummular lesions, rather than retinitis
pigmentosa-like pigmentary migration of lymphoma-associated retinopathy. Our case fits in with BDUMP features as described by Gass:
multifocal, faintly visible, round or oval, red, subretinal patches, with associated striking pattern of associated hyperfluorescence during
the early phases of angiography . Two types of melanocytes are found in the normal uveal tract: the normal melanocytes and, in many
patients, nevus cells. Normal melanocytes are nonreactive cells that rarely, if ever, proliferate. Nevus cells that are present, either
focally or diffusely (melanocytosis), do have the capability of proliferation that, in part, is subject to hormonal control and that
normally is limited to the prepubertal and early adult years . Suggestions for the pathogenesis of BDUMP have been postulated as either the
de novo development of uveal melanocytic proliferation and the systemic carcinoma in response to a common oncogenic stimulus, or the de novo
development of uveal melanocytic proliferation in response to a hormone-secreting visceral carcinoma, or possibly coincidental development
of bilateral low-grade diffuse uveal melanomas and a systemic carcinoma in patients genetically predisposed to neoplasia . In addition,
Miles et al. have recently shown that there is cultured melanocytic elongation and proliferation factor (CMEP) factor, in the serum that
causes uveal melanocytes to proliferate . Systemic carcinomas reported with BDUMP are ovarian, lung, gall bladder, cervical, uterine,
kidney, pancreatic, breast, esophageal, and colorectal cancers. They may also be associated with melanocytic proliferation in other tissues
. Although rare, BDUMP has consistently resulted in devastating visual consequences. Usually during the year preceding death, patients with
this paraneoplastic syndrome have severe bilateral vision loss. Vision decline has been attributed to destruction of photoreceptors and
underlying RPE, serous retinal detachments, and, later, cataracts . In the current case, the prompt diagnosis and immediate referral was
key, with detailed systemic evaluation by internists and oncologists. As per the original description by Gass et al. ocular signs precede
manifestation of systemic carcinoma by 3–12 months, highlighting the need for the appropriate index of suspicion and prompt evaluation . It
is uncertain whether earlier intervention for the systemic malignancy will impact survival, as this paraneoplastic phenomenon is thought to
occur in advanced malignancy. Treatment of BDUMP is usually directed towards the primary cancer. Although transient visual improvement has
been reported in patients with BDUMP in response to systemic corticosteroids and chemotherapy, most cases have shown no effect of
corticosteroid therapy alone and no significant effect of radiotherapy . Our case responded to systemic chemotherapy along with topical non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drops. This atypical case of BDUMP is unique for several reasons. Although it had the presence of subretinal
lesions, which were hyperfluorescent on FA, exudative retinal detachment or cataract were absent, indicating perhaps an earlier stage in the
evolution of this condition. Furthermore, we documented OCT changes similar to reported histopathological changes in BDUMP . Finally, this
case is distinct for the reason that BDUMP occurred secondary to primary CNS lymphoma, a hitherto unreported association. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. This report adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Bilateral
diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation Central nervous system Retinal pigment epithelium Fluorescein angiography Optical coherence
tomography Magnetic resonance imaging Inner segment-o uter segment Indocyanine green angiography Cultured melanocytic elongation and
proliferation factor Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MP had written
the first draft of the manuscript and was involved in patient care. RA has edited the draft, did literature review and was involved in
patient care and intellectual input. PD was involved in patient care and reviewing the draft. CP was directly involved in patient care and
edited the draft and intellectual inputs. MSS was involved in patient care and edited the draft significantly alongwith intellectual input.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. “This work was supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical
Research Centre based at Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology. The views expressed are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health. RA was on overseas research training fellowship
from Singapore sponsored by National Medical Research Council, Singapore”.
