Skin malformations that resembled manifestations of Ehlers-Danlos-Syndrome were described in a variety of domestic animals during the last
century as cutis hyperelastica, hyperelastosis cutis, dermatosparaxis, dermal/collagen dysplasia, dermal/cutaneous asthenia or Ehlers-
Danlos-like syndrome/s. In 2007, the mutation responsible for Hereditary Equine Regional Dermal Asthenia (HERDA) in Quarter Horses was
discovered. Several case reports are available for similar malformations in other breeds than Quarter Horses (Draught Horses, Arabians, and
Thoroughbreds) including four case reports for Warmblood horses. Since 2013, a genetic test for the Warmblood Fragile Foal Syndrome Type 1
(WFFS), interrogating the causative point mutation in the equine procollagen-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 1 (PLOD1, or lysyl
hydroxylase 1) gene, has become available. Only limited data are available on the occurrence rate and clinical characteristics of this newly
detected genetic disease in horses. In humans mutations in this gene are associated with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type VI (kyphoscoliotic
form). This is the first report describing the clinical and histopathological findings in a foal confirmed to be homozygous positive for
WFFS. The Warmblood filly was born with very thin, friable skin, skin lesions on the legs and the head, and an open abdomen. These
abnormalities required euthanasia just after delivery. Histologic examination revealed abnormally thin dermis, markedly reduced amounts of
dermal collagen bundles, with loosely orientation and abnormally large spaces between deep dermal fibers. WFFS is a novel genetic disease in
horses and should be considered in cases of abortion, stillbirth, skin lesions and malformations of the skin in neonatal foals. Genetic
testing of suspicious cases will contribute to evaluate the frequency of occurrence of clinical WFFS cases and its relevance for the horse
population. A hereditary disease with symptoms of hyperextensible and abnormally fragile skin, as well as hyperextensibility of
articulations, was first described in humans in 1892 . The name Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) was proposed in 1934 to describe this disease
complex . This syndrome is caused by various mutations with different modes of heredity and was categorized into different subtypes because
of variation in affection of blood vessels, internal organs, wound healing and impact on the pregnancy, additional to the typical lesions on
skin and joints . EDS-like diseases have been described for decades in cat , dog , rabbit , mink , cattle , sheep and horse , with variable
heredity in the different species. These syndromes were commonly described as cutis hyperelastica, hyperelastosis cutis, dermatosparaxis,
dermal/collagen dysplasia, dermal/cutaneous asthenia or Ehlers-Danlos-like syndrome/s . « Ehlers-Danlos-like syndromes » (EDLS) will be used
in this paper to describe the syndromes in animals, in which the clinical findings are similar to human EDS, independent of their origin. In
several cases of EDLS in different species, mutations were detected in genes encoding for enzymes involved in production of collagen or
other components of the dermal extracellular matrix . In equines, EDLS are described in Draught horses , Warmblood horses , Arabians ,
Quarter Horses and Quarter lineage as well as Thoroughbreds . These syndromes were described in neonates, juveniles and adults. Two gene
defects causing an EDLS phenotype in horses have been discovered in recent years. Since 2007, the test for the well documented hereditary
equine regional dermal asthenia (HERDA) in Quarter Horses and related breeds, testing for the known PPIB:p.39Gly > Arg mutation of the
peptidylprolyl isomerase B (cyclophilin B) gene, is available . For Warmblood Fragile Foal Syndrome Type 1 (WFFS), a genetic test developed
by N. Winand became commercially available in 2013a . This autosomal recessive inherited disease occurs in Warmblood horses and related
breeds and is reportedly caused by a point mutation (c.2032G > A, p.Gly678Arg) in the equine procollagen-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate
5-dioxygenase 1 (PLOD1) gene . PLOD1 is an important posttranslational modifying enzyme in collagen biosynthesis, which hydroxylates
specific lysines in collagen . These hydroxylysines act as precursors for crosslinking that are responsible for the tensile strength,
mechanical stability of collagen fibrils and are involved in the formation of fibers . Plod1 knock-out mice are flaccid, have gait
abnormalities and about 15% of them die because of aortic rupture. Smooth muscle cells in non-ruptured Plod1−/− aortas showed degenerative
changes and collagen fibrils in the Plod1−/− aorta and skin showed abnormal morphology . Over 20 different mutations have been reported for
the human PLOD1 gene and are associated with clinical Ehler-Danlos-Syndrome type VI, also called the kyphoscoliotic type, with the most
common human mutation (25%) being a duplication of exons 10–16 . Ten human pathogenic variants were point mutations in different exon
regions of PLOD1, which were also shown to be associated with a decreased enzyme activity in Ehler-Danlos Type VI patients . Symptoms of
this autosomal recessive inherited connective tissue fragility syndrome occur from birth on and are characterized by skin hypersensibility,
muscle hypotonia, joint laxity, eyes and vessels involvement, scoliosis and premature rupture of fetal membranes . Life span of these
patients may be normal, but affected individuals are at risk for rupture of medium sized arteries . The decreased activity of PLOD1 leads to
reduced hydroxylysine-based pyridinoline cross-links in collagens and therefore to an increased lysylpyridinoline (LP) to
hydroxylysylpyridinoline (HP) ratio in urine, which is used to diagnose kyphoscoliotic EDS VI . Another method to test these patients for
EDS, kyphoscoliotic form, is the measurement of PLOD1 enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts . Mutations in the PLOD1 gene were not
described in animals up to the patent application for the WFFS test . To our knowledge, this is the first case report describing the
clinical and histopathological changes in a genetically confirmed homozygous WFFS foal. A 5-year-old Westfalian Warmblood mare was referred
to the Clinic of Reproductive Medicine for dystocia in March 2012. During pregnancy, no complications were detected and parturition occurred
near the calculated date of term. The obstetrical examination revealed a living foal in cranial presentation, dorso-sacral position, with
bilateral carpal flexion. Correction of carpal flexion was not possible in the standing mare, resulting in the decision to perform a
controlled vaginal delivery under general anaesthesia. Ten minutes after induction of anaesthesia, correction of bilateral carpal flexion
was possible after elevation of the mare’s hindquarters. A living filly was extracted after solely manual correction with slight traction.
The foal presented with an open abdomen and extensive skin lesions (Figure 1). Obstetrical devices were not used for the gentle correction
and extraction procedure, which makes idiopathic causes for the injuries unlikely. The newborn was euthanized due to poor prognosis and a
full necropsy was performed. The mare was released from the clinic in healthy condition after treatment for retained foetal membranes.Figure
1 Clinical presentation of the WFFS foal. The foal presented with severe ablation of skin on the right front leg (above) and an open abdomen
and eventration of the small intestines (below). Clinical presentation of the WFFS foal. The foal presented with severe ablation of skin on
the right front leg (above) and an open abdomen and eventration of the small intestines (below). On macroscopic necropsy examination, the
foal presented with multiple extensive (up to 20 cm in length) and severe skin lacerations on both front legs and face. The abdomen was open
on midline measuring approximately 30 cm in length with eventration of the small intestines. In the affected areas, the skin was extremely
fragile and thin (1 to 2 mm), friable and very loosely attached to the underlying subcutaneous tissue (Figure 2). Pressure points on head as
well as front and hind limbs showed subcutaneous oedema, hematomas and seromas, particulary affected were the fetlocks and tarsus
regions.Figure 2 Skin morphology of the WFFS foal. Affected skin from the front limb (above) is markedly thinner (<1.5 mm) than unaffected
skin from the back (below) of the same foal. Skin morphology of the WFFS foal. Affected skin from the front limb (above) is markedly thinner
(<1.5 mm) than unaffected skin from the back (below) of the same foal. Several samples of lesional and non-lesional skin were fixed in 10%
neutral buffered formalin, paraffin-embedded, sectioned at 3 μm, and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (HE) for light microscopy. On
histologic examination, the abnormally thin dermis showed a markedly reduced amount of dermal collagen bundles that were of variable
thickness and orientation and loosely arranged with abnormally large spaces between deep dermal fibers. The epidermis and adnexal structures
were normal (Figure 3).Figure 3 Light and electron microscopy of affected (a&c) and unaffected (b&d) skin. Light microscopy of affected (a)
and unaffected (b) skin: The deep dermis is markedly thinned (approximately 30% of dermal thickness of hind limb skin of unaffected 1-day-
old control Warmblood foal (b)) and shows a reduced number of thin, irregular collagen bundles separated by clear spaces. The epidermis and
adnexal structures appear normal. Subcutaneous tissue was detached from the overlying dermis and is missing on this slide. The size bars
indicate 200 μm. Haematoxylin and eosin staining (HE), 4x. Electron microscopy of affected (c) and unaffected (d) skin: In the affected skin
(c) (front limb) a mild randomness in orientation and variability of the cross-sections of the collagen fibrils are present. The size bar
indicates 0.5 μm. The skin of the control (d) (hind limb from a 1-day-old control Warmblood foal) shows regular orientation of collagen
fibrils with no visible variability of cross-sections. The size bar indicates 1 μm. Light and electron microscopy of affected (a&c) and
unaffected (b&d) skin. Light microscopy of affected (a) and unaffected (b) skin: The deep dermis is markedly thinned (approximately 30% of
dermal thickness of hind limb skin of unaffected 1-day-old control Warmblood foal (b)) and shows a reduced number of thin, irregular
collagen bundles separated by clear spaces. The epidermis and adnexal structures appear normal. Subcutaneous tissue was detached from the
overlying dermis and is missing on this slide. The size bars indicate 200 μm. Haematoxylin and eosin staining (HE), 4x. Electron microscopy
of affected (c) and unaffected (d) skin: In the affected skin (c) (front limb) a mild randomness in orientation and variability of the
cross-sections of the collagen fibrils are present. The size bar indicates 0.5 μm. The skin of the control (d) (hind limb from a 1-day-old
control Warmblood foal) shows regular orientation of collagen fibrils with no visible variability of cross-sections. The size bar indicates
1 μm. Electron microscopy (EM) was performed on affected skin samples from various locations of the body. For negative contrast EM, selected
tissues were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1% osmium tetroxide (OsO4) and buffered with 0.1 M sodium phosphate (pH 7.4). After fixation,
the tissues were dehydrated in an ethanol series, embedded in Epoxy resinb, cut in ultrathin (90 nm) sections and stained with uranyl
acetate and lead citrate. EM examination revealed only mild abnormalities. The collagen fibrils were reasonably well organised in bundles
forming parallel arrays and showed regular periodic banding. However, mild randomness in orientation and mild variability of the cross-
sections of the collagen fibrils were present (Figure 3). At the time of necropsy, the only available genetic test for EDLS was the test for
HERDA, for which the mare was homozygous negative. In spring 2013, when the WFFS-test became commercially availablea, the mare was tested
and resulted heterozygous positive for the WFFS allele (A/G). The stallion was not tested. Consequently, formalin fixed muscle tissue of the
foal was also submitted for genetic testing. Genomic DNA was extracted from muscle tissue using the commercially available MagNA Pure 96 DNA
and Viral NA Small Volume Kitc following manufacturers’ instructions. Genotyping was performed for the XM_001491331:c.2032G > A variant in
the PLOD1 gene, which is supposed to be the causative variant for Warmblood Fragile Foal Syndrome type 1 (WFFS) according to the patent
application (primers and PCR conditions available from Laboklin, Bad Kissingen, Germany upon request). The results revealed a homozygous
positive WFFS (A/A) genotype for the foal. Close relatives to the foal, all healthy, were also tested for the WFFS genotype and revealed
either a carrier genotype (A/G; two tested half-sisters of the foal sired by the same stallion) or a homozygous wild type genotype (G/G; two
mothers of the heterozygous half-sisters and the full sister of the mother of the homozygous positive and symptomatic foal) (Figure 4). All
samples for genetic analysis were submitted to the laboratory without mentioning clinical suspicion for WFFS. The Clinic of Reproductive
Medicine and the owner of the horses were fully charged for all tests.Figure 4 Results of the genetic testing of the foal and close
relatives. WFFS carriers in the relatives of the homozygous foal are the mare (M) and two of his half-sisters (HS) from the same stallion
(S). The mothers of the half-sisters (OM) and the mare’s half-sister (MHS) were homozygous for the wild-type allele. The stallion was not
tested for WFFS. Results of the genetic testing of the foal and close relatives. WFFS carriers in the relatives of the homozygous foal are
the mare (M) and two of his half-sisters (HS) from the same stallion (S). The mothers of the half-sisters (OM) and the mare’s half-sister
(MHS) were homozygous for the wild-type allele. The stallion was not tested for WFFS. Case reports about EDLS describing clinical,
histological and EM findings in horses were well recorded this past decade, but usually without any genetic confirmation as HERDA and WFFS
tests were not available. Now, after the discovery of two genetic causes, previous cases may be explained by the newly detected mutations.
The majority of published EDLS case reports in horses describe the clinical signs of HERDA mutation in the Quarter Horse. Nevertheless,
there are several EDLS cases documented in other breeds than Warmblood or Quarter horses . These horses presented with several of the
following symptoms: skin hyperelasticity; loss of the hoof capsule; lesions on the back, the flanks, shoulders and legs; pathologic scar
formation; and abortion or embryonic loss in related pairings . Literature of HERDA homozygous symptomatic horses, after the launch of the
genetic test in 2007 , enabled the description of a more precise phenotype for this mutation: fragile and hyperextensible skin, lacerations,
seromas, haematomas, ulcerations and scars with typical localisation on the dorsal region extending to other parts of the body . The disease
may also affect other tissues, such as tendons, ligaments, great vessels or the cornea. These clinical signs most commonly emerge in older
horses; however, documentation of neonatal cases exist . Genetically confirmed WFFS cases were not available in previous literature;
however, four case reports of EDLS clinical signs in Warmblood horses have been reported . The first two cases in neonates (one and six days
old) showed skin lesions on the limbs, abdominal region, withers and underneath the tail, with hyperextension of the limb articulations,
hydrops, subcutaneous emphysema, and a general modified integument . In another case report, a 6-week-old foal developed haematomas,
multiple lacerations, scars and oedema and displayed poor wound healing with skin lesions localised on the flank, stifle and limb regions .
Regarding age (1.5 years) and localisation of lesions, the last case is atypical. In this case, the horse displayed wound-healing problems
and dermatological modifications of the skin and hair on the flank and back. The dorsal skin, lateral to the thoracolumbar region, was
hyperelastic and painful . Retrospectively, these four clinical cases without association to a specific genotype are now suspicious for
WFFS. As suggested by Steelman (2013), EDLS in horses seems to be a collection of similar phenotypes with different genetic origin , so
differentiation between HERDA, WFFS and other EDLS cases is difficult without genetic testing (Table 1).Table 1 Synoptical table for
congenital skin lesions and malformations in horses Disease WFFS HERDA EDLS Full Name Warmblood Fragile Foal SyndromeHereditary Equine
Regional Dermal AstheniaEhlers-Danlos-like syndrome of unknown origin Breed WarmbloodQuarter Horse (lineage: stallion Poco Bueno)Warmblood,
Quarter horse, Drafthorse, Arabian, Thoroughbred Gene PLOD1: “procollagen-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 1” (LH1: lysyl hydrohylase 1)
PPIB: “peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase B” (Cyclophilin B)Involved genes not elucidated up to now Symptoms Lesions of skin/mucosa
(tearing, ulcerations); Hyperextension of articulations, floppy ears, hydrops, subcutaneous emphysema, hematomas, premature birthFragile and
hyper extensible skin, lacerations, seromas, hematomas, ulcerations, scarsSkin hyper elasticity, loss of hoof capsule, lesions on back,
flanks, shoulders, legs, scarring, pregnancy loss, retention of fetal membranes Localisation of lesions Head, neck, thorax, legs, abdomen,
stifle, withers, perineum, oral mucous membranes, articular cartilageBack and from back extending, may involve: tendons, ligaments, great
vessels, corneaVariable Age Most common in neonatesMostly older horses, also possible in neonatesNeonates as well as adult horses Heredity
Autosomal recessiveAutosomal recessiveHeredity mode not described Genetic testing available YesYesNo Prevalence of mutation Up to 11.11% in
clinically normal adult Warmblood horsesPrevalence up to 28.3% in Cutting horsesPrevalence unknown Data sources Patent applicationIshikawa
et al. (2012) Gunson et al. (1984) Winand N (2012)Mochal et al. (2010) Esser M. et al. (1999) Grady et al. (2009) Solomons B (1984) ,
Rufenacht S et al. (2010) Steelman et al. (2013) Synoptical table for congenital skin lesions and malformations in horses Necropsy alone
appears insufficient to diagnose one of the EDLS types, as many similarities were observed in the lesions of our positive tested WFFS case,
the cases retrospectively suspicious for WFFS and other documented EDLS cases. Additionally, it is unclear if other atypical phenotypes
exist for this disease. Perhaps the birth of foals with cutaneous malformations is not the only clinical presentation. In humans, EDS
symptomatic fetuses of asymptomatic mothers were affected by premature birth, still birth and abortion . As the foetal membranes find their
origin in the embryo, the connective tissue in these membranes may also be affected and leading to their premature rupture, causing the
above described complications of pregnancy . These clinical manifestations of cases with similar causative mechanism can lead to the
suggestion that cases of abortion, still birth and premature labour may also be caused by WFFS, even when there are no case reports
available. Widespread genetic testing, especially of abortions and symptomatic offspring of heterozygous (A/G) pairings, will help to obtain
a more detailed description of the clinical signs that may be caused by this mutation. Detailed information about the prevalence of the WFFS
mutation is not available in the literature. The human EDSVI is rare with a disease incidence of approximately 1:100,000 live births and an
estimated carrier frequency of 1:150 . The patent application for the test describes test results of 124 horses. The carrier frequency in
the tested clinically normal adult Warmblood population was 11.11%. Perfect association between homozygosity (A/A, n = 2) and clinical WFFS
symptoms was observed. Heterozygous (A/G, n = 8) and wild type homozygous (G/G, n = 114) animals were all phenotypically normal. The carrier
frequency in the initial test population was corroborated by the data of 500 randomly selected Warmblood horses in Germany, where 9.5% of
the population were detected as carriers (Personal Communication: Gunreben B.a; 2013). The seven horses tested for this case report reflect
these results with regard to association between genotype and phenotype: a clinical phenotype was observed solely in the homozygous positive
foal. Up to now, no reports are available for genetically confirmed homozygous positive animals for the WFFS mutation with absence of
clinical symptoms. Due to the severe clinical signs, this novel genetic disease requires further investigation to obtain robust data on
prevalence of the mutation as well as the correlation between genotype and phenotype. Homozygous (A/A) offspring can be avoided from now on
easily by breeding heterozygous carriers only to homozygous negative breeding partners. Awareness for this new disease will hopefully result
in the genetic testing of suspicious cases as identification of homozygous animals provides the unique opportunity to study the biochemical
and clinical consequences of the mutation to obtain an in-depth characterization of WFFS. Manufacturers’ details aLaboklin GmbH&Co.KG, Bad
Kissingen, Germany bEpon, Fluka, Sigma-Aldrich, St-Louis, MO, USA cRoche Diagnostics International AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland. Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome Ehlers-Danlos-like syndromes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VI Hereditary equine regional dermal asthenia Lysyl hydroxylase 1
Procollagen-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 1 Peptidylprolyl isomerase B (cyclophilin B) Warmblood fragile foal syndrome type 1
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CM drafted the manuscript and created
the diagram, table and figures; SDB did the macroscopic, histopathological and electron microscopic examination, drafted the respective part
of the manuscript and provided the gross (Figure 2) and microscopical (Figure 3) pictures; MJ was the responsible surgeon for this case and
provided pictures of the foal; UB provided helpful discussions and final corrections on the manuscript; JW treated the obstetrical case,
initiated genetic testing, drafted parts of the manuscript and revised it critically. All authors read and approved the final version of
this manuscript. We thank Tosso Leeb (Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern) for helpful discussions on this
manuscript and Lisbeth Nufer (Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich) for performing electron
microscopy.
