Dear Editor, This report describes a patient with locally aggressive adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the lacrimal gland that recurred
after neoadjuvant intra-arterial chemotherapy (IAC), local surgery and postoperative radiotherapy. A 47-year-old female presented with
painless swelling of her right eyelid that had persisted for 3 months. Physical examination revealed 3-mm exophthalmos of the right eye.
Orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast revealed an approximately 3-cm-sized enhancing lesion in the right lacrimal gland with
bony invasion (Fig. 1A). Incisional biopsy verified ACC. Neoadjuvant intracarotid adriamycin and cis-platinum was started, but the patient
was switched to the intravenous regimen due to facial swelling and tenderness. After two chemoreduction cycles, the patient underwent
orbital exenteration. Because the resected margin of the lateral exenterated orbit and zygoma were positive for carcinoma, additional
lateral zygoma bone was removed (Fig. 1B). The pathology report verified T4bN0M0 stage ACC, cribriform type, with lymphovascular invasion
(Fig. 1C). The patient then received postoperative 59.4 Gy radiotherapy. An MRI taken 1 year after exenteration revealed an approximately
7-mm, focal enhancing lesion in the right anterior maxilla bone, suggestive of possible tumor recurrence. However, positron emission
tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) did not show increased uptake of fludeoxyglucose (FDG) (Fig. 1D). The patient refused to have a bone
biopsy. A repeat MRI performed 2 years after surgery indicated that there was an increase in the extent of the enhancing lesion inferior to
the right orbit and right pterygomaxillary fissure and suspicious tumor spread along the right foramen rotundum, but again no increased FDG
uptake was observed on PET-CT (Fig. 1E). A bone biopsy was recommended which the patient refused. A PET-CT taken 3 years postoperatively
again showed a stable disease state, however, the patient presented with an elevated pigmented mass along the inferolateral margin of the
exenterated orbit after 6 months. An MRI revealed a markedly increased infiltrating mass along the entire maxillary sinus wall with
perineural spread to the cavernous sinus via the foramen rotundum. At that time, PET-CT finally showed consistent findings of high FDG
uptake (Fig. 1F). An excisional biopsy of the elevated pigmented lesion (Fig. 1G) confirmed the pathology as recurred ACC (Fig. 1H). The
patient was referred to the head and neck surgery department and a salvage operation was planned, however the patient refused to undergo the
operation and she did not return until she presented to the emergency room in a confused mental status with blindness in her left eye a year
later. An MRI revealed an increased right maxillary sinus mass with intracranial extension, brain edema, and infiltration into the left
orbital apex compressing the optic nerve (Fig. 1I). Upon refusal of further treatment, the patient died within 1 month. ACC is an aggressive
malignant neoplasm with locoregional recurrence being the most common cause of disease progression and death . Surgery and radiotherapy are
the conventional treatment modalities, but whether the addition of IAC improves survival and whether the risk of potential toxicities should
be taken remain controversial. Tse et al. reported that the cumulative 5-year carcinoma cause-specific death rate was 16.7% in the group
treated with IAC and exenteration. In contrast, Fellman et al. reported 2 cases of ACC recurrence and distant metastasis after IAC followed
by surgery and high-dose radiation therapy. We report a case of recurring ACC that involved the contralateral eye and brain, despite
multimodality treatment. The condition was not detectable on PET-CT scan for several years. ACC has been reported to be FDG avid,
manifesting low FDG uptake compared to size-matched squamous cell carcinoma . Cribriform or tubular histologic subtypes show even lower FDG
uptake compared to the solid pattern, and therefore physicians should be meticulous when interpreting PET-CT results in ACC patients. The
locally aggressive nature of the cancer and the inconsistent radiologic findings which was apparent in this case highlight the need for
serial MRI follow-up for monitoring of disease progression, for prompt biopsy when recurrence is suspected, and for radical local control of
the disease. Also, the potential complications of IAC, such as facial tenderness and swelling that were experienced by our patient, and
other factors that lead to the optimal treatment response, should be taken into consideration when deciding the treatment regimen for ACC.
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. (A) Coronal and axial views of orbit magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) taken preoperatively, revealing an approximately 3-cm-sized enhancing lesion in the right lacrimal gland with bony invasion. (B)
Photograph of the exposed lateral zygoma bone during operation which was pathologically proven to have cancer infiltration. (C) Histologic
section of primary cancer of stage T4bN0M0, cribriform type with lymphovascular invasion (H&E, ×100). (D) Coronal and axial views of orbit
MRI with positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan contrast coronal images in the middle taken 1 year after
exenteration, showing a focal enhancing lesion in the right anterior maxilla bone without uptake in the PET-CT scan. (E) Two years
postoperatively, with increased extent of the enhancing lesion, yet still no visible uptake in the PET-CT scan. (F) Three and half years
after local surgery, showing a markedly increased infiltrating mass along the entire maxillary sinus wall with corresponding fludeoxyglucose
uptake in the PET-CT scan. (G) Photograph of an elevated pigmented mass along the inferolateral margin of the exenterated orbit 3.5 years
after exenteration. (H) Histologic section of recurred cancer (H&E, ×100). The pathologic grade was not different, but the proportion of the
mesenchymal component differed in that the primary cancer contained more fibrous components whereas the recurred cancer had more myxoid
components. (I) Coronal and axial views of orbit MRI 4.5 years postoperatively, showing the right maxillary sinus mass with intracranial
extension, brain edema, and infiltration into the left orbital apex.
