This report described radiographic and CT features of atypical diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis in a 5 year-old, female Shih-tzu
showing marked proliferative bone lesions in the appendicular skeleton with minor spinal changes. Continuous or flowing bony bridge
formation of vertebrae is used as the gold standard for diagnosing diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. However, this criterion seems
not to be suitable for appendicular type diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, as in the present case. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis is a progressive skeletal disease, and thus, enthesophytosis and the multiple bony proliferations at insertion sites of
ligaments and tendons to appendicular bones in a lamellar or trabecular pattern were considered diagnostic features of the appendicular type
of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis is a systemic disease affecting the axial and
appendicular skeletons of humans and dogs [8, 12, 13]. In particular, several cases involving spinal sites have been reported [2,3,4,5, 9].
In human medicine, three radiographic criteria for differentiating diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis from other proliferative spinal
diseases, such as spondylosis deformans, osteochondrosis and ankylosing spondylitis, have been presented. These include: (1) flowing
calcification and ossification along the ventrolateral aspect of at least four continuous vertebral bodies, with or without localized
pointed excrescences at the inventing vertebral body-intervertebral disc junctions, (2) relative preservation of disc width and the absence
of extensive changes of degenerative disc disease and (3) absence of apophyseal joint ankylosis and sacroiliac joint erosion, sclerosis or
intra-articular fusion . These criteria are also used as the gold standard for diagnosing diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis in
veterinary medicine. However, the early stages of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis cannot be recognized from these criteria, because
it is a progressive disease . Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis may occur in the appendicular skeleton with minor or absent
abnormalities in the axial skeleton . Therefore, these diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis criteria with spinal manifestations have
limitations to fulfill the diagnosis of appendicular diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. In this study, we described the diffuse
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis with prominent proliferative change from appendicular bones without typical vertebral lesions and suggested
the diagnostic features for appendicular type of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. A 5 year-old, female Shih-tzu presented with a
recurrent generalized dermatologic disorder. A physical examination revealed keratosis, pyoderma and pigmentation over all of the skin, and
restricted hip motion, with difficulty walking up and down stairs. No significant abnormalities in the complete blood count, electrolytes or
serum chemistry were detected, including calcium (9.3 mg/dl; reference 7.9–12.0 mg/dl) and phosphate (4.7 mg/dl; reference 2.5–6.8 mg/dl).
The values of free thyroxine (1.38 µg/dl; reference 0.6–3.7 µg/dl), thyroid stimulated hormone (0.166 µg/ml; reference 0.05–0.42 µg/ml) and
total thyroxine (1.03 µg/dl; reference 1.0–4.0 µg/dl) were within the normal reference ranges. Marked new bone formation with a smooth
margin was observed over bilateral ilium and ischium on radiography, and relatively mild bony changes with a similar appearance were
observed in the pubis. A lamellar periosteal reaction, which consisted of a radiolucent inner layer surrounded with a radiopaque outer
layer, was observed along bilateral femurs and tibia. The outer radiopaque bone had similar bone density as cortical bone (Fig. 1Fig.
1.Ventrodorsal (A) and right lateral (B) radiographs of the hindlimbs. Proliferative bony changes with a smooth margin were present over the
entire ilium and ischium (white arrows). Periosteal reaction along the right and left femurs was observed as a laminated bone pattern that
had radiolucent trabecular intensity surrounded by a radiopaque neocortex (arrowheads).). Additional radiographs to define the extent of the
disease revealed bone proliferation with a smooth margin at the infraglenoid tubercle of the right scapula, surfaces of bilateral humeri,
radii and ulna. In contrast, joints, such as the shoulder, elbow, hip, stifle, carpus and tarsus, were preserved with no evidence of bone
formation. Bone with a smooth margin had proliferated from the spinous processes of all thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, the ventral surface
of the vertebral body of the second and from the fourth to seventh lumbar vertebrae and the ribs. Although the ventral surface of vertebrae
could not be definitely evaluated due to superimposition with the transverse processes, there was no continuous or flowing pattern of
proliferative bones and no evidence of bone destruction. Intervertebral disc width was preserved (Fig. 2AFig. 2.Lateral radiography (A) and
sagittal (B) CT image of the lumbar vertebra and transverse CT images of the second (C) and fourth (D) lumbar vertebrae. Bony proliferation
on the ventral surface of the second and from the fourth to seventh lumbar vertebral bodies was observed, but was not distinct because of
superimposition with the transverse processes on radiography (black arrowheads). A sagittal CT scan revealed more distinct proliferative
bone formation on the ventral surface of the vertebral body (white arrowheads). Transverse images show a lamellar pattern with outer
hyperdense and inner hypodense composition (white arrow) or more severe bone proliferation with a remarkable trabecular bone pattern and
formation of neocortex.). Ventrodorsal (A) and right lateral (B) radiographs of the hindlimbs. Proliferative bony changes with a smooth
margin were present over the entire ilium and ischium (white arrows). Periosteal reaction along the right and left femurs was observed as a
laminated bone pattern that had radiolucent trabecular intensity surrounded by a radiopaque neocortex (arrowheads). Lateral radiography (A)
and sagittal (B) CT image of the lumbar vertebra and transverse CT images of the second (C) and fourth (D) lumbar vertebrae. Bony
proliferation on the ventral surface of the second and from the fourth to seventh lumbar vertebral bodies was observed, but was not distinct
because of superimposition with the transverse processes on radiography (black arrowheads). A sagittal CT scan revealed more distinct
proliferative bone formation on the ventral surface of the vertebral body (white arrowheads). Transverse images show a lamellar pattern with
outer hyperdense and inner hypodense composition (white arrow) or more severe bone proliferation with a remarkable trabecular bone pattern
and formation of neocortex. CT was performed to investigate the extent and severity of bone changes in detail using a 16 channel multi-
detector CT scanner (Siemens Emotion 16, Siemens, Forchheim, Germany). Helical CT scanning was performed from the cervix to the sacrum using
130 kVp and 200 mAs with a 1 mm slice thickness to acquire the vertebral CT images; from the thoracic and pelvic limbs with 130 kVp, 270 mAs
and 1 mm slice thickness for the appendicular skeleton; and from the nostril to the occipital bones with 110 kVp, 130 mAs and a 1 mm slice
thickness for the skull. Then, multiplanar reconstruction, curvilinear reconstruction and three dimensional volume rendering reconstruction
were carried out. Transverse vertebral CT images showed irregular bone spurs at the ventral part of the sixth and seventh cervical and from
the first to sixth thoracic vertebrae, and lamellar bone proliferation with outer hyperdense and inner hypodense composition on the ventral
surface from the tenth to the thirteenth thoracic vertebrae and from the first to third lumbar region. More severe bone proliferation was
shown in the ventral part of the fourth to seventh lumbar vertebrae as a remarkable trabecular bone pattern with neocortex formation. The
distribution and proliferative pattern of new bone were more clearly described on the reconstructed sagittal plane showing bone formation
mainly produced from the ventral surface of the vertebral body without bridge formation between adjacent vertebrae. That is, there was no
continuous or flowing pattern of new bone between cranial and caudal vertebrae (Fig. 2B and 2C). Thickening of the spinous processes of
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae was observed on the transverse and sagittal planes. The bone proliferative changes were more marked in most of
the appendicular bones as an irregular and lacy pattern. The origins of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus and subscapularis muscles had
irregular bony proliferation. Bilateral humeri had a relatively mild periosteal reaction with a lacy and irregular margin. Most parts of the
radii showed lacy and irregular proliferation with the typical lamellar pattern from the distal diaphysis to epiphysis. Severe bone
formation was found in most of the pelvis. In particular, new bone that proliferated in the iliac crest was thicker than normal bone. Bone
formation around the dorsal sacroiliac ligament with fusion of the sacroiliac joint was detected on dorsal CT images. The ileal body at the
origin of the deep gluteus muscle also showed severe proliferative changes, and the ischiatic tuberosity, where the sacrotuberous ligament
was inserted, had distinct proliferation. Bilateral coxofemoral joints were preserved. Lamellar or trabecular bone formation was noted in
the distal femur and proximal and distal tibiae (Fig. 3A–3EFig. 3.Transverse CT image of appendicular bone including iliac crest inserted
into the deep gluteal muscle; (A), ischiatic tuberosity inserted into the sacrotuberous ligament (B), right distal femur (C) and right
distal tibia; (D, E) attached diverse ligaments and tendons. Relatively mild lesions show lacy and irregular bony changes (arrowhead). In
addition, more progressive proliferation was noted as a laminated pattern and a trabecular bone pattern (white arrow).). CT images of the
skull demonstrated no remarkable findings. Transverse CT image of appendicular bone including iliac crest inserted into the deep gluteal
muscle; (A), ischiatic tuberosity inserted into the sacrotuberous ligament (B), right distal femur (C) and right distal tibia; (D, E)
attached diverse ligaments and tendons. Relatively mild lesions show lacy and irregular bony changes (arrowhead). In addition, more
progressive proliferation was noted as a laminated pattern and a trabecular bone pattern (white arrow). Proliferative changes in both the
axial and appendicular skeletons except for the digits and skull were confirmed based on the radiographic and CT examinations. Various
diseases, including hypertrophic osteopathy, osteopetrosis, vitamin A toxicity and thyroid acropachy were considered in the differential
diagnosis. Hypertrophic osteopathy is an osteoproductive disease, typically commencing on the distal extremities and extending proximally.
This disease is radiographically characterized by a nodular or spiculated patterned periosteal reaction . However, in this case, bilateral
digits had no evidence of bony proliferation, and the new periosteal bone was in a lamellar or trabecular bone pattern. Osteopetrosis
reveals increased bone opacity in medullary portions with normal shape and size of bone . In this patient, the affected bones had relatively
hypodense medullary portions, maintaining distinction from the hyperdense cortical bone. Vitamin A toxicity is one of the reasons for
hyperostosis in cats, whereas it has an opposite effect in dogs and causes bone resorption . Additionally, thyroid acropachy was ruled out,
because the values of free thyroxine, thyroid stimulated hormone and total thyroxine were within the normal reference ranges. Consequently,
it was difficult to make the initial diagnosis based on the diagnostic imaging. The dog was euthanized at the owner’s request in view of the
uncertain prognosis and chronic dermatitis, and a necropsy was performed. New bone formation in the joint margins (osteophyte) and ligament
and tendon insertion sites (enthesophytes) as well as periosteal reactions in both spinal and extraspinal structures was the most prominent
features. Osteophytes and enthesophytes were arranged into small to sharp finger-like projections in the spinal column (Fig. 4Fig. 4.Three
dimensional volume rendering reconstructed image of the pelvis and bilateral femur (A, B). A severe periosteal reaction was seen not only in
the macerated pelvis (C, D) but also on the three dimensional volume rendering reconstructed image.). There was thickening of the dorsal
spinous processes of vertebrae and irregular rib shapes. Enthesophytes appeared as mineral deposits around the joint surfaces as well as in
the diaphyseal region of the humeri, radii, ulna, femurs and tibiae. These irregular mineral deposits varied from pinpoint size to several
millimeters in diameter and were more obvious on the para-articular surfaces of the humeri, tibiae and femurs. Evident fusion of the
sacroiliac joint and the periosteal reaction was seen, and it was more severe in the regions of the ilium and ischium; this finding was
compatible with the three dimensional volume rendered CT images (Fig. 4A–4D). Three dimensional volume rendering reconstructed image of the
pelvis and bilateral femur (A, B). A severe periosteal reaction was seen not only in the macerated pelvis (C, D) but also on the three
dimensional volume rendering reconstructed image. A histopathologic examination was performed on the right forelimb and right hindlimb (Fig.
5Fig. 5.Histopathologic findings of humerus. A rough and thickened periosteum was observed in the diaphysis and articular region.
Osteoclasts were occassionally seen in the thickened periosteal are. Along them, osteoblasts were seen in the marginal area between
periosteum and subchondral bone. Enthesophytes were observed, resulting in distinct separation from the cortical bone. 10X, H&E (A, B).
Reactive bones along the margins of the humerus were merged into the meshwork of bundles of dense collagen framework. These collagens were
arranged randomly and made a dense meshwork parallel to the articular surface. The deep zonal area showed irregular tidemark, calcified
cartilage, mildly clustered chondrocytes and vascular invasion, indicating osteoarthritis. 100X, Masson’s trichome staining (C). In the
joint region, there was infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells as well as hypertrophy of the villi of the synovial membrane. Alongside
of lymphocytic and plasma cells infiltrates was small blood vessels in the connective tissue. 10X, H&E (D). 100X, Masson’s trichome staining
(E).). Osteoclasts were occasionally seen in the rough and thickened periosteal areas in the articular regions of the humeri and femurs.
Along these osteoclasts, there were osteoblasts in the marginal area between the periosteum and subchondral bone. New bone formation, such
as enthesophytes, was observed, resulting in distinct separation from cortical bone. Reactive bone was observed along the margins of the
humeral and femoral articular surfaces. Masson’s trichrome staining showed that these marginal areas had merged into a meshwork of dense
collagen bundles. These collagen bundles were arranged randomly and made a dense meshwork parallel to the articular surface. In addition,
the deep zonal area showed an irregular tidemark, calcified cartilage, mildly clustered chondrocytes and vascular invasion, indicating
osteoarthritis. Based on these results, canine diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis was diagnosed. Histopathologic findings of humerus.
A rough and thickened periosteum was observed in the diaphysis and articular region. Osteoclasts were occassionally seen in the thickened
periosteal are. Along them, osteoblasts were seen in the marginal area between periosteum and subchondral bone. Enthesophytes were observed,
resulting in distinct separation from the cortical bone. 10X, H&E (A, B). Reactive bones along the margins of the humerus were merged into
the meshwork of bundles of dense collagen framework. These collagens were arranged randomly and made a dense meshwork parallel to the
articular surface. The deep zonal area showed irregular tidemark, calcified cartilage, mildly clustered chondrocytes and vascular invasion,
indicating osteoarthritis. 100X, Masson’s trichome staining (C). In the joint region, there was infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells
as well as hypertrophy of the villi of the synovial membrane. Alongside of lymphocytic and plasma cells infiltrates was small blood vessels
in the connective tissue. 10X, H&E (D). 100X, Masson’s trichome staining (E). In our case, intervertebral disc width was preserved without
degenerative disc disease. The apophyseal and sacroiliac joints showed no evidence of ankylosis, erosion or sclerosis that met criteria (2)
and (3). However, the proliferative bone lesion in vertebrae was mild without continuous or flowing ossification in the ventral region,
which is a typical feature of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Furthermore, accurate radiographic evaluation was difficult, because
of superimposition with the surrounding structures, such as transverse processes. The CT examination demonstrated the extent and severity of
new bone formation. In particular, ventral bone formation of vertebrae was determined on the sagittal plane without superimposition, and
there was no continuous bone bridge formation. However, the classical features of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, including the
laminated bone pattern, consisting of a relative low density area between the ossified deposits and underlying vertebral body, was observed
on transverse CT images. In some regions, such as the fourth to seventh lumbar vertebrae, more enlarged and thickened ossification, which
was observed as a trabecular bony pattern, was found and was considered the more progressed lesion. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
with appendicular manifestations has been reported in only two dogs, which were both 4-year-old and large breeds [8, 13]. Both dogs had a
history of progressive gait abnormalities for the past 1–2 years, and they were euthanatized because of extreme stiffness, pain and lack of
a response to treatment [8, 13]. Long-term radiographic monitoring of bone lesions was performed in one of them for 26 months . On the
initial radiography, the periosteal reaction with a mottled appearance was observed in the proximal region of the right femur, ischium and
ilium. Then, progressive ossification of the right elbow, pelvic, right stifle and tarsal joints occurred. Finally, the pelvis, femur and
caudal lumbar vertebrae were osseously fused to show a trabecular pattern. Para-articular joint fusion around the elbow and smooth new bone
formation in the stifle and tarsal joints developed progressively with preservation of the joint space itself. These characteristic
radiographic findings were also observed in the other case . Periarticular new bone and enthesiophytes were present in the bilateral
shoulders and elbows, hip joint and the right stifle joint. However, both carpal and tarsal joints were normal . In both cases, thin section
radiography demonstrated a trabecular bone pattern in the neocortex [8, 13]. The regions of proliferative changes in appendicular bones of
our case were similar to previous reports [8, 13]. Enthesiophyte, a bone spur at the sites of attachment of tendon and ligament,
periarticular osteophytes and the periosteal reaction were prominently demonstrated with preservation of the joint surfaces including the
shoulder, elbow, hip, stifle, carpus and tarsus. The severity of new bone formation in this patient was comparatively less than that in the
previous cases showing mineralization of soft tissue with mottled opacity, progressive bony fusion and flowing ossification along the
ventrolateral aspect of at least three continuous vertebral bodies. The present case did not have bony fusion or muscle mineralization, and
proliferative changes in the vertebral body were not clearly identified on lateral radiographs. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis was
estimated to be at the early stage based on only mild symptoms in our case. The CT examination showed characteristic changes in the
appendicular region in detail. The region of bone proliferation was identified exactly without superimposition using the dorsal and sagittal
images from multiplanar reconstruction as well as the transverse images. Moreover, three dimensional volume rendering reconstructed images
at various angles improved our understanding of the multiple proliferative lesions. Conspicuous bone proliferation was noted in regions of
attachment to muscles, tendons and ligaments to bone including iliac crest, ileal body, sacroiliac joint, distal femurs, and proximal and
distal tibiae. The definite features of bone proliferation in the appendicular region were evaluated with CT, although detailed slab
radiography was not performed in this dog. The relatively mild proliferative lesions showed as lacy and irregular bony changes, and the
laminated pattern and trabecular bone pattern were noted in regions with more severe proliferation. This study describes the diagnostic
radiography and CT features of canine diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Continuous flowing bone formation at the ventral region of
the vertebral body has been used as a typical feature of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. However, this criterion seems not to be
suitable for appendicular type of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, as in our case, showing marked proliferative bone lesions in the
appendicular skeleton with minor spinal changes. We could not determine whether the discrepancy in vertebral lesions in this case as
compared to the previous cases was related to the breed, because this case was the first small breed dog with diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis. The typical vertebral flowing lesions caused by enthesophytosis and the multiple bony proliferations at insertion sites of
ligaments and tendons to appendicular bones in a lamellar or trabecular pattern were considered diagnostic features of the appendicular type
of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis
when multiple enthesophytosis with a lamellar or trabecular pattern is observed in vertebrae as well as appendicular bone even in small
breed dogs. This study was supported, in part, by a research grant from Chonnam National University, 2012 and by the Animal Medical
Institute of Chonnam National University.
