Henoch–Schonlein purpura (HSP) is a self-limited autoimmune disease, the cause of which is not clear. Gastrointestinal involvement is often
the main symptom of HSP. We report an unusual and rare case in a patient who was diagnosed with HSP. This is the second report of terminal
ileitis induced by HSP that presented as acute appendicitis. We report a 21-year-old man who presented with right lower abdominal pain, and
was diagnosed with acute appendicitis. Terminal ileitis was diagnosed intraoperatively, and when a rash occurred postoperatively, the final
diagnosis was HSP. When the rash occurred, HSP was diagnosed and methylprednisolone was administered for 5 days. The diagnosis of HSP is
difficult to establish, especially when the purpura occurs after gastrointestinal involvement; thus, abdominal pain should not be ignored
and HSP should be considered. Henoch–Schonlein purpura (HSP) is a self-limited autoimmune disease, the etiology of which is not clear, but
is known to be associated with infections, medications, tumors, vaccinations, α-1-antitrypsin deficiency, and familial Mediterranean
fever.1,2 The clinical manifestations of HSP include palpable purpura, arthritis, and renal and gastrointestinal involvement.3 HSP is a
systemic disease. The complement pathway is activated by antigen–antibody (IgA) complexes, which lead to small-vessel vasculitis and
inflammation.1 HSP is common in children between 2 and 10 years of age, and 90% of affected individuals are <10 years of age.4,5 HSP occurs
most often in the winter and spring. The incidence of HSP in adults is 3.4 to 14.3 per million; however, because HSP is self-limited, the
actual incidence may be underreported.1,6 Abdominal pain is the most common symptom of gastrointestinal involvement in patients with HSP.
There are also other symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, melena, and hematochezia. Abdominal pain precedes the rash in 12% to
19% of patients.5 We present an unusual and rare case, in which a patient was diagnosed with acute appendicitis preoperatively, terminal
ileitis was diagnosed intraoperatively, and when the rash occurred postoperatively, the diagnosis was revised to HSP. A 21-year-old man
presented to our emergency room with a complaint of right lower abdominal pain for 2 days. On physical examination, the vital signs were as
follows: temperature, 37.3°C; heart rate, 94/min; respiratory rate, 20/min; blood pressure, 120/75 mm Hg. The abdominal examination was
significant for tenderness and pain in the right lower quadrant upon palpation. There was no rebound tenderness or muscle rigidity. The
remainder of the physical examination was normal. Laboratory testing revealed the following: white blood cell count, 9.54 × 109/L;
neutrophilic granulocytes, 81.1%; hemoglobin, 136 g/L; platelet count, 232 × 109/L. Kidney function and other biochemical measures were
normal. Computed tomography (CT, Figure 1A and B) showed pneumatosis in the appendix and fluid in the pelvic cavity. Based on the above
findings, a diagnosis of acute appendicitis was made and a laparoscopic appendectomy was undertaken; however, the appendix was normal in
appearance and an appendectomy was not performed. Intraoperatively, the terminal ileum was noted to be approximately 15 cm in diameter,
hyperemic, and edematous (Figure 2); there was no apparent inflammation of the appendix. Thus, terminal ileitis was diagnosed. Three days
postoperatively, the patient had rose-colored petechiae and palpable purpura on the lower extremities, and HSP was diagnosed. Subsequently,
methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg/d iv) was administered for 5 days. Seven days postoperatively, the abdominal pain and purpura resolved. There
were no recurrences in the subsequent 8 months, and long-term follow-up in the clinic was recommended. (A and B) CT scan shows pneumatosis
in the appendix and fluid in the pelvic cavity. CT = computed tomography. Hyperemia and edema involving the terminal ileum. HSP is a self-
limited, systemic, nongranulomatous, autoimmune, small-vessel vasculitis with multiorgan involvement.1 HSP is characterized by
nonthrombocytopenic palpable purpura most often involving the lower extremities and buttocks, arthralgia/arthritis, bowel angina, and
hematuria/proteinuria.7 HSP is a multisystem disorder, which can affect the gastrointestinal tract, skin, joints, and kidneys, but rarely
the nervous system, lung, heart, and genitourinary tract are affected.8 Greater than 90% of patients with HSP are children, and the
incidence in adults is low.9 The etiology of HSP is unclear but associated with infections (bacterial, viral, and parasitic), medications
(adalimumab), vaccinations, tumors (nonsmall cell lung cancer, prostate cancer, and hematological malignancies), and α-1-antitrypsin
deficiency.1,10 The highest incidence of HSP has been reported in Asians.1 The incidence of HSP in North America is 13.5/100,000 children;
whites have the highest incidence, and Afro-Americans have the lowest incidence.1 HSP is usually diagnosed based on an atypical
presentation; however, when atypical presentations are not evident, noninvasive diagnostic methods are needed to establish the diagnosis of
HSP.5 β2GPI facilitates the diagnosis of HSP,11 and visfatin is abnormally elevated in patients with HSP.12 Abdominal pain is the most
common symptom of the gastrointestinal tract in patients with HSP. In the present case, the patient came to the hospital for evaluation of
right lower abdominal pain, and was thought to have acute appendicitis. HSP has been associated with other gastrointestinal symptoms,
including nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, melena, and hematochezia. There are also other rare gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with HSP,
such as intussusception, ischemic necrosis of the bowel wall, intestinal perforation, massive gastrointestinal bleeding, acute acalculous
cholecystitis, hemorrhagic ascites with serositis, pancreatitis, and biliary cirrhosis.1 Cutaneous symptoms often precede gastrointestinal
symptoms in patients with HSP; nevertheless, skin lesions occur after gastrointestinal manifestations in 25% of patients, which make the
diagnosis difficult and may even result in unnecessary surgery.13,14 Our case is a typical example that can pose a diagnostic dilemma for
physicians. Specifically, right lower abdominal pain and CT findings led to laparoscopic surgery. Intraoperatively, the appendix was noted
to be normal in appearance without inflammation, and the terminal ileum was congested and edematous, thus, terminal ileitis was diagnosed.
Terminal ileitis has rarely been reported in 9 patients with HSP.5,15,16 This is the second report of a patient with terminal ileitis who
presented with acute appendicitis induced by HSP. The first case was reported by Yantis17 in 1973, which illustrated a patient presented
with acute appendicitis and Crohn disease. Three days after laparoscopic surgery, purpura developed on the lower extremities. At that time,
the diagnosis was revised and with appropriate therapy, the patient recovered. The differential diagnosis of HSP includes Crohn disease,
Wegener granulomatosis, infective endocarditis, IgA nephropathy, and hemolytic uremic syndrome. The differential diagnosis of HSP
accompanied by terminal ileitis should include Crohn disease, vasculitides, and infections.1,5 There are some diseases that should be
considered in a patient with pain in the right lower quadrant is evaluated, including appendicitis, terminal ileitis, Crohn disease, HSP,
and other infections. Gastrointestinal involvement is frequent in patients with HSP. The diagnosis of HSP can be challenging, especially
when abdominal symptoms precede cutaneous lesions (palpable purpura). HSP should be included in the differential diagnosis of an acute
abdomen so that physicians avoid unnecessary surgical procedures. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, HSP = Henoch–Schonlein purpura,
IgA = antigen–antibody. ZF and XT are cofirst authors having equal contribution to the present study. The authors have no funding and
conflicts of interest to disclose.
