Intussusception is a very rare cause of intestinal obstruction in neonates. It is of extremely rare occurrence among premature neonates. We
present a case of 11-day-old premature neonate who presented with abdominal distension, intolerance to feeds, vomiting, significant bilious
aspirate and bleeding per rectum. The initial diagnosis of necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) led to a delay in the diagnosis. On exploratory
laparotomy, it turned out to be a case of ileo-colic intussusception with Meckel's diverticulum as a lead point. This site of
intussusception (ileo-colic) and presence of a lead point among premature neonate is of exceedingly rare occurrence and very few such cases
have been reported. In this article, the published work about clinical features and management on intussusceptions in premature neonates has
been reviewed. The authors intend to highlight the difficulty in distinguishing the NEC and intussusception. Subtle clinical and
radiological features which can help in differentiating the two conditions have been emphasized. This can avoid the delay in diagnosis and
management which can prove critical. High index of suspicion with timely intervention is the key for optimizing outcome. A diagnosis of
intussusception should always be considered in any preterm infant with suspected NEC. Less than 1.3% of all cases of intussusceptions occur
in term neonates. Intussusception in the premature neonate is an exceedingly rare clinical entity. The rarity of the condition and the lack
of specific clinical features often lead to diagnostic confusion with necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) which is a much more common disorder
in this age group. This further leads to delay in the diagnosis and surgical treatment resulting in increased morbidity and mortality. The
exact aetiology remains unclear in majority of cases. We present a case of intussusception in an 11-day-old premature neonate who was born
at gestational age of 32 weeks. The etiopathogenesis, diagnostic and treatment protocols of this rare clinical entity are discussed herewith
along with subtle clues to avoid the diagnostic dilemma. A 1.3 kg male neonate who was delivered at 32 weeks of gestation presented at 11th
day of life with vomiting, failure to pass meconium and abdominal distension. The child was admitted to neonatal intensive care unit with
the provisional diagnosis of NEC and was treated as per standard protocols for a couple of days. Subsequently there was bilious vomiting
with progressive abdominal distention and an episode of bleeding per rectum. Hematological tests showed the leucocytosis, thrombocytopenia
and dyselectrolemia which were corrected. Abdominal radiograph showed multiple air and fluid-filled bowel loops [Figure 1]. Ultrasonography
(USG) revealed fixed small bowel loops with suspicion of intussusception. Exploratory laparotomy was planned for suspected intestinal
obstruction. Child was started on ionotropic support for hypotension pre-operatively. Intra-operatively, ileo-colic intussusception with
meckel's diverticulum acting as the lead point with adjoining bowel ischemia was detected [Figure 2]. Intussusception was reduced, and
resection of the gangrenous bowel with ileo-ileal anastomosis was performed. The post-operative period was stormy with features of
septicaemia, disseminated intravascular coagulation and pneumonitis. Unfortunately, the child succumbed on third post-operative day to
septicaemia, persistent hypotension and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. X-ray abdomen showing dilated bowel loops in the centre with
paucity of gas in pelvis Intraoperative photograph showing ileo-colic intussusception Intussusception is the most common cause of intestinal
obstruction at ages between 6 and 18 months but is an extremely rare clinical entity in neonates, especially among premature neonates. It
accounts for only 3% of intestinal obstruction in neonates and only 0.3% (0-2.7%) of all cases of intussusceptions. Intussusception
occurring in premature infants shows numerous differences from that in the typical age group of patients, or even that in full-term neonate.
Intussusception in infancy, childhood and full-term neonates occurs most commonly at the level of the ileo-colic junction (80%). The small
bowel intussusceptions are found in <10% cases among all age groups. In premature neonates, however, the involvement of small bowel is very
common and is mostly observed in ileum and jejunum (91.6%). In this case, it was ileo-colic intussusceptions which is very uncommon among
premature neonates. The etiology of neonatal intussusceptions in premature infants remains unclear. In full-term infants, it is associated
with identifiable lead point. In the majority of premature infants, usually no lead point is found, and the exact etiopathology is still
unclear. In these patients, recognizable anatomical leading points, such as diverticulum, polyps, or cysts are not common and may be found
in only about 8% of cases. In our case, Meckel's diverticulum was present as the lead point, and this again is quite rare amongst premature
neonates. It is suggested that common perinatal risk factors resulting in intestinal hypo perfusion, hypoxia, dysmotility and stricture
formation may act as a lead point for intussusceptions. Moreover, intestinal hypo perfusion or ischemia results in dysmotility and stasis,
but accelerated peristalsis occurs in the early or recovering phases of the event, potentially acting as a functional leading point. Ueki et
al., in a recent study of 14 neonates concluded that hypoxic events may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of late-onset neonatal
intussusceptions. In many of these patients, common perinatal risk factors such as respiratory distress syndrome, patent ductus arteriosus,
hypoxia, hypotension and umbilical catheterization are often present and add substantially to morbidity. Onset of symptoms in premature
infants with intussusceptions usually occurs at around 10 days of age, when hypoxic and ischaemic events due to delayed cardiopulmonary
adaption are most likely to occur. Intussusceptions occurring in premature neonates are difficult to assess. Typical clinical features are
absent and the symptoms viz. abdominal distension, feeding intolerance, vomiting and bloody stools are almost identical to NEC. A palpable
abdominal mass is present less commonly. Owing to its high prevalence in this age group, NEC is the first diagnosis in most cases thus
resulting in an average delay on the correct diagnosis of approximately 7 days. This average period gets longer in cases not complicated
with perforation. Bilious emesis or nasogastric secretions are present in most patients, as is marked abdominal distension without
pneumatosis intestinalis. This along with the passage of blood per rectum, without systemic signs of toxicity, makes NEC less likely. Mooney
et al., in their series observed that more than half of the cases were misdiagnosed as NEC, and only 10% cases was diagnosed pre-
operatively. There has been no previous report of any specific radiological features of intussusceptions in preterm infants. The most common
imaging finding in patients with intussusceptions in premature neonates is dilated bowel loops. Pneumatosis intestinalis or portal venous
gas are neither common nor do they relate appropriately to the clinical course of the disease. One of the major criteria for diagnosing
intussusceptions is absent cecal shadow. In neonates, the sigmoid colon comes to lie superficially on the right side (43%) along with
distended small bowel loops overlapping the intussuscepted bowel and obscuring it which results in diagnostic dilemma. Recent studies
concluded that ultrasound scan is capable to establish an early diagnosis of intussusceptions in neonates, but a high index of suspicion is
warranted. Indeed, USG is a very reliable imaging tool for rapid and accurate diagnosis. Advantages of USG include the ability to document
ileo-ileal intussusception, the absence of ionizing radiation to the neonate and identification of lead points. USG shows a characteristic
multi concentric ring on axial and sandwich-like appearance on longitudinal scans in the lower right quadrant of abdomen confirming
intussusception. Contrast enemas may be both diagnostic and therapeutic for older children. In premature neonates, however, the ileo-ileal
location of the intussusceptions and a higher rate of complications like intestinal perforation and metabolic disturbances make contrast
enema less useful. The use of enemas should, therefore, be limited to positive and equivocal cases as well as to detect unsuspected disease
in selected cases. Subtle clinical and radiographic differences are important and helpful in differentiating NEC from intussusception.
Various clues to exclude the diagnosis of NEC are non-deterioration of the general condition, the presence of negative inflammation
indicators especially C-reactive protein and platelet count, the absence of both bloody stools and microscopically conditions that
frequently occur in NEC, and finally, the radiograph findings. Indeed, intussusceptions must be highly suspected in a neonate who is
diagnosed with NEC but who has a more stable course than would be expected. It is important to distinguish the condition from NEC as the
management changes drastically. The conservative management for NEC will jeopardize the viability of the bowel resulting in high morbidity
and mortality if the infant has intussusception. Premature infants with intussusceptions require surgical correction. Prompt laparotomy
following diagnosis is crucial for achieving better outcomes. Primary anastomosis can be performed successfully, and stomas can be created
in the critically ill patients or those with late detection and septicaemia. No recurrences have been reported, and anastomotic stricture is
the only post-operative intestinal problem reported till date is. Hydrostatic reduction should not be attempted as the primary management in
view of its reported higher morbidity and mortality. Despite improved outcomes in surgical neonates, the overall prognosis for premature
infants with intussusceptions depends on the co-morbidities and once a critical condition develops, as in this case, the mortality rate is
likely to rise. Intussusception is a rare clinical entity among premature infants. It is difficult to diagnose and is frequently confused
with NEC. The unusual constellation of symptoms may adjourn the diagnosis and increase the mortality and morbidity. Subtle clinical and
radiographic difference may help to differentiate it from NEC and avoid the delay in therapy. A high degree of suspicion is of paramount
importance. It is, therefore, imperative for neonatologists, paediatricians and paediatric surgeons to be aware of the possibility of
intussusception in association with NEC or as an alternative diagnosis, particularly when there is a poor response to medical treatment.
Timely diagnosis and prompt and appropriate management can significantly improve the otherwise poor outcome. Source of Support: Nil.
Conflict of Interest: None Conflict of Interest.
