The Proteus syndrome (PS) is a complex and rare congenital hamartomatous condition with a wide range of malformations. Little is reported
about spinal deformity associated with this syndrome. This study presents a case of scoliosis occurring in the setting of PS and explores
the possible mechanisms between the 2 diseases. The patient is a 17-year-old Chinese female with scoliosis and hemihypertrophy of the right
upper and lower extremity as well as exostosis of the right lower leg joint including the hip, knee, ankle, and toes. These manifestations
were suggestive of PS. She underwent a posterior correction at thoracic 2-lumbar 4 (T5–L4) levels, using the Moss-SI spinal system. At
3-month follow-ups, the patient was clinically pain free and well balanced. Plain radiographs showed solid spine fusion with no loss of
deformity correction. The severity of scoliosis in PS is progressively aggravated and the correction of the extensive spinal deformities is
generally difficult. Therefore, early diagnosis is required for adequate interdisciplinary treatment. Proteus syndrome (PS) is a complex,
rare, and variable disorder characterized by the patchy or segmental overgrowth of multiple tissues and organs including connective tissue
nevi, epidermal nevi, vascular and lymphatic malformations, and craniofacial hyperostosis along with susceptibility to tumors.1–3 This
syndrome was first described by Cohen and Hayden in 1979.4 Dietrich et al5 titled the disease, which has multiple, diverse, somatic
manifestations, as the Greek god Proteus, who could change his form at will. The diagnostic criteria of the disease are yet to be properly
established, and it may be confused with other similar syndromes such as Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome, neurofibromatosis, and Mafucci
syndrome.3,6 About 200 cases of PS have been reported in the literature, and incidence of bone malformations is unknown.7,8 The exact cause,
pathogenesis, and embryologic origin of PS remain a subject of discussion.9,10 There are limited reports regarding the diagnosis and
management of PS with its possible resultant scoliosis. We here present a case of PS in a 17-year-old girl with unusual presentation of
scoliosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents on behalf of the child for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. A 17-year-old asylum seeker
was admitted for an elective correction of her progressive scoliotic deformity. She was found to have scoliosis at age 3 by her parents. The
brace therapy was initiated around 3 years of age, and the patient was compliant with the brace for 12 years, wearing it approximately 18
hours a day. There was also a history of progression of scoliosis despite brace therapy with thoracolumbosacral orthosis. Therefore, she was
suggested the surgical correction for her spinal deformity. After 2 years, she was referred to the Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Beijing, China. Her plain radiographs of the spine showed that the Cobb angle of the thoracolumbar scoliosis was 100° and the Cobb angle of
compensatory thoracic curvature was 70° (Figure 1), suggesting the need for surgical correction. Standing anteroposterior and lateral
radiographs of the preoperation. Her past medical history was only remarkable in that she underwent resection of a soft tissue mass on the
right side of her anterior abdomen at the age of 7. On physical examination, she has gradually demonstrated hemihypertrophy of the right
upper and lower extremity as well as exostosis of the right lower leg joint including the hip, knee, ankle, and toes (Figure 2). She also
showed increased thickness of the right plantar surface without cerebriform masses. For these asymmetrical deformities and joint
dysfunctions, PS eventually was diagnosed. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed no evidence of any spinal cord or canal abnormalities.
Computed tomography revealed no vertebral body deformities. The family history was unremarkable, and there was no parental consanguinity.
Radiograph of the foot showing enlargement of the first tarsometatarsal and metatarsophalangeal joints, with epiphyseal osteocartilaginous
exostosis. Note the same finding in the fifth metatarsophalangeal joint. In June 2014, a posterior correction and fusion at T2–L4 levels was
performed, using the Moss-SI spinal system. The total operation time was 4 hours and 45 minutes. Total amount of blood loss was 800 mL.
During the operation, the signal of this patient was normal using intraoperative spinal cord monitoring. Postoperatively, there was no sign
of renal dysfunction. Postoperative plain x-ray film demonstrated the Cobb angles of the thoracolumbar scoliosis correction from 100° to 77°
(correction rate 33%) (Figure 3). Her follow-up was asymptomatic, well balanced in the sagittal and coronal planes, with solid fusion at the
third postoperative month. Both the patient and her parents were satisfied with the results of the surgery. Standing anteroposterior and
lateral radiographs of 4 d after operation. PS is a group of disorders marked by partial gigantism of the hands, feet, or both; plantar
hyperplasia; hemangiomas; lipomas; lymphangiomas; varicosities; verrucous epidermal nevi; macrocephaly; cranial exostosis; and asymmetry of
the limbs because of long bone overgrowth.11,12 However, there are limited reports regarding the diagnosis and management of PS with
scoliosis. In the present study, we reported a case of a 17-year-old female with scoliosis. The diagnosis of PS is based on the existence of
at least 4 of the major 7 criteria described by Samlaska et al13 in 1989. The diagnostic criteria for PS are summarized in Table 1.14
Despite these criteria, PS was often confused with a number of other syndromes with related disproportional skeletal enlargement including
the following: hemihyperplasia syndromes, epidermal nevi (CLOVE) syndrome, type 2 segmental Cowden syndrome, neurofibromatosis,
Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome, multiple enchondromatosis (Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome), and Bannayan–Zonana syndrome.11 However,
each of these syndromes can be distinguished from PS by meticulous observation of these characteristics.3 Scoliosis is a common
manifestation of PS, which can range from one single long, gentle curve to multiple, severe curves.6 While the time of onset of scoliosis in
PS is similar to that of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, the severity and rate of progression in PS can be remarkable. There are no
specific guidelines for scoliosis operations on patients with PS, but doctors must keep in mind that these PS including overgrowth of bones
of the external auditory canal can cause conductive hearing loss, infection, and cholesteatomas. Diagnostic Criteria for Proteus Syndrome
The exact etiology, pathogenesis, and embryologic origin of PS syndrome are still not known.1,15 It is hypothesized to be caused by a new,
mosaic, mutation acquired early in development; cells derived from the mutated cell line carry this mutation and result in affected
tissues.16,17 For this patient, we propose that the localized overgrowth of the right lumbar facets and pedicles were the result of
hemihypertrophy based on PS, not the influence of mechanical stress. In conclusion, PS is a relatively new rare syndrome described in recent
years. The management of patients with PS and scoliosis is challenging. However, the cause of scoliosis in PS remains to be investigated. As
the number of cases increases, the etiology, clinical manifestations, and natural history of this syndrome will become clearer. The severity
of scoliosis in PS is progressively aggravated, and that correction of the extensive spinal deformities is generally difficult. Considering
these findings, early diagnosis and treatment is recommended. The authors would like to thank their center colleagues and the devotion of
the patients. Abbreviation: PS = Proteus syndrome. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of P.R. China (Grant
Number: 81272053, 81330044, 81301596, and 81401847). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
