Late presentation of congenital diaphragmatic hernia is uncommon. It poses considerable diagnostic challenges when it strangulates. The
authors report a case of a left posterolateral strangulated congenital diaphragmatic hernia in a 5-year-old child diagnosed at the stage of
acute intestinal occlusion with intestinal necrosis and managed successfully. A strangulated congenital diaphragmatic hernia should be
suspected in the case of an association of sudden-onset respiratory and digestive manifestations with no sign of trauma or specific
pulmonary history. It then requires an antero posterior thoracic X-ray or, even better, a thoracic-abdominal scan to confirm the diagnosis.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia occurs most frequently in the neonatal period (1 in 3000 birth). Late presentation of congenital
diaphragmatic hernia is uncommon, accounting for 5-30% of all congenital diaphragmatic hernia cases in several studies. It poses
considerable diagnostic challenges when it strangulates Diagnostic delay, inappropriate treatment, and potential fatal outcome. We are
reporting a case of a left posterolateral strangulated congenital diaphragmatic hernia in a 5-year-old child diagnosed at the stage of acute
intestinal occlusion with intestinal necrosis and managed successfully. This case involves B.G., a 5-year-old girl admitted to an outlying
healthcare centre for paroxysmal epigastric abdominal pain, a respiratory distress syndrome and a sudden-onset gaseous effusion syndrome
with no sign of trauma. Owing to the suddenness of the clinical symptoms, the diagnosis of pneumothorax was suggested, and pleural
exsufflation was unsuccessfully performed. Owing to the absence of remission of the signs, bilious vomiting and stoppage of faecal matter
and gas, the patient was evacuated at the Charles de Gaulle Paediatric teaching hospital of Ouagadougou for better treatment. On admission,
the patient was fully conscious with a temperature of 39.3° and was in a state of hemodynamic shock. Furthermore, she presented with major
respiratory distress with no change in the morphology of the left hemithorax, but with the meteorism and a decreased vesicular murmur on the
left. The abdomen was slightly distended with no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly and no other palpable mass. The abdomen was silent on
auscultation. The standing antero posterior (AP) thoracic-abdominal X-ray [Figure 1] performed in the Emergency Department showed a diffuse
opacity in the thorax with a central air-fluid level in the left hemithorax displacing the mediastinum on the right, fading of the left
diaphragmatic cupola and significant colonic air-fluid levels in the abdomen. A C-shaped posteroanterior image with air-fluid levels and an
absence of the left diaphragmatic cupola was noted on the profile thoracic X-ray. Standing antero posterior thoracic-abdominal X-ray The
hypothesis of a strangulated congenital hernia of the left diaphragmatic cupola was suggested, with a surgical indication. After a brief
stay in Intensive Care, a surgical approach via a left subcostal supraumbilical transverse laparotomy was used after orotracheal intubation.
Exploration of the peritoneal cavity noted incarceration of the transverse colon in a defect measuring approximately 2 cm [Figure 2] in the
posterolateral part of the left diaphragmatic cupola. After sectioning the neck of the hernia, the incarcerated intestine was reduced
[Figure 3]. There was necrosis over 4 cm of the bowel [Figure 4]. Postero lateral hernia with incarceration of the transverse colon in the
diaphragmatic defect Start of hernia reduction: Necrotic bowel after sectioning of the neck of the hernia End of intestinal reduction The
gangrenous part was resected a double-barrel colostomy was performed. A diaphragmatic breach was sutured on one plane using nylon 00 after
debriding the edges of the diaphragmatic defect. Postoperative resuscitation consisted of oxygenation via a facial mask, triple antibiotic
treatment combining ceftriaxone, gentamicin and injectable metronidazole, a crystalloid infusion and analgesia with injectable paracetamol.
The reestablishment of digestive continuity was performed 45 days. The postoperative was uneventful. Late-discovery congenital diaphragmatic
hernias strangulate rarely, as proven by the low number of reported cases in literature on children. The predominant mechanism seems to be
intra-abdominal hyperpressure (cough, exertion…) which propels the intra-abdominal viscera in the thorax through a narrow diaphragmatic
defect. The clinical picture, dominated by acute respiratory insufficiency, sudden-onset paroxysmal abdominal pain and the absence of any
trauma in a child to date, may make for misdiagnosis. In fact, it is easy to confuse with a pneumothorax, which is the main differential
diagnosis. It may lead to an exsufflation puncture as in our case, or even drainage in the absence of a radiological workup, resulting in
exposure to an iatrogenic lesion of the herniated organ. The diagnosis is confirmed by a standard AP thoracic X-ray which shows intestinal
intrathoracic images with air-fluid levels and displacement of the mediastinum on the opposite side to the lesion. Thoracic computed
tomography scanning and pulmonary magnetic resonance imaging with ingestion of a contrasting product enables a more precise diagnosis of the
lesions. There is a formal indication for surgery. The surgical approach may be a classic supra umbilical laparotomy or celioscopic surgery.
The possibility of treating a possible associated intestinal malrotation and the difficulties related to the performance of such celioscopic
surgery explains our approach. Various abdominal viscera may ascend into the thorax, but the colon and stomach are the most commonly
affected organs. The narrowness of the defect and the diagnostic delay led to necrosis of the incarcerated intestine, indicating resection
and preparation of a double-barrel colostomy followed by reestablishment of continuity in our case. This anastomosis could have been
performed immediately after the resection of the necrotic intestine. Although the evolution was favourable, a strangulated congenital
diaphragmatic hernia may be fatal. It should be suspected in the case of an association of sudden-onset respiratory and digestive
manifestations with no sign of trauma or specific pulmonary history. It then requires an antero posterior thoracic X-ray or, even better, a
thoracic-abdominal scan to confirm the diagnosis. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
