Behavioral disturbances following chemotherapy with cisplatin are rare. Here, we report a patient with temporary loss of moral behavior in
the setting of cisplatin-based chemotherapy for treatment of tonsillar cancer. A 66-year-old Caucasian male with no psychiatric or violent
history was started on chemotherapy with cisplatin for treatment of tonsillar cancer. During the following weeks, the patient developed
profound personality changes involving volatile emotions and impulsive aggression with verbal and physical assaults on others. Admitted to
the hospital, the patient lacked any awareness that his behavior was wrong. Chemotherapy was discontinued and the patient was prescribed
risperidone. Aside from mild cognitive impairment, comprehensive neuropsychological, neuroradiological and lab testing were unremarkable.
Three weeks following cessation of chemotherapy, the patient had recovered to his original mental state and he was completely aware of his
wrongdoing and social misconduct. Since neurotoxic effects of chemotherapeutics on the brain are not yet sufficiently elucidated, our case
emphasizes that early signs of behavioral abnormalities in patients receiving chemotherapy should trigger comprehensive psychiatric
evaluation and ongoing monitoring of the patients’ mental state. Abnormal moral behavior resulting in social inappropriateness and
aggressive conduct has been described as a result of structural damage to the frontal lobe of the brain . We report on a patient with
temporary loss of moral behavior with severe aggressive and violent outbursts in the setting of cisplatin-based chemotherapy for treatment
of tonsillar cancer. A 66-year-old Caucasian male underwent curative tonsillectomy and ipsilateral radical neck dissection for right-sided
tonsillar cancer (T2, N2b, cM0, G2; stage IVa). Four weeks after surgery, he was started on combined radiation therapy at a total dose of
60 Gy to the neck and chemotherapy with cisplatin (with standard schedule of 6 cycles á 40 mg/m2 = 73 mg, weekly). During the following
three weeks, the patient’s wife increasingly observed changes in her husband’s personality involving irritability, volatile emotions and
impulsive aggression leading to verbal abuse and threats towards family members and neighbors (e.g., he delivered a letter to his neighbor
including strong abusive language). The patient started to argue with his neighbor about proprietary rights of a water pump that has been
shared for a long time. Ultimately he revealed physical aggression while cutting through the pipes of the water pump and chopping the
house’s windowsills using an axe. After the fourth cycle of chemotherapy was completed, the situation escalated at home as his wife wanted
to restrain him from driving his car after he had expressed suicidal thoughts in a state of agitation. He threatened to push her down the
stairs unless she was willing to hand over the car keys. Finally their daughter called the police and emergency medical services and the
patient was presented to the emergency department. On initial mental state examination, the patient articulated himself clearly and was
oriented to person, place and time. Initial testing of global cognitive functions did not reveal any gross impairment. The patient was calm
and placid throughout the interview. When questioned about the preceding events, he trivialized them and revealed lack of any understanding
that his behavior was wrong. Instead, he blamed his wife being responsible for his current situation and assured the admitting psychiatrist
that he would avenge himself by giving his wife a sound beating once at home. His affect was euthymic with normal emotional reactivity while
being inappropriate to the situation. The patient’s thought process and content were unremarkable. He denied any current suicidal ideation.
Eventually he accepted admission to the acute psychiatric ward; however, he stated that his motivation was primarily the fact that this
would spare him the daily drive to the hospital to receive ambulatory radiotherapy. The patient did not have any other past medical or
psychiatric history. He reported a history of chronic alcohol consumption (about two large beer per day), which he had ended after the
diagnosis of tonsillar cancer 3 months ago with no occurrence of alcohol withdrawal symptoms. Drug history was insignificant. His wife
assured that he had never been a violent or aggressive person in 42 years of marriage and that the current behavior was radically different.
Brain contrast-enhanced computed tomography on admission revealed no significant findings. No abnormal findings were apparent on routine
blood test (including blood alcohol level). At first, the patient behaved cooperatively on the ward. The next day, however, he felt harassed
by the volume of a fellow patient’s radio, so he angrily walked into the fellow patient’s room, intentionally destroyed the radio and
assaulted her with his shoes and fists. He also attacked an attending nurse who came to intervene with his fists. Subsequently, the patient
was restrained and, with obtained consent of the patient, intravenously treated with lorazepam. Further hospitalization commitment was
ordered by court due to endangerment of others. Like the previous day, the patient appeared unrepentant and lacked any awareness of
wrongdoing. Rather, he tried to rationalize his violent behavior by stressing that everyone feeling disturbed would have acted this way. The
patient was started on neuroleptic treatment with risperidone 0.5 mg twice daily and lorazepam temporarily. The remaining two cycles of
chemotherapy were not completed due to the unpredictability of the patient’s behavior; radiation therapy was continued as scheduled. In the
following, magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed a minor degree of general brain atrophy and slight chronic microvascular white
matter changes. Cerebrospinal fluid examination including tests for infectious diseases (e.g., neurosyphilis) and biomarkers for Alzheimer’s
Disease was unremarkable. No abnormal values were found on comprehensive blood tests including thyroid hormones and B vitamins. Although the
patient scored within the normal range on both mini-mental state examination (MMSE, 28 points) and DemTect (16 points), the three-item
clock-drawing test (CDT, 3 points) and Nuremberg Age Inventory (NAI) revealed a slight impairment in executive cognition. Specifically, he
scored slightly below average in the NAI Labyrinth-, Number- and Word- Connection items (78, 83 and 84 points, respectively). Over the
course of the patient’s stay, the psychopathological condition improved constantly. Although still convinced that his conduct was justified,
he was on good terms with the hospital staff and his fellow patients and increasingly behaved cooperatively and adequately. Therefore, the
patient was put on home visit for stress vacation without any incidents and three weeks following cessation of cisplatin therapy, the
patient’s wife confirmed that he had recovered to his original mental state. By that time, the patient was aware of his wrongdoing and
regretted his recent social misconduct. He further emphasized that such conduct was not consistent with his personality. Of note, the
patient did not experience any amnesia over the reported course. The patient was discharged four weeks after admission with continuation of
risperidone and further treated by an ambulatory psychiatrist. In this case report, a loss of moral behavior was noticed that was not
related to an established psychiatric disorder or structural brain damage but occurred in temporal proximity to cisplatin-based
chemotherapeutic treatment of tonsillar cancer. Discontinuation of chemotherapy and start of neuroleptic treatment may have reversed the
patient’s psychopathological condition. Hence, our case highlights the importance of pharmacovigilance in chemotherapy with regard to
psychiatric symptoms as these may affect compliance to treatment and, thus, long-term prognosis. Recent reports have attributed certain
encephalopathy syndromes (e.g., the posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome) to cisplatin or carboplatin therapy causing severe
neurological complications ; however, sole psychiatric disturbances following platinum-based chemotherapy seem rare. Since the introduction
of platinum-based drugs in the 1970s for treatment of various types of cancer , only a few cases of new-onset psychotic or manic episodes
were reported during treatment with platinum-based antineoplastic drugs . The set of behavioral disturbances observed in our patient, namely
disinhibition, impulsivity, inappropriate affect, emotional lability and poor judgment and insight was highly suggestive of a dysexecutive
syndrome . Although this syndrome has been formerly referred to as frontal lobe syndrome as dysexecutive symptoms are predominantly related
to structural frontal lobe damage, research studies demonstrated that it may also involve cortical and subcortical regions outside the
frontal lobe . Neurological causes of dysexecutive syndrome comprise stroke, multiple sclerosis, tumor and dementia with permanent
structural damages to the frontal lobe . Although our patient did not show gross cognitive deficits indicated by standard neuropsychological
testing, more in-depth tests (such as the three-item CDT and NAI) revealed slight impairment in executive cognition suggestive of mild
cognitive impairment, which is commonly seen in, but not specific for, dysexecutive syndrome . However, as changes in moral behavior are
also frequently seen in mania, a manic episode was considered a differential diagnosis. In disconcordance with this differential, current
psychopathology did not fulfill formal diagnostic criteria for an acute manic episode and history taken from our patient and his wife did
not reveal any previous depressive or hypomanic/manic episodes . Although we did not perform a specific test, an antisocial personality
disorder or antisocial trait was not deemed likely either since the patient’s history did not reveal any corresponding symptoms prior to the
treatment with cisplatin. Alternatively, the patient’s behavioral disturbances might be explained by early dementia. After initial diagnosis
of dementia, older patients are at an almost 10-times higher risk of developing a manic-like episode than older patients without dementia .
Conversely, mild cognitive impairment detected in our patient might be an early state of Alzheimer’s disease or other types of dementia and
might therefore, pathomechanistically, constitute an synergism with cisplatin induced predominant frontal cerebral dysfunction leading to
behavioral disturbances observed in this case . This synergistic mechanism is also consistent with the previous observation that patients
with higher cognitive reserves are able to compensate cognitive declining but this compensation can be compromised by exogenic noxa to the
brain such as physical illness or certain drugs . This noxa-induced decompensation of cognitive function in patients with subclinical
dementia can be reversed by ending noxa exposition which is consistent with the return to normal behavior following cessation of cisplatin
therapy in our patient . Also, the presence of a synergistic pathomechanism with functional cerebral damage due to cisplatin therapy and
preceding subclinical dementia in our patient might be consistent with the lack of reported cases of dysexecutive syndrome in cisplatin
treated patients. However, mild cognitive impairment in our patient might have also resulted from chronic alcohol abuse (the latter in
accordance with normal cerebrospinal fluid Alzheimer’s markers). Since the patient received radiotherapy treatment solely to the neck area
with safety margins applied to spare surrounding, inter alia, brain tissues, we did not consider radiotherapy being related to the
psychiatric outbreak in this case. This is underlined by the fact that radiation therapy was continued during hospitalization yet the
patient improved constantly. While peripheral sensory neurotoxicity mediated by DNA-cross links with positive charged molecules formed by
hydrolytic aquation in dorsal root ganglion neurons is a common side effect of platinum-based antineoplastic drugs affecting almost one in
two treated patients, cytotoxic effects of cisplatin to the central nervous system are not well elucidated . One explanation for this
apparent relative sparing of the central nervous system might be the characteristics of the compartmental distribution of the drug in vivo.
In a study in 11 patients with ovarian cancer receiving cisplatin, the investigators observed equally high platinum concentrations in tumor,
sural nerves, and spinal ganglia, but substantially lower platinum concentration in brain . This loss of platinum on its way to the central
nervous system might be caused by the reduced capacity of positive charged molecules formed by cisplatin aquation to cross the blood–brain
barrier. Concordantly, following osmotic blood–brain barrier modification in an experimental setting in dogs, cisplatin was shown to induce
disseminated cerebral foci of hemorrhagic necrosis and edema . However, these focal lesions were also observed in other chemotherapeutic
agents such as 5-fluorouracil and adriamycin and could therefore not be linked to a drug-specific pharmacodynamic mechanism. While
blood–brain-barrier induced peripheral-central concentration gradient of cisplatin in vivo might, in parts, explain the discrepancy of
highly prevalent cisplatin induced peripheral nerve damage and low prevalent central adverse effects of cisplatin, it does not explain the
occurrence of selective dysexecutive symptoms (with predominant frontal lobe pathology) following cisplatin administration as reported in
this case. Our observation, viewed in conjunction with the current literature, might therefore suggest the possibility of an alternative
coincident mechanism of cisplatin which causes predominant frontal cerebral neuron dysfunction in humans if the blood–brain-barrier has been
passed to sufficient extent. Since neurotoxic effects of chemotherapeutics on the brain are not yet sufficiently elucidated, our case
emphasizes that early signs of behavioral changes in patients receiving chemotherapy should trigger comprehensive psychiatric evaluation and
ongoing monitoring of the patients’ mental state. The patient has given written consent for publication of this case report. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions KB and TS drafted the initial manuscript
including interpretation of the case findings. HL, DB, UB and NS critically revised the draft. All authors have given final approval of the
version to be published. We acknowledge support by the German Research Foundation and the Open Access Publication Funds of the TU Dresden.
