To the Editor: Primary empty sella associated with pituitary adenoma in diabetes patients is rarely reported. Here, we report a case of this
association. A 63-year-old type 2 diabetic woman was admitted to our hospital on July 4, 2014. Laboratory examinations revealed HbA1c level
was 8.6%. General physical examination revealed typical acromegalic features of the face [Figure 1a], hands, and feet while a static
enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination indicated an empty sella without pituitary adenoma. Laboratory examinations revealed
an elevation of urine cortisol of 24 h at 353.6 μg (reference range 28.5–214.0 μg). One milligram dexamethasone suppression test suggested
the presence of hypercortisolemia, which could not be inhibited by 1 mg dexamethasone. The serum growth hormone (GH) level at 8 a.m. was
2.73 ng/ml. Other laboratory examinations were all within the normal range. Pituitary dynamic enhanced MRI showed the sella turcica was
partially empty with a thin rim of pituitary tissue along the right rear part of its floor, where presented the abnormal signal after
enhancing. The MRI result suggested an empty sella associated with pituitary adenoma [Figure 1b]. Adrenal gland computed tomography was
performed and indicated the thickened left adrenal nodular [Figure 1c]. Subsequent bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sample (BIPSS) was
performed for the localization diagnosis [Figure 1d], which demonstrated adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) level of inferior petrosal
sinus and femoral vein at 0 min were 691.4 ng/L and 162.9 ng/L, at 5 min were 952.2 ng/L and 172.3 ng/L, respectively; GH level of inferior
petrosal sinus and femoral vein at 0 min were 6.34 ng/ml and 3.88 ng/ml, at 5 min were 3.7 ng/ml and 2.38 ng/ml, respectively. The ratio of
inferior petrosal sinus ACTH level and peripheral level was >2 at any time, suggesting that ACTH was derived from the pituitary gland. The
patient's serum ACTH, cortisol, and GH levels normalized after the nasal endoscopic transsphenoidal sellar pituitary resection.
Immunohistochemical test showed immunohistochemical test disclosed a plurihormonal adenoma, producing GH mainly. During the 2-month follow-
up, patient's blood glucose was controlled satisfactorily with oral hypoglycemic drugs. Primary empty sella associated with pituitary
adenoma. (a) Patient's appearance; (b) Pituitary dynamic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging images. Arrows show abnormal signal accumulate
on at the pituitary; (c) Adrenal gland CT images; (d) Bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sample. In this case, a static enhanced MRI
indicated an empty sella without pituitary adenoma, which was not in accordance with typical acromegalic appearance and hypercortisolism.
Meanwhile, dynamic contrast MRI and BIPSS were helpful in diagnosing under these circumstances, as the former test is useful in both
evaluating the pituitary adenoma and assessing its location, positive-rate of ACTH-secreting adenomas was 84.6% on MRI scans, and that of
small microadenomas was 87.2% on dynamic enhanced MRI scans. BIPSS has been established as a highly accurate diagnostic procedure to
distinguish between pituitary and ectopic sources of ACTH, which is rather sensitive and specific at diagnosing difficult cases of Cushing's
syndrome. One explanation of this case could be a role of local (paracrine action) GH action on bone and pituitary (negative feedback),
resulting in the sellar enlargement and pituitary gland atrophy. Another possible explanation is interrelated to most of the precursors of
nasopharyngeal origin remained in the clivus during the formation of the anterior pituitary gland. Edited by: Yuan-Yuan Ji Source of
Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
