Monilethrix is a rare hereditary condition generally considered to be an autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance. A case of a
6-year-old girl without a familial background for this disease is reported. The diagnosis was made by optic microscopy and dermoscopy. A
therapeutic trial with topical minoxidil was conducted. The term moniletrix comes from monile (necklace, in Latin) and thrix (hairs, in
Greek). It is a rare, hereditary and autosomal dominant condition caused by mutations of the genes encoding trichocytes, hHb1, hHb3 and bHb6
type-2 keratins. It has been proposed that the hHb1 gene mutation produces a milder phenotype. The defect is located on chromosome
12q11q13.1 It is characterized by the presence of elliptical nodes and intermittent constrictions on the hair shafts, resulting in hair
fragility at those points.2 Clinical expression varies widely.1 Normal hair is progressively replaced by abnormal one during the early
months of life.3 Mutations in desmoglein 4 have been found in autosomal recessive forms.1 Clinical presentation may be very characteristic,
with extremely short, fragile hair emerging from keratotic follicular papules, especially in the occipital region.4 In milder forms, it may
go unnoticed with few affected follicles. However, in serious forms, the secondary sexual hairs as well as the eyebrows and eyelashes may be
compromised.1 The hair defect may occur in isolation or be associated with keratosis pilaris, syndactyly, cataracts, dental abnormalities
and nail abnormalities.1,4 It may cause scarring alopecia.1 Trichoscopy shows regular variations in the diameter of the hair shaft with
elliptical dilations (nodes) and constrictions (internodes).4 Fusiform nodes are microscopically seen every 0.7-1 mm. Among the nodes, there
is usually no hair marrow (medulla).5 Hair shine may show improvements during the summer and with age. The use of topical minoxidil or oral
acitretin may be effective in some cases. Initial improvement but with no lasting effect is described with the use of N-acetyl cysteine .3
Avoiding trauma to the hair is the most effective method in the management of this anomaly.3 We report the case of a 6-year-old girl, born
of a non-consanguineous marriage. She had two healthy sisters. Her normal hair had progressively been replaced by abnormal one during the
early months of life. In fact, she never had a hair cut, due to its easily fragmentation and, consequently short length. Clinical
examination revealed diffuse hypotrichosis of the scalp, as well as coarse hair. Keratotic follicular papules were mainly observed in the
occipital region (Figure 1). The diagnosis was confirmed by dermoscopy and optical microscopy, which demonstrated the appearance of “rosary
beads”, with nodes and constrictions (Figures 2 and 3). She was referred for genetic evaluation and was prescribed minoxidil 2% solution. A
few months after, we noticed an increase in the length of a few strands of hair, which did not have the previously described aspect (Figure
4). Initial clinical aspect: diffuse hypotrichosis, coarse hair and keratotic follicular papules, especially in the occipital region
Dermoscopic aspect - hair looking like rosary beads, with nodes and constriction Optical microscopy of a hair strand- hair looking like
rosary beads, with nodes and constrictions Final clinical aspect – A few months after the use of minoxidil - increase in the length of a few
strands of hair Conclusion: Monilethrix is a rare condition that can be identified through characteristic findings. Diagnosis may also be
noninvasively made by dermoscopy and optic microscopy of the hair. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this
article: Oliveira EF, Araripe ALCA. Monilethrix: a typical case report with microscopic and dermatoscopic findings. An Bras Dermatol.
2015;90(1):126-7. Study conducted at the Instituto Fernandes Figueira - Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (IFF-FioCruz) – Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
