The authors report a case of cutaneous tuberculosis in a 63-year-old female patient, who had an infiltrated, erythematous-ferruginous plaque
of indurated aspect on her right leg and a nonreactive PPD skin test. Diagnosis was made by tissue culture and PCR of skin biopsy material.
The treatment was performed with pyrazinamide, rifampicin, isoniazid and ethambutol, with good response. A 63-year-old female patient had an
indurated, infiltrated erythematous-ferruginous plaque with central atrophic scars (from previous biopsies) on her right leg (Figure 1). She
had been treated with antibiotics, antifungal and corticosteroid therapy with no improvement. We repeated the biopsy and the lesion
progressed to a 6-cm ulcer with irregular borders and fibrino-necrotic areas (Figure 2). The following tests were normal: blood cell count,
VDRL, ANA, AFB in the lymph nodes, HIV, culture for bacteria and fungi (in biopsy material), serology for leishmaniasis, and radiography of
the chest and legs. ESR was 48 mm/hour and PPD was nonreactive. The anatomicopathological study showed histiocytes and multinucleated giant
cells (Figure 3). Culture was positive for AFB. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) revealed genotypic characters of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(primers TB1 (primers: TB1 (5’-CCTGCGAGCGTAGGCGTCGG-3’) and TB2 (5’-CTCGTCCAGCGCCGCTTCGG-3’)), which amplify a fragment of 123 base-pairs
(bp) of the IS6110 sequence (Figure 4). The treatment was performed with pyrazinamide, rifampicin, isoniazid and ethambutol. Indurated
erythematous-ferruginous plaque with central atrophic scars (from previous biopsies) on the lateral side of the right leg Ulcer with
irregular borders and center with areas of necrosis and fibrin on the lateral side of the right leg H.E. Areas of granulation tissue with
foci of lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate and associated fibrosis are seen in the dermis Electrophoresis in agarose gel of the PCR
products. Lane M, molecular weight marker (100 bp ladder); lane 1, PCR product obtained from the patient´s sample (positive for M.
tuberculosis). Lane 2, positive control (M. tuberculosis); lane 3, negative control Cutaneous tuberculosis (CT) accounts for 1.5% of cases
of extrapulmonary tuberculosis.1 It may be acquired through exogenous inoculation or endogenous spread.2 The tuberculous chancre is
exogenously acquired and develops after inoculation of M. tuberculosis into the skin. PPD skin test is usually negative, compatible with the
clinical presentation.3 The following tests are used for the diagnosis of CT: culture, PCR, bacterioscopy, histopathology and PPD.4,5
Attention should be paid to PPD skin test, since it can be negative in patients with tuberculous chancre, tuberculous gumma or miliary CT,
or viral infections; in patients treated with immunosuppressants or corticosteroids; in advanced age or pregnant patients; in patients with
myeloproliferative diseases, malnutrition, sarcoidosis, idiopathic hypothyroidism or hypothyroidism after isoniazid therapy?3,6,7 Conflict
of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Nassif PW, Rosa APZ, Gurgel ACM, Campanerut PAZ, Fillus Neto J, Cardoso
RF. Cutaneous tuberculosis with nonreactive PPD skin test: a diagnostic challenge. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(1):128-30. Study conducted at a
private clinic - Maringá (PR), Brazil.
