Dear Editor, We present here a case of an infertile man with azoospermia, from whom an insertion mutation (g. 1283_1284insAGTTTGCTG) near
the beginning of the CAG repeat in the exon 1 of androgen receptor (AR) gene is demonstrated. The human AR is a ligand-activated
transcription factor. Encoded by a single-copy gene located on Xq11–12, it is composed of 8 exons.1 There are four domains in the protein
structure, including the N-terminal transactivation domain (TAD) encoded by exon 1, DNA-binding domain encoded by exons 2 and 3, hinge
region encoded by part of exon 4, and C-terminal ligand-binding domain encoded by exons 4–8.2 The TAD consists of two polymorphic sites,
characterized by different numbers of CAG and GGN repeats in exon 1, resulting in variable lengths of polyglutamine and polyglycine
stretches.3 Mutations in the AR gene may result in the androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) with various phenotypes in XY individuals.
Males with Complete AIS (CAIS) show the female phenotype with female external genitalia. In partial AIS, the patients have genital ambiguity
while males with mild AIS (MAIS) are phenotypically normal with or without normal spermatogenesis.4 More than 1000 mutations in the AR gene
have been reported, most of which pertains to substitutions leading to transformations of proteins. Variations of insertions or duplications
are rare, and the overwhelming majority of them are in regard to CAIS. A 25-year-old infertile man presented to our department with a
history of hypoplasia of testis. The scrotum was small and testes were palpable but decreased in size, with a one-sided testicular volume of
4 ml measured by an orchidometer. Routine examination of semen was conducted with the consequence indicating the volume and pH of semen was
normal (2.2 ml and 7.2 ml, respectively), however, the total amount and concentration of spermatozoa were down to zero. In addition, no
sperm could be detected even after centrifugation. Scrotum biopsy failed by the rejection of patient (Table 1). Hormonal evaluation revealed
that total testosterone (T), free T and estradiol were in the physiological range (16.62 nmol l−1, 43.06 pg l−1 and 111.0 pmol l−1,
respectively), whereas luteinizing hormone (LH, 17.00 IU l−1) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH, 49.70 IU l−1) were in high levels
(Table 1). Hormonal features and examination of semen in the patient Eight AR exons were sequenced from the patient, and molecular genetic
testing of the AR gene revealed a mutation in exon 1, which resulted in a glutamine to leucine substitution at codon 58, caused by a CAG to
CTG transversion. Besides, a more remarkable variation (g. 1283_1284insAGTTTGCTG) was found between codon 56 and codon 57, which meant three
proteins (serine-leucine-leucine) were added in Figure 1a. The point mutation was at the beginning of CAG repeat, and the insertion was
close to it in the meanwhile. To predict how the mutation affected protein function and stability, SOPMA (http:@www.ibcp.fr/predict.html)
prediction tool was performed. The results, to be specific, the ratio of four main spatial structures in normal and variant sequences were
as follows: alpha helix 27.56%–25.10%, extended strand 9.06%–8.37%, beta-turn 1.57%–3.19%, and random coil 61.81%–63.35% (Figure 1b).
Results of sequencing and structure prediction. (a) “>0” and “>1” stand for sequences from the normal and the patient, respectively.
Alignments of them revealed the insertion of three proteins including serine-leucine-leucine at codon 57 in yellow block, along with the
point mutation at codon 58 in green block. (b) The ratio of four main spatial structures in normal and variant sequences was described with
various colors: blue, red, green, and purple line represents alpha helix, extended strand, beta-turn, and random coil, respectively. The
number of CAG and GGC triplets was determined during analysis of exon 1. The triplet number (21 CAG and 17 GGC) was within the normal range
(10–35 and 4–24, respectively),3 therefore, the possibility that the length of the CAG repeat contributed to infertility in this patient
could be excluded, especially Kennedy's disease in which the number of CAG repeats exceeds 40.5 Routine examination of semen delivered signs
that spermatogenesis may be impaired with no sperm being detected, which could be considered as azoospermia. It was reported that an
elevated level of serum FSH, together with either normal or low serum T levels, was associated with primary testicular failure. In contrast,
elevated serum LH levels with normal or elevated T levels indicated androgen resistance at the hypothalamic-pituitary level.6 In this case,
the elevation of LH was the consequence of an impaired negative feedback control of T on LH secretion due to insensibility of the AR. Then
the deficiency of spermatozoa in patient might be responsible for the inverse feedback toward FSH. Consistent with the previous study, the T
was within the normal level. Exon 1, as the longest coding region of the AR gene, plays a significant role in regulating AR activity and
encodes roughly 58% of the protein.7 According to the AR gene mutations database (http://www.androgendb.mcgill.ca, last updated 2013),
approximately 20.7% of entire mutations have been reported in exon 1, among which only 9.6% (mainly point mutations) result in the MAIS
phenotype. Of the total, just 24 insertion mutations (about 2.2%) are covered, the majority of which occur in CAIS patients. Our finding
differed from them with the insertion of nine nucleotides, which avoided causing a frame shift and stopping in advance. It meant the length
and structure of proteins did not change violently, without contributing to CAIS. But obviously, it varied a lot from alterations caused
merely by point mutations. The p.Gln58Leu substitution presented in this study has been previously reported.8 In accordance with the study,
an extra leucine is located immediately upstream of the polyglutamine tract and is likely to slightly change the conformation of this
domain, thereby perhaps altering interaction with other co-activators and/or repressors. Furthermore, together with notable changes that
three proteins, Ser-Leu-Leu, inserted near the point mutation, the final result was that a chain of proteins involving five ones altered
around the beginning of polyglutamine tract, from “LQ” to “SLLLL” (Figure 1a). With the help of SOPMA, we identified that the specific
gravity of the alpha helix and extended strand reduced while beta turn and random coil structure increased. It demonstrated the variation
induced a moderate change of the predicted protein structure in the TAD of the AR, where was known to interact with co-factors.910 To
testify the prevalence of insertion mutations associated with MAIS and damaged spermatogenesis, we analyzed relevant studies in exon 1 by AR
database. Ferlin et al.4 covered infertility in a subject with a mutation at codon 57 of the AR gene, with one leucine duplicated, the
position of which was definitely identical to our finding. Our present case showed two more amino acids (serine and leucine) compared to
them. Moreover, as the polyglutamine tract coded by the CAG repeat is involved in regulating the AR transactivation function, it is crucial
to spermatogenesis.8 Therefore, we believed that the protein function may be affected, for the variation was located near the beginning of
polyglutamine, where was conserved region for the correct folding of AR protein and resemble outcomes could be referred. However, for our
expose of variation includes a substitution and an insertion, further studies are needed to elucidate the detailed roles of these mutations
in male infertility separately. In summary, an insertion mutation together with a known point variation was described in the TAD of AR gene.
They could be responsible for the impaired spermatogenesis, and this research would enrich the AR database and extend the current
understanding of AR pathology. YHC carried out the genetic studies, conducted the analysis of mutations and drafted the manuscript. HYX and
CDL participated in the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data. ZYW and ZHZ took part in data acquisition and sequence alignment.
ZGW and BCC conceived the study and assisted to modify the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
declared no competing interests. This study was supported by grants from Undergraduate Innovation Project of Wenzhou Medical University (wyx
201401007), and Undergraduate Scientific and Technological Innovation Project for Talent Program from Zhejiang Province.
