A 36-year old man presents to the emergency room five days after undergoing extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) for a symptomatic
11mm left renal pelvis stone. The patient has persistent symptoms of severe left flank pain at presentation. Plain abdominal radiography is
obtained and shows a steinstrasse pattern of urolithiasis. In the 1980s, the German developers of ESWL observed that stone fragments could
stack in a column formation in the ureter in a radiographic pattern that resembled a “stone street,” or steinstrasse in German (plural is
steinstrassen) (Figure).1 This phenomenon is observed in 2–20% of ESWL patients and is a unique cause of ureteral obstruction that may
present to the emergency department.2 Risk factors for the development of steinstrasse include large proximal stones, staghorn calculi, and
pre-existing ureteral obstruction that may have caused permanent kinking of the ureter. Eighty-seven percent of steinstrassen occur in the
distal ureter. For asymptomatic cases of steinstrasse, conservative management is preferred with observation and serial imaging with plain
radiography to follow progression of the stones and ultrasonography to evaluate for hydronephrosis. Sixty-five percent of steinstrassen will
pass spontaneously over days to weeks.2 Tamsulosin has been more recently added as adjunctive therapy to improve outcomes in these
asymptomatic cases. For symptomatic cases characterized by pain, fever, or hydronephrosis, more urgent urologic intervention is required
through percutaneous nephrostomy or ureteroscopy with stent placement. This particular patient underwent urgent ureteroscopy with stent
placement the following day and had an uneventful recovery thereafter. Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available
through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all
authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as
potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Steinstrassen seen in the left ureter.
