This report describes a patient with sub-massive pulmonary embolism (PE) who was successfully treated with half-dose thrombolytics guided by
the use of point-of-care (POC) ultrasound. In this case, POC ultrasound was the only possible imaging since computed tomography was
contraindicated. POC ultrasound demonstrated a deep vein thrombosis and evidence of cardiac strain. In situations or locations where
definitive imaging is unobtainable, POC ultrasound can help diagnose submassive PE and direct the use of half-dose tissue plasminogen
activator. Pulmonary embolus (PE) is a life-threatening condition affecting 250,000 people annually.1 In the emergency department (ED),
computed tomography angiography (CTA) is the method of choice to diagnose PE; however, it may not be feasible to obtain a CTA when patients
have abnormal kidney function, hemodynamic instability, or are in resource-limited areas. In these situations, thrombolytic treatment may be
delayed or withheld due to risk benefit concerns. Although thrombolytics decreases clot burden faster than heparin, the complication of
intracerebral hemorrhage has led to hesitant physician use. Half-dose tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) research demonstrates decreased
complications with similar clot resolution; however, its true influence on morbidity and mortality remains unknown.2 A patient presented to
the ED with a chief complaint of sudden onset diaphoresis, dyspnea and near-syncope with minimal exertion. Aside from recent travel, the
patient denied any other medical or surgical history. Triage vital signs were temperature 36.3°C, blood pressure 126/83mm Hg, heart rate 123
beats/min, respiratory rate 34 breaths/min, SpO2 85% on room air and required a non-rebreather to maintain oxygen saturation above 95%.
Initial impression was a dyspneic patient without respiratory distress. Cardiac exam demonstrated tachycardia with irregular rate, and his
lung exam was normal. Extremity evaluation demonstrated a slightly enlarged right lower extremity with trace edema. The remainder of the
physical examination was normal. Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) displayed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response (124
beats/min); no evidence of ischemia, infarction or patterns concerning for right ventricle strain. The patient also had an elevated Troponin
(1.8ng/ml) and B-type Natriuretic Peptide (888pg/ml). Chest radiograph was normal, but definitive CTA imaging to diagnose PE could not be
pursued due to an elevated creatinine level (1.8mg/dl). Point-of-care (POC) ultrasound of the right lower extremity demonstrated a femoral
vein deep vein thrombosis (DVT) extending from the sapheno-femoral junction to the popliteal fossa (Figure 1). POC cardiac ultrasound
revealed right heart strain (dilatation, hypokinesis, and paradoxical septal motion) and a plethoric inferior vena cava (Figure 2). Given
these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a sub-massive PE. Although this patient was not hemodynamically unstable, it was clear that
the patient could decompensate at any moment. The decision was made to start half-dose tPA with heparin infusion.2 One hour into the
infusion, the patient appeared more comfortable, with improved vital signs: blood pressure 123/83mm Hg, heart rate 95 beats/min, respiratory
rate 20 breaths/min, and SpO2 of 100% on a non-rebreather. The patient’s atrial fibrillation resolved without any dysrhythmic agents. Eight
hours later, the patient was asymptomatic and no longer required oxygen. After resolution of the patient’s acute renal injury, a CTA was
performed, which demonstrated extensive PEs in all five pulmonary arteries as well as possible early infarct of the left lower lung. The
patient was transitioned to subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin and warfarin and was discharged 72 hours after presentation. Sub-
massive PE is considered in hypoxic and dyspneic patients who are hemodynamically stable but demonstrate signs of heart strain as seen by
ECG changes, cardiac biomarkers, or sonographic evidence of right ventricular strain.3 Treatment with thrombolytics may prevent clinical
deterioration and morbidity; however, it is associated with increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage.4 Some experts choose not to
thrombolyse these patients because there is insufficient evidence for reducing mortality.5 New research demonstrates that treating sub-
massive PEs with half-dose tPA may be safer and decrease long-term complications such as pulmonary hypertension.2 Despite this, emergency
physicians must be confident in their diagnosis of PE with POC ultrasound prior to making this decision. In this case, POC ultrasound was
performed by an emergency ultrasound fellowship-trained physician. First, POC ultrasound helped diagnose a lower extremity DVT, which
carries concomitant PE in 40–50% of cases.6,7 When the patient could not undergo definitive imaging secondary to acute renal injury, POC
ultrasound demonstrated a dilated right heart, decreased right ventricular contractility, interventricular septal wall motion irregularity,
and a plethoric inferior vena cava (Video). Although each of these findings are not sufficient for the diagnosis of PE, a recent study by
Nazerian et al. demonstrated a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 86.2% when imaging the heart, lung, and veins.8 In this case, POC
ultrasound confirmed the diagnosis of sub-massive PE and directed treatment with half-dose tPA in addition to systemic heparin. While
administration of thrombolytic therapy is controversial, and outside the scope of this article, POC ultrasound can assist in the decision
making process. Due to the expanded use of POC ultrasound in emergency medicine (EM) and increased emphasis on ultrasound training in EM
residency programs, it is reasonable to believe that all graduating EM residents will have the skills necessary to make this diagnosis.9 POC
ultrasound can assist with rapid evaluation and treatment of patients with suspected sub-massive PE, especially in patients with
contraindications to CTA. Supervising Section Editor: Rick A. McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Dual image demonstrating right lower extremity popliteal vein clot with and without compression. The popliteal
vein does not compress demonstrating active popliteal deep vein thrombosis. Point-of-care echocardiogram in apical 4-chamber view
demonstrates significant right ventricle dilation. Initial POC ultrasound.
