Knowledge of the inverted "T" incision - used in plastic, oncologic and orthopedic surgery - has allowed its adaptation for the diagnostic
assessment and therapeutical approach of acral, nodular lesions. The authors describe the use of this technique for the surgical approach of
a patient with a plantar nodular lesion, further diagnosed as a calcified angioleiomyoma. We describe the case of a 53-year-old, brown-
skinned man who had had a nodular lesion for four years. The lesion was well-delimited, regular-shapped, had a smooth surface, measured 4x2
cm in diameter, was mobile to palpation, had a relatively softened center and indurated edges, and was located in the left plantar region at
the level of the first metatarsus (Figure 1A). Despite experiencing pain with ambulation, the patient denied adenomegalies or impairment of
general condition. Angioleiomyoma. A. Lesion in the preoperative period. B. Drawing of the incision lines resembling an inverted T. C.
Creation of two cutaneous lobes. D. Complete excision of the subcutaneous lesion The patient underwent excisional biopsy for histological
assessment. 1g of intravenous cefazolin was administered intraoperatively. Antisepsis was performed with a 5% alcoholic solution of
chlorhexidine gluconate. Surgical incision lines in the shape of an inverted "T" and bordering the edges of the lesion were marked before
local infiltration of anesthetic solution containing 5mL of 2% lidocaine, 15mL of 0.9% saline, 2 mL of 8.4% bicarbonate and 0.2 mL of 1mg/mL
epinephrine (Figure 1B). With the incision and displacement, two cutaneous lobes were created. This promoted a better visualization of the
lesion and the deep layers (Figure 1C). A whitish spherical lesion with a smooth surface and indurated to palpation was completely dissected
from the subcutaneous tissue until the level of the tendon of the abductor hallucis muscle and the tendon of the flexor hallucis longus
muscle, which were kept intact (Fig. 1D). After hemostasis testing was reviewed, the surgical defect was reconstructed using only one of the
skin lobes of the initial incision. The remaining lobe was removed. It was not necessary to close the incision in layers. Cutaneous suture
was performed by simple interrupted stitches using 3-0 mononylon (Figure 2A). Postoperative period. A. Suture of only one of the cutaneous
lobes was used to reconstruct the surgical defect. B. Outpatient follow-up: postoperative day 43 The stitches were removed on postoperative
day 21. The procedure healed uneventfully and excellent functional and aesthetic results were achieved. (Figure 2B). After one year of
outpatient follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic and without recurrence. Histopathological assessment was conclusive for the diagnosis
of calcified angioleiomyoma. It is considered to be a rare, benign, painful tumor located in the acral regions and predominant in female
patients.1-3 Calcinosis, inclusion cyst, nodular fasciitis, neurofibroma, angiolipoma and liposarcoma are some of the possible differential
diagnoses.2-5 The surgical approach using the "T"-incision technique has proved to be useful in other situations, such as reductive
mammoplasty and sagging skin of the breast region, surgical treatment of pelvic sarcomas and uterine carcinoma, nail surgery and
tracheotomies.6-10 The advantages of this technique include an enlargement of the field of view of the surgeon, facilitates the dissection
of deep structures and allows for safer tumor resection. The creation of two cutaneous lobes reduces surgical time. No flaps or grafts are
required and it spares surrounding tissue in the reconstruction of the surgical defect. The vascularization by lobe randomization promotes a
satisfactory healing without evidence of necrosis. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Sampaio FMS,
Lourenço FT, Gualberto GV, de Cerqueira FGM, de Souza, PRC. Use of the inverted “T” incision to approach a plantar nodular lesion An Bras
Dermatol. 2015;90(1):134-5. Study conducted at the Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso – Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
