Around 50 mycobacteria species cause human disease. Immunosuppressive states predispose to non-tuberculous mycobaterium infection, such as
Mycobacterium chelonae: AFB, non-tuberculous, fast growth of low virulence and uncommon as a human pathogen. It may compromise the skin and
soft tissues, lungs, lymph nodes and there is also a disseminated presentation. The diagnosis involves AFB identification and culture on
Agar and Lowenstein-Jensen medium base. A 41-year-old female with MCTD (LES predominance) is reported, presenting painless nodules in the
right forearm. She denied local trauma. Immunosuppressed with prednisone and cyclophosphamide for 24 months. Lesion biopsy has demonstrated
positive bacilloscopy (Ziehl-Neelsen stain) and M.chelonae in culture (Lowenstein-Jensen medium base), therefore clarithromycin treatment
has been started (best therapy choice in the literature). Until the 1950s no non-tuberculous mycobacterium species had been identified as
causing infection in human beings; however, at the current time, around 50 potentially pathogenic mycobacterium species have been isolated
in humans. Immunocompromised states, such as AIDS and immunosuppressive drug use, can facilitate non-tuberculous mycobacterium infection,
among which Mycobacterium chelonae, which is a fast-growing mycobacterium, involving mainly the lungs, but that has also been described as
affecting the skin, lymph nodes and the skeletal system.1 A 41-year-old female patient was diagnosed with mixed connective tissue disease,
of which the main component was systemic lupus erythematous with associated nephritis. Progressive onset of growing painless lesions in her
right forearm were described, for a three-month period, without any other symptoms, previous trauma, local surgery or injections. She had
been using prednisone one mg/kg/day (immunosuppressive dose) and regular cyclophosphamide pulses for 24 months. The physical examination
showed erythematous nodules, discreetly hard, palpable be rather than visible, with a diameter of one and a half to two centimeters,
distributed along the anterior and posterior sides of the right forearm (Figure 1). Erythematous nodules, discreetly hard, with a diameter
of 1.5-2.0cm, distributed along the anterior and posterior sides of the right forearm She underwent a skin lesion biopsy and the
anatomopathological exam demonstrated: extensive adipocytic necrosis in the hypodermis with lipomembranous and pseudo cystic patterns,
associated with recent hemorrhage and subtle inflammatory infiltrate surrounding some vessels, localized in superficial and deep dermis,
sometimes in the hypodermis, composed of lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasmacytes (Figures 2 and 3). The bacilloscopy using Ziehl-Neelsen
coloration was positive and the culture using Lowenstein-Jensen medium for mycobacteria was positive for Mycobacterium chelonae (Figures 4
and 5). The diagnosis of non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis by Mycobacterium chelonae was confirmed and treatment with clarithromycin was
started. Extensive adipocytic necrosis in the hypodermis with lipomembranous and pseudocystic patterns, associated with recent hemorrhage
and subtle inflammatory infiltrate surrounding some vessels, localized in superficial and deep dermis, sometimes in the hypodermis, composed
of lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasmacytes Extensive adipocytic necrosis in the hypodermis with lipomembranous and pseudocystic patterns,
associated with recent hemorrhage and subtle inflammatory infiltrate surrounding some vessels, localized in superficial and deep dermis,
sometimes in the hypodermis, composed of lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasmacytes Ziehl-Neelsen coloration demonstrating AFB in cutaneous
biopsy material Lowenstein-Jensen medium base culture In the 1930s, Pinner demonstrated the existence of another mycobacteria group, which
he named atypical mycobacteria, nowadays named non-tuberculous mycobacteria. Later, Runyon classified them according to their colony
pigmentation, ideal growth temperature and rate of growth at this temperature. The Mycobacterium chelonae is considered a non-tuberculous
environmental mycobacterium, belonging to the M.fortuitum complex, acid-fast bacilli, non-pigmented and with a fast rate of growth; it was
first isolated from a sea turtle named Chelona corticata, but can be found in the water, soil, dust and contaminated instruments. 2 Although
these mycobacteria have the remarkable characteristic of producing biofilm, they have low virulence, and therefore do not usually provoke
disease in humans. However, immunosuppressive status (transplant recipients; those with AIDS; immunosuppressive drug use, and long term
corticotherapy) have led to infections, caused by these organisms in humans since the 1950s. 3,4It has also been recognized that this kind
of infection may appear in non-immunocompromised people, but also in those with lung base disease or those who have undergone some invasive
procedure, as the simple act of shaving or major operations, due to a residual break in the skin or potentially contaminated instruments.5
After the incidental environmental inoculation, the incubation period lasts from four to six weeks.2The infection may involve: the skin,
soft tissues, lungs, lymph nodes (mainly in small children), osteoarticular system, liver and also trigger a disseminated presentation. The
degree of severity depends on the mycobacterium virulence, but chiefly on the immune status of the carrier; thus immunosuppressed people are
more vulnerable to serious and disseminated presentations.2Cutaneous manifestations include edema, papules, hard-to-heal ulcers, abscess,
subcutaneous nodules and multiple or isolated chronic drainage fistulas; they usually appear in the extremities, mainly the lower ones. In
the reported case multiple subcutaneous nodules were found in the right upper limb. The diagnostic confirmation using affected tissue
includes: bacilloscopy (identification of the acid-fast bacilli using Ziehl-Neelsen coloration), histopathological study (demonstrates
tuberculous or sarcoid granulomas, rheumatoid nodules, diffuse dermal and/or hypodermal histiocytic infiltration and chronic panniculitis),
molecular biology methods (PCR is most commonly used, it is highly effective and can return a result in under two hours; however, it does
not show the antibiotic susceptibility), culture in appropriate mediums (e.g. agar and Lowenstein-Jensen, which provide culture in about one
week), essential for the therapeutic decision because mycobacteria are resistant to many common drugs, and finally RNA probes. 1,6,7 The
recommended therapy differs from that used for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, because non-tuberculous mycobacteria are generally resistant to
antituberculous drugs and metronidazole, even though the latter has been approved by the FDA for treating this kind of infection.3There are
also reports of resistance with the use of cefotaxime, doxycycline, ciprofloxacin and sulfamethoxazole. 8There is no randomized control
study demonstrating a specific therapy for these infections, nevertheless clarithromycin (without a stated dose, the most commonly used is
500mg/day) has been prescribed successfully, with few reports of resistance. 1,9The concomitant use of another drug, preferably
ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin, has been widely employed in order to prevent resistance.1Although the duration of therapy has not been
defined, it should be around four to six months, or in another scheme it may be used from diagnosis until four to six weeks after the lesion
has healed.10Surgical procedures, such as curettage and drainage, may also be performed. 10 Conflict of Interests: none Financial Support:
none How to cite this article: Lage R, Biccigo DGZ, Santos FBC, Chimara E, Pereira ESP, Costa A. Mycobacterium chelonae cutaneous infection
in a patient with mixed connective tissue disease. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(1):104-7. Work performed at the Faculdade de Medicina
Departamento de Dermatologia - Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Campinas (PUC-Campinas) – Campinas (SP), Brazil.
