The mitochondrial myopathies include a diverse group of disorders characterized by morphological abnormalities of muscle mitochondria.
Little is reported about spinal deformity associated with this syndrome. This study presents a case of scoliosis occurring in the setting of
mitochondrial myopathies and explores the possible mechanisms between the 2 diseases. A previously unreported scoliosis in mitochondrial
myopathies is described. The patient was a 16-year-old Chinese adolescent boy undergoing a posterior correction at thoracic 2-lumbar 3
(T2-L3) levels using the Moss-SI spinal system. At 48-month follow-up, the patient was clinically pain free and well balanced. Plain
radiographs showed solid spine fusion with no loss of deformity correction. After evaluating 60 mitochondrial myopathies, patients referred
to Peking Union Medical College Hospital from February 2009 to May 2013, the prevalence of scoliosis among patients with mitochondrial
myopathies was 5% (3/60), much higher than that among general population (2%). The scoliosis in mitochondrial myopathies is usually
extensive and progressively aggravated and the correction of the associated spinal deformities is generally difficult. Therefore, the exact
role of mitochondrial myopathy in the development of scoliosis requires further study for a better understanding of the disease, as well as
adequate and effective patient care. Mitochondrial myopathies are a diverse group of disorders characterized by morphological abnormalities
of muscle mitochondria.1 Mitochondrial disorders are the most common form of inherited metabolic disorders with an incidence of 1 in
4000.2,3 Engel et al first reported this disease in 1966 and subsequent cases were reported with strikingly similar findings on
histochemical and electron microscopic studies.4 Patients with this disorder have a wide spectrum of symptoms due to varied genotype
penetrance and disease severity.2 Patients may present with fibromyalgia, skeletal muscle weakness, ptosis, pain, fatigue, and exercise
intolerance that progressively worsens over time.5 In addition, patients may present with slowly progressive peripheral muscle weakness,
multisystem organ failure, or respiratory insufficiency requiring mechanical ventilation.6 There are no specific therapeutic strategies for
mitochondrial myopathies.7 The exact cause, pathogenesis, and embryologic origin of mitochondrial myopathies remain a subject of discussion.
There are limited reports regarding the diagnosis and management of mitochondrial myopathies with its possible resultant scoliosis. We here
present a case in a 16-year-old boy with mitochondrial myopathies and scoliosis and explore the possible association between them. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents on behalf of the child for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. We present the case of a 16-year-old asylum
seeker who was admitted for correction of his progressive scoliosis. His plain radiographs of the spine showed that the thoracic scoliosis
was progressive with the Cobb angles increasing from 0° to 53° from February 2007 (Figure 1) to December 2009 (Figures 2 and 3), suggesting
the need for surgical correction. Standing anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the preoperation on February 2007. Standing
anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the preoperation on December 2009. All length right and left side bending x-ray of spine on
December 2009. His past medical history was only remarkable in that he had complained about progressive muscle weakness of limbs since the
age of 12. He had undergone a skeletal muscle biopsy in the Department of Neurology in our hospital that revealed the typical appearance of
mitochondrial myopathies with multiple deletions of mitochondrial DNA. His physical signs included muscle weakness of limbs and tendon
reflex decrease. The patient denied any recent dysphagia, pain, and expiratory dyspnea. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no
evidence of any spinal cord or canal abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) revealed no vertebral body deformities. The family history was
unremarkable, and there was no parental consanguinity. The diagnosis of mitochondrial myopathies was confirmed based on the findings of
skeletal muscle biopsy. In January 2010, a posterior correction and fusion at T2-L3 levels were performed, using the Moss-SI spinal system
(Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, American). The total operation time was about 4 hours. Total amount of blood loss was 400 mL. During the
operation, the signal of this patient is normal using intraoperative spinal cord monitoring. Postoperatively, there was no sign of
respiratory dysfunction. Postoperative plain x-ray film demonstrated a Cobb angles correction from 53° to 8° (correction rate 85%) (Figure
4). He was asymptomatic, well balanced in both the sagittal and coronal planes, with solid fusion at the 48-month postoperative follow-up
(Figure 5). Both the patient and families were satisfied with the results of surgery. Standing anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of 4
days after operation. Standing anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of 48 months after operation. To study the potential association
between scoliosis and mitochondrial myopathies, we evaluated the spinal deformity of the mitochondrial myopathies patients in our hospital
between February 2009 and May 2013. All mitochondrial myopathies were diagnosed based on the clinical examination and muscle biopsy. A total
of 60 mitochondrial myopathies patients were identified. Among them, there were 3cases of scoliosis. The prevalence of scoliosis among
patients with mitochondrial myopathies was 5%, much higher than the incidence of scoliosis among general population (2%). The prevalence of
mitochondrial myopathies worldwide was estimated to be 0.025%; however, the accurate frequency of mitochondrial disorders is difficult to
estimate because of their clinical and genetic heterogeneity.8 There are limited reports regarding the diagnosis and management of
mitochondrial myopathies with scoliosis. In the present study, we reported a case of a 16-year-old mitochondrial myopathies patient with
scoliosis. To our knowledge, this is the first report of scoliosis in the setting of mitochondrial myopathies. Mitochondria are the only
organelles that have their own DNA (mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA), and their own cellular machinery for making RNA and protein.9 All
mitochondria are maternally inherited; mutations in mtDNA are passed on to all offspring of an affected mother, but only transmitted further
to her daughters.9,10 Diagnosis of mitochondrial myopathy is often a challenge clinically. Typically, patients may present with slowly
progressive peripheral muscle weakness, multisystem organ failure, or solely respiratory insufficiency requiring mechanical ventilation.11
Many forms of this disorder manifest in adolescence or childhood and have a very poor prognosis.12,13 Electromyographic testing often shows
evidence of active or inactive myopathy. Molecular genetic testing and muscle biopsy are usually performed to confirm the diagnosis.2 Many
characteristic features can be seen on light microscopy, including detection of ragged red fibers on modified trichrome Gomori stain and
ragged blue fibers on SDH stain. Absence of COX staining is often seen in mitochondrial myopathy patients.14,15 The diagnosis of
mitochondrial myopathy was confirmed based on the points of muscle biopsy. To our knowledge, the scoliosis among mitochondrial myopathy has
not been reported. There are no specific treatment guidelines on patients of scoliosis with mitochondrial myopathy. Doctors must keep in
mind that the respiratory function impairment might progress in these mitochondrial myopathy patients, possibly to abnormal before surgery.
During surgery, all the general anesthetic agents are known to directly inhibit mitochondrial function and may add to perioperative
problems. The exact etiology and pathogenesis of mitochondrial myopathy with scoliosis are still not known. The prevalence of scoliosis
among patients with mitochondrial myopathy was 5%, much higher than the incidence of scoliosis that among general population (2%).16 The
clinical performance of this case is similar to the scoliosis with the neuromuscular disorders. Neuromuscular disorders are a group of
diseases affecting the neuromusculoskeletal system. Children with neuromuscular disorders frequently develop progressive spinal deformities
with cardiorespiratory compromise in the most severe cases.17 The main limitations for investigating the association between scoliosis and
mitochondrial myopathy are the sample size, since both of them were rare disease. In conclusion, mitochondrial myopathy is a relatively
novel rare syndrome described in recent years. When performing surgery on patients of scoliosis with mitochondrial myopathy, surgeons and
anesthesiologists should mind the associated respiratory function impairment. The prevalence of scoliosis among patients with mitochondrial
myopathies was much higher than that among general population. There is a potential association between scoliosis and mitochondrial
myopathy. However, the exact association of all these conditions is unclear. As the number of cases increases, the etiology, clinical
manifestations, and natural history of scoliosis with mitochondrial myopathy will become clearer with more investigations. Many thanks are
given to our center colleagues and the devotion of the patients. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of P.R. China (Grant Number: 81272053,81330044, 81301596 and 81401847). The
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The authors have
no conflicts of interest to disclose.
