A 13-year old female patient presented to the emergency department (ED) with four days of intermittent non-radiating, left upper quadrant
pain, associated with non-bloody, non-bilious emesis and decreased appetite. The patient had been evaluated by a gastroenterologist three
months prior for abdominal pain. At that time an esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a trichobezoar in the stomach too large for endoscopic
removal. Elective surgical removal had been offered to the patient, although surgery had not yet been scheduled. Vital signs were within
reference limits for the patient’s age. The patient had tenderness throughout the left upper quadrant, however there was no guarding or
rebound tenderness. The patient underwent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis, which confirmed the thichobezoar in the
stomach and intussusception of the bowel (Figures 1 and 2) consistent with Rapunzel Syndrome. Rapunzel Syndrome, named after the Brothers
Grimm’s fairy tale princess with long hair by the same name, is a rare disorder resulting from trichobezoar formation and subsequent
extension of the tail of the bezoar into small bowel associated with trichophagia (Figure 1).1 The tail of the hair acts as a lead point,
causing intussusception of the bowel (Figure 2). Bezoars are rare, occurring in less than 1% of patients undergoing upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy and only a small number of patients have been reported with Rapunzel Syndrome.1–3 While many patients may undergo CT scans,
ultrasound and plain radiographs have also been used to establish the diagnosis.4,5 Management includes removal via endoscopy or elective
surgery although complications including gastric perforation has been reported.6,7 The patient was transferred to a pediatric hospital where
she underwent an exploratory laparotomy including bezoar removal from both the stomach and jejunum. Over the next 48 hours the patient’s
diet was advanced and was discharged home on post-operative day five. Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available
through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all
authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as
potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Bezoar in the stomach. Target sign signifying intussusception. The arrow points to
the tail of the bezoar acting as a lead point for the intussusception.
