© F. T. Collison, Y. Xie, T. Gambin, S. Jhangiani, D. Muzny, R. Gibbs, J. R. Lupski, G. A. Fishman, R. Allikmets. This is an Open Access
article. Non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly attributed, cited, and
is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way, is permitted. The moral rights of the named author(s) have been asserted. Background:
Methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type C (cblC), a disorder of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) metabolism caused by mutations in the MMACHC
gene, presents with many systemic symptoms, including neurological, cognitive, psychiatric, and thromboembolic events. Retinal phenotypes,
including maculopathy, pigmentary retinopathy, and optic atrophy are common in early onset form of the disease but are rare in adult onset
forms. Materials and Methods: An adult Hispanic female presented with decreased central vision, bilateral pericentral ring scotomas and
bull’s eye-appearing macular lesions at 28 years of age. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable except for iron deficiency anemia
and both urinary tract and kidney infections. Screening of the ABCA4 gene, mutations in which frequently cause bull’s eye maculopathy, was
negative. Subsequently, analysis with whole exome sequencing was performed. Results: Whole exome sequencing discovered compound heterozygous
mutations in MMACHC, c.G482A:p.Arg161Gln and c.270_271insA:p.Arg91Lysfs*14, which segregated with the disease in the family. The genetic
diagnosis was confirmed by biochemical laboratory testing, showing highly elevated urine methylmalonic acid/creatinine and homocysteine
levels, and suggesting disease management with hydroxycobalamin injections and carnitine supplementation. Conclusions: In summary, a unique
case of an adult patient with bull’s eye macular lesions and no clinically relevant systemic symptoms was diagnosed with cblC by genetic
screening and follow-up biochemical laboratory tests. Methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type C (cblC; OMIM #277400) is a recessively
inherited disorder of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) metabolism,1 which is caused by mutations in the MMACHC gene.2 Maculopathy (including bull’s
eye maculopathy), pigmentary retinopathy, and optic atrophy are all common in early-onset disease.3 Conversely, ocular findings are rare,4 ,
5 in the “late-onset” type, where systemic symptoms become apparent after age 4.1 Although optic atrophy and peripheral retinal pigmentary
changes have been noted in late-onset cblC disease4 , 6 a maculopathy has not been described.1 Patients with the late-onset form present
with a variety of systemic deficits, including neurological complaints, cognitive decline, psychiatric disturbances, thromboembolic events,
and gait disturbances.4 , 7 Some of the late-onset cblC cases also present retinal changes, but no late-onset cblC case has been described
presenting without systemic symptoms but with a retinal degenerative phenotype.1 A 28-year-old Hispanic female (Figure 1) presented in 2006
with decreased central vision and mild photoaversion of approximately two years duration. She reported subjectively normal color vision,
night vision and peripheral vision. Her medical history was positive for iron deficiency anemia, occasional urinary tract infections, and
recurrent kidney infections in 2002. Best corrected Snellen visual acuities (BCVA) were 20/80 OD and 20/70−2 OS with a low myopic
refraction. She correctly read only two out of twelve Ishihara color plates OD, and zero out of twelve OS. Goldmann visual field testing
demonstrated a pericentral ring scotoma in each eye (Figure 2A and B). Funduscopy showed bilateral bull’s eye-appearing macular lesions
(Figure 2C and D) with no visible fundus flecks, vessel attenuation, optic nerve pallor or peripheral pigmentary changes. A scotopic and
photopic full-field electroretinogram (ERG) of the right eye showed normal a- and b-wave amplitudes and implicit times. The patient reported
no current or previous use of hydroxychloroquine or any other medication or toxic exposure that could be potentially responsible for the
bull’s eye-appearing lesions in her maculae. The patient reported no family history of a retinal dystrophy, and examination of both parents
and a brother (Figure 1) showed essentially normal maculae; only a few fine drusen near the fovea were observed in the examinations of both
parents. FIGURE 1. Pedigree of the family and segregation of the MMACHC mutations with the disease phenotype. The open circle and squares
represent the unaffected female and male family members, respectively; the closed circle represents the affected female patient. FIGURE 2.
Goldmann visual fields of the left (A) and right (B) eyes from the initial visit in 2006, showing ring scotomas consistent with the bull’s
eye-appearing macular lesions. Shaded areas indicate the target was not seen in that area. Fundus photos from 2006 (C, right eye and D, left
eye) and 2013 (E and F) show some extension of RPE atrophy, apparent at the peripheral boundaries, as well as in the foveal region, in both
eyes over 7 years. Near-infrared autofluorescence (G and H) from the 2013 follow-up visit shows hyper-autofluorescence at the fovea,
surrounded by hypo-autofluorescence (bull’s eye), further surrounded by a ring of hyper-autofluorescence. Pedigree of the family and
segregation of the MMACHC mutations with the disease phenotype. The open circle and squares represent the unaffected female and male family
members, respectively; the closed circle represents the affected female patient. Goldmann visual fields of the left (A) and right (B) eyes
from the initial visit in 2006, showing ring scotomas consistent with the bull’s eye-appearing macular lesions. Shaded areas indicate the
target was not seen in that area. Fundus photos from 2006 (C, right eye and D, left eye) and 2013 (E and F) show some extension of RPE
atrophy, apparent at the peripheral boundaries, as well as in the foveal region, in both eyes over 7 years. Near-infrared autofluorescence
(G and H) from the 2013 follow-up visit shows hyper-autofluorescence at the fovea, surrounded by hypo-autofluorescence (bull’s eye), further
surrounded by a ring of hyper-autofluorescence. By the most recent visit in 2013 at age 35, the patient was still working at her job as a
production planner, although her BCVA had dropped to 10/100−2 OD and 10/80 OS. Fundus photos (Figure 2E and F), and near-infrared
autofluorescence (Figure 2G and H) demonstrated bull’s eye macular dystrophy with relative preservation of the retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) at the foveolar region. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography also showed preservation of the RPE at the fovea in the presence
of marked foveal thinning (Figure 3). However, the patient’s eccentric viewing and level of visual acuity evidenced a notable degree of
compromised foveal function. A repeat full field ERG (Figure 4) of the right eye at that visit still showed amplitudes and implicit times
that were within normal limits under both scotopic rod isolated and photopic cone isolated test conditions, whereas the scotopic rod and
cone combined response b-wave was mildly reduced and delayed compared to normal. FIGURE 3. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography line
scans (right eye top and left eye bottom, corresponding to the location of the horizontal lines on the near-infrared autofluorescence images
in Figures 2G and H, respectively) show intact RPE at the foveola in the presence of marked foveal thinning, surrounded by atrophy of the
outer retinal layers and retinal pigment epithelium, with relatively more normal retinal structure at the margins of the line scans in both
eyes. FIGURE 4. Full-field electroretinogram (Espion E3, Diagnosys LLC, Littleton, MA) of the patient’s right eye at age 35 during a follow-
up visit. Boxes represent ranges of 13 visually-normal subjects. The cone isolated amplitudes and implicit times (top), and the rod isolated
single flash response (bottom left) are within the normal range. The combined rod and cone single flash response (bottom right) is mildly
reduced and delayed compared to normal. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography line scans (right eye top and left eye bottom,
corresponding to the location of the horizontal lines on the near-infrared autofluorescence images in Figures 2G and H, respectively) show
intact RPE at the foveola in the presence of marked foveal thinning, surrounded by atrophy of the outer retinal layers and retinal pigment
epithelium, with relatively more normal retinal structure at the margins of the line scans in both eyes. Full-field electroretinogram
(Espion E3, Diagnosys LLC, Littleton, MA) of the patient’s right eye at age 35 during a follow-up visit. Boxes represent ranges of 13
visually-normal subjects. The cone isolated amplitudes and implicit times (top), and the rod isolated single flash response (bottom left)
are within the normal range. The combined rod and cone single flash response (bottom right) is mildly reduced and delayed compared to
normal. Since the bull’s eye maculopathy phenotype is frequent in patients with diseases caused by mutations in the ABCA4 gene,8 , 9 the
patient was first screened for mutations in ABCA4 by direct sequencing with negative results. Consequently, all members of the family were
subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES) at the Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center as part of the Baylor-Hopkins
Center for Mendelian Genomics. Exome capture was performed on the NimbleGen array with minor revisions, and sequencing was performed on the
Illumina platform. Sequence analysis was performed using the HGSC Mercury analysis pipeline. Samples achieved an average of 90% of the
targeted exome bases covered to a depth of 20X or greater. Possible disease-associated variants were determined by filtering based on minor
allele frequency, predicted pathogenicity and by segregation analysis in all family members. Screening of the ABCA4 gene on an array
revealed no disease-associated variants. WES analysis uncovered two compound heterozygous mutations, c.G482A:p.Arg161Gln and
c.270_271insA:p.Arg91Lysfs*14, in the MMACHC gene in the proband, which segregated with the disease in the family (Figure 1). Sanger
sequencing confirmed compound heterozygous mutant alleles in the proband and heterozygous alleles in carrier parents again documenting trans
mutations in the patient. Both of these mutations have been frequently described as causes of cblC (http://omim.org/entry/609831).
Consequently, based upon the molecular diagnosis established by genetic studies, the patient was referred for biochemical laboratory
testing, which showed a urine methylmalonic acid/creatinine level of 510 mmol/mol creatinine (reference range 0–3.60) and a urine
homocysteine level of 51 mg/day (reference range 0–32). The patient was then referred for disease management by a pediatric genetics
specialist. Physical examination at that visit was normal; specifically, no focal neurological abnormalities were found. She was
subsequently prescribed intramuscular hydroxycobalamin (vitamin B12) injections, as well as carnitine supplementation due to low carnitine
levels. To our knowledge, no cases with ocular findings as the only presenting sign in an adult patient with methylmalonic aciduria and
homocystinuria type C have been described before. In addition, maculopathy has not been described in late-onset cblC disease.10 It is
possible that subtle, sub-clinical bull’s eye macular changes have been missed in previously reported cases of late-onset cblC disease if
sensitive tests such as SD-OCT, autofluorescence imaging or multifocal ERG were not performed. The late-onset form of cblC is usually
discovered due to neurological complaints and cognitive decline. The history of iron deficiency anemia and urinary tract infections in our
case has been described in other cases of late-onset cblC disease,11 although these are not unusual findings in an otherwise healthy adult
female. Phenotypes associated with the two disease-causing mutations in the MMACHC gene, c.G482A:p.Arg161Gln and
c.270_271insA:p.Arg91Lysfs*14, have been previously characterized. The c.270_271insA:p.Arg91Lysfs*14 variant is the most common MMACHC
mutation (>40% of all disease-associated alleles), and is associated with a more severe, early-onset phenotype especially when found in
homozygosity.2 , 12 The c.G482A:p.Arg161Gln mutation is more often associated with the milder, late-onset phenotype.2 , 11–13 Interestingly,
the exact same combination of mutations has been described before in at least six cases with teenage or adult onset of cblC.11–14 , 15 All
cases, however, presented with severe systemic symptoms, often including muscular abnormalities in lower extremities, loss of bowel and/or
bladder function, progressive encephalopathy, neurological anomalies, and thromboembolic complications. No degenerative retinal changes were
described in any of these patients.13 , 14 Patients who were compound heterozygous for the c.G482A:p.Arg161Gln and
c.270_271insA:p.Arg91Lysfs*14 variants had variable ethnic origin, including Italian, German, Hispanic, and Chinese descent. Perhaps the
most relevant study with regards to the patient described in this report is the description of a patient with late-onset cblC presented by
Tsai and colleagues,11 since that patient matched the case described here by age, gender, and Hispanic ethnicity. However, in that case a
36-year-old woman had a constellation of systemic features including joint hypermobility, arthritis, chronic anemia, urogenital fistula, and
spinal cord infarct. She also presented with emotional difficulties beginning in her teens and was diagnosed with depression and psychosis
requiring hospitalization.11 Bilateral cataracts were the only ocular findings described. Conversely, the patient described here, although
matched by age, ethnicity, and gender, did not report any systemic abnormalities, other than iron deficiency anemia and urinary tract
infections, but instead presented with an ocular finding (bull’s eye maculopathy) as a primary finding. More macular dystrophy patients with
mutations in the MMACHC gene will need to be identified before cblC becomes a serious consideration for a disease underlying a non-syndromic
macular dystrophy. However, patients with bull’s eye-appearing macular lesions may be questioned about systemic symptoms, possibly prompting
testing for methylmalonic acid and homocysteine levels. Even with overt neurological symptoms, the diagnosis of late-onset cblC disease can
be easily missed or delayed,7 , 16 but urine or plasma markers of the disease can be easily detected with simple and inexpensive clinical
biochemical laboratory tests. The implementation of whole exome and whole genome sequencing has allowed identification of causes of
metabolic diseases which previously have remained obscure.17 These include new genes, including those for methylmalonic aciduria,18 and many
cases of phenotypic expansion of known loci; i.e. where the clinical phenotype has not directed the screening of underlying genetic
causes.19 Importantly, as shown here, clinical phenotype can be very divergent from those described, and genetic testing can unequivocally
determine the cause of a disease. Screening of the MMACHC gene is an accessible option for confirmation of cblC disease. An early diagnosis
in patients with cblC disease has added importance because often systemic symptoms can not only improve,7 , 16 but also may be prevented,
delayed, or ameliorated with hydroxycobalamin treatment.1 In conclusion, a patient with bull’s eye macular lesions and no neurological,
psychiatric or cognitive symptoms was determined to have cblC, a potentially debilitating disorder if left untreated. Due to the precise
molecular diagnosis, achieved through genetic studies and confirmed by follow-up biochemical laboratory tests, she was treated for her
condition, thereby possibly improving her systemic prognosis. The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible
for the content and writing of the paper. This study is supported in part by NIH grants EY021163, EY019861, HG006542 and EY019007 (Core
Support for Vision Research), by unrestricted funds from Research to Prevent Blindness (New York, NY) to the Department of Ophthalmology,
Columbia University, and by the Pangere Family Corporation, The Chicago Lighthouse for People Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired (Chicago,
IL).
