Hemiplegic migraine is a particularly severe form of the disease that often evolves to a debilitating chronic illness that is resistant to
commonly available therapies. Peripheral neurostimulation has been found to be a beneficial therapy for some patients among several
diagnostic classes of migraine, but its potential has not been specifically evaluated for hemiplegic migraine. Four patients with hemiplegic
migraine were treated with concordant, combined occipital and supraorbital neurostimulation over periods ranging 6–92 months. The clinical
indicators followed included assessments of headache frequency and severity, frequency of hemiplegic episodes, functional impairment,
medication usage, and patient satisfaction. All reported a positive therapeutic response, as their average headache frequency decreased by
92% (30 to 2.5 headache days/month); Visual Analog Score by 44% (9.5 to 5.3); frequency of hemiplegic episodes by 96% (7.5 to 0.25
hemiplegic episodes/month); headache medication usage by 96% (6 to 0.25 daily medications); and Migraine Disability Assessment score by 98%
(249 to 6). All were satisfied and would recommend the therapy, and all preferred combined occipital–supraorbital neurostimulation to
occipital neurostimulation alone. Concordant combined occipital and supraorbital neurostimulation may provide effective therapy for both the
pain and motor aura in some patients with hemiplegic migraine. For more information on author guidelines, an explanation of our peer review
process, and conflict of interest informed consent policies, please go to http://www.wiley.com/bw/submit.asp?ref=1094‐7159&site=1 Conflict
of Interest: Dr. Reed has served as a paid consultant for St. Jude Medical and is a co‐investigator in St. Jude Medical's studies evaluating
occipital nerve stimulation for migraine headaches. Dr. Will has served as a paid consultant for St. Jude Medical. No advice, direction, or
assistance (financial or otherwise) was received for this study. Drs. Reed, Bulger, and Will report no conflicts other than stated above.
Dr. Conidi reports no conflicts. Hemiplegic migraine (HM) is a rare but particularly severe form of migraine that is distinguished by its
associated motor aura. The International Classification of Headache Disorders II (ICHD II) recognizes two subtypes, familial HM and sporadic
HM, which are similar clinically and differ only in familial associations 1. Though uncommon, it is the most debilitating form of the
disease and often progresses to an incapacitating situation resistant to medical management 2, 3, 4. Recognition of the magnitude of its
impact on society has galvanized a search for more effective therapies, an end to which guidance is provided by evidence that HM has
mechanisms and therapies in common with other migraine types 2, 5, 6. On the basis of these common features we felt that other documented
migraine therapies, including implanted peripheral neurostimulation (PNS), might also benefit HM. PNS therapy for headache (HA) may be
divided into two categories according to paresthesia concordancy, where a concordant paresthesia is defined as one that optimally covers the
anatomic area of perceived pain 7, 8. Examples of the “concordant paresthesia” category include the application of occipital nerve
stimulation (ONS) to occipital neuralgia, supraorbital nerve stimulation (SONS) to supraorbital neuralgia, and combined occipital and
supraorbital neurostimulation (ON‐SONS) to patients with holocephalic pain due chronic migraine. Typifying the “non‐concordant paresthesia”
category is the application of ONS to any migraine pain perceived over the distant fronto‐temporal (trigeminal) region. There is some
preliminary evidence that suggests a higher success rate for implants that produce a concordant paresthesia (Tables 1 and 2) 7. Summary of
Primary Headache Diagnostic Categories Treated with Non‐concordant Neurostimulation The Medtronic study used a VAS improvement of 30% as the
test for positive response, rather than the historical standard of 50%. The statistics from the St. Jude Study Group's reports (Silberstein
20; Dodick 19) come from the Dodick 19 report. Table 1 is an update on a table from a previous report of our group 7. Cl, cluster; CM,
chronic migraine; HC, hemicrania continua. Summary of All Primary Headache Categories Treated with Concordant Neurostimulation The Popeney
and Oh reports on transformed migraine were expressly on patient groups whereby the pain was solely or primarily focused over the occipital
region. Unless otherwise specified all success rates indicate > 50% improvement in VAS or HA freq. Table 2 is an update of a table from a
previous report from our group 7. TM, transformed migraine; CEH, cervicogenic headache; IC2H, intractable C‐2 Headaches; AC, Arnold‐Chiari;
CM, chronic migraine; CNP, cervical neuropathic pain; TNP, trigeminal neuropathic pain; AFP, atypical facial pain; PHN, post herpetic
neuralgia; SON, supraorbital nerve; ATN, auriculotemporal nerve; ION, infraorbital nerve; ON, occipital nerve. Based upon these
considerations, we felt that concordant combined ON‐SONS may have potential as a therapy for HM. While previous studies have documented PNS
efficacy across a wide range of primary HA diagnostic categories, including two papers that reported resolution of hemiplegia as an
associated finding, this is the first to specifically consider its potential as a therapy for HM 31, 32. As our center does not have a
formal ethics review committee, we note that the procedures involved in the evaluation and treatment of all patients, including full oral
and written informed consent, were part of the normal procedures applied to all patients in the physicians' offices. Further, all aspects of
patient care specifically conformed to the ethical principles for human subjects as outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Between 2004
and 2013 five patients suffering from debilitating, chronic HM were referred to our facility for evaluation for implantable PNS. All had
been under the care of experienced neurology headache specialists, who for each patient had documented an extensive diagnostic evaluation,
including laboratory and imaging studies to rule out other causes of chronic head pain. No genetic testing was undertaken for the recognized
gene mutations associated with familial HM; however, the family histories of all the patients were specifically negative for HM 37. All
diagnoses conformed to ICHD II criteria for HM 1. Following a full clinical evaluation, each patient underwent a five‐ to seven‐day period
of trial stimulation. Those reporting a positive response (>50% imp in pain severity by a visual analog scale and/or headache frequency [HA
days/mo]) were offered a permanent implant. Over the seven‐year period between the first and last HM patients, our clinical approach to
trial stimulation for all PNS patients evolved. As such, the first HM patient had initially only a trial, then permanent, ONS implanted;
whereupon, as the response was inadequate, a SONS was added two months later and a full therapeutic response achieved. The second HM patient
was evaluated during a period where we included two phases during the trial period for comparison—one that provided only ONS, and the other,
combined ON‐SONS, and per his preference the combined system was permanently implanted. Thereafter, our approach for all patients undergoing
a PNS trial for head pain has been to deliberately position leads according to where the patient reported pain and in a manner so as to
optimize paresthesia concordancy. As both remaining patients were experiencing holocephalic pain, each had combined ON‐SONS systems trialed
and then permanently implanted. The operative procedures have been described in our previous reports 31, 38. Essentially, in the permanent
procedure lead terminal arrays were positioned subcutaneously over both the supraorbital and occipital nerves (Fig. 1), whereupon the lead
bodies were passed subcutaneously and connected to an implantable pulse generator (IPG). The IPGs in the first two patients were implanted
in their upper gluteal regions. Seeking to ease tension on the leads and thus help rectify problems with lead migration, the IPGs in the
subsequent three patients were implanted in the upper chest wall. Systems used included either an Eon with quadripolar leads (St. Jude
Medical Inc., Plano, TX, USA), or a Precision Spectra with octopolar leads (Boston Scientific, Valencia, CA, USA). Postoperatively, the
patients were evaluated on a regular basis for approximately two months and intermittently thereafter. Radiograph demonstrating positions of
occipital and supraorbital quadripolar neurostimulator leads. Based on chart reviews and clinical evaluations the following pre‐implant
clinical scales were assessed—headache frequency (HA days/month) and severity (VAS), frequency of hemiplegia (hemiplegic episodes/month),
headache medication usage (number of different HA medications/day), and functional impairment (Migraine Disability Assessment score). The
self‐administered MIDAS score is the most frequently used disability instrument in migraine research, and its reliability and validity have
been extensively documented 39, 40, 41. At the conclusion of the study the patients were interviewed by the authors, either in person or by
telephone, where in addition to the same pre‐implant scales, the questionnaires included queries as to which programs were preferred (ones
that provided solely an occipital paresthesia or those that provided a paresthesia over both the supraorbital and occipital regions);
whether or not they would recommend the therapy to others; and their overall assessment of response. In September 2006 a 49‐year‐old woman
presented with daily incapacitating HAs. They began as a teenager and two years prior to presentation progressed to severe daily, unilateral
throbbing HAs interspersed with fleeting, knifelike pains in her eye and jaw. Flashing lights and transient paresis of her left arm were a
common prodrome; significant visual loss occurred 50% of the time; and photophobia and phonophobia were common. Her neurological examination
was normal, and a full diagnostic evaluation, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT scans, was unremarkable, whereby HM was
diagnosed. Medical management, which included at least nine abortive and six prophylactic medications, ultimately failed, as the HAs became
incapacitating to the point of full disability (MIDAS 255), and she was forced to resign her corporate executive position. In September 2006
bilateral occipital leads were placed with moderate but on the whole, inadequate relief. With the addition of supraorbital leads in October
2006, the HAs and all neurologic symptoms, including the hemiparesis, resolved. In March 2007 an occipital lead migrated and was
repositioned. In May 2014 she reported being near HA free off all daily medications. Over the immediately preceding two months she
experienced HAs requiring medication only three times, and none involved hemiplegia. She had returned to full time employment and was
enjoying a normal, active lifestyle (MIDAS 7). A 50‐year‐old gentleman presented in August 2011 with debilitating HAs. They developed three
years previously and progressed to daily, severe left‐sided HAs, which were heralded by confusion and agitation and accompanied by a left
hemiplegia two to three times weekly, occasional grand mal type seizures, and prolonged (up to two days) post‐HA somnolence. A full
diagnostic evaluation by experienced neurologists, including an MRI scan, revealed no other causes of head pain, and HM was diagnosed. An
electroencephalogram (EEG) was positive and anti‐seizure medications prescribed. Despite an extended course of medical management, which
included at least seven preventatives, the problem progressed to the point of complete incapacity (MIDAS 270), as he had to sell his several
businesses and became virtually bedbound. In October 2011, a combined ON‐SONS was implanted, which resulted in near complete resolution of
both the HA and the hemiplegia. In August 2013 a partial recurrence of symptoms necessitated repositioning the leads, whereupon the HAs
again promptly resolved. At the follow‐up evaluation in July 2014 he was near HA free while off of all daily medications. Indeed, over the
preceding two months he experienced HM on only two occasions—both of which occurred when his IPG battery depleted on trips where he forgot
to bring along his external charger. Otherwise, he was completely HA and hemiplegia free and had resumed a normal lifestyle, which included
all family activities and the management of two companies (MIDAS 12). A 52‐year‐old woman with HM was referred in August 2013 for evaluation
for an implanted PNS. The HAs began 15 years previously, and 3 years prior to presentation acutely progressed to incapacitating migraines.
Associated findings that uniformly began at the onset of the HA included dysarthria, intermittent aphasia, and profound weakness of the left
arm and leg, along with a distinct pins and needles sensation of these extremities and dense numbness limited to the hand and foot. Grand
mal type seizures were occasionally associated. The HM lasted 20 min on average, and afterward she would be somnolent the rest of the day.
An EEG, MRI, and MRA were normal. An extended course of medical management, which included at least nine abortives and ten preventative
medications, as well as regional nerve blocks, ultimately failed. In 2013 she responded to a combined ON‐SONS, and eight months post implant
she was completely HA and hemiplegia free (0 HA days/month and 0 episodes hemiplegia/month) while off all headache medications, and had
returned to a normal, fully active lifestyle, which included regular swimming, volunteer work, and taking vacations with her family (MIDAS
0). A 35‐year‐old woman developed HAs in her mid‐twenties. In 2009 they progressed to severe, near daily, left‐sided HAs. Right‐sided
weakness (two to three times a week), visual changes, and occasionally a foul odor heralded the onset, whereupon she became bed bound for
the duration (commonly one to two hours), followed by prolonged somnolence for up to a day. In 2011 she came under the care of experienced
neurology HA specialists, whereby a full evaluation, including MRI scan, CT angiogram, EEG and a lumbar puncture were unremarkable, and a
diagnosis of HM was made. An extended course of medical management, which included at least 12 abortive and 7 preventative medications,
ultimately proved unsuccessful. At presentation she was markedly impaired (MIDAS 270) due daily severe HM, despite taking ten different HA
medications daily. In 2013 she responded to a combined ON‐SONS and six months later reported very good improvement (30 → 8 HA days/mo) with
resumption of a near normal lifestyle (MIDAS 3) on only one daily HA (topiramate). While feeling generally weak, she had experienced no
hemiplegic episodes over the immediately preceding two months. The results of the survey are summarized in Tables 3 and 4. Five patients
satisfied the diagnostic criteria for HM, of whom all went on to a positive trial, followed by permanent implant. While all five reported an
excellent response at their first postoperative office visit, one was lost to follow‐up when she returned to her home in Puerto Rico. The
remaining four completed the full study period. For these four patients, the median patient age was 50 years (range 41–60), and the median
headache duration was 15 years (range 3–30). All suffered from frequent (avg 30 HA days/month), severe (avg VAS 9.5) migraines with profound
motor auras (avg 7.5 hemiplegic episodes/mo), which resulted in complete incapacitation (avg MIDAS 249). Two had grand‐mal type seizures
(one with positive EEG findings and one negative), and three reported prolonged post‐headache somnolence (up to one to two days). Family
histories were all negative for HM. Preimplant, the average numbers of failed migraine abortive and preventative medications were 8 (range
3–12) and 7 (range 5–8) respectively, and at presentation the average number of different headache medications being taken daily was 6
(range 4–10). Patient Characteristics Prior to Implant All visual and tactile sensory symptoms were unilateral and began at onset of HA or
preceded the HA by less than 1 hour. All had symptoms ipsilateral to HA, except Pt 4, who had a left sided HA but right hemiplegia and other
neuro symptoms. Preventatives—number of preventative medications tried and failed over pre‐implant. Hem, hemiplegia; FD, facial droop; AP,
aphasia; Dys, dysarthria; UBV, unilateral blurred vision; FL, flickering lights; PN, pins & needles; Nm, numbness; FO, foul odor; Sz,
seizures; PS, prolonged post HA somnolence; LOC, loss of consciousness; PCn, prodrome confusion; PVr, prodrome vertigo. Clinical Outcome
Scales Hemiplegia/Mo—number of migraine‐associated hemiplegic episodes/mo. The first 2 patients received St. Jude Eon systems with
quadripolar leads. The last 2 received Boston Scientific Precision Spectra systems with octopolar leads. Our impression was that both
systems produced equivalent therapeutic results. At the final evaluation, the remaining four participants had been with their systems for an
average of 35 months (range 6 to 92) and reported an average 92% improvement in HA frequency (30 to 2.5 HA days/month); a 44% improvement in
intensity (VAS 9.5 to 5.3); and near complete resolution of their motor auras (0–1 hemiplegic episode/mo) with resultant commensurate
functional improvement (>98% improvement in MIDAS). Three no longer required any routine daily headache medications, and the other was down
to only 1 daily med. They all used their stimulator continuously and employed only combined ON‐SONS stimulation programs, as ONS alone was
inadequate. Each was pleased with the results and would recommend the procedure. The two patients with documented grand mal type seizures
reported no further seizures following their PNS implants. The first two patients received St. Jude Eon systems with quadripolar lead, and
the last three received Boston Scientific Precision Spectra systems with octopolar leads. Our impression was that both systems produced
equivalent therapeutic results. Adverse events included lead migrations in the first two patients, noting resumption of a full therapeutic
response upon repositioning of the leads. Hemiplegic migraine remains a burden to the patient and society, as it is commonly resistant to
medical management, which noting some debate over the use of triptans, otherwise follows the general approach as to other migraine types 2.
As the motor auras are often the most debilitating aspect of the illness, their management has received particular attention; however, given
the rarity of HM (prevalence 0.005%), the reports are anecdotal and include four case series involving treatment with either intranasal
ketamine, verapamil, or a combination of lamotrigine and sodium valproate 2, 42, 43, 44, 45. The lamotrigine/valproate series reported a
decrease in the frequency of hemiplegic episodes in a family of three patients, including one who went from 12 hemiplegic episodes/mo to
complete resolution (0 hemiplegic episodes/mo) 42. Recently, PNS has been offered as a potential treatment, and since 2006 there have been
two case reports of motor auras responding to combined neurostimulation 31, 32. In our series all four patients, pre‐implant were suffering
from frequent hemiplegic episodes (avg 7.5 hemiplegic episodes/mo). Post‐implant all described virtual resolution of the episodes at their
first post‐permanent office visit, and this response continued. At their final evaluations, three of the four patients were completely
hemiplegia free over the immediately preceding two months and the other reported only two episodes over the same period (avg 0.25 hemiplegic
episodes/month). But, even in that case the episodes occurred only when he twice left town without his recharger, and the battery depleted.
Viewed differently, over the two months immediately preceding their last evaluation, all four patients were completely hemiplegia free so
long as their implanted systems were functioning and on. In addition to its clinical importance, any responsiveness of motor auras to PNS
would suggest a potential mechanistic role for the cerebral cortex in PNS therapeutic action. This thesis should be considered within the
context of our current understanding of the functional neuroanatomy related to potential mechanisms of PNS action, as well as migraine
pathogenesis. With respect to the PNS mechanisms, interest has largely centered on two regions—the trigeminocervical complex (TCC) and
higher CNS centers. The caudal trigeminal nucleus and portions of the upper three cervical dorsal horns form the TCC. Nociceptive afferents
from both the trigeminal nerve and the occipital nerves partially converge on the same second order neurons in the TCC and thus to a final
common pathway to higher centers for cephalic nociception and modulation 46, 47, 48, 49. These findings were originally intended as evidence
for the TCC being the anatomic substrate underlying the well‐accepted clinical phenomena of headache pain referral; for example, the common
clinical observation of pain initially localized over the occiput, e.g., occipital neuralgia, yet over time spreads to the frontal regions
48, 49. In 2003 however Popeney and Aló assigned potential mechanistic value to the TCC as regards PNS, when they suggested that TCC
convergence might help explain why a paresthesia perceived over the C2‐3 distribution may be mechanistically related to pain relief
perceived over the distant trigeminal network 25. More recent evidence, however, suggests than any putative mechanistic role for the TCC be
reconsidered. First, Bartsch and Goadsby's work, which is often cited as foundational for a TCC site of PNS action, actually found only
nociceptive specific neurons in the TCC (corresponding to Ad and C fiber input) 47, 48, 49. They specifically found no low threshold
mechanoreceptors that would correlate to fibers responsible for vibratory sensation (AB afferents) 49. Now, while it is generally accepted
that cervical AB afferents do synapse in various dorsal lamina of the cervical cord, we can find no direct empiric evidence for their
convergence with trigeminal nociceptor afferents. In other words, while there is empiric evidence for trigeminal nociceptive and occipital
nociceptive fiber convergence, there is none for trigeminal nociceptive and occipital non‐nociceptive (vibratory sensation) convergence.
This is not to rule out the possibility of such convergence; rather, it is to indicate the want of direct evidence. Further, TCC convergence
cannot explain the reports documenting a therapeutic response to trigeminal stimulation alone for pain perceived over a trigeminal region,
e.g., SONS for supraorbital pain 28, 29, 30, 36, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57. The reason for this is that while trigeminal nociceptive
afferents do synapse in the caudal trigeminal nucleus, the trigeminal AB fibers do not; rather, they synapse in the distinct principal
trigeminal nucleus 58. Thus, a TCC convergence mechanism is problematic, as the fibers simply do not synapse in the same TCC nuclei.
Additionally, recent clinical findings also challenge a role for the TCC. Magis found increased nociceptive‐specific blink reflexes in a
study on ONS and cluster headaches as clinical evidence against a TCC role in PNS therapeutic action 59. Therefore, when considering the
available experimental findings, we suggest that the mechanistic role for the TCC as currently formulated be reconsidered. On the other
hand, there is mounting evidence supporting a mechanistic role for higher CNS centers. In 2003 Matharu presented positron emission
tomography (PET) scan evidence for such a role for some of these centers, including the cuneus, pulvinar, and anterior cingulate cortex 27.
Others have since reported similar or consistent PET and functional MRI findings 59, 60. Notably, however, none have posited a role for the
somatosensory cortex, which is interesting as it is the one anatomic locus that is accepted as a site of nociceptive and non‐nociceptive
convergence. As an illustrative example, a patient with occipital neuralgia treated with an ONS experiences both pain and ONS‐induced
vibratory sensation over the same region of the occiput, which indicates that the corresponding occipital region of the sensory homunculus
is involved in both sensations; that is, both occipital nociceptive and non‐nociceptive afferents (vibratory sense) converge on the same
region of the cortex. With respect to migraine pathogenesis, it is now understood that the cortex plays a central role, as it is the locus
for cortical spreading depression (CSD), which is generally accepted as the physiologic substrate to the clinical auras (visual, motor,
etc.) that precede the actual headache 61. CSD is a wave of cortical cellular depolarization followed by prolonged quiescence, which
typically begins at the visual cortex and then propagates rostrally over the sensorimotor cortical areas. Animal studies have demonstrated
CSD activation of meningeal nociceptors and then central trigeminovascular neurons in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, which is one of the
presumed mechanistic pathways related to migraine 61, 62, 63. The cortex is therefore central to the genesis of both the pain and hemiplegia
due HM. Could PNS‐related stimulation of the cortex in some fashion effectively block the spreading depression wave front? There is indeed
some early experimental evidence for this, as in 2010 Kovacs presented functional MRI findings in a patient treated with ONS that
demonstrated depression of the motor (M1), sensory (S1 & S2), and visual (V1) cortical areas, which are exactly the same cortical regions
involved with CSD 60. Thus, the currently accepted model for CSD indicates that the cortex is functionally integral to the generation of
both the pain and the motor auras of HM. As CSD is viewed causally as the immediate precursor to the motor aura, then any therapy that
impacts the motor aura would suggest that the cortex be included as possibly mechanistically significant. In that regard, our findings of
dramatic responses of the motor auras in all of these patients are consistent with the CSD model. As the evidence is indeed early, these
suggestions stand as speculations, yet ones that can be tested by appropriate controlled studies, likely involving neuroimaging techniques.
A final aspect of our study that deserves attention is that of paresthesia concordancy; in this case the application of combined ON‐SONS to
holocephalic pain due HM, a therapeutic approach that relates to the potential relationship between paresthesia concordancy and clinical
outcome. Preceding this report, five others have described similar positive results with concordant, combined PNS (three on ON‐SONS; two on
ON‐Auriculotemporal Stimulation) 31, 32, 33, 35, 36. Support for this approach is provided by direct comparisons of the concordant and
non‐concordant paresthesia groupings of extant outcome studies, which are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 (updated tables from an earlier
report of ours) 7. Taken together, the reports on ONS for CM (non‐concordant paresthesia) average to a 46% response rate, while those on
ON‐SONS therapy (concordant paresthesia) to 81%. The difference is highlighted when the results of the benchmark Boston Scientific, St.
Jude, and Medtronic controlled studies on non‐concordant ONS for CM are scrutinized, as they all actually found limited or no response. The
Boston Scientific team found no significant therapeutic response, and Medtronic's reported 39% response rate was based only on a 30%
improvement in the VAS as the definition of responder vs. the historical standard of >50% improvement 18, 21. The St. Jude study failed to
demonstrate significant improvement in its primary endpoint (VAS) but did find a 48% response rate applying the historical 50% standard 19,
20. This difference in response rates supports an approach for a concordant paresthesia, and evidence adduced in this report is consistent
with that database, as all of our patients were treated with concordant, combined ON‐SONS, noting further that they preferred programs that
provided both occipital and supraorbital stimulation against those that provided occipital stimulation alone. Limitations of our study
include the small sample size, the lack of a diary, lack of genetic testing, and an open‐label, non‐randomized structure. While a placebo
effect cannot be completely excluded, given the uniform dramatic responses across all patients and for the duration of their implants, we
feel that there is likely minimal placebo effect. These case reports offer preliminary evidence suggesting a potential for combined ON‐SONS
as a therapy for patients suffering from hemiplegic migraine. The evidence is sufficient to warrant prospective, controlled studies of
sufficient power to appropriately evaluate the therapeutic potential. Dr. Reed is the lead author and has participated in all aspects of
clinical and manuscript preparation. Dr. Bulger has participated substantially in clinical development of the procedure, as well as with
data acquisition, manuscript editing, and final manuscript acceptance. Dr. Will has participated substantially in clinical development of
the procedure, as well as with data acquisition, manuscript editing, and final manuscript acceptance. Dr. Conidi has participated
substantially with data acquisition, manuscript editing, and final manuscript acceptance.
