To the Editor: Mycobacterium abscessus is a ubiquitous, rapidly growing mycobacteria (RGM) found in water supplies, soil, and dust. M.
abscessus is considered the most pathogenic and difficult to treat of the RGM and is most often associated with pulmonary, skin, and soft
tissue infections; it has also been reported to cause ocular infections, otitis, lymphadenitis, arthritis, osteomyelitis, disseminated
disease, and prosthetic valve endocarditis (1,2). Most prosthetic valve endocarditis cases have been fatal. M. abscessus subsp. massiliense
is 1 of 3 subspecies of M. abscessus. M. abscessus subsp. massiliense has an identical 16S rRNA gene sequence to the other 2 subspecies,
Mycobacterium abscessus subsp. bolletii and Mycobacterium abscessus subsp. abscessus, but can be differentiated by rpoβ and erm41 gene
sequencing (3,4). M. abscessus subsp. massiliense grows readily in blood culture media and on sheep’s blood agar within 2–4 days. Care
should be taken in interpreting Gram staining of isolates because RGM is not identifiable by this method and could be mistaken for
corynebacteria or diphtheroids (5,6). Such isolates could be further tested by acid-fast staining and, if positive, sent to a reference
laboratory for definitive identification and susceptibility testing. Five cases of M. abscessus native valve endocarditis have been
reported; 4 were fatal and 1 was lost to follow-up (1,5–9). One of the 4 fatal cases also involved the tricuspid valve and was associated
with intravenous heroin abuse (9). We report a case of M. abscessus subsp. massiliense native tricuspid valve endocarditis successfully
treated with antimicrobial therapy and surgical debridement. A 52-year-old man who used intravenous drugs was admitted to our hospital
describing a 25-pound weight loss, fever, and night sweats. He reported injecting crushed opioid tablets mixed with tap water. He had
tachycardia and pitting edema of the legs and feet. Laboratory data revealed elevated minotransferase levels, thrombocytopenia, and opiates
in the urine. Computerized chest tomographic scan showed cavitary right upper lobe and lingular nodules. Routine blood cultures
(BacT/ALERT3D; bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) of samples drawn at admission and on hospital day 3, before the initiation of
antimicrobial drug therapy, grew acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in broth medium on days 3 and 4 of incubation. A transthoracic echocardiogram on
hospital day 5 revealed a 1-cm vegetation on the tricuspid valve. An empiric regimen for RGM consisting of intravenous cefoxitin and
amikacin and oral clarithromycin and moxifloxacin were administered. Based on preliminary (3-day) susceptibility test results showing
susceptibility to amikacin, resistance to the quinolones, and intermediate susceptibility to cefoxitin, linezolid, and imipenem, the regimen
was changed to tigecycline, linezolid, clarithromycin, and amikacin (10). Routine blood cultures on hospital days 11 and 17 were negative.
On hospital day 19, linezolid was stopped, and imipenem was added. A transthoracic echocardiogram on hospital day 31 showed the vegetation
had enlarged to 1.5 × 0.5 cm. We concluded that antibiotics alone were unlikely to be curative; cardiac catheterization was performed on
hospital day 38. On the basis of hemodynamic findings, the cardiologist inferred that valve replacement would be of no value and recommended
valvectomy alone. Surgery on hospital day 41 revealed a 2-cm nodule on each anterior and posterior leaflet and a 2–3 mm nodule on the septal
leaflet of the tricuspid valve. The anterior and posterior leaflets were removed, and the septal leaflet was segmentally resected. Routine
cultures of valve tissues, in which M. abscessus would have grown, were negative. Pathologic examination confirmed suppurative vegetations
with numerous bacterial colonies consistent with AFB; AFB staining disclosed numerous mycobacteria. Identification and final
susceptibilities of the RGM from the original blood culture isolate revealed M. abscessus subsp. massiliense by hsp65 PCR and erm gene
sequencing (4) and 14-day susceptibility to clarithromycin (10). M. abscessus subsp. massiliense has a nonfunctional (truncated) macrolide-
inactivating gene (erm41), and untreated isolates are susceptible to the macrolides (4). Repeat chest tomographic scan on hospital day 69
showed nearly complete resolution of the RUL cavitary and lingular nodules/infiltrates. Tigecycline, amikacin, imipenem, and clarithromycin
were continued until hospital day 77, when amikacin was stopped because of moderate hearing loss. The patient was discharged without
antibiotics after 2 months of postoperative antibiotic therapy. At follow-up visits 2 and 8 weeks later he was doing well except for
peripheral edema. AFB and routine blood cultures drawn at both visits were negative. He is periodically seen in the cardiology clinic; his
edema has resolved with diuretic therapy. Cure of M. abscessus native valve endocarditis has not been previously reported. A case of M.
chelonae native tricuspid valve endocarditis associated with a pacemaker lead was successfully treated with wire removal, valve debridement,
and antimicrobial therapy (11). The patient in the current study likely acquired his infection from the tap water diluent he injected.
Clinicians should consider the possibility of mycobacterial endocarditis when evaluating a septic patient with intravenous drug use history
or cardiac prosthetic devices. We successfully treated mycobacterial native tricuspid valve endocarditis with combination antimicrobial
therapy and surgical debridement. The location of the infection in the tricuspid valve and favorable hemodynamics enabled debridement
without implantation and the subsequent possibility of intraoperative infection of a prosthetic valve. Suggested citation for this article:
Huth RG, Douglass E, Mondy K, Vasireddy S, Wallace RJ Jr. Successful treatment of Mycobacterium abscessus subspecies massiliense tricuspid
valve endocarditis . Emerg Infect Dis. 2015 Mar [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2103.140577 This study was supported in part by a
grant from the Amon G. Carter Foundation.
