Renal Medullary Cancer (RMC) is a rare and aggressive type of renal cell cancer that presents predominantly in patients with sickle cell
hemoglobinopathies, and is typically metastatic at the time of presentation. Although platinum based chemotherapeutic regimens have recently
emerged as the best option for producing a clinically significant response as reported in various case series, the response is far from
satisfactory, as most RMC patients still succumb to their disease within a year of diagnosis. There is currently no standard of care for
treatment of this disease. We report, to our knowledge, the first case of RMC where in molecular characterization of the tumor was used to
guide therapy. In our patient, molecular analysis identified a decreased expression of Ribonucleotide Reductase M1(RRM1) and phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN). Based on these results of PTEN deficiency, we started our patient on everolimus (an MTOR inhibitor) maintenance after
treating him with an induction chemotherapy regimen of Paclitaxel-Cisplatin-Gemcitabine (PCG). His tumor responded to induction therapy and
he went into complete remission and remained in remission for 7 months. He is now alive about 14 months from his diagnosis and is
asymptomatic with minimal disease. The rarity of RMC makes it very difficult to do any meaningful clinical trials in this group of patients.
The overall prognosis for RMC remains very poor and knowledge about driver mutations may help in guiding therapy to improve survival in this
select group of patients, where there is dearth of available therapies. Renal Medullary Carcinoma (RMC) is a rare tumor found predominantly
in young patients with Sickle Cell Trait (SCT) or Sickle Cell Disease (SCD).1,2 The disease is highly aggressive, typically presenting with
widespread metastases at the time of diagnosis.3 The disease is predominant in males (M:F = 2:1) with a median age of 26 years and the
tumors commonly occur in the right kidney.4 The pathogenesis of this disease is unknown but in some cases inactivation of SWI/SNF-related
matrix-associated actin-dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily B member 1 (SMARCB1) protein has been observed suggesting its role in the
development of this disease.4,5 Historically, patients would succumb to this disease within weeks to months with a median of <12 months.1,6
Because of the rarity of the tumor and its vicious nature, clinical trials are difficult to perform. There are some case reports and case
series1 that hint toward the benefit of using cisplatin-based chemotherapy regimen in RMC but almost all of them relapsed quickly after
treatment. The overall prognosis of this disease remains poor with no cure. We present here what is, to our knowledge, the first case in
which molecular analysis of the tumor was used to direct maintenance therapeutic approach post cisplatin-based chemotherapy in a patient
with metastatic RMC. A 27 year-old African-American male with SCT presented with hematuria and left flank pain in June 2013. Computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a poorly defined mass at the midpole of the left kidney, 4.8 × 4.4 cm in size, with
minimal hydronephrosis (Fig. 1). CT guided biopsy of the mass was performed at an outside institution. The pathology came back as RMC. The
patient underwent left radical nephrectomy without any complications in an outside institution. The surgical specimen contained highly
atypical cells arranged in nests, sheets, and adenoid cystic patterns, with intratumoral neutrophilic infiltration and peritumoral
inflammation and fibrosis (Fig. 1). Staining was positive for thrombomodulin, EMA, CAM5.2, PAX-8, high molecular weight keratin, and
E-Cadherin; and negative for PAX-2, uroplakin, p63, and Mucicarmine. The tumor was 6.5 cm in its longest dimension, and was pathologically
staged as pT3a pN1 Mx. He had not had a staging CT chest prior to his surgery. Five weeks post his surgery, in July 2013; he was referred to
our institution for further management. At that time, he had noticed recurrence of his flank pain. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis
revealed mediastinal, hilar, and gastrohepatic ligament lymphadenopathy with right pulmonary nodules suspicious for metastatic disease (Fig.
2). Bone scan had shown suspicious lesion in the left 8th rib, which was thought to be a metastatic site. He was unable to start
chemotherapy with cisplatin based regimen because of renal insufficiency and was instead started on carboplatin (AUC 6) and Paclitaxel
(175 mg/m2) Q3 weekly with denosumab (120 mg) Q6 weekly (per patients’ request to decrease frequent hospital visits) with plans to switch to
cisplatin based regimen when renal function improves. Figure 1.Pathological features of renal medullary carcinoma. Pathologic surgical
specimen of left kidney, revealing highly atypical cells arranged in nests and sheets, with intratumoral neutrophilic infiltration and
peritumoral inflammation and fibrosis. Figure 2.Sequential CT scans showing response to therapy. Metastatic Renal Medullary Carcinoma with
Complete Remission of Disease post chemotherapy and it remained the same while on maintenance: CT scan prior to the initiation of
chemotherapy revealed significant lymphadenopathy consistent with metastatic disease in the mediastinum (A), gastrohepatic ligament (B), and
in the right lung (C). After Cycle 4 of chemotherapy, CT imaging revealed complete remission of mediastinal (D), gastrohepatic ligament (E),
and pulmonary (F) nodules. Pathological features of renal medullary carcinoma. Pathologic surgical specimen of left kidney, revealing highly
atypical cells arranged in nests and sheets, with intratumoral neutrophilic infiltration and peritumoral inflammation and fibrosis.
Sequential CT scans showing response to therapy. Metastatic Renal Medullary Carcinoma with Complete Remission of Disease post chemotherapy
and it remained the same while on maintenance: CT scan prior to the initiation of chemotherapy revealed significant lymphadenopathy
consistent with metastatic disease in the mediastinum (A), gastrohepatic ligament (B), and in the right lung (C). After Cycle 4 of
chemotherapy, CT imaging revealed complete remission of mediastinal (D), gastrohepatic ligament (E), and pulmonary (F) nodules. We switched
him to PCG (paclitaxel 80 mg/m2, cisplatin 35mg/m2 and gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 every 21 d), when his renal function
stabilized with GFR >50. He tolerated the chemotherapy well except for myelosuppression needing dose reduction and addition of neulasta from
his C#3 onwards. He got a total of 6 cycles with platinum based chemotherapy, out of which 5 were PCG. CT of chest and abdomen after cycle 2
of PCG revealed marked decrease mediastinal, hilar, and gastrohepatic ligament lymphadenopathy with complete resolution (CR) of lung nodules
and lymph nodes post completion of cycle 4 of PCG chemotherapy (Fig. 2). Given the rarity of the tumor and no standard of care for
treatment, his surgical specimen was sent to Caris Life Sciences for molecular profiling and next generation sequencing in the hopes of
finding a targetable mutation. Tumor immunohistochemistry revealed below threshold expression of Ribonucleotide Reductase M1 (RRM1)
expression (Figs. 3A), near complete loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) expression(Fig3 B) and 50% c-MET expression (positive but
CISH was negative for cMET amplification); as shown in Figure 4B, loss of PTEN gene function removes the negative feedback mechanism exerted
on PI3- kinanse, thereby increasing downstream signaling and increased un-inhibited cell growth. The tumor biomarker profile indicated
potential benefit of gemcitabine, nab-paclitaxel, and doxorubicin. Since most of the literature showed that patients had early relapse of
their disease post chemotherapy, we wanted to explore maintenance therapy for his disease to prevent early relapse.1,7 His molecular
analyses had shown low level of PTEN expression by IHC(5%), frequently correlated with PTEN gene deletion and functional loss. We opted to
give him maintenance everolimus (mTOR-mammalian target of rapamycin, inhibitor) 10 mg/daily therapy, starting beginning of December 2013.
Figure 4C demonstrates potential targets for therapy in patients with PTEN gene loss of function, including an MTOR inhibitor. His follow up
bone scans were stable and upon repeat review, the rib lesion was thought to be a bony island of uncertain significance. Figure
3.Immunohistochemical Identification of Molecular Targets for Therapy. (A) Negative expression of RRM1 (defined as less than 2+/50%) was
detected in the patient sample (1+/90%). (B) Negative expression of PTEN (defined as ≤1+/50%) was detected in the patient sample (1+/5%, a
near complete loss of expression). Figure 4.Outline of the role of PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog;
mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin. (A) Exhibits role of tumor suppressor gene PTEN in regulating PI3K mediated cell cycle signaling. (B)
Demonstrates role of loss of PTEN inhibition in tumor genesis. (C) Highlights potential targets of cell cycle inhibitor, including
Everolimus which was used in our patient. Immunohistochemical Identification of Molecular Targets for Therapy. (A) Negative expression of
RRM1 (defined as less than 2+/50%) was detected in the patient sample (1+/90%). (B) Negative expression of PTEN (defined as ≤1+/50%) was
detected in the patient sample (1+/5%, a near complete loss of expression). Outline of the role of PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PTEN,
phosphatase and tensin homolog; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin. (A) Exhibits role of tumor suppressor gene PTEN in regulating PI3K
mediated cell cycle signaling. (B) Demonstrates role of loss of PTEN inhibition in tumor genesis. (C) Highlights potential targets of cell
cycle inhibitor, including Everolimus which was used in our patient. He tolerated everolimus well, follow up CT chest and abdomen showed
maintenance of CR until the end of June 2014, when his imaging showed a significant increase in his mediastinal and hilar and aortocaval
lymph nodes. However, all his nodes were less than 2 cm and he was clinically asymptomatic. The repeat biopsy from his aortocaval lymph node
was positive for recurrence of his disease. He was switched to gemcitabine single agent therapy in July 2014 and continues to tolerate it
well. He is presently alive and almost 14 months from his diagnosis. We had wanted a repeat biopsy for next generation sequencing but due to
unavoidable circumstances this was not possible in spite of disease progression. The patient in this study presented with RMC that was
widely metastatic shortly after the time of presentation. We had done molecular profiling to determine possible targets with intent to
treat. He was found to have near absence of PTEN expression by immunohistochemistry and we used this information to guide his maintenance
therapy (Fig. 4C). He tolerated this therapy well with no significant side-effect and was in clinical and radiological remission for 7
months since stopping of his induction chemotherapy and is now alive about 14 months since his diagnosis. Our case is one of the very few
cases with advanced RMC who achieved CR from his initial chemotherapy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case to show that
profiling and subsequent targeted therapy had therapeutic benefit in RMC and should be considered in these patients. Our patient is alive;
about 14 months post his diagnosis. RMC was first described in 1995 by Davis et al as “the seventh sickle cell nephropathy.” Since that
initial publication, the literature has become populated with case reports and periodic reviews of the literature, which form the principle
body of knowledge available on this tumor. The disease is usually widely metastatic at the time of diagnosis. The tumor microscopically
presents with islands of reticular growth, with adenoid cystic-like spaces, solid sheets, and anastomosing tubules.8 The cancer cells are
highly atypical, with a rhabdoid or plasmacytoid shape as well as dark cytoplasm, clear nuclei, and prominent nucleoli.9 Prominent fibrosis
and inflammation are characteristic. Historically, the prognosis of this tumor has been dismal, with patients surviving approximately weeks
to months. We searched for all English-language case reports for adult patients (>18 y of age; we have included one case of 17 y old who had
an amplification of ABL-tyrosine kinase) with RMC that was metastatic at or shortly after the time of diagnosis, published since 2003, and
gathered available data on these cases pertaining to chemotherapy protocols and survival since the time of the diagnosis (Table 1). We only
included patients from the case reports or case series who had data for chemotherapy use, survival post diagnosis and or response to
therapy. Our search returned 34 unique cases published during that time, out of which only 17 cases met our above mentioned criteria for
inclusion in the Table 1.1,10-17 The median survival calculated for all included patients in the Table 1 was 10.75 months with an average of
10.9 months. We observed that the majority of patients who had any meaningful response (complete or partial response) were treated with
cisplatin based chemotherapy (survival appeared to be more extended with PCG regimen when compared to the rest). Majority of these patients
had right sided kidney RMC. The observation of positive response to cisplatin appears to be consistent with the previously published notion
that renal medullary carcinoma may respond to platinum-based agents.18,10 While these regimens have improved survival compared to the
original studies, they still universally fail to produce a durable response or cure. Table 1.Relevant cases with renal medullary carcinomas
and their survivalReferenceAgeSurgical TreatmentChemotherapy RegimenResponseSurvival from Diagnosis (weeks)123NoneSutent f/u
GCPD2124RNPCGPR32124RNGCPR20130RNGC f/u by doxorubicin f/u by sutentNA104124NoneGCaSD241120None – unresectablePCGPR421851NephrectomyPCa f/u
everolimus**PR for 4 months after 6 cycles f/u PD601832Nephrectomy +partial ureterectomySunitinib (4 wk on clinical trial)/ PCaSD after 2
cycles of PCa f/u PD after 4 cycles441217***NephrectomyImatinib (4wks)/ MVACPD on imatinib f/u by PR post MVAC521230NoneMVACPR f/u by
decline and he only got 2 cycles of MVAC141248Nephrectomy+ureterectomySunitinib (4wks)/ MVACPR681633NoneMVACSD on initial scan f/u
PD281735NephrectomyPCG (6 mo)/ Salvage: AGCR*1081325NephrectomyMVACNA162019NoneGCNA241434Not specifiedGCaPR521519Nephrectomy after 3x
MVACMVAC f/u GD f/u ICE f/u TCPR52Abbreviations: RN-radical nephrectomy; GC-gemcitabine and cisplatin; GCa- gemcitabine and carboplatin;
PCG- paclitaxel, cisplatin, gemcitabine: PCaG- paclitaxel, carboplatin, gemcitabine; PCa-carboplatin, paclitaxel; MVAC-methotrexate,
vinblastine, doxorubicin, cisplatin; AG-adriamycin, gemcitabine; EDCV- Etoposide, Doxorubicin, Cyclophospamide, Vincristine; GD-
gemcitabine, docetaxel; ICE- ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide; TC-thalidomide, capecitabine; PD-progressive disease; PR- partial response;
SD-stable disease; NA-not available; f/u ,followed by *-post salvage. He had topoII increased expression by immunohistochemistry; **- no
response to everolimus and it was used as last resort for a few weeks. Reason to start this unclear but she died very shortly after that;
***- this is the only patient we have included who is <18 years because her tumor had amplification of ABL-tyrosine kinase. Relevant cases
with renal medullary carcinomas and their survival Abbreviations: RN-radical nephrectomy; GC-gemcitabine and cisplatin; GCa- gemcitabine and
carboplatin; PCG- paclitaxel, cisplatin, gemcitabine: PCaG- paclitaxel, carboplatin, gemcitabine; PCa-carboplatin, paclitaxel; MVAC-
methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, cisplatin; AG-adriamycin, gemcitabine; EDCV- Etoposide, Doxorubicin, Cyclophospamide, Vincristine;
GD- gemcitabine, docetaxel; ICE- ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide; TC-thalidomide, capecitabine; PD-progressive disease; PR- partial
response; SD-stable disease; NA-not available; f/u ,followed by *-post salvage. He had topoII increased expression by immunohistochemistry;
**- no response to everolimus and it was used as last resort for a few weeks. Reason to start this unclear but she died very shortly after
that; ***- this is the only patient we have included who is <18 years because her tumor had amplification of ABL-tyrosine kinase. The
difficulty in achieving durable responses for this tumor may reflect our poor understanding of its pathophysiology. A report by Swartz
et al.19 has shown a strong expression of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF), and Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF) in RMC.19 These
findings formed the basis for a pathophysiologic theory, which proposes that the low oxygen tension in the renal medulla, especially in
patients with sickle cell hemoglobinopathies, promotes the expression of HIF. Under normal circumstances, HIF leads to upregulation of p53,
ultimately causing apoptosis. In the setting of deficient or absent p53, however, HIF instead leads to VEGF expression, which may help tumor
vascularization and growth. In a separate report, Yang et al. suggested presence of hypoxia related and unrelated genetic abnormalities in
significant number of cases, and hinted their role in the pathogenesis of RMC.20 Recent studies looking into the cytogenetic abnormalities
of RMC have failed to identify any consistent abnormalities across cases, and have also brought into question the aforementioned theory by
Swartz on the grounds of cases in caucasian patients without hemoglobinopathies.21,22 Gao et al., had recently shown involvement of genes in
signaling pathways such as phosphatidylinositol 3-kinasePIK3C2G), cell cycle control (CDC25D and CDC73), and histone synthesis (HIST2H3D)
based on molecular analysis of 11 patient specimens in a retrospective fashion. Although mechanism of pathogenesis still remains largely
elusive, these alterations may become probable targets for therapy in the future.23 It is both the lack of complete understanding of the
disease and rarity of desirable response to treatment that led us to our treatment approach. The fact that RMC is probably sensitive to
platinum based chemotherapy, coupled with the low expression/absence of RRM1 in his tumor; may have contributed to the complete remission of
our patient's disease when treated with PCG chemotherapy regimen. Whether the low RRM1 expression facilitated a strong response to
gemcitabine component in PCG is difficult to determine. The decision to attempt the use of everolimus for maintenance therapy, however, was
entirely guided and deemed feasible based on the information regarding loss of PTEN expression gained from IHC profiling of the tumor. It is
well known that PTEN deletion causes upregulation of PI3K-AKT pathway which plays a significant role in proliferation and progression of
cancer and since mTOR is a downstream signal for the PI3K-AKT pathway, blocking this mTOR signal may cause decrease in tumor
proliferation.24 There is literature supporting PTEN deletion being a marker for predicting response to everolimus in other cancer types
such as prostate cancer and that was our rationale for using everolimus in this patient.24 We acknowledge that molecular profiling with next
generation sequencing is not feasible, nor is it necessary for every patient with a malignant tumor. However, for these rare tumor types,
especially those in which treatment guidelines are not well established, comprehensive molecular characterization may provide an invaluable
insight for choosing a more personalized therapeutic approach. The information from molecular profiling can be used to guide maintenance
therapy with targeted agents, which are better tolerated than chemotherapy and may provide a road to prolonged survival in patients with
this deadly disease in this current era of personalized medicine. No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed. The authors complied
with patient confidentiality. An informed consent was obtained by the patient prior to preparing this manuscript. JSL and SMR- manuscript
preparation and both contributed equally to be co-first authors; ZG and NES- manuscript preparation, critical review of the article; SLH, MK
and JJD provided critical review of the article; MJ-manuscript preparation, critical review/revision of the article and patient care.
