Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 60 Final Diagnosis: Bilateral cervical facet dislocation Symptoms: Neck pain
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Neurosurgery Unusual clinical course Cervical facet dislocation injuries typically present
shortly after occurrence due to the pain and neurologic deficit that can be associated with this injury. Bilateral dislocations of the facet
joint require prompt evaluation, reduction, and surgical intervention. Rare case reports present bilateral dislocations presenting in a
delayed fashion. We report the case of a 60-year-old male who presented with mild neck pain 1 year after initial injury. Computed topography
of the cervical spine showed healing with bony fusion of a bilateral C6–7 facet dislocation. Given the chronic healed nature of the injury
and minimal symptoms, the patient is being followed without intervention. Although most bilateral facet dislocations present and are treated
immediately after injury; this case illustrates that some may be missed during initial evaluation. Once healed, these injuries may be stable
without surgical intervention. Bilateral facet dislocations of the cervical spine can be devastating cervical injuries that typically
present at time of injury . This dislocation is an unstable injury and patients can present with severe neurologic deficits . Without prompt
treatment, neurologic deterioration is a major risk . The majority of patients undergo closed reduction with traction . After reduction
patients often require surgical stabilization . When surgical intervention is not an option, conservative measures often include prolonged
traction or halo vest placement. Conservative interventions may have satisfactory results, but delayed surgery may be required if
conservative therapies fail . As this injury often causes severe neck pain along with neurologic deficits, late presentations are uncommon.
Missed diagnosis occurs in patients with multiple traumatic injuries, those with incomplete adequate radiographic studies, or, least
commonly, patients who are asymptomatic at time of injury . Rare reports present patients with bilateral facet dislocation without
neurologic deficit weeks to months after initial injury . Typically, these late presenting patients are discovered due to severe neck pain
with radicular symptoms after an injury. Surgical intervention is indicated in these patients due to the severity of symptoms and lack of
fusion . Even with spontaneous fusion, patients may be symptomatic from deformity or stenosis of the neuroformina, requiring surgery . Our
case illustrates that not providing treatment may be an option for very late-presenting patients with minimal symptoms and radiographic
evidence of fusion. A 60-year-old male with neck pain and no significant past medical history was admitted to the hospital for treatment of
depression. He had a significant bicycle accident 1 year prior in which he developed sudden-onset severe neck pain. At that time, he was
evaluated at a community emergency department, where cervical x-rays were performed and reported as normal. He was released with pain
medications and no cervical collar. The patient described his neck pain then as severe and constant, requiring him to be on bed rest at
home. The pain gradually diminished over time to a dull ache. He also noted intermittent numbness in his right first and second digit over
the last year. He felt less coordinated than usual but still able to walk normally, ride his bicycle, and continue his active lifestyle. Two
weeks prior to his admission, he had a minor bicycle accident that worsened his chronic neck pain. He did not notice any new neurologic
symptoms. He described the pain as a stiffness that improved with oral pain medications. His primary service ordered a computed topography
(CT) scan of his neck to further evaluate his pain given his history of a bicycle accident. Physical exam showed no deficits. The CT
revealed a bilateral facet dislocation of C6 on C7 with evidence of bony fusion suggesting a chronic nature (Figure 1). MRI was performed,
which showed no spinal cord injury (Figure 2). Flexion and extension x-rays of the cervical spine were stable (Figure 3). Surgical
intervention was discussed, including a 3-stage posterior-anterior-posterior surgical approach. In the first stage, we would release the
posterior healed facet joints and fusion mass and perform a laminectomy for decompression and then we would proceed to the second stage to
release the anterior fusion mass, reduce the dislocation, and perform an anterior fusion. The final stage would be fusion of the posterior
elements. After discussing risks and benefits of surgery with the patient, he elected to continue with conservative management of his neck
pain because he felt that with minimal symptoms the risks of surgery outweighed the benefits. At 9-month follow-up he continued to do well
without intervention. Patients with bilateral facet dislocations that remain without diagnosis and treatment are rare in the literature. We
present here a patient with spontaneous fusion after bilateral cervical facet dislocation 1 year prior, having his diagnosis missed and
receiving no treatment for his injury. In 1978, Thompson and Hohl presented a case of a 72-year-old male with alcoholism who had a healed
bilateral C5/6 dislocation that presented 10 days after injury . Since then, scattered case reports of undiagnosed bilateral facet
dislocations that present several weeks or more after initial injury have been published (Table 1). Surgical intervention was indicated in
these cases due to symptoms related to the injury . Hassan et al. reported patients whose surgery was delayed up to a year, but the injury
had been previously recognized and attempts at conservative therapies had failed . Late presentations of bilateral cervical facet
dislocations are challenging to treat. One of the difficulties in treating this entity is the inability to reduce the dislocation at more
than 72 hours after the injury . One case series reviewed 19 patients with cervical facet dislocation whose presentation was delayed from 7
to 21 days after injury; 5 of these patients had bilateral dislocations. Closed reduction was attempted first on all patients, followed by
surgical intervention. Of the 5 patients with bilateral dislocations, 4 required anterior-posterior repair after closed reduction failed .
One author suggests a posterior-anterior-posterior approach based on their institution’s experience. In their series of 3 patients, no
attempt at closed reduction was made because the patients presented at several days, 10 weeks, and 8 months after injury. In 2 of the 3
patients, the anterior-posterior-anterior approach failed to achieve adequate reduction, requiring the patients to have a fourth procedure
from a posterior approach. With the third patient, the posterior-anterior-posterior approach was used with success . In the case reports and
series that included chronic bilateral facet dislocation, surgery was necessary because the patients continued to have severe symptoms from
the injury. Unlike chronic bilateral facet dislocations, chronic unilateral facet dislocations have been followed with no intervention and
without neurologic deficits on follow-up . A study of long-term outcomes comparing patients treated conservatively with those treated
surgically would aid in managing this complex situation, but would be difficult given the rarity of this presentation. The case presented
indicates that the diagnosis of bilateral facet dislocations may be missed initially, then remain untreated in patients who have no or
minimal symptoms. In certain patients, spontaneous fusion can occur. In patients presenting with chronic healed dislocations and who are
neurologically intact with minimal or no symptoms, surgical intervention may not be necessary. Conflicts of interest The authors report no
conflicts of interest. CT imaging (A) sagittal view of bilateral facet dislocation with bony fusion of C6 on C7, (B) sagittal view of right
jumped facet with fusion, (C) sagittal view of left facet with bony growth, (D) axial view of fused dislocated facets. T2 sagittal MRI
showing chronic dislocation of C6–7 without signal changes within the spinal cord. Lateral cervical spine x-rays with (A) extension view,
(B) flexion view was obtained and showed stability of the dislocation. Previous reports of untreated bilateral cervical facet dislocations
that presented in a delayed fashion. Only 2 cases reported healed fusion of the dislocation. Case series that included unilateral injuries
or previous attempts at conservative treatment are excluded.
