In this study, we report a case of a healthy, 25‑year‑old male patient with presyncope during a football match divergent blood pressure, and
a grade 3/6 aortic diastolic murmur. The echocardiogram showed a rounded structure in the basal area of the interventricular septum adjacent
to the aortic valve, which causes inadequate commissural support, communicating with the left ventricle (LV). There was moderate secondary
aortic insufficiency and dilated LV with preserved contractility. MRI revealed myocardial density in the structure without delayed
enhancement. After follow-up, the LV increased further in size and syncope on exertion. The patient underwent surgery and the anatomic
pathologist diagnosed left ventricular diverticulum. The diverticulum, a congenital protrusion in the myocardial wall of the LV, differs
from an aneurysm by its close connection to the chamber and presence of myocardial fibers in the composition of the wall1. It most often
affects the LV or right ventricular apex and is rare in the septum. A) Transthoracic echocardiogram, parasternal longitudinal view, showing
the diverticulum in the interventricular septum (arrow) adjacent to the right coronary cusp of aortic valve; B) apical five-chamber view
showing the aortic regurgitant jet and apparent structural communication with the LV cavity (Doppler flow); C) Cardiac MRI, axial view in
dark blood sequence, and T1-weighted image, confirms the continuity solution (arrow); D) short basal axis view sequence of cine-MRI
(perfusion) shows isointense structure (muscular) and hypointense content. Author contributions Conception and design of the research,
Acquisition of data and Writing of the manuscript: Barberato SH; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Barberato SH, Barberato MFA;
Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Barberato MFA. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association
This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
