Early Class III malocclusion treatment may not have long-term stability due to mandibular growth. Although some features of this
malocclusion point to a better prognosis, it is practically impossible for the orthodontist to foresee cases that require new intervention.
Many patients need retreatment, whether compensatory or orthodontic-surgical. The present study reports the case of a Class III patient
treated at the end of the mixed dentition with the use of a face mask followed by conventional fixed appliances. The case remains stable 10
years after treatment completion. It was presented to the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics (BBO) as a requirement
for the title of certified by the BBO. O tratamento precoce da má oclusão de Classe III pode não apresentar estabilidade em longo prazo, em
decorrência do crescimento mandibular. Embora algumas características sinalizem um melhor prognóstico para o tratamento dessa má oclusão, é
praticamente impossível para o ortodontista prever qual caso irá requerer nova intervenção. Muitos pacientes precisam de retratamento, que
pode ser compensatório ou mesmo ortodôntico-cirúrgico combinado. O presente artigo relata o tratamento realizado em um paciente com má
oclusão de Classe III, no final da dentição mista, mediante o auxílio da máscara facial seguida de aparelhagem fixa convencional, e que
continua estável após 10 anos da conclusão do tratamento. Esse caso foi apresentado à Diretoria do Board Brasileiro de Ortodontia e
Ortopedia Facial (BBO) como parte dos requisitos para obtenção do título de Diplomado pelo BBO. This study reports the case of a 12-year and
4-month-old patient referred to treatment with chief complaint of "crossed front teeth and protruded lower lip".The patient sought
improvements in smile and facial esthetics. He was in good general health without relevant register in his medical history, and presented in
regular oral hygiene with a few white spot lesions and mild gingivitis. His parents reported that anterior crossbite was not present in
deciduous dentition, it only appeared after permanent incisors eruption. Facial assessment (Fig 1) revealed absence of passive labial seal,
a concave profile and protruded lower lip; thereby suggesting anteroposterior skeletal relationship (Class III).The patient was at the end
of the second transitional period of the mixed dentition with Class III molar relationship (Figs 1 and 2).He presented unbalanced
maxillomandibular transverse relationship which resulted in functional unilateral posterior crossbite from tooth #12 to #16 and lower
midline deviation to the right when in maximum intercuspation. Figure 1Initial facial and intraoral photographs Figure 2Initial casts.
Panoramic radiograph (Fig 3), taken at the end of the second transitional period of the mixed dentition, did not reveal any abnormalities.
Cephalometric analysis (Fig 4 and Tab 1) highlighted retrusion of the maxilla (SNA = 80o) and poor maxillomandibular relationship for the
patient's age (ANB = 0.5o).He had retruded retroclined maxillary incisors (1-NA = 18o and 2 mm) as well as protruded and buccally tipped
mandibular incisors (1-NB = 29o and 7 mm). These dental features indicated dentoalveolar and skeletal components of Class III malocclusion.
Figure 3Initial panoramic radiograph. Figure 4Initial lateral cephalogram (A) and cephalometric tracing (B). Table 1Initial (A), final (B)
and control cephalometric values 10 years after treatment (C). Measurements NormalABDif. A/BC Skeletal pattern SNA (Steiner) 82° 80° 82° 2°
82° SNB (Steiner) 80° 79.5° 80° 0.5° 81° ANB (Steiner) 2° 0.5° 2° 1.5° 1° Angle of convexity (Downs) 0° 2° 3° 1° 2.5° Y-Axis (Downs) 59° 63°
61.5° 1.5° 62° Facial angle (Downs) 87° 87° 89.5° 2.5° 89 SN-GoGn (Steiner) 32° 35° 32° 3° 32° FMA (Tweed) 25° 33° 28° 5° 28° Dental pattern
IMPA (Tweed) 90° 92.5° 97.5° 5° 97° 1.NA (degrees) (Steiner) 22° 18° 29° 11° 28° 1-NA (mm) (Steiner) 4 mm 2 mm 5 mm 3 mm 5° 1.NB (degrees)
(Steiner) 25° 29° 32° 3° 30° 1-NB (mm) (Steiner) 4 mm 7 mm 6 mm 1 mm 6 mm - Interincisal angle (Downs) 130° 131° 115.5° 15.5° 120° 1-APo
(Ricketts) 1 mm 6 mm 5 mm 1 mm 5 mm Profile Upper lip — S-line (Steiner) 0 mm -0.5 mm 0 mm 0.5 mm 0 mm Lower lip — S-line (Steiner) 0 mm -5
mm -4 mm 1 mm -4 mm In functional terms, there was little anterior mandibular shift to the right from centric relation to maximum
intercuspation. Treatment planning initially aimed at correcting maxillomandibular discrepancy by means of a face mask followed by rapid
expansion of the maxilla which also contributed to correct the transverse deficiency. To this end, a modified Haas appliance associated with
hooks in the region of canines used as support for protraction of the maxilla was used. Patient and parents were aware of the need for
strong compliance to achieve treatment success. They were also informed that unpredictable mandibular growth could create the need for a new
intervention and potential orthognathic surgery during adulthood. Thus, they were presented with an alternative approach: wait for growth
completion during adolescence and have orthodontic treatment with fixed appliances and potential orthognathic surgery carried out in the
future. Patient's parents agreed on the early approach and follow-up to monitor the possibility of new interventions. A pre-adjusted,
metallic, fixed orthodontic Roth prescription appliance would be installed in both maxillary and mandibular arches. After treatment
finishing, the retention phase would begin with the use of a removable wraparound retainer in the maxillary arch and an intercanine bar in
the mandibular arch. The modified Haas appliance was manufactured based on a Hyrax expander. Maxillary expansion followed an activation
protocol of 1/4 turn every 12 hours for 14 days. Figure 5 illustrates the final outcomes. After 14 days, the expansion appliance remained
stabilized and therapy with Petit face mask began (Fig 6). A 600-g force was applied 14 hours a day for 6 to 8 months so as to overcorrect
overjet. However, the patient reported having applied force 12 hours a day and, for this reason, 6 months were rendered necessary to correct
anterior crossbite. He was then advised to wear the appliance while sleeping for 4 months so as to achieve protraction stability. Figure
5Treatment outcomes after 14 days using the expander activated twice a day. Figure 6Petit face mask with 600-g force applied. After removing
the expander and discontinuing protraction, a removable 0.8-mm stainless steel wire palatal bar was installed to achieve transverse
stability and adjust first molars rotation. During the same appointment, pre-adjusted, metallic, fixed orthodontic Roth prescription
brackets were bonded on maxillary teeth, except for unerupted canines. Alignment and leveling procedures began with the use of 0.016-in NiTi
archwire followed by 0.016, 0.018 and 0.020-in stainless steel archwire associated with omega loops on molars mesial surface until canines
erupted so as to preserve dental arch circumference. At treatment finishing, 0.019 x 0.025-in stainless steel rectangular archwire was used.
Fluoride-varnish at 5 ppm (Duraphat(r), Colgate, Germany) was applied every three months to prevent white spot lesions1 (Fig 7). Figure
7Alignment and leveling onset in the upper arch with palatal bar used for transverse maintenance and control of first molars rotation.
Fluoride-varnish was applied every three months to minimize the incidence of white spot lesions.1 On the mandibular arch, bracket bonding
was carried out with individualized angulation for teeth #43 and 33 so as bracket slots were perpendicular to the root axis, thereby
favoring format compensation. The sequence of archwires used for alignment and leveling was similar to that used in the maxillary arch:
0.019 x 0.025-in stainless steel rectangular archwire associated with intermaxillary Class III elastics 16 hours a day. Importantly,
maxillary canines and second molars eruption was delayed, which increased total treatment time (41 months). Left mandibular second molar was
mesially and buccolingually tipped while the patient and his parents were anxious for treatment conclusion. Thus, the appliance was
completely removed with only the TMA rectangular archwire remaining on teeth #36 and 37 to correct #37 positioning. This wire segment was
removed after 4 months when the patient brought his final exams to the last appointment. Additionally, the patient was referred to
extraction of tooth #48 which was the only mesially tipped third molar he had. A removable wraparound retainer was continuously used in the
maxillary arch for 6 months during the day and at night for 2 years during the retention phase. In the mandibular arch, however, a 0.8-mm
stainless steel wire intercanine bar was installed and used for life. Patient's final exams (Figs 8 to 12)revealed harmonious lip
repositioning as well as improvements in facial profile which became slightly convex. Maxillomandibular relationship was restored to
normality and ANB angle increased from 0.5o to 2o. Such improvements were due to maxillary advancement (SNA increased in 2o).Class III
relationship was corrected by maxillary incisors buccal tipping (1-NA increased in 11o and 3 mm).Mandibular incisors practically remained in
their original position. Treatment was completed without further shifts between centric relation and maximum intercuspation. Occlusion
guidance was restored (protrusion and laterality). Figure 8Final facial and intraoral photographs. Figure 9Final casts Figure 10Final
panoramic radiograph. Figure 11Final lateral cephalogram (A) and cephalometric tracing (B). Figure 12Initial (black) and final (red)
cephalometric tracings total (A) and partial (B) superimposition. Cephalometric tracings superimposition (Fig 12A) revealed facial growth
down and forward. Particularly due to protraction, the maxilla advanced towards the nasion point, thereby resulting in a balanced
maxillomandibular relationship. Partial maxillary superimposition (Fig 12B)revealed buccal incisors tipping and little molar extrusion as a
result of alveolar protraction and development expected for that period. Partial mandibular superimposition (Fig 12B) revealed mandibular
growth as well as compensatory alveolar growth in molar and incisors regions. In view of the above, it is reasonable to assert that
treatment results were in accordance with treatment initial objectives. The patient was highly satisfied with his final facial and dental
esthetics and remained aware of the need for a long-term follow-up to monitor mandibular growth and occlusal relationship. Total treatment
time was long due to early treatment approach, delayed maxillary canines and second molars eruption as well as patient's absence at some
appointments. New examinations were requested ten years after orthodontic treatment completion (Figs 13 to 17). They revealed excellent
occlusal stability and facial balance. Both panoramic radiograph (Fig 14) and lateral cephalogram (Fig 15A) revealed all aspects were within
standards of normality. The patient was advised in terms of periodontal care and the need for extracting tooth #48. Control and
cephalometric tracings superimposition (Fig 16) revealed little residual mandibular growth which did not compromise facial and dental
features achieved at treatment completion. Figure 13Control facial intraoral photographs 10 years after treatment completion. Figure
14Control panoramic radiograph 10 years after treatment completion Figure 15Control lateral cephalogram (A) and cephalometric tracing (B) 10
years after treatment completion. Figure 16Final (red) and control cephalometric tracings superimposition 10 years after treatment (green).
Figure 17Initial (black), final (red) and control cephalometric tracings superimposition 10 years after treatment (green). Class III
skeletal malocclusion relies on early treatment approach to achieve treatment success without the need for surgery during adulthood.2 Early
treatment with protraction of the maxilla has proved effective particularly in cases involving maxillary retrusion, as diagnosis of Class
III, and meso or brachyfacial facial pattern. It results in adult stability in 75% of cases.2 , 3 Treatment is considered as early when
performed before permanent dentition onset, in which case better results with small chances of relapse occur in patients younger than 10
years of age.4 , 7 In general, rapid maxillary expansion is associated with protraction of the maxilla,8 , 11 although the latter might be
dispensable.12 The case reported herein revealed excellent stability due to patient's good growth pattern associated with appropriate
intervention. Despite excellent stability, patients similar to the one reported in the present study must be informed about the potential
need for compensatory retreatment and surgery. » The author reports no commercial, proprietary or financial interest in the products or
companies described in this article. » Patients displayed in this article previously approved the use of their facial and intraoral
photographs. Case report, DI 18, approved by the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics and Facial Orthopedics (BBO).
