We report a 64-year-old lady with stage II, Immunoglobulin-G lambda multiple myeloma (MM) (standard risk), who presented with type-B lactic
acidosis (LA), and multi-organ dysfunction associating myeloma progression, and ending in imminent death. In the context of literature
review of all previously reported similar cases, this report highlights and discusses the association of type-B LA and MM (especially
progressive disease), and also emphasizes the poor outcome. Early recognition of this condition with intensive supportive care, and
treatment of multiple myeloma may improve outcomes. Metabolic acidosis (MA) can be defined as decreased systemic pH resulting from either an
increase in hydrogen ion (H+), or a reduction in bicarbonate (HCO3-). Based on the etiology, it is classified into anion gap MA and non-gap
MA. Lactic acidosis (LA) is a common cause of the high anion gap MA.1 It is the normal end-product of the anaerobic breakdown of glucose in
the cells. Also the normal level of lactic acid in the serum is 0.5-1 mmol/l.1 Lactic acid can accumulate in the blood due to increased
production or decreased utilization. Lactic acidosis occurs when there is an increase in lactate levels (>4 mmol/l) along with MA.1 This
results in several adverse effects on human physiology. Lactic acidosis can be classified based on the pathogenesis into 2 categories:
type-A LA and type-B LA.1 Type-A LA is diagnosed when there is clinical evidence of decreased tissue perfusion, or oxygenation of blood and
it results from either: 1) increased production of lactate; such as in the cases of hypovolemia, cardiac failure, sepsis, and
cardiopulmonary arrest, or 2) from the diminished utilization of lactate, such as in liver disease, and in thiamine deficiency.1 In
contrast, type-B LA occurs when there is no evidence of decreased tissue perfusion, or oxygenation. This can occur with systemic diseases,
such as renal and hepatic failure, diabetes mellitus, malignancy, toxins, drugs, and inborn errors of lactate metabolism. The link between
type-B LA and malignancy is established, especially in leukemia and lymphoma.2 This case report describes the association of multiple
myeloma (MM) with type-B LA, and highlights the prognostic impact of this association in a background of literature review of all reported
cases of MM and LA. A 64-year-old lady was diagnosed in March 2012 to have standard risk, stage II (international staging system ),
immunoglobulin-G lambda, MM with large osseous left femur plasmacytoma. She had fixation and radiotherapy to left femur, and then she
started induction therapy with cyclophosphamide, thalidomide, and dexamethasone (CTD). She completed 5 cycles of CTD in August 2012, and
achieved very good partial response, and she refused to undergo autologous stem cell transplantation. Three months later, she developed
disease progression and was treated with 4 cycles of bortezomib and Velcade and low dose dexamethasone. Initially, she had good partial
response, but in April 2013 she had disease progression. She was given one cycle of lenalidomide and dexamethasone, and was then admitted to
the hospital in June 2013 with fatigue, decreased urine output, and sleepiness as a case of acute kidney injury, hypernatremia, sub-clinical
disseminated intravascular coagulation, and progression of MM. The vital signs at presentation were stable, with temperature 36.8°C. Her
oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. She was pale, sleepy but arousable, glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 13/15, and she appeared not-toxic.
The laboratory results are shown in Table 1. Blood film showed normochromic normocytic red blood cells with rouleaux formation, no
schistocytes, and there were 3% circulating plasma cells. Fibrinogen was 60mg/dl, lactate dehydrogenase was 639 IU/L, haptoglobin was 87
mg/dl, and her brain CT scan did not show any acute insults. She received intravenous (IV) fluid, IV broad spectrum antibiotics, IV
bicarbonate, dexamethasone, transfusion of blood, fresh frozen plasma, and cryoprecipitate. The progress of patient’s laboratory parameters
during the hospitalization period. Her blood and urine cultures were negative. Brain MRI showed only the presence of multiple lytic bone
lesions, but there was no evidence of acute brain insult. Computed tomography scanning of the chest, abdomen and pelvis ruled out pneumonia,
abdominal collection, and bowel ischemia. A new right pelvic soft tissue mass was detected (Figure 1). Biopsy from this mass revealed a soft
tissue plasmacytoma in keeping with myeloma progression. Axial cut from non-contrasted pelvic CT scan (soft tissue window) showing a large
destructive right iliac bone lesion with associated soft tissue mass (white arrow). There is also another destructive lesion with soft
tissue component in the left iliac bone. She remained in a state of a decreased level of consciousness with GCS of 8-10/15, and she
maintained normal hemodynamic parameters until the last 2 days of her life. The progress of laboratory results is shown in Table 1.
Cerebrospinal fluid examination was not feasible due to the patient’s abnormal coagulation profile entailing high risk of bleeding. During
hospitalization, she developed type-B LA in day 3 of hospitalization. Intravenous thiamine was added to the treatment, and a gradual drop of
lactic was noticed within a few days. Though there was measurable biochemical improvement with the intensive supportive treatment. She
passed away after 23 days of hospitalization from respiratory failure. Multiple myeloma is a neoplasm that is associated with several
metabolic abnormalities including, elevated serum creatinine, hypercalcemia, low anion gap, low value for high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, high bilirubin value, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and acidosis.3 The acidosis in MM can be attributed to several
causes, both acute and chronic renal insufficiency, proximal and distal renal tubular acidosis, and both type-A and B LA.4 Recent studies
indicate that the increased use of the glycolytic pathway, even in the presence of oxygen, is a characteristic hallmark of malignant cells.5
This glycolytic phenotype results in increased lactic acid production. The occurrence of LA has been demonstrated in both hematologic and
solid malignancies.2 There are several mechanisms proposed to explain the occurrence of LA in malignancies, including: liver and kidney
dysfunction, overproduction of lactate by tumor cells, tumor cell overexpression of glycolytic enzymes, and mitochondrial dysfunction, tumor
necrosis factor a, thiamine deficiency, and chemotherapy.2,5 Malignant cells favor glycolysis even when there is an abundant blood supply
and normal oxygen concentrations, which is known as aerobic glycolysis, or the Warburg effect.5 It was found that malignant cells
overexpress hexokinase and insulin like growth factors, both of which increase the production of lactic acid.2 The predisposing factors for
the development of LA in myeloma patients are not yet identified. In our reported case, our patient had stage II MM with standard risk
category. Looking into previously reported cases, the only common denominator was the presence of relapsed disease. Other factors like
immunoglobulin subtype, stage, and cytogenetic profile were variably reported. Though the survival of our patient was in a range of a few
days as with other reported cases (Table 2), we cannot say that LA is a surrogate for shorter survival. Although elevated levels of lactic
acid have been shown to be correlated with increased mortality.6 Some studies have also demonstrated an association between a 12-hour rise
in lactate concentration above 2.5 mmol/L and multisystem organ failure.6 Summary of case reports of type-B LA associated with MM including
the current reported case. In conclusion, it is evident that relapsed-refractory myeloma carries a poor prognosis, and is associated with
involvement of multiple body systems. Lactic acidosis may reflect tumor burden and warrants an early recognition and treatment. Physicians
should consider type-B LA in patients with malignancies when there is high anion gap metabolic acidosis and normal hemodynamics. Delays in
diagnosis and treatment of such cases could lead to rapid death.6 Reduction of tumor burden with chemotherapy could possibly improve the
LA.2 Other treatment modalities including careful use of bicarbonate infusion, hemodialysis, thiamine replacement, and mechanical
ventilation should be considered while waiting for a potential response to chemotherapy. The authors would like to thank Dr. Mahmoud
Alarini, MD, for reviewing patient’s radiological figures. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported
or funded by any drug company. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug
company. Alherabi AZ, Khan AM, Marglani OA, Abdulfattah TA. Multiple myeloma presenting as dysphagia. Saudi Med J 2013; 34: 648-650.
Charafeddine KM, Kaskas HR, Zaatari GS, Mahfouz RA, Hanna TS, Sarieddine DS, et al. Patterns of monoclonal components and their correlation
with different analytical parameters. Saudi Med J 2011; 32: 308-310. Saad AA, Awed NM, Abdel-Hafeez ZM, Kamal GM, Elsallaly HM, Alloub AI.
Prognostic value of immunohistochemical classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma into germinal center B-cell and non-germinal center
B-cell subtypes. Saudi Med J 2010; 31: 135-141.
