aspartate aminotransferase beats per minute creatine kinase Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine equine granulocytic anaplasmosis
fahrenheit gamma‐glutamyl transpeptidase polymerase chain reaction reference range severe combined immunodeficiency disease A 15‐year‐old,
558‐kg Quarter Horse gelding was examined because of peripheral edema and bicavitary (pleural and abdominal) effusion, identified via field
ultrasonography before referral. Two years earlier, the horse was evaluated for a similar clinical presentation, including peripheral edema,
bicavitary effusion, and fever. The gelding was diagnosed with Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)1 on
peripheral blood. He was treated with oxytetracycline2 (approximately 10 mg/kg IV q12h for 5 days) and made a full clinical recovery.
Initial evaluation during the most recent episode revealed a normal body temperature, tachycardia (60 BPM; reference range (RR): 26–501),
and a normal respiratory rate and effort. Thoracic auscultation identified muffled left‐sided heart sounds and bilateral absence of
bronchovesicular sounds ventrally. The horse had marked pitting ventral, preputial, and pectoral edema. There were prominent jugular pulses,
extending one‐half to one‐third up the neck. Arterial oxygen tension3 was within reference range. A subsequent serum chemistry analysis
revealed low total protein levels (3.9 g/dL; RR: 5.6–7.0) characterized by panhypoproteinemia, but was otherwise unremarkable. Complete
blood count (CBC)4 analysis revealed mild anemia (hematocrit 30%; RR: 32–50), leukopenia (4.8 × 103/μL; RR: 5.9–11.2), and lymphopenia
(0.96 × 103/μL; RR: 1.6–5.2), consistent with inflammation. The serum fibrinogen (375 mg/dL; RR: 100–400) and platelet count (159 × 103/μL;
RR: 100–400) were within normal limits. No granulocytic inclusions were noted. Abdominal and thoracic ultrasound examination confirmed the
presence of moderate, hypoechoic bicavitary effusion, and identified mild dilatation of the liver sinusoids. Bilateral thoracentesis yielded
moderate volumes (4 L from the left hemithorax, 3 L from the right hemithorax) of a neutrophilic transudate. As the horse's clinical signs
could be attributable to heart failure, an echocardiogram was subsequently performed. The examination revealed a structurally normal heart
with normal cardiac measurements, but mild pulmonic valve insufficiency and mild tricuspid valve regurgitation. Moderate pericardial
effusion was present, resulting in irregular motion of the right cardiac chambers, consistent with mild tamponade. Regional epicardial
thickening with fibrin accumulation was also noted. An electrocardiogram identified a second‐degree atrioventricular block. Subsequent
pericardiocentesis yielded 5 L of serosanguinous fluid, which was characterized as a mixed inflammatory exudate with a total protein of
3.8 g/dL (RR: <2), HCT of 2%, red blood cell count of 0.334 M/μL, and a total nucleated cell count of 6.02 × 103/μL (RR: <5). Cytologic
evaluation revealed 52% nondegenerate neutrophils, 39% lymphocytes, and 9% monocytes. While peripheral blood contamination could not be
entirely ruled out, the lack of visible platelets in the sample, as well as the relative increase in inflammatory cells compared to
peripheral blood made a primary serosanguinous effusion probable. Multiple neutrophils contained pale basophilic inclusions consistent with
degenerating A. phagocytophilum organisms; however, peripheral blood leukocytes exhibited normal morphology with no noted inclusions.
Samples of the pericardial fluid and peripheral blood were PCR1 positive for A. phagocytophilum, consistent with a diagnosis of equine
granulocytic anaplasmosis (EGA; formerly equine ehrlichiosis). The horse was treated with oxytetracycline1 (approximately 7.5 mg/kg IV q12h)
for 14 days, followed by 14 days of doxycycline5 (10 mg/kg PO q12h). There was no recurrence of effusion after the initial pericardio‐ and
thoracocentesis, based on repeated ultrasound examination of the thorax. The horse's hypoproteinemia began to improve within 24 hours of
initial therapeutic intervention, and his tachycardia and jugular pulses resolved after pericardiocentesis. Peripheral edema improved by day
3 of hospitalization, and had largely resolved at the time of discharge. The horse remained afebrile with a gradual daily improvement in
affect and appetite throughout hospitalization. A recheck CBC on day 8 revealed a normal leukocyte count (8.2 × 103/μL; RR: 5.9–11.2), with
a neutrophil count of 5.2 × 103/μL (RR: 2.3–9.1) and a lymphocyte count of 2.64 × 103/μL (RR: 1.6–5.2). The horse's platelet count was
estimated to be 200,000–500,000/μL and the hematocrit was 31% (RR: 30–51), Serum chemistry indicated resolving hypoproteinemia (4.7 mg/dL;
RR: 5.6–7.0). No recurrence of disease has been reported. A 4‐month‐old, 49‐kg miniature donkey filly was examined because of a several‐day
history of anorexia, weakness, and lethargy, which at the time of admission had progressed to recumbency. Initial evaluation revealed the
filly to be weak and centrally lethargic with normal cranial nerve function, deep pain, withdrawal and reflex responses. The foal's body
temperature was within normal limits2. Auscultation identified sinus tachycardia (90 BPM; RR: 30–50) and a normal respiratory rate with
mildly increased bronchovesicular sounds. Arterial blood gas analysis2 verified adequate oxygenation and ventilation. However, several
abnormalities were present, including mild, uncompensated metabolic acidosis, anemia (PCV 16%; RR: 33–43), hyperlactatemia [94.5 mg/dL
(10.5 mmoL/L); RR: <18 (<2)], hyponatremia (121 mEq/L; RR: 137–145), mild hyperkalemia (5.4 mEq/L; RR: 3.6–4.8), hyperglycemia (168 mg/dL;
RR: 60–110), and hypercreatininemia (3.2 mg/dL; RR: 0.8–1.9). Serum chemistry further identified hypoalbuminemia (2.0 g/dL; RR: 3.0–4.0),
hypochloremia (85 mEq/L; RR: 99–105), and elevations in AST (2,324 U/L; RR: 368–600) and CK (627 U/L; RR: 21–136). A CBC revealed
leukocytosis (16.7 × 103/μL; RR: 5.9–11.2) and hyperfibrinogenemia (500 mg/dL; RR: 100–400)3, consistent with inflammation, and an estimated
platelet count of 200,000–500,000/μL. Neutrophil morphology was normal and no cellular inclusions were noted. Fecal floatation showed a
heavy parasite burden of strongyles (6,150 ova/g), Parascaris equorum (300 ova/g), and Strongyloides spp. (97,950 ova/g). Serum iron
concentrations1 were subsequently determined to be low (38 μg/dL; RR: 50–198). Serum vitamin E and selenium levels6 were within published
reference ranges. Goal‐directed fluid resuscitation with lactated Ringer's solution (LRS)7 led to a clinical improvement in alertness and
gradual resolution of the hypercreatininemia, hyperlactatemia and electrolyte derangements over 24 hours. After initial stabilization,
abdominal ultrasound revealed mildly increased small intestinal wall thickness, a prominent liver, and subjectively small spleen. Thoracic
ultrasound demonstrated marked pleural effusion bilaterally with evidence of fibrin strands, but a normal pleural reflection. No other
abnormalities of the lungs or heart were appreciated. Bilateral thoracocentesis yielded a moderate volume of pleural effusion (660 mL from
the left hemithorax, 215 mL from the right hemithorax). Fluid analysis from the left hemithorax revealed a pure transudate (protein
<2.0 g/dL; RR<2.0) with a low nucleated cell count (1.25 × 103/μL; RR: <8.0) and a mixed population of cells (36% nondegenerate neutrophils,
37% lymphocytes, and 27% monocytes). Analysis of the right hemithorax sample showed a protein rich fluid (4.4 g/dL; RR: <2.0) with a normal
leukocyte count (5.16 × 103/μL; RR: <8.0). Leukocyte examination demonstrated a mixed population of cells (51% nondegenerate neutrophils,
23% lymphocytes, and 26% monocytes) and the presence of morulae within a small percentage of neutrophils. This fluid sample tested PCR8
positive for A. phagocytophilum. The foal was treated with oxytetracycline2 (10 mg/kg IV q12h). Treatment with iron9 (6.5 mg/kg PO q24h) was
initiated based on the filly's low serum iron concentration, and a 5‐day course of fenbendazole10 (10 mg/kg PO q24h) was administered to
address the extensive parasitism. Routine supportive therapies, including fluids administered IV (LRS)7, were also continued. The foal's
clinical signs and HCT steadily improved after the initiation of tetracycline and iron treatment, and by day 5 of hospitalization, her
packed cell volume (PCV) had risen to 25%. A repeat serum chemistry performed at that time revealed mild hypertriglyceridemia (169 mg/dL;
RR: 32–100) and elevations of GGT (355 U/L; RR: 40–98) and AST (1311 U/L; RR: 368–600), indicating hepatic injury3. Hyperglobulinemia
(5.8 g/dL; RR: 3.2–4.6) was noted, and was considered consistent with antigenic stimulation. Concurrently, the filly's SDH level1 was
increased (18.4 U/L; RR: 2.0–6.0), consistent with ongoing hepatic insult. The aberrations in liver values potentially occurred in
association with EGA infection, although other possible causes of liver damage, including cholestasis, hypoxic injury, hepatic lipidosis,
and drug‐induced liver damage, were considered. A definitive cause could not be determined with certainty, in the absence of a liver biopsy.
On day 8 of hospitalization, the GGT had decreased slightly (260 U/L; RR: 40–98), and a serum iron level was found to be within normal
limits. Thoracic ultrasound evaluation repeated on day 8 of hospitalization demonstrated minimal residual pleural effusion. CBC and serum
chemistry performed the next day revealed mild leukocytosis (11.8 × 103/μL; RR: 5.9–11.2), a HCT of 25%, further improvement in GGT
(210 U/L; RR: 40–98), and normalization of AST (391 U/L; RR: 368–600), suggesting cessation of active hepatocyte injury. Thoracic
radiographs obtained on day 13 were unremarkable, and the foal was discharged with a 2‐week course of doxycycline11 (10 mg/kg PO q12h) and
continued iron supplementation under the direction of the referring veterinarian. The foal's HCT remained stable throughout the remainder of
hospitalization, and was 25% at the time of discharge. CBC and serum chemistry analysis4 performed 6 weeks after discharge revealed a HCT of
34%, and resolution of all other blood work abnormalities. Serum iron at that time was normal. No recurrence of disease has been noted. This
report describes Anaplasma‐associated cavitary effusion in equids leading to a primary complaint of cardio‐respiratory compromise. In
contrast, classic EGA most commonly presents with a fever, partial or total anorexia, lethargy, peripheral edema, ataxia, icterus, and
petechiation, secondary to vasculitis and thrombocytopenia. In addition, mild anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia are frequently
reported hematologic abnormalities in affected horses4, 5. Some of these characteristics were also shared by the equids in this report. A
variety of uncommon clinical manifestations of A. phagocytophilum include acute recumbency6, rhabdomyolysis7, and acute death in an
experimentally infected horse, attributed to disseminated intravascular coagulation and circulatory shock8. Novel disease presentations in
other species have historically included edema, asymptomatic ascites, and premature parturition in a camelid9, congenital infection in a
calf10, and acute blindness associated with uveitis, intraocular hemorrhage, and retinal detachment in a dog11. However, clinically
symptomatic multi‐cavitary effusion secondary to A. phagocytophilum infection is considered to be an atypical clinical presentation of this
tick‐borne disease. The ability to document morulae and to obtain a positive PCR for A. phagocytophilum in various body fluids was strongly
supportive of EGA as the inciting cause of cavitary effusion in both equids of the current report. Visualization of basophilic morulae
within the neutrophilic cytoplasm is commonly observed, and most notable on days 3–5 postinfection in horses12. Identification of these
morulae in whole blood or fluid samples can be a critical element in obtaining a rapid diagnosis in affected equines, although PCR analysis
for A. phagocytophilum is considered a more sensitive diagnostic test13. The relationship between EGA infection and the development of
cavitary effusions remains speculative. Localized vasculitis is a well described clinical manifestation of EGA infection in equids4, and has
been cited as the most probable pathogenesis of distal limb edema. While it is plausible that localized vasculitis (myocardial, pleural,
peritoneal) was the source of cavitary effusion in these cases, it remains unclear why clinically relevant effusion is not more frequently
detected in equids infected with A. phagocytophilum. Proliferative, necrotizing inflammation of the small arteries and veins, with
associated endothelial and smooth muscle cell swelling, cellular thromboses, and perivascular leukocyte infiltration, primarily affecting
the distal limbs and reproductive structures, was described in one of the first reported cases of EGA4. This study further described a
proportion (approximately 11/33) of animals with postmortem effusions of the peritoneum and pericardium, although no mechanism was proposed.
In contrast, a more recent report14, comparing the pathologic findings of A. phagocytophilum infection in sheep, humans, and equids,
documented localized distal limb vasculitis in horses, but no component of necrosis or proliferation. Evidence of systemic vasculitis as a
major underlying pathology was not described in this more recent report. The currently proposed pathogenesis of vasculitis in EGA infection
is 2‐fold. First, A. phagocytophilum may localize and perpetuate in granulocytes (neutrophils) with subsequent colonization of endothelial
cells. Reports focusing on A. phagocytophilum have not only determined the organism's ability to colonize the microvascular endothelium and
reproduce in vitro15, but have established this pathogenesis in vivo, using chronically affected SCID (severe combined immunodeficiency)
mice16. The latter study concluded that microvascular endothelial cells may not only play a key role in the initial infectivity of the
bacteria, but also serve as a nidus for continued infection. Vascular endothelium provides an ideal site for colonization, as these cells
have a greater longevity than granulocytes, and would allow for easy transfer of bacterial organisms to marginating granulocytes, while
altering their behavior to prevent transmigration, and permitting for their return to the general circulation. Furthermore, endothelial
colonization allows for avoidance of certain host immune effectors such as immunoglobulin and complement15, which permits propagation of
infection and associated vascular injury. Alternatively, the production of myelosuppressive and proinflammatory cytokines by neutrophils can
contribute to the development of vasculitis and edema15, 17. Multiple studies have determined that the severity of clinical and
histopathologic disease is exacerbated by host immune responses, most notably gamma interferon, IL‐12, and IL‐1017. A. phagocytophilum
induces increased expression of chemokines, including IL‐8, which attracts naïve neutrophils to sites of infection and allows for
propagation of the organism18. In addition, the variability in host defenses between individuals likely plays a role in the manifestation of
disease. This notion is supported by the fact that the horse in case 1 presented twice for EGA infection, with a similar, yet atypical
constellation of clinical signs. On both occasions the horse responded well to treatment with oxytetracycline. Both equids in the current
report demonstrated evidence of potential liver damage based on hematology, ultrasonography, or both. While Anaplasma spp. infections are
associated with liver pathology in humans, including hepatocyte apoptosis and periportal lymphohistiocytic infiltrates19, this disease
manifestation is not routinely recognized in equids. However, one report14 described a variety of histologic abnormalities of the liver on
postmortem examination, including periportal lymphocytic infiltrates, macrophage aggregates, lobular hepatitis, and visible apoptotic cells
in a group of horses infected with A. phagocytophilum. Subclinical hepatitis may be underdiagnosed in the clinical setting, as most equines
do not undergo routine blood screening in uncomplicated cases of EGA. In addition, horses with more classic clinical signs of EGA may be
diagnosed and treated quickly in endemic areas, thus limiting more wide‐spread systemic effects of infection. In summary, this report
describes a novel manifestation of clinically relevant cavitary effusion, secondary to A. phagocytophilum infection in equids presenting for
cardio‐respiratory compromise. While classic clinical signs of EGA commonly include fever, anorexia, lethargy, peripheral edema, ataxia, and
petechiation, a differential diagnosis of A. phagocytophilum infection should be considered in equids presenting for inflammatory pleural,
pericardial, or abdominal effusion, especially in endemic areas and in equids with a history of tick exposure. Conflict of Interest
Declaration: Authors disclose no conflict of interest. Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: Authors declare no off‐label use of
antimicrobials. Idexx Laboratories, N. Grafton, MA Butler Animal Health, Dublin, OH Stat Profile pHOx Ultra, NOVA Biomedical, Waltham, MA
Antech Diagnostics, Lake Success, NY Wedgewood Pharmacy, Swedesboro, NJ Michigan State University Diagnostic Center for Population and
Animal Health, Lansing, MI Abbott Laboratories, N. Chicago, IL North Carolina State University Vector Borne Disease Laboratory, Raleigh, NC
Ferrous Sulfate, Major Pharmaceuticals, Livonia, MI Panacur, Intervet Inc., Merck Animal Health, Summit, NJ Westward Pharmaceutical
Corporation, Eatontown, NJ
