The transcatheter aortic valve implantation in the treatment of high-risk symptomatic aortic stenosis has increased the number of implants
every year. The learning curve for transcatheter aortic valve implantation has improved since the last 12 years, allowing access
alternatives. The aim of this study is to approach the implantation of transcatheter aortic valve through transaortic via associated with
off-pump cardiopulmonary bypass surgery in a 67-year-old man, with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arterial hypertension and kidney
transplant. Off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery was performed and the valve in the aortic position was released successfully. There were
no complications in the intraoperative and postoperative period. Gradient reduction, effective orifice increasing of the prosthesis and
absence of valvular regurgitation after implantation were observed by transesophageal echocardiography. Procedural success demonstrates that
implantation of transcatheter aortic valve through the ascending aorta associated with coronary artery bypass surgery without CPB is a new
option for these patients. implante de prótese aórtica transcateter no tratamento da estenose aórtica sintomática de alto risco vem
aumentando de número a cada ano no mundo. A curva de aprendizado para implante da prótese aórtica transcateter melhorou os resultados ao
longo dos últimos 12 anos, o que permitiu o surgimento de outras vias de acesso como alternativas. Este trabalho refere-se ao implante de
prótese aórtica transcateter pela via transaórtica associada à revascularização do miocárdio sem em paciente do sexo masculino de 67 anos
com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica, hipertensão arterial sistêmica e transplante de rim. A revascularização miocárdica e o implante da
prótese aórtica transcateter foram realizados com sucesso sem o auxílio da circulação extracorpórea. No intra e pós-operatório não houve
complicações, a redução do gradiente transvalvar, o aumento do orifício efetivo e ausência de regurgitação paravalvar foram observados pelo
ecocardiograma transesofágico. O implante da prótese aórtica transcateter pela aorta ascendente associado com revascularização do miocárdio
sem circulação extracorpórea é uma nova alternativa para pacientes de alto rico. The learning curve for transcatheter aortic prosthesis
implantation over the last 12 years has improved the results and allowed the emergence of other approach vias as implant alternatives.
Access through the ascending aorta is a possibility for cases in which the transfemoral and transapical vias are contraindicated, mainly in
combined procedures of aortic valve replacement and coronary artery bypass grafting. This study describes the implantation of a
transcatheter aortic prosthesis through the ascending aorta concomitant with coronary artery bypass grafting without cardiopulmonary bypass
in high risk patients. 67-years-old male patient, white, with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), hypertension and right kidney
transplanted seven years ago, was admitted to our hospital with angina pectoris , CCS 3 (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Angina
Classification) and dyspnea at minimum effort, NYHA Class IV (New York Heart Association). Arterial blood pressure of 150x90 mmHg, heart
rate 98 bpm, cardiac auscultation with presence of an ejection murmur in the aortic area, presence of Gallavardin phenomenon and B1
hypophonetic sound. Coronary angiography showed critical obstructive lesions of 80% in the distal third of the right coronary anterior
descending artery with 70% in the proximal third, 99% diagonalis in the proximal third and 80% in the first marginal branch ostium. A
transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a double aortic valve lesion with predominant severe and calcified stenosis. The flow rate was
4.44 m/s, mean gradient of 48 mmHg aortic valve, ejection fraction of 80%, left ventricular end diastolic diameter (LVEDD) of 51 mm, left
atrium and aorta of 46 mm and 31 mm, respectively. The creatinine was 2.8 mg/dl and creatinine clearance of 58 ml plasma/min/m2. Other
comorbidities included left carotid disease with significant asymptomatic atherosclerotic plaque. The EuroSCORE II was 14.86%. CABG and
implantation of transcatheter aortic prosthesis for ascending aorta without the use of CPB (Figures 1 and 2) were performed. Both internal
thoracic arteries were dissected and a segment of the magna right saphenous vein was removed. The CPB circuit was installed by the vein and
femoral artery in case of any complication during the procedure. Image of the procedure Intraoperative 3D Transesophageal Echocardiogram The
procedure was performed in a hybrid operating room with C-shaped arch Philips BV Pulsera and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) GE Vivid
E9 3D. The response curve dose of systemic heparin, described by Bull and colleagues in 1975 was used. The right internal thoracic artery
was anastomosed to the left internal thoracic artery, making a Y-shaped branch. Thus, the left internal thoracic artery was grafted to the
descending artery and the right internal thoracic artery to the diagonal branch, and the saphenous vein segment to the first marginal
branch. CPB was not used at any stage of the procedure. During the anastomoses of coronary grafts we used stabilizer and intracoronary
shunts of 1.5 for diagonal and 1.75 for anterior descending and first marginal branch. In the anastomosis of the saphenous marginal branch
there was a hemodynamic instability due to the presence of cardiac dislocation and severe aortic stenosis, by releasing the heart to
hemodynamic stability, then resumed the anastomoses without instability. The implantation of transcatheter aortic valve prosthesis was
performed through the ascending aorta in the anterior, superior and lateral wall, locations with lower prevalence of calcification. To
prevent bleeding a purse was performed using 4.0 prolene wires and bovine pericardial pledges. The prosthesis used was No. 24 and the 28
balloon catheter, the implantation in the aortic valve annulus without pre-dilatation guided the previously introduced guidewire into the
left ventricle. Heart rate was increased to 160 bpm using a temporary pacing electrode in the right ventricle, this maneuver was used to
decrease blood flow in the aorta during the release of the prosthesis and the total time of the aortic procedure lasted 28 minutes. There
was no intraoperative and postoperative complication, the patient was extubated eight hours after the procedure without the need for
inotropic support or temporary pacemaker. Postoperative TEE showed reduced transvalvular gradient, effective increased orifice, and absence
of paravalvular regurgitation. The patient was asymptomatic and returned to professional activity after three months follow-up. The
implantation of transcatheter aortic prosthesis represents a paradigm shift in the treatment of aortic stenosis in symptomatic or high risk
patients considered inoperable. The first implantation of transcatheter aortic prosthesis in humans was published in 2002, and the first
randomized study to determine safety and effectiveness of transcatheter prosthesis in the aortic position demonstrated the noninferiority of
the method compared with conventional surgery. The global sample exceeded 100 thousand cases of transcatheter prostheses implantation over
the last twelve years. In Brazil, three types of transcatheter prostheses are used, including a Brazilian prosthesis with good results
through transapical access and as an alternative it was implemented by femoral access with success. Transapical and transfemoral approaches
are the most used for the transcatheter treatment of symptomatic calcified aortic stenosis. However, in patients with peripheral arterial
disease, deformed chest and fragile left ventricular apical segment, other approaches can be used. The transaortic approach through the
ascending aorta and ministernotomy is an attractive therapeutic option. However, there are few reports in the literature on thoracotomy
through a median sternotomy involving implantation of transcatheter aortic prosthesis concomitant to off-pump coronary artery bypass
grafting. The study by Mohammad et al. in 2011 on the transcatheter aortic prosthesis implantation through the ascending aorta and coronary
artery bypass grafting showed reproducible results with success. Our study concerns a patient who had severe aortic stenosis and associated
coronary artery disease, and the "Heart Team" opted for transaortic via in the ascending portion with full median sternotomy due to the need
for CABG; two mammary arteries and one great saphenous vein segment were used. The aid of 3D TEE allowed the release of INOVARE®
transcatheter aortic prosthesis at the desired location without complication. Full off-pump CABG was performed, and the right coronary
artery was not revascularized because it presented an obstructive lesion in the distal third. The CPB system was on standby, allowing to
perform the procedure safely if there were any complications. However, there were some difficulties during the procedure, the largest of
which was to establish the optimal length of the introducer and release device of the transcatheter valve between puncture in the aortic
wall up to the aortic valve annulus. Leaving the guidewire until the tip of the left ventricle and determine the exact point of release of
the prosthesis are important maneuvers to the aforementioned procedure. The hybrid operative treatment with transcatheter aortic prosthesis
implantation through the ascending aorta and CABG is an alternative therapy that justifies the indication for symptomatic calcified aortic
stenosis associated with coronary artery disease in high-risk patients.
