A 12-year-old mixed-breed neutered female dog was referred with cutaneous tumors at the left auricle. Histologically, the cutaneous tumor
located in the dermis comprised numerous clefts and cavernous channels lined by neoplastic endothelial cells with no erythrocytes. Bone
tissue without direct contact with neoplastic cells was seen in the well-developed stromal connective tissue. The neoplastic endothelial
cells exhibited mild to moderate atypia. Immunohistochemically, neoplastic cells were positive for vimentin and negative for cytokeratin and
factor VIII-related antigen. Basement membrane around the neoplastic lumens was positive for laminin in a linear or granular pattern.
Ultrastructural examination revealed discontinuous basement membrane beneath the tumor cells. Histopathological features of this case were
consistent with lymphangiosarcoma, and stromal ossification was characteristic. Lymphangiosarcoma is a rare malignant cutaneous tumor that
derives from the lymphatic endothelium in humans and domestic animals [1,2,3,4,5, 8, 9, 11,12,13]. Only a small number of case reports have
described canine lymphangiosarcoma [1, 4, 9, 11, 14]. In dogs, lymphangiosarcoma tends to localize in the subcutis along the ventral midline
and limbs, with major reported locations of the inguinal region, cervical region, hind limb and forelimb [1, 4, 9, 11, 14]. We recently
encountered a unique case of canine lymphangiosarcoma with bone formation in the auricle. We describe herein the morphological and
immunohistochemical findings of a case of lymphangiosarcoma of the auricle in a dog. A 12-year-old mixed-breed neutered female dog developed
cutaneous masses at the left auricle. The dog had a history of bilateral chronic pruritic otitis externa. The largest mass at the tip of the
auricle was found by the dog’s owner 1.5 years before resection of the auricle and had become gradually enlarged since first discovery. The
mass in the region of the tip of the auricle had slowly grown to 28 × 25 mm, but no swelling was apparent in surrounding tissues (Fig. 1Fig.
1.The cutaneous mass (arrows) in the region of the tip of the left auricle. Two millet-sized daughter nodules (arrowheads) were present on
postauricular skin. Bar=50 mm.). Two millet-sized daughter nodules developed on the postauricular skin during the period of primary tumor
development. Resection of the auricle was performed, and the specimen was submitted to our laboratory for histopathological examination. The
largest mass was soft on palpation, but difficult to transect due to presence of a calcified lesion within the center of the mass. Effusion
of a clear serous fluid was noted from the cut surface. During the 14 months since surgical excision, no local recurrence or metastasis has
been recognized. The cutaneous mass (arrows) in the region of the tip of the left auricle. Two millet-sized daughter nodules (arrowheads)
were present on postauricular skin. Bar=50 mm. The mass was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned and
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), alcian blue (pH 2.5), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Watanabe’s silver impregnation. Surface
decalcification of paraffin-embedded sections for HE staining was performed by placing tissue blocks in Plank-Rychlo’s solution (0.3 M
aluminium chloride, 3% HCl and 5% formic acid) for 20 min at room temperature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed by the immunoenzyme
polymer method using the primary antibodies shown in Table 1Table 1.Primary antibodies and immunostaining protocol in the current
studyAntibodya)CloneDilutionSourceAntigen retrievalb)Pan-CKAE1/AE31:50Dako Denmark A/S., Glostrup, DenmarkMW, 95°C, 10
minVimentinSP201:100Nichirei Corp., Tokyo, JapanMW, 95°C, 10 minFactor VIII-related antigenPolyclonalpredilutedDako Denmark A/S., Glostrup,
Denmarkpepsin, 37°C, 20 minSMA1A41:100Dako Denmark A/S., Glostrup, DenmarkNo treatmentKi67MIB-11:100Dako Denmark A/S., Glostrup, DenmarkAC,
121°C, 20 minLamininPolyclonal1:100Progen Biotechnik., Heidelberg, Germanypepsin, 37°C, 20 mina) CK=cytokeratin, b) MW=microwave, citrate
buffer (PH6.0); AC=autocleve, citrate buffer (PH6.0); Pepsin=0.4% pepsin (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.).. Peroxidase-conjugated
anti-mouse (Histofine Simple Stain MAX-PO (M); Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan) or anti-rabbit (Histofine Simple Stain MAX-PO (R); Nichirei)
immunoglobulin (Ig) G was used as secondary antibodies. Immunofluorescence testing was performed using anti-laminin antibody (Table 1).
After blocking with 4% Block AceTM(Snow Brand Milk Products, Sapporo, Japan) for 10 min at room temperature, dewaxed sections were incubated
with anti-laminin antibody. After washing with PBS, sections were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Invitrogen,
Tokyo, Japan). Fluorescence was analyzed using a FSX100 fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). In addition, part of the formalin-
fixed tissue specimen was cut into 1-mm3 cubes, re-fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, post-fixed in 1% osmium acid and embedded in Epon. Ultra-
thin sections were double-stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and then examined using a transmission electron microscope (JEOL
1210; JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) at 80 kV. a) CK=cytokeratin, b) MW=microwave, citrate buffer (PH6.0); AC=autocleve, citrate buffer (PH6.0);
Pepsin=0.4% pepsin (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.). Histologically, the largest infiltrative mass at the tip region was located
in the dermis. The mass comprised numerous irregular lumens or slit-like spaces with no erythrocytes and lined by plump or spindle-shaped
neoplastic cells (Fig. 2Fig. 2.The mass was located in the dermis and comprised numerous clefts and cavernous channels lined by neoplastic
endothelial cells with no erythrocytes. Inset: Mitotic figure in the lining cells (arrowhead). Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain. Bar=300
µm.). Neoplastic cells exhibited mild to moderate atypia and pleomorphism, varying in size. The mitotic activity of neoplastic cells was
mild, at 2 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. Localized bone tissue without direct contact with neoplastic cells and cartilage of the auricle
was seen in the stromal connective tissue (Fig. 3Fig. 3.Bone formation (asterisk) in the well-developed stroma separated from neoplastic
cells. HE stain, decalcified tissue. Bar=200 µm.). The bone tissue did not show lamellar structure and was irregular in shape, approximately
6 mm in maximum length. Osteoclast-like giant cells and polyhedral osteoblasts were frequently found on the surface of the bone tissue.
Fibrous stroma around the bone contained irregular osteoid structures (Fig. 4Fig. 4.Osteoclast-like giant cells (arrows) and osteoblasts
were frequently found around the bone tissue (asterisk). Osteoid formation (arrowhead) occurred near the bone tissue. Inset: Osteoclast-like
giant cells. HE stain, decalcified tissue. Bar=200 µm.). Alcian blue staining demonstrated no cartilaginous components in and around the
bone tissue. Marked necrosis and superficial ulceration of the epidermis with infection by Gram-positive cocci were noted at the tip of the
ear. Inflammatory cells, mainly comprising lymphocytes and plasma cells, were scattered throughout the tumor and adjacent soft tissues.
Histopathologically, daughter nodules exhibited similar features to the largest mass, but without formation of bone tissue. The mass was
located in the dermis and comprised numerous clefts and cavernous channels lined by neoplastic endothelial cells with no erythrocytes.
Inset: Mitotic figure in the lining cells (arrowhead). Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain. Bar=300 µm. Bone formation (asterisk) in the well-
developed stroma separated from neoplastic cells. HE stain, decalcified tissue. Bar=200 µm. Osteoclast-like giant cells (arrows) and
osteoblasts were frequently found around the bone tissue (asterisk). Osteoid formation (arrowhead) occurred near the bone tissue. Inset:
Osteoclast-like giant cells. HE stain, decalcified tissue. Bar=200 µm. Silver staining demonstrated that most neoplastic cells proliferated
along reticular fibers. PAS-stained sections confirmed discrete basement membrane around intratumoral non-neoplastic capillary vessels, but
results were unclear around neoplastic vessels. Basement membrane also showed staining with anti-laminin antibody. Laminin staining was
linear or granular around the neoplastic lumens or slit-like spaces (Fig. 5Fig. 5.Immunofluorescence (IF) for laminin. Green color indicated
positive staining for laminin. Nuclei were colored blue with 4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole. (a) Laminin expression was linear or granular
around neoplastic vascular channels (arrowheads). The wall of non-neoplastic vessel showed intense positive staining for laminin (arrows).
Bar=50 µm. (b) High magnification view of IF for laminin. Laminin expression was granular around neoplastic vascular channels. Bar=30 µm.).
Immunofluorescence (IF) for laminin. Green color indicated positive staining for laminin. Nuclei were colored blue with
4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole. (a) Laminin expression was linear or granular around neoplastic vascular channels (arrowheads). The wall of non-
neoplastic vessel showed intense positive staining for laminin (arrows). Bar=50 µm. (b) High magnification view of IF for laminin. Laminin
expression was granular around neoplastic vascular channels. Bar=30 µm. Neoplastic cells showed diffuse expression of vimentin, but no
positive labeling for cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3. Factor VIII-related antigen was intensely positive in normal endothelial cells of both blood
and lymphatic vessels, but neoplastic cells showed no labeling for factor VIII-related antigen. Smooth muscle actin-positive pericyte layers
were not seen in the structures of any lumens or slit-like spaces. The proliferation rate, evaluated as the percentage of Ki67-positive
cells in 5 high-power fields (including approximately 1,000 cells), was 10.7%. Ultrastructural examination revealed empty clefts devoid of
blood cells and lined by neoplastic cells with oval nuclei and a paranuclear zone rich in intermediate filaments. There were no pericytes
around the neoplastic vasculatures. Weibel-palade bodies were not found in the neoplastic cells examined. Basement membrane was apparent,
but partly unclear beneath the tumor cells, of which findings might be consistent with those in immunofluorescence for laminin (Fig. 6Fig.
6.Ultrastructural examination revealed empty clefts (asterisk) devoid of blood cells, lined by neoplastic cells with oval nuclei and a
paranuclear zone rich in intermediate filaments (white arrows). Basement membrane beneath the neoplastic cells was detected (black arrows),
but it was partly unclear (arrowheads). Weibel-palade bodies were not present in the neoplastic cells. Bar=2 µm.). Ultrastructural
examination revealed empty clefts (asterisk) devoid of blood cells, lined by neoplastic cells with oval nuclei and a paranuclear zone rich
in intermediate filaments (white arrows). Basement membrane beneath the neoplastic cells was detected (black arrows), but it was partly
unclear (arrowheads). Weibel-palade bodies were not present in the neoplastic cells. Bar=2 µm. The differential diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma
and lymphangiosarcoma is based on both immunohistochemical and morphological features. Recently, Halsey et al. have shown usability of novel
lymphatic endothelial cells markers; lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-1 (LYVE-1) and prospero-related homeobox-gene-1 (PROX-1) for
differential diagnosis of vascular tumors in dogs. However, in the present case, a lack or greatly reduced presence of erythrocytes,
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration in the tumor, absence of pericytes and lack of Weibel-palade bodies in the neoplastic cells suggest the tumor
to be a lymphangiosarcoma, not a hemangiosarcoma [3, 15]. Moreover, unclear or discontinuous basement membrane as seen by electron
microscopy or PAS staining in the present case was consistent with previous descriptions of lymphangiosarcoma in animals [2, 3, 9,10,11].
The granular immunoreactivity for laminin around neoplastic vascular channels might indicate discontinuous basement membrane in agreement
with ultrastructural finding. According to some previous cases, distinguishing well-differentiated lymphangiosarcoma from lymphangiomatosis
might be difficult. In our case, the presence of daughter nodules, mitotic activity and markedly infiltrative growth separated
lymphangiomatosis from lymphangiosarcoma. This is the first report of canine lymphangiosarcoma which occurred in the auricle. The trigger
for the development of canine lymphangiosarcoma remains unclear in most cases. However, most lymphangiosarcomas in humans arise against a
background of chronic lymphedema following mastectomy, trauma or irradiation . In the present case, the dog had no history of chronic
lymphedema at the tumor site. We suspect that chronic inflammation and trauma associated with pruritic otitis externa might have been
involved in the oncogenesis in this case. As stated above, the tumor was diagnosed as a lymphangiosarcoma. However, the case was not
histologically typical, because of the accompanying intratumoral bone tissue. Bone formation has been reported in other soft tissue tumors,
including one case of ossifying epithelioid hemangioendothelioma in humans . To the best of our knowledge, bone formation has not been
reported in any previous cases of lymphangiosarcoma in dogs or humans. In the present case, bone tissue in fibrous stroma separated from
neoplastic cells indicated that stromal mesenchymal cells might differentiate into osteoblasts. The mechanisms and biological signals
involved in extraskeletal bone formation are poorly understood. Imai et al. reported that bone morphogenetic proteins 2, 4, 5 and 6 may play
important roles in ectopic bone formation in human colon carcinoma. Analysis focused on these factors might thus provide valuable
information regarding bone formation in the present case. We wish to thank Dr. Yoko Kakinuma and Ms. Yuka Isayama of Azabu University for
their valuable assistance.
