We report a 10-year-old Saudi girl who has Fanconi anemia (FA) and was admitted due to acute hemiplegia, of the right side. She had a
previous attack of left side hemiplegia that resolved spontaneously. The brain magnetic resonance angiography showed a cerebrovascular
pattern of moyamoya disease. She underwent partially matched related donor stem cell transplantation (SCT), but unfortunately died 3 months
later with post SCT complications. The association of moyamoya disease with FA is uncommon, and is rarely reported in the literature.
Although this condition may be acquired, it is considered a truly congenital defect in FA, and to identify the etiology of this association
furthermore genetic mutation analysis is needed. Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive condition, first described in 1927 by the
Swiss pediatrician Guido Fanconi.1 It is a phenotypically heterogeneous disorder characterized by pancytopenia, congenital malformation, and
predisposition to malignancy.2 Fanconi anemia cells are characterized by chromosomal hypersensitivity to cross linking agents such as
diepoxybutane, which is often used as the diagnostic test.3 Fanconi anemia is a very rare heterogeneous condition clinically, with a wide
variety of abnormalities. Skeletal abnormalities are most common anomalies, followed by skin pigmentation, and short stature. Central
nervous system defects are a rare anomaly, including hydrocephalus, absent septum pellucidum, and neural tube defects.4 Moyamoya disease is
rarely associated with FA, hence we are reporting a case of FA in Saudi child presenting with recurrent alternating hemiplegia. Our
objective in presenting this particular case is to highlight this rare association. A 10-year-old Saudi girl was referred from a local
hospital with right side weakness, which was of sudden onset, started in the right lower limb, and 2 days later involved the right upper
limb. She had a history of 4 months of pallor, and 2 weeks skin bruising prior to the onset. It was not associated with facial weakness,
headache, fever, convulsion, visual disturbance, or loss of consciousness, and no history of preceding head trauma. She had a similar attack
of left side weakness 5 months earlier, which resolved spontaneously without medical evaluation at a local hospital. Her mother noticed that
she is shorter than her other siblings. Her immunization was completed, and her physical, and cognitive development was normal. Her parents
were first degree cousin, and had 6 other siblings. Her physical examination revealed a well looking girl, with pallor and skin bruising on
lower limbs, with 2x3cm scattered café au lait spots on the back, and inguinal region. Her weight was 25 kg, below 5th centile for her age,
and her height was 118 cm, below the 3rd centile for her age. She had right hemiparesis, there were no hepatosplenomegaly, and the
examination of other systems were unremarkable. Her investigations showed white blood cell count 2600/mm3 (normal value - 4000-10500/mm3),
neutrophil count 500/mm3 (NV - 3000-5000/mm3), hemoglobin 6.3 g/dl (NV - 12.5-16.1 g/dl), and platelet count 33000/mm3 (NV - 150-400/mm3).
Her liver and renal profile were within normal limits. Bone marrow aspiration showed hypocellular marrow. Chromosomal analysis confirmed
chromosomal breakage. Brain MRI showed a left frontal focal area of acute ischemic infarction, and an area of right parietal periventricular
white matter old infarction, with multiple small white matter lacunar infarcts (Figure 1). The brain MRA showed poor arterial circulation,
and a narrow distal internal carotid artery with puff of smoke sign (arrow) on the right side suggestive of moyamoya disease (Figure 2). The
diagnosis was confirmed as FA, with association of moyamoya disease, presenting with right hemiplegia. She was managed initially by
supportive care in the form of a blood transfusion, and physical therapy for hemiplegia, later she underwent partial match related donor
stem cell transplantation (SCT), but unfortunately, she died after 3 months from post SCT complications. Magnetic resonance imaging (flair
image) showing left frontal focal area of acute ischemic infarction (left arrow), and right parietal periventricular white matter old
infarction (right arrow). Magnetic resonance angiography (axial image) showing poor arterial circulation, and narrow distal internal carotid
artery with puff of smoke sign (arrow) on right side suggestive of moyamoya disease. Moyamoya is rarely associated with FA. On literature
review, we found 3 reported patients with FA, and moyamoya disease. The first case was reported in 1980, a 10-year-old Arab boy, presented
with recurrent left hemiplegia.5 The second and third cases were reported in 1995, and presented with strokes.6 Moyamoya disease is observed
in multiple conditions including bacterial meningitis, tuberculosis, head trauma, neurocutaneous syndrome, atherosclerotic disease, sickle
cell disease, and mitochondrial disease.7 It results from chronic occlusion of the distal carotid artery resulting in collateral vessels
network and angiographic appearance. Various hypothesis have been implicated in the etiology of moyamoya in FA. Recurrent bleeding around
the carotid siphon resulting in progressive narrowing of the carotid artery is one possible etiology. Considering FA is associated with
multiple congenital anomalies, narrowing of the carotid artery resulting in moyamoya disease is truly a congenital defect, and this was
supported by a reported case of FA associated with internal carotid agenesis,8 and Fanconi’s anemia and a cerebral anomaly in the form of
hypoplasia of the cerebral artery.9 Our case presented with recurrent episodes of hemiplegia similar to the first case.5 Moyamoya disease
frequently presents with recurrent hemiplegia, and sometimes with alternating hemiplegia as in our case. We observed this presentation with
sickle anemia patients and moyamoya disease following strokes. Stem cell transplantation is the treatment of choice for FA. Our patient
underwent SCT from a partially matched related donor, however, she died due to post SCT complications, mainly infection. As FA is highly
prevalent in Saudi Arabia, mainly due to a high rate of consanguinity, and inherited marriage as a result, more than 120 allogenic SCT have
been performed in Saudi patients with FA over the last 30 years at King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.10 In conclusion, this is a very rare association between 2 rare conditions, and reporting such cases from Saudi Arabia, and
other Arab countries with high consanguinity is very important. To identify the etiology of this association, further genetic mutation
analysis for FA is needed to investigate any disease associated mutation between the 2 conditions. We would like to express our thanks to
Dr. Ali Al-Mohammadi, General Director of the Madinah Maternity & Children’s Hospital for allowing us to report this case, and to Dr.
Mohamed Abdulkarim, Consultant Radiologist, for his critical review of the radiological figures. Our thanks also to Mr. Elsadig Ahmed for
his excellent secretarial work. Ethical Consent All manuscripts reporting the results of experimental investigations involving human
subjects should include a statement confirming that informed consent was obtained from each subject or subject’s guardian, after receiving
approval of the experimental protocol by a local human ethics committee, or institutional review board. When reporting experiments on
animals, authors should indicate whether the institutional and national guide for the care and use of laboratory animals was followed.
