A 3-year-old, intact female Pomeranian presented with a 1-month history of coughing. Thoracic radiography showed focal infiltration of the
left cranial lung lobe and widening of the cranial mediastinum. Subsequent computed tomography revealed torsion of the caudal segment of the
left cranial lung lobe, which was confirmed by exploratory thoracotomy. There was no apparent underlying etiology for the condition. To the
authors’ knowledge, this is the first report of lung lobe torsion in this breed and the first detailed CT imaging report for segmental lung
lobe torsion. Lung lobe torsion (LLT) is a rare, life-threatening pulmonary disorder in small animals [3, 8]. Large-breed dogs with a deep
narrow chest are predisposed to spontaneous LLT, but LLT can also occur in small-breed dogs, often in association with predisposing
conditions, such as pleural effusion, trauma, diaphragmatic hernia or prior surgery . The imaging findings of LLT have been well described .
Thoracic radiography demonstrates pleural effusion and evidence of consolidation in the affected lobe [2, 7]. Thoracic ultrasonography may
show the affected lobe with a liver-like appearance . Computed tomography findings include pleural effusion, an abruptly terminating
bronchus, emphysema of the affected lung and no contrast enhancement in the rotated lobe . The only treatment for LLT is surgical resection,
and successful medical therapy has not been reported . This case report describes LLT affecting the caudal segment of the left cranial lung
lobe (LCrL) in a Pomeranian. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report of lung lobe torsion in this breed and the first detailed
CT imaging report for segmental LLT. A 3-year-old, intact female Pomeranian was referred to us with a 1-month history of coughing. At the
referring hospital, the dog had been treated with antibiotics for 1 week, but there was no response. On presentation, the dog showed a
normal status but exciting, and it showed intermittent coughing (sounded like a goose honking). The results of laboratory examinations
(complete blood count, serum chemistry and coagulation time) were within the normal range, except for increased levels of serum alanine
aminotransferase (162 µ/l; reference range, 10–100 µ/l), aspartate aminotransferase (111 µ/l; reference range, 0–50 µ/l) and glucose (172
mg/ dl; reference range, 74–143 mg/dl). Orthogonal radiographic views were obtained (Fig. 1A and 1BFig. 1.Thoracic radiographs (A, B) and
longitudinal intercostal ultrasonogram (C) of the left cranial thorax. In the lateral view (A), there is increased soft tissue opacity in
the cranial thorax with dorsal elevation of the intrathoracic trachea. In the ventrodorsal view (B), there is mediastinal shift to the left
and widening of the cranial mediastinum. An echogenic mass (C, asterisk) was observed near the large blood vessel.). The lateral view
revealed narrowing of the cervical trachea and increased soft tissue opacity in the cranial thorax. There was also dorsal elevation of the
intrathoracic trachea. On the ventrodorsal view, focal alveolar infiltration of the left cranial lung field was identified, along with a
mediastinal shift to the left and widening of the cranial mediastinum. Subsequent thoracic ultrasonography showed an echogenic mass (0.63 ×
16.3 mm) near a large blood vessel (Fig. 1C). Differential diagnosis was lung parenchymal infiltration or mediastinal mass. In order to
clarify anatomical locations, computed tomography (CT) was performed. CT revealed torsion of the caudal segment of the LCrL toward the
medial side of the cranial segment (Fig. 2B and 2CFig. 2.Diagram of normal left cranial lung lobe (A). The left cranial lobe is incompletely
divided into a cranial (Cr.-Cr.) and a caudal segment (Cr.-Cd.); the 2 segments share a common lobar bronchus. In our case (B), the caudal
segment was twisted toward the medial side (toward the mediastinum) of the cranial segment. Dorsally reformatted computed tomography image
(C) of the dog (solid line, caudal segment; dashed line, cranial segment) and the bronchus (arrowhead) of the caudal segment of the LCrL,
which was twisted, with abrupt termination (D). There was rarely pleural effusion (D, asterisk).). Normally, cranial and caudal segments of
the LCrL were aligned with the thoracic wall (Fig. 2A), but this patient showed a caudal segment of the LCrL aligned with the mediastinum
and it was surrounded by the cranial segment of the LCrL. The bronchus of the caudal segment of the LCrL showed torsion and abrupt
termination, whereas as the more distal segment was filled with air and dilated, giving the bronchus as twisted appearance (Fig. 2D). There
was rarely pleural effusion (Fig. 2D). The twisted lobe contained trapped gas, which appeared as a vesicular gas pattern (Fig. 3AFig.
3.Axially reformatted image of the lung (A) and mediastinal window (B, C). (A) The twisted lung lobe contained trapped gas (bottom,
asterisk). (B, C) After intravenous contrast medium was administered (B, before; C, after), the mean increase in enhancement of the twisted
lung lobe (arrow) was similar to the enhancement of focal infiltration in a normal lung lobe.). Focal alveolar infiltration of the cranial
segment of the LCrL and mild cranial mediastinal lymphadenopathy were also identified. After intravenous contrast medium was administrated
(Fig. 3B and 3C), the mean increase in enhancement of the twisted lung lobe (39 Hounsfield units ) was similar to the enhancement of focal
infiltration in a normal lung lobe (34 ). Thoracic radiographs (A, B) and longitudinal intercostal ultrasonogram (C) of the left cranial
thorax. In the lateral view (A), there is increased soft tissue opacity in the cranial thorax with dorsal elevation of the intrathoracic
trachea. In the ventrodorsal view (B), there is mediastinal shift to the left and widening of the cranial mediastinum. An echogenic mass (C,
asterisk) was observed near the large blood vessel. Diagram of normal left cranial lung lobe (A). The left cranial lobe is incompletely
divided into a cranial (Cr.-Cr.) and a caudal segment (Cr.-Cd.); the 2 segments share a common lobar bronchus. In our case (B), the caudal
segment was twisted toward the medial side (toward the mediastinum) of the cranial segment. Dorsally reformatted computed tomography image
(C) of the dog (solid line, caudal segment; dashed line, cranial segment) and the bronchus (arrowhead) of the caudal segment of the LCrL,
which was twisted, with abrupt termination (D). There was rarely pleural effusion (D, asterisk). Axially reformatted image of the lung (A)
and mediastinal window (B, C). (A) The twisted lung lobe contained trapped gas (bottom, asterisk). (B, C) After intravenous contrast medium
was administered (B, before; C, after), the mean increase in enhancement of the twisted lung lobe (arrow) was similar to the enhancement of
focal infiltration in a normal lung lobe. A total left cranial lung lobectomy was performed. Exploration of the left hemithorax revealed LLT
in the caudal segment of the LCrL (segmental torsion), in agreement with the CT findings. Grossly, the caudal segment of the LCrL appeared
congested, and atelectasis was noted. Histopathologic examination (IDEXX Laboratories) revealed marked locally extensive necrosis,
hemorrhage and fibrosis. An underlying cause of the torsion was not evident. Segmental LLT in dogs has only been reported three times,
involving the cranial segment in a 5-month-old chow chow and 7-week-old pug , and the caudal segment in a 9-year-old Yorkshire terrier . All
dogs showed typical results of LLT in radiographic imaging like lung consolidation and pleural effusion [2, 7]. At the time of diagnosis,
the animals were considered to have general LLT, but after the surgery, they were diagnosed with segmental LLT. Our case, on the other hand,
was diagnosed with lung consolidation (pneumonia, etc.) or a mediastinal mass based on radiographic findings at first. A definitive
diagnosis of segmental LLT diagnosis is difficult using only radiographic findings. A definitive diagnosis requires an additional study,
such as CT or bronchoscopy. Our case was different from general LLT as well as previous cases of segmental LLT. First, the patient did not
show general characteristics of LLT like marked pleural effusion and no contrast enhancement of the twisted lung lobe on imaging [2, 7].
These differences might have been because the arterial blood supply appeared to be intact, and the lobe was possibly in the early stages of
LLT, although the exact timing of development of the torsion was unknown. Second, the torsion of the segment lobe looked like an additional
lung lobe, because it displaced the medial side of the normal segment. A mediastinal reflection-like membrane (lung to lung interface) had
formed between torsion and normal segment. To distinguish between torsion and a rudimentary normal lung lobe, the appearance of the bronchus
(displacement, abrupt ending) needs to be confirmed. Compared with our case, previous cases of segmental LLT might have been in the chronic
stage, so they showed a general signature of LLT. But, in the acute (early) stage, as in our case, a mediastinal reflection-like membrane
and the appearance of the bronchus represent essential diagnostic information on CT imaging for segmental LLT. There are several theories as
to why LLT occurs. This patient made a sound like a goose honking when exciting, so we hypothesized that it had concurrent bronchial
abnormalities because the presence of pulmonary atelectasis is recognized to predispose to rotation . As surgical findings, atelectasis was
noted in the twisted caudal segment of the LCrL, so this change might be due to inflammation or the suspected bronchial abnormalities. But,
no underlying cause was identified by histopathologic examination, and spontaneous LLT was suspected. LLT should be considered in any
patient presenting with a history of acute dyspnea and supporting radiographic signs of pleural effusion, increased opacity of a lung lobe
and the presence of air bronchogram. However, our case illustrated that segmental LLT can occur without dramatic radiographic changes in the
thorax. Therefore, if there are nonspecific findings on thoracic radiography, an additional study, such as CT, should be performed for
definitive diagnosis, as prompt surgical intervention gives the patient the best chance for survival. This study was supported by the
Research Institute for Veterinary Science at Seoul National University.
