Bilateral synchronous breast cancer is extremely rare. A 75-year-old man presented with a right breast mass, which ulcerated and a lump in
the left breast. Right breast examination revealed a breast ulcer 7×10cm with everted edges and complete nipple destruction. The left breast
showed a hard lump measuring 4×5cm in the nipple-areolar area, unattached to skin, or underlying structure. There was no palpable axillary
lymph node bilaterally. A wedge biopsy of right breast ulcer and excision of the left breast lump confirmed bilateral invasive ductal
carcinoma - Grade 2 tumor in both breasts. He had bilateral simple mastectomy and chemotherapy; defaulted for 18 months during treatment,
and re-presented with bilateral tumor recurrence. The importance of this case report is to create more awareness that breast cancer can
occur in males just as in females, though the incidence is rare in males. Early presentation and compliance with treatment modality provide
a better outcome. Male breast cancer is rare in men and accounts for 1% of all breast cancers.1 A bilateral synchronous presentation is
extremely rare with an incidence of 1-2.5% of the total number of patients with breast cancer.2 Bilateral breast cancer is defined as the
presence of an independent primary malignant tumor in each mammary gland. The term “synchronous” refers to the presence of primary tumors in
both breasts, which are diagnosed simultaneously.3 The incidence of metachronous breast cancer is higher than that of synchronous male
breast cancer.4 Most cases of male breast cancer are detected between the ages of 60 and 70 with a mean age of 67 years which is older than
the mean age of females.5 The risk factors for male breast cancer include familial and genetic factors (BRCA2), radiation exposure,
Klinefelter’s syndrome, hormonal imbalance, obesity, and testicular disease (undescended testis, orchitis, orchectomy).1 Although breast
cancer in males presents in a similar way to that of females, there is limited data regarding treatment of male breast cancer, and most
treatment recommendations are extrapolated from data in women.6 Male breast cancer tends to be diagnosed at an older age, and at a more
advanced stage than female breast cancer; hence, the overall survival rate is lower in males.7 However, outcomes are comparable when age at
diagnosis and stage are adjusted.5 This study examines a 75-year-old man who was diagnosed with bilateral synchronous male breast cancer; he
had bilateral simple mastectomy and chemotherapy; then defaulted for 18 months during treatment and re-presented with bilateral tumor
recurrence. Our objective in presenting this case is to highlight that breast cancer can occur in males just as in females, though the
incidence is rare in males. Early presentation and compliance with treatment modality provide a better outcome. Our patient is a 75-year-old
man who noticed a lump in the right breast 2 years prior to presentation. The lump was initially small in size, painless, but progressively
increased in size. Following massage and application of herbal medication, the lump ulcerated with complete nipple destruction (Figure 1).
Around the same time he noticed a lump in the right breast, he felt a small lump in the left breast, which was the size of a bean seed,
painless, and progressively increased in size. There was no history of nipple discharge, ulcer, or itching of the left breast. There was no
antecedent history of trauma to both breasts and no family history of breast disease/malignancy. He had no history of cough, chest pain,
night sweats, weight loss, or difficulty in breathing. There was no history of abdominal pain/swelling, yellowness of the eyes, bone pain,
or low backache. He drank 2 bottles of alcohol daily for approximately 30 years, and smoked a pack of cigarette daily for 9 years. General
examination revealed an elderly man, chronically ill-looking, not pale, afebrile, anicteric, not dehydrated, with neither pedal edema, nor
peripheral lymph node enlargement. The right breast examination revealed an ulcerated breast with complete nipple destruction. The ulcer
measured 7 × 10 cm with everted edges, non-tender with sloughs on the floor, and hypo/hyper pigmented surrounding skin. The left breast
showed a hard lump measuring 4 × 5cm in the nipple-areolar area with no differential warmth, non-tender, and unattached to skin or
underlying structure. There was no palpable axillary lymph node bilaterally. The examinations of other systems were essentially normal.
Picture at presentation showing ulcerated right breast with complete nipple destruction and a left breast lump. Full blood count, random
blood sugar, electrolytes, urea and creatinine carried out were normal. An abdominal ultra-sonography and chest radiograph did not reveal
features of metastasis. The tumor-lymph node-metastasis (TNM) staging was T4bN0Mx in the right breast, and T3aN0Mx in the left breast. A
wedge biopsy of the right breast ulcer and excision biopsy of the left breast lump confirmed a bilateral invasive ductal carcinoma (Figures
2 & 3). Sections of both breasts show a malignant neoplastic lesion composed of malignant ducts, sheets, and nests of atypical polygonal
epithelial cells with invasion of the stroma and surrounding tissues by these cells. These cells have large ovoid to round hyperchromatic
nuclei with numerous abnormal mitosis. Both breast tumors were grade 2 (Nottingham modification of Bloom-Richardson breast cancer grading
system). The estrogen, progesterone, and Her-2-neu status were not carried out due to lack of facilities; hence, he was neither treated with
tamoxifen nor Trastuzumab (Herceptin). Left breast: invasive ductal carcinoma. Arrow shows focal area of mucin between sheets of malignant
cells. Right breast: invasive ductal carcinoma. Arrow shows sheets of malignant cells surrounded by desmoplastic stroma. He had bilateral
simple mastectomy without axillary dissection because there was no palpable axillary lymph node (Figure 4). In addition, axillary lymph node
dissection in advanced breast cancer is not advocated, as it does not improve the overall survival. He had 2 cycles of Cyclophosphamide,
Adriamycin, and 5-flourouracil chemotherapy regime. He defaulted after the second cycle of chemotherapy for 18 months and represented with
bilateral tumor recurrence (Figure 5), marked weight loss, and ascites. He is presently being worked up for chemotherapy. Picture after
bilateral simple mastectomy. Tumor recurrence after patient defaulted from treatment for 18 months. Bilateral breast cancer is defined as
the presence of an independent primary malignant tumor in each mammary gland while the term “synchronous” refers to the presence of primary
tumors in both breasts, which are diagnosed simultaneously.3 Our patient had tumors in both breasts on hospital admission. A total of 24
cases of synchronous bilateral male breast cancer have been reported as of August 2011 using a PubMed search.4 This corroborates the fact
that the incidence of metachronous breast cancer is higher than that of synchronous.4 Although breast cancer can affect men of all ages, the
median age at diagnosis is 60-70 years,2 which is in keeping with the age of 75 in our patient. Presentation is usually late with more than
46% of patients having stage III or IV of the disease at the time of diagnosis,8 which is similar to our case. This can be attributed to low
awareness, absence of screening protocols in men, and limited amount of mammary tissue in male, thus allowing rapid local invasion.8 The
most frequent histological type in men is invasive ductal carcinoma (85-90%),9 which is similar to the findings of our patient. Other rare
invasive tumors are invasive papillary (4.5%) and mucinous (2.8%) papillary carcinoma. Although breast cancer in males presents in a similar
way to that in females, there is limited data regarding treatment of male breast cancer, and most treatment recommendations are extrapolated
from data in women.6 The mainstay of treatment is based on local and regional control of the disease with surgery.10 Other adjuvant
therapies are chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and hormone therapy.10 This was similar to the treatment of our patient, which comprised simple
mastectomy and chemotherapy, though he did not fully comply initially with the chemotherapy regime. The prognosis of male breast cancer
remains uncertain because of the late diagnosis, unpredictable course, and high potential for metastasis.11 The prognosis does not seem to
be poor compared with females when age and stage are matched.11 The importance of this case report is to create more awareness that breast
cancer can occur in males just like females, although it is rare in males. A painless lump, bloody nipple discharge, or retraction in a
male, especially an elderly male, requires thorough evaluation and on confirmation of cancer, compliance with treatment modalities is
necessary to ensure good outcome. In conclusion, breast cancer is rare in males, and extremely rare is bilateral synchronous breast cancer.
Early presentation and compliance with treatment schedule will help reduce the incidence of tumor recurrence and provide better prognosis
for the patient. Dr. Ezekiel E. Ugiagbe reviewed the slides for clarity and correctness. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests,
and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not
supported or funded by any drug company. *References should be primary source and numbered in the order in which they appear in the text. At
the end of the article the full list of references should follow the Vancouver style.*Unpublished data and personal communications should be
cited only in the text, not as a formal reference.*The author is responsible for the accuracy and completeness of references and for their
correct textual citation.*When a citation is referred to in the text by name, the accompanying reference must be from the original
source.*Upon acceptance of a paper all authors must be able to provide the full paper for each reference cited upon request at any time up
to publication.*Only 1-2 up to date references should be used for each particular point in the text. References should be primary source and
numbered in the order in which they appear in the text. At the end of the article the full list of references should follow the Vancouver
style. Unpublished data and personal communications should be cited only in the text, not as a formal reference. The author is responsible
for the accuracy and completeness of references and for their correct textual citation. When a citation is referred to in the text by name,
the accompanying reference must be from the original source. Upon acceptance of a paper all authors must be able to provide the full paper
for each reference cited upon request at any time up to publication. Only 1-2 up to date references should be used for each particular point
in the text. Sample references are available from: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/uniform_requirements.html
