Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma has a dismal prognosis and lacks an established therapeutic strategy. We have recently conducted chemotherapy
with docetaxel and cisplatin as part of multimodal treatment for eight patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Docetaxel (75 mg/m²) and
cisplatin (75 mg/m²) were administered on day 1 every 4 weeks for six courses. This chemotherapy was used as induction therapy in one
patient, as therapy for distant metastases in five patients and as postoperative adjuvant therapy in two patients. Three patients showed
partial responses and three patients showed stable disease. After excluding the two patients receiving the treatment as adjuvant therapy the
response rate was 50 %. Grade 3 or 4 leukocytopenia occurred in seven patients (88 %), but these adverse events were tolerable. Chemotherapy
with docetaxel and cisplatin may thus be feasible for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is rare, but it is
one of the most aggressive and lethal types of cancer. The median overall survival is only 2–12 months, and the 1-year survival rate ranges
from 9 to 46 % even with aggressive multimodal treatment . While locally curative surgery and radiation prolong the survival in patients
with stage IVA or B disease, the majority of these patients develop distant metastasis after local therapy. The survival of patients with
stage IVC disease is even poorer. Systemic chemotherapy is, therefore, required to improve the patient survival . Some investigators have
recently reported that the use of taxanes, such as paclitaxel and docetaxel, resulted in higher response rates than those demonstrated by
previous protocols . The combination of docetaxel and cisplatin (DC therapy) was originally employed for patients with head-and-neck
squamous cell cancer, and achieved good responses and tolerable adverse effects . We have utilized DC therapy as a component of multimodal
treatment for eight ATC patients at our institution since 2008, and herein present the outcomes of this treatment. Docetaxel (75 mg/m²) and
cisplatin (75 mg/m²) were administered intravenously on day 1 every 4 weeks for six courses. Premedication was performed in all patients
using 8 mg of dexamethasone and 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor antagonists. We considered a reduction of the dose of both cisplatin and
docetaxel to 80 % if we detected the creatinine clearance to be <60, or grade 1 renal dysfunction (assessed by creatinine), and a
prolongation of myelosuppression or febrile neutropenia (FN), and also a low (one and more) performance status (PS). When grade 2 renal
dysfunction occurred, then cisplatin was not utilized in the next course. This regimen was approved by our institutional review board. All
patients were diagnosed with ATC based on pathological examinations, and all of the patients provided informed consent before receiving DC
therapy. The clinical response was assessed by computed tomography (CT) according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
version 1.1 after three or four courses of therapy. Adverse events were evaluated according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse
Events version 4.0. The time to progression was calculated from the initiation of DC therapy. The survival time in response to multimodal
therapy, including DC therapy, was calculated from the time of initial therapy until the date of death. The characteristics of the eight
cases are summarized in Table 1. All adverse events are summarized in Table 2.Table 1The clinical courses of eight patients who received
chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin as part of multimodal treatmentNo.AgeSexPSStage (TMN)SurgeryRadiationObjective of DC
therapyResponseCoursesa Survival (weeks)TTP (weeks)164M0IVB(T4bN1bM0)TT+ND60 GyPostoperative adjuvantNE5180157262F0LN(b)
ND60 GyPostoperative adjuvantNE6280 d 358F0IVC(T4bN1bM1)LT+ND–Induction chemotherapyPR42721447M0LNb ND60 GyDistant
metastasisSD64229570M0IVB(T4bN0M0)LT+NDCRT 40 GyDistant metastasisPR59124658M0IVC(T4bN1bM1)LT–Distant metastasisPR6c 227 d
770M1IVC(T4bN1bM1)TT+ND–Distant metastasisSD55223872F0IVC(T4bN1bM1)TT+NDCRT 40 GyDistant metastasisSD6174 d PS performance status, TT total
thyroidectomy, LT lobectomy, ND neck dissection, CRT chemoradiotherapy consisted of 40 Gy irradiation plus cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil and
doxorubicin, TTP time to progression, NE not evaluable, PR partial response, SD stable disease aNumber of courses of chemotherapy completed
bMetastatic anaplastic cancer component in lymph nodes cAfter six cycles of DC therapy, this patient was switched to single-agent docetaxel
every 4 weeks for 30 cycles dNo progressionTable 2Adverse events associated with combination chemotherapy with docetaxel and
cisplatinAdverse eventGrade 1 (number of patients)Grade 2 (number of patients)Grade 3 (number of patients)Grade 4 (number of patients)Ratio
of G3+G4 (%)Leukocytopenia107088Neutropenia014388Anemia133038Thrombocytopenia01000Febrile
neutropenia003038Diarrhea002025Vomiting001013Anorexia331013Stomatitis10000Renal dysfunction32000Peripheral sensory neuropathy20000Allergic
reaction01000Alopecia10000 The clinical courses of eight patients who received chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin as part of
multimodal treatment PS performance status, TT total thyroidectomy, LT lobectomy, ND neck dissection, CRT chemoradiotherapy consisted of
40 Gy irradiation plus cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin, TTP time to progression, NE not evaluable, PR partial response, SD stable
disease aNumber of courses of chemotherapy completed bMetastatic anaplastic cancer component in lymph nodes cAfter six cycles of DC therapy,
this patient was switched to single-agent docetaxel every 4 weeks for 30 cycles dNo progression Adverse events associated with combination
chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin A 64-year-old male presented with a 40-mm ATC in the right lobe of the thyroid. The tumor involved
the tracheal wall and recurrent laryngeal nerve, and a 30-mm lymph node metastasis was identified at level IV in the right neck. We
performed locally curative surgery, including shaving of the tracheal wall and recurrent nerve resection, and also administered 60 Gy of
postoperative external beam radiation (EBRT). DC therapy was carried out as adjuvant therapy. An 80 % reduction in doses was performed after
three courses, and the therapy was completely withdrawn after five courses because of FN. The patient survived for 3 years after the
initiation of DC therapy without recurrence, then local recurrence developed and he died of the disease. A 62-year-old female presented with
an ATC component in a lymph node (level III; diameter, 30 mm) four years after lobectomy for papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). She
underwent neck dissection and received 60 Gy of postoperative EBRT, then, DC therapy was initiated as adjuvant therapy. She completed six
courses and remains alive without recurrence as of 5 years and 4 months after neck dissection, and 5 years after the initiation of DC
therapy. A 58-year-old female presented with a 53-mm ATC in the right thyroid lobe that had invaded into the superior mediastinum and
multiple lung metastases. We initiated DC therapy for this patient as induction chemotherapy. The patient showed a partial response (PR) for
the thyroid lesion and a complete response (CR) for the lung lesions after four courses of therapy (Fig. 1). We then performed locally
curative surgery, including resection of the right recurrent laryngeal nerve, and shaving of the trachea and esophagus, resection of the
cicatrices around the right internal jugular vein and prevertebral muscles. However, the patient presented with convulsions and disturbance
of consciousness 1 week after surgery, and brain metastases were identified on CT. We performed cranial irradiation and she recovered
thereafter. However, she subsequently developed bone, liver, and skin metastases and both a recurrence of lung metastasis and local
recurrence. She died of disseminated intravascular coagulation 6 months after the initiation of DC therapy, and 3 months after
surgery.Fig. 1Computed tomography at the thyroid level and lung in a patient who received chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin (DC
therapy) as induction therapy (Case 3). The primary thyroid lesion showed a partial response, and the lung metastasis showed a complete
response Computed tomography at the thyroid level and lung in a patient who received chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin (DC therapy)
as induction therapy (Case 3). The primary thyroid lesion showed a partial response, and the lung metastasis showed a complete response A
male patient had undergone total thyroidectomy for PTC when he was 5-year old. He developed multiple lung metastases when he was 22-year
old, and underwent radioactive iodine therapies. The lung metastasis remained, but had not progressed after therapy. He presented with rapid
enlargement of a right level III lymph node (diameter 51 mm) at age 43, and an ATC component was detected. We performed neck dissection and
administered 60 Gy of postoperative EBRT. The lung metastasis showed rapid progression 3 months later, so DC therapy was initiated. The lung
metastasis was defined as stable disease (SD) after three courses, and six courses were completed. A month after stopping DC therapy, the
lung metastasis progressed rapidly. He died 7 months (30 weeks) after the initiation of DC therapy, which was 9 months (42 weeks) after
surgery. A 70-year-old male presented with a 40-mm ATC in the right thyroid lobe. Locally curative surgery was performed, including shaving
of the trachea and esophagus, and resection of the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. We initiated postoperative concurrent chemoradiotherapy
(CRT) that consisted of 40 Gy irradiation plus low-dose cisplatin (5 mg/m2) on days 1–5, 8–12, 15–19 and 22–26, 5-fluorouracil (200 mg/m2)
on days 1–26, and doxorubicin (20 mg/m2) on days 1 and 15 . Fourteen months postoperatively, we detected multiple lung nodules and a
pathological examination showed anaplastic thyroid carcinoma component in those nodule, and, therefore, DC therapy was initiated. He
underwent five courses of DC therapy, but cisplatin was not utilized in the fifth course because of grade 2 renal dysfunction. The patient
showed a PR for the lung metastasis after the fourth course (Fig. 2), but progressive disease (PD) developed after the fifth course. He died
of a progression of lung metastasis and survived for 1 year and 9 months (91 weeks) after surgery, which was 6 months (27 weeks) after the
initiation of DC therapy.Fig. 2Computed tomography of the lungs in two cases with a partial response. Case 5 showed a 40 % reduction in the
tumor volume from baseline. Case 6 showed a near-complete response Computed tomography of the lungs in two cases with a partial response.
Case 5 showed a 40 % reduction in the tumor volume from baseline. Case 6 showed a near-complete response A 58-year-old male presented with a
58-mm ATC in the left thyroid lobe and an 18-mm lymph node metastasis at level IV in the left neck. He also showed multiple lung metastases,
but these were limited to 12 mm or smaller in diameter, so we performed locally curative surgery, including shaving of the tracheal wall and
esophagus, and resection of the left recurrent nerve and internal jugular vein. The multiple lung metastases showed rapid progression with
CT and high level accumulation with 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) a month after surgery, so we assessed
these metastases to be ATC and, therefore, administered DC therapy. He showed a PR for the lung metastases after four courses of DC therapy
(Fig. 2), and six courses were completed, but cisplatin was not utilized in the sixth course because of grade 2 renal dysfunction. The
patient has continued docetaxel monotherapy every 4 weeks and has remained alive for 4 years and 4 months after surgery (227 weeks), and
4 years and 3 months after the initiation of DC therapy. A 70-year-old male presented with a 10-mm thyroid primary tumor in the left lobe,
bilateral neck lymph node metastases up to 50 mm in diameter that involved the left common carotid artery and multiple lung metastases. We
performed locally curative surgery, including the careful dissection of the carotid artery, and resection of the left recurrent nerve,
internal jugular vein and left clavicle. The postoperative pathological examination revealed that both the primary thyroid tumor and lymph
node metastasis were ATC. Bone metastases in the thoracic vertebrae were identified with FDG-PET 2 months after surgery, and DC therapy was
initiated with an 80 % reduction of the doses because of PS1. The patient showed SD after three courses, but PD after five courses. He
thereafter developed lung metastasis and died at 1 year (52 weeks) after surgery, which was 8 months (38 weeks) after the initiation of DC
therapy. A 72-year-old female presented with a 20-mm papillary thyroid carcinoma in the right thyroid lobe and bilateral neck lymph node
metastases, and multiple lung metastases up to 10 mm in diameter were also detected. She underwent locally curative surgery, including
partial resection of the tracheal wall and resection of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The pathology showed an anaplastic cancer component
only in a lymph node. We performed postoperative CRT comprising 40 Gy of irradiation plus low-dose cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and
doxorubicin , but multiple lung metastases showed a rapid enlargement and high level accumulation on FDG-PET, and these metastases were
identified as ATC at 5 months after surgery. We initiated DC therapy for the lung metastasis with an 80 % dose reduction because of grade 1
renal dysfunction due to the previous CRT. The patient showed SD after three courses and completed six total courses. The patient remains
alive, and the lung metastases have been stable for 2 years and 10 months (148 weeks) after the initiation of DC therapy, which was 3 years
and 4 months (174 weeks) after surgery. In this report, DC therapy was used in three different ways, as: (1) adjuvant chemotherapy after
local therapy (Cases 1 and 2); (2) induction chemotherapy (Case 3); and (3) chemotherapy for distant metastases after local therapy (Cases
4–8). Accurately assessing the efficacy of each type of therapy is difficult, but a PR was seen in three patients and SD was seen in three
patients. After excluding the two patients who received DC therapy as adjuvant therapy, the response rate (PR) was 50 %, and the disease
control rate (PR+SD) was 100 %. The two patients who received DC therapy as adjuvant chemotherapy were not evaluable (NE), but one survived
as long as 180 weeks and the other is still alive without disease for more than 280 weeks. The clinical response and survival on DC therapy
as components of multimodal treatment for these eight cases, which included stage IVB and C disease, appear to be as good as those in past
studies using doxorubicin, cisplatin and taxanes . Based on our findings, we considered it advantageous to add cisplatin to docetaxel
monotherapy . In case 3, the period from surgery until the development of new brain metastasis was very short. There is a possibility that
blood–brain-barrier interferes with the effect of DC therapy in the brain. As a result, CT examinations are mandatory before starting DC
therapy. In case 5, the patient showed PR in the lesions of lung metastasis that developed after CRT using cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil and
doxorubicin. This suggested the efficacy of DC therapy in CRT-resistant cases. In case 8, the patient has survived a long time with lung
metastasis, but without chemotherapy, after undergoing DC therapy. We determined these lung lesions to be metastasis of anaplastic thyroid
carcinoma because of their rapid growth, but no pathological examinations were performed in this case. We, therefore, cannot definitively
confirm that DC therapy eradicated the ATC components and there is possibility that these lung metastases were not ATC, but instead poorly
differentiated papillary carcinoma. One drawback associated with DC therapy is the high rate of leukocytopenia and neutropenia. In this
report, grade 3 or 4 leukocytopenia and neutropenia occurred in seven patients (88 %). Furthermore, three patients developed FN, although,
all recovered after the initiation of antibiotic therapy. Four patients (50 %) completed six courses of therapy, but the remaining four
patients dropped out after four or five courses. The reasons for the discontinuation were PD in three patients and adverse events in one
patient. In two patients, cisplatin was discontinued after four or five courses of therapy due to grade 2 renal dysfunction; these patients
were subsequently treated with docetaxel monotherapy. The doses of both cisplatin and docetaxel were 80 % of the intended dose in three
patients because of renal dysfunction and an unfavorable performance status or adverse events. The completion rate of DC therapy thus
appears to be insufficient. Most patients with ATC experience rapid progression and some of these patients cannot tolerate aggressive
treatment because of their poor general condition. Careful consideration of the balance between the individual biological malignancy of ATC
and the intensity of treatment is thus important [14, 15]. It is important to emphasize that DC therapy is a high-intensity treatment that
should be reserved for patients who are in good general condition and have a high PS. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
