This 29-year-old woman from Afghanistan presented with intractable cough. Imaging showed she had a cystic lesion in her lung and two large
unilocular cysts consistent with cystic echinococcosis (Figure 1). A day before the surgery, she coughed up copious amounts of white sputum,
called vomica, indicating rupture of the lung cyst. It was resected and she was treated with perioperative albendazole and praziquantel.
Computed tomography (CT) image of two large, unilocular hepatic hydatid cysts. We then began to discuss management of the liver cysts,
trying to decide between puncture, aspiration, injection, reaspiration (PAIR) or surgical resection.1,3–5 However, during her recovery about
6 weeks after resection of the lung cyst, she presented with abdominal pain. Her abdominal imaging was redone, and the classic signs of
ruptured hydatid are seen (Figure 2). Though there is not much evidence on the subject, anecdotally, surgeons describe softening and
decrease in turgidity of large hydatid cysts with medical therapy.2 Given the almost simultaneous change in both cysts, we postulate that
the perioperative antiparasitic therapy for the pulmonary cyst may have been a contributor to the rupture of the large hepatic cysts. The
cysts were removed operatively on an emergent basis with no evidence of intraperitoneal spillage (Figure 3). The patient did quite well
post-operatively with no recurrence of hydatid disease thus far. Computed tomography (CT) image of the same two ruptured unilocular hydatid
cysts with the clearly visible cyst walls collapsed away from the liver. This is known as the “serpent sign.” Gross pathology of resected
liver with visible jelly-like membrane consistent with hydatid cyst. Authors' addresses: Sumontra Chakrabarti, Trillium Health Partners,
Infectious Diseases Toronto, Ontario, Canada, E-mail: sumontra.chakrabarti@trilliumhealthpartners.ca. Philippe Garzon, Trillium Health
Partners, Hepatobiliary Surgery Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, E-mail: philippe.garzon@trilliumhealthpartners.ca. Adam Mohammed, Trillium
Health Partners, Thoracic Surgery Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, E-mail: adam.mohammed@trilliumhealthpartners.ca. Mahin Baqi, William Osler
Health System, none Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada, E-mail: Mahin.baqi@Williamoslerhs.ca. Jay Keystone, University Health Network, Tropical
Medicine Toronto, Ontario, Canada, E-mail: jay.keystone@utoronto.ca.
