To the Editor: Here, we report the case of a 37-year-old asymptomatic male patient who was referred because of abnormalities seen on a
routine chest X-ray. The physical examination findings and laboratory test results were normal. A new chest X-ray revealed a large opacity
in the left lower hemithorax. Chest CT revealed a heterogeneous pleural mass in the left lower hemithorax (Fig. 1). The mass appeared to be
an extrapulmonary lesion arising from the chest wall. There were no calcifications. Complete surgical excision was performed. The gross
specimen showed a well-circumscribed, encapsulated, soft, brown-to-yellow mass, measuring 10 × 9 × 5 cm (Fig. 2A). The microscopic findings
were diagnostic of a hibernoma (Fig. 2B). At this writing, the patient remains asymptomatic and subsequent follow-up evaluations have been
unremarkable. Figure 1 - Chest CT reconstructions in the axial, coronal, and sagittal planes (A, B, and C, respectively), showing a
heterogeneous pleural mass with areas of low-attenuation (fatty tissue, arrows) in the left lower hemithorax. Figure 2 - Photograph of the
gross specimen (A), demonstrating a well-circumscribed, encapsulated, soft, brown-to-yellow mass measuring 10 × 9 × 5 cm. Below, the
photomicrograph (B) shows that, histologically, the tumor consisted of two tumor cell types: cells with granular intense eosinophilic
cytoplasm; and clear multivacuolated cells filled with lipid droplets, with no evidence of cellular atypia or mitosis (hematoxylin and eosin
staining; magnification, ×200). Hibernomas are rare benign tumors that take their name from their histological similarity to the brown fat
of hibernating animals, but also seen in the human fetus and to a diminishing degree with age in adults.( 1 - 3 ) The distribution of this
tumor follows the sites of persistence of brown fat. The most common sites are the thigh, shoulder, back, neck, thorax, upper extremity,
abdomen, and retroperitoneum. Intrathoracic locations include the mediastinum and the pericardium. Tumors involving the pleura are extremely
uncommon. In most cases, a hibernoma manifests as a painless mass and is an incidental finding on physical examination or imaging. Although
these tumors are always benign, they tend to grow to large sizes and symptoms can arise from the compression of adjacent structures. In
individuals with a hibernoma, significant weight loss has been described and is attributed to excessive thermogenesis of the tumor tissue
responsible for the catabolism of circulating lipids and carbohydrates into thermal energy.( 4 ) Complete surgical excision is the treatment
of choice, and the postoperative prognosis is excellent. There have been no reports of recurrence or metastatic disease in hibernoma
patients.( 1 , 2 ) The gross specimen typically shows a well-encapsulated, firm, tan or brown tumor. Microscopy reveals univacuolated or
multivacuolated fat cells with small, central nucleoli.( 1 ) On CT scans, a hibernoma usually presents as a heterogenous low-attenuation
mass (with regions of fat and soft tissue attenuation); on T1- and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, it is seen as a hyperintense,
heterogeneous mass. In imaging studies, the main differential diagnoses are lipoma and liposarcoma. Because of the similarity of their fat
content, hibernomas and lipomas have comparable signal characteristics on magnetic resonance imaging and CT scans. Although hibernomas are
more heterogeneous due to their different composition, in terms of their fibrous and vascular elements, histopathological analysis is always
necessary in order to make an accurate diagnosis.( 1 , 2 )
