We report the case of a child with tetraplegia after cervical trauma, who subsequently underwent diaphragmatic pacemaker implantation. We
reviewed the major indications for diaphragmatic pacing and the types of devices employed. We highlight the unequivocal benefit of
diaphragmatic pacing in the social and educational reintegration of individuals with tetraplegia. Relatamos o caso de uma criança
tetraplégica após trauma cervical que foi posteriormente submetida a implante de marca-passo diafragmático. Revisamos as principais
indicações da estimulação diafragmática e os tipos de dispositivos empregados, assim como apontamos o inequívoco benefício da reinserção
socioeducacional desses indivíduos na sociedade. The generic term "diaphragmatic pacemaker" (DP) refers to a device that generates
electrical impulses delivered to the phrenic nerve in order to produce diaphragm contractions that are aimed at replacing mechanical
ventilation in patients with respiratory failure. The key requirement for the use of this treatment approach is that the phrenic nerve is
preserved. Electrical stimulation of the phrenic nerve was described 200 years ago, and, since then, this treatment approach has been
investigated under various conditions, such as asphyxia, cholera, polio, and apnea.( 1 ) However, the clinical use of DPs has occurred only
in recent decades, after the study by Glenn & Phelps, who implanted a DP into patients with spinal trauma and congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome. ( 2 , 3 ) Since then, there have been many advances in diaphragm pacing, also referred to as electrical( 4 ) or
electrophrenic( 5 ) ventilation. There are two types of devices for stimulation of the phrenic nerve, depending on the site of implantation:
directly on the phrenic nerve or directly on the diaphragm. Phrenic nerve pacemakers can be implanted on the nerve via the cervical or
thoracic route. The phrenic nerve arises from the C3 and C4 nerve roots, and, more distally, from the C5 nerve root. When implantation is
performed via the cervical route, there is the risk of the electrode being positioned on the nerve below its junction to the C5 nerve root.
The presence of a tracheostomy can increase the risk of infection.( 6 ) Therefore, the recommended site for implantation is the
intrathoracic segment of the phrenic nerve, preferably by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. In addition to implanting
electrodes around the phrenic nerve, it is necessary to create a subcutaneous pocket to place a metallic extension of the electrode. On the
international market, there are two models of phrenic pacemakers: Mark IV(r) (Avery Biomedical Devices, Commack, NY, USA), which is
monopolar (Figure 1),( 7 ) and Atrostim(r) (Atrotech, Tampere, Finland), which is quadripolar.( 8 , 9 ) Figure 1 - Diaphragmatic pacemaker
with the receiver connected to the electrode. Another device that has been developed more recently is a true DP: NeuRx(r) (Synapse
Biomedical, Oberlin, OH, USA).( 10 , 11 ) This device is laparoscopically implanted directly on the motor point of the diaphragm. Although
it has the theoretical advantage of being implanted via a single route, this device has one disadvantage: its electrodes are exteriorized
through the skin of the patient. Such types of pacemakers have been used in three groups of patients. The classic indication is patients
with respiratory failure after spinal trauma or with respiratory failure due to central lesions caused by tumors or strokes. Another
indication is patients with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (Ondine syndrome),( 12 ) particularly full-time ventilator-dependent
patients, so that they can gain mobility during daytime. Finally, an indication that has yet to be proven is patients with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, in the hope that DPs can delay the onset of respiratory failure.( 13 ) Considering that the use of electrical ventilation
is still limited in Brazil, the objective of the present study was to report a case of DP implantation in a child with spinal trauma, not
only to demonstrate the benefits obtained from this treatment option (essentially, the social reintegration of the patient and the technical
ease of video-assisted thoracoscopic implantation) but also to demonstrate that DPs can be handled without difficulty even outside the
hospital setting. A five-year-old male patient from the city of Caxias do Sul, Brazil, presented with a history of pedestrian-motor vehicle
accident (in January of 2010) and an upper cervical spine fracture, at C3-C4. The spinal cord injury was confirmed by axial CT and 3D
reconstruction. The patient underwent alignment and surgical fixation of the corresponding vertebrae. He developed tetraplegia and
respiratory failure requiring full-time mechanical ventilation, and underwent tracheostomy, gastrostomy, and cystostomy. In addition to the
clinical circumstances, social isolation was crucial to the family's decision to seek help. In social networks, his suffering was shared
with other patients experiencing the same condition. In April of 2013, implantation of a phrenic pacemaker was recommended. The preoperative
evaluation included routine hematological tests, arterial blood gas analysis, and chest X-ray. A nerve conduction study of the phrenic nerve
was requested in order to assess its functional viability, which could be impaired because of traumatic ischemia, as well as to evaluate
phrenic nerve/diaphragm integrity, which is a key requirement for implantation. The nerve conduction study revealed proper nerve conduction,
with a good response of the diaphragm to cervical transcutaneous electrical stimulation. The surgical procedure for implantation of the
device was conducted by the team of the Department of Thoracic Surgery of the General Hospital of the University of Caxias do Sul
Foundation, in the city of Caxias do Sul, Brazil. Because of the patient's specific clinical status, the anesthetic and surgical procedure
demanded precautions that are unusual in young patients.( 14 ) The patient was given general anesthesia with a tracheal tube inserted
through the tracheostomy stoma, with the aid of bronchoscopy to achieve unilateral ventilation during the procedure. With the patient placed
in the lateral decubitus position, a 10-mm trocar was inserted in the midaxillary line, sixth intercostal space, for introduction of a fiber
optic probe (30º). A 3-cm minithoracotomy was performed in the anterior axillary line, fourth intercostal space, for insertion of the
components of the Mark IV(r) system and for phrenic nerve dissection. Over the pericardium, the nerve was carefully dissected to prevent
rupture or ischemia. The extent of dissection was kept as minimal as possible so that the electrode could "embrace" the nerve without
causing excessive traction or compression (Figure 2). At this point, the system was connected, and DP stimulation was tested in vivo to
confirm diaphragm contraction (Figure 3). Figure 2 - Photograph showing the time of implantation of the diaphragmatic pacemaker
intraoperatively. Figure 3 - Photograph showing the positioning of the receivers and antenna intraoperatively. Through the minithoracotomy,
over the pectoralis major muscle, a tunnel incision was made to create a subcutaneous pocket in which to place the device receiver, which
was connected to the electrode implanted on the phrenic nerve. The system was tested again, under direct thoracoscopic visualization, using
different voltages, to define the voltage that would produce an as-isometric-as-possible contraction bilaterally. Residual pneumothorax was
evacuated by performing Valsalva maneuvers, without the need for pleural cavity drainage (Figure 3). The possibility of performing the
procedure by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery reduced morbidity and accelerated postoperative recovery. The procedure was
uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. Given that the use of mechanical ventilation leads to diaphragm atrophy
with conversion of slow type I fibers to fast type II fibers,( 15 ) after three weeks, which is the time required for surgical wound healing
and for decrease in the edema at the nerve-electrode interface, the period of DP stimulation to condition the diaphragm was started.
Although mechanical ventilation is the life-sustaining factor in patients with upper spinal trauma, it also has negative characteristics,
such as diaphragm atrophy, barotrauma, tracheostomy and tube wounds, speech difficulty, loss of smell, etc. In addition, poorly ventilated
posterior lung segments, impaired mucociliary clearance, and accumulation of excess secretion result in a high frequency of respiratory
infections, which are the leading cause of death in such patients.( 16 ) Transition from the ventilator to the DP requires a systematic
progression, both for the child, so that he/she can adapt as physiologically and comfortably as possible, and the caregiver, who should be
able to identify signs of ventilatory effort and fatigue. The child's family was trained to recognize such signs and quickly proved to be
able to handle the device. Closure of the tracheostomy tube and perception of the diaphragm muscle contraction caused discomfort and
anxiety, but such symptoms were addressed and were improved at each session of use of the equipment by the family itself. It is known that,
in diaphragm pacing with a DP, there is a relationship between stimulation with high frequencies and neural fatigue/degeneration. Initially,
stimulation occurred at low frequencies (< 10 Hz) and at an RR of 12 to 15 breaths/min. Accordingly, time off the ventilator was gradually
increased day by day, starting with a 5-minute session every hour. Tracheostomized mechanically ventilated patients experience loss of
smell, which prevents them from differentiating foods and recognizing their taste because of a shift in airflow caused by positive pressure.
After initiation of ventilation with the DP, the patient regained normal olfactory function, which also represents a gain in quality of
life.( 17 ) Dependence on mechanical ventilation and the consequent reduction in mobility, which leads to social isolation, are factors to
be considered, especially because, in general, patients are young, previously healthy individuals who have been abruptly deprived of
autonomy. Psychological trauma and hopelessness settle in and are issues that need to be addressed by a specialized team. In this scenario,
the resumption of social and educational interaction is the most celebrated result of the procedure. At this writing, the discharged patient
is living in his home, where he receives supportive care from a multidisciplinary team, and has returned to regular classes and started
going to the movies and on outings with friends and family. More than one year after the procedure, the child already remains off mechanical
ventilation for more than 10 uninterrupted hours, maintaining a satisfactory respiratory pattern (tidal volume = 277 mL; RR = 18 breath/min;
and SpO2 = 97%). Full-time pacing can be achieved.( 18 ) Although DPs are a technology that is still expensive in Brazil, they are available
in the country, and medical industry and medical research point to an increase in the supply and quality of device options. In conclusion,
the possibility of dispensing with mechanical ventilation, even intermittently, allowing the reintegration of such individuals into society,
as well as their inclusion in rehabilitation programs that are more effective and their return to school or work life, is the essence of
this therapeutic indication. Study carried out at the Caxias do Sul General Hospital, Caxias do Sul University Foundation, Caxias do Sul,
Brazil. Financial support: None.
