Granular muscle degeneration (GMD) of the appendix is rare. Although first described in 1959, the histogenesis of this lesion remains
incompletely elucidated. We report in this paper, a case of nodular GMD diagnosed incidentally in an appendix resected for the treatment of
acute abdominal pain. The 39-year-old, afebrile woman presented with acute abdominal pain and amenorrhea. The patient's mother had arterial
hypertension and diabetes. The patient's personal history included an anal abscess (16 years previously) and, more recently, an increase in
body weight with facio-truncal obesity (30 kg in 12 months, body mass index ranges 39-40.2), umbilical hernia, hirsutism, and axillary
acanthosis nigricans. Three years previously, the patient had had an spontaneous abortion, with amenorrhea alternating with spotting, which
was treated by dydrogesterone. Blood tests showed fluctuant hypercholesterolemia and hyperprolactinemia with normal big-big-prolactin,
follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin, thyroid hormones, cortisol, and glucose. A normal
hypophysis was seen on MRI. Computed tomography indicated incipient appendicitis and a diffusely enlarged (12 × 7 × 6 cm) uterus with
uterine body myomatous necrobiotic aspects. Appendectomy was performed. At 40 days postoperatively, the patient was well. The appendix
measured 6.5 cm and did not show any macroscopic lesion. The entire appendix was analyzed microscopically. The appendiceal wall showed
lymphoid follicular hyperplasia and submucosal fibrosis with mild inflammation [Figure 1]. A 3-mm plurilobar nodular lesion was observed in
the inner muscle layer at 1 cm from the tip. The lesion was deforming the muscle layer and was prominent in the submucosa, which showed
diffuse fibrosis with mild inflammation. The lobules were round-oval, with a focal rim of surrounding collagen. They were composed of large
round and polygonal cells. These cells showed abundant pale-pink eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and rare round eosinophilic bodies of
megamitochondria type. The nuclei, round-to-oval, showed focal irregularities. They were larger and normo- or hypochromic as compared to the
surrounding muscle. The nuclear/cytoplasm ratio was low. No mitoses were seen. One glycogenated nucleus was observed. A total of 205
granular-appearing cells were counted (with 51 nuclei) on the hematoxylin-and-eosin stained section. Rare compressed interspersed atrophic
muscle cells were seen between 2 of the lobules at the periphery of the lesion. Perilesional muscle cells were compressed. The overlying
mucosa was normal. On immunohistochemistry, the granular cells expressed smooth-muscle-actin and desmin. Both proteins showed cytoplasmic
expression with perimembrane/membrane reinforcement. Perinuclear accumulation for desmin was also observed. CD34, CD117, S100 protein,
chromogranin, and synaptophysin were not expressed by the granular cells. (A-D) The appendiceal intramuscular nodule consisted in large,
polygonal cells with granular cytoplasm. (B: Arrows for mega-mitochondria-type globules. C arrow for glycogenic nucleus). They expressed
smooth-muscle-actin (Dinset) and desmin (D) in a cytoplasmic/perimembranous, or perinuclear pattern (D: Arrow). Original magnification ×2.5
(A) ×40 (B-D) Once the smooth-muscle-actin- and desmin-positive immunophenotype of the lesion was established, the main differential
diagnoses were appendiceal smooth muscle lesions, in spite of the morphological resemblance to neural ganglion or granular cell tumor cells
on standard stains. The diagnoses of leiomyomatosis and uterine leiomyosarcoma metastasis were not retained on the basis of the
morphological features, although the patient showed a diffusely enlarged uterus characterized as “myomatous” at radiological examination. We
did not favor the hypothesis of diabetic myopathy either since the patient's blood glucose level was normal. The presence of a plurilobular
architecture, the lack of veritable stroma, and the presence of a round and polygonal (rather than spindle) cell morphology, as well as the
presence of glycogenated nucleus and cytoplasmic globules of megamitochondria type (similar to those described in obesity hepatocytes), were
interpreted as being suggestive of GMD-type lesions rather than of microleiomyoma, despite the perinodular compression effect. Of interest
was the patient's weight gain with obesity since GMD is thought to occur by cytoplasmic liposomal accumulation. The staining pattern we have
observed supported this hypothesis, with a cytoplasmic perimembraneous and perinuclear concentration of the smooth muscle actin- and desmin-
positive intermediate filaments. GMD has been compared in the past to Masson's granular myoblastoma. Moreover, the current knowledge does
not allow us to completely rule out the hypothesis of an incipient leiomyoma, prominent in the submucosa and deforming the muscle layer,
with GMD, this association being already reported in uterine leiomyoma, however voluminous (5 cm). In conclusion, here we report a case of
appendiceal nodular muscular granular degeneration that was incidentally diagnosed in an obese patient. Immunohistochemical phenotyping is
required for a differential diagnosis, although morphological features such as glycogenic nuclei and cytoplasmic megamitochondria might be
suggestive of such lesions. The authors thanks Dr. Hanh Luong, Dr. Ema Dragoescu, Dr. Ibtissem Radhouani, Pr Anne Couvelard, Dr. Viorel
Vasiliu, Pr Benoit Terris, Florence Bouchard, Virginie Akdim, Christine Van Vetteren, Leila Jovanov, Isabelle Pluchart, Fella Spindler,
Nathalie Delva, Valerie Ipotesi, Nadine Jalem, Amelie Poirier, Julie Diallo, Valerie Moigne, Brigitte Mechekour, Marie-Christine Portenier
and Laurent Lefebure as well as the CDMP/APHP and BIUM teams. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
