Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) type II is an immune-mediated, acquired, prothrombotic disorder that follows heparin therapy. A
significantly lower HIT frequency has been observed in patients who take low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) compared to those receiving
unfractionated heparin (UFH). Bemiparin is a LMWH whose efficacy and safety in various clinical conditions has been established. We report
the case of a 78-year-old woman, with a history of dementia, who presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital with complaints of
abdominal pain. She had recently undergone a total hip arthroplasty, for which she had received bemiparin at a prophylactic dose (3500 IU,
once a day). On Day 8 of bemiparin, her platelet count fell from 172.000/μL (pre bemiparin) to 45.000/μL and bemiparin was changed to
fondaparinux (2.5 mg, once a day). She was subsequently discharged. The patient's main clinical and laboratory findings at the Emergency
Department were as following: diffuse pain during the abdomen's deep palpation, sites of skin necrosis [Figure 1], high serum LDH levels
(1021 IU/L), thrombocytopenia (65.000/μL) and respiratory alkalosis from the arterial blood gas. A computed tomography (CT) angiography of
chest and abdomen was performed which demonstrated a large pulmonary emboli at the right pulmonary artery, as well as thrombosis of the
right common iliac and right common femoral veins. The patient's total 4T score for HIT was 8/8, while ELISA test and Serotonin Release
Assay (SRA) for PF4-heparin antibodies proved to be strongly positive. The Naranjo algorithm, a method for estimating the probability of
adverse drug reactions, produced a score equal to 7, suggesting a probable association between bemiparin and HIT development. She was
maintained on fondaparinux at prophylactic and not therapeutic doses (2.5 mg, once a day), considering the patient's low body mass index
(approximately 20 kg/m2) and the risk of bleeding complications. She was discharged 10 days later on fondaparinux and after a month, her
platelet count was within the normal range. Fondaparinux was then replaced by acenocoumarol, with target INR of 2.5, for a time period of 3
months. In her follow-up visits she remained in good health and her blood tests were all within the normal range. Necrotic skin lesions at
patient's arm In conclusion, we here report an uncommon case of bemiparin-associated severe HIT type II. LMWHs are widely used
anticoagulants and physicians should be aware of this extremely rare but potentially lethal adverse effect. Moreover, as already
demonstrated by other studies, fondaparinux can be an alternative, effective and safe agent for the treatment of HIT.
