Nocturnal enuresis is a common disorder in childhood, but its pathophysiological mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. Iatrogenic
nocturnal enuresis has been described following treatment with several psychotropic medications. Herein, we describe a 6-year-old child who
experienced nocturnal enuresis during treatment with the antihistamine cetirizine. Drug rechallenge was positive. Several neurotransmitters
are implicated in the pathogenesis of nocturnal enuresis, including noradrenaline, serotonin and dopamine. Antihistamine treatment may
provoke functional imbalance of these pathways resulting in incontinence. Nocturnal enuresis (NE) is defined as nighttime bedwetting after
developmental age when bladder control should have been established. Anatomical and functional integrity of noradrenaline, dopamine and
serotonin systems is required for continence. Iatrogenic NE is an adverse event commonly reported in patients taking several central nervous
system agents, in particular antipsychotics, (risperidone and clozapine), SSRI and some antiepileptics (sodium valproate). Despite enuresis
being reported as a very rare adverse event in summary of product characteristics of some antihistamines, no single case report is available
to date in literature. We herein report a case of a child presenting with NE after treatment with the antihistamine drug cetirizine. A
6-year-old female child presented with recurrent episodes of rhinitis, bronchitis and bronchospasm since the age of 2 years. Her family
history was positive for allergic diatheses. The rest of her past medical history was unremarkable with normal developmental milestones
having been reached. She never experienced episodes of NE after bladder control was achieved at the age of 3 years. During an episode of
persistent dry coughing, which was unresponsive to oral betamethasone 1 mg/day, she was prescribed add-on oral cetirizine 5 mg/day in the
evening for a week. On Day 2 cetirizine of she had NE. This continued through Day 7., and disappeared when cetirizine was stopped. No other
medication was concurrently taken and urinary infections were excluded by appropriate analyses. Two months later, she was again treated with
oral cetirizine at the same dosage for another episode of cough and bronchospasm. Once again she experienced night-time enuresis throughout
drug treatment. No further episode of NE occurred after treatment withdrawn. A total score of 9 (probable) was obtained on the Naranjo
causality scale. Mechanisms underlying enuresis are complex and not exhaustively explained. Recent investigations focused the main role of
the catecholamine systems in continence maintaining. In particular, a subtle regulation between noradrenaline, serotonin and dopamine
pathways is required for appropriate bladder control. Functional imbalance of these neurotransmitters within basal ganglion structures
appears to be central in the pathophysiology of enuresis and urinary incontinence. The substantial role of dopaminergic circuits is
supported by the frequent neurogenic detrusor overactivity and voiding dysfunction in patients with Parkinson's disease or other
extrapyramidal dysfunctions, due to nigrostriatal dopamine depletion. Noradrenergic and serotoninergic systems exert their effects on
continence directly, but also by facilitating or inhibiting dopaminergic pathways, respectively. Overall, pharmacological agents depleting
or blocking norepinephrine or dopamine cause incontinence or enuresis, while drugs increasing these pathways induce urinary retention [Table
1]. Experimental studies proved that the histaminergic system directly influences the serotonin transmission in the central nervous system,
by the presynaptic inhibition of 5-hydroxytryptamine release. Therefore, antihistamine treatment, acting on 5-hydroxytryptamine regulation,
could involve a central serotonin disinhibition, leading to an imbalance of the serotonin/dopamine ratio. Drugs reported to be associated
with enuresis In particular, cetirizine in this patient could have enhanced serotonin pathways originating from raphe nucleus, which exert
an inhibitory effect on dopamine release from the mesocortical tract. Thus, this disrupted serotonin modulation can lead to a relative
dopaminergic depletion, which eventually causes enuresis. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
