Spindle cell oncocytoma (SCO) of the adenohy-pophysis is a rare tumor in the sellar region. Due to its rarity, little information is
available regarding SCO. It is often misdiagnosed as another type of sellar tumor. In the present study, two cases of SCO were reported. One
patient was a 35-year-old female presenting with decreased visual acuity, amenorrhea and lactation. The other patient was a 62-year-old
female with no clear symptoms or signs. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a suprasellar mass with marked homogeneous
enhancement in the two cases. A craniotomy was performed to completely resect the tumors. The tumors were immunopositive for vimentin,
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S-100 and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). The tumors were pathologically diagnosed as SCO. No
recurrence occurred during the follow-up period of 15–21 months. In the present study, the literature was reviewed and the clinical data,
imaging features, intraoperative findings and recurrence of 24 cases were analyzed in the literature as well as the present two cases. The
average age of the SCO patients was 58.5 years and no gender preference was observed for the disease. The tumor exhibited homogeneous
enhancement on the MRI. The intraoperative assessment revealed that the tumor had a rich blood supply and the SCO tumors were immunopositive
for vimentin, S-100, EMA and TTF-1. These findings provided valuable clinical data for the preoperative diagnosis and surgical removal of
SCO tumors. Spindle cell oncocytoma (SCO) of the adenohypophysis is a rare benign tumor in the sellar region, accounting for 0.1–0.4% of all
sellar tumors (1,2). SCO was first identified as a distinct entity by the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the
central nervous system (CNS) in 2007 (3). To date, only 24 cases have been reported in the literature (1,2,4–18). Due to its rarity, little
information is available regarding the imaging features and surgical characteristics of SCO (2). As SCO shares a similar clinical
presentation and imaging features with nonfunctional pituitary adenoma, it is often misdiagnosed as a nonfunctional pituitary adenoma (7).
However, SCO tumors have a greater blood supply than pituitary adenomas, thereby increasing difficulties associated with surgical removal of
the tumor (15). Preoperative misdiagnosis as pituitary adenoma may result in an underestimation of the surgical difficulty. In the present
study, two cases of SCO were reported and 24 cases of SCO in the literature were reviewed. The imaging features, intraoperative findings,
immunohistochemical features and prognosis of SCO were summarized. The present study provided important clinical information for the correct
preoperative diagnosis and intraoperative removal of SCO tumors. Written informed consent was obtained from all of the patients. A 35-year-
old female was admitted to the First Hospital of Jilin University (Changchun, China), who had been presenting with amenorrhea and lactation
for two years. On examination, her visual acuity was 0.8 in the left eye and 0.5 in the right eye. Dark spots were observed in the left
inferior temporal quadrant and decreased light sensitivity was observed in the right nasal quadrant. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI; 3.0 Tesla Trio MRI Scanner; Siemens AG, Erfurt, Germany) revealed a suprasellar round mass of 2.5×3.0×1.0 cm, with equal T1 and T2
signals. This mass exhibited marked homogeneous enhancement (Fig. 1A). Laboratory assessments used to examine pituitary disorders revealed
an elevated level of prolactin (34.62 ng/ml; normal range, 1.4–24.0 ng/ml), a decreased level of luteinizing hormone (LH; 1.410 IU/l; normal
range, 2.12–10.891 IU/l) and normal levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), corticotropin and thyrotropin. The patient was diagnosed
as having a pituitary prolactin adenoma. The tumor was resected through the second gap using a right expanded frontotemporal craniotomy. The
tumor was gray with blood vessels on the surface, was firm without clear encapsulation and had an appearance similar to that of normal brain
tissue with a rich blood supply. The pituitary stalk was adherent to the tumor and was pushed inferiorly by the tumor. The stalk was
partially preserved following careful dissection. The tumor was removed section by section until complete removal of the tumor was achieved
by visualization under a microscope. Persistent diabetes insipidus occurred following surgery and it was gradually relieved following oral
administration of desmopressin acetate for 2.5 months. An enhanced MRI performed at seven days after surgery confirmed the complete removal
of the tumor. No recurrence had occurred by the time-point of the 21-month follow-up examination (Fig. 1B). Postoperative hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E)-stained sections revealed that the tumor was composed of spindled and epithelioid cells arranged in nests and sheets. The cells
had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Mild to moderate nuclear atypia was identified; however, mitosis was not observed. Nuclear
pleomorphism was observed in certain cells and a double nucleus was occasionally present. Infiltration of scattered mature lymphocytes was
observed in the extracellular matrix (Fig. 2A and B). The tumor was immunonegative for GFAP and Syn, whilst it was immunopositive for
vimentin, EMA, S-100 and TTF-1 (Fig. 2C-F). The mindbomb E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (MIB-1) labeling index was ~3%. The tumor was
pathologically diagnosed as SCO. A 62-year-old female was admitted to the First Hospital of Jilin University due to a sellar mass identified
during a routine physical examination. She presented no clear symptoms or signs. Cranial MRI revealed a suprasellar mass of 2.3×1.7×2.0 cm,
with long T1 and short T2 signals (Fig. 3A). This mass exhibited marked homogeneous enhancement. The pituitary gland was flattened due to
tumor compression and the pituitary stalk was not clearly observed. The optic chiasm was elevated; however, the cavernous sinus was not
invaded by the tumor. Laboratory assessments used to examine pituitary disorders revealed a decreased level of LH (0.390 IU/l; normal range,
2.12–10.891 IU/l), but normal levels of pituitary hormones, including FSH, prolactin, corticotropin and thyrotropin. The patient was
diagnosed as having a nonfunctional adenoma. The tumor was resected between the first and second gap using a right transpterional
craniotomy. The tumor was light yellow and slightly soft, and it had a brain stem-like appearance with a rich blood supply. The tumor was
removed section by section. Care was taken to preserve the membrane-like pituitary stalk dorsolateral to the tumor until the tumor was
completely removed. Transient diabetes insipidus occurred immediately following surgery; however, it was effectively treated following two
weeks of oral administration of desmopressin acetate. An enhanced MRI performed at three days after surgery confirmed the complete removal
of the tumor. No recurrence had occurred by the time-point of the 15-month follow-up examination (Fig. 3B). Post-operative H&E-stained
sections demonstrated that the tumor was composed of spindled and epithelioid cells arranged in intersecting fascicles. The cells had an
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with round or oval nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli. Mild to moderate nuclear atypia was identified;
however; mitosis was not observed. Nuclear pleomorphism was observed in certain cells. Infiltration of a few mature lymphocytes and local
interstitial mucoid degeneration was observed (Fig. 4A and B). The tumor was immunonegative for GFAP, creatine kinase, Syn and B-cell
lymphoma 2; however, it was immunopositive for vimentin, EMA, S-100 and TTF-1 (Fig. 4C-F). The MIB-1 labeling index was ~1.5%. The tumor was
pathologically diagnosed as SCO. SCO was first reported by Roncaroli et al (1) in 2002 in five patients and it was later identified as a
novel entity by the WHO classification of tumors of the CNS in 2007 (3). Histologically, SCO cells are mainly composed of a bundle of
spindle cells with an eosinophilic and granular cytoplasm. They are immunopositive for vimentin, EMA, S-100 and galectin-3, but
immunonegative for pituitary hormones, chromogranin and Syn. SCO is similar to nonfunctional pituitary adenoma and accounts for 0.1–0.4% of
all sellar tumors (1,2). In a retrospective study of 2,000 cases of pituitary tumors, only two cases were diagnosed as being SCO (2). Due to
its rarity, only 16 studies were available describing 24 cases of SCO using a PUBMED search (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) for studies
published between 2002 and 2013. The clinical characteristics, intraoperative findings as well as the imaging and immunohistochemical
features of the 24 published cases, and the two cases reported in the present study were assessed. SCO commonly occurred in middle-aged and
elderly males or females. Of the 24 cases published in the literature, 10 patients were male and 14 were female. No gender preference for
SCO is therefore present. The average age of the SCO patients was 56.4 years (range, 24–76 years). In the present two cases, the patients
were females aged 35 and 62 years old, respectively. Similar to nonfunctional pituitary adenoma, the most common clinical manifestations of
SCO are visual impairment and panhypopituitarism. Of the 24 cases in the literature, 14 cases presented with decreased or impaired visual
acuity and 12 cases presented with panhypopituitarism. In addition, intermittent epistaxis was reported in one patient with a large SCO (4),
two cases exhibited weight loss (2,5) and one case had long-term musculoskeletal pain (6). A total of three cases had decreased libido or
sexual dysfunction (7–9) and two cases presented with oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea (10,11). Consistent with previous studies, one patient
(case 1) in the present study presented with decreased visual acuity, amen-orrhea and lactation. However, the other patient (case 2) did not
exhibit any clear symptoms or signs. Furthermore, postoperative panhypopituitarism and diabetes insipidus occurred in four cases (12–15).
One case required hormone replacement therapy for 15 years (12). In the present two cases, postoperative diabetes insipidus occurred and was
treated following oral administration of desmopressin acetate for two weeks and two months, respectively. Therefore, similar to other sellar
tumors, SCO often leads to pituitary hormone disorders and is associated with postoperative complications, such as diabetes insipidus. SCO
is often misdiagnosed preoperatively. Of the 24 cases of SCO in the literature, 14 cases were misdiagnosed as being nonfunctional adenomas.
Due to its spindle-like shape, four cases were misdiagnosed as being schwannomas. In addition, one case was misdiagnosed as being a
craniopharyngioma due to recurrent intratumoral bleeding (13). Furthermore, two cases were misdiagnosed as being null cell pituitary
adenomas (4). In the present two cases, one was misdiagnosed as being a nonfunctional adenoma and the other was misdiagnosed as being a
pituitary prolactin adenoma. SCO shares similar imaging features with nonfunctional adenoma, exhibiting no dural attachment or invasion
(19). Of the 24 cases in the literature, the size and site of the tumor on MRI images were described in 23 cases. Suprasellar or intrasellar
tumors were reported in 20 cases. Only two cases reported that the tumor was located within the sella turcica (10,11). Tumor invasion to the
cavernous sinus and compression of the temporal lobe was reported in one case (9). In addition, one case reported that the tumor grew
forward and invaded into the sphenoid, ethmoid, nasopharynx and posterior nasal cavity, leading to intermittent epistaxis (4). Borota et al
(6) reported one case of SCO, which had invaded into the sphenoid sinuses and disrupted the body of the sphenoid bone, including the sella
turcica. In the present two cases, the two tumors were large and suprasellar, without invasion into the cavernous sinuses. These findings
are consistent with a meta-analysis of the world literature since 1893 by Covington et al (20), revealing that SCO is either suprasellar or
intra- and supra-sellar. Computed tomography (CT) images of SCO were only reported in three cases (5,13,16). Borges et al (13) reported that
~50% of SCO tissues exhibited calcification on CT images, consistent with the local hyperintense signals on T1-weighted MRI. In addition,
Singh et al (16) demonstrated that SCO exhibited isointensity to the cerebral parenchyma on CT images without intratumoral calcification or
bleeding. In addition, as SCO commonly has a rich blood supply, the tumor may exhibit enhancement on MRI. In the present cases, the two SCO
tumors exhibited marked homogeneous enhancement. Similarly, Fujisawa et al (15) reported that SCO exhibited numerous and faint intratumoral
vessels on a magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA); angiography revealed that the SCO was extensively fed by the bilateral internal carotid
arteries and draining veins were observed in the arterial phase (15). Of five cases of SCO with a rich blood supply as determined by a
preoperative MRA, severe intraoperative bleeding occurred in four cases (6,8,9,15). However, as SCO was misdiagnosed as nonfunctional
adenoma preoperatively, angiography was not performed in the majority of cases of SCO. Therefore, preoperative angiography should be
performed to evaluate the blood supply of SCO if a rich blood supply is suspected on the MRA, thereby reducing the risk of intraoperative
bleeding. Of the 24 cases of SCO in the literature, 13 cases described the intraoperative findings. The SCO was described to be pale gray
(10), grayish gelatinous (7) and yellow (11). Similarly, the SCO was gray or yellow in the present two cases. The texture was similar to
that of normal brain tissue with a rich blood supply. In addition, 11 cases described the SCO as a firm and vascular tumor. Kloub et al (4)
reported that two recurrent SCOs were invasive with an unclear boundary with the surrounding tissues and necrosis was identified in one
tumor. Tumor invasion into the base of the sella turcica occurred in two cases (4,9). No tumor invasion was reported via intraop-erative
inspection in any of the other cases. Dahiya et al (9) reported a case of SCO that was firm and difficult to dissect and residual tumors
were found around the internal carotid artery following the second surgical procedure. Intratumoral bleeding was reported in two cases and
tumors with a rich blood supply were reported in seven cases. Severe intraopera-tive blood loss (600–900 ml) was also reported (13,15). SCO
tumors are immunopositive for vimentin, S-100 and EMA (1,2,4–6,10–12,14,15,16). Electron microscopy revealed that SCO cells contain abundant
swollen mitochondria and that bundles of intermediate filaments are entrapped in the lysosomes and profiles of the rough endoplasmic
reticulum (1). Roncaroli et al (1) and Borges et al (13) reported that well-formed desmosomes and intermediate junctions, but not secretory
granules, were observed in SCO cells. However, several other studies revealed that occasional electron dense secretory granules, but not
desmosomes or intercellular junctions, were observed in SCO cells (4,9,16). Based on the immunohistochemical and ultrastructural
similarities shared by SCO and folliculostellate cells (FSCs), SCO is theorized to originate from FSCs (1,21,22). FSCs are star-like nonhor-
mone-secreting cells in the anterior pituitary, which provide structural support for hormone-secreting cells, accounting for 5–6% of the
pituitary cell population (23,24). FSCs are hypothesized to be adult stem cell-like pituitary cells, which have a capacity for divergent
differentiation (4). Lee et al (25) described the expression of TTF-1 in eight cases of SCO and demonstrated that TTF-1 was generally
expressed in the fetal neurohypophysis. Similarly, Mlika et al (14) reported one case of SCO with positive TTF-1 expression. In the present
study, positive TTF-1 expression was identified in the two cases of SCO. These findings suggested that this marker may be specific to human
pituicytes. The positive expression of TTF-1 in these 11 cases of SCO may facilitate further studies on the classification of these rare
sellar tumors and may suggest that SCO and pituicytoma have a similar origin (25). In addition, Mete et al (26) reported positive TTF-1
expression in seven cases of SCO, four cases of pituicytomas and three cases of granular cell tumors of the pituitary; while all cases were
negative for FSCs. The authors hypothesized that SCO and granular cell tumors are variants of pituicytoma and proposed the terms ‘oncocytic
pituicytoma’ and ‘granular cell pituicytoma’ to refine the classification of these lesions (26). Alexandrescu et al (11) observed that SCO
was positive for CD44, nestin and SMI-131, suggesting that SCO has features that are similar to those of neuronal precursors, which may
explain the recurrence of SCO in certain cases. Of the 24 cases of SCO in the literature, recurrence occurred in eight cases with an average
recurrence time of 3.3 years (range, 5–13 years). The mean MIB-1 labeling index was 3%. A total of two cases with a high MIB-1 labeling
index (10–20%) exhibited recurrence. The other six cases with a low MIB-1 labeling index also exhibited recurrence. Of the six cases treated
with radiotherapy (doses of 50–55 Gy), recurrence occurred in four cases. No intra- or extracranial metastases were identified. However, the
longest follow-up period was 16 years (12). These findings suggested that SCO patients should be followed up for five years or more and it
may not be appropriate to define SCO as a WHO grade I tumor with a short follow-up period. In addition, Ogiwara et al (7) found that an
incomplete resection of the tumor was a significant risk factor for the recurrence of SCO. Therefore, a complete resection of the tumor is
necessary to prevent the recurrence of SCO. In conclusion, SCO was identified as a novel type of tumor in the WHO classification of tumors
of the CNS in 2007 (3). However, to date, only 24 cases of SCO have been reported in the literature and little information regarding SCO is
available. Similar to nonfunctional adenoma, the most common clinical manifestation of SCO is panhypopituitarism. Tumors with an enhancement
on an MRI should be considered as SCO and MRA and/or angiography should be performed to assess the blood supply of the tumor, thus
preventing the risk of severe intraoperative bleeding. Complete removal of the tumor is important to prevent tumor recurrence. The
intraoperative findings, including the texture and the blood supply of the tumor, may provide valuable clinical information to guide the
surgical procedures. MRI images of case 1. (A) Preoperative MRI image revealing a suprasellar round mass. (B) MRI image at the 21-month
follow-up exhibiting no recurrence of the tumor. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. Histological and immunohistochemical staining of the
spindle cell oncocytoma in case 1. (A and B) Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed that the tumor was composed of spindled and epithelioid
cells with an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Infiltration of scattered mature lymphocytes was observed in the extracellular matrix. A,
magnification, ×100; B, magnification, ×200. Immunohistochemical staining for (C) vimentin, (D) epithelial membrane antigen, (E) S-100 and
(F) glial fibrillary acidic protein. C-F, magnification, ×20. MRI images of case 2. (A) Preoperative MRI image demonstrating a suprasellar
mass. (B) MRI image at the 15-month follow-up revealing no recurrence of the tumor. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. Histological and
immunohistochemical staining of the spindle cell oncocytoma in case 2. (A and B) Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealing that the tumor was
composed of spindled and epithelioid cells arranged in intersecting fascicles. The cells had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Mild to
moderate nuclear atypia was identified, but mitosis was not observed. Nuclear pleomorphism was found in certain cells. Infiltration of a few
mature lymphocytes and local interstitial mucoid degeneration was observed. A, magnification, ×20; B, magnification, ×40.
Immunohistochemical staining for (C) S-100, (D) epithelial membrane antigen, (E and F) vimentin and (G and H) thyroid transcription
factor-1. C-E and G, magnification, ×20; F and H, magnification, ×40.
