Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: HY WG. Performed
the experiments: ZL XC TC. Analyzed the data: BZ. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: BZ. Wrote the paper: HY JK. Limb amputation
due to lower extremity arterial injury is not uncommon and multilevel arterial injury is even more limb-threatening and easily missed with
potentially devastating consequences. There is limited information on multilevel arterial injuries. We undertook a review of our experience
to gain insight on multilevel arterial injury patterns associated with lower extremity trauma and to analyze the results of management of
such injuries with a special focus on the influence of initial diagnosis on limb salvage. Between August 2002 and September 2012, 38
patients with lower extremity multilevel arterial injuries were reviewed, retrospectively. The injury patterns and amputation rates
associated with initial diagnosis or misdiagnosis were analyzed. According to their injury levels, three multilevel arterial injury patterns
were seen in this series: arterial injuries with the involvement of femoral artery and popliteal artery (pattern A), femoral artery and
anterior or (and) posterior artery (pattern B), and popliteal artery and anterior or (and) posterior artery (pattern C). The general missed
diagnosis rate was 31.6%. Pattern B had a much higher missed diagnosis rate than the other two patterns. The missed diagnosis rate was
significantly correlated with the amputation rates (Odds Ratio =10.7, 95% CI: 2.04-56.61). The definite diagnosis rate was only 14.8% using
duplex ultrasonography examination. Diagnosis of pattern B injury is more prone to be missed. DUS has low specificity in the detection of
multilevel arterial injuries. Aggressive intraoperative exploration is considered to be valuable in the definitive diagnosis of highly
suspected cases when other diagnostic tools are unavailable. All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information files.
Lower extremity arterial injuries remain an uncommon but challenging clinical entity, resulting in high rates of lower extremity amputation,
functional disability, and mortality, if not treated early and competently. The limb salvage rate in patients with simple arterial injuries
is over 90%. In contrast, complicated vascular injuries, especially in the lower extremity with more tenuous vascular collaterals, may
result in much higher amputation rates. Even worse and particularly devastating are multilevel vascular injuries in a mangled extremity.
Hafez et al reported a 45% of limb loss rate (Odds Ratio for amputation, 4.4) in patients suffering from above- and below-knee vascular
injuries. Limb amputation in patients with lower extremity arterial injury has been attributed to duration of ischemia, concomitant
injuries, development of compartment syndrome, injury mechanism, and failed revascularization. The reported limb loss and salvage rates vary
widely in the literature, partly because of the bias in patient populations and time periods . Nonetheless, the timely and competent
management of these devastating injuries is of great importance in terms of their final results. In practice, timely diagnosis and repair in
the treatment of these vascular injuries have been proved to be the key for limb salvage and the restoration of better function. Although
multilevel vascular injuries are particularly uncommon, they may cause even more devastating consequences with higher limb loss rate and
mortality due to the complicated mechanism of injury and the extent of trauma. In particular, the definitive diagnosis of multilevel
arterial injuries is sometimes more challenging under emergent situations. In this retrospective study, we reviewed our 10-year experience
with a subset of patients who had lower extremity multilevel arterial injuries. We attempted to summarize and evaluate different vascular
injury patterns associated with extremity trauma, focusing on the influence of initial diagnosis on limb salvage. Between August 2002 and
September 2012, the data of 271 patients suffering from lower extremity arterial injuries treated in our hospital were reviewed
retrospectively. For the purposes of this study, only patients suffering multilevel arterial injuries were included and those who sustained
single arterial injury or multiple arterial injuries at the same level or underwent primary amputations were excluded. In all, 38 such cases
were identified. According to the locations of the arterial injuries, these multiple level injuries were divided into three zones: upper
zone injury (femoral artery), middle zone injury (popliteal artery) and lower zone injury (posterior and anterior tibial arteries) (Fig. 1).
This study was granted permission by the Research Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University and all
the patient records were anonymized and de-identified prior to analysis. The individual in this manuscript has given written informed
consent (as outlined in PLOS consent form) to publish these case details. Primary diagnosis was usually determined by physical examination,
history of trauma and by Doppler ultrasonography in selected patients and the definitive diagnosis was confirmed by the intraoperative
findings during exploration. Vascular management was carried out prior to tendon and nerve repair in the operating room under general
anesthesia. Bone fractures were treated first in cases with unstable, comminuted fractures using external fixators or some simple fractures,
which were estimated to be accomplished within 30 minutes, or else, a temporary arterial shunt was applied. Otherwise, bone immobilization
was performed after arterial anastomosis. Systemic heparinization was employed except for arterial injuries with severe soft tissue and
muscle injuries. The contralateral saphenous veins were used for interpositional vein grafts, which were used liberally. Venous injuries
involved were repaired whenever possible to prevent postoperative venous congestion and to minimize the potential of developing extremity
compartment syndrome. At the same time, immediately after revascularization, fasciotomy involving four compartments of the lower legs in all
of the patients was carried out using a posteromedial and an anterolateral skin incision either therapeutically or prophylactically.
Postoperatively, a protocol of anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin was strictly followed in all the cases and dextran therapy
was also given. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to analyze the normality of the variables. The independent patterns between groups were
compared by One Way ANOVA. The categorical variables were analyzed using Pearson chi-square test and Fisher exact test. The differences
between groups were compared using Bonferroni correction. Mean and standard deviation (SD) were used for continuous variables. Statistical
significance with a two-sided P value of less than 0.05 was adopted. All the statistical analyses were performed with SPSS v. 19.0. Thirty
males (78.9%) and 8 females (21.1%) were involved in this series, ranging in age from 17 years to 61 years with a mean age of 31.7 years.
Based on the injury patterns, all the patients included were classified into three patterns: pattern A with arterial injuries in the upper
and middle zones, pattern B with arterial injuries in the upper and lower zones and pattern C with arterial injuries in the middle and lower
zones. There were 15 cases in pattern A, 10 cases in pattern B and 13 cases in pattern C. Duration of time before surgery ranged from 2
hours to 6 hours with an average time of 3.2 hours. In terms of injury patterns, 18 cases (47.4%) were closed injuries and 20 cases (52.6%)
were open injuries. No significant differences in duration of ischemia (p = 0.425) and injury patterns (p = 0.599) were seen among the three
patterns. Patients in pattern B suffered from a lower fracture occurrence rate of only 20% in comparison with 86.7% and 76.9% in pattern A
and pattern C, respectively (pattern B vs. A, p = 0.002; pattern B vs. pattern C, p = 0.012). The details regarding the patients’
demographics were listed in Table 1. The mechanism of injury was blunt trauma in all the patients: road traffic injury in 55.53% (21/38),
landslide trauma in 31.6% (12/38), and strangulation injury by ropes in13.2% (5/38). No significant differences existed between mechanism of
injury and injury pattern (p = 0.839) (Fig. 2). * Zone I, femoral artery; Zone II, popliteal artery; Zone III, posterior and anterior tibial
artery. ♦ No significant differences in duration of ischemia (p = 0.424) and the MESS scores (Mingled Extremity Severity Score, p = 0.537)
among the three patterns ▼No significant differences in injury types (Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.599) and the occurrence of concomitant
venous injuries (p = 0.903) among the three patterns. ▲The fracture occurrence rate in the pattern B was lower than the other two patterns
(Fisher’s exact test: pattern A vs. B, p = 0.002; pattern B vs. pattern C, p = 0.012). Overall, multilevel arterial injuries were initially
misdiagnosed as a single level injury in 12 patients (31.6%). All of these patients underwent re-exploration and the definitive diagnosis of
multilevel vascular injuries was confirmed during the secondary management. The differences in missed diagnosis rate were significant among
the three patterns (p = 0.014), of which pattern B had a much higher missed diagnosis rate (70%) than the other two patterns (20% and 15.4%
in pattern A and C, respectively). The amputation rate of pattern B was also much higher than those of the other two patterns (pattern A vs.
B, p = 0.028; pattern B vs. pattern C, p = 0.039, respectively) (Table 2). ♦Fisher’s exact test showed that the differences in the missed
diagnosis rates were significant among the three patterns (p = 0.014); ▲The amputation rate in pattern II was much higher than the other two
patterns (Fisher’s exact test: pattern I vs. II, p = 0.028; pattern II vs. pattern III, p = 0.039, respectively). In this series, no
patients in this study died. The amputation rate in those patients with an initial diagnosis of multilevel vascular injury was only 11.5%
(3/26), while it was significantly higher with 58.3% (7/12) in the misdiagnosed cases (p = 0.005). The correlation between missed diagnosis
rate and amputation rate, confidence interval (95% CI), odds ratios (OR), and main findings were listed in Table 3. The missed diagnosis
rate was significantly correlated with the amputation rates (OR = 10.7, 95% CI: 2.04–56.61). ▲Chi-square test showed that the amputation
rate in patients with missed diagnosis was much higher than those with initial definite diagnosis (p = 0.005, OR = 10.7, 95% CI:
2.04–56.61). Duplex ultrasonography examination was performed in 27 patients (75%). The definitive diagnosis rate was only 14.8% with a
suspicion of injury rate of 18.5% and a 66.7% rate of missed diagnosis. No significant differences in the results of color ultrasonography
examination were revealed among the three patterns (p = 0.965) (Table 4). ▲Fisher’s exact test showed no significant differences in the
results of duplex ultrasonography examination among the three patterns (p = 0.965). A 35-year-old man was referred to our hospital 2 hours
after a run-over injury to his left leg by a truck. He sustained a closed distal femur fracture with extensive soft tissue injury. The left
dorsalis pedis artery was not palpable at admission. The color ultrasonography examination reported a femoral artery injury at above-knee
level. Surgical management was soon carried out after necessary preoperative preparation. The femoral artery was contused and thrombosed
around the fracture site. The fracture was quickly reduced and immobilized with internal fixation using an AO compression plate. The femoral
artery was repaired with an interposition saphenous vein graft from the contralateral side. Four-compartment fasciotomy was performed
prophylactically. Four hours after surgery, the skin temperature of the right lower leg remained relatively low and the palpation of
dorsalis pedis artery was still uncertain. After routine management of the vascular crisis with no obvious improvement within 30 minutes,
re-exploration in the operation room was performed. Surprisingly, the patency of the above-knee anastomosis was confirmed. Further
exploration revealed that the popliteal artery was also injured and thrombosed. After repair with an interpositional vein graft, the blood
supply of the left leg was resumed and the leg was salvaged. The patient was discharged 15 days after re-exploration (Fig. 3). a.
Preoperative view. The straight arrow indicates the popliteal fossa and the curved one indicates the medial femoral condyle. b.
Intraoperative view during primary exploration. The yellow arrow on the top in the inset shows the appearance of the injured femoral artery;
the black arrow on the bottom indicates the site of arterial injury. c. Intraoperative view during re-exploration. The black arrow on the
top in the inset shows the appearance of the injured popliteal artery; the blue arrow on the bottom indicates the site of arterial injury.
d. Postoperative view at 15-month follow-up. The black arrows on the top in the inset show the appearance of lateral incisions for
fasciotomy and internal fixation of the femur fracture, respectively; the red arrows on the bottom show the sites of skin grafting for the
coverage of wounds. The outcomes of the management of lower extremity arterial injuries are time dependent and the duration between injury
and restoration of blood supply to the affected limb is of great importance to patients prognosis. Undoubtedly, a prompt and definitive
diagnosis of these injures is critical to guiding the development of surgical strategies and reducing limb ischemia time. A majority of
simple lower limb arterial injuries can be diagnosed using the combination of a good physical examination and duplex ultrasonography (DUS).
It was reported that careful physical examination was highly sensitive and specific in screening vascular injuries in patients with
penetrating vascular injuries within extremity and could achieve a negative predictive value of 99% The use of duplex scanning in the
diagnosis of such injuries was also reported to have both sensitivity and specificity of more than 90%. However, the diagnosis of blunt
vascular trauma is more complicated than those of penetrating ones with a greater likelihood to compromise the arterial supply at an
extensive zone. In addition, the vessel and surrounding structures following blunt trauma usually sustain more extensive injury, leading to
severe destruction of the main and collateral blood supply. In such injuries, the management was more complicated and accordingly the
amputation rates were usually higher in comparison with those with stab wounds. As reported, multilevel arterial injuries due to blunt
trauma may contribute to a 10-fold increased risk when compared with other injury patterns. Consistent with previous reports , all the
patients in this series were injured by blunt trauma. However, no significant differences in the mechanism of injury were seen among the
three patterns. Since multilevel arterial injuries are quite uncommon in clinical settings, misdiagnosis may readily occur as the clinician
may concentrate on the highly suspected site and neglecting to recognize additional vascular injuries, resulting in high amputation rates
and increased mortality. No related studies focusing on the multilevel arterial injuries were available in the literature. In the present
study, the occurrence of missed diagnosis was 31.6%; of the three patterns, pattern B accounts for a much higher missed diagnosis rate of
70%, which means the extra vascular injury related to two isolated vascular injuries are more prone to be neglected; while it could be more
easily diagnosed when occurring in two adjacent arteries, such as in pattern A and pattern C with missed diagnosis rates of only 20% and
15.4%, respectively. The severity of the trauma may also interfere with clinician’s ability to make a definitive diagnosis. Patients in
pattern B suffered from a lower fracture occurrence rate of only 20% in comparison with 86.7% and 76.9% in pattern A and pattern C,
respectively, misleading surgeons to making an imprudent diagnosis due to focusing on the lack of bony injuries. The identification of
multilevel arterial injuries is the prerequisite for a better outcome with a higher limb salvage rate. In this series, the amputation rate
was only 11.5% (3/26) in patients with a definitive diagnosis, while it was approximately 5 times higher in those with a missed arterial
injury. Of the three patterns, the amputation rate in pattern B (60%) was much higher than the other two patterns (13.3% and 15.4% in
pattern A and III, respectively). This result seems not to be in line with the commonsense of an expected worse result when popliteal artery
was involved. However, it was closely correlated with the initial definitive diagnosis rate. It is conceivable that all the multilevel
arterial injured cases with definitive diagnosis will be treated primarily with restoration of limb blood supply in a shorter time, which is
vital in limb salvage and functional recovery as well. Otherwise, secondary exploration is required for those who are misdiagnosed, putting
the vulnerable tissues in peril of unsalvageable changes with potentially devastating consequences. Although the higher amputation rate in
pattern B, which represents multilevel trauma of distant regions with a likelihood of a larger area of injured soft tissues, is probably due
to a more extensive soft tissue trauma, it is conceivable that making a timely definite diagnosis is crucial in limb salvage no matter what
level of artery injuries is located. DUS is portable, cheap and non-invasive and it can be conveniently used for severely injured patients
at the bedside. Although few studies specially focused on the use of DUS in extremity blunt vascular injuries, its accuracy when diagnosing
blunt cervical vascular injury was found to be questionable. In addition, a high occurrence of missed injuries was also reported in some
studies with a low sensitivity Therefore, some authors suggested that ultrasonography should not be advocated for suspected blunt cervical
vascular injury. In our practice, lower extremity arterial injuries can be detected easily by duplex ultrasonography with sensitivity of
100%; however, it is challenging to identify the existence of multilevel arterial injuries and its specificity was only 14.8%. Our findings
also indicate that the values of DUS should be modestly considered in the diagnosis of blunt extremity arterial injuries. Arteriography and
computed tomography angiography (CTA) have been utilized for the diagnosis of vascular injuries in patients suffering from vascular trauma
in some studies with satisfactory outcomes. Unfortunately, such examinations were not utilized in this series partly due to the concerns of
high cost, technical availability, time consuming and inconvenience. Undoubtedly, if these work-ups were performed, the misdiagnosis rate
would be significantly decreased. All the concerns neglecting the merit of these examinations should be reconsidered and a comprehensive
evaluation of these techniques in the diagnosis of such cases is under further investigation in practice. But anyway, based on the widely
accepted protocols in the management of extremity vascular injuries , more liberal use of arteriography should be considered in dealing with
such cases. For the treatment of vascular injuries, “although surgical technique affects outcome, results are primarily dependent on early
detection of vascular injury followed by immediate treatment.” The preoperative evaluation is valuable in diagnosis; however, more attention
should be paid to intraoperative exploration in the management of blunt arterial injuries. Intraoperative arteriography is undoubtedly a
very useful method to identify the exact vascular injuries with less trauma to the limbs; however, to some extent, it is technical demanding
and is restricted by device limitations. In contrast, surgical intervention may be more feasible in most hospitals of the developing
countries. The extent of surgical exploration is suggested to be performed in a more aggressive way in comparison with the treatment of
penetrating injuries and it is advisable to exceed the trauma zones. Sometimes tandem distal lesions can be treated by endovascular means
using a vascular stent with no need of extensive exploration, but it has little merit in diagnosis. On the other hand, the routine judgment
of vascular patency based on the blood reflux from the ends is not always reliable, especially around the knee area because of the abundant
collateral circulations. Although a palpable dorsalis pedis artery pulse is a reliable indication for a successful repair, it is not
uncommon that the absence of dorsalis pedis artery pulse doesn’t always mean that the vascular anastomosis has failed since patients
sometimes are still in a state of shock with low blood pressure shortly after surgery. Nonetheless, after resuscitation with restoration of
blood pressure, the dosalis pedis artery pulse should be palpated and easily detected by DUS. Therefore, postoperative monitoring is of
great importance in order to identify a vascular crisis in a timely manner and to confirm the patency of a repaired artery. The drawbacks of
this study include: the demographic data are not detailed enough; the outcomes mainly concentrate on the limb salvage or amputation rate
without regard to long-term function; other factors, such as the severity of trauma to additional structures and accompanying venous
injuries, were just grossly documented, which may affect the outcomes and weaken the power of comparison among groups. The data of the Ankle
and Brachial Index (ABI), one of the common parameters in evaluation of lower extremity arterial injures, were not collected in this study.
Although it has little room in the differential diagnosis of multilevel arterial injuries, it may benefit the assessment of the patency of
repaired arteries postoperatively. In addition, intraoperative angiograms were not use in this study, which may provide accurate information
for definite diagnosis; the computed tomography angiography (CTA), as another essential modality of assessment in patients with suspected
vascular injuries who lack the hard signs of vascular injury that mandate immediate surgical exploration, was also not carried out in this
series. These techniques are especially important for the diagnosis and management of patients with suspected multi-level crush injuries
featured in the present study. Therefore, our findings can only be interpreted with exclusion of the impact of these factors. In conclusion,
multilevel arterial injury of the lower extremity due to blunt trauma is limb-threatening and easily missed with potentially devastating
consequences. The diagnosis of multilevel arterial injuries associated with femoral artery and posterior or anterior arteries is prone to be
missed. DUS has low specificity in the detection of multilevel arterial injuries. A well-organized perioperative protocol, especially
aggressive intraoperative exploration, is considered to be valuable in the definitive diagnosis of such injuries. Injury patterns: (Zone I,
femoral artery; Zone II, popliteal artery; Zone III, posterior and anterior tibial artery). A: Zone I + Zone II. B: Zone I + Zone III. C:
Zone II + Zone III. (XLS) Click here for additional data file. The authors thank Dr. Jingwei Zheng for the completion of statistical
analysis. This study was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang province (Grant No. LY12H06003) and the funding of Health
Department of Zhejiang province (201338025).
