This paper reports a rare iatrogenic complication of acupuncture-induced haemothorax and comments on the importance and need for special
education of physicians and physiotherapists in order to apply safe and effective acupuncture treatment. A 37-year-old healthy woman had a
session of acupuncture treatments for neck and right upper thoracic non-specific musculoskeletal pain, after which she gradually developed
dyspnoea and chest discomfort. After some delay while trying other treatment, she was eventually transferred to the emergency department
where a chest X-ray revealed a right pneumothorax and fluid collection. She was admitted to hospital and a chest tube inserted into the
right hemithorax (under ultrasound guidance) drained 800 mL of bloody fluid (haematocrit (Hct) 17.8%) in 24 h and 1200 mL over the following
3 days. Her blood Hct fell from 39.0% to 30.8% and haemoglobin from 12.7 to 10.3 g/dL. The patient recovered completely and was discharged
after 9 days of hospitalisation. When dyspnoea, chest pain and discomfort occur during or after an acupuncture treatment, the possibility of
secondary (traumatic) pneumo- or haemopneumothorax should be considered and the patient should remain under careful observation (watchful
waiting) for at least 48 h. To maximise the safety of acupuncture, specific training should be given for the safe use of acupuncture points
of the anterior and posterior thoracic wall using dry needling, trigger point acupuncture or other advanced acupuncture techniques.
Acupuncture is an alternative complementary medical therapy that has gained increasing popularity in the treatment of various conditions in
the Western world.1 Because of its increasing use, there is a parallel increasing tendency for side effects and complications that can occur
as a result of direct trauma or inflammation. We present the first known report from Greece of a rare iatrogenic complication of acupuncture
which we hope will alert practitioners and other healthcare staff to suspect, promptly diagnose and quickly admit similar cases for
intensive care in the future. A 37-year-old woman presented with acute thoracic and neck pain to a private practice acupuncture
practitioner. The patient was healthy with no other known significant medical conditions, although she had been a heavy smoker for the
previous 15 years (2–3 cigarette packs per day) and marginally underweight with a body mass index of 18.2. The patient had previously
successfully undergone several acupuncture sessions at the same private acupuncture clinic for stress management and posture-related
musculoskeletal pain without complaining of any side effect. On the day of presentation she requested acupuncture treatment for pain that
had commenced during the past 12 h and extended from the right shoulder region (rhomboid major muscle), above the elevator scapulae and
trapezoid muscles and into the suboccipital region and the head (figure 1A). It was described by her as ‘muscular pain’ and was accompanied
by muscular stiffness and decreased range of motion. (A) Pain diagram showing the referred pain area over the cervical and interscapular
region. (B) Admission X-ray showing pneumo-haemothorax in the right chest (arrows indicate fluid collection). (C) Ultrasound image
demonstrating the pleural effusion and the collapsed right lung. The collection fluid is located between the base of the lung and the
diaphragm over the liver (arrows). (D) Chest tube inserted at the right base. The practitioner inserted approximately 20 needles locally and
regionally, connecting two pairs with an electroacupuncture device. At the end of the session the therapist tried to ‘deactivate’ a trigger
point which he located by palpating the elevator scapulae muscle. He used a dry needling technique (intramuscular stimulation) by
manipulating a needle that was already in place. According to the patient, he used intense manipulation. At this point the patient felt an
acute local and intense pain which remained unchanged even after the needle was removed. The same evening, 4–5 h after treatment, the pain
became more intense. The patient contacted the acupuncturist who advised her to treat the pain with pain killers and bed rest. The next day
(24 h after the treatment), the same acute pain reappeared and extended to the anterior chest wall, including almost the whole right
hemithorax. It was intensified during inspiration and speech. She called her acupuncturist who advised her to visit the emergency (A&E)
department of the nearest hospital. She did not follow his advice but, instead, thinking that she might have a muscular pain, tried to
obtain pain relief by visiting a physiotherapist. The physiotherapist, without contacting the acupuncturist, tried to help her with light
massage, local manual manipulation and superficial heat therapy with warm packs at the region where she first felt the pain. The next day
(48 h after the episode) she was in a better condition and able to undertake her daily tasks. At some point the chest pain reappeared. She
felt exhausted and thought she was feverish (indeed, she had a fever of 37.8°C) and she felt that she was about to faint and gradually
developed shortness of breath (later, during our interview with the patient, she mentioned that she had shallow breathing and was out of
breath while speaking). She again called her acupuncturist and was again advised to attend an A&E department in order to have a chest X-ray.
This time she followed his advice and went to a private radiology clinic where a chest X-ray revealed pneumothorax and fluid accumulation in
the right pleural space (figure 1B). It was then that she finally visited the A&E department of the nearest private hospital on duty with
signs of dyspnoea and intense pain over the right hemithorax. She was tachypnoeic, with a respiratory rate of 30–32 breaths/min, a pulse
rate of 110/min, blood pressure 92/64 mm Hg, decreased chest expansion with active accessory respiratory muscles, dullness to percussion and
reduced breath sounds over the right hemithorax. Pneumothorax was suspected and a diagnostic fluid aspiration (under X-ray) was performed.
The fluid sample was bloody (haematocrit (Hct) 17.8%, haemoglobin (Hb) 6.1 g/dL, red blood cells 1.90×106/μL), confirming the diagnosis as
traumatic haemothorax (criteria: pleural effusion with a Hct value >50% of that of the circulating serum Hct). Admission blood Hct was 39%,
Hb 12.7 g/dL, platelets 174 000/μL, white blood cells 12 550/μL. Chest drainage was immediately performed under general anaesthesia, with
insertion of a drain (intercostal catheter F32) through a 1 cm incision at the sixth intercostal space in the mid-axillary line in order to
remove the fluid from the pleural cavity. The following blood examination (in the afternoon on the same day) showed that Hct had fallen to
30.8% and Hb to 10.3 g/dL. Through the tube, 800 mL of bloody fluid were aspirated in the first 24 h. The dyspnoea was gradually relieved
over the course of 4–6 h. Meanwhile, a repeat blood test the following day showed that the Hct and Hb remained unchanged (Hct 29.8% and Hb
10 g/dL). The patient was not transfused and was kept under observation with intravenous pain killers and antibiotics
(fluoroquinolone/ciprofloxacin). Two pleural fluid cultures were negative. Three days after the pleural drainage, even though the vital
signs and respiration were improved, an ultrasound examination following a new X-ray showed the continued presence of fluid in the pleural
space which was not properly drained by the tube (figure 1C), so a second chest tube was inserted to the right lung base (figure 1D). The
total amount of bloody fluid drained by the chest tubes was 2000 mL before their removal on day 5 after admission. Blood tests on day 5
revealed an increase in Hct to 30.3% and Hb was10.1 g/dL. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the ninth day with a fully
expanded lung and normal lung function. The patient remained asymptomatic at follow-up 10 days after discharge. A haemothorax, pneumothorax
or both can occur when the chest wall is punctured, allowing blood, air or both to enter the pleural space, and dyspnoea and chest pain
result.2 Traumatic haemothorax develops when trauma to the chest or lung wall occurs with concomitant rupture of a small contractile vessel,
vascular bulla or lung parenchyma at the apex of the lung, or an aberrant thin-walled vessel. Penetrating chest trauma such as acupuncture
lacerates a blood vessel and causes trauma-related blood loss into the pleural cavity.3 Sometimes haemothorax can be a major complication
not due to acupuncture treatment but as a result of bleeding from insertion of a thoracic catheter (the differential diagnosis can be made
by measuring the Hct and Hb levels of the pleural effusion). Traumatic events in acupuncture treatment are usually caused by improper
insertion or manipulation at high-risk acupuncture points. The depth, direction and angle of needle insertion, especially in the chest
region, are crucial. The lung surface is about 10–20 mm beneath the skin in the region of the medial scapular or mid-clavicular line (figure
2A). This may explain the high incidence of pneumothorax from needling in these areas.4 5 Preventing iatrogenic complications is therefore
crucial.6 Inspection and history can provide us with valuable information. The importance of the depth and angle during acupuncture
treatment. (A) The acupuncture point ST13 is located in a high-risk body region. Needles (a) and (b) are placed in the correct direction and
depth; needles (d) and (c) could damage the large vessels or right pleura. In the same region, acupuncture points ST12, LU1 and LU2 are also
in a high-risk anatomical region. (B) Cross-sectional anatomy images provide valuable information, indicating the safe depth, direction and
angle of needle insertion in order to prevent inappropriate needle technique. We suggest that high-risk patients are those with a thin body
status, thin chest wall, atrophic neck and thoracic muscles, a history of chronic respiratory diseases and heavy long-time smokers. However,
obese patients can also be at risk as it becomes more difficult to gauge the depth of the needle tip. We consider high-risk techniques to
include deep intramuscular stimulation and dry needling techniques, especially when they are applied on acupuncture points situated in the
thoracic region, thoracic erector muscles (bladder meridians), rhomboids, trapezius, the subclavicular and supraclavicular region,
intercostal spaces, suprascapular and infrascapular fossae. Finally, we consider high-risk regions to be all the following acupuncture
points: ST11, ST12, LU1, LU2, ST2, KI27, KI26, KI22, ST18, BL41 and BL50. Acupuncture points situated in the mid-axillary line (SP17, SP21,
GB21 and BG22) have to be punctured with caution (depth, direction and angle), and the acupuncturist must know the anatomy of the above
regions and the anatomical structures and layers that are located beneath the acupuncture points, preferably using illustrations that
present the cross-sectional anatomy, especially for high-risk acupuncture points (figure 2B). Acupuncture in the above areas should
therefore be applied with caution.7 8 We recommend that any patient who develops shortness of breath, chest pain and/or thoracic
(interscapular) pain following acupuncture applied to the chest region (anterior or posterior thoracic wall) should always be suspected of
pneumothorax or haemothorax, which is a serious and potentially life-threatening complication that can be treated successfully if the
patient follows the instructions of his/her doctor. To our knowledge, this is the first known report of haemothorax occurring in Greece
following routine acupuncture treatment. Because of its widespread use, acupuncture is often assumed to be safe, but serious and sometimes
fatal adverse events have been reported. It is important that patients who have been treated with acupuncture are strongly encouraged to
contact their acupuncturist first if they develop any new-onset symptoms following acupuncture. Their acupuncturist is more likely than
someone unfamiliar with acupuncture to consider the possibility of acupuncture-induced complications including haemothorax. Knowledge of
these incidents should change our practice (and alertness) and discipline to instructions would profoundly reduce fatal events caused by
acupuncture. The acupuncturist should consider following up the telephone conversation to ensure that the advice given has been followed. We
recommend a review of—and, if necessary, improvement to—acupuncture training for safety including new educational guidelines (or red flags)
and special acupuncture training for treating high-risk areas based on the cross-sectional anatomy of chest and thoracic acupuncture points.
We intend to design specific training that gives precise guidance on the exact location, underlying anatomy, depth and spatial distribution
of acupuncture points as well as the position of vessels, nerves, muscles and viscera. Correction notice: This article has been corrected
since it was published Online First. The provenance and peer review statement has been corrected. Contributors: TT participated actively
from the first moment with the patient as part of the medical staff at the emergency department and, with AE and KYM, conceived the idea of
publishing this case report. SV helped with treatment and ultrasound images and diagnostics. YA and GG contributed to refinement of the
study. All authors approved the final manuscript. Competing interests: None. Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not
commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
