Peroxisomes are involved in various metabolic reactions. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) type 1 is one of the peroxisomal
biogenesis disorders caused by mutations in the PEX7 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. We present a nine-year-old boy
with skeletal abnormalities and dysmorphic facial appearance. The patient was born to parents who were first cousins. Very-long-chain fatty
acids and pristanic acid levels were in the normal range, but an elevated phytanic acid level was detected by gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry. The PEX7 gene was sequenced in the patient and his parents. A novel homozygous mutation, c.192delT (p.F64Lfs*10), was
identified in the patient and was present in heterozygosity in both parents. In conclusion, the clinical presentation and peroxisome profile
of the patient suggest that this novel mutation leads to RCDP type 1. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) type 1 (OMIM, #215100) is
an autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by disproportionally short stature due to the skeletal abnormalities including proximal
shortening of the humerus and to a lesser degree the femur (rhizomelia); punctate calcifications in cartilage with epiphyseal and
metaphyseal abnormalities (chondrodysplasia punctata) which can be seen on X-rays, joint deformities (congenital contractures); distinctive
facial appearance including a prominent forehead, broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism, epicanthus, micrognathia, high arched palate and
dysplastic external ears. Cataracts are found at birth or develop in early infancy in RCDP type 1. Intellectual disability is severe and
most patients also develop seizures and spasticity (1). Peroxisomes are membrane-enclosed ubiquitous subcellular organelles that contain
many enzymes for various metabolic reactions. RCDP type 1 is one of the peroxisome biogenesis disorders and the defective gene responsible,
PEX7, encodes the cytosolic receptors required for the transport of a few peroxisome matrix proteins (enzymes) into the peroxisomes (2).
Peroxisome matrix proteins contain specific peroxisome targeting signals (PTS) including PTS1 and PTS2 on the primary peptide sequences.
Most matrix proteins contain PTS1 and a few matrix proteins contain PTS2 (2). After the synthesis of these matrix proteins, their transport
to the peroxisomes is mediated by PEX proteins, or peroxins, which are encoded by PEX genes (3). A cytosolic receptor, PEX5, binds the PTS1
signals and plays a role in the transfer and translocation of those peroxisomal matrix proteins into the peroxisomes. PEX7, also a cytosolic
receptor, binds the PTS2 signals of peroxisomal matrix proteins, but also PEX5, for transfer to the peroxisomal membrane and translocation
into peroxisome (4). PTS2-containing enzymes play a role in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids (3-ketothiolase), in the alpha-oxidation of
fatty acids (phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase) and in the biosynthesis of ether phospholipids including plasmalogens (alkyl-DHAP synthase, or AGPS)
(2). The defective peroxin in RCDP type 1 is PEX7. Over 130 probands with RCDP1 have been reported and around 50% of the PEX7 mutations
described are PEX7-L292*, a founder allele in Northern Europeans (5,6). Thus, it is important to describe PEX7 alleles in patients of non-
European ancestry in order to record the full spectrum of PEX7 mutations. In this case report, we report the case of a patient from the
Southeastern part of Turkey with RCDP in whom a novel mutation in the PEX7 gene was identified. A nine-year-old boy was referred to the
Department of Medical Genetics for growth and developmental delay. The parents were first cousins and he was the first child of the family.
He was born at term by Cesarean section due to breech position. Bilateral congenital cataracts (operated on at age two years),
cryptorchidism on the right side, hypertonia and seizures were observed after birth. However, no further seizures occurred for about twelve
months. The patient was reported to have severe developmental delay. He never learned to crawl or walk and did not say any words. He was fed
by nursing bottle. His height and weight were within the normal range at birth, but below -2 standard deviations at all times after age 2
months. Rhizomelic shortening of the arms, contractures at elbows and wrists, dolichocephaly, a flat occiput, maxillary hypoplasia, a long
flat philtrum, a wide nasal base and hypoplasia of the anterior nasal spine were the dysmorphic features noted in the patient (Figure 1).
His younger sibling had died following surgery for kidney disease at age 2 months, but this sibling did not have the clinical features of
RCDP (see pedigree, Figure 2). Atrial septal defect (ASD) (3x3.5 mm), a left to right shunt, a small secundum ASD and peripheral pulmonary
stenosis on the left side were detected by echocardiography at age 2 years. Cranial computerized tomography performed at age 3 years was
reported as normal. Digital electroencephalography (EEG) was performed at age 5 years when he was awake and resting. No focal or paroxysmal
abnormality was noted on the EEG. Liver, portal vein, hepatic vein, gallbladder, spleen, kidneys and adrenal glands were all reported as
normal in an abdominal ultrasonography performed at age 6 years. At presentation, the patient was 9 years old. Rhizomelic shortening of the
arms and calcifications at the elbow were observed. Ulnar hypoplasia and distal radio-ulnar dyplasia were detected on the X-rays (Figure 3).
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (Shimadzu GCMS QP 2010 SE) performed at Dicle University revealed the blood levels of very-long-chain
fatty acids (VLCFA) as C22: 68.7 µmol/L (N: 0-96.3 µmol/L), C24: 61.5 µmol/L (N: 0-91.4 µmol/L), C26: 0.8 µmol/L (N: 0-1.3 µmol/L) and
pristanic acid 0.12 µmol/L (N: 0-2.98 µmol/L), values which were in the normal range (normal levels given in parenthesis). Phytanic acid
level was 125.85 µmol/L (N: 0-9.88 µmol/L), a value which was very high. We elected to sequence the PEX7 gene in the patient and his
parents. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid blood samples were sent to the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre in
Montreal, Canada, in the context of a research protocol (7). Molecular genetic analysis was performed by Sanger sequencing of polymerase
chain reaction amplicons of all 10 PEX7 exons and flanking intronic regions according to reported methods (5). The results indicated that
the patient was homozygous for an unreported PEX7 variant, c.192delT (p.F64Lfs*10). This variant was found in the heterozygote state in both
parents (Figure 4). It was not found in public exomes databases and is considered highly likely to be pathogenic and consistent with the
diagnosis of RCDP type 1. The parents were informed about this disease and genetic counseling was provided. The family gave informed consent
to use the X-rays, the patient’s photograph and test results for publication. The peroxisomal disorders are a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous group of disorders in which there is impairment in peroxisome biogenesis or in the function of single peroxisomal enzymes. The
peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) can be divided into two groups, the Zellweger syndrome spectrum disorders (ZSD) and RCDP type 1 (8).
RCDP type 1 is clinically distinct from the ZSD and is characterized by rhizomelia, multiple punctuate epiphyseal calcification, cataracts,
facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, small stature and psychomotor retardation (9). The clinical diagnosis of a PBD can be suspected by
biochemical laboratory assays. Elevated plasma VLCFA levels reflect deficient peroxisomal fatty acid metabolism. Elevated plasma levels of
phytanic acid, pristanic acid, pipecolic acid and the bile acid precursors trihydroxycholestanoic acid and dihydroxycholestanoic acid and
lowered concentrations of C16 and C18 plasmalogen levels in erythrocytes are also observed in PBDs and reflect other deficient peroxisome
pathways. Following the biochemical assays, ideally, molecular testing and/or peroxisome enzymatic studies in primary skin fibroblasts are
required to confirm the diagnosis (3). Defects in any one of 13 PEX genes cause ZSD, but only defects in PEX7 cause RCDP type1.
Nevertheless, the RCDP clinical phenotype can also be caused by single peroxisome enzyme defects in the pathway of plasmalogen synthesis.
These enzymes are DHAP-AT (GNPAT) and alkyl-DHAP synthase (AGPS), causing RCDP type 2 and type 3, respectively. Recently, an atypical RCDP
phenotype was described in 3 probands with FAR1 deficiency, the peroxisomal enzyme that provides the substrate, a fatty alcohol, for
plasmalogen synthesis (10). In all types of RCDP, VLCFAs and most other peroxisome biochemical markers are normal, while plasmalogen levels
are typically reduced. Thus, it is suggested that disturbed plasmalogen synthesis is responsible for the clinical phenotype. In RCDP1,
because the defect is in the PEX7 transporter, there is also a secondary biochemical defect in phytanic acid oxidation, leading to elevated
phytanic acid levels in patients on diets that are not phytanic acid restricted. In the situation of a suspected RCDP patient, elevated
phytanic acid levels target RCDP1 and eliminate the other single enzymes involved in the plasmalogen synthesis (5,10,11). In this patient,
phytanic acid level was elevated, but C22:0, C24:0, C26:0 and pristanic acid levels were in normal range. Considering the distinct clinical
phenotype of RCDP compared to other peroxisomal disorders, we focused first on the diagnosis of RCDP type 1. We were unable to determine
plasmalogen levels at our center but expect these to be reduced. In conclusion, we have described a novel mutation, c.192delT (p.F64Lfs*10),
in PEX7 gene. The clinical and biochemical presentation of the patient and the homozygous deletion, c.192delT, suggest that this mutation
leads to RCDP type 1. Acknowledgement We thank the family for participating in this study.
