Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 76 Final Diagnosis: Rheumatic valvular heart disease Symptoms: Breathlessness
and leg edema Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Medical treatment for heart failure Specialty: Cardiology Rare disease Complete
calcification of the left atrium (LA) is called “coconut atrium”, which decreases the compliance of LA, leading to the elevation of LA
pressure that is transmitted to the right-side of the heart. The pathogenesis of LA calcification in patients with rheumatic heart disease
is unknown; however, possible mechanisms include chronic strain force in the atrial wall and inflammation. We report here a patient with
long-standing rheumatic valvular heart disease with coconut atrium. A 76-year-old man presented with breathlessness and leg edema due to
right-sided heart failure. He was diagnosed with rheumatic fever at 8 years of age. Mitral commissurotomy and the mitral and aortic valve
replacement were previously performed to treat mitral and aortic valvular stenosis. The profile view of the chest X-ray indicated a diffuse
calcified outline of the LA wall. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed pulmonary hyper-tension and dilatation of both atria. Moreover,
computed tomography showed nearly circumferential calcification of the LA wall. Despite intense medical treatment, he succumbed to heart
failure. An autopsy demonstrated that the LA was markedly dilated, its wall was calcified, and its appearance was similar to the surface of
an atherosclerotic aorta. Microscopic examination revealed intensive calcification in the endocardium. Minimal accumulation of inflammatory
cells was noted. Although slight fibrosis was observed, the cardiac musculature was preserved. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first report that identifies the histological changes of LA calcification associated with long-standing rheumatic valvular heart disease.
Ectopic calcification in the heart is often observed in patients with various cardiac diseases or other clinical conditions. For example,
mitral annular calcification is a common feature of patients with chronic kidney disease or very elderly patients . However, massive
calcification of the left atrium (LA) is a rare clinical condition that involves the left atrial appendage, left atrial free wall, mitral
valve apparatus, or all 3 in more severe cases . Complete calcification of the LA has been described as “coconut atrium” . There are several
reports of patients with LA calcification as an uncommon complication of long-standing rheumatic valvular disease; however, there are no
reports of histological findings. Here, we present the histological analysis of marked LA calcification in a patient with long-standing
rheumatic heart disease. A 76-year-old man was admitted due to complaints of breathlessness and bilateral leg edema. His medical history is
as follows: rheumatic fever at the age of 8 years; aortic and mitral stenosis at the age of 30 years, requiring open mitral commissurotomy;
and mitral and aortic valve replacement for chronic rheumatic mitral and aortic valvular disease was performed at the age of 60 years. On
admission, his blood pressure was 128/86 mmHg and pulse rate was 70 beats per minute. The jugular vein was dilated, and pitting edema was
present on both legs. A systolic murmur was audible. An electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation (heart rate 72 beats/min), complete
right bundle branch block, and right axis deviation. The frontal view of a chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with mild lung congestion (Figure
1A). The profile view revealed a diffuse calcified outline of the LA wall (Figure 1B). Laboratory data indicated anemia and renal
dysfunction (Table 1). The serum level of BNP was markedly elevated (2327 pg/ml). Transthoracic echocardiography showed dilation of the
right ventricle (RV) and inversion of the interventricular septum curvature, indicating elevated RV pressure (Figure 2A, 2B). The estimated
systolic pulmonary pressure was 62.7 mmHg and the end-diastolic dimension of the RV was 38 mm. The left ventricle (LV) and both atria were
also dilated; the size of the LV end-diastolic dimension was 57 mm, and the dimension of the LA was 56 mm (Figure 2). The wall motion of the
LV was mildly reduced and the LV ejection fraction was 52%. Although the acoustic shadow of a prosthetic valve did not allow complete
evaluation, calcification of the LA wall was observed (Figure 2A). Chest computed tomography showed massive and near circumferential
calcification of the LA wall (Figure 3). According to these clinical findings, we attributed his symptoms to right-sided heart failure.
Although the patient underwent intensive treatment with diuretics, dobutamine, and adaptive servo-ventilation therapy, he died due to heart
failure. Autopsy showed marked dilation of the LA and calcification of the wall. The endocardial surface of the LA appeared similar to that
of an atherosclerotic aorta (Figure 4A). Microscopic analysis revealed that intensive calcification under the endocardial layer (Figure 4B,
4C). There were few minimal inflammatory cells and some fibrotic changes were observed. Lipid deposition in the atrial wall was not
detected. There was no specific finding in the respiratory system or gastro-intestinal tract. LA calcification was originally described in
1898. Calcification of the LA is an uncommon complication of long-standing rheumatic valvular heart disease, and complete calcification of
the LA has been described as “coconut atrium” . These characteristics are similar to those of the present case. Calcification of the LA
decreased its compliance, which led to the transmission of elevated LA pressure to the right side of the heart. The pathogenesis of LA
calcification with rheumatic valvular heart disease is unknown; however, possible mechanisms include chronic strain force on the atrial wall
and inflammation. Recent research on the mechanisms of ectopic calcification such as arterial calcification indicates that well-regulated
processes, similar to those that drive osteogenesis, mediate vascular calcification. It is hypothesized that a subpopulation of vascular
cells retains the potential to differentiate into osteoblasts and may play a pivotal role in vascular calcification by forming mineralized
nodules and expression of osteoblast-specific proteins such as osteocalcin, bone morphogenetic protein-2, and alkaline phosphatase .
However, there currently are no published studies that define the mechanisms of calcification in the myocardium. Chronic mitral stenosis
causes pressure overload eventually stretches the walls of the LA. Such long-term hemodynamic forces in the LA induce dysfunction of the
endocardium. During atherogenesis, endothelial dysfunction plays an important role in vascular calcification. For example, Yao et al.
demonstrated that the endothelium is a source of osteoprogenitor cells in vascular calcification . We speculate that dysfunction of
endocardium induced by chronic pressure on the LA wall played a significant role in the atrial calcification in the present case. Further
inflammation during the healing process of rheumatic carditis may be involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatic heart disease . Although we
observed the fibrotic changes here, there were few inflammatory cells in the LA wall, suggesting that active inflammation occurred during a
very early phase of the rheumatic fever. These factors induce structural and electrical remodeling of the atrium, which lead to the
development of atrial fibrillation. Indeed, atrial fibrillation persisted for a long time in our patient. The advanced electroanatomical
remodeling of the LA exacerbates the hemodynamics of heart failure. We report here an autopsied patient with coconut atrium, which is a rare
complication of long-standing rheumatic valvular heart disease. Our observation of intensive calcification under the endocardial layer of
the coconut atrium is, to the best of our knowledge, the first demonstration of the histological changes that occur during LA calcification.
Moreover, our analysis highlights the substantial variability in ectopic calcification of cardiovascular diseases. Frontal (A) and profile
views (B) of a chest radiograph. Triangles represent calcification. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram on admission. Parasternal long-axis (A),
short-axis views (B), and 4-chamber view (C) at end-diastolic phase showing the dilation of the RV and both atria. LV was also mildly
dilated. The inversion of the interventricular septum curvature indicated elevated RV pressure, indicated by arrowheads (B). Although the
acoustic shadow of a prosthetic valve did not allow complete evaluation, the calcification of the LA wall was observed, indicated by arrows
(A). Computed tomography shows calcification of the left atrium wall. Gross appearance of the left atrium (LA) (A). Microscopic view of the
LA (B, C). A low-power view (B) of the LA wall revealed intensive calcification under the endocardial layer. Panel C is a high-power view of
the area, indicated by the rectangle in B. Laboratory data on admission.
