This case report is from Malawi Beit CURE international Hospital (BCIH), a center of excellence for the management of chronic osteomyelitis
(COM) in children. Currently minimal evidence based data exists on the long term outcomes for treatment of bone defects following COM. Few
studies evaluating outcomes are based solely on clinical parameters. This case study highlights the often-debilitating outcome after
treatment and hence the need for further research to find the most effective treatment to create treatment guidelines. It particularly
demonstrates the importance of the bio/psycho/social impact of long-term morbidity and disability, which must be considered alongside
clinical outcomes in evaluation. Chronic osteomyelitis (COM) is defined as bone infection and inflammation lasting longer than 3 months .
COM commonly causes long-term defects and morbidity to children; the burden of which is often greater in developing countries due to, poor
recognition, late presentation and incomplete treatment. Where treatment is available surgery is needed to eradicate infection and correct
deformities. Due to the global distribution of the disease there is minimal research comparing long-term outcomes after treatment for COM,
particularly treatment of bone defects. Consequently, there are no published guidelines or protocols for treatment. Treatments are commonly
unsuccessful; some patients require multiple revision surgeries and are left with long-term physical, psychological and socioeconomic
morbidity and disability. A 9-year-old boy named T.S, presented to BCIH for recurrent treatment of a bone defect caused by COM. T.S had a
3-year history of chronic osteomyelitis following a closed fracture of the right that which was managed conservatively by a district
hospital. Subsequent development of chronic osteomyelitis progressed unnoticed for 3 months with vague bone pain and no fever. By the time
access to a tertiary care was made and chronic osteomyelitis was diagnosed at BCIH, radiographs showed a large circumferential sequestrum
with reduced structural integrity of the right tibia. Aggressive surgical debridement and circumferential sequestectomy was needed to
attempt clearance of all infection, this resulted in a large segmental bone defect (Figure 1). Reconstructive treatment was consequentially
needed using a contralateral fibular bone graft. T.S was readmitted to BCIH, 2 years on, due to a painless anterior deformity of his right
leg. He had been walking with the aid of a stick since the tibia reconstruction. Radiographs showed that the graft within the right tibia
had united however, there was a non-union fatigue fracture through the graft and anterior deformity of the tibia bone (Figure 2). To repair
this T.S's third radical surgical treatment in 3 years was by open reduction and insertion of a rush rod (Figure 3). He was discharged for
follow up once medically stable and imaging showed a stable correction. Lateral and PA radiograph of the right tibia and fibula post
sequestectomy showing a large segmental bone defect Lateral and AP radiograph of the right leg, showing a non-union fracture through a
previous fibular graft in the tibia taken from the contralateral leg Lateral and AP radiograph of the right leg showing correction of a non-
union fracture of the tibia with a rush rod Remarkably, a qualitative questionnaire used at 5-year review revealed that the most challenging
part of T.S's condition was not the repeated unsuccessful surgical treatment, time in hospital, or general fatigue associated with a chronic
condition. Instead, he suffered most from the ridicule, bullying and isolation he encountered from his peers due to his deformity and
disability. Despite this, the psychosocial impact of his condition was neither documented nor known of to the medical team. During the
review T.S described feeling “different and isolated” because he walked with the aid of a stick and couldn′t play with his friends. He said
that people in his village referred to him as “the disabled one” and bullied him. His mother described conspiracies that her son was cursed.
Importantly his attendance at school had reduced due to bullying. Acquired disability from COM can be extremely debilitating to the patient
yet little recognition of this is made in current available literature. In developing countries such as Malawi only 2% of children have
access to rehabilitation and basic support . In this case T.S had received no governmental or community based support for his disability. In
2010 a qualitative study found that indignity and exclusion, as T.S. experienced, are extremely common outcomes for children living with
musculoskeletal impairments in Malawi . They also found that for the majority of people, the need for emotional support exceeded that of
economic support . This case report reflects the importance of these findings; in countries such as Malawi where a vast amount of practical
support is needed, emotional support can be easily overlooked. T.S. had poor school attendance due to the psychosocial impact of his
condition. Less than 10% of African children living with disability are estimated to attend school due to physical and psychological
barriers . This finding is reiterated in findings by SINTEF report; children living with disability were almost twice as likely never to
have attended school . In 2011 the prevalence of disability in Malawi, was measured at 4.18%, 43% caused by a physical disability . Yet WHO
estimates that 15% of the world's population lives with a disability indicating this percentage may be an underestimation. UNICEF reports
provide a potential explanation for this underestimation, it reports that many people with disabilities in under-developed countries are
excluded from research; in some cases their births even go unregistered . Globally, there are strategies designed to encourage and educate
for inclusion and support for people living with disability within communities . The community based rehabilitation framework produced by
WHO provides guidelines on possible ways to implement support. The Malawi council for the handicapped is the most successful organization
currently implementing this framework in Malawi but funding is scarce. Disability leaders have been trained within districts but they
struggle with the practicalities of providing support within the villages. Recently the Malawian government produced a disability bill with
the aim to promote the rights of people living with disability, allowing them to play an even role within society. This will hopefully
encourage more funding, more research, and more emphasis on disability and will highlight the need for holistic care with a focus on the
bio/psycho/social impacts of long term diseases like COM. Ultimately however awareness, education and recognition of patients’ struggles is
fundamentally important. COM is common in developing countries. Further evidence-based research into long-term outcomes comparing treatment
options is needed to establish treatment guidelines. Currently, patients are commonly left with significant morbidity and disability
following surgical treatment for resultant bone defects. This can restrict the child from functioning normally within their family and
social community and have significant psychosocial and economical implications for the child and their family. Psychosocial outcomes must be
recognized and support needs to be considered for the patient. Community education can provide a sustainable beginning for solutions to
enable recognition and holistic support for those struggling to live with disability. The authors declare no competing interest. All authors
read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and equally contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
