An overlap in the distribution of the 2 diseases (leishmaniasis and malaria) was reported in endemic areas, and it can cause significant
delay in the diagnosis of leishmaniasis. Here, an 8-year-old Yemeni boy who was initially diagnosed as malaria and schistosomiasis, and
later on as leishmaniasis is reported. He presented with prolonged fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and diarrhea. His blood film was positive for
Plasmodium falciparum malaria, and his stool was positive for Schistosoma mansoni. Although a full therapeutic course of antimalarial and
schistosoma was administered, his fever, weight loss, and increased hepatosplenomegaly continued. Bone marrow aspiration was carried out
revealing Leishman-Donovan bodies (amastigote form). He was successfully treated with a full course of sodium stibogluconate. This case
stresses the importance of alertness among the treating physicians to this disease occurring in a patient from an endemic area, presenting
with prolonged fever, and hepatosplenomegaly. Leishmaniasis is an infection caused by various leishmania species. It represents important
public health problem in the Eastern Mediterranean Region of the World Health Organization (WHO), and is considered a neglected disease.
Attention should be focused in controlling this disease. It tends to occur in some of these countries in sporadic outbreaks at approximately
a 10-year interval.1 Visceral leishmaniasis, also known as kala-azar is a chronic infectious vector-borne disease caused by protozoa
Leishmania donovani and Leishmania infantum, affecting the pediatric age after inoculation of the organism into the skin by a sandfly. It is
considered as the second most alarming parasitic disease next to malaria.2 The incubation period ranges from 10 days to 24 months, with only
a small percentage of infected persons manifesting the disease. In the initial period, the symptoms are fever, pallor, and
hepatosplenomegaly, which are infrequently associated with coughing and diarrhea, and in some cases, could be oligosymptomatic. In the
second period, the features are irregular fever, weight loss, and more enlarged spleen and liver, as well as deterioration in the
individual’s general condition. In the final period of the disease, the features are severe malnutrition, pancytopenia (anemia, leukopenia,
and thrombocytopenia), jaundice, and ascites. Mortality is often due to hemorrhagic or infectious complications.3 Our objective in
presenting this particular case is to highlight the importance of taking into consideration visceral leishmaniasis in patients with
prolonged fever and hepatosplenomegaly from endemic areas. An 8-year-old Yemeni boy was referred to Al-Sabeen Hospital (ASH), Sana’a, Yemen
in December 2012 with prolonged febrile illness and hepatosplenomegaly for further management. He was from the rural area in Sana’a city,
the eldest among 3 siblings; his siblings and parents were healthy. His complaints began 4 weeks prior to his referral. He developed vague
intermittent abdominal pain, diarrhea on and off, and mild- to moderate-grade fever with chills and rigor. With time, his condition
worsened. His fever continued, moderate to high-grade fever associated with rigor and chills, and his abdominal pain was persistent and
severe accompanied with bloody diarrhea, and weight loss. Therefore, his family decided to seek medical advice. He was brought to a private
clinic in Sana’a city. Laboratory investigations, including blood film for malaria parasite, urine analysis and culture, stool examination,
and typhoid serology were carried out. Results of his test showed that his blood film was positive for Plasmodium falciparum, and
Schistosomal ova (S. ova) were found in the stool. Oral chloroquine (400 mg) was given initially as a loading dose, followed by another 200
mg 6 hours later, and subsequently 200 mg daily for 2 more days. Also, a single dose of Praziquantel 50 mg per kilogram of body weight per
day (mg/kg/BW/D) was given. He was treated adequately by antimalarial and schistosoma therapy, and both his blood film for malaria parasite
and stool for schistosomal ova were negative. Even after all these medications, his condition did not improve, there was constant fever,
malaise, poor appetite, abdominal discomfort, and he did not look well. He was brought to another private clinic where he was examined, and
there, the attending physician gave him another antimalarial medication as he thought that he had resistance to the previous antimalarial
drugs. Later, he was brought to another private clinic; he was given broad spectrum antibiotic, in addition to another antimalarial drug.
This problem continued for 4 weeks without improvement and a final diagnosis. He was then transferred to ASH for further management where
bone marrow aspiration was carried out, and he was diagnosed as visceral leishmaniasis. On examination in ASH, he looked ill, lethargic, and
had no jaundice. His weight was 20 kg, body temperature was 38.5°C, and pulse, respiratory rate, and blood pressure were within the normal
range (NR). He had splenomegaly (spleen size, 10 cm), which was firm but not tender, and had enlarged liver (approximately 7 cm below the
right subcostal margin, and the liver span was 14 cm) (Figure 1). Other systems were normal. Photograph of an 8-year-old patients’ abdomen
revealing marked hepatosplenomegaly (arrows). Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin was 8.0 g/dL, white blood cell count was 1,500
cells/mm3 (NR - 4000 cells/mm3) with a differential count of 57% polymorphs (NR - 40-70%), 41% lymphocytes (NR - 20-45%), and 2% monocytes
(NR - 2-10%). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (Westergren) was 76 mm in the first hour, platelet count was 70×103/µL), and reticulocyte count
was 0.5%. Peripheral smear showed normocytic normochromic anemia with leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Total bilirubin was 1.7 mg/dL,
direct bilirubin was 0.5 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 110 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 91 U/L, total protein was
5.2 g/dL, serum albumin was 2.5 g/dL, and serum globulin was 2.7 g/dL. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and anti-hepatitis C virus (anti-
HCV) tests were negative using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Urinalysis, blood urea, and creatinine were normal. Blood and urine
cultures, and Widal test were negative. The chest x-ray was normal. Ultrasound of the abdomen showed splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Bone
marrow aspiration revealed Leishman-Donovan bodies (amastigote form) (Figure 2). He was diagnosed as visceral leishmaniasis. An 8-year-old
boy bone marrow patient’s aspirate showing amastigotes of Leishmania (Leishman-Donovan bodies) (arrow). Sodium stibogluconate was started 20
mg/kg/BW/D and continued for 21 days. After a few days of sodium stibogluconate therapy, there was observed clinical improvement, his mood
and condition improved, and the fever and abdominal discomfort subsided. Laboratory findings during the course of the treatment showed
spontaneous recovery of all the results; hemoglobin, total white blood cell count, platelet count, and so forth. The bone marrow examination
was not repeated. He was followed up regularly at the clinic, and after 4 months at discharge, he was examined, and there was complete
remission of the symptoms and weight gain with remarkable regression of the spleen and liver. Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) is a
serious disease, which is lethal if left untreated. It occurs in irregular, periodic epidemics. Visceral leishmaniasis affects older
children and young adults in Asia and Africa. Yemen is an endemic area for Leishmaniasis, malaria, and schistosomiasis.4-6 We present a case
of a young boy who had long-standing fever and hepatosplenomegaly that was first diagnosed as malaria and schistosomiasis. Four weeks later,
he was eventually diagnosed as leishmaniasis. The delayed diagnosis of leishmaniasis occurred as a result of the association of the 3
diseases at the same time, and the positive malaria test directed the treating physicians of this disease to antimalarial drug resistance.
Visceral leishmaniasis should be strongly suspected in patients with prolong fever, weakness cachexia, marked hepatosplenomegaly, and
pancytopenia that have potential exposure in an endemic area. An overlap in the distribution of the 2 diseases (Leishmaniasis and malaria)
were reported,7 but the 3 diseases together was not previously reported. The diagnosis of leishmaniasis depends on, either the microscopical
demonstration of Leishmania amastigotes in the applicable tissue aspirates or the biopsies, such as bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, or
liver. The diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis in our case was carried out on the basis of bone marrow aspiration, which provided clear
evidence of Leishman-Donovan bodies. Bone marrow aspiration is considered as a more acceptable method of diagnosis, less dangerous with no
major problems, although it has a sensitivity of less than splenic aspirate.8 Bone marrow biopsy results can also be useful for assessing
the prognosis of leishmania patients in terms of improvement of affected marrow cells. The result of treatment appears to be excellent in
cases of hypercellular marrow.8 Treatment consists of antileishmanial therapy; the main limitation rgarding the choice of antileishmanial
drug is cost and availability. For the case under discussion, sodium stibogluconate was used as it is more readily available and cheap. Our
patient completed a total course of 21 days (20 mg/kg of sodium stibogluconate per day). Pentavalent antimony like sodium stibogluconate and
meglumine antimoniate remains the first-line treatment in all regions of the developing world following decades of clinical experience. It
has confirmed efficacy, with a greater than 90% of long-term cure rate, and affordable cost. Repeated course of therapy may be necessary in
patients with severe visceral leishmaniasis. Supportive therapy to manage nutritional status, associated anemia, hemorrhagic complications,
and secondary infections is also important to optimize treatment outcomes. The development of resistance to first-line therapy requires the
use of even more costly, and more toxic second-line drugs like amphotericin B.9,10 In conclusion, our case was successfully treated for
malaria, schistosomiasis, and later on for leishmaniasis despite the delay in the diagnosis. The association of visceral leishmaniasis,
malaria, and schistosomiasis can be the cause of delayed diagnosis. Visceral leishmaniasis must be taken into consideration in the
differential diagnosis of prolonged febrile illness and hepatosplenomegaly. This case alerts general practitioners, pediatricians, and
health authorities to the possibilities of the presence of visceral leishmaniasis together with other endemic diseases. The author
gratefully acknowledges and sincerely thank Mr. Ameen Bin Mohanna and Mr. Mohammed Bin Mohanna for their contribution in the preparation of
this case report.Also all the laboratory technicians and all team working in the Al-Sabeen Hospital (ASH), Sana’a, Yemen section who
participated in the study.
