Dear Editor, Retinal features associated with septicemia usually do not involve the macula. However, there have been a small number of
reports regarding macular hole cases secondary to septic emboli . We report a case of bilateral macula-involving metastatic infection rather
than macular hole resulting from septic embolization. A 29-year-old man who had initially presented to the emergency room for altered
mentality and been diagnosed with gram-positive cocci bacteremia and meningoencephalitis after work-up was referred for decreased bilateral
vision, noted about 3 days after admission. Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus was observed on blood culture. The patient began a
4-week course of intravenous penicillin G (4 million units every 4 hours). On initial examination, his best-corrected visual acuities (BCVA)
were 20 / 40 in right eye and 20 / 100 in left eye. Fundus examination showed small white infiltration with hemorrhage in the juxtafovea of
both eyes (Fig. 1A). Fluorescein angiography showed no active leakage (Fig. 1B). Spectral domain-optical coherence tomography images showed
disruption at the junction of the photoreceptor inner and outer segments (IS/OS) junction and cone outer segment and hyperreflective
intraretinal deposits involving both the inner and outer retinal layers at the fovea (Fig. 1C). The area of IS/OS junction and cone outer
segment layer disruption was much wider and more extensive in the left eye, in which there was also a focal area of near total retinal
tissue defect close to the shape of an impending macular hole in the juxtafovea of the left eye (Fig. 1D). On the second visit 2 weeks after
appropriate intravenous antibiotic therapy, his BCVA had improved to 20 / 22 in right eye and 20 / 30 in left eye. Fundus examination showed
complete resolution of the hyperreflective intraretinal deposits in both eyes (Fig. 1E). Spectral domain-optical coherence tomography showed
near full restoration of the previously disrupted IS/OS junction and cone outer segment lines except for a small focal defect of the IS/OS
junction in the left eye. The hyperreflective intraretinal deposits in both eyes were no longer present (Fig. 1F). Three months later, his
BCVA were 20 / 20 in right eye and 20 / 40 in left eye; however, the focal defect of the IS/OS junction in the left eye was nearly
unchanged, and the continuity of each retinal layer remained incomplete. Although the incidence of macula-involving metastatic infection
secondary to bacterial septic embolism is rare, careful observation is required when performing fundus examination for possible metastatic
infection in bacteremia patients. Metastatic septic emboli may involve both the outer and inner retinal layers at the bilateral fovea and
may cause a near total retinal tissue defect close to that of an impending macular hole. Our case showed that a macula-involving metastatic
infection can involve reversible retinal structural change with no functional sequelae and improvement of visual acuity after suitable
antibiotic therapy. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
