Korea is not known as an endemic area for Histoplasma. However, we experienced a case of histoplasmosis in a person who had never been
abroad. A 65-year-old female was admitted to the hospital for evaluation of multiple lung nodules. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the
chest showed multiple ill-defined consolidations and cavitations in all lobes of both lungs. The patient underwent a CT-guided lung biopsy,
and a histopathology study showed findings compatible with histoplasmosis. Based on biopsy results and clinical findings, the patient was
diagnosed with chronic cavitary pulmonary histoplasmosis. The patient recovered completely following itraconazole treatment. This is the
first case report of pulmonary histoplasmosis unconnected with either HIV infection or endemicity in Korea. Histoplasmosis is an endemic
disease that mainly occurs in the Ohio and Mississippi River Valleys of the United States and certain areas of North, Central, and South
America.1 When people visit an endemic area or are engaged in outdoor activities such as caving, they could aspirate spores and run the risk
of infection.2 Korea is not known as an endemic area for Histoplasma. However, we experienced a case of a 65-year-old woman who had never
been abroad and presented with multiple pulmonary cavitary lesions, which were finally identified as chronic cavitary histoplasmosis. She
was non-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patient, but she had a medication history of corticosteroid. We report herein this case. A
65-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital for evaluation of multiple lung nodules. The patient had been living in an urban area of
Korea. She denied any previous overseas travel history. The patient was seronegative for hepatitis B surface antigen, and for antibodies to
hepatitis C, and HIV. She was diagnosed with autoimmune hemolytic anemia 2 years before the admission, and had been receiving corticosteroid
monotherapy of 20 mg/day prednisolone. The patient was admitted because a chest X-ray showed new nodular opacities in both lungs, compared
with a chest X-ray taken 6 months ago (Fig. 1). She did not report cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, or pleuritic chest pain. She denied fever,
night sweats, anorexia, or weight loss. Body temperature was 36.8℃, respiratory rate was 18/min, and blood pressure was 120/80 mm Hg. The
chest was clear to auscultation. The laboratory results were as follows: hemoglobin, 11.7 g/dL; white blood cell count, 6230/uL (88.4%
neutrophils, 5.9% lymphocytes); platelet count, 152000/µL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 12 mm/hr; C-reactive protein, 11.94 mg/dL; blood
urea nitrogen, 23 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.87 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 15 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 19 IU/L; total bilirubin,
0.61 mg/dL; and reticulocyte count, 4.39%. Blood and sputum cultures were negative for any pyogenic bacteria. Sputum was negative for acid-
fast bacilli by smear. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed multiple ill-defined consolidations and cavitations in all lobes
of both lungs with the absence of mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Fig. 2). The patient underwent a CT-guided lung biopsy. A histopathology
study revealed many oval shaped, budding yeast-form fungal micro-organisms in the cytoplasm of CD68(+) alveolar macrophages (Fig. 3), which
was clearly identified by Periodic acid-Schiff and Gomori Methenamine Silver stains. The patient was diagnosed with chronic cavitary
pulmonary histoplasmosis. Therapy was initiated with 200 mg itraconazole orally three times per day for 3 days and maintained with 200 mg
orally twice per day for 12 months. She was well following treatment, and the follow-up chest X-ray taken 1 year later revealed complete
resolution (Fig. 1). Histoplasmosis is very rare in Korea, and only three cases have been reported. The first case was diagnosed on a
peripheral blood smear from a newborn.3 The second case was a foreign worker diagnosed with Histoplasma peritonitis based on a laparoscopic
biopsy.4 Third, a case of disseminated histoplasmosis in a patient with HIV infection, was reported.5 In the first case, the evaluation did
not include complete immunological work-ups, nor was there a medical history to reveal possible exposure to histoplasmosis. In the second
case, the patient was a 25-year-old man from Bangladesh. He was negative for HIV-antibody and was not immunocompromised. In the third case,
a patient with HIV infection had been living in Guatemala for 5 years. Our patient had neither a history of recent travel abroad nor
residence, and the serum HIV-antibody test was negative. The first case in newborn is also not connected with either HIV infection or travel
history, but when it comes to a case of histologically confirmed cavitary histoplasmosis in adult, our patient might be the first report of
histoplasmosis unconnected with either HIV infection or endemicity in Korea. The most frequent sources for histoplasmosis in non-endemic
areas are thought to be prior exposure to endemic areas through living or travelling abroad. Histoplasma may be found in isolated microfoci
even in non-endemic areas, and patients can acquire histoplasmosis during activities that disturb these microfoci, as in endemic areas.2 The
distribution of H. capsulatum in the environment varies; the highest concentrations of organisms exist in soil and nitrogen-bearing
environments, including old chicken coops, decaying trees, river or creek banks, and caves contaminated with bat guano.6 Infection occurs by
aerosol aspiration of spores, and a histoplasmosis outbreak can be accompanied with caving or exposure to an area where buildings are being
demolished.7 Bat infested caves can be a source of human exposure to fungal spores, causing outbreaks of "cave disease" if inhalation
exposure is heavy.8 The soil from a bird roost may contain fungal spores. Accordingly, disturbing the soil by cleaning may infect people who
participate or live nearby. Although Korea is not an endemic area, there may be an environmental source of Histoplasma in Korea. Fungal
infections are becoming a serious problem to the elderly or immunocompromised patients. In this case, the patient was receiving
corticosteroid for 2 years and it was assumed to be a predisposing factor in this case of histoplasmosis. Steroids have a depressant effect
on host defense, particularly on cellular immunity, which appears to be the most important defense against fungal disease.9 Many cases of
opportunistic histoplasmosis have been reported in the patients with long-term steroid use and many cases within those undergoing tumor
necrosis factor blocker therapy for rheumatologic disorders or Crohn's disease.10,11,12 Most cases of opportunistic histoplasmosis occur in
patients who are inhabitants of an endemic area or have been to infected places; thus, it is easier to infer infectious routes from their
history.13,14,15 However, our case did not have any history of exposure to an endemic area. Until recently, few studies have been conducted
on domestic systemic mycoses in Korea, including histoplasmosis. Clinicians, therefore, have little experience with histoplasmosis, and no
systemic guidelines are available for prompt diagnosis and treatment. The chance to develop imported mycosis is increasing according to the
increase in the number of travelers and immigrant workers. Imported mycoses can become naturalized in Korea due to climate change and global
warming. This case indicates that more investigations are needed to prepare guidelines for an early and accurate diagnosis. The authors have
no financial conflicts of interest.
