A 70-year-old male presenting a 3-month history of genital painless erythematous nodules in the balanopreputial sulcus was referred to our
service. Histopathological exam presented a chronic dermatitis with epithelioid granulomas and Grocott staining revealed numerous fungal
structures with a suggestive morphology of Histoplasma sp. Cultures evidenced Histoplasma capsulatum var. capsulatum. Treatment with oral
itraconazole led to complete remission of lesions. Histoplasma capsulatum is commonly found in soil contaminated by feces of birds and bats.
Most human infections are subclinical. Symptomatic cases are usually manifested as self-limiting respiratory tract infections and
disseminated infections are primarily associated with immunosuppression.1 Skin lesions occur in 4-11% of patients and result from secondary
invasion of the skin in patients with disseminated infection. Primary cutaneous histoplasmosis is an extremely rare clinical entity and
previously reported cases were mostly related to traumatic inoculation.2,3 We report the case of a 70-year-old male patient, white, from the
urban area of Sao Paulo (Brazil), presenting a 3-month history of genital painless erythematous nodules in the balanopreputial sulcus,
measuring 2.0 cm and 0.7 cm in diameter (Figures 1-3). Adenopathy and systemic symptom were absent. Type II Diabetes mellitus was diagnosed
15 years ago (using Metformin and Glimepiride), hypertension (using Captopril and Atenolol) and cigarette smoking for 50 years. He denied
previous local trauma, but frequently traveled to a farm (countryside of the state of Sao Paulo), where he usually spent time cleaning one
of the rooms where he often found bats. Patient also bred birds at home. Histopathological exam presented chronic dermatitis with
epithelioid granulomas characterized by the presence of epithelioid or vacuolated histiocytes, some of which were grouped into giant cells,
often phagocytizing the etiologic agent. Grocott staining revealed numerous fungal structures with a suggestive morphology of Histoplasma
sp. Sabouraud-agar with chloramphenicol and later Mycosel-agar cultures evidenced Histoplasma capsulatum var. capsulatum (Figure 4). Blood
tests resulted negative for HIV 1/2, HCV, HBV, VDRL and ANA; C3, C4, ESR, total protein fractions, protein electrophoresis, electrolytes,
fasting glucose, renal function test and CBC were all within normal values. Serological tests (immunodiffusion and
counterimmunoelectrophoresis) directed to Histoplasma capsulatum were negative. Chest radiography and computed tomography were performed and
no changes were observed in the lung parenchyma. Treatment with Itraconazole 200mg-day was prescribed and imporItraconazole 200mg-day was
prescribed and important regression of cutaneous lesions was noted after 1 month. A new biopsy with specimen culture was performed in the
sixth month of treatment, presenting caseous necrosis. No fungal structures were visualized and the new cultures were negative. After nine
months, treatment was discontinued and the patient now has a 1-year clinical follow-up, sustaining complete remission of lesions (Figures
5-6). Clinical Picture Clinical Picture Clinical Picture Microculture presenting Histoplasma capsulatum Complete remission after treatment
with oral itraconazole Complete remission after treatment with oral itraconazole Systemic mycoses with cutaneous involvement such as
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis and paracoccidioidomycosis are usually acquired by pulmonary inoculation through inhalation, and later
disseminated to other organs such as the skin. The emergence of isolated skin lesions leads to the possibility of primary cutaneous
inoculation, which is difficult to prove.4 Reports of genital ulcers caused by Histoplasma capsulatum are rare and most reports of cutaneous
histoplasmosis occurred in immunosuppressed patients.5 The inoculation process in this report is not clear, since the patient doesn't refer
previous genital trauma. Dust rich in spores that might be held in clothes after cleaning contaminated sites is a hypothesis that should be
explored. Despite the absence of immunosuppression signs, the elderly are associated with lower function of cellular immune response as well
as worse vigilance against cancer and infectious diseases.6 Genital dermatoses comprise several diseases whose clinical manifestations can
differ from their elsewhere presentations. Sexually transmitted diseases such as syphilis, chancroid and genital herpes may present as
ulcerous lesions with adenopathy; neoplasms, inflammatory such as Behçet disease, traumatic and infectious diseases can have genital
manifestations which dermatologists must be aware of. We report the present case due to its very rare presentation of primary cutaneous
histoplasmosis affecting a patient without evidence of immunosuppression or trauma. Conflict of Interests: none Financial Support: none How
to cite this article: Paixão M, Miot HA, Avancini J, Belda Junior W. Primary cutaneous histoplasmosis developed in the penis of an
immunocompetent patient. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(2):255-7. Work performed at the Teaching Hospital (Hospital das Clínicas), Universidade
de São Paulo (HC-FMUSP) - São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
