Lacaziosis or Jorge Lobo's disease is a fungal, granulomatous, chronic infectious disease caused by Lacazia loboi, which usually affects the
skin and subcutaneous tissue. It is characterized by slow evolution and a variety of cutaneous manifestations with the most common clinical
expression being nodular keloid lesions that predominate in exposed areas. We report the case of a patient who had an unusual clinical
presentation, with a single-plated lesion on the back. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of Lacaziosis. A thirty-four
year old female patient, working as a maid and coming from Manaus/Amazon reported the appearance of a lesion in the dorsal area two years
before. Physical exam showed an infiltrated, erythematous-violaceous plate, with soft consistency, located in the left superior dorsal area
and measuring approximately 6.0 x 4.5 cm (Figure 1). Erythematous-violaceous infiltrated plate, with soft consistency Histopathological
examination of the sample obtained by incisional biopsy evidenced rectified epidermis and granulomatous infiltration on the dermis,
containing spherical, double-walled structures, which appeared either isolated or grouped in chains compatible with Lacazia loboi (Figure
2). Grocott 400x. Fungi arranged in chains are best seen through silver staining The lesion was surgically excised and oral itraconazole 200
mg 12/12h was prescribed next. The patient evolved in a satisfactory manner, with good esthetical results and no signs of recurrence.
Lacaziosis is a disease that has low prevalence rates but significant morbidity for the patients.1 It usually affects adult male patients
living in the Amazonic areas of South America.2,3 Lesions often appear after trauma in exposed areas, especially in the face and limbs.4,5
Due to the highly polymorphic characteristic of the lesions, it is necessary to establish differential diagnoses with several other
dermatoses.6 In the case reported here, the lesion was not keloidiform and was located in a mainly covered region (dorsal area). Surgery
represents, until now, the best therapeutic choice particularly for isolated lesions.7 In order to prevent recurrence, treatment with
clofazimine, dapsone or itraconazole must be prescribed.5 We emphasize the importance of considering differential diagnoses for this type of
lacaziosis' clinical presentation, especially in geographic areas where the disease coexists with leprosy. Conflict of interest: None
Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Sousa PP, Schettini APM, Rodrigues CAC, Westphal DC. Lacaziosis - unusual clinical
presentation. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(2):268-9. Work performed at the Fundação Alfredo da Matta (FUAM) - Manaus (AM), Brazil.
