Immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis is the most common acquired systemic amyloidosis. Its presentation is often insidious and
progressive, which may delay diagnosis. The authors describe a rare case of immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis in a 34-year-old man with
scleroderma-like manifestation substantiated by multifarious laboratory investigations and the histopathologic feature of involved skin
lesions stained with Congo red and crystal violet. This helps to maintain a high clinical suspicion of the disease when confronting similar
skin presentation. A 34-year-old man presented progressive generalized hardening of the body for 3 years. Three months ago, he experienced
difficulty in swallowing and extending his tongue, and several hard nodules were noted progressively on the forehead (Figure 1A). Physical
examination revealed that the skin on his face and distal extremities was indurated (Figure 1B). On the trunk and proximal extremities, the
skin was normal in elasticity, but the underlying muscles were indurated, and almost all the joints were restricted in motion. No regional
lymph nodes were palpable. Laboratory examination showed no abnormality in routine tests. Serum and urine immunofixation showed a
characteristic pattern of monoclonal IgG gammopathy, particularly of λ paraprotein. Some cardiac abnormalities including left ventricular
outflow obstruction and right ventricular dysfunction were noted upon echocardiography. Positron emission tomography computed tomography
(PET-CT) scan showed multiple areas of abnormal uptake in almost all the joints and some muscles. Bone marrow aspirate revealed active
myeloid proliferation and 3% of plasmacyte observed. Flow cytometry showed that CD38birght CD45dim/- cells occupied 6.5% of all the
nucleated cells and the expression of antigen was CD19 (0.7%), CD56 (1.9%), CD20 (1.7%), CD54 (99.9%), CD138 (99.8%), CD49e (2.6%),
intracytoplasmic IgM (3.5%), intracytoplasmic IgD (0.5%), intracytoplasmic IgG (12.6%), intracytoplasmic κ paraprotein (0.3%) and
intracytoplasmic λ paraprotein (98.5%). There were no remarkable findings in various other studies, including abdominal ultrasonography and
chest computer tomography (CT) scan. The skin and muscle biopsy specimens obtained from the nodule on the forehead and inner thigh showed a
deposition of amyloid materials in the dermis, subcutaneous tissues, vessel walls and connective tissue septae of the skeletal muscle, by
Congo red and crystal violet stain (Figure 1C, 1D, 1E, 1F, 1G and 1H). The diagnosis was immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis with
scleroderma-like manifestation. A. Indurated skin on the face and macroglossia; B. Indurated skin on the distal extremities; C. HE:
deposition of amyloid materials in the dermis and vessel walls; D. HE: deposition of amyloid materials in the muscles; E. Red Congo stain
highlighting the amyloid substance in the vessel walls; F. Red Congo stain highlighting the amyloid substance in the muscles; G. Crystal
violet stain revealing the amyloid substance in the vessel walls; (H) Crystal violet stain revealing the amyloid substance in the muscles
Amyloidosis refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by extracellular deposition of proteinaceous fibrillar materials
(termed amyloid) in various tissues and organs. Clinically, the most commonly affected organs resulting in symptoms are the heart, kidneys,
skin, peripheral nerves, autonomic nerves, and liver. Their respective means of presentation are: 1) normal ejection fraction with diastolic
dysfunction, left ventricular hypertrophy with low voltage electrocardiogram; 2) nephrotic syndrome with preserved glomerular filtration
rate; 3) purpura, most notably around the eyes and neck, as well as macroglossia; 4) small fiber peripheral neuropathy characterized by
dysesthesia; 5) orthostatic hypotension; 6) hepatomegaly, often with a cholestatic rise in liver function tests.1 Mucocutaneous alterations
are present in 20-40% of cases, frequently as the first signs of amyloidosis.2 In this patient, however, it has rarely been seen only with
scleroderma-like skin manifestation. At present, all treatments are aimed at destroying the underlying plasma cell clone, which, in turn,
reduces or eliminates the amyloidogenic clonal immunoglobulin light chain. Currently, there are no approved drugs that directly attack
and/or dissolve the amyloid. The approach of using molecules and/or antibodies directed against serum amyloid protein, or antibodies
directed at the tertiary structure of the amyloid, may be treatments for the future.3 Conflict of Interests: None Financial Support: None
How to cite this article: MA H, Chen M, Li J, Qiu S. Syndrome in question. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;90(2):270-1. Work performed at the the
Third Affiliated Hospital and First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
