Hai-Ning Zhen and Wei Zhao contributed equally to this work. To the Editor: Here we report a craniotomy under general anesthesia
successfully performed at a 4350-m altitude and the patient's follow-up results. To the best of our knowledge, this is one craniotomy
carried out at the highest altitude in the world to date. A 21-year-old man occurred spontaneous light headache in the Ali area at a 4350-m
altitude in the Tibet autonomous region of China on October 23, 2011, and his headache became severe gradually. Three days later, the
patient was in a coma with 5 scores (E1V1M3) on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS); his left pupil diameter was 5.0 mm and right pupil diameter
was 3.0 mm, both direct and indirect light reflex of the bilateral pupils disappeared. Craniocerebral computed tomography (CT) scan
indicated a large acute subdural hematoma located in the left fronto-temporo-parietal region, widespread subarachnoid hemorrhage and brain
herniation [Figure 1a–c]. Emergency treatment was given for the patient in time, including continuous mask oxygen inhalation, strong
dehydration (20% mannitol 250 ml + furosemide 10 mg + dexamethasone 5 mg, fast intravenous drip, once per 5 h), and medical hemostasis.
Craniocerebral computed tomography (CT) of the patient. (a-c) Preoperative CT scan indicated a large acute subdural hematoma in the left
fronto-temporo-parietal region, widespread subarachnoid hemorrhage and brain herniation; (d-f) CT scan on postoperative day 2 disclosed that
the subdural hematoma and subarachnoid hemorrhage almost disappeared, although a small intracerebral hematoma occurred in the left temporal
lobe; (g-i) CT scan at postoperative one and a half months showed that the small intracerebral hematoma in the left temporal lobe had been
absorbed; (j-l) CT scan at 5 months after cranioplasty indicated the cranial appearance was good. After the professional medical team
reached by helicopter and quick preoperative preparation, a left fronto-temporo-parietal decompressive craniectomy involving evacuation of
the subdural hematoma and lavage of the subarachnoid hemorrhage was performed emergently under tracheal intubation and general anesthesia on
October 27, 2011. Intraoperatively, it was seen that two of bridging veins located respectively on the parietal and temporal brain surface
were actively bleeding, and absolute hemostasis of both was achieved by cautery. Moreover, we discovered that the staxis of the surgical
region was extensive and achieving hemostasis was very difficult, which may be associated with the increased capillary fragility and
permeability and the abnormality of blood clotting function due to the patient living on the plateau. Therefore, careful surgical
hemostasis, a large dose of hemostatic agent (2 units of haemocoagulase by intravenous injection and 2 units by intramuscular injection,
respectively; a hemostatic mixture (normal saline 250 ml + etamsylate 3.0 g + carbenzamine 0.3 g + vitamin C 3.0 g), intravenous drip) and
proper blood transfusion (whole blood volume 400 ml) were adopted, all these measures ensured the successful completion of the operation.
Postoperatively, a comprehensive treatment was given, including medical hemostasis, dehydration, anti-infection, corticosteroid, anti-stress
ulcer, sedation and nutritional support. At 6 h after operation, the patient began to recover partial consciousness and his GCS increased to
13 scores (E3V4M6). However, the patient's condition became serious again on postoperative day 2, and his consciousness fell into confusion
with 9 scores of GCS (E2V2M5), although craniocerebral CT re-examination disclosed that the intracranial condition improved obviously
[Figure 1d–f]. In view of the adverse influence for the patient’ recovery in the hypobaric hypoxia environment, including high altitude
cerebral edema, high altitude pulmonary edema and hemorrhagic tendency, the patient was successfully evacuated to another better hospital at
a 1300-m altitude via helicopter for further therapy on postoperative day 5. Through continual conservative therapy, the patient recovered
consciousness again 4 days after the evacuation, and his condition improved gradually. Two weeks after the operation the patient could speak
clearly and eat smoothly. One and a half months after the operation, the patient could walk slowly, and CT re-examination showed that the
intracranial condition improved further [Figure 1g–i]. Although at the same period the patient appeared several times of tonic-clonic
seizure, which was well-controlled by proper oral administration of antiepileptic drugs (sodium valproate sustained release tablets, 0.5 g,
b.i.d. and phenobarbital tablets, 60 mg, t.i.d.). At 9 months after craniotomy, a cranioplasty was performed uneventfully for the patient
[Figure 1j–l]. Now the patient has recovered well and can do certain physical work with 5 scores on the Glasgow Outcome Scale. In
conclusion, the condition of one patient suffering acute intracranial hemorrhage complicating brain herniation under extremely high altitude
circumstance is very danger, and whose disease progresses rapidly. The active emergency treatment, timely operation, and opportune
evacuation are the optimal choice for the patient. Edited by: Li-Min Chen Source of Support: This study was supported by a grant from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81430043). Conflict of Interest: None declared.
