Current technique of airway management for impaled knife in the back includes putting the patient in lateral position and intubation. We
present here a novel technique of anesthesia induction (intubation and central line insertion) in a patient with impaled knife in the back
which is simple and easily reproducible. This technique can be used for single lung ventilation using double lumen tube or bronchial blocker
also if desired. Impaled knife in the back is often an anesthetic challenge as patient cannot be put on supine position. Current technique
of airway management includes putting the patient in lateral position and intubation. We present here a novel technique of anesthesia
induction in a patient with impaled knife in the back. A 35-year-old male presented with a knife in the back [Figure 1]. Computerized
tomography of the chest was performed in the prone position [Figure 2] which revealed knife inside the right chest with partial collapse of
the lung and right hemopneumothorax. Picture of the patient and chest X-ray taken bedside Computerized tomography chest performed in the
prone position The patient was taken to the head end of the operating table and was put on lateral position with the upper part of the body
supported by a surgical trolley. Height of the operating table was adjusted to the level of the surgical trolley. Now the patient was put on
supine position - the lower part of the body was at the head end of the operating table and the part of the torso above the knife impalement
site was supported by a surgical trolley. The gap in between the head end of the table and the surgical trolley accommodated the impaled
knife [Figures 3 and 4]. Chest tube was inserted before anesthesia induction under local anesthesia because of hemopneumothorax. Anesthesia
induction, intubation was performed following conventional technique in this position. Central venous access through right internal jugular
vein was secured in the same position. After intubation and central venous access, patient was made lateral for right posterolateral
thoracotomy and moved towards the foot end of the operating table [Figure 5] so that surgical trolley was removed and upper body was also on
the operating table. Surgical plan was to perform a thoracotomy before removing the knife so that hemorrhage from injury can be controlled
easily. Patient position for anesthesia: Patient is taken to the head end of the table, and the part of the torso above the knife impalement
site is supported by a surgical trolley. The gap in between the head end of the table and the surgical trolley accommodated the impaled
knife Different view of the patient position for anesthesia induction. Internal jugular line was inserted in this position Position of the
patient for thoracotomy and incision Right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed, and the impaled knife was removed [Figure 5]. There was
profuse bleeding from intercostal artery which was controlled and the patient required middle and lower lobectomy. This operation was
performed at 2 a.m. and double lumen tube or bronchial blocker was not available. We decided that the risk of waiting will be more as
patient had developed hemothorax. As the injury was very close to the hylum, it was decided that middle and lower lobectomy will be a safer
option than trying to repair the lung tear. Rest of the operation was completed in conventional manner. Impaled knife in the back is an
anesthetic challenge as the patient cannot be put on supine position. Various techniques of intubation in the lateral position of single
lumen or double lumen tube have been described. Intubation in the lateral position is often difficult in the trauma patient because of
unfamiliar position and a full stomach. The technique described by us is simple. It involves using a surgical trolley (which is universally
available) to support the head and upper torso and keeping a gap between the trolley and the head end of the table to accommodate the
impaled knife. After the patient had been put in the supine position, the anesthesia induction procedure was routine. We decided not to use
double lumen tube. However, double lumen tube can be easily used in this novel technique. For thoracotomy, patient was made lateral and then
moved toward the foot end of the table. After an extensive search of the literature, we could not find any report of this technique. One
limitation of this technique must be recognized - the height of the operating table has to be adjusted as the height of the surgical trolley
available was fixed. But we feel that intubation and insertion of the neck line in the supine position is easier because of the familiar
anatomy. We recommend routine use of this induction positioning in patients with impaled knife in the back. The authors certify that they
have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms. In the form the patient(s) has/have given his/her/their consent for his/her/their
images and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patients understand that their names and initials will not be
published and due efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of
Interest: None declared.
