Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 72 Final Diagnosis: Systemic amyloidosis Symptoms: — Medication: — Clinical
Procedure: Liver biopsy Specialty: Gastroenterology and Hepatology Unusual clinical course Amyloidosis is a systemic disease known to affect
a vast range of organs, including the liver, heart, and kidney. When infiltrating the liver, amyloidosis typically does not present with
cirrhosis. Typical presentation includes hepatomegaly with some mild laboratory abnormalities. A 72-year-old man presented with a 2-week
history of worsening abdominal, scrotal, and extremity swelling. He endorsed melanotic stools and intermittent dizziness with a 10-pound
weight gain. Vitals revealed a blood pressure of 82/57 mmHg and a pulse of 83 beats/min with positive orthostatic changes. Mild bibasilar
crackles were noted. His abdomen was moderately distended with a fluid wave present, but no hepatosplenomegaly was noted. He displayed
anasarca with significant extremity and scrotal edema, but no jaundice, telangiectasias, or other stigmata of chronic liver disease were
present. Liver function tests demonstrated a total bilirubin of 1.5 mg/dL (normal value: 0.2–1.2 mg/dL), AST 111 IU/L (normal value 5–34
IU/L), ALT 51 IU/L (normal value 5–55 IU/L), and GGT 583 U/L (12–64 U/L). Alkaline phosphatase was 645 U/L (40–150 U/L). Analysis of
peritoneal fluid was consistent with portal hypertension due to liver disease. Given an atypical presentation of cirrhosis with unclear
etiology, a biopsy was performed and revealed amyloid deposition. Liver disease can be due to various etiologies, many of which can present
ambiguously. Although the most typical etiologies have been well defined, we present a case of an atypical presentation of hepatic
amyloidosis discovered in a patient with ascites and without typical hepatomegaly. The diagnosis of amyloidosis dates back to 1854, when it
was described by Rudolph Virchow . It is the extracellular tissue deposition of abnormal proteinaceous material and can be limited to a
single organ or be systemic. The most commonly involved organs are the heart and kidney . It can also involve the liver, gastrointestinal
tract, bone marrow, and infiltrate other tissues. Hepatic involvement most commonly presents with hepatomegaly. The most common laboratory
abnormality is elevated alkaline phosphatase. Ascites is not commonly seen in hepatic amyloidosis . A 72-year-old man presented with a
2-week history of worsening abdominal, scrotal, and extremity swelling. He denied any hemoptysis or hematemesis, but did complain of
melanotic stools and intermittent dizziness. He had a history of peptic ulcer disease, coronary artery disease, and congestive heart failure
with an unknown ejection fraction. Over the last several weeks he noticed an increase in his abdominal girth. He had gained approximately 10
pounds during this time. While never experiencing chest pain, he did complain of exertional dyspnea. His home medications included aspirin,
atorvastatin, clopidogrel, furosemide, lansoprazole, lisinopril, and metoprolol succinate. He denied the use of any NSAIDs. He had a
25-pack-year smoking history and drank 2–3 alcoholic drinks nightly for the past 30 years, quitting both in the last year. He reported
having a screening colonoscopy 3 years prior, during which a single polyp was the only pertinent finding. He was afebrile, with a blood
pressure of 82/57 mmHg and a pulse of 83 beats/min with positive orthostatic changes. The patient was alert and orientated. Cardiopulmonary
exam demonstrated mild bibasilar crackles; otherwise, no jugular venous distension, heart murmurs, or extrasystolic heart sounds were
appreciated. While soft and non-tender, his abdomen was moderately distended with a fluid wave present. No hepatosplenomegaly was noted. He
displayed anasarca with significant extremity and scrotal edema. His skin was without jaundice, telangiectasias, or other stigmata of
chronic liver disease. Laboratory evaluation revealed hemoglobin of 13.4 g/dL (normal value: 14.1–18.1 g/dL), MCV 88 FL (normal value: 80–97
FL), BUN 50 mg/dL (normal value: 6–20 mg/dL), and creatinine 1.2 mg/dL (normal value: 0.72–1.25 mg/dL). His albumin was 1.8 g/dL (normal
value: 3.5–5 g/dL) and total protein was 4.9 g/dL (normal value: 6.4–8.3 g/dL). Liver function tests demonstrated a total bilirubin of 1.5
mg/dL (normal value: 0.2–1.2 mg/dL), AST 111 IU/L (normal value: 5–34 IU/L), ALT 51 IU/L (normal value: 5–55 IU/L), and GGT 583 U/L (normal
value: 12–64 U/L). Alkaline phosphatase was 645 U/L (normal value: 40–150 U/L). Protime was 13.3 seconds (normal value: 9–12.5 seconds) and
partial thromboplastin time was 26.1 seconds (normal value: 20–33 seconds). B-natriuretic peptide was 1661 (normal value: <100). A
urinalysis revealed proteinuria and hematuria. His ejection fraction was measured at 60–65% on transthoracic echocardiography, with
significant left ventricular hypertrophy and abnormal left ventricular relaxation consistent with a grade 1 diastolic dysfunction without
abnormalities in tissue densities. Analysis of peritoneal fluid was consistent with portal hypertension due to liver disease. The serum-to-
ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) was 1.5 and total protein was 0.8 g/dL. Abdominal MRI revealed a small and nodular liver with several cysts,
esophageal varices, mild splenomegaly, and significant ascites. Spot assessment of urine protein excretion was 2.5 g/dL, in the sub-
nephrotic range. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed due to reported melena and declining hemoglobin. No source of bleeding was
evident, only mild gastritis was present, and biopsies were taken. After autoimmune, infectious, and genetic etiologies of cirrhosis were
excluded, a liver biopsy was performed and revealed amyloid deposition. On presentation, there were multiple etiologies for his anasarca and
ascites: decompensated heart failure, cirrhosis, and hypoalbuminemia due to malabsorption or nephrotic syndrome. End-stage liver disease was
a likely culprit based on exam, and was later confirmed with diagnostic paracentesis and abdominal imaging. The serum-ascites albumin
gradient (SAAG) greater than 1.1 g/dL indicated portal hypertension as the etiology of his ascites. Additionally, the ascites total protein
less than 2.5 g/dL decreased the likelihood of cardiac ascites . The etiology of his end-stage liver disease was unclear following routine
laboratory and radiological evaluation. Although he endorsed chronic daily alcohol use, which could have explained his presentation of
advanced liver disease, his elevated alkaline phosphatase at 645 U/L and sub-nephrotic range proteinuria was incongruent with end-stage
liver disease and prompted further evaluation with liver biopsy. Alkaline phosphatase elevation can originate from bone or liver. When it is
combined with an elevation of liver enzymes or bilirubin it is suggestive of a hepatic cause. In end-stage liver disease, alkaline
phosphatase levels are not typically elevated. Elevation in alkaline phosphatase can be extahepatic or intrahepatic. Extrahepatic causes
include malignancies, chronic pancreatitis, choledocholithiasis, or primary sclerosing cholangitis . Intrahepatic causes include viral and
alcoholic hepatitis, drug toxicities, primary biliary cirrhosis, or infiltrative diseases like sarcoidosis and amyloidosis . Some of the
conditions that cause an elevated alkaline phosphatase can lead to cirrhosis: infiltrative diseases, primary biliary cirrhosis, and chronic
obstruction . Our patient’s radiologic studies did not show any signs of obstruction or common bile duct dilation. Autoimmune work-up,
including ANA and anti-mitochondrial antibody, were negative. Random gastric biopsies performed to identify the source of melena revealed
amyloid deposition within the lamina propria. His subsequent liver biopsy confirmed the same: near total replacement of hepatic parenchyma
with amyloid deposition (Figures 1 and 2). A subsequent bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular (30%) marrow with relative erythroid
hyperplasia with Congo red positive staining. This confirmed the diagnosis of systemic AL amyloidosis. Our patient had systemic amyloidosis
involving several organs: the liver, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys. Hepatic amyloidosis typically does not cause symptoms of liver
disease . One of the most common manifestations, hepatomegaly, is found in at least 80% of the patients . Other manifestations noted have
been weight loss, proteinuria, edema, and ascites. Laboratory abnormalities are unusual with liver involvement; elevated alkaline
phosphatase is the most common, present in approximately 86% of patients . Elevation in AST, ALT, and bilirubin is rarely seen, most
commonly in patients presenting with hepatomegaly . Due to the patient’s poor performance status, Hematology recommended melphalan with
high-dose dexamethasone. Unfortunately, hepatic amyloidosis combined with involvement of other organs like the heart or kidney is associated
with a poorer prognosis, and, after a prolonged hospitalization complicated by worsening renal failure, our patient subsequently died . The
evaluation for the underlying etiology of ascites and cirrhosis is typically predictable. Our case highlights an atypical presentation of
systemic amyloidosis. This diagnosis was un-tangled from the clinical clues of proteinuria and alkaline phosphatase elevation, suggesting an
accompanying diagnosis. Conflicts of interest statement There are no conflicts of interest among the authors of this case report. Liver
biopsy demonstrating hepatic parenchymal changes consistent with cirrhosis. Congo red staining indicating apple-green birefringence.
