We describe a case of persistent strongyloidiasis complicated by recurrent meningitis, in a human T cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
seropositive Peruvian migrant adult resettled in Italy. He was admitted with signs and symptoms of acute bacterial meningitis, reporting
four other meningitis episodes in the past 6 years, with an etiological diagnosis of Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecium in two cases.
He had been previously treated with several antihelmintic regimens not including ivermectin, without eradication of strongyloidiasis, and he
had never been tested for HTLV before. During the described episode, the patient was treated for meningitis with broad-spectrum antibiotic
therapy and 200 μg/kg/dose oral ivermectin once daily on day 1, 2, 15 and 16 with full recovery and no further episodes of meningitis. The
presented case underlines several critical points concerning the management of poorly known neglected diseases such as strongyloidiasis and
HTLV infection in low-endemic areas. Despite several admissions for meningitis and strongyloidiasis, the parasitic infection was not
adequately treated and the patient was not previously tested for HTLV. The supply of ivermectin and the choice of treatment scheme was
challenging since ivermectin is not approved in Italy and there are no standardized guidelines for the treatment of severe strongyloidiasis
in HTLV seropositive subjects. Strongyloidiasis is a nematode infection caused by Strongyloides stercoralis, widely distributed in tropical
and subtropical areas, with some foci of low endemicity even in temperate areas.1 The infection is acquired primarily by walking bare foot
on ground contaminated with infective larvae that are eliminated with stools by parasitized subjects. Once the subject has been infected, in
the absence of appropriate treatment, S. stercoralis is able to persist indefinitely in the host through a so called autoinfective cycle.
The infection is frequently unrecognized because it can be completely asymptomatic; or it may cause mild and nonspecific clinical complains
such as itching, gastrointestinal discomfort, respiratory symptoms; or it can be responsible of asymptomatic eosinophilia.1 Moreover the
diagnosis is difficult because it requires a combination of dedicated techniques such as blood agar plate culture of stool and specific
serology since the direct parasitological examination of stool is insensitive.2 Even more challenging is the diagnosis in immunocompromised
patients because serological tests may be negative.2 A peculiar characteristic of S. stercoralis is its ability to act as an opportunistic
agent in immunocompromised subjects in whom it can cause hyperinfection syndrome and disseminated strongyloidiasis, two conditions with a
high fatality rate.3 Hyperinfection syndrome is characterized by the presence of larvae confined to lungs and gastrointestinal tract, but
with signs/symptoms of severe diseases in relation to elevated number of larvae, whereas disseminated strongyloidiasis is defined in
presence of larvae in any organ, other than the respiratory and the gastrointestinal tracts.3 In such circumstances, the massive passage of
intestinal bacteria through the bowel wall can be responsible for severe invasive bacterial diseases such as meningitis, which is the most
frequent central nervous system manifestation of disseminated strongyloidiasis.4 Human T cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is a
retrovirus highly prevalent in some areas of Japan, Papua New Guinea, South America, and West Africa.5 It is transmitted through mother-to-
child route (mainly through breast-feeding), through blood transfusions, and through sexual route causing a chronic infection. Only about
10% HTLV-1-infected subjects develop a disorder related to the virus during their life, including adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma,
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy, uveitis, and opportunistic infections (including strongyloidiasis). As a matter of fact, HTLV-1 acts as
immunosuppressant reducing the ability of the infected host to mount an adequate immune response to organisms that require a Th2-dependent
response.5,6 On March 14, 2014, a 35-year-old Peruvian man, body mass index (BMI) = 24.9, was admitted to the University Division of
Infectious Diseases at Siena University Hospital (Siena, Italy) because of acute onset of severe headache, mental confusion, vomiting, and
abdominal pain. The patient had migrated to Italy from Peru 7 years before and he had never traveled back to his country of origin. Since
2008, he was admitted four times to different Italian hospitals with meningitis. In the first two instances, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
culture yielded Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecium, respectively, while two other episodes were diagnosed clinically since repeated
attempts to perform lumbar puncture failed. During the first episode of meningitis, because of concomitant severe abdominal pain, he
underwent an explorative laparotomy that did not reveal any abnormal finding. S. stercoralis larvae were found in stool microscopy during
the first three episodes of meningitis. He was treated with different antihelmintic regimens, namely mebendazole 500 mg qid for 10 days,
thiabendazole 500 mg bid for 5 days, albendazole 200 mg bid for 6 days and another course of albendazole with unspecified dosage and
duration. Physical examination revealed fever (body temperature 38°C), neck stiffness, positive bilateral Lasègue sign, and red
dermographism. Blood tests were normal except for 18,060 leukocytes/μL (80% neutrophils) and C-reactive protein 1.01 mg/dL (reference value
< 0.5 mg/dL). Chest x-ray, abdominal ultrasound, and brain computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal any alteration. Several attempt to
lumbar puncture failed, because of difficulties related to anatomical conformation. Parasitological stool examinations showed S. stercoralis
larvae both in microscopic examination of three stool samples collected on alternate days and in Koga-agar plate culture. In brief, three
stool samples were collected on alternate days in the concentration system of intestinal parasites, Paraprep S Gold Plus Kit (DiaMondial,
Sées, France), and processed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Microscopic examination of the sediment revealed the presence of
numerous S. stercoralis rhabditoid larvae in all the three samples. A modified method for S. stercoralis agar plate culture was performed as
reported: a stool sample was cultured on multiple Mueller Hinton 2 agar plates (Biomerieux, Durham, NC); plates were sealed, incubated for
2–7 days at 22°C, protected from light. Plates were daily checked for tracks left by larvae and suspicious areas observed under a
stereomicroscope (dissection microscope). After the first 18 hours incubation, S. stercoralis rhabditoid larvae were observed on the edge of
the inoculum. Although serology (SeroELISA Strongyloides IgG; IVD Research Carlsbad, CA)7 was negative. HTLV antibodies were tested by a
commercial chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay (Architect rHTLV-I/II assay; Abbott, Wiesbaden-Delkenheim, Germany), according to
manufacturer's instructions, and resulted strongly positive (index 128.20, cutoff value for positivity = 1). No other cause of acquired or
congenital immunodeficiency was revealed. HIV ELISA test was negative, serum immunoglobulins were within normal range, and so were
complement dosage and lymphocytic subset count. Strongyloides serology was performed again at the Center for Tropical Diseases, Sacro Cuore
Hospital, Negrar, Verona, Italy, with an in-house indirect immunofluorescence antibody test (IFAT)8 (negative), and with a commercial ELISA
(Bordier ELISA; Bordier Affinity Products, Switzerland)9 that showed a slight positivity (index 1.1, cutoff value for positivity = 1). Blood
cultures for bacteria and fungi performed on admission were negative. The patient was also screened for hepatitis B and C, Toxocara canis,
Trypanosoma cruzi, echinococcus, and cysticercus serologies, which were all negative. On admission, blood cultures were performed and
empirical, broad-spectrum antimicrobial treatment was started (meropenem 2 g tid, vancomycin 1 g bid, and acyclovir 750 mg tid). Acyclovir
was discontinued after 7 days as herpetic encephalitis was deemed very unlikely, vancomycin was stopped on 14th day, while meropenem was
continued for a total of 3 weeks. Strongyloidiasis could not be treated as the drug of choice, ivermectin, was not registered in Italy, and
was requested from the local pharmacy but not retrieved in time before discharge. On the 21st day, the patient was discharged in excellent
clinical conditions. After discharge, patient was referred to the Tuscany Reference Center for Tropical Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliero-
Universitaria Careggi, Florence (Italy), where a small stock of ivermectin was available. The case was discussed within the “World Health
Organization Strongyloidiasis Information Sharing Platform” (http://ezcollab.who.int/ntd/strongyloidiasis), which is an internet-based
system accessed by invitation only, intended to share information and exchange opinions among the subcommunity members on key issues of
strongyloidiasis, to decide the management strategy. Three different strategies were suggested by three different experts (Table 1). After
discussion, the patient was treated with a first cycle of 200 μg/kg/dose ivermectin once daily on day 1, 2, 15, and 16. The first dose was
administered under medical surveillance, while the rest of the doses were delivered to the patient who completed the regimen at home.
Follow-up with full blood cell count, Strongyloides serology, direct parasitological examination of stool, stool culture, and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) for Strongyloides were scheduled but, unfortunately, the patient did not present to any follow-up appointment despite
several telephone reminders and attempts to reschedule the follow-up visits. After 6 months of ivermectin treatment, the patient did not
complain of any symptom at telephone follow-up. A parasitological screening of all family members (the wife and two children) was also
repeatedly suggested, without any success so far. The case presented highlights the possibility of recurrent meningitis due to intestinal
bacteria in HTLV-1-infected patients with strongyloidiasis refractory to treatment. Even though a test to distinguish among HLTV-1 and
HTLV-2, such as a Western blot, was not performed, the patient was most likely infected with HTLV-1 given the epidemiological distribution
of the virus in the patient's country of origin10 and because, unlike HTLV-2, HTLV-1 only has been associated with complicated
strongyloidiasis.6,11 Strongyloides hyperinfection is strongly associated with HTLV-1 infection in Peru.12 Meningitis in association with
strongyloidiasis is usually due to intestinal pathogens and diagnosed in severely immunocompromised patients who develop disseminated
strongyloidiasis,4 a condition with a fatality rate of about 70%.3 Recurrent episodes of bacterial meningitis in patients with
strongyloidiasis are reported in subjects presenting predisposing factors, such as organ transplant,13 corticosteroid use,14 diabetes,14 and
HTLV-1 infection.15 The association of strongyloidiasis and meningitis is not infrequent in some endemic areas where S. stercoralis and
HTLV-1 are co-endemic, such as subtropical areas of Japan. In a recent case series, 33 meningitis episodes in 21 patients with
strongyloidiasis in a 10-year period were described, with five patients presenting recurrent episodes. Out of 21 patients, 16 were HTLV-1
positive, and all 5 patients with recurrent episodes were also HTLV-1 positive.15 In 19 out of 33 episodes described in this series, blood
and/or CSF culture yielded intestinal bacteria (with Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus bovis, and Escherichia coli being the most
frequently isolated), while 14 out of 33 cases were culture negative suggesting that the parasite itself may invade the meninges without any
concurrent bacteria, and that S. stercoralis alone may induce the intense inflammatory changes that mimic the CSF findings of bacterial
meningitis, as already hypothesized by Kishaba and others.16 HTLV-1 interferes with Th2 cell responses to S. stercoralis, including
eosinophils activation and production of interleukins and IgE.17 Moreover, a poor response to antihelmintic treatment (ivermectin,
albendazole, and thiabendazole) of S. stercoralis has been observed in HTLV-1-infected individuals.6 In uncomplicated strongyloidiasis,
ivermectin is the drug of choice because it is more effective than albendazole18 and better tolerated than thiabendazole,19 although the
optimal dosage and schedule of ivermectin has yet to be determined. Management strategies for severe case of strongyloidiasis, such as the
one reported in this article, are not yet standardized. A recent systematic review of literature based on case reports and short case series
of severe strongyloidiasis outline a “Babylon of different treatment schemes.”3 Even the different suggestions for our case provided by the
consulted experts through the web-based platform confirm the lack of a standardized treatment approach to this condition. However, all
consulted experts agreed on including repeated doses of ivermectin in the treatment strategy and on the need for a strict follow-up to
assess cure. As far as follow-up is concerned, a combination of all available laboratory techniques including stool culture, serology, and
PCR is probably the best strategy to achieve the highest sensitivity to detect a treatment failure, even if the interpretation of serology
may be critical and evidence for the usefulness of PCR in this context is lacking.20 Our case underlines several crucial points concerning
the management of poorly known neglected infectious diseases such as strongyloidiasis and HTLV-1 in a low-endemic area in the “global health
era.” The migrant patient was repeatedly admitted to different Italian hospitals for meningitis and strongyloidiasis, but the two conditions
had never been causally linked. He had never been tested for HTLV-1 nor treated with ivermectin, the drug of choice for strongyloidiasis. He
underwent an invasive, explorative laparotomy because of severe abdominal pain most likely due to strongyloidiasis, which could have been
avoided if the parasitic infection had been properly suspected and managed. Our case also confirms the possibility of false-negative
Strongyloides serology in immunocompromised patients21–23 with severe forms of strongyloidiasis demonstrating the irreplaceable and
complementary role of appropriate parasitological investigation (particularly stool culture). Our experience also underscores the
difficulties in obtaining ivermectin that is not registered in some countries and that may be urgently needed to treat a severe infection.
Finally, we wish to underline the usefulness of the “World Health Organization Strongyloidiasis Information Sharing Platform,” the internet-
based system that allowed to easily share opinions with experts on the management strategy. On the basis of our case report and on the
literature available, we suggest conclusive few, key take-home messages, as summarized in Table 2. Authors' addresses: Lorenzo Zammarchi and
Alessandro Bartoloni, Clinica Malattie Infettive, Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università Degli Studi di Firenze, Largo
Brambilla 3, 50134 Firenze, Italy, E-mails: lorenzo.zammarchi@unifi.it and alessandro.bartoloni@unifi.it. Francesca Montagnani and Giacinta
Tordini, UOC Malattie Infettive Universitarie, UOC Microbiologia e Virologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, and Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy, E-mails:
francesca.montagnani@unisi.it and giacinta.tordini@unisi.it. Andrea De Luca, UOC Malattie Infettive Universitarie, UOC Microbiologia e
Virologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, E-mail:
deluca.andrea@fastwebnet.it. Eduardo Gotuzzo, Instituto de Medicina Tropical “Alexander von Humboldt,” Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia,
Lima, Peru, E-mail: eduardo.gotuzzo@upch.pe. Zeno Bisoffi, Ospedale Sacro Cuore, Centro per le Malattie Tropicali, Negrar, Verona, Italy,
E-mail: zeno.bisoffi@sacrocuore.it. Management strategies for the patient described in the case report proposed by some of the members of
the “World Health Organization Strongyloidiasis Information Sharing Platform” (http://ezcollab.who.int/ntd/strongyloidiasis) PCR =
polymerase chain reaction. Take-home message learned from this case HTLV-1 = human T cell lymphotropic virus type 1.
