Thromboembolism continues to be a major concern in patients with mechanical heart valves, especially in those with unsatisfactory
anticoagulation levels. The new On-X valve (On-X Life Technologies, Austin, TX, USA) has been reported as having unique structural
characteristics that offer lower thrombogenicity to the valve. We report a case where the patient received no or minimal systemic
anticoagulation after placement of On-X mitral and aortic valves due to development of severe mucosal arterio-venous malformations yet did
not show any evidence of thromboembolism. This case report reinforces the findings of recent studies that lower anticoagulation levels may
be acceptable in patients with On-X valves and suggests this valve may be particularly useful in those in whom therapeutic levels of
anticoagulation cannot be achieved due to increased risk of bleeding. Currently available mechanical heart valves (MHVs) have acceptable
durability and hemodynamics, however, thromboembolism continues to be a concern, especially in patients with unsatisfactory anticoagulation
levels. A relatively new MHV, the bileaflet On-X valve (On-X Life Technologies, Austin, TX, USA) is believed to have greater
thromboresistance because of its all-carbon manufacturing and improved flow dynamics. Preliminary short- and intermediate-term studies have
shown that this valve could possibly reduce anticoagulation requirements. In this case report, we discuss the critical need to balance
anticoagulation therapy with the potential for life-threatening protracted bleeding in a patient with two freshly implanted On-X valves. A
57-year-old woman with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis, severe aortic stenosis, and severe tricuspid regurgitation underwent implantation
of a 25 mm mitral and a 19 mm aortic On-X valve, a de Vega tricuspid annuloplasty, and Maze procedure. The cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic
cross-clamp times were 174 and 134 min, respectively. She had chronic atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and pacemaker placement for sick
sinus syndrome, and was on warfarin, but denied any history of bleeding in the past. Her preoperative echocardiogram and right heart
catheterization revealed severe pulmonary hypertension with pulmonary arterial systolic pressures of 75 mmHg and severe right ventricular
dilatation. She came to the intensive care unit (ICU) intubated and on high infusion rates of inotropic and vasopressor agents including
epinephrine, norepinephrine, vasopressin, and milrinone. Despite multiple blood component therapy intraoperatively, she continued to be
severely hypocoagulable, with thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogenemia, and elevated international normalized ratio (INR) levels [Figures 1 and
2]. As her coagulation parameters began to normalize, she was started on subcutaneous heparin 5000 IU every 12 h for prophylaxis against
deep vein thrombosis on postoperative day (POD) 8. However, neither antiplatelet therapy nor therapeutic heparinization was initiated due to
the patient's precarious medical condition. Despite this, immediately after removal of the epicardial pacing wires on POD 9, she developed
pericardial tamponade requiring emergent opening of the sternum. This led to progressive worsening of pulmonary hypertension, causing severe
right heart failure and eventually biventricular failure, necessitating placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump and inhalational
epoprostenol therapy. The patient developed renal failure which required continuous renal replacement therapy and compounded coagulopathy by
causing consumptive thrombocytopenia and thrombocytopathia. Wild fluctuations in platelet count from preoperative visit until discharge on
postoperative day 166. Intervals between time points on the x-axis are variable Patient's international normalized ratio (INR) from
preoperative visit until discharge on postoperative day 166, showing subtherapeutic INR at multiple time points throughout the Intensive
care unit stay Three weeks after surgery, she progressed to disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) and was given multiple blood
component transfusions including desmopressin, cryoprecipitate, and factor VII. After the DIC was resolved, she exhibited waxing and waning
coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia [Figures 1 and 2]. Interestingly, around 6 weeks into her ICU stay, she developed profuse, life-
threatening bleeding from the respiratory and upper gastrointestinal tracts and natural orifices in response to any attempts to initiate
anticoagulation, even with prophylactic doses of heparin. Diagnostic bronchoscopy and upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies revealed
extensive arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) throughout her respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. Due to the lack of preoperative
endoscopy and the fact that AVMs were not restricted to the colon, making a definitive diagnosis of Heyde's syndrome with acquired von
Willebrand factor deficiency was difficult. However, there is also a possibility that some degree of aortic valve patient-prosthetic
mismatch could have caused a variant of Heyde's syndrome. The patient therefore received little or no anticoagulation for almost her entire
hospital stay. During her 5 months in the ICU, frequent transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiographic examinations revealed no valve
thrombi. She was discharged to a long-term acute care facility on aspirin and warfarin with a subtherapeutic INR of 1.6, in view of her
higher risk for bleeding. There was no history of thromboembolism and no further bleeding episodes. She died about 3 months later at an
outside hospital due to pulmonary aspiration and sepsis. In the USA, there is a growing number of valve replacements in patients of all age
groups. While MHVs are more durable than tissue valves, they are also thrombogenic and, therefore, require life-long anticoagulation based
on American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines to prevent valve thrombosis. These guidelines may not be achievable in those at high-risk of
bleeding, creating a therapeutic dilemma as thromboembolism due to inadequate anticoagulation can have dire consequences at any age. The new
On-X valve is said to have several structural characteristics that may confer a certain degree of thromboresistance as compared to the other
MHVs and may prove to be especially beneficial in such circumstances. The US Food and Drug Administration approved the On-X aortic valve in
2001 and the On-X mitral valve in 2002. The pure pyrolytic carbon used in the construction of these valves makes them more wear-resistant
without the need for silicon carbide. The absence of silicone alloy allows for a smoother finish and greater biocompatibility, which may
decrease thrombogenicity. According to the manufacturer, several properties of the valve including flared inlet design, elongated orifice,
smooth contours of the pivots, and opening of the valve leaflets to a full 90 degrees, may improve flow dynamics across the valve and
provide more thromboresistance than other MHVs (On-X Life Technology information. Available at: http://www.onxlti.com/. Accessed April 01,
2015) [Figure 3]. On-X prosthetic heart valve design and features. (1) Pure carbon, (2) Optimal longer length (3) Inlet flared orifice, (4)
Full 90° leaflet opening, (5) Stasis-free pivots, (6) Two-point leaflet closure (with permission from On-X Life Technologies, Inc., Austin,
Texas, USA) Intraoperative and early postoperative echocardiographic data have shown increased effective orifice area and reduced
transvalvular gradients as compared to St. Jude MHVs (St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA). In a randomized comparison with the
Carbomedics Top Hat valve (Carbomedics Inc., Austin, TX, USA), the On-X valve had a significantly better hemodynamic profile, including
effective orifice area, peak velocity, and peak and mean pressure drop across the valve in the immediate postoperative period. MHVs in
general cause significant hemolysis with reports of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels increasing up to 200% of upper normal. However, both
aortic and mitral On-X valves have shown much lower LDH levels at up to 1 year after implantation. Coagulation-related complications of MHVs
range from a fatal thromboembolism due to inadequate anticoagulation at one end of the spectrum to equally devastating anticoagulation-
induced bleeding at the other end. In several short- and intermediate-term multi-center American and European studies, On-X valves have
performed favorably compared to other MHVs. Most recently, in a 5-year prospective observational study, 737 patients who underwent On-X
valve replacement in aortic and/or mitral positions were maintained at an INR of 2.0–2.5 for aortic valve replacements (AVR) and 2.0–3.0 for
mitral valve replacements (MVR). The results showed a 5-year freedom from major thromboembolism of 96.5% for AVR and 97.7% for MVR and from
hemorrhage of 93.6% for AVR and 95.7% for MVR. Thromboembolism and hemorrhage were seen only when there was a deviation in the desired INR
ranges. In another study, clinical performance of the On-X valves was compared with the Carbomedics and Medtronic Hall valves (Medtronic,
Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) in the challenging setting of a Third World population. Target INR was 1.5–2.5 to minimize bleeding, with
several patients receiving either no or incomplete anticoagulation coverage. This study showed that in the aortic position, there were no
significant differences in thromboembolic complications among the three valves; however in the mitral position, both Medtronic Hall and On-X
valves performed favorably as compared to the Carbomedics valve (Carbomedics Inc., Austin, TX, USA). According to current AHA guidelines,
patients with mechanical and tissue valves should be anticoagulated for 3 months postoperatively for an INR between 2.5 and 3.5. While
biological valve patients may be switched over to aspirin after that, those with MHVs should be continued on warfarin to maintain INR levels
of 2.0–3.0 for low-risk AVR patients without risk of thromboembolism and 2.5–3.5 for all MVR patients and high-risk AVR patients. At this
time, no standard INR ranges to prevent thromboembolism are recommended for On-X valves. The Prospective Randomized On-X Valve Reduced
Anticoagulation Clinical Trial is presently underway to examine whether a lower level of anticoagulation may be acceptable. In the protocol,
all patients will receive standard anticoagulation therapy for the first 3 months followed by aspirin 325 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day
for low-risk AVR; warfarin to maintain INR of 1.5–2.0 paired with aspirin 81 mg/day for high-risk AVR; and warfarin to maintain INR of
2.0–2.5 along with aspirin 81 mg/day for all MVRs. Results of the phase I study involving high-risk AVRs showed reduced frequency of minor
and major bleeding events without increased risk of thromboembolism in the test group receiving warfarin to maintain INR of 1.5–2.0 and low-
dose aspirin therapy. Retrospective studies have shown that anticoagulation has been safely held for 1–2 weeks in MHV patients with
intracranial hemorrhages or ischemic strokes who are at a very high-risk for worsening of hemorrhage or conversion to a hemorrhagic stroke.
However, our patient remained off any type of anticoagulation for several months without any clinical evidence of valve thrombosis or
embolism. While we do not endorse defying those recommendations, based on recent data that have suggested lower thrombogenicity of On-X
valves and the absence of thromboembolism in our patient, it may be possible to accept lower anticogulation levels in those at a very high-
risk of bleeding. In the future, the On-X valve could well become the valve of choice for such patients; however, further randomized trials
are needed to determine the safety and efficacy of maintaining lower anticoagulation levels. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest:
None declared.
