Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Case series Patient: Male, 44 • Female, 73 • Male, 63 Final Diagnosis: Cecal diverticulitis
Symptoms: Abdominal pain Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Right hemicolectomy Specialty: Surgery Challenging differential diagnosis Cecal
diverticulitis is an uncommon cause of acute abdominal pain and presents clinically similar to acute appendicitis. There are many
perspectives concerning the management of this condition, ranging from different types of surgical resections to conservative treatment with
antibiotics. We present 3 cases of cecal diverticulitis. One of the patients was treated conservatively with intravenous antibiotics and the
other 2 were treated with surgical resection. Conservative treatment with intravenous antibiotics can be used in uncomplicated cecal
diverticulitis. Complicated cecal diverticulitis is managed surgically and the type of resection depends mainly on the extent of
inflammation. Solitary diverticulum of the cecum presents more frequently in Asian than Western societies and was first described by Potier
in 1912 . About 80% of right colonic diverticula is located in the anterior cecum, close to the ileocecal valve, and is usually
asymptomatic. Cecal diverticulitis is an uncommon cause of acute pain located in the lower abdomen and is often clinically indistinguishable
from acute appendicitis . It presents mainly in younger patients with a median age of 44 years and the predominant sex is male. The
males/females ratio is 3/2 . There are many perspectives concerning the management of this condition. These range from different types of
surgical resections to conservative treatment with intravenous antibiotics . We present 3 cases with cecal diverticula which we treated in
our clinic during a period of 2 months. Two of them were managed surgically and 1 conservatively with antibiotics. A 44-year-old male
patient was hospitalized in the Cardiothoracic Surgery Unit of our hospital, where he was submitted for mitral valve replacement. Ten days
after the operation, the patient presented with abdominal pain located in the lower abdomen and mainly in the lower right quadrant. During
the physical examination, intense tenderness located mainly in the right iliac fossa was present. He was febrile (up to 39°C) and with an
elevated white blood cell count (19500) and neutrophil count (90.8%). A computed tomography of the abdomen showed thickening and edema of
the cecal wall with infiltration of the surrounding fatty tissue extending up the ascending colon to the right colic flexure. We also
noticed a small amount of fluid in the pelvis. An emergency operation was performed. Intraoperatively, necrosis of the wall of the cecum was
noted (Figure 1). Right hemicolectomy was performed due to the extension of the inflammation. The surgical specimen is shown in Figure 2.
The histopathological examination of the specimen showed the presence of a solitary diverticulum of the cecum with necrosis of its wall. The
patient had a normal postoperative course and he was discharged 6 days after the second operation. A 73-year-old woman presented to the
Emergency Department of our hospital with acute pain located in the lower right quadrant of the abdomen. She was febrile with temperature up
to 39°C. Laboratory exams showed an elevated leucocyte count (20,050) as well as an elevated neutrophil count (91.2%) and a very increased
CRP (26.42). The clinical examination revealed intense pain located mainly in the right iliac fossa with positive rebound sign. A computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen followed, which showed an area of about 7 cm located in the right abdomen with thickening of the cecal wall
and the ascending colon and infiltration of the surrounding fat (Figure 3). A colonoscopy followed, which showed inflammation and necrosis
of the cecal wall right by the appendix (Figure 4). She was then admitted to the operating room where a right hemicolectomy was performed
because of the extent of the inflammation. The patient had a normal postoperative course and she was discharged 5 days after the operation.
A 63-year-old man presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital with pain located in the lower right quadrant of the abdomen, which
started 24 hours prior to admission. He presented no other symptoms and physical examination revealed tenderness in the right iliac fossa.
He was afebrile and all the laboratory test results were normal except for a neutrophil count of 81.4%, but with normal leucocyte count
(WBC: 9900). An abdominal ultrasound was first executed, which was not diagnostic. It only showed the presence of air in the ascending colon
and a small amount of liquid located in the right iliac fossa, at the point of maximum tenderness. A computed tomography of the abdomen
followed, which demonstrated thickening of the wall of the cecum with infiltration of the surrounding fat and thickening of the parietal
peritoneum. No signs of inflammation were present in the appendix (Figure 5). Intravenous metronidazole 500 mg 3 times per day was started
and the patient’s condition improved from the first day. Four days later, a colonoscopy was performed, showing a solitary diverticulum of
the cecum with no signs of inflammation. The treatment with metronidazole continued and the patient was discharged from our clinic 7 days
after admission. Cecal diverticulitis is rare in Western countries and appears more often in Asian populations . Solitary diverticula of the
cecum are rare; they were first described by Potier in 1912 . They are believed to be a congenital anomaly arising during the 6th week of
gestation and they are considered “true” because they consist of all layers of the colon wall. They are usually asymptomatic and only become
evident when complications such as inflammation, hemorrhage, or perforation are present . Cecal diverticulitis usually mimics acute
appendicitis and the correct diagnosis is made intraoperatively. More than 2/3 of the patients with cecal diverticulitis are operated on
with a presumptive diagnosis of acute appendicitis . Some studies have shown the presence of clinical characteristics that may assist in
distinguishing cecal diverticulitis from acute appendicitis. Nausea, vomiting, and anorexia are more frequent in acute appendicitis. In
cecal diverticulitis, the pain has a relatively longer history that typically starts and remains in the right iliac fossa, while in acute
appendicitis it begins from the central abdomen and shifts to the right iliac fossa . Many patients presenting with intense tenderness and
pain located in the right iliac fossa with a presumable diagnosis of acute appendicitis are generally not subjected to preoperative
radiological investigations unless the diagnosis of acute appendicitis is uncertain . In a study of 934 patients with unclear pain located
in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen, abdominal ultrasound showed a sensitivity of 91.3% and a specificity of 99.5% in the diagnosis
of cecal diverticulitis . The precision of computed tomography of the abdomen in distinguishing acute appendicitis from cecal diverticulitis
has a sensitivity and specificity of 98%, as various studies have shown . Thickening of the colon wall, pericolonic inflammation, and
extraluminal mass effect are the most common CT findings of cecal diverticulitis . These are also present in left-sided diverticulitis and
can also be seen when a cecal tumor is present. In about 1/10 of cases, due to the similarity of the CT findings, cecal diverticulitis may
sometimes be indistinguishable from carcinoma on the CT scan . In uncomplicated diverticulitis a conservative surgical approach with
appendectomy and drainage has been described in studies based mainly in Asian populations. However, since the diverticula are left in place,
this approach has a high incidence of recurrence of cecal diverticulitis . Although right hemicolectomy has a higher rate of morbidity and
mortality, it is recommended when the extent of inflammation is so great that a diverticulectomy is usually not possible, or when a tumor is
suspected . Diverticulectomy and ileocecal re-section have also been described in the literature as being an adequate treatment . Right-
sided diverticulitis can also be managed with laparoscopic diverticulectomy . Both our patients that were managed surgically underwent a
right hemicolectomy due to the extent of inflammation and because the presence of a tumor could not be excluded. As a result of our
experience and as some studies have shown, in patients with suspected uncomplicated cecal diverticulitis diagnosed by radiological imaging,
conservative treatment with intravenous antibiotics has the advantage of avoiding surgery and may be sufficient . Solitary diverticulum of
the cecum is a rare entity especially in Caucasian populations. Cecal diverticulitis is rather uncommon, but should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of pain located mainly in the right iliac fossa. It is generally an intraoperative diagnosis, but abdominal
ultrasound or CT scan may be helpful for a preoperative diagnosis. Conservative treatment with intravenous antibiotics can be used in
uncomplicated diverticulitis. Depending on the extent of inflammation, the surgical resection varies from a diverticulectomy or ileocecal
resection to a more aggressive resection such as a standard right hemicolectomy. The authors would like to thank the patients on whom these
case reports are based. Intraoperative picture showing necrosis of the wall of the cecum. The surgical specimen of right hemi-colectomy
showing the extend of inflammation and the necrosis of the cecum wall. CT scan of the patient showing thickening of the wall of the cecum
and infiltration of the surrounding fat. Colonoscopy of the patient showing the presence of inflammation and necrosis of the cecal wall and
a possible extraluminal mass. CT scan of the patient showing infiltration of the peritoneal fat of the cecum.
