Ischemic stroke associated movement disorders can be seen as the first sign of a stroke or as a delayed onset development. Tremor after a
stroke is a rare finding among movement disorders. In addition to reports of tremor caused by cerebral infarction of varied locations, data
on the disappearance of existing tremor following infarction is also available. In this report, we present a case with acute tremor in the
contralateral hand following frontal cortical infarction, and disappearance of the tremor after the second infarction comprising large areas
in the same hemisphere. Involuntary abnormal movements caused by strokes are relatively common. Chorea, tremor, dystonia, Parkinsonism, and
myoclonus associated with both infarctions and cerebral hemorrhage may occur delayed or progressive as part of the symptomatology of acute
stroke.1 Patients with hand tremor associated with cerebral infarct are not encountered frequently. In addition to reports of tremor caused
by cerebral infarction of varied locations, data on the disappearance of existing tremor following infarction is also available.2-5 Kim2
reported hand tremor that developed 3-21 months after infarct of the caudate nucleus, internal capsule, and thalamus in 3 patients. Kim et
al4 also reported a case with essential tremor, which improved 5 weeks after frontal infarct. There is a scarcity of reports in the
literature on the development of, and improvement of hand tremor following a subsequent stroke. In this report, we present a case with acute
tremor in the contralateral hand following frontal cortical infarction and disappearance of the tremor after the second infarction
comprising large areas in the same hemisphere. Our objective in presenting this particular case is to report the interesting development and
disappearance of tremor as a result of ischemic stroke. A 78-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department with a complaint of
sudden onset of tremor in his left hand fingers. His medical and family histories were unremarkable. Vital signs were within normal limits.
Neurological examination revealed resting and postural, continuous, rhythmic, involuntary movements like tremor, prominent in left first and
second fingers of the hand. The frequency of the tremor was the same at rest and during action. He did not have rigidity at the time of the
tremor. He did not have a tremor in his leg. As the complaint’s started acutely, cerebral and diffusion MRI were carried out, and the
results showed an acute infarction in the right frontal region (Figure 1). Examinations for the etiology of the stroke (carotid-vertebral
artery color Doppler, electrocardiography, and echocardiography) were not remarkable. The EEG revealed normal findings. Electromyographic
assessment of the left first metacarpal region with surface electrodes showed resting and postural involuntary rhythmic activity at a
frequency of 6-7 Hz, 20-50 ms duration and 0.3 to one millivolt amplitude (Figure 2). He was started on 100 mg acetylsalicylic acid. Due to
the acute nature of the stroke, no treatment for the tremor was given and we planned to examine the patient after 2 weeks. However, he did
not attend for examination. Cerebral and diffusion MRI showing acute infarction in the right frontal region (arrows). Electromyographic
assessment of the left first metacarpal region with surface electrodes showing resting and postural involuntary rhythmic activity at a
frequency of 6-7 Hz, 20-50 ms duration and 0.3 to 1 millivolt amplitude (arrows). His second presentation to our clinic was one year after
the first event. He had developed left hemiparesis syndrome 7 months after the first event. According to the information given by the
patient and his relatives, the tremor in the left hand had disappeared following the second stroke. On neurological examination, left
spastic hemiparesis (upper extremity 0/5, lower extremity 4/5) was determined. The tremor was not detected. Cerebral MRI showed chronic
ischemia of right fronto-parietal and parietal-occipital regions (Figure 3). Second cerebral MRI showing chronic ischemia of right fronto-
parietal and parietal-occipital regions (arrows). Many brain regions play a role in the development of tremor. These regions that control
voluntary and involuntary commands are the main parts of the critical circuits. Each of the loops has specific anatomical connections, and
they interact with numerous sensory feedback signals. These circuits are the loop between the motor cortex and basal ganglia, the circuit
between the cerebellum and brain stem especially Guillain-Mollaret triangle, the circuit among the cerebellum, the thalamic nucleus and the
motor cortex (cerebello-thalamocortical pathways and cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathways), the peripheral circuits from muscle spindles to the
alpha-motor neurons (spinal loop), and from the peripheral recipients to the motor cortex (transcortical loop).6 Clinically, tremor may be
divided into resting, postural, kinetic, and task-specific forms. Action tremor results from voluntary muscle contractions and includes
postural, kinetic, and isometric tremor forms. Major tremor causes include Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson-Plus syndromes, stroke, drug-
induced tremor, psychogenic tremor, essential tremor, multiple sclerosis, cerebellar diseases, dystonic tremor, and writing tremor.7 In a
study by Alarcón et al,1 the frequency of movement disorders after stroke was reported as 3.7%, with 14% tremor. Ischemic stroke associated
movement disorders can be seen as the first sign of a stroke or as a delayed onset development. Tremor after a stroke is a rare finding
among movement disorders. Holme’s tremor, which accompanies different types of tremor occurring after a stroke, has been reported as the
most common tremor type.8 Tremor associated with involvement of many regions of the brain has been reported. Tremor disappearance has also
been reported as a result of lesions of these regions. In the literature,2 3 cases have been reported with developed delayed onset (ranging
from 3-21 months) hand tremors caused by stroke. Also, in 2 patients, tremor reportedly occurred immediately at the onset of the stroke and
lasted only a few days.3 In another patient, right arm, and leg tremor developed 3 months after the left centrum semiovale and caudate
lacunar infarction.9 In addition, patients whose tremor resolved following a frontal infarct have been reported.4,5 In our case, the tremor
was localized to the hand and seen at rest and posturally, and developed immediately at the onset of the frontal infarct. Seven months
later, as a consequence of the development of new infarct areas comprising the frontal, parietal, and occipital regions, the upper extremity
became plegic, and the tremor disappeared. However, the disappearance of the tremor may be associated with the complete power loss. In this
report, we wanted to draw attention to tremor developing after a stroke, and disappearing after a second stroke in the same patient. The
initial presentation with only a mild hand tremor is another interesting aspect of this case. As a result, we can suggest that stroke should
be suspected in a patient with only a mild hand tremor, if the onset is acute and the tremor may disappear after a new subsequent stroke.
DisclosureThe authors have no affiliation or financial involvement with organizations or entities with a direct financial interest in the
subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. No funding was received for this work from any organization. The authors have no
affiliation or financial involvement with organizations or entities with a direct financial interest in the subject matter or materials
discussed in the manuscript. No funding was received for this work from any organization. Four copies of all figures or photographs should
be included with the submitted manuscript. Figures submitted electronically should be in JPEG or TIFF format with a 300 dpi minimum
resolution and in grayscale or CMYK (not RGB). Printed submissions should be on high-contrast glossy paper, and must be unmounted and
untrimmed, with a preferred size between 4 × 5 inches and 5 × 7 inches (10 × 13 cm and 13 × 18 cm). The figure number, name of first author
and an arrow indicating “top” should be typed on a gummed label and affixed to the back of each illustration. If arrows are used these
should appear in a different color to the background color. Titles and detailed explanations belong in the legends, which should be
submitted on a separate sheet, and not on the illustrations themselves. Written informed consent for publication must accompany any
photograph in which the subject can be identified. Written copyright permission, from the publishers, must accompany any illustration that
has been previously published. Photographs will be accepted at the discretion of the Editorial Board.
