With the increase in the cases of multidrug resistance tuberculosis, second line anti-tubercular drugs like the cycloserine are being
prescribed frequently. Isoniazid and ethambutol are reported to cause psychosis like state; however, few reports of cycloserine induced
psychosis are available. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of cycloserine induced psychosis with hepatic dysfunction.
Cycloserine (D-4-amino-3-isoxazolidine) is a broad spectrum antibiotic produced by streptomyces-orchidaceus and is commonly used as a second
line anti-tubercular treatment (ATT) in multidrug tuberculosis (MDR-TB). ATT induced psychosis is reported with drugs like isoniazid (INH)
and ethambutol (EB). Few reports of cycloserine induced psychiatric disorders like delusions and hallucinations, mania and associated
seizures are available. With the emergence of MDR-TB and extensively drug-resistant TB, second line drugs like the cycloserine are used more
frequently. We report a case of cycloserine induced psychosis with hepatic dysfunction. A 45-year-old male patient weighing 60 kg, with
sputum positive pulmonary Koch's was put on directly observed treatment (DOTs) Category-I as per revised national TB control programme
guidelines on May 2012. On completion of extensive phase of the treatment patient remained acid fast bacilli (AFB) positive. Patient was
labeled as Category-I failure and was prescribed Category-II treatment. Patient did not respond to this regimen too. Sputum culture for AFB
and drug sensitivity showed the patient to be resistant to INH, rifampicin, streptomycin and EB. At this point of time, liver functions and
all basic biochemical parameters were within normal limits. Hence, it was decided to change the treatment to DOTs Category-IV in December
2012, which included injection. Kanamycin 0.5 g intramuscular once daily 6 days a week, tablet levofloxacin 500 once daily, tablet
ethionamide 500 mg once daily, tablet cycloserine 500 mg once daily, tablet pyrazinamide 1250 mg in daily divided doses and tablet
pyridoxine 100 mg once daily. In July 2014, the patient manifested with change in his behavior with aggression, violence with wife and other
family members, anxiety, restlessness, irrelevant talking, insomnia, recent loss of interest in work, family, clothes and food; for which
psychiatric consultation was sought. The Hamilton score was 18 and brief psychotic rating score was 33 on 3rd day. There were no signs of
neurological deficiency. Cycloserine was suspected as the possible offending agent for the adverse event. Thus, DOTS Category-IV regimen was
de-challenged on July 2014. The patient was hospitalized and prescribed antipsychotic drugs like injection lorazepam 2 mg at bed time and as
and when required, injection haloperidol 5 mg intramuscular twice daily, injection promethazine 50 mg intramuscular once daily, tablet
olanzapine 10 mg twice daily, tablet nitrazepam 10 mg twice daily, tablet thiamine 100 mg 3 times a day. After brief de-challenge of 3 days
and co-prescribed anti-psychotic medicine, most of the symptoms subsided and the patient improved within 4 days. Keeping this in view,
cycloserine containing regimen was again started after 4 days. On 3rd day of taking cycloserine patient again exhibited similar change in
behavior. DOTS Category-IV regimen was stopped and the patient was put on the tablet. Levofloxacin 500 once daily, tablet macrozide 750 mg
once daily and tablet pyridoxine 100 mg once daily. Antipsychotic drugs were continued. The patient had no history of smoking, alcohol or
drug abuse. There was no associated pathology or history of concurrent drug intake. He had no family history of mental disorders. Only
recent disinterest in work, family, food, clothes was reported by attendants related to present adverse event. No history of anxiety or any
conflict with family friends or at work place was reported. Clinical examination revealed that patient was well oriented to time, place and
person, having normal pulse rate, icterus positive with, no palpable lymphodenopathy; blood pressure was 128/88 mmHg, chest examination
showed bilateral decreased air entry with wheeze, cardiovascular examination was normal, abdomen and central nervous system (CNS)
examination were also normal. Laboratory investigations showed: Sputum AFB positive, hemoglobin 8.2 g/dL, total leukocyte count-18000 cu3
mm, differential leukocyte count polymporphs - 78; eosinophils - 2 monocytes - 2; lymphocytes - 18, blood sugar fasting - 80 mg/dL, thyroid
profile-normal, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 42 mm/h, serum urea - 23 mg/dL, serum creatinine - 0.5 mg/dL, HIV - I and II-nonreactive,
serum bilirubin - 5.4 mg/dL, aspirate transferase - 192 mg/dL, alanine transferase 202 mg/dL, Vitamin B6 levels were normal, serum.
electrolytes were within normal limits. X-ray (PA view) showed bilateral fibrotic lesions in upper zones, ultrasonography abdomen and
computed tomography scan head were normal. The temporal relationship, the fact that brief de-challenge ameliorated the symptoms and re-
challenge of cycloserine further aggravated the psychosis suggests that cyclosrine was the suspected drug for the adverse drug event.
Furthermore, the appearance of psychiatric manifestations could not be explained by any concurrent disease, drug or chemical. Adverse drug
reaction (ADR) was probable as assessed by WHO uppasla monitoring the center causality scale and Naranjo's score (score = 8). Severity of
the reaction as assessed using Hartwig ADR severity assessment scale classified the said ADR as potentially serious. Preventability
assessment was done by using Schumock and Thornton scale which classified the ADRs as preventable. The ADR was not studied for dose
dependent response and in view of its uncertain mechanism it is difficult to comment on the type of ADR. Sharma et al. reported psychosis,
delusions and hallucinations with cycloserine. While, mania was the main presentation reported by Bakhla et al. and seizure with psychosis
in the case reported by Fujita et al. Unlike above cases our patient was aggressive, violent, restlessness, anxious and presented with
insomnia and had severe hepatic dysfunction. The exact mechanism of such ADR is uncertain. However, possible modulation of N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonists and partial agonist at NMDAR associated glycine site by the drug as proposed by Bakhla et al. may be
the possible mechanism, in this case. The current case further supports this hypothesis since aggression and insomnia suggests a CNS
stimulant action of the drug although no seizures were observed in our patient. Another interesting possibility remains that deranged liver
function in our case may have contributed to the decreased metabolism of the drug and hence the response. However, this remains the
constraint as drug levels could not be assessed. The current case report highlights that the psychiatric evaluation should be done
preferably before and after prescribing cycloserine containing MDR regimens so that such potentially serious reactions can be prevented
before any permanent damage is done. Source of Support: IPC, Gaziabad (PvPI). Conflict of Interest: No.
