A 53-year-old woman visited her physician complaining of acute breathlessness and productive cough. Her medications included budesonide and
formoterol for asthma, fixed-dose combination aspirin 150 mg + clopidogrel 75 mg + atorvastatin 20 mg for ischemic heart disease. History
revealed that she had allergic rhinitis and was hypersensitive to penicillins. The patient was prescribed acebrophylline (ABP). Six hours
after ABP therapy she presented with generalized urticarial lesions, swelling of hands, feet, lips and face, suggestive of angioedema. ABP
was stopped immediately, and the patient was treated symptomatically. This case was categorized as probable as per standard causality
assessment scale. Angioedema is defined as a deep dermal, subcutaneous and/or mucous swelling, which usually lasts for 1 to 3 days, whereas
urticaria usually represents a more acute, superficial dermal swelling due to plasma leakage and vasodilation. Drug-induced angioedema is
associated with urticarial lesions in approximately 50% of cases and may be complicated by life-threatening anaphylaxis. It could be due to
a wide range of drugs and vaccines including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors,
bupropion, angiotensin II receptor blockers, antibiotics, radio-contrast agents, proton pump inhibitors, statins, fibrinolytic agents,
estrogens, diuretics, calcium channel blockers, beta blockers, and anti-depressants (serotonin reuptake inhibitors). Angioedema is one of
the most commonly reported ADRs and is usually seen in women. ACE inhibitors are the leading cause of angioedema wherein, 0.5% of patients
develop this reaction and the highest incidence (5.5%) is seen in the black race. NSAIDs can produce the angioedema in about 0.3% of
patients; facial edema is the commonest presentation. The rationale behind using acebrophylline (ABP) in this patient was that the drug is
known to be most effective in patients suffering from acute or chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and asthma. It
reduces the episodes of bronchial obstruction, dosage of β2-agonists, and improves ventilatory functions. A 53-year-old female patient with
a history of asthma and allergic rhinitis since 18 years with a known history of hypersensitivity to penicillins came to the hospital with
worsening of breathlessness and productive cough. She was on budesonide and formoterol dry powder inhalers daily prophylaxis for control of
asthmatic symptoms. The patient was on fixed-dose combination (FDC) of aspirin 150 mg + clopidogrel 75 mg + atorvastatin 20 mg and Tablet
diltiazem 40 mg since 1 year for ischemic heart disease. Patient vitals were stable, and respiratory examination revealed bilateral rhonchi.
Chest radiographs were normal, and all the laboratory investigations (including complete blood count, arterial pH, serum electrolytes,
thyroid profile, liver function tests and urinalysis) were reported normal. The patient was admitted in view of severity of symptoms and was
treated with (ipratropium + salbutamol) nebulization, injection methylprednisolone 40 mg intravenously (IV) 3 times a day, tablet (aspirin
150 mg + clopidogrel 75 mg + atorvastatin 20 mg) FDC and tablet diltiazem 40 mg. FDC containing tablet (montelukast 10 mg + levocetirizine
HCl 5 mg) and tablet ABP 100 mg 2 times a day were added, 1 day later due to non-resolution of symptoms. After 6 h of ABP administration,
she developed generalized itching, swelling of both hands and feet. On clinical examination, both hands and feet, lips and face were swollen
with no signs of laryngeal edema. This could be attributed to the prior administration of systemic corticosteroids. Dermatology consultation
was sought, and ABP was stopped. Swelling started regressing 24 h after withdrawal of the drug. However, erythematous lesions overpalms and
soles were not resolved completely. Disappearance of lesions within 24 h following ABP discontinuation confirmed drug induced angioedema.
However, no rechallenge was done. A detailed past medication history was elicited which revealed patient was treated with doxophylline and
ambroxol in the past for acute exacerbations of asthma with no untoward effects. After 2 days of drug discontinuation, all lesions subsided.
Methyl prednisolone was tapered and replaced by oral deflazacort 6 mg. Patient was discharged after complete clinical recovery. Mucoactive
agents are very useful for the treatment of respiratory diseases in which mucus hypersecretion is a major clinical complication. ABP (drug
molecule containing ambroxol and theophylline-7 acetic acid) is a bronchodilator with mucosecretolytic, anti-reactive and anti-inflammatory
activities. The efficacy, cost effectiveness and favorable tolerability profile of ABP are reflected in recommending it as an add-on drug.
Numerous trials in adults and children confirm the excellent safety profile of ABP, with a low rate of adverse reactions like mild
gastrointestinal upset (2.6%). In a post-marketing survey, ADRs were reported only in 6.5% of subjects. Most of the ADRs were mild and
transient, and treatment required discontinuation only in 0.7% of cases. A clinically significant reduction of bronchial hyperresposiveness
was also noted in 7 out of 10 patients after a single dosage of ABP and the effect was seen 24 h after the last dose following 1-month of
treatment. In the present case, symptoms of angioedema were found to be unrelated to food, activity or stress. Aspirin (NSAID) could not be
the alternate cause for angioedema as the patient was tolerating the drug well for past 1 year. Moreover, the reaction started six hours
after starting ABP, hence proving temporal association. Discontinuation of the drug is the ultimate litmus test to confirm an ADR which was
done in this case. Angioedema abated after 2 days of withdrawal. However, no re-challenge was done. According to Naranjo's (score +5) and
WHO causality assessment scale, this case was categorized as “Probable.” A serious complication like angioedema due to ABP might not be
uncommon and should be looked out for. In the absence of concrete proof regarding mechanism of development of ABP hypersensitivity, we can
only speculate that it could be due to IgE-mediated type 1 allergic reaction. Clinicians prescribing ABP should be aware of this potential
adverse effect, such that it may be recognized and managed in a timely manner. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No.
