Modafinil is a psychostimulant drug, which has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of narcolepsy
associated excessive daytime sleepiness, sleep disorder related to shift work, and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. However, presently it
is being used as a lifestyle medicine; in India, it has been misused as an “over the counter” drug. Modafinil is known to have several
cutaneous side effects. Fixed drug eruption (FDE) is a distinctive drug induced reaction pattern characterized by recurrence of eruption at
the same site of the skin or mucous membrane with repeated systemic administration. Only two case reports exist in the literature describing
modafinil induced FDE until date. Here, we report two similar cases. The increasing use of this class of drug amongst the medical personnel
might be posing a threat to the proper use and encouraging subsequent abuse. There might be a considerable population using these drugs
unaware of the possible adverse effects. Authorities should be more alert regarding the sale and distribution of such medicines. Modafinil
is a psychostimulant drug with wakefulness-promoting properties. It has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the
treatment of narcolepsy associated excessive daytime sleepiness, sleep disorder related to shift work, and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
However, at present it is being used as a lifestyle drug, especially amongst sports personnel, hardworking business executives and call
center workers. In fact, it is sold illegally on various online shopping websites; in India, it has become an “over the counter” drug-and
thus, open for abuse, where it may be used by anyone who wishes to work or study overnight. Modafinil is known to have several cutaneous
side effects, apart from the numerous psychiatric and systemic ones. Since its initial marketing in December 1998, several cases of severe
cutaneous adverse reactions associated with modafinil have been recorded. These included Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal
necrolysis, and drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms in adult and pediatric patients. Yet only two cases similar to describing
modafinil induced fixed drug eruption (FDE) have been reported till date. We report two similar cases. A 23-year-old trainee doctor
presented to the dermatology out-patient department with a complaint of painful erosion in his mouth [Figure 1] for the preceding 2 days. He
stated that there were two such episodes in which he had similar erosion at the same site, 1 and 2 months ago. The previous erosions had
healed spontaneously without any intervention. It was on the third episode that he got anxious and decided to seek medical attention.
Erosion on the left side of the hard palate Detailed interview revealed the subject consuming 200 mg of tablet modafinil for few days prior
to his exams for mental alertness and avoiding an undue sedation. He was preparing for his postgraduate entrance examinations and was
scheduled to appear for a series of tests. The medicines were obtained by him from a colleague undergoing training in psychiatry. There was
no history of psychiatric morbidity or intake of any regular or casual medication, including psychotropics. Local examination revealed
tender erosion on the left hard palate beside the premolars. The floor of the lesion was red with well-defined borders. The rest of the
cutaneous and mucosal examination was normal. General survey and systemic examination did not reveal anything significant. Mental state
examination revealed a well-built, appropriately groomed male maintaining eye contact during the interview. There was no noticeable abnormal
movement, speech was relevant and coherent, mood euthymic, but affect was anxious. There were no perceptual disturbances. Higher cognition
was perfectly intact and insight was grade VI. Biopsy was obtained from the mucous membrane and sent for histopathology. Examination
revealed hydropic degradation of the basal cell layer and a lymphocytic infiltrate with dermal macrophages. The adverse drug reaction (ADR)
scale proposed by Naranjo et al. has been utilized causality assessment of a drug in these situations. In the present case, the score was 6,
which meant that modafinil was the probable cause of the ADR. The patient was advised to desist from taking modafinil in the future and was
prescribed triamcinolone acetonide oral paste to be applied 4 times daily for 5 days. He was cured within a day though he completed the
course of medication as advised. A 19-year-old 2nd year medical student presented to the dermatology clinic with a red annular painful mark
on his right palm [Figure 2], which had appeared the night before. He described three previous similar episodes, which occurred 1, 3 and 6
weeks ago respectively. Annular erythema on right palm He was due to appear for the board examinations, in which he was keen on performing
well. Having heard about modafinil from a senior colleague; he started using it (100 mg tablets) out of sheer curiosity. The medicines were
procured from a local medicine shop without a prescription. He was not on any other regular or casual medication. The results of his initial
we having gone well, he had started using the drug as and when required. However, he had noticed that each such use was accompanied by the
same painful bruise like rash on his right palm, which he could not explain. This peculiar rash would disappear spontaneously; nevertheless
this time he decided to consult a dermatologist. General and systemic examination did not prove to be significant. Local examination
revealed nonblanching tender erythema. The rest of the skin and mucous membranes were normal. Skin biopsy was done, and the sample sent for
histopathological examination. Findings included hydropic degeneration of the basal layer, melanin incontinence and dense mononuclear
infiltrate in the dermis. On mental state examination, the patient was average-built, looking to his age and appropriately groomed. He
maintained eye contact during the interview. No abnormal movement was noticed, speech was relevant and coherent and affect anxious. There
were no perceptual disturbances, higher cognition was intact and insight was grade VI. Based on the history and clinical findings, he was
diagnosed to have modafinil induced FDE. In the present case also, the ADR probability classification score was 6, which meant that
modafinil again, was the probable cause of the ADR. He was advised to refrain from taking modafinil in the future. The tenderness and
erythema disappeared with application of mometasone furoate cream, within 36 h. Fixed drug eruption is a distinctive drug induced reaction
pattern characterized by recurrence of eruption at the same site of the skin or mucous membrane with repeated systemic administration of the
drug. It was first described by Bourns and later on by Brocq. FDE is the most common cutaneous drug reaction described in India, being
somewhat more common in this part of the globe; a finding ascribed to genetic factors. It is considered to be a CD8 lymphocyte mediated
reaction, the offending drug, along with virus-induced factors, causing local reactivation of memory T-cell lymphocytes located in the
epidermis and dermis. Common drugs incriminated in causing FDE are trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, penicillin, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin, diclofenac sodium, naproxen and ibuprofen. Clinically, FDEs are single or multiple, bullous, pigmented
or nonpigmented; they occur mainly on the extremities or on the mucous membranes. They generally start as sharply marginated, round-oval
patches of erythema and edema and become dusky violaceous or brown in color or ulcerate. Most reactions occur between 30 min to 24 h of drug
exposure. Treatment includes stoppage of the offending drug with application of topical steroids, emollients, and oral antihistamines.
Modafinil belongs to a novel class of psychostimulants known as eugeroics (eugeroic denotes good arousal) with absence of side effects
common to traditional psychostimulating drugs, which include anxiety, jitteriness, excess locomotor activities and rebound phenomenon. The
mode of action of modafinil is yet to be fully understood: However, its actions in the anterior hypothalamus and orexin neurons have been
appreciated. It probably promotes wakefulness by increasing the level of glutamate, serotonin, and histamine; there is also evidence of the
decrease of gamma amino butyric acid in the brain. Modafinil has been tried in the treatment of diseases like attention deficit disorder,
Alzheimer's disease, idiopathic hypersomnia, cognitive impairment in schizophrenics and to solve lifestyle issues as jet lag, night shift
jobs and so on. The present cases illustrate the abuse potential of this drug and its side effects. In both the cases, the patients involved
were young doctors. The increasing use of this class of drug amongst the medical personnel might pose a threat of abuse potential. Alertness
in distribution and sale of these medicines is warranted. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No.
