Primary cardiac spindle cell sarcomas are extremely rare and have poor prognosis. Complete surgical resection represents the only treatment
option proven to work. We report a case of a 28-year-old man who was referred to our cardiothoracic unit with a right ventricular mass
extending to the main pulmonary artery with a provisional diagnosis of a thrombus or a right ventricular myxoma. He sought medical attention
after experiencing shortness of breath, cough, chest pain, abdominal pain and bilateral leg swelling for about 6 weeks. Two dimensional
transthoracic echocardiogram showed a mass arising from the right ventricle and extending into the main pulmonary artery; findings that were
confirmed with contrast chest CT scan. He underwent extensive resection of the mass and had uneventful postoperative period with immediate
symptomatic relieve. He is on adjuvant chemotherapy using vincristine, adriamycin and cyclophosphamide (VAC). Right ventricular sarcoma is a
very rare cause of right sided heart failure, a very aggressive tumour whose only chance of successful treatment is complete surgical
excision. Primary cardiac tumours are rare with a reported incidence of 0.017-0.019 . Most cardiac tumours are metastases with majority
having a pulmonary source . Seventy-five percent of primary cardiac tumours are benign with close to half being myxomas . Twenty-five
percent are malignant with 95% of these being reported as sarcomas . The most common sarcoma is angiosarcoma (34%) and undifferentiated
sarcoma second at 24%. Others include rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, synovial sarcoma and leiomyosarcoma . The least reported cardiac
tumours are spindle cell sarcomas . These tumours are rare and produce non-specific symptoms. They are thus often difficult to diagnose
preoperatively and they can be missed. Use of echocardiogram (transesophageal echocardiogram is more sensitive than transthoracic Echo), CT
scan and cardiac MRI makes preoperative diagnosis possible. In most cases, the provisional diagnosis is a benign myxoma and the suspicion of
sarcomas is only made intraoperatively due to the tendency of the tumour to be invasive. Due to rarity of these tumours, there is no
consensus on effective adjuvant therapy. A 28 year old mechanic from rural Kenya, was referred to our unit with a provisional diagnosis of
right ventricular tumour, favouring either a thrombus or myxoma. He sought medical attention after experiencing shortness of breath, cough,
chest pain, abdominal pain and bilateral leg swelling for 6 weeks. He also reported unexplained weight loss (8 kg), fever and night sweats.
He had been admitted two weeks earlier at a peripheral hospital and treated for pneumonia, but the symptoms persisted. Tests for
tuberculosis were negative. There is no history of asthma in the family. He doesn’t smoke or take alcohol. He is single and lives with his
parents. Physical examination revealed marked bilateral pedal oedema, distended neck veins, and tender hepatomegaly. The laboratory tests
showed markedly elevated liver enzymes; AST 664 (5–42) IU/L and ALT 224 5–42) IU/L with other blood tests being within normal limits. Based
on these features of right-sided heart failure and suspicion of a thrombus in the right ventricle, he was started on heparin, frusemide and
spirinolactone with modest symptomatic improvement. A chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly and minimal right sided pleural effusion. The ECG
revealed sinus tachycardia and right ventricular hypertrophy. Two Dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram showed a mass arising from the
right ventricle and extending into the main pulmonary artery, small pericardial effusion and a right sided pleural effusion. Contrast Chest
CT scan confirmed the Echo findings (Figure 1).Figure 1 Preoperative echocardiogram showing right ventricular mass. Preoperative
echocardiogram showing right ventricular mass. Intraoperatively we found, normal appearing pericardium, and minimal pericardial effusion.
Right ventriculotomy was performed after going on cardiopulmonary bypass, we found a whitish yellow lobulated, friable mass that appeared to
arise from the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve, with a wide base and filling the entire ventricular chamber with diffuse infiltration
of the ventricular walls and extending into and nearly occluding the main pulmonary artery trunk, without adhering to it. With pulmonary
artery cross clamp on, the mass was gently delivered from the pulmonary artery and dissected off the RV and the tricuspid valve. The
tricuspid valve was then repaired. Due to the diffuse infiltrating nature of the tumour, resection with margins was not feasible. The
patient was nursed in ICU and discharged to the general ward on the third postoperative day. Repeat echocardiogram in the immediate
postoperative period showed moderate tricuspid regurgitation, mild pulmonary hypertension and a mild right-sided pleural effusion. He was
put on diuretics; frusemide and spirinolactone and he is currently asymptomatic. Definitive histopathology of the mass revealed a high-grade
spindle cell sarcoma. Immunohistochemical tests showed the tumour only had patchy positivity for AE1/AE3 and negative for the following
markers: SMA, Desmin, CD34, S100, EMA, and CD99. Staining for CD117 was not performed. He is undergoing adjuvant chemotherapy using VAC
regimen. He received 2 mg of Vincristine as the total dose per course, Adriamycin at 70 mg/m2, and Cyclophosphamide at 600 mg/m2,
administered as intravenous bolus infusion. He received six courses of adjuvant chemotherapy at 21 days interval. This patient was first
admitted with a diagnosis of a thrombus in the right ventricle and started on anticoagulation and ant failure regime. After ten days of
treatment without much improvement the cardiothoracic team was consulted and possibility of a heart tumour was encouraged, a repeat two-
dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram still showed a mass in the right ventricle. Our facility doesn’t have capability to perform
transesophageal echocardiogram which would better define the intracardiac mass. The patient went to surgery with a provisional diagnosis of
right ventricular myxoma or a thrombus, these being the commoner intracardiac tumours. It was not possible to achieve tumour free margins
due to the extensive infiltration of the tumour into the right ventricular walls. The post operative echocardiogram showed marked
improvement in cardiac output and right ventricular function. The patient was started on adjuvant chemotherapy, using the VAC regimen, which
in our set up is the affordable treatment option for sarcomas. This patient is being followed up at our cardiothoiracic outpatient clinic
every three months, oncology unit and cardiology clinic. In view of the intraoperative findings and the chemotherapy regimen he is on that
includes Adriamycin, an echocardiogram will be performed at the end of each treatment cycle to reassess the functional status of the heart.
The most recent echocardiogram done three months after surgery, showed mild tricuspid regurgitation, he remains symptom free and he is off
ant failure drugs. The earliest report of tumour in the heart dates back to mid 16th century, by Colombus . The commonest cardiac sarcomas
are angiosarcomas, followed by malignant fibrous histiocytomas (MFH). The angiosarcomas have predilection for the right side of the heart
with the MFHs favouring the left Cardiac spindle cell sarcomas are tumours of mesenchymal origin, more commonly affecting the large blood
vessels. They are extremely rare in the heart, with only four cases reported so far . Echocardiography by transthoracic or preferably
transesophageal route is easy to perform, rapid and inexpensive tool to identify intracardiac masses. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
provides better resolution, as it allows for use of higher-frequency transducers. However, TEE provides limited soft-tissue characterization
and visualization of the mediastinum . CT and MRI scan of chest and abdomen complement echocardiography . Unlike echocardiography, CT and
MRI have the advantage of showing the extra cardiac extent of tumour and presence of metastases, myocardial infiltration, compression of
cardiac chambers along with pericardial and great vessel involvement . Cardiac MRI (CMRI) is useful to assess tumour volume, tumour burden,
mediastinal invasion and response to therapy. The limitations of CMRI include cost and dependence on regular electrocardiographic rhythms
and cardiac gating . Chest x-ray though not diagnostic may show cardiomegaly, infiltrates suggestive of pulmonary oedema due to congestive
cardiac failure, pleural effusion, lung nodules, cardiac mass or left hemi diaphragm paralysis . Electrocardiogram is usually non-diagnostic
being normal or may show non-specific changes such as conduction block, right ventricular hypertrophy, atrial fibrillation, paroxysmal
atrial tachycardia etc. . Where expertise exists and condition of the patient permits, transvenous end myocardial biopsy is helpful to yield
a histological confirmation before operation . These tumours are highly aggressive, rapidly infiltrating all the layers of the heart and
metastasize rapidly. At the time of presentation up to 80% have evidence of metastasis . The prognosis of cardiac primary spindle cell
sarcomas is poor because these tumours are highly aggressive with reported mean survival of approximately 3 months to 1 year. Survival of up
to 11 years has been reported . Cardiac tumours can cause significant morbidity and mortality because of the delicate structures involved .
The effects of a cardiac tumour depend on its anatomical location in the heart, size, invasiveness, friability, and the rate of growth with
the most important factor affecting the prognosis of these tumours being the anatomical location in the heart (intracavitary versus
intra/extramyocardial growth) . Surgery with negative resection margins is the only proven successful treatment so far but complete tumour
resection is only possible in less than 50% of patients . It has been shown that patients who undergo surgery with negative resection
margins have two times the life expectancy of those who complete surgical resection is not feasible , this shows that early diagnosis and
timely treatment have an impact on treatment success and prognosis. Additionally surgery also has a role in palliative resections for relief
of symptoms, biopsy to confirm diagnosis or repeated resections. Though the initial results of surgery are encouraging their long-term
survival remains poor mostly due to local or systemic recurrence. Never the less surgery has been shown to prolong the survival and improve
the quality of life . When spindle cell sarcoma arises in the heart, the differential diagnosis includes angiosarcoma or synovial sarcoma.
Spindle cell sarcomas usually show positive immunoreactivity for vimentin, osteopontin, and MDM2 . Variable positivity may be observed for
alpha smooth muscle actin, CD117, CD68, p53, and bcl-2. Occasionally, the tumour has some positive staining with antibodies against desmin.
CD31, CD34, and Factor VIII are typically negative. The role of chemotherapy or radiotherapy in the treatment of primary cardiac sarcoma has
not proven to be beneficial , though there are some reports of adriamycin and doxorubicin showing some improvement in survival. Poor
tolerance of radiation by the heart has limited the use of radiotherapy. Though it’s role has not been proven, radiotherapy has been used
for treatment of positive margins after resections, palliation of aggressive localized disease and local recurrences . Cardiac sarcomas
remain a challenge to treat partly due to their rarity and also because of the aggressive nature of these tumours. Its diagnosis can be
challenging due to the nonspecific nature of presentation. In our setup two-dimensional echocardiography is available and this tool aids in
quick evaluation of the heart enabling the genesis of a prompt provisional diagnosis. Surgery remains the mainstay of treatment. Keeping in
mind that adjuvant therapy has poor response the cardiac surgeon needs to strike a balance between obtaining adequate tumour free margin and
leaving behind a functioning heart. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. Antigen E1 and E3
(multi-cytokeratin) Alanine transaminase Aspartate transaminase B-Cell Lymphoma 2 gene Cluster of differentiation Computed tomography scan
Electro cardiogram Epithelial membrane antigen International units per litre Murine double minute Malignant fibrous histiocytoma Magnetic
imaging resonance Right ventricle Smooth muscle actin Trans-esophageal echocardiogram Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. We also declare no financial competing interests. Authors’ contributions AM, JR, MM operated on the patient; VK was
an observer in this surgery; WW did the histopathological reporting and immunohistochemistry tests VK, AM wrote the case report. MM, JR, WW
critically reviewed the paper making important comments. All authors read the final document prior to publication. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information AM, VK: We are surgical residents in fourth year of training at the university of
Nairobi. We both have an undergraduate degree in medicine. MM, JR: Are both cardiothoracic surgeons working for Kenyatta National hospital
in Kenya. JR is furthermore a lecturer of cardiothoracic surgery at Agakhan University Hospital Nairobi. WW: Is a pathologist and a lecturer
of pathology at University of Nairobi. We would like to extend great appreciation to Susan Logedi the echocardiography technician who
promptly assisted in doing the echocardiogram pre and post surgery.
