Phosphatidylinositol glycan biosynthesis class A protein (PIGA) is one of the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor proteins, which function as enzymes, adhesion molecules, complement regulators and co-receptors in
signal transduction pathways. Until recently, only somatic PIGA mutations had been reported in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria (PNH), while germline mutations had not been observed, and were suspected to result in lethality. However, in just two years,
whole exome sequencing (WES) analyses have identified germline PIGA mutations in male patients with XLIDD (X-linked intellectual
developmental disorder) with a wide spectrum of clinical presentations. Here, we report on a new missense PIGA germline mutation
[g.15342986C>T (p.S330N)] identified via WES followed by Sanger sequencing, in a Chinese male infant presenting with developmental arrest,
infantile spasms, a pattern of lesion distribution on brain MRI resembling that typical of maple syrup urine disease, contractures,
dysmorphism, elevated alkaline phosphatase, mixed hearing loss (a combination of conductive and sensorineural), liver dysfunction,
mitochondrial complex I and V deficiency, and therapy-responsive dyslipidemia with confirmed lipoprotein lipase deficiency. X-inactivation
studies showed skewing in the clinically unaffected carrier mother, and CD109 surface expression in patient fibroblasts was 57% of that
measured in controls; together these data support pathogenicity of this mutation. Furthermore, we review all reported germline PIGA
mutations (1 nonsense, 1 frameshift, 1 in-frame deletion, five missense) in 8 unrelated families. Our case further delineates the
heterogeneous phenotype of this condition for which we propose the term ‘PIGA deficiency’. While the phenotypic spectrum is wide, it could
be classified into two types (severe and less severe) with shared hallmarks of infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia on EEG and profound
XLIDD. In severe PIGA deficiency, as described in our patient, patients also present with dysmorphic facial features, multiple CNS
abnormalities, such as thin corpus callosum and delayed myelination, as well as hypotonia and elevated alkaline phosphatase along with
liver, renal, and cardiac involvement; its course is often fatal. The less severe form of PIGA deficiency does not involve facial
dysmorphism and multiple CNS abnormalities; instead, patients present with milder IDD, treatable seizures and generally a longer lifespan.
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a glycolipid that is synthesized and transferred to proteins in the membrane of the endoplasmic
reticulum . Biogenesis of GPI anchored proteins is a conserved post-translational mechanism in eukaryotes and is important for attaching
these proteins to the cell membrane, for protein sorting, trafficking, and dynamics , and plays an essential role in embryogenesis,
neurogenesis, immune responses, and fertilization . To date, more than 20 phosphatidylinositol glycan biosynthesis protein (PIG) subclasses
have been found to be involved in GPI anchor biosynthesis and remodeling, and more than 150 proteins carry GPI anchors . An increasing
number of human diseases have been discovered to be due to mutations in GPI biosynthesis genes. PIGA (MIM 311770) encodes one of the seven
proteins involved in the transfer of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from UDP-N-acetylglucosamide (UDP-GlcNAc) to phosphatidylinositol (PI) to
form GlcNac-PI . This is the first step of GPI anchor biosynthesis and takes place on cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum . The
human PIGA gene is located on chromosome Xp22.2. It spans 162 kb and the longest transcript (NP_002632.1) encodes for a protein of 484 amino
acids expressed in a wide variety of tissues including brain, liver, heart, and blood cells . Somatic PIGA mutations had been well
documented in PNH [MIM 300818], an acquired hemolytic disease that manifests after clonal expansion of hematopoietic cells with somatic PIGA
mutations, where loss of CD55 and CD59 on erythrocytes causes complement-mediated lysis . Unlike somatic PIGA mutations, germline mutations
had not been observed until recently, and based on experiments in mice and in both murine and human embryonic stem cells it had been
proposed that germline PIGA mutations were lethal. In 2012, using an X-chromosome exome next-generation sequencing screen, Biesecker and
colleagues identified a PIGA germline nonsense mutation in two siblings with an early epileptic encephalopathy with hypotonia, brain
anomalies (myelination abnormalities and a thin corpus callosum), cleft palate, cardiac anomalies and early death . Recently, four
additional clinical reports were published on patients with germline PIGA mutations depicting a wide spectrum of phenotypes and clinical
diagnoses , including West syndrome , Multiple congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome 2 (MCAHS2) and Ferro-Cerebro-Cutaneous
syndrome (FCCS) . Here, we report a male patient with MRI brain abnormalities that resemble those of infants with maple syrup urine disease
(MSUD), multi-organ involvement, therapy-responsive dyslipidemia, and reductions of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I and V on Blue
Native Gel (BNG) analysis. Using WES, we identified in this patient a new missense PIGA germline mutation (g.15342986C>T, c.989G>A , ),
which will be referred to as c.989G>A (p.S330N). We also review a total of 8 mutations from 9 unrelated families, summarize clinical
findings, discuss genotype–phenotype correlations and identify common features that may be used to guide clinical identification of patients
with germline PIGA mutations. This study was approved as part of our TIDEX gene discovery project by the Ethics Board of the Faculty of
Medicine of the University of British Columbia (UBC IRB approval H12-00067). Parents provided written informed consent for publication of
this report. The male index (II:2) was the second child (Figure 1) of non-consanguineous healthy Chinese parents with unremarkable family
history. Prenatal ultrasound showed macrosomia and increased nuchal thickness. At 31 weeks 6 days gestation the biparietal diameter (BPD)
was 89 mm (97th centile), head circumference (HC) was 322 mm (91st centile), abdominal circumference (AC) 330 mm (>99th centile), and femur
length (FL) was 64 mm (86th centil) using B.C. Women’s Health Centre standard measurements. At 22 weeks 3 days gestation BPD was 59 mm (89th
centile), HC was 215 mm (81st centile), AC was 213 mm (>99th centile), and FL 42 mm (89th centile). Nuchal fold measurement at 20 weeks
3 days was 6.9 mm. Maternal serum alpha-fetal protein (AFP) at 16 weeks 0 days was 49.1 ug/L which is 1.37 multiples of the mean (MoM).
Amniotic fluid AFP was 22.0 mg/L which is 3.61 MoM (with a risk assessment for open spina bifida of 1:11). Acetylcholinesterase
electrophoresis appeared to be normal. Prenatal amniocentesis revealed normal male karyotype (46,XY). The boy was born at 38 weeks by
Caesarean section due to breech position with Apgar scores 5 and 9. His birth weight was 3975 g (>99th centile), length was 51 cm (~75th
centile) and head circumference 36.0 cm (98th centile). Dysmorphism was noted at birth but became more apparent at a later age. Phototherapy
was administered during one week for unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.Figure 1 Patient images and pedigree of the family. (A) Facial features
of the index patient at age 14 months. (B) Pedigree of the family with new c.989G > A germline PIGA mutation. Sanger sequence verification
is shown next to each member of the family. The deceased index was confirmed to be hemizygous for the variant, while mother was confirmed to
be a carrier; father and two unaffected brothers were confirmed to have a normal copy of the gene. (C) MRI at age 4 months. Upper row, axial
diffusion-weighted images (DWI), b = 1000 s/mm2; middle row, corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps; bottom row, axial
T2-weighted images. There is restricted diffusion, evidenced by high signal on DWI (arrows) and corresponding low signal on the ADC maps, at
the level of the ponto-medullary tegmentum, superior cerebellar peduncles, ventral midbrain, subthalamus, and inferior striatum. The same
regions show abnormally elevated signal on the T2-weighted images. The abnormalities selectively involve regions that are normally
myelinated at this age and are consistent with intramyelin edema. Patient images and pedigree of the family. (A) Facial features of the
index patient at age 14 months. (B) Pedigree of the family with new c.989G > A germline PIGA mutation. Sanger sequence verification is shown
next to each member of the family. The deceased index was confirmed to be hemizygous for the variant, while mother was confirmed to be a
carrier; father and two unaffected brothers were confirmed to have a normal copy of the gene. (C) MRI at age 4 months. Upper row, axial
diffusion-weighted images (DWI), b = 1000 s/mm2; middle row, corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps; bottom row, axial
T2-weighted images. There is restricted diffusion, evidenced by high signal on DWI (arrows) and corresponding low signal on the ADC maps, at
the level of the ponto-medullary tegmentum, superior cerebellar peduncles, ventral midbrain, subthalamus, and inferior striatum. The same
regions show abnormally elevated signal on the T2-weighted images. The abnormalities selectively involve regions that are normally
myelinated at this age and are consistent with intramyelin edema. The onset of epilepsy was 2.4 months; he had intractable seizures, which
were initially classified as infantile spasms (EEG showed modified hypsarrhythmia), evolving one month later to myoclonic seizures (EEG
showed suppression-burst-like pattern). He showed acquired microcephaly at 8.7 months with an occipital frontal circumference (OFC) of 43 cm
(~3rd centile). On examination at 14 months (Figure 1A), our patient showed plagio-brachycephaly with the flattening of the right occiput
greater than the left and a prominent right side of the face, giving the appearance of facial asymmetry. There was a frontal hair upsweep
with unruly scalp hair and poorly defined eyebrows laterally. He had a round face with flattening of the lateral profile, a broad forehead
with shallow orbital ridges and supraorbital indentations, most likely due to poor muscle function in the temples. There was glabellar
fullness, bilateral ptosis with hypertelorism (intercanthal distance 3.0 cm; +2SD), upslanted short palpebral fissures (palpebral fissure
length 2.0 cm; −2.0 SD), and an interpupillary distance of 4.95 cm (90th centile). The outercanthal distance was 7.0 cm (−1 SD), within
normal limits the short palpebral fissures correct for the hypertelorism. The nose was short (2.6 cm; −2 SD) with a low bridge, prominent
lateral nasal cartilage and anteverted nares. Ears were of normal size, placement and form. Philtrum appeared relatively long (measured
1.2 cm) and smooth. There was retrognathia, a tented upper lip with thickened alveolar overgrowth giving the appearance of a high arched
palate (intact). He showed decreased facial expression. Redundant skin at the neck was noted, along with contractures of the small and large
joints of upper and lower extremities; no pigmentation or other cutaneous abnormalities were noted. From a neurologic perspective there was
profound global developmental delay with hyperekplexia, axial hypotonia, peripheral hypertonia, rigidity and abnormal cry. There was
decreased range of motion of all major joints including the shoulders, elbows, wrist and fingers, as well as hips, knees and ankles. He had
hand splints for camptodactyly, deep palmar creases (because of his fisting) and minimal movement of his fingers. Brain MRI at presentation
(age 4 months) revealed signal abnormalities with restricted diffusion at level of the brainstem tegmentum, superior cerebellar peduncles,
subthalamus, and ventral striatum (Figure 1C), while follow-up studies at 10 months and 2.5 years showed progressive, severe cerebral and
cerebellar atrophy associated with diffuse leukoencephalopathy and thinning of the corpus callosum. Serial MR spectroscopy showed initially
mildly elevated lactate peaks, normal on subsequent imaging, as well as mild reduction of N-acetyl aspartate in the mid brain. His heart was
mildly enlarged and ECG and Holter revealed right ventricular hypertrophy and arrhythmia (AV block, Wenckebach type I). He also had moderate
hepatomegaly, apnea, unilateral hydronephrosis with renal calculi, GI dysmotility which led to aspirations requiring G-tube feeding, visual
motor impairment and retinal dystrophy (pale optic disc, flat macula, myopia, atrophic retina; no cherry red spot), moderate conductive and
sensorineural hearing loss, stomatocytosis and hyperechoic liver. The child died at the age of 3.4 years of cardiac arrest; autopsy was not
performed. TORCH (toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and HIV) screening was negative. A comprehensive metabolic
investigation was initiated but largely uninformative, with the following exceptions: Plasma lipid profiling revealed markedly elevated
triglycerides at 85.31 mM (reference 0.4-1.5) and cholesterol at 23.4 mM (reference 2.6-5.2), and absent post-heparin lipoprotein lipase
activity suggesting a lipoprotein lipase deficiency. The abnormal lipid profile normalized quickly with the implementation of a medium-chain
triglyceride enriched diet. Persistently elevated alkaline phosphatase levels were also noted, ranging from 364–649 U/L (Ref 110–320);
calcium, phosphate and vitamin D were within normal limits. BNG Analysis of a muscle biopsy at 10 months showed decreased amount of complex
of I and V (at 30% and 10% of a tissue-matched control sample, respectively). These findings led to the initial clinical suspicion of a
mitochondrial deficiency syndrome (lactates varied between normal – 3.8 umol/L) or lipid storage disorder, and investigations were pursued
accordingly. Further molecular investigations yielded normal results including array-CGH analysis for copy number variations (CNVs), mtDNA
genome sequencing, targeted gene sequencing of LPL, MECP2, ARX and a number of nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins. Elaborate biochemical
testing was completed with essentially unremarkable results (ammonia, acylcarnitine profile, plasma amino acids, very long chain fatty
acids, transferrin iso-electric focussing; urine organic acids, purines & pyrimidines, mucopolysaccharides, oligosaccharides, bile acids).
The following enzymatic analyses yielded normal results: acid phosphatase, sphingomyelinase, arylsulphatase A, hexosaminidase A&B,
biotinidase, chitotriosidase, galactosyl-ceramidase, beta-glucosidase, beta-galactosidase, cathepsin D, palmitoyl protein thio-esterase I,
tripeptidyl peptidase I. Filippin staining studies in fibroblasts showed mildly atypical peri-nuclear vesicular accumulations of un-
esterified cholesterol but were considered non-diagnostic. Sphingomyelinase enzymology and NPC1 and NPC2 sequencing were all unremarkable.
Iron staining of muscle was negative. With a profound IDD and an abnormal biochemical phenotype, this patient met the inclusion requirements
for our TIDEX (Treatable Intellectual Disability Endeavour exome sequencing) gene discovery study. We isolated genomic DNA samples from the
peripheral blood of the patient as well as parents and two unaffected male siblings using standard techniques. WES was performed for the
index patient and his unaffected parents using the Agilent SureSelect kit and Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Perkin-Elmer, Santa Clara, California,
USA). An in-house designed bioinformatics pipeline was used to align the reads to the human reference genome version hg19 and to identify
and assess rare variants for their potential to disrupt protein function. The candidate variants were further confirmed using Sanger re-
sequencing in all the family members. Deleteriousness of the candidate variants was assessed using Combined Annotation–Dependent Depletion
(CADD) scores , PolyPhen-2 (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/) and SIFT (Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant; (http://sift.jcvi.org/) .
Protein alignment was generated using T-Coffee (http://www.tcoffee.org/) and analyzed using GeneDoc
http://www.nrbsc.org/gfx/genedoc/gdpaf.htm/). Only those variants predicted to be “functional” (missense, nonsense and frameshift changes,
as well as in-frame deletions and splice-site effects) were subsequently screened under a series of inheritance models. X-chromosome
inactivation (XCI) was assayed in the unaffected mother using the allelic ratio of methylated alleles at the Androgen Receptor (AR) locus as
described previously . The degree of allelic bias in terms of which X chromosome is inactivated can range from 50% (completely random) to
100% (completely skewed). To provide evidence for pathogenicity of the identified mutation, patient and control skin fibroblasts were
analyzed by flow cytometry for surface expression of CD109, a GPI-anchored protein. Cells were washed with PBS (without Ca2+ or Mg2+)
(Gibco), detached using 5 mM EDTA (Gibco) in PBS and washed in 2% FBS (Gibco)/PBS. Cells were then stained for 20 minutes at 4°C with
CD109-PE (BioLegend) and PE mouse IgG1, κ isotype control (BioLegend). Data were acquired using a BD™ LSR II flow cytometer and analyzed
using FlowJo v8.8.4 (Tree Star). Protein expression was determined by Western blot analysis. Briefly, skin fibroblasts were harvested and
lysed (cell lysis buffer, Cell Signaling) in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Equal amounts of protein were separated
by SDS-PAGE, transferred to PVDF membrane and blocked with 5% BSA. Protein expression was detected using an anti-PIG-A (clone H-6, Santa
Cruz) primary antibody. After washing, bound antibody was detected with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody and Novex ECL
chemiluminescent substrate (Invitrogen). In the WES data we identified four rare homozygous, four rare hemizygous and eight rare compound
heterozygous candidates; we did not identify any rare denovo variants affecting protein-coding regions. Of those, only three missense
variants were considered functional candidates. COX7A2 (encoding the nuclear-coded polypeptide chains of cytochrome c oxidase, the terminal
oxidase in mitochondrial electron transport (MIM123966)), and C19orf12 (associated with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 4
(MIM 614298)), and Spastic Paraplegia 43 AR (MIM 615043) phenotypes were subsequently ruled out as Sanger sequencing showed the same
recessive genotype in both clinically unaffected brothers. The final candidate, PIGA (g.15342986C>T c.989G>A , ) was a novel missense
variant not found in more than 250 in-house exomes, dbSNP 138, NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project or Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC). The
variant is predicted to be the most deleterious of all candidates using the CADD scores . It affects a highly conserved amino acid
(Figure 2) and is predicted to be damaging by both PolyPhen-2 and SIFT . The Sanger re-sequencing of the genomic DNA confirmed that index
II-2 is hemizygous for the C to T transition, mother is the carrier, while the two unaffected brothers do not have this variant (Figure 1B).
Finally, X-inactivation studies showed the pattern of X-inactivation to be 94.5% skewed in the unaffected carrier mother. Together, the
genetic analysis based on WES shows that the c.989G>A (p.S330N) variant is a new variant, it affects an evolutionarily conserved amino acid
of PIGA resulting in a deleterious change (Figure 2), and segregates with disease in the family (Figure 1B). Functional characterization of
the variant showed normal expression of PIGA protein in skin fibroblasts (Figure 3A) but there was a 44% reduction in the surface expression
of GPI-anchored CD109 (Figure 3B). The mother of the patient had a normal complete blood cell count and no evidence of red cell hemolysis on
peripheral blood smear. A standardized flow cytometric method for screening PNH measuring CD55 and CD59 expression on erythrocytes was
negative.Figure 2 A multi-sequence alignment of PIGA proteins and distribution of all known germline mutations. The PIGA protein sequences
were generated using depicted transcript identifiers from: Homo sapiens (human), Mus musculus (mouse), Bos taurus (cow), Gallus gallus
(chicken), Danio rerio (zebrafish), Caenorhabditis elegans (worm) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast). Protein alignment was generated
using T-Coffee and analyzed using GeneDoc.Figure 3 PIGA expression and surface expression of GPI-AP (CD109) in patient skin fibroblasts. (A)
Western Blot showing similar expression of PIGA in patient versus control fibroblasts; β-actin was used as a loading control. (B) Flow
cytometry analysis of patient’s fibroblasts revealed reduced expression (56%) of GPI-AP (CD109) when compared to control fibroblasts.
Isotype controls are included to show specific binding. A multi-sequence alignment of PIGA proteins and distribution of all known germline
mutations. The PIGA protein sequences were generated using depicted transcript identifiers from: Homo sapiens (human), Mus musculus (mouse),
Bos taurus (cow), Gallus gallus (chicken), Danio rerio (zebrafish), Caenorhabditis elegans (worm) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast).
Protein alignment was generated using T-Coffee and analyzed using GeneDoc. PIGA expression and surface expression of GPI-AP (CD109) in
patient skin fibroblasts. (A) Western Blot showing similar expression of PIGA in patient versus control fibroblasts; β-actin was used as a
loading control. (B) Flow cytometry analysis of patient’s fibroblasts revealed reduced expression (56%) of GPI-AP (CD109) when compared to
control fibroblasts. Isotype controls are included to show specific binding. WES revealed a novel, likely pathogenic variant in the PIGA
gene in our patient with multisystem disease including early onset intractable epilepsy, severe IDD, facial dysmorphism, conductive and
sensorineural hearing loss and visual impairment, joint contractures and hepatic and renal involvement. To date, seven germline mutations in
PIGA have been discovered using WES technologies in eight unrelated families . Locations of the pathogenic variants are listed in Table 1
and highlighted on a multi-sequence alignment of PIGA proteins in Figure 2. PIGA germline mutations have been found in XLIDD male patients
with a wide spectrum of clinical diagnoses (Table 1). Mothers of the affected males were confirmed to be carriers in all except for one
family (Table 1) where the DNA for the mother was unavailable .Table 1 Overview of mutations and phenotypes observed in patients with
germline PIGA mutations (Johnston et al. [ 15 ] ) (Johnston et al. [ 15 ] ) (van der Crabben et al. [ 17 ] ) (Swoboda et al. [ 16 ] ) (Belet
et al. [ 7 ] ) (Kato et al. [ 18 ] ) (Kato et al. [ 18 ] ) (Kato et al. [ 18 ] ) (Kato et al. [ 18 ] ) (Kato et al. [ 18 ] ) Our patient
IV-2 IV-4 III-1 III-9 IV-2 1 2 3 4 5 Mother carrier YES YES YES YES YES Unknown YES YES YES YES YES Mutation c.1234C>T c.1234C>T c.278C>T
c.328_330delCCT c.76dupT c.1234C>T c.616A>T c.230G>T c.230G>T c.355C>T c.989G>A Polyhydramnios NOYESYESNONOYESNONONOYESNO Current age Death
at 11wkDeath at 10wkDeath at 2.5 yrsDeath at 7 yrs24 yrs6 yrs10 yrs8 yrs18 mo15 moDeath at 3.4 yrs Sex MMMMMMMMMMM Neurology Developmental
delay (severity) Early deathEarly deathProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfound Hypotonia
YESYESYESYESYESYESNONONOYESYES Hyperreflexia YESYESNOYESNRNRNONONOYESYES Seizure onset NeonatalNeonatal8.5 months7 months6 months1 month3
months7 months7 months3 months2.4 months Seizure types MyoclonicMyoclonicGeneralized clonic (febrile)Febrile, myoclonicMyoclonic epileptic
seizuresTonic seizures followed by frequent myoclonusMyoclonus or epileptic spasm-like movementTonic seizures, secondarily generalized
seizuresTonic or clonicMyoclonic seizures, tonic spasmsInfantile spasms, myoclonic seizures EEG findings Suppression burstSuppression
burstSymptomatic generalized epilepsyPosterior burstsHyps-arrhythmia at 7 moSuppression burst at neonatal periodHypsarrhythmia, periodic
bursts of multifocal epileptic dischargesIrregular spike and slow wave and multifocal spikes at 2 and5 yNormal at 7 moHypsarrhythmia at 3
mo, suppression burst at 5 moHypsarrythmia at 2.4 mos, suppression-burst pattern at 3.5 mos Seizure prognosis
IntractableIntractableRefractoryIntermittentNRIntractableIntractableSeizure-free at 3 y with TPMSeizure-free at 15 moIntractableIntractable
Thin corpus callosum YESYESYESNRNOYESYESNONOYESYES White matter immaturity YESYESYESNRNOYESYESNONOYESYES Small cerebellum
YESYESYESYESNONRNRNRNRNRYES Cortical atrophy NRNRNRYESNOYESYESNONOYESYES Restricted diffusion brainstem/cerebellum
NRNRNRNRNOYESYESNONOYESYES Other organs Facial dysmorphism YESYESYESYESNOYESYESNONOYESYES Joints (contractures) YESYESNRNRNRYESYESNONONOYES
Cardiac Systolic II–III/VI murmur with a fixed split S2, ASDSmall PDAASD type 2NRNRNRNRNRNRNRRVH, arrhythmia (grade 1 AV block, Wenckebach
type) Liver NRHepatic microvesicular steatosisNRHepatosplenomegalyNRHepato-megaly, hepato-blastomaNRNRNRNRHepatomegaly, hyperechoic liver
Kidney Vesicoureteral reflux, duplicated collectingSystemVesicoureteral refluxNRNRNRVesicoureteral refluxNRNRNRNRLeft hydronephrosis with
renal calculi Ophthalmologic NRNRNRBlindnessNRNRNRNRNRNRVisual motor impairment, retinal dystrophy Hearing loss
NRNRNRDeafnessNRNRNRNRNRNRSensorineural hearing loss Dental NRUnderdeveloped gumsAbsence of teethNR, but III-10 microdontia, widely-spaced,
delayed eruptionNRNRNRNRNRNRMicrodontia, widely-spaced delayed eruption Other Globulous chest and small nails, broad palms with short
fingersAbsence of olfactory bulb and tractsAccelerated linear growth, obesityIchthyosisNRTracheostomy, micropenis, bilateral inguinal
herniation, hypotonic quadriplegiaSpastic quadriplegia, bulbar palsy with gastrostomy and tracheostomyNRNRTransverse palmar crease,
prominent calcaneus, left inguinal hernia, hydrocele testicle, hypotonic quadriplegiaStomatocytes Biochemical Elevated alkaline phosphatase
NRYESYESNRNRNRYESNONOYESYES Mitochondrial abnormalities NRNRAbnormal ATP production (muscle biopsy)Disorganized
mitochondriaNRNRNRNRNRNRRespiratory chain complex I and V reductions (muscle blue native gel) Iron storage NONONOCNS iron
depositionNRNRNRNRNRNRNO Other Slightly elevated MCV and RDW and low ionized calcium, HgB and RBCSlightly elevated MCV and
RDWNONRNRNRNRNRNRNRDyslipidemia (high triglycerides, hypercholesterolemia, LPL deficiency) Clinical diagnosis Clinical descriptor MCAHS2
Bethesda– Utrecht syndromeMCAHS2Bethesda–Utrecht syndromeMCAHS2 Bethesda– Utrecht syndromeFerro-Cerebro-Cutaneous syndromeMCAHS2-like
syndrome X-linked infantile spasm syndrome (West syndrome)Ohtahara syndrome, early myoclonic encephalopathy, Schinzel-Giedion syndromeWest
syndrome with hypomyelinationEarly-onset epileptic encephalopathyEarly-onset epileptic encephalopathyWest syndromePIGA deficiency Cause of
death PneumoniaRespiratory failureCardiac arrestAspiration pneumoniaNANANANANANACardiac arrest Overview of mutations and phenotypes observed
in patients with germline PIGA mutations The phenotypic spectrum of PIGA germline mutations has shown wide variation, as reflected by the
range of clinical diagnoses summarized in Table 1. However, a common set of characteristic features, shared by our patient, has emerged
including infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia on EEG (Table 1) and IDD. Generally, the phenotypic spectrum could be classified into two
types (severe and less severe), as proposed by Kato et al. , where presence of facial dysmorphism correlates very well with the more severe
spectrum of clinical manifestations (Table 1). In addition to early onset infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia on EEG, IDD and profound
developmental delay, the patients with more severe manifestations of PIGA germline mutations (patients: IV-2, IV-4 , III-1 , III-9 , 1, 2,
and 5 , and our case [this report]) also present with dysmorphic facial features, multiple CNS abnormalities, such as thin corpus callosum
and delayed myelination, as well as hypotonia (Table 1). Other phenotypes such as polyhydramnios, joint contractures, hyperreflexia, cardiac
anomaly, severe developmental delay and elevated alkaline phosphatase are also recurrently seen in these patients, while additional
phenotypes appear to be allele-specific (Table 1). Unlike patients with severe phenotypes, the less severe form of PIGA germline mutations
(patients: IV-2 , 3 and 4 ) did not involve facial dysmorphism and multiple CNS abnormalities, but did present with early onset of infantile
spasms with hypsarrhythmia on EEG (Table 1), and generally longer life span marked by IDD, treatable seizures and PDD (Table 1). Early onset
infantile spasms appear to be a common feature of PIGA mutations, as is seen with many other defects in GPI-anchor biosynthesis. Chiyonobu
et al. hypothesized that these seizures are due to intracellular pyridoxal phosphate deficiency secondary to the loss of membrane bound
alkaline phosphatase, which is required to initiate pyridoxal-phosphate for transit of the plasma membrane (after which it is
rephosphorylated). Given that GABA synthase requires intracellular pyridoxal-phosphate, it is the intracellular GABA deficiency which likely
leads to the onset of seizures . Additional features are frequently reported in patients with the severe form of PIGA germline mutations, as
proposed by including: hypotonia (7/8 patients with available data), elevated alkaline phosphatase (5/5 patients with available data),
hyperreflexia (5/5 patients with available data), joint contractures (5/6 patients with available data), cardiac anomalies (4/4 patients
with available data) and polyhydramnios (4/8 patients with available data) possibly due to dysphagia associated with hypotonia. The
plagiocephaly facial dysmorphism in our and published cases is likely secondary to the hypotonia, causing facial asymmetry and distortion of
proportions as well as secondary contractures. Our patient specifically appears to have a short nose with anteverted nares and a depressed
nasal bridge, seen as the triangular structure at the base of the nose (Figure 1A). This feature appears to be present in the more severely
affected published cases . Additional features such as dental problems (e.g. microdontia, delayed eruption) , liver problems visual
impairment and deafness appear to be recurrent as well (Table 1). On the other hand some features, such as accelerated linear growth and
obesity , CNS iron deposition and ichthyosis , dyslipidemia and stomatocytosis (in the patient reported here) are reported only once. The
cause of death in patients with PIGA mutations has been mainly due to cardiac arrest, pneumonia and respiratory failure (Table 1). Although
the life span of the patients affected with less severe mutations is generally longer, there is a great degree of variability in life-span
even in patients with the same germline mutation . Reports of brain MRI findings in PIGA deficiency describe white matter immaturity with
insufficient myelination, cerebral atrophy, thinning of the corpus callosum, and a small cerebellum . Cerebral atrophy appears to progress
rapidly and is associated with abnormal white matter myelination, consistent with an early neurodegenerative process . Our case showed a
similarly rapid progression, with an established cerebral atrophy associated with disrupted subcortical myelination at age 2.5 years.
However, the most remarkable finding in the early stages of the disease was restricted diffusion in the brainstem tegmentum, superior
cerebellar peduncles, subthalamus, and ventral striatum, indicative of intramyelin edema, involving selectively white matter regions that
are already physiologically myelinated at birth. Kato et al. also reported three cases showing restricted diffusion at the brainstem, basal
ganglia, thalamus, and deep white matter. Interestingly, these findings are remarkably similar to those of the classical form of MSUD, an
amino aciduria caused by deficiency of branched chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase enzyme, in which brain MRI of affected newborns or infants
studied during stages of metabolic decompensation shows prominent signal changes and swelling within myelinated brain areas representing
intramyelin edema, caused by a deficit of Na+/K+ ATPase activity as a result of impairment in energy production secondary to branched chain
amino acids accumulation . In particular, the findings of our case are remarkably similar to those shown in figure six in the report by
Rossi and Biancheri , implicating that the diagnosis of PIGA deficiency could be suggested in neonates with similar brain MRI findings and
unremarkable plasma amino acid and urine organic acid profiles. An explanation for the similarities remains speculative; the typical lesions
in the newborn with MSUD involve preferentially those structures that are already myelinated at birth and thus with higher metabolic demands
and most vulnerable to the energy deficiency and toxicity of branched-chain 2-oxo acid(s). In PIGA deficiency, although toxins have not yet
been identified, we speculate that mitochondrial and thus energy deficiency could similarly play a role in the etiology of the observed
intra-myelin edema. Regardless of the implicated pathophysiologic mechanism, identification of similarities in the lesion distribution and
appearance on MRI represents the foundation of the pattern recognition approach, whereby neuro-imaging can guide the diagnostic process to
reduce the number of unnecessary tests and time to diagnosis . PIGA catalyzes the first step in GPI biosynthesis and it is anticipated that
even a partial defect in activity will have a significant impact on the localization and functionality of a broad range of GPI-anchored
proteins. The elevation in serum alkaline phosphatase reported here as well as in the majority of other PIGA deficient cases (likely
correlated with severity of the disease) (Table 1) as well as other PIG deficiencies results from the secretion of GPI-deficient alkaline
phosphatase (normally membrane-anchored) and may serve as a diagnostic clue. Normal levels of alkaline phosphatase however, do not rule out
the condition, as evidenced by the mild case reported by Belet et al. . The hypertriglyceridemia and serum LPL deficiency observed in our
patient is also likely caused by abnormal GPI biosynthesis. LPL release from endothelial cells in response to heparin stimulation requires
the activity of GPIHBP1 (GPI-anchored high-density lipoprotein binding protein 1) and primary genetic defects in this GPI-anchored protein
lead to hypertriglyceridemia and non-detectable serum lipoprotein lipase . The GPI biosynthesis defect resulting from PIGA mutation likely
leads to a secondary GPIHBP1 deficiency, although further evaluation is required to confirm this mechanism, as a similar defect has not been
described or investigated in other individuals with PIGA defects. The germline mutational spectrum for PIGA comprises various mutation types
including one nonsense mutation , one frameshift mutation that results in production of 36 amino acids shorter PIGA protein , one small in-
frame deletion , and four missense mutations (Figure 2). PIGA protein is well conserved from yeast to human (Figure 2), and all of the
reported mutations, except for c.76dupT, occurred at evolutionarily conserved or semi-conserved amino acids (Figure 2). The c.76dupT
frameshift mutation occurs in the non-conserved part of the protein but results in translation of the PIGA protein using a cryptic start
site at amino acid position 37 producing shorter PIGA protein with the majority of the conserved amino acids intact . One mutation,
c.1234C>T, was recurrent (Table 1) . Studies in mice revealed that complete disruption of the PIGA gene results in early embryonic lethality
in males, while in carrier female mice late embryonic lethality is observed . Based on these studies, it is believed that complete loss of
PIGA function is lethal in humans. A number of studies suggest that the human mutations identified to date result in reduced, but not
absent, PIGA activity and using the flow cytometry of blood granulocytes method, Kato et al. showed that the phenotype severity of the PIGA
germline mutations appeared to correlate with genotype and the residual functional activity of the PIGA protein . Functional studies on the
truncating c.1234C>T mutation (p.R412X) suggest that small amounts of full length PIGA protein were generated by the read through of the
premature termination codon (PTC) . During two stages of eukaryotic translation (elongation and termination), aminoacyl-tRNAs and
termination factors compete for codon binding. When aminoacyl-tRNAs supersedes, read through of the termination codon occurs, which allows
the generation of the full-length polypeptide. Depending on the amino acid inserted during the read through, the resulting protein may have
normal or partial activity. Studies on base level of read through reveal 10 fold higher frequency at PTCs (<1%) when compared to naturally
occurring stop codons (<0.1%) . In addition to c.1234C>T (p.R412X), studies on the c.328_330delCCT (p.L344Del) mutation revealed reduced
GPI-anchored proteins on the patient’s granulocytes, while normal levels were observed on the red blood cells and monocytes, suggesting
reduced but not absent PIGA activity . Complementation assays using the c.76dupT frameshift mutation confirmed partial function of the
shorter PIGA protein, which was sufficient to rescue surface expression of CD59 in a PIGA null cell line . Consistent with previous
findings, our patient’s mutation also led to reduced surface expression of the GPI-anchored protein CD109 on skin fibroblasts, despite
normal levels of protein expression. Patients with PIGA germline mutations share key phenotypic features with patients carrying mutations in
genes encoding various PIG family members, including IDD, seizures, hypotonia, growth defects, congenital abnormalities, heart defects, and
abnormal metabolic profiles. For example, inherited glycosylphophatidylinositol deficiency (MIM 610293) resulting in portal- and hepatic-
vein thrombosis and absence seizures was found to be due to mutations in PIGM gene (MIM610273) . Hyperphosphatasia Mental Retardation
syndrome (HPMRS, MIM 239300, MIM 214749, and MIM 614207), also known as Mabry syndrome, was found to be associated with PIGV (MIM 610274),
PIGO (MIM 614730),PGAP2 (MIM 615187) and PGAP3 (MIM 611801) mutations . HPMRS is characterized by elevated alkaline phosphatase levels, IDD,
seizures, hypotonia, and facial dysmorphic features . CHIME syndrome (MIM 280000), also known as Zunich Neuro-Ectodermal syndrome was found
to be due to mutations in PIGL (MIM 605947). Individuals with CHIME syndrome present with colobomas, congenital heart defects, early onset
migratory ichthyosiform dermatosis, IDD, and ear anomalies, including conductive and sensori-neural hearing loss . PIGT mutations cause
congenital anomalies-seizures-hypotonia type 3, with hypophosphatasia as key feature . The wide spectrum of human conditions associated with
mutations in PIG genes reflects their role in multiple developmental processes and resembles the diversity of clinical features associated
with glycosylation pathways deficiencies . A variety of clinical case descriptors have been applied to individuals with germline PIGA
mutations (Table 1). However, given the varied clinical spectrum reported to date, it appears that the multi-system roles of GPI-anchored
proteins and private nature of most of the PIGA mutations identified will preclude the definition of a common feature set. To unify further
reports on this intriguing condition, we advocate for the use of ‘PIGA deficiency’. Careful patient phenotyping will continue to shed light
on the (patho-) physiologic roles of PIGA deficiency; for example, its relation with mitochondrial structure and function. We are the first
to report severely reduced amount of mitochondrial complexes (specifically I and V), but other mitochondrial defects have been reported in
PIGA mutations: e.g. ‘disorganized mitochondria’ in FCC syndrome and ‘abnormal ATP production’ in a patient with accelerated linear growth
and obesity . In fact, recent publications show that several mitochondrial membrane proteins are either modified with GPI anchor addition or
associated with GPI anchored proteins, a process required for their proper function . Therefore, it is of great interest to test patients
with the PIGA mutations for mitochondrial defects and vice versa, to test the patients with unexplained mitochondrial phenotypes for
potential PIGA mutations, especially in the presence of features described here. Based on the patient descriptions published to date,
intractable, infantile onset epilepsy with suppression burst and/or hypsarrhythmia in patients with X-linked IDD of unknown etiology should
prompt clinicians to consider germline mutations in the PIGA, particularly in a patient with elevated serum alkaline phosphatase. The
additional presence of dysmorphic facial features, CNS abnormalities, hypotonia, heart defects, dyslipidemia/lipoprotein lipase deficiency,
or signs of intra-myelin edema on brain MRI, may increase the likelihood of mutations in PIGA specifically, and PIG family members in
general. Flow cytometry of blood granulocytes has also proven a useful test for levels of GPI-anchored proteins expression in patients with
PIGA mutations . Phosphatidylinositol glycan biosynthesis class A protein Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Phosphatidylinositol glycan
biosynthesis protein Phosphatidylinositol Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria N-acetylglucosamine UDP-N-acetylglucosamide Whole Exome
Sequencing Maple syrup urine disease Multiple congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome 2 Ferro-Cerebro-Cutaneous syndrome Blue
Native Gel Occipital frontal circumference N-Acetylaspartic acid Toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and HIV
Intellectual developmental disorder Treatable Intellectual Disability Endeavour eXome sequencing Copy number variation Combined
Annotation–Dependent Depletion Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant Androgen Receptor X-Chromosome inactivation X-linked intellectual
developmental disability GPI-anchored high-density lipoprotein binding protein 1 Hyperphosphatasia Mental Retardation syndrome Premature
termination codon Maja Tarailo-Graovac and Graham Sinclair contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MTG: performed bioinformatics analysis and identified PIGA mutation; reviewed and
summarized the literature, and drafted the manuscriptl: GS: participated in data analysis and interpretation as well as drafting and
revision of the manuscript: SS: clinical case description, clinical diagnostic management, enrolment in WES research project, critical
editing and revision of the manuscript: MVA: described the dysmorphologic exam, performed diagnostic investigations and contributed to the
drafting and critical edits of the manuscripts: JR: designed and performed the functional analyses (CD109 measurements and Western Blot on
fibroblasts): CS: contributed to the bio-informatic analysis: RB: contributed to the phenotypic description of the case, with focus on
epilepsy and neuro-imaging results: TO: provided genetic counselling to the family, contributed to data collection and provided critical
manuscript edits: ML: collected phenotypical and testing data, contributed to the case description and extracted qualitative data from
printed and electronic records: BS: contributed to the case description and provided manuscript edits and revisions: CJR: performed targeted
Sanger sequencing for all candidate variants identified via WES in this family, provided critical edits to the manuscript: WR: performed and
interpreted X-inactivation studies, contributed to the manuscript with subsequent critical edits: WW: Supervised the bio-informatic analysis
and pipeline creation: AR: interpretation and description of ten euro-imaging findings, preparation figures, critical editing and revision
of the manuscript: CvK: spearheaded the conception and design of the study, acquisition of data, and coordinated data analysis and
interpretation, as well as drafting and revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We are indebted to
the patient and his family for participation in this study; Dr. S. Miller, Dr. S. Mahmutoglu and Dr. P. Louie for their contributions to
clinical management of the patient; Dr. Maria Penaherrera and Ms. Ruby Jiang for X-inactivation studies; Mrs. X. Han for Sanger sequencing;
Dr. M. Thomas for consenting and data management; Mrs. M. Higginson for DNA extraction and sample handling; Mr. D. Arenillas and Mr. M.
Hatas for systems support, and Mrs. D. Pak for research management support (University of British Columbia). Dr. R. Hegele (University of
Western Ontario, Canada) for LPL molecular analysis. We are also grateful to the anonymous reviewers; their thoughtful comments and
suggestions helped us strengthen the manuscript. This work was supported by funding from the B.C. Children’s Hospital Foundation as “1st
Collaborative Area of Innovation” (www.tidebc.org); Genome BC (SOF-195 grant); BC Clinical Genomics Network (#00032 grant), and the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (#301221 grant). Informatics infrastructure supported by Genome BC and Genome Canada (ABC4DE Project). Dr. C.
van Karnebeek is a recipient of the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research Scholar Award.
