Intrathecal transplantation is a minimally invasive method for the delivery of stem cells, however, whether the cells migrate from the
lumbar to the injured cervical spinal cord has not been proved in humans. We describe an attempt to track bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stem cells in a patient with a chronic cervical spinal cord injury. A 33-year-old Thai man who sustained an incomplete spinal cord injury
from the atlanto-axial subluxation was enrolled into a pilot study aiming to track bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, labeled with
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, from intrathecal transplantation in chronic cervical spinal cord injury. He had been dependent
on respiratory support since 2005. There had been no improvement in his neurological function for the past 54 months. Bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells were retrieved from his iliac crest and repopulated to the target number. One half of the total cells were labeled
with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles before transplantation to the intrathecal space between L4 and L5. Magnetic resonance
imaging studies were performed immediately after the transplantation and at 48 hours, two weeks, one month and seven months after the
transplantation. His magnetic resonance imaging scan performed immediately after the transplantation showed hyposignal intensity of
paramagnetic substance tagged stem cells in the subarachnoid space at the lumbar spine area. This phenomenon was observed at the surface
around his cervical spinal cord at 48 hours. A focal hyposignal intensity of tagged bone marrow-derived stem cells was detected at his
cervical spinal cord with magnetic resonance imaging at 48 hours, which faded after two weeks, and then disappeared after one month. No
clinical improvement of the neurological function had occurred at the end of this study. However, at 48 hours after the transplantation, he
presented with a fever, headache, myalgia and worsening of his motor function (by one grade of all key muscles by the American Spinal Injury
Association impairment scale), which lasted for 48 hours. Intrathecal injection of bone marrow-derived stem cells at the lumbar spine level
could deliver the cells to the injured cervical spinal cord. Transient complications should be observed closely in the first 48 hours after
transplantation. Further study should be carried out to evaluate the result of the treatment. Spinal cord injury usually results in long-
lasting disability as there are limited treatments for improving neurological condition. Finding a new specific treatment to treat such
injury is a major clinical challenge, however, stem cell transplantation is a possible way of repairing the injured spinal cord . Autologous
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) are one type of stem cells that have been well-reported on in spinal cord injury studies
. Intrathecal transplantation is an attractive approach for BMSC transplantation because it requires a simple technique and less invasive
approach. Intrathecal BMSC transplantation allows for the efficient delivery of cells to the injured spinal cord . Intrathecal
transplantation can deliver BMSCs to the spinal cord through the blood–brain barrier in rat models; moreover, BMSCs infused into
cerebrospinal fluid promote functional recovery of the injured spinal cord, with reduced cavity formation . Nevertheless, intrathecal
transplantation is not a direct transplant into the injured site of the spinal cord; the migration of intrathecally transplanted cells at
the lumbar level to higher injured areas such as the cervical spinal cord is questionable in humans, especially in cases of chronic injured
spinal cord. Cell tracking technology would help to gain more information regarding cell migration in intrathecal transplantation. Cell
labeling with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) is an interesting choice for stem cell tracking in cases of spinal cord
injury . It is an intracellular labeling that provides high specificity for tracking living cells. Labeling cells with SPIONs is simple to
prepare and, in low doses, does not affect the proliferation and differentiation of cells . Moreover, cells labeled with SPIONs are
detectable using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which is useful for clinical evaluation. We describe the case of a patient with a chronic
cervical spinal cord injury who was enrolled in a study which attempted to track BMSCs labeled with SPIONS after intrathecal
transplantation. In addition, the clinical outcomes and safety of using intrathecal SPION-labeled BMSC transplantation was evaluated. We
conducted a pilot study for patients with a complete or incomplete spinal cord injury at the cervical spine level, occurring more than two
years previously. Our patient was recruited from the spinal unit at Siriraj Hospital (Bangkok, Thailand). The protocol for this study was
reviewed and approved by the local ethics committee (Ethics Committee for Research in Humans, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University (approval number: Si084/2009). This research was registered With Thai Clinical Trials Registry (www.clinicaltrials.in.th); the
register number is 20140611001). Our patient was the sole patient to enroll in this pilot study. Our patient was a 33-year-old Thai man who
sustained an incomplete spinal cord injury, quadriparesis, from atlantoaxial subluxation. MRI showed that his spinal cord was compressed
from the posterior arch of the atlas. He was reduced with traction and received atlantoaxial fusion with wiring and post-operative cervical
spine maintenance using Halo vest immobilization in May, 2005. Neurological deficits had partially improved from the operation. At four
years and six months later, his neurological condition was still quadriparesis, and he was still dependent on respiratory support via a
tracheostomy. His respiratory functions and motor power functions did not improved any further, despite intensive rehabilitation treatment.
His sensory function was mainly preserved, however, neuropathic pain was predominant over his entire body, especially on his left side. His
cervical spine was evaluated with a computed tomography (CT) scan for bony fusion, and his atlantoaxial joint had already fused. His spinal
cord lesion was evaluated with 3.0 Tesla MRI in 2009. His cervical spinal cord at the C1-C2 level was small in diameter, representative of
atrophic myelomalacia change of his cervical spinal cord from level C1 to the intervertebral disc of level C2-C3 (Figure 1).Figure 1
Cervical spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging scan prior to stem cell transplantation. Sagittal and axial T2-weighting (A, C) and axial
T1-weighting (B) scans revealed the small diameter of the cervical spinal cord at the C1-C2 level, which demonstrated the atrophic change of
the spinal cord (arrowhead). Cervical spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging scan prior to stem cell transplantation. Sagittal and axial
T2-weighting (A, C) and axial T1-weighting (B) scans revealed the small diameter of the cervical spinal cord at the C1-C2 level, which
demonstrated the atrophic change of the spinal cord (arrowhead). We discussed this study with our patient and his family thoroughly to avoid
any ethical issues. He and his family made the decision and provided signed informed consent to be enrolled in this study. A total of 200mL
of bone marrow aspiration was harvested from his iliac crest. Mononuclear cells were separated with Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient
centrifugation (IsoPrep®, Robbins Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The mononuclear cells were cultured with Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s
medium (DMEM) (Gibco®, Life TechnologiesTM, NY, USA) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany). The culture was maintained at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide. Culture medium was replaced every four days. The cells were maintained in the primary
culture for four weeks in order to increase the number of cells. The target number of culture stem cells was 30×106 cells. A sample of the
BMSCs was cultured to test for bacteria and fungus; the results were negative. Half of the BMSCs (15×106 cells) were separated for labeling
with SPIONs. The superparamagnetic iron oxide agent (Resovist®, Schering, Berlin, Germany) was administered to the culture medium at a
concentration of 100μg/mL and the transfection agent (protamine sulphate (Leo Pharmaceutical, Ballerup, Denmark)) was also administered to
the culture medium at a concentration of 4μg/mL, which was then mixed for approximately 10 minutes. Following mixing, 12.5mL of the labeling
medium was added to an 80% confluent BMSC monolayer in a 150cm2 cell culture flask. After two hours of incubation, an equal volume of
complete DMEM was added to the cultures for a final SPION concentration of 50μg/mL. Cell cultures were incubated overnight. Samples were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing heparin (Leo Pharmaceutical, Ballerup, Denmark) at a concentration of 10 US
Pharmacopeia (USP) units/mL. The BMSCs labeled with SPIONs and the unlabeled BMSCs were mixed and re-suspended in normal saline. Intrathecal
BMSC transplantation was performed at the lumbar spine. Then, an immediate MRI scan was carried out to confirm that the BMSCs were injected
into the arachnoid space. After intrathecal BMSC transplantation, he was set in the Trendelenburg position for 24 hours. We performed MRI
scans using a 3.0 Tesla Philips Achieva MRI scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Best, Netherlands) with a combination of two different phase
array coils: a sensitivity encoding (SENSE) spine coil and a SENSE- neurovascular coil, a combination in terms of dual-coil imaging. We
examined the T1-weighted sagittal spin echo images (the repetition time (TR)=584 milliseconds; the echo time (TE)=6.6 milliseconds; slice
thickness=2.0mm; field of view=25×25cm; matrix=288×230; and number of excitations=8 (NEX)) and the T2-weighted sagittal fast spin echo
images (TR= 4017 milliseconds; TE=100 millisecond repetition time; slice thickness=2.0mm; field of view=25×25cm; matrix=352×308; and NEX=8)
of each patient. T2-star echo images (TR=14.8 milliseconds; TE=multiechoes=3.57/4.93/6.29/7.65/9.0/10.36/11.72/13.08; slice thickness=3.0mm;
field of view=15×15cm; matrix=152×144; and NEX=4). The MRI scan was performed immediately after stem cell transplantation. In addition, the
same protocol of whole spinal axis MRI was performed at two days, two weeks, one month and seven months after the transplant. At 48 hours
after transplantation, he had a fever (temperature: 38 to 38.5°C), headache and myalgia. There were transient neurological deficits. All key
muscles by the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale decreased by one grade of all key muscles by ASIA Impairment
scale, followed by loss of penile erection the next morning; however, his sensory by ASIA impairment scale was still intact. His physical
examination revealed no stiff neck and his CBC revealed mild leukocytosis. Hemocultures were taken and the results were negative. An
immediate MRI scan was performed and did not reveal any significant change. He was treated with 10mg intravenous dexamethasone every six
hours for two days. His neurological status had improved to pre-transplant status within 12 hours after the dexamethasone treatment. For the
first six months after transplantation there was no change in both neurological status and respiratory function. At 12 months after the
transplantation, his neuropathic pain increased on both sides of his body. At present, his left side is still experiencing more pain than
his right side and his respiratory function has not significantly changed, remaining respirator-dependent (Table 1).Table 1 Summary of
clinical data from pre-operative time to 12 months post-operative time Preoperative data Postoperative data 2 days 6 months 12 months ASIA
impairment scaleBBBBRespiratordependentdependentdependentdependentMotor scoreUpper limbs motor score18101818Lower limbs motor
score4244Sensory scoreLight touch score109109109109Pin prick score108108108108Neuropathic pain+++++ Summary of clinical data from pre-
operative time to 12 months post-operative time A 3.0 Tesla MRI scan of his spine was performed immediately after stem cell transplantation.
The T2-weighted scan of his whole spine and axial T2-weighted scan of his lumbar spine showed hyposignal intensity of paramagnetic substance
tagged stem cells in the subarachnoid space and some in the area of the cauda equina, but no demonstrable hyposignal intensity at the
cervical spine level (Figure 2). At 48 hours, there was focal hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells at the injured cervical spinal cord;
the focal hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells faded at two weeks and had disappeared in the MRI scans taken at two months and seven
months (Figure 3). There was no change of spinal cord structure in any follow-up MRI scans.Figure 2 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the
cervical spine taken one day after stem cell transplantation via lumbar puncture technique. A sagittal T2-weighted scan of his whole spine
(A, B) and an axial T2-star scan of his lumbar spine (C) shows hyposignal intensity of paramagnetic substance tagged stem cells in the
subarachnoid space of the lumbar spine and some in the cauda equina. No demonstrable paramagnetic tagged stem cell was seen at the cervical
spine level. (White arrow; hyposignal intensity in the subarachnoid space at lumbar spine).Figure 3 Timeline of axial T2-star echo5 magnetic
resonance imaging scans of his cervical spine at the C1 level on pre-transplantation (A), two days (B), two weeks (C), one month (D) and
seven months (E) after stem cell transplantation. The axial T2-star scan taken two days after stem cell transplantation (B) showed focal
hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells in the surface of the pathological upper cervical cord (arrow) at the axial T2-star scan taken two
weeks after stem cell transplantation showed fading of the focal hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells (C), which disappeared on the
scans taken at one and seven months. Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the cervical spine taken one day after stem cell transplantation via
lumbar puncture technique. A sagittal T2-weighted scan of his whole spine (A, B) and an axial T2-star scan of his lumbar spine (C) shows
hyposignal intensity of paramagnetic substance tagged stem cells in the subarachnoid space of the lumbar spine and some in the cauda equina.
No demonstrable paramagnetic tagged stem cell was seen at the cervical spine level. (White arrow; hyposignal intensity in the subarachnoid
space at lumbar spine). Timeline of axial T2-star echo5 magnetic resonance imaging scans of his cervical spine at the C1 level on pre-
transplantation (A), two days (B), two weeks (C), one month (D) and seven months (E) after stem cell transplantation. The axial T2-star scan
taken two days after stem cell transplantation (B) showed focal hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells in the surface of the pathological
upper cervical cord (arrow) at the axial T2-star scan taken two weeks after stem cell transplantation showed fading of the focal hyposignal
intensity of tagged stem cells (C), which disappeared on the scans taken at one and seven months. Intrathecal transplantation is one of the
less invasive procedures for stem cell transplantation in spinal cord injury. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first clinical human
case to show positive evidence of tracking stem cell migration from intrathecal transplantation at the lumbar region to the cervical region
in chronic spinal cord injury. The SPION signals could be detected by serial MRI scans at the injured cervical spinal cord after intrathecal
transplantation at the lumbar level. In previous clinical studies, the intrathecal stem cell transplantation was mainly focused on clinical
outcomes (motor improvement, sensory improvement or electrophysiology) . There is only one report from Callera and de Melo which evaluated
the migration of autologous bone marrow CD34+ cells, extracellularly labeled with magnetic beads, after intrathecal transplantation. The
study detected a hypointense signal at the chronic injured spinal cord but the migrated cells could not reach up to the injured cervical
spinal cord . However, in our case, the transplanted cells could reach up to the injured cervical spinal cord. It is possible that the
setting of our patient in the Trendelenburg position for 24 hours after the transplantation allowed the cells to fall from the lumbar to the
cervical level; the question of whether this is the reason for the upward migration of cells requires further studies. Tracking cells with
SPION labeling by MRI is based on the use of magnetic particles. This technique is straight forward in locating the transplanted cells . The
signal intensity which is detected by MRI can be readily identified and correlated with imaging anatomy; this would be an advantage for
evaluation of the effectiveness of the transplantation process . Nevertheless, the viability and function of BMSCs could not be evaluated
with this direct cell labeling technique . The hyposignal intensity from SPION labeling which is detected by MRI could not distinguish the
viable cells from the dead cells or macrophages . The fading of focal hyposignal intensity at the two-week follow-up MRI scan could be due
to the division of viable cells or from the scavenging of dead cells by macrophages . The fading of hyposignal intensity at the two-week
follow-up MRI scan remained sufficient to track the transplanted stem cells; however, it would not be enough for tracking long-term cell
survival. There are new techniques for tracking and monitoring the viability of transplanted cells, such as reporter gene imaging, which
uses specific probes to express reporter proteins from living cells. The reporter signals can be identified with many kinds of imaging, such
as MRI, positron emission tomography (PET) scanning or bioluminescence imaging . However, the concern of using reporter gene imaging in
humans is mutagenesis from processes that require some transfection of genetic materials . The neurological deficit in our patient was not
significantly improved from the treatment; moreover, the unpleasant neuropathic pain increased obviously. The other complications that
occurred in our patient were headache, fever and transient neurological deficit. These complications were reported in the previous
literature of intrathecal stem cell transplantation, even without stem cell labeling . There are some possible causes of the immunological
reaction from this procedure. The first possibility is contamination from bovine serum in the culture process, despite multiple washing
before transplantation. The second possibility is the reaction of the body toward SPIONs remnant during the transplantation procedure, or
the spreading of SPIONs from apoptosis of BMSCs. Although the clinical safety of SPIONs in liver parenchymal MRI is proven, they might
stimulate the immune system in the arachnoid space. Therefore, the intrathecal transplantation of stem cells should be closely observed in
the first 48 hours after transplantation. The role of prophylaxis, such as steroids as a pre-medication to prevent immune reaction, may be
considered in further studies. Our case report clearly demonstrates the existence of signal intensity SPIONs at the injured site, away from
the administered site. Nevertheless, the engraftment, viability and function of the cells could not be evaluated, along with the limitations
of the SPIONs labeling technique. Intrathecal injection of the cells at the lumbar spine level could deliver the BMSCs to the chronic
injured spinal cord at the upper cervical level. The BMSCs labeled with SPIONs could be detected by the hyposignal intensity with serial
MRI. Transient complications should be observed closely in first 48 hours after transplantation. Further study should be carried out to
evaluate the result of the treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells Computed tomography Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium Magnetic resonance imaging Number of excitations Sensitivity
encoding Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles The echo time The repetition time Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. The manuscript submitted does not contain information about medical device(s) or drug(s). No benefits in any form
have been or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript. Authors’
contributions AC designed the study, drafted the manuscript and performed the bone marrow harvest procedure. MR performed the bone marrow
harvest procedure, coordinated the study, collected data and drafted the manuscript. PC performed and interpreted the imaging study. AW
carried out the cell preparation and molecular study. KS performed the cell transplantation. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This study was funded by Siriraj Research Funding (grant number: R015232040) of the Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital,
Mahidol University awarded to AC. This study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Faculty of Medicine Siriraj
Hospital, Mahidol University, Thailand (approval number: Si084/2009). This Study was registered with the Thai Clinical Trial Registry
(identifier: TCTR 20140611001). The authors would like to express their gratitude to Ms Sunisa Duangsa-ard for her assistance in cell
preparation, and Dr Pairash Saiviroonporn for his assistance in MRI study. AC, MR and AW are recipients of Chalermprakiat Fund of the
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University.
