Pulmonary tuberculosis remains an important public health problem globally and one of the most prevalent infectious diseases in Sri Lanka.
It can cause a wide variety of complications but hematological manifestations are rare. According to our literature survey, this is the
first reported case of the disease associated with deep vein thrombosis in Sri Lanka. A 37 year old Sri Lankan Sinhalese female presented
with fever of one month’s duration with productive cough and two weeks painless left lower limb swelling. Chest X-ray showed bilateral
inflammatory shadows with a cavitatory lesion on the right apical region. A computed tomographic pulmonary angiography scan excluded
pulmonary embolism. She had rising mycoplasma antibody titre (four fold). Acute deep vein thrombosis of the left lower limb was confirmed by
venous duplex. Pulmonary tuberculosis was confirmed with positive culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. She was treated with
clarythromycin, enoxaparin, warfarin and anti tuberculus drugs. It was difficult to maintain her International Normalizing Ratio in the
therapeutic range due to drug interactions and poor compliance. At five months of presentation she died of massive pulmonary embolism. Our
case emphasizes that patients with severe pulmonary tuberculosis are at risk of developing thromboembolism and superadded infections. It
should be noted that even though starting anti tuberculosis drugs improved haemostatic disturbances, achieving the target International
Normalizing Ratio was difficult due to drug interactions. Therefore these patients should be closely followed up to prevent complications
and death from pulmonary embolism. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13104-015-0990-6) contains supplementary material, which
is available to authorized users. According to the WHO (World Health Organization), every second a person gets infected by the tuberculus
bacillus in the world. As of today one third of world's population has been infected by this bacillus. Tuberculosis is the commonest cause
for death in adults with infectious diseases despite the availability of drugs. Therefore it is a health problem globally. Tuberculosis can
cause a wide variety of complications but hematological complications are rarely demonstrated in pulmonary tuberculosis. Some authors
believe that the risk of developing deep vein thrombosis (DVT) increases with the severity of this disease . DVT can be the presenting
feature of tuberculosis that occurs late in the course of this disease or in patients on anti tuberculosis treatment . Here we present a
case of pulmonary tuberculosis presented to us with DVT in the lower limb. Even though tuberculosis is one of most prevalent infectious
disease in Sri Lanka and to the best of our knowledge after through literature searched, this is to be the first reported case of pulmonary
tuberculosis (PTB) presenting with DVT. A 37 year old Sri Lankan Sinhalese female presented to the Teaching Hospital Peradeniya, Sri Lanka
with fever of one month duration. She complaints of productive cough of three week’s duration with no history of haemoptysis or
breathlessness. Fever was associated with anorexia and weight loss. She noticed painless left lower limb swelling of two weeks duration
which had gradually extended up to the upper thigh three days before presenting to the hospital. She did not have any history of joint pain,
photosensitivity rash or alopecia, deep vein thrombosis, recurrent abortion, intrauterine death or thrombotic stroke. She did not have risky
behavior or history of immobilization. She was neither an alcoholic nor smoker and denied use of oral contraceptives. On examination she was
febrile and pale but not tachypnic or tachycardic. She was normotensive and the pulse oxymetric reading was 96% on air. Chest auscultation
revealed scattered bilateral coarse crepitations which were more on the right side. Abdominal examination was normal including per vaginal
and per rectal examination. Cardiovascular and neurological examinations were clinically normal. Her left lower limb was swollen up to the
groin and there was tenderness over the calf. No evidence of cellulites was detected. On the third day of hospital admission she became
dyspnoic with wide spread right sided coarse crepitations and reduced pulse oximetric reading of 93% on air. Laboratory finding on admission
revealed relative neutrophil leucocytosis, hypochromic microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin 10.5 g %) with high Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP). The blood picture revealed, hypochromic microcytic anaemia with toxic granules and vacuolations in
neutrophils indicating severe bacterial infection. Her renal and liver functions were normal. Chest X-ray on admission showed bilateral
inflammatory shadows with a cavitatory lesion on the right apical region. Chest X-ray on the third day revealed wide spread inflammatory
shadows involving whole right sided lung field (Figures 1 and 2). Computed tomographic pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) was done on the third day
to exclude pulmonary embolism. She had rising mycoplasma antibody titre (four fold) with normal reticulocyte count and Coombs’ test was
negative. Her fasting blood sugar and lipid profile were normal. Human immune deficiency virus (HIV) and Hepatitis B and C viral infections
were excluded. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) was negative. Acute DVT of the left lower limb causing total occlusion of veins below the internal
iliac vein was confirmed by venous duplex. Ultrasound scan of abdomen and pelvis was normal with no lymphadinopathy. Mycobacterium
tubercululosis bacillus was detected by sputum AFB (Acid fast Bacilli) staining and confirmed by culture. She was initially treated with
intravenous clarythromycin for mycoplasma infection and was started on subcutaneous enoxaparin and oral warfarin for DVT. Enoxaparin was
discontinued once the target International Normalizing Ratio (INR) was achieved. Initial warfarin 7 mg once a day could maintain her INR
within 2–2.5. Once tuberculosis infection was confirmed, anti tuberculus treatment (ATT) was started (DOTS regimen under category- 1). With
initiation of ATT, a titrated warfarin dose up to 15 mg per day was given to maintain therapeutic INR. One month after initiating warfarin,
a repeat duplex scan was done and revealed little blood flow without significant recanalisation or further extension of the thrombus. Two
months after the commencement of ATT, thrombophilia screening according to the National Health Services (NHS) United Kingdom Foundation
Trust guidelines for thrombophilia testing was planned . Protein S and C levels were normal with normal fibrinogen level. DRVVT (Dilute
russell’s viper venom test) and KCT (Kaolin clotting time) were negative. Next she was discharged on warfarin 15 mg once a day. She was
reviewed at the medical clinic in a week and two weeks’ time, and then she had the target INR. In subsequent clinic visits INR was in the
sub therapeutic range (1.2 to 1.6). She had poor drug compliance and clinic follow up despite proper education of family members as well as
the patient. She refused admission for in ward management. She defaulted clinic follow up and for about five months of initial presentation
was admitted to a local hospital with sudden onset of difficulty in breathing with low blood pressure. She died a few minutes after
admission. Large pulmonary embolism obstructing the left pulmonary artery was detected on post mortem examination.Figure 1 (Chest x-ray on
Day 1 of admission). Opacification predominantly involving the right mid zones. There are adjacent nodular opacities with large cavitatory
lesion at the right upper zone. Right heart border is obliterated. Mediastinum has shifted to right. No pleural effusions or bony
erosions.Figure 2 (Chest x-ray on Day 3 of admission). Extent of opacification increased with coalescing of nodules (Right > Left). (Chest
x-ray on Day 1 of admission). Opacification predominantly involving the right mid zones. There are adjacent nodular opacities with large
cavitatory lesion at the right upper zone. Right heart border is obliterated. Mediastinum has shifted to right. No pleural effusions or bony
erosions. (Chest x-ray on Day 3 of admission). Extent of opacification increased with coalescing of nodules (Right > Left). Venous
thromboembolism is a rare complication of tuberculosis. The association between inflammation, haemostatic changes and hypercoagulable state
has been established in tuberculosis recently. Another mechanism of DVT is retroperitoneal adenopathies in patients with tuberculosis
causing compression of the inferior vena cava in the absence of any haemostatic abnormalities . This is unlikely in our patient as we have
excluded abdominal adenopathies by ultrasonographically. Hypercoagulability in tuberculosis is attributed to decreased antithrombin lll and
protein C, elevated plasma fibrinogen level, increased platelet aggregation and reactive thrombocytosis . Apart from high frequency of
antiphospholipid antibody levels in a patient with tuberculosis, deficiency of protein S has been mentioned . But in our patient all these
were normal. Robsen et al. found 35 patients with pulmonary tuberculosis with DVT but only two of them, DVT was the presenting feature as in
our case . Some reports indicate that thrombotic phenomena in patients with pulmonary TB can occur in other sites as well . Turken et al. in
a case control study demonstrated haemostatic disturbances in 45 patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis . It has stated that
haemostatic disturbances improved within four weeks of commencing ATT . For this reason, ATT should be started immediately in addition to
anticoagulant treatment. So early commencement of ATT in our patient would have contributed to the absence of thrombophilic changes, as it
was done after two months of treatment. This patient who presented with lower limb DVT with pulmonary tubercolosis did not have any other
risk factors or causes for the development of DVT. Thrombophilia screen for protein C, S were negative and she does not fulfill the criteria
for antiphospholipid syndrome or connective tissue disorders with high risk of DVT. We could not investigate for the Factor V Leiden
mutation and genetic study for prothrombin gene mutation due to its unavailability at the time of investigation and financial constraints.
Our patient was initially started on anticoagulant treatment and the target INR was achieved with a daily warfarin 7 mg dose. She was
started on standard ATT according to her body weight once diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis was made. Then the maintenance of the target
INR was difficult and a high dose of warfarin (15 mg daily) was administered to achieve the target INR. This was explained by
hypercoaguability state induced by rifampicin by decreasing hepatic production and increasing clearance of anticoagulants. In addition
rifampicin is a cytochrome p450 inducer. Even after providing proper information on warfarin therapy, the patient’s drug compliance was poor
and she defaulted in clinic follow up. All these would have contributed to her succumbing to pulmonary embolism. Apart from DVT, our patient
clinical picture was complicated with co-existent Mycoplasma infection. This was evident by initial deterioration of the chest X-ray with
minimal respiratory signs and symptoms with rising Mycoplasma antibody titer. Even though this patient was anemic it was unlikely to be due
to mycoplasma induced hemolytic anemia as she had normal bilirubin levels, with normal retic count & negative Coombs test. She was from a
poor socioeconomic background and had hypochromic microcytic anemia suggesting iron deficiency with menorrhagia. Iron supplement was given
and her haemoglobin and blood picture was improved. Serum iron studies were not done due to financial constrains. Our case emphasizes that
patients with severe pulmonary tuberculosis are at risk of developing thromboembolism due to the disease itself. Therefore clinicians should
have high index of suspicion to diagnose these cases. It should be noted that even though starting ATT itself improves haemostatic
disturbances, achieving target INR is difficult due to drug interactions. Thus they should be followed up closely to prevent complication
and death from pulmonary embolism. At the same time clinicians should keep in mind that pulmonary tuberculosis patients can develop
superadded infections as well. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's husband for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Deep vein thrombosis
Erythrocyte sedimentation ratio C reactive protein Computed tomographic pulmonary angiogram Human immunodeficiency virus Anti nuclear
antibody Acid fast Bacilli Direct observe therapy International Normalizing ratio Dilute Russell’s viper venom test Kaolin clotting time
Anti tuberculosis treatment Tuberculosis Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions Analysis and interpretation of patient data and literature review were done by KWMPPK, DMPUKR. DMPUKR, WATAJ guided the other
authors in reporting this case and corrected the final manuscript. All authors were involved in the management of the patient and read and
approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information KWMPPK (MBBS) is a registrar in medicine. DMPUKR (MBBS, MD, MRCP, FRCP) WATAJ (MBBS, MD,
MRCP, FRCP) are senior Lecturers & senior consultant physicians. We all express our gratitude to Dr. T.Varagunam for his critical reading
and grammar check of the manuscript, and to the family of the patient who kindly gave consent for this case to be presented in this paper.
