Although Leptospira isolation has been reported in Chilean cattle, only serological evidence of serovar Hardjo bovis infection has been
routinely reported. The present report provides characterization of the pathological presentation and etiology of a clinical case of
leptospirosis in a calf from the Los Rios Region in Chile. In a dairy herd in southern Chile, 11 of 130 calves died after presenting signs
such as depression and red-tinged urine. One of these calves, a female of eight months, was necropsied, and all the pathological findings
were consistent with Leptospira infection. A urine sample was submitted to conventional bacteriological analysis together with highly
specific molecular biology typing tools, in order to unravel the specific Leptospira specie and serovar associated with this clinical case.
A significant finding of this study was that the obtained isolate was confirmed by PCR as L. interrogans, its VNTR profile properly matching
with L. interrogans Hardjoprajitno as well as its specific genomic identity revealed by secY gen. Leptospira interrogans serovar
Hardjoprajitno was associated with the investigated calf clinical case. This information adds to the value of serologic results commonly
reported, which encourage vaccination improvements to match circulating strains. In addition, this finding represents the first case report
of this serovar in Chilean cattle. Leptospirosis is a zoonotic infectious disease caused by bacteria of the genus Leptospira that affects
domestic and wild animals. The disease is distributed worldwide and of great public health importance, especially in warm and humid
climates. The bacterium is shed in the urine of infected animals and this is the main transmission route for human infection . The disease
has also been recognized as one of the most important diseases in livestock, particularly in cattle, due to negative impacts on reproduction
. It is well established that Leptospira infection in Chile is present both in domestic and wild animals . The apparent seroprevalences in
different domestic animal species are high, ranging from 59 to 91% in cattle, 24% in goats, 7.1% sheep, 49% in equine, 70% in swine and 47%
in wild mice . In a study from Southern Chile 162/361 (45%) serum samples from apparently healthy cattle were seropositive for Leptospira
using the Microscopic Agglutination Test. The proportion of seropositive samples was highest for Leptospira serovar Hardjo (68%), followed
by serovars Pomona (11%), Tarassovi (8.6%), Bratislava (1.9%), Canicola (1.9%), Icterohaemorrhagiae (1.9%) and Ballum (1.2%) . Recently, a
study was carried out to determine Leptospira seroprevalence and to evaluate risk factors associated with seropositivity at herd level in
smallholder bovine dairy herds in southern Chile, and 75% of the included herds (52/69) showed serological titers against one or more
Leptospira serovar, where Leptospira borgpetersenii serovar Hardjo was the serovar most frequently (81%) reported from animals with positive
results . Infection by L. interrogans serovar Hardjo (type Hardjoprajitno) in cattle has not been investigated previously in Chile. The
importance of serovar Hardjoprajitno infection on the rate of abortion has been estimated to be 30% as opposed to what happens with
Leptospira borgpetersenii Hardjo bovis where the rate reaches only a 3 to 10%. Additionally, acute infection of dairy cows with Leptospira
interrogans Hardjoprajitno is associated with a drop in milk production . Therefore, the aim of the present study was to present both
pathological and microbiological evidence of the Leptospira interrogans Hardjoprajitno virulence from its isolation and characterization
from a calf that died of clinical leptospirosis. In a dairy herd in southern Chile, eleven out of 130 calves died after presenting clinical
signs such as depression and haematuria. One of these calves, a female of eight months, was submitted to the Department of Animal Pathology
at the Faculty of Veterinary Science, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile for necropsy. Necropsy showed a marked yellowing
pigmentation in all mucosal body openings and in the subcutaneous tissue, fat and muscles. There were also isolated petechia in the kidneys
and the bladder contained approximately two liters of red-tinged urine (Figure 1).Figure 1 Calf with clinical sign and pathological findings
consistent with Leptospira infection. Calf with clinical sign and pathological findings consistent with Leptospira infection. A urine sample
was collected by puncturing the bladder and sent to the Leptospirosis and Paratuberculosis Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, at the Faculty of Sciences, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. All the procedures were in strict accordance with
the recommendations in the Guide of Use of Animals for Research of Universidad Austral de Chile, approved by the Committee on the Ethics of
Animals for Research (www.uach.cl/direccion/ investigacion/uso_animales.htm). The urine sample was investigated using dark field microscopy
and bacterial structures consistent with Leptospira were found. Thereafter, 200 μl of urine sample with four replicates was cultured in EMJH
medium at 29°C . After a month of incubation, a positive result was reported with a typical Dinger ring growth. Leptospira DNA was extracted
from positive cultures and in order to identify Leptospira species, primers covering the most common pathogenic Leptospira species were used
(664–665 L. kirschneri fla gene; 1280–1281 L. interrogans IS1500; 1805–1809 L. borgpetersenii IS1533) . The total PCR reaction was 50 μl, of
which 5 μl was 10× Taq polymerase buffer (Promega, Madison, WI), 2 μl dNTPs (2.5 mM stock containing all four dNTPs) (Promega, Madison, WI),
0.5 U Taq Polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI), 1 μl (each) primer (stock concentration = 100 pmol/μl; final concentration 2 pmol/μl), 35.5 μl
dH2O and 5 μl template. The PCR reactions considered 40 cycles of 94°C for 15 sec; 60°C for 30 sec and 68°C for 2 min. then 10°C hold.
Negative and positive PCR controls were included as well as DNA extraction negative and positive controls. To refine our understanding of
the Leptospira specie and serovar associated with this clinical case, a Variable Number Tandem Repeat (VNTR) analysis was done. The VNTR
primers were designed exclusively for use with L. interrogans . PCR products for VNTR loci 4, 7, 10, 23, 27, 29, 30, 31, and 36 were
assessed using the same PCR reaction as described above and the primers used were as previously reported . PCR products were separated by
agarose gel electrophoresis and visualized, and their sizes were calculated by comparing with reference standards (100-bp ladder;
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and with the literature . As a complement, we also amplified the gene secY, which is a house keeping gene that
consists of alternating conserved and variable regions, making it suitable to deduce primers that generate amplicons with sufficient
sequence heterogeneity to enable phylogenetic interpretation for Leptospira . A 202 bp product was amplified by conventional PCR in 25 μl
mixture containing 5 μl diluted template (1:100), 0.2 μM each primers SecYIVF (5′-GCGATTCAGTTTAATCCTGC-3′) and SecYIV
(5′-GAGTTAGAGCTCAAATCTA-AG-3′), 0.625 U GoTaq Flexi DNA Polymerase in 1X Green Buffer GoTaq (Promega, Madison, WI), 3.0 mM MgCl2, 0.3 mM
dNTPs (Promega, Madison, WI), and 400 ng mL-1 bovine serum albumin (BSA; BioLabs, Ipswich, England). Cycle conditions included an initial
denaturation step at 95°C for 5 min followed by 40 cycles at 94°C for 1 min, 57°C for 1 min and 72°C for 1 minute and a final elongation
step at 72°C for 10 minutes. The PCR products obtained were separated on 1.5% agarose gel, stained with Gel Red (GelRed, Biotium Inc,
Hayward, U.S), excised and purified using a commercial kit (E.Z.N.A® Gel Extraction Kit, Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, U.S). Amplicons were
sequenced by Macrogen Inc (Seoul, Korea). The consensus nucleotide sequence obtained in this study was compared with secY gene of Leptospira
interrogans serovar Hardjo prajitno (GenBank accession number EU357983.1). DNA alignments were done using clustalW tools
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2). The isolate obtained in this study was confirmed by PCR as L. interrogans and its VNTR profile
properly matched with L. interrogans type Hardjo prajitno (Figure 2). The secY gene alignment done by clustalW did reveal sequence identity
strain belonging to the species L. interrogans serovar Hardjo prajitno (Figure 3). This confirms that L. interrogans type Hardjo prajitno is
associated with acute infection of cattle in Chile. Previous studies have shown that the abortion rate after Leptospira borgpetersenii
serovar Hardjo bovis infection is 3 to 10% whereas the rate increases up to 30% for L. Hardjo prajitno infection , which underscores the
importance of this serovar. The clinical information in the presented study was conveniently complemented with bacteriological findings to
describe the isolated strain affecting the clinical case presented.Figure 2 PCR analysis of the polymorphism of nine representative VNTR
loci. Amplification was performed on the VNTR 4, 7, 10, 23, 27, 29, 30, 31, 36 loci of L. interrogans strains.Figure 3 ClustalW aligment for
202 bp fragment, SecY gen. PCR analysis of the polymorphism of nine representative VNTR loci. Amplification was performed on the VNTR 4, 7,
10, 23, 27, 29, 30, 31, 36 loci of L. interrogans strains. ClustalW aligment for 202 bp fragment, SecY gen. The typing method used based on
VNTR polymorphism provided a rapid characterization together with the highly discriminatory power reported to identify L. interrogans
serovars using clinical specimens. Furthermore, the use of secY gene in combination with the latter allowed a more robust result due to its
great phylogenetic potential . The present finding represents the first isolation confirmed as L. interrogans serovar Hardjo prajitno from
cattle with clinical disease in Chile. The importance of this serovar in Chilean cattle needs to be investigated further. This information
add to the value of serologic results commonly reported, which encourage vaccination improvements to match circulating strains. The latter
is based on a previous published study on serological cross-reactivity between Hardjo bovis and Hardjoprajitno serovars, which implies
similar antigenic determinants; although with substantial genomic differences as well as in their pathogenicity in the bovine specie . Due
to above mentioned, we emphasize the need to isolate, preserve and characterized strains of Leptospira in order to improve and standardize
currently available diagnostic techniques. This will help to improve our understanding of the epidemiology and impact of this infection as
well as to identify optimal option for surveillance and control. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions MS: lab work and draft writing; BO lab work and draft writing; MM: pathological study and draft writing:
ES: lab work and draft writing; GR: draft writing; SB: draft writing, CE: molecular analysis; CMZ: draft writing. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by DID GRANT S-2012-19. We also wanted to acknowledge Dr Richard Zuerner for provide
technical help, writing assistance, and lab support at the Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences.
