Henoch–Schönlein purpura is an immunoglobulin A-mediated, small vascular inflammatory disease that can be associated with palpable purpura,
arthralgia, abdominal pain, or nephritis. The presence of purpura facilitates the diagnosis of Henoch–Schönlein purpura at the onset of
associated symptoms, whereas the absence of purpura makes the diagnosis challenging. It is important to diagnose Henoch–Schönlein purpura
with delayed-onset skin purpura to avoid unnecessary surgery for acute abdomen. Most cases of Henoch–Schönlein purpura with severe abdominal
pain are treated with low-dose steroids and intravenous immunoglobulin. A 15-year-old Korean girl complained of severe abdominal pain and
delayed-onset purpura on admission. Henoch–Schönlein purpura was diagnosed based on endoscopic findings of hemorrhagic duodenitis and
duodenal vasculitis and abdominal computed tomography findings of edematous bowels. Two common initial treatments, a low-dose steroid and
intravenous immunoglobulin, were administered, but there was no improvement for 1 month. Subsequently, we used high-dose intravenous
methylprednisolone pulse therapy (30mg/kg/day, with a maximum of 1g/day), which dramatically alleviated her abdominal symptoms. High-dose
intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy can be used as the ultimate treatment for delayed-onset Henoch–Schönlein purpura with severe
abdominal pain when symptoms do not improve after low-dose steroid and intravenous immunoglobulin treatments. Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP)
is one of the most common small vascular inflammatory diseases in childhood that is associated with an immunoglobulin (Ig) A-mediated
autoimmune response . The main clinical symptoms of HSP, including purpura, arthralgia, abdominal pain, and nephritis , which are associated
with vascular injuries of the skin, joint areas, abdomen, and kidneys, do not always occur simultaneously . HSP can be characterized by
palpable purpura mostly over the buttocks and lower extremities. Compared to other clinical manifestations, palpable purpura is present in
all patients with HSP . HSP can be diagnosed if palpable purpura is present with diffuse abdominal pain, any biopsy showing predominant IgA
deposition, arthritis, arthralgia, or renal involvement . Therefore, it may be difficult to diagnose HSP based only on associated symptoms
if palpable purpura is momentarily absent. Intravenous Ig (IVIg) and low-dose steroids have been used for treating HSP with gastrointestinal
(GI) involvement . When HSP with GI involvement is diagnosed, a low-dose steroid (1 to 2mg/kg/day) can be administered initially, followed
by IVIg if the symptoms persist . When purpura is present, the response to these treatments is favorable, except in cases of HSP with
delayed-onset purpura . Here we describe a case of delayed-onset purpura with GI involvement in which high-dose intravenous
methylprednisolone pulse therapy (IMPT) was effective. In July 2013, a previously healthy 15-year-old Korean girl presented with abdominal
pain and bile-colored vomiting, which began 6 days prior. She had poor food intake since the onset of symptoms. Her urine output started
decreasing daily before hospital transfer. She lost approximately 6kg in a week (from 46kg to 40kg). There was no sign of purpura. Her blood
pressure (BP) was high (130/90mmHg), heart rate was 114 beats/minute, respiratory rate was 22 breaths/minute, and temperature was 37.5°C.
However, laboratory and urine analysis results indicated no significant abnormalities, except 1+ proteinuria due to dehydration. On hospital
day (HD) 1, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed, and diffuse superficial ulceration with whitish membrane and mucosal bleeding
was noted in the descending and transverse portion of her duodenum (Figure 1). A purplish and reddish mucosal edema was also noted,
indicating hemorrhagic duodenitis and duodenal vasculitis due to HSP. IMPT (60mg/day, 1mg/kg/day to a maximum of 60 to 80mg/day) and
intravenous pantoprazole/ranitidine (gastric acid pump inhibiter/H2-blocker) were administered because of difficulties with oral intake.
Intravenous pethidine and morphine were used for pain control but were ineffective.Figure 1 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy of the
Henoch–Schönlein purpura-affected bowel. A) the antrum of the stomach and B) the duodenal second portion. This image shows the descending
and transverse portion of the duodenum in the patient with hemorrhagic duodenitis and duodenal vasculitis with the additional finding of a
purplish and reddish mucosal edema. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy of the Henoch–Schönlein purpura-affected bowel. A) the antrum of the stomach
and B) the duodenal second portion. This image shows the descending and transverse portion of the duodenum in the patient with hemorrhagic
duodenitis and duodenal vasculitis with the additional finding of a purplish and reddish mucosal edema. On HD 4, a second EGD was performed
because of worsening abdominal pain. The previous lesion had slightly improved. However, diffuse superficial ulceration with edematous and
dark brownish mucosa was noted in the descending and transverse portions of her duodenum. Under the presumptive diagnosis of duodenal
vasculitis caused by HSP, high-dose IVIg was administered (2g/kg/day). On HD 7, she experienced dyspnea and persistent abdominal pain. She
had an acutely ill appearance. Her BP and temperature increased to 140/80mmHg and 38.3°C, respectively. Her serum was negative for
antinuclear antibody and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. Serum complements 3 and 4 (132mg/dL and 16mg/dL, respectively) were within
normal limits. Serum IgG, IgA, and IgM levels were 3629mg/dL (normal range, 639 to 1349mg/dL), 162mg/dL (normal range, 70 to 312mg/dL), and
139mg/dL (normal range, 56 to 352mg/dL), respectively. Urine analysis revealed microscopic hematuria. An abdominal computed tomography (CT)
scan showed an edematous bowel (Figure 2). Intravenous cefotaxime was added because of her persistent high fever and inflammation. IMPT
(60mg/day) was discontinued because of pancreatitis.Figure 2 Computed tomography of the abdomen showing an edematous bowel. This image shows
multifocal areas of bowel wall thickening, mesenteric edema, and vascular engorgement in jejuno-ileal loops (yellow arrows). Computed
tomography of the abdomen showing an edematous bowel. This image shows multifocal areas of bowel wall thickening, mesenteric edema, and
vascular engorgement in jejuno-ileal loops (yellow arrows). On HD 11, purpura developed on both of her ankles and feet (Figure 3). Her
temperature was still high (38.2°C). A laboratory examination still showed an elevated white blood cell count (WBC; 22,200/μL) and
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 64mm/hour). Her amylase, lipase, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels increased to 190IU/L, 210U/L, and
17.14mg/dL, respectively. Since pancreatitis had not improved after discontinuing IMPT, we readministered low-dose IMPT
(0.5mg/kg/day).Figure 3 Palpable purpura on both of the patient’s ankles and feet on hospital day 11. Palpable purpura on both of the
patient’s ankles and feet on hospital day 11. On HD 14, her abdominal pain was aggravated, but the purpura disappeared. She still had a
fever (38.0°C). Her laboratory results showed a much higher WBC (34,700/μL) and a declined but abnormal ESR (15mm/hour) and amylase
(74IU/L), lipase (62U/L), and CRP (8.16mg/dL) levels. However, her random urine protein to creatinine ratio (UP/Cr) value of 0.41 had
slightly increased. Because of her aggravated abdominal pain, an emergency abdominal CT scan was performed, showing more severe bowel edema.
Consequently, the IMPT dose was increased to 1 to 2mg/kg/day, with the addition of intravenous metronidazole. On HD 17, the second IVIg was
infused (2g/kg). On HD 20, her fever and abdominal pain persisted, and gross hematuria (GHU) developed. Laboratory results showed the
following abnormalities: WBC count, 23,600/μL; ESR, 67mm/hour; amylase, 125IU/dL; lipase, 104U/L; and CRP, 6.41mg/dL. The random UP/Cr had
elevated to 2.15. The antibiotic was switched to piperacillin and tazobactam to eradicate the infection. A kidney biopsy was performed.
Finally, a decision was made to administer high-dose IMPT for 3 days consecutively. The renal biopsy showed an increased glomerulus size,
segment hypercellularity, 9% segmental loop necrosis on light microscopy, mesangial deposits on electron microscopy, and IgA 3+ on
immunofluorescence microscopy. Overall, the biopsy revealed grade II HSP nephritis according to the International Study of Kidney Disease in
Children grading system , and HSP nephritis was confirmed (Figure 4).Figure 4 Kidney involvement of Henoch–Schönlein purpura. The biopsy
reveals 9% segmental loop necrosis. A) Polymorphonuclear cell infiltration and B) segmental mesangial proliferation. C) Periodic acid–Schiff
stain with hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×400. D) The mesangial deposit is observed on electron microscopy. E) The immunoglobulin A deposit
is 3+ on immunofluorescence microscopy. Overall, grade II Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis is diagnosed based on the International Study
of Kidney Disease in Children grading system . Kidney involvement of Henoch–Schönlein purpura. The biopsy reveals 9% segmental loop
necrosis. A) Polymorphonuclear cell infiltration and B) segmental mesangial proliferation. C) Periodic acid–Schiff stain with hematoxylin
and eosin stain, ×400. D) The mesangial deposit is observed on electron microscopy. E) The immunoglobulin A deposit is 3+ on
immunofluorescence microscopy. Overall, grade II Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis is diagnosed based on the International Study of Kidney
Disease in Children grading system . After the course of high-dose IMPT, her abdominal pain and fever dramatically disappeared. On HD 30, an
oral, not intravenous, steroid (1mg/kg/day to a maximum of 60 to 80mg/day) was administered, because the patient was able to eat. GHU and
proteinuria persisted. Therefore, enalapril was prescribed for the proteinuria (5mg daily), and she was discharged. The oral steroid was
discontinued after 6 months, and only enalapril was continued for an additional 2 months. Urine analysis results at the last follow-up in
April 2014 were as follows: proteins, negative; red blood cells, 1 to 4/high-power field; and UP/Cr, 0.047. The patient was admitted to our
hospital with upper abdominal pain and bile-color vomiting. On admission, there was no evidence of intestinal obstruction or acute
pancreatitis during the initial physical examination or on radiographs. Therefore, EGD was performed to determine if a gastric ulcer such as
HSP duodenitis was present. Based on the EGD findings, duodenal vasculitis due to HSP was diagnosed. It is not rare for a patient with HSP
to present with skin purpura prior to having abdominal symptoms. However, in our case, HSP was associated with delayed-onset purpura and GI
involvement at disease onset. Approximately 14 to 36% of cases of HSP show GI involvement with delayed-onset of purpura . Therefore, if a
patient complains of severe upper epigastric pain, duodenitis due to HSP must be considered even though skin purpura may be absent.
Treatment for HSP is controversial. Although in some cases the symptoms may resolve without any therapy, corticosteroids and IVIg have been
used in patients with HSP with severe GI involvement as standard and alternative therapy, respectively . In this case, the patient
complained of repeated severe abdominal pain accompanied by abdominal distention, dyspnea, fever, and pancreatitis. The symptoms did not
resolve even after administering twice the amount of low-dose steroid treatments, followed by twice the amount of IVIg injections. Severe
edema of her small intestine was also observed on CT. The efficacy of double IVIg injections in most cases of refractory intestinal
involvement by HSP is unknown; however, it did not work in our case. IMPT may aggravate pancreatitis. However, serial changes of
amylase/lipase worsened even after discontinuing the steroid. Thus, pancreatitis was not induced by IMPT. Furthermore, in most cases, HSP
would be accompanied by pancreatitis. We considered that pancreatitis was a complication of uncontrolled HSP. Studies have reported that
high-dose IMPT is rarely used to stop the progression of nephropathy in cases of HSP nephritis with a severe crescent on renal biopsy .
However, a few case reports have suggested high-dose IMPT for HSP with GI involvement . In this case, renal biopsy was performed because of
the GHU on HD 20. Even though the biopsy showed that renal involvement was not as serious as assumed by the severe abdominal symptoms, high-
dose IMPT was performed because the two standard treatments failed. After administering high-dose IMPT, her fever continued for 2 weeks
while severe abdominal pain and whole body discomfort disappeared. Since she was able to eat independently, intravenous nutrition was
discontinued. Therefore, all of the abdominal symptoms recovered simultaneously with high-dose IMPT. In our case, a high serum level of IgG
was noted. However, it was assumed that this elevation was because IVIg was the previous initial treatment. Besides, it is more important to
recognize that severe abdominal symptoms (bloody stool) and persistent purpura for >1 month are risk factors for renal involvement . In this
case, GI symptoms were severe, with less involvement of the kidneys. When GI symptoms are severe, the possibility of another disease (for
example, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, microscopic polyangiitis, or Wegener’s granulomatosis), which are capable of mimicking HSP,
should be ruled out . A low level of factor XIII activity correlates with the severity of HSP’s clinical manifestations, particularly
abdominal pain and GI bleeding . In our case, we could not quantitatively determine the factor XIII level. One study suggested that the
administration of factor XIII may be useful in the rapid improvement of severe abdominal pain and GI bleeding . High-dose IMPT can be used
as the ultimate treatment for delayed-onset HSP with severe abdominal pain when symptoms do not improve after administering low-dose steroid
and IVIg treatments. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s father for the publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. Upon request, a copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Blood
pressure C-reactive protein Computed tomography Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Gross hematuria Gastrointestinal
Hospital day Henoch–Schönlein purpura Immunoglobulin Intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy Intravenous immunoglobulin Urine protein
to creatinine ratio White blood cell count Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions HSK and HSC contributed equally to this work and were the major contributors to the manuscript writing process. KK helped
write and edit the manuscript. KHH, the corresponding author, helped draft, write, edit, and review the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a
financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment,
consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties. No writing
assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.
