Herpes simplex virus (HSV) encephalitis is the most common sporadic cause of encephalitis with significant morbidity and mortality that is
drastically reduced by early antiviral treatment. We report a 37 year old woman, 33 weeks pregnant, who presented with seizures due to
proven HSV-1 encephalitis, and who had had a previous episode of probable viral encephalitis aged 14 years. She was successfully treated
with aciclovir on both occasions and, in the latter, went on to deliver a healthy infant. This case is compared with 17 cases of HSV
encephalitis in pregnancy in the literature identifying a predominance in the late 2nd and 3rd trimesters, perhaps in part due to
immunological changes in pregnancy. The clinical presentation is also compared with non-pregnant patients with HSV encephalitis in the
largest prospective UK and European studies. We also present practical advice on management from recent national guidelines. When pregnant
women present with new seizures, headache, impaired consciousness or altered behaviour urgent investigation is required to identify common
diagnoses, such as eclampsia, venous sinus thrombosis and metabolic disturbances. Nevertheless, viral encephalitis is a very treatable cause
of this presentation with potentially serious complications if missed, and may be more common in latter stages of pregnancy. Encephalitis
should not be discounted if the patient is afebrile, has a normal Glasgow coma score, or the cerebrospinal fluid white cell count is only
slightly elevated, as these features are well recognised in viral encephalitis. Herpes simplex virus is the most common sporadic cause of
encephalitis, with the majority of cases due to HSV type-1. Early investigation and treatment is critical, as mortality is reduced from >70%
to <20-30% . HSV encephalitis has been described in pregnancy but little is known about how the clinical presentation and outcome compare
between this group and those with HSV encephalitis outside of pregnancy. To assess if the clinical presentation and outcome in pregnant
patients differs from non-pregnant patients, we first describe a case of HSV encephalitis in pregnancy. In addition, a Medline search for
previous case reports of HSV encephalitis in pregnant women in English (between 1972 and 2013) was performed, using the search terms herpes
simplex encephalitis and pregnancy. Cases with HSV type 1 and type 2 were identified, but were only included if they met established
clinical case definitions for encephalitis, namely encephalopathy (altered consciousness that persisted for longer than 24 hours, including
lethargy, irritability, or a change in personality and behaviour) and two or more of the following: fever or history of fever (≥38°C) during
the presenting illness; seizures and/or focal neurological findings (with evidence of brain parenchyma involvement); CSF pleocytosis
(>4cells/μL); electroencephalographic findings indicative of encephalitis; and abnormal results of neuroimaging (computed tomography or
magnetic resonance imaging) suggestive of encephalitis . Data from these cases were compared with those from the two largest multicentre
prospective studies of HSV encephalitis in the UK and Europe; the authors of the UK paper were approached to provide additional raw data
when required . Univariate analysis was performed using the chi-squared Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables and the Mann–Whitney U
test for continuous data using SPSS 2012©. A Glasgow coma score (GCS) of <8 was defined as coma and statistical significance as a p value of
<0.05. A 37 year old right-handed woman, who was 33 weeks pregnant (gravida 5, para 3), presented following a first seizure. She had a
preceding 10-day history of diarrhoea, vomiting, photophobia and severe headache, which woke her up from sleep and was exacerbated by
coughing. There was no recent travel or head injury. A witness reported that she had visual hallucinations, followed by an episode of
inappropriate laughter and within minutes a secondary generalised seizure: her right arm moved over her chest and her head deviated to the
right, followed by her whole body becoming stiff, with clonic movements of all limbs. She became cyanosed, bit her tongue, had urinary
incontinence and was unrousable. This lasted for approximately five minutes, followed by post-ictal drowsiness for two hours. At
presentation to the local teaching hospital she was apyrexial, had a GCS of 15/15, and normal cardio-respiratory and neurological
examinations. She was not hypertensive and urinalysis did not demonstrate proteinuria. Her full blood count, renal, liver and bone profiles
were normal, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 39 (reference range 5–15) mm/hr and C-reactive protein was 6 (<10) mg/L. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and venography of the brain on day one were normal. Oral carbamazepine was commenced and, following a second tonic-
clonic seizure 16 hours after admission, oral clobazam was added. A lumbar puncture (LP) demonstrated an opening pressure of 14 (reference
range 7–18) cm, CSF white cells count (WCC) 10 (<5) ×106/L, with predominance of immature neutrophils (percentage not known), red cell count
(RCC) 2 (0–10) ×106/L, protein 0.23 (0.15-0.4) g/L, and CSF glucose 3.6 (2.8-4.2) mmol/L, 67% of blood glucose. No organisms were seen, and
oligoclonal bands were negative. On receipt of these results, intravenous aciclovir was commenced; approximately 25 hours after admission.
On day two she developed fluctuating confusion, abnormal behaviour and a temperature of 37.8°C. Her GCS deteriorated to 11/15 (eyes opening
to speech, incomprehensible sounds and obeying commands), and she had a positive Babinski’s sign on the right. She was given intravenous
phenytoin, for clinically suspected non-convulsive status epilepticus. The patient had previously been admitted, when aged 14, with acute
headache, confusion, vomiting, photophobia and diplopia. LP demonstrated a CSF protein of 0.8 (0.15-0.4) g/L, glucose 3.6 (2.8-4.2) mmol/L,
WCC 1 (0–5) ×106/mm3, RCC 38 (0–10) ×106/L, and no organisms were seen. Viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis and antibody testing
were not available. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain demonstrated small ventricles with early cerebral oedema. A full course of
intravenous aciclovir was given for presumed HSV encephalitis. She made a full and uneventful recovery. In the current admission, CSF PCR
returned positive for HSV type-1 and negative for HSV type-2, varicella zoster virus and enterovirus. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed
left fronto-temporal epileptiform discharges, and repeat MRI on day three showed classic changes of herpes simplex encephalitis with high
signal on diffusion weighted imaging of the left temporal pole and left insular cortex. The aciclovir was stopped after 16 days, following
repeat CSF HSV-1 PCR testing negative. Foetal growth scans and foetal heart rate monitoring were normal throughout. An elective caesarean
section at 39 weeks was undertaken with no complications, and a healthy boy, of 3.725 kg, was delivered. The neonate was not given
aciclovir. A repeat EEG prior to discharge showed marked improvement albeit with some residual slowing. Phenytoin and clobazam were
gradually tapered off and carbamazepine continued. At six month follow-up the patient is well with no seizure recurrence and the child was
healthy. 21 cases were identified, four were excluded; two as they contained cases of metabolic encephalopathy and disseminated HSV-2
infection without encephalitis, and two had no definite proof of HSV infection . Therefore, 17 cases were included in the analysis and these
are summarised in Table 1 . The majority of cases occurred in the later stages of pregnancy, with 11 (61) in the 3rd trimester, 6 (33%) in
the 2nd trimester and only 1 (6%) in the 1st trimester.Table 1 Previous HSV encephalitis in pregnancy case reports Year and Author Age (yrs)
Gestation (wks) Type Admission Investigations Treatment Outcome Febrile GCS Symptoms CSF CT/MRI EEG 2015 Dodd KC (This
case)37331N15Headache, vomiting, photophobia, diarrhoea, visual hallucinations, confusion and seizures.WCC 10MRI - Initially normal, then
increased signal in the left temporal lobe with cytotoxic oedemaLeft fronto-temporal epileptiform changesIV aciclovir 10 mg/kg TDS stopped
after 16 days when repeat HSV PCR negativeElective caesarean section at 39 weeks. Mother and child well at 5 months.HSV-1 PCR2012. Pascal J,
et al. 31331Y13Pyrexia, vomiting, headache, neck stiffness, photophobia, phonophobia, visual and auditory symptoms.WCC 345MRI -
Hyperintensity with oedema in the right temporal area and cerebral peduncleNot doneIV aciclovir 10 mg/kg TDS stopped after 21 days and
repeat HSV PCR negativeNormal vaginal delivery at 39 weeks with epidural analgesia. Mother and child normal and healthy 15 months
later.HSV-1 PCRMesker AJ et al. 2013 Dodd KC, et al. 30371YNKHeadache, fever, mental status change and reduced consciousness.WCC unknown
HSV-1 PCRCT + MRI - Abnormalities in right temporal lobeNot doneIV aciclovir 750 mg TDS (unknown course length)Caesarean section at 37 weeks
– healthy child.Dexamethasone 10 mg QDS 4 daysPatient improved but deficit in spatial orientation on discharge.2009. Sellner et
al.25321YNKTonic-clonic seizure, drowsy, headaches, photophobia, vomiting, antero- and retro-grade amnesia.WCC 125MRI - Right temporopolar
and medial hyperintensity, with cytotoxic oedemaNot doneIV aciclovir 12.5 mg/kg TDS for 21 days. Stopped after repeat HSV PCR
negative.Caesarean section at 33 weeks due to deterioration.HSV-1 PCRMother and child healthy 4 weeks after discharge.2008 Piskin N, et
al.26251YNKFever, headache, nausea, mental status changes. Tonic-clonic seizure during admission.WCC 70MRI - Increased signal and oedema in
the right temporal region.Diffuse slowing with epileptic activity right frontal region.IV aciclovir 750 mg TDS for 21 daysNormal vaginal
delivery at term.HSV-1 PCRDexamethasone – reducing regimen 28 days2 months later – MRI shows clear regression and repeat EEG normal.2006
Gunduz A, et al. 247NKY (low grade)NKHeadache, episodes of unresponsiveness, non-convulsive status epilepticus.WCC Normal (figure not
given)MRI - NormalIctal state – nonconvulsive statusAciclovir 30 mg/kg/day (unknown duration)Patient improved and seizure free at 10 months
on carbamazepine.HSV PCRPregnancy terminated.2003 Godet C, et al.2938 (post-partum)2YNKPost caesarean section developed fever and then
impaired consciousness and amnesia.WCC 9CT – normalNormalIntravenous aciclovir 10 mg/kg every 8 hoursThe fever and neurological disorder
resolved after a few days on aciclovir.HSV-2 PCR1999 Dupuis O, et al.31351YNKHeadache, vomiting, and photophobia. Then confusion, aphasia,
and auditory hallucinations.WCC 138CT - NormalEpileptic foci in left temporal regionIntravenous aciclovir (unknown dose and
duration)Delivered a healthy child at term.HSV-1 PCRMRI - Abnormal signal in the left temporal regionThree months later, the mother
exhibited moderate amnesia.1999 Dupuis O, et al.35271Y15Generalised seizure, fever, headache, and photophobia. Then confusion, followed by
coma, right paraparesis and facial palsy.WCC 156CT - NormalAbnormal signal in left frontotemporal region.Aciclovir (unknown dose and
duration)Vaginal delivery at term. Child healthy.HSV-1 PCRMRI - Increased signal in left temporal region.Mother walking by day 23. Seizure
recurrence at 12 weeks. At one year severe anterograde memory loss.1992 Luby JP.15351Y15Fever, nausea, sore throat, and headache.WCC 398CT -
A low density area in the right temporal lobeNot doneAciclovir 10 mg/kg TDS for 14 days.Labour induced at 35 weeks. Discharged after 15 days
– patient and infant healthy.Developed nystagmus, focal seizures and confusion.Brain biopsy culture grew HSV-11992 Anteby E, et
al.2821NKYNKFever and acute confusional state. Mild right hemiparesis.WCC −0 initially,CT – normalDiffuse slowing, pronounced over the left
parieto-temporal regions.Aciclovir (2250 mg/day) for 10 daysDischarged in good health after 10 days. Delivery of normal child at
39 weeks.105 after 1 week.MRI - normalCSF serology – anti-HSV seroconversion 1:8 to 1:5121990 Frieden FJ, et al.37261 + 2Y14Headache,
confusion, aphasia, right sided paraesthesias, and fever.WCC 623 Antibody titres positive for type 1 (>1:1600) and type 2 (>1:400)CT - Low
density in the left temporal-parietal regionDiffuse bilateral cerebral dysfunction more prominent on the leftAciclovir IV 500 mg TDS
(unknown duration)The patient improved gradually with treatment and discharged well on day 11. Forceps delivery at term of a healthy
infant.MRI - Increased signal left temporal-parietal regionMethylprednisolone 25 mg IV QDS1989 Besser R et al.25231Y15Headache, vomiting and
fever. Nuchal rigidity and somnolence developed.WCC 320CT - A large low-density lesion in the right temporal lobe sparing the lenticulate
nucleusModerate slowing of background activity with delta waves in the right temporal regionAciclovir 10 mg/kg TDS for 10 daysPremature
labour required tocolysis.HSV-1 IgM and IgG (ELISA)Improved rapidly and completely once aciclovir started. Delivered a healthy child
16 weeks later.HSV complement fixing antibodies in CSF rose from 1:2 to 1:161987 Hankey GJ, et al.2229NKY15Fever, headache and malaise.
Developed seizures and reduced GCS.WCC 270CT - Hypodense area in right temporal lobe with oedemaDiffusely abnormal, right side worse than
leftAciclovir 800 mg/day 22 daysSlow recovery over 2 months. Vaginal delivery at 41 weeks, healthy child.Serum HSV complement fixation
antibody titres, and HSV-specific IgM in CSF.Dexamethasone 4 mg QDS in a reducing regimen to 22 daysOn-going secondary generalised seizures,
but otherwise well.1986 Berger SA, et al.41322YNKFever, confusion, seizures, and then stupor.WCC 15 leucocytesCT – diffuse cerebral oedema
with bitemporal cerebral necrosisSeizure foci in both temporal lobesAciclovir IV 10 mg/kg TDS on day 5 for 3 doses and then day 13 for
7 days.Infant delivered day 18 by caesarean section. The child had disseminated HSV infection treated successfully with IV aciclovir. The
mother died 2 days later.Adenine arabinoside IV 30 mg/kg 8 days.DexamethasoneELISA of maternal and infant sera demonstrated antibody to
HSV-2.1979 Roman-Campos G, et al.2216NKNNKSpontaneous abortion, and 2 months of abnormal behaviour.Post mortem – bitemporal necrotising
encephalitis with intranuclear inclusion bodies in neurons. Electron microscopy - herpevirus particles.Not doneNot doneNonePatient had
curettage following admission, then developed shock and low GCS. Died on day three.1979 Roman-Campos G, et al.1724NKNNKBizarre behaviour, a
week later coma and then seizures.WCC 0Carotid angiogram negativeGeneralised low voltage slow activity in the temporal
regions.DexamethasoneDelivered a macerated foetus after one week. Patient died after 2 weeks.Brain biopsy – brain oedema and necrotising
encephalitis with multiple internuclear inclusion bodies. Electron microscopy - herpesvirus particles.1972 Anderson JM, et
al.19~39NKY15Pharingitis and fever, followed by dysphasia, right hemiparesis, paraesthesia, hemianopia and reduced conscious level.CSF WCC
not stated.Technetium brain scan – a large left temporal space occupying lesion.Not statedIdoxuridine 2.5 g TDS started after 10 daysThe
patient died after twelve days. She delivered a healthy live child five days before she died.Culture – HSV.Brain biopsy –positive
fluorescent antibody study to HSVAbbreviations: CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid, IV: Intravenous, MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging, NK: Not known,
WCC: White cell count. Previous HSV encephalitis in pregnancy case reports Abbreviations: CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid, IV: Intravenous, MRI:
Magnetic resonance imaging, NK: Not known, WCC: White cell count. In this case, the patient was afebrile and the CSF white cell count was
only slightly raised. In comparison to the largest prospective UK cohort of 38 patients and the European cohort of 98 patients, the
proportion of patients during pregnancy reported in the literature who were afebrile on admission was similar (Table 2). The mean WCC was
also similar between the groups. In this case, although there had been a preceding seizure, at the time of initial clinical clerking
assessment the GCS was normal. Of the cases in the literature at presentation, none of the eight pregnant patients in whom the GCS was
available had GCS <8, whereas this has previously been seen in 24% of the general mixed sex population with HSV-1 encephalitis and 9% of
adults with HSV encephalitis overall . This may reflect an earlier presentation in pregnant patients, as the median (range) days of symptoms
prior to admission was shorter for pregnant patients, although this was not statistically significant (3 vs 6.5 , p = 0.35). There are
limitations in the interpretation of this data as the case reports are from a wide time period and there is variability in the data that is
presented within them. What would have been ideal, but was not possible due to the limitations of the published data, would have been to
compare the time from onset of symptoms, to onset of coma between pregnant patients with HSV1 encephalitis and an age and sex-matched cohort
with HSV1 encephalitis.Table 2 Comparison between clinical features, investigation findings and outcome of HSV encephalitis in the general
population and those pregnant Pregnant patients with HSV encephalitis General population with HSV-1 encephalitis [ 4 ] p value General
population with HSV encephalitis [ 5 ] p value Fever89% (16/18)76% (29/38)0.7592% (90/98)0.22Headache67% (12/18)42%
(16/38)0.1NKNKSeizures45% (8/18)63% (24/38)0.1732% (31/98)0.32Mean GCS on admission (where documented)14.6NKNK13.7NKComa on admission
(GCS < 8, where GCS documented)0% (0/8)24% (9/38)0.329% (9/98)0.36Abnormal CT40% (4/10)56% (18/32)1.079% (72/91)0.17(if performed)Abnormal
MRI80% (8/10)89% (25/28)0.59NKNK(if performed)Abnormal EEG92% (11/12)81% (22/27)0.64NKNK(if performed)WCC mean (range)177 (0–623)46
(10–1278)0.51237 (1–3900)NKDeath3/18 (17%)11% (4/38)0.6713/85 (15%)1.0Footnote: Population 4: Granerod et al ; Population 5: Raschilas et al
. Comparison between clinical features, investigation findings and outcome of HSV encephalitis in the general population and those pregnant
Footnote: Population 4: Granerod et al ; Population 5: Raschilas et al . The outcome of pregnant patients treated for HSV encephalitis
appears not to be statistically different to that in the general population. In those patients treated with aciclovir (n = 15), only 1 women
(7%), and 1 foetus, died with on-going disability for 4 (27%) of the surviving women. Nevertheless, of those not given aciclovir (n = 6), 4
(67%) women and 3 (50%) foetuses died. In other studies, mortality in HSV encephalitis treated with aciclovir has been reported as 11% –
15%, without a significant difference in outcome between sexes, although this may reflect publication bias . Herpes simplex virus is the
most common cause of sporadic viral encephalitis with 90% of cases being due to type-1 . It usually presents as a concurrent or antecedent
febrile or coryzal illness with headache, impaired cognition, reduced consciousness, changes in personality and behaviour and seizures. This
patient had proven HSV-1 encephalitis when pregnant aged 37, with an episode of encephalitis aged 14 which was of uncertain aetiology due to
investigatory limitations at the time of intitial presentation in childhood, although HSV would be the most common cause and the patient was
treated for presumed HSV encephalitis. Therefore, this may possibly represent a late relapse of HSV-1 encephalitis during pregnancy, which
has not previously been reported, although more thorough investigation at the time of the childhood illness would be required to establish
this. Relapse of HSV-1 encephalitis is rare, but recognised, and can be either early, due to suboptimal treatment or post-infectious immune
process, or late, with latencies previously reported of up to 8.5 years . During pregnancy, women may be at an increased risk of certain
infections, and also increased risk of severe manifestations of infection . There are many complex immunological adaptations during in
pregnancy, to prevent rejection of the ‘foetal allograft’, which contains paternal antigens . Oestrogens and progesterones rise during
pregnancy, are highest in the late 2nd and 3rd trimesters, and are thought to modulate an immunological shift, in both the cell-mediated and
humoural systems . Interestingly the vast majority of cases of HSV encephalitis identified in pregnancy occurred in the 3rd trimester and,
to a lesser extent in the 2nd trimester, with only 2 occurring in the 1st trimester. This may, however, relate to lower recognition of
pregnancy during the first trimester. In pregnant women presenting with seizures, headache, or altered behaviour, in addition to viral
encephalitis the differential diagnosis includes and number of other structural and metabolic causes which must be excluded. Hyperemesis
gravidarum in early pregnancy results in excessive vomiting producing electrolyte imbalance, which, if severe, may provoke seizures .
Eclampsia refers to seizures or coma as severe complications of pre-eclapmsia; this is identified by hypertension and proteinuria. Pregnancy
increases blood viscosity and the risk of thrombosis; therefore if seizures were preceded by headache, especially if with features of raised
intracranial pressure, then an MR venogram should be performed. Further differential diagnosis includes acute hepatitis, malaria, ischaemic
stroke, or acute intermittent porphyria . The UK guideline for the management of suspected viral encephalitis recommend intravenous
aciclovir as soon as possible if the CSF or MRI findings suggest viral encephalitis, or within 6 hours if these results are not available
(Figures 1 and 2) . There are no specific guidelines for management of viral encephalitis in pregnancy, but there is accumulating evidence
that aciclovir is safe in pregnancy and is not associated with an increase in birth defects . As mortality in HSV encephalitis is reduced
from >70% to <20-30% with aciclovir, and delay in starting treatment is associated with a worse outcome, treatment should be started
promptly in all patients with suspected HSV encephalitis . In pregnant patients with seizures the lowest effective dose of anti-epileptic
drugs is preferable, avoiding polytherapy and particularly potentially teratogenic drugs . Nevertheless, the aim should be seizure freedom
as there is a risk to the foetus during tonic-clonic seizures . There is currently no evidence to support the use of anti-epileptic drugs as
primary prophylaxis in viral encephalitis, and no evidence to direct secondary prophylaxis .Figure 1 Algorithm for the management of
patients with suspected viral encephalitis. (Reprinted from Journal of Infection, 64(4): 347–73, Solomon T, Michael BD, Smith PE, et al.
Management of suspected viral encephalitis in adults - Association of British Neurologists and British Infection Association National
Guidelines, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier) .Figure 2 Classical asymmetrical temporal lobe T2 hyperintensity in a patient
with Herpes Simplex Virus type-1 encephalitis. Algorithm for the management of patients with suspected viral encephalitis. (Reprinted from
Journal of Infection, 64(4): 347–73, Solomon T, Michael BD, Smith PE, et al. Management of suspected viral encephalitis in adults -
Association of British Neurologists and British Infection Association National Guidelines, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier) .
Classical asymmetrical temporal lobe T2 hyperintensity in a patient with Herpes Simplex Virus type-1 encephalitis. We identified that the
cases of HSV encephalitis reported in pregnancy often did not have a significantly impaired GCS and that this may reflect an earlier
presentation of some patients in this group. However, there are limitations in the interpretation of these data as the case reports are from
a wide time period and there is variability in the data that is presented within them. What would have been ideal, but was not possible due
to the limitations of the published data, would have been to compare the time from onset of symptoms, to onset of coma between pregnant
patients with HSV1 encephalitis and an age and sex-matched cohort with HSV1 encephalitis. Urgent investigation for common diagnoses, such as
eclampsia, venous sinus thrombosis and metabolic disturbance is required when pregnant women present with headaches, new seizures, and
changes in cognition or behaviour. HSV encephalitis is an additional treatable cause of this presentation, with potentially devastating
consequences if missed, and may be more common in the late 2nd and 3rd trimesters. Importantly, HSV encephalitis should not be discounted in
pregnant patients presenting with a normal or near-normal GCS, which can be seen in all patients with HSE, but may be more common during
pregnancy; possibly due to the altered immune response, or earlier presentation. In future, where possible, pregnant women should not be
excluded from studies of immunological responses during viral encephalitis. We have obtained the patient’s full consent for publication.
Consent for anonymous publication of the index case in this report was obtained by the authors, consent for the additional cases in this
series is provided with the individual case publications. Herpes Simplex Virus Glasgow Coma Score Cerebrospinal Fluid Magnetic Resonance
Imaging Lumbar Puncture White cell count Red cell count Polymerase chain reaction Computed tomography Electroencephalogram Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions KD participated in the design of the manuscript,
performed the literature search and drafted the manuscript. BDM also participated in the design of the manuscript, drafted the manuscript,
reviewed the literature, and performed statistical analysis. BZ obtained the patients consent. BW, AK, RB and TS all participated in the
design and composition of the manuscript. All authors made substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, or
analysis and interpretation of data; drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and final approval
of the version to be published. BDM is an NIHR Academic Clinical Lecturer and received support as part of an NIHR Doctoral Research
Fellowship. TS received support from the MRC and NIHR PHRU. The authors have not conflicts of interest to declare. The research materials
supporting this publication can be accessed by contacting benedict.michael@liv.ac.uk.
