Mediastinal lymph node metastasis from colorectal cancer is rare, and barely any reports have described resection of this pathology. We
report herein a successful thoracoscopic resection of mediastinal lymph node metastasis in a prone position. A 65-year-old man presented
with posterior mediastinal lymph node metastasis after resection of the primary rectal cancer and metachronous hepatic metastasis.
Metastatic lymph nodes were resected completely using thoracoscopic surgery in the prone position, which provided advantages of minimal
invasiveness, good surgical field, and reduced ergonomic burden on the surgeon. Thoracoscopic resection in the prone position was thought to
have the potential to become the standard procedure of posterior mediastinal tumors. Colorectal cancer most commonly metastasizes to the
regional lymph nodes, liver, lungs, brain, and bone . Mediastinal lymph node metastasis from colorectal cancer has been reported on rare
occasions . With the continued development of chemotherapeutic options, the control of metastatic colorectal cancer has increased in recent
years. Furthermore, some good results from aggressive surgical resection of distant metastasis or local recurrence have been reported . The
general consensus is that solitary metastatic lesions from colorectal cancer should be resected. However, very few reports have described
the surgical treatment of mediastinal lymph node metastasis, because of the rarity of this pathology. We present a case of mediastinal lymph
node metastases successfully treated using thoracoscopic resection in the prone position. A 65-year-old man with stage IIIa rectal cancer
underwent low anterior resection and lymph node dissection in January 2009. Histopathological findings showed only one vicinal lymph node
metastasis. After the first surgery, he received adjuvant chemotherapy comprising uracil-tegafur for 1 year, followed by 10 cycles of
5-florouracil, leukovorin and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX). Twenty-six months after the first surgery, liver metastasis was detected on computed
tomography and 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18 F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET). Serum level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was also
high (30.48 ng/ml). A solitary liver mass measuring 3 × 2 × 2 cm in lateral segment 2 was identified, and lateral segmentectomy was
performed. The pathological finding was metastatic adenocarcinoma, similar to the primary rectal cancer. After the second surgery, he could
not receive adjuvant chemotherapy because of the adverse drug reaction. At 29 months after this second surgery, serum CEA level was again
found to be high (24.33 ng/ml) (Figure 1). CT revealed a lower posterior mediastinal mass close to the lower esophagus (Figure 2A, B). One
month later, whole body PET-CT showed FDG accumulation in the mass (Figure 2C, D). No other sites of FDG accumulation were detected.
Solitary posterior mediastinal lymph node metastasis from rectal cancer was diagnosed and the decision was made to resect the lesion by
thoracoscopic surgery in the prone position.Figure 1 Treatment progress and changes in serum CEA levels. Figure 2 CT and PET-CT findings of
posterior mediastinal lymph nodes. (A, B) CT shows multiple enlarged lymph nodes (arrows). (C, D) PET-CT shows significant accumulation
(SUVmax, 4.80) in the posterior inferior mediastinum (arrows). Treatment progress and changes in serum CEA levels. CT and PET-CT findings of
posterior mediastinal lymph nodes. (A, B) CT shows multiple enlarged lymph nodes (arrows). (C, D) PET-CT shows significant accumulation
(SUVmax, 4.80) in the posterior inferior mediastinum (arrows). Thoracoscopic resection was performed. The procedure was as follows. First, a
12-mm port for the operator’s right hand was inserted into the fifth intercostal space on the posterior axillary line with 8 mmHg of
pneumothorax. Second, a 12-mm camera port was inserted into the ninth intercostal space on the lower scapula line. Third, a 5-mm port for
the operator’s left hand was inserted into the seventh intercostal space on the posterior axillary line. Finally, a 12-mm port for the
assistant using cotton swabs was inserted into the eighth intercostal space on the middle axillary line. A mass involving multiple lymph
nodes was visualized between the esophagus and esophageal hiatus and was separated from the esophagus using an ultrasonic coagulation and
cutting device. No tumor invasion or adhesions around the tissue were identified, and successful en bloc resection was achieved (Figure 3).
Histopathological examination showed metastatic lymph nodes containing adenocarcinoma similar to the primary rectal cancer and liver
metastasis (Figure 4). Postoperatively, serum CEA level again decreased (Figure 1). The patient was administered gastric stasis and
anticholinergic drugs because of slight postoperative gastric stasis.Figure 3 Surgical procedure by thoracoscopic surgery in the prone
position. (A) Dissection of the right lower pulmonary ligament. (B) Separation of metastatic lymph nodes from diaphragm and esophagus. (C)
En bloc resection of lymph nodes. (D) The right crus and esophagus are recognized after resection of lymph nodes.Figure 4 Histopathological
examination of the resected specimen shows metastatic lymph nodes involving adenocarcinoma. Surgical procedure by thoracoscopic surgery in
the prone position. (A) Dissection of the right lower pulmonary ligament. (B) Separation of metastatic lymph nodes from diaphragm and
esophagus. (C) En bloc resection of lymph nodes. (D) The right crus and esophagus are recognized after resection of lymph nodes.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen shows metastatic lymph nodes involving adenocarcinoma. Recently, the development of
diagnostic imaging modalities such as PET-CT and adjuvant chemotherapy has changed the therapeutic plan for patients with metastatic and
recurrent colorectal cancer, and some good results for distant metastasis or regional recurrence have been reported with aggressive
resection. However, few reports have described the resection of solitary mediastinal lymph node metastasis from colorectal cancer .
Standardized therapeutic approaches have also yet to be defined. The differential diagnoses for mediastinal lymphadenopathy are
tuberculosis, sarcoidosis/sarcoid-like reaction, lymphoma, and metastatic lymph nodes . The usefulness of PET-CT for identifying metastatic
mediastinal lymph nodes has been reported. However, PET-CT is useless for tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, and lymphoma because of the low
specificity . This modality is also useless for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) because of the low sensitivity . In the present case, we
diagnosed solitary posterior mediastinal lymph node metastasis from rectal cancer because of FDG accumulation and increasing serum CEA
levels. The postulated mechanism leading to mediastinal lymph node metastasis is spread via lymphatic drainage routes from liver metastasis
or via the paravertebral and para-aortic lymphatic plexus in patients with abdominal or pelvic malignancy. In the present case, we
speculated the spread involved lymphatic drainage from liver metastasis because of the previous liver metastasis. The key advantage of
thoracoscopic surgery compared with thoracotomy is the marked reduction in invasiveness. We have reported the usefulness of the prone
position for thoracoscopic esophagectomy . In this case, we applied the technique to resect posterior mediastinal lymph nodes. The prone
position provided a good view of the surgical field without displacing the heart or right lung using gravity and artificial pneumothorax.
Moreover, cotton swabs assisted in reducing the ergonomic burden on the surgeon around the esophageal hiatus. These advantages of
thoracoscopic surgery with the prone position were thought to contribute to the good postoperative course and have potential to become
standard procedures in the treatment of posterior mediastinal tumors. We have described successful thoracoscopic resection of mediastinal
lymph node metastasis from rectal cancer. Thoracoscopic surgery in the prone position has the potential to become the first-choice surgical
approach for posterior mediastinal tumors because of the advantages in terms of minimum invasiveness, good surgical field, and reduced
ergonomic burden for the surgeon. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the
accompanying images. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors
participated in the outpatient, surgery, and preoperative care. YS drafted manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
We are grateful to Dr. Takehiro Tanaka of Okayama University Hospital (Okayama, Japan) for pathological findings.
