An 83-year-old man underwent computed tomography during a routine check-up due to a history of surgical treatment for pancreatic cancer. Two
tumors were detected in the anterior segment of the liver. A needle biopsy of the larger tumor was performed, and pathological examination
showed that the tumor was a poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. Resection was not performed considering the patient’s poor
physical condition. Thus, transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and radiofrequency ablation of the tumors were performed. Three months
later, residual tumor of the larger lesion and multiple pulmonary metastases were detected. This time, continuous hepatic arterial infusion
chemotherapy was performed. Although the pulmonary metastases markedly reduced, tumor thrombi appeared in the right portal vein on computed
tomography. Finally, sorafenib was administered, which led to disappearance of the tumor thrombi and no other signs of recurrence 8 months
after initiation of sorafenib on computed tomography. Although sorafenib administration has continued at reduced doses of 200 mg per day or
less due to hypertension, complete response has persisted for the past 34 months. It is noteworthy that sorafenib has been given at reduced
doses, but a long-term complete response is maintained in a patient who had portal tumor thrombi and distant metastasis. Herein, we present
this rare case of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma controlled with reduced doses of sorafenib following multidisciplinary therapy, describe
our single center experience with sorafenib use in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, and review previous reports that focused on dose
reduction of sorafenib. Although potentially curative therapies including liver transplantation, resection, and ablations have been
developed for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), patients with advanced stage of HCC still have poor prognosis . The recent development of
molecular targeted therapies has begun to change strategies for treating advanced HCC. The efficacy and safety of sorafenib for advanced HCC
were assessed in the SHARP study and also in the Asia-Pacific study . To date, sorafenib has been applied to a large number of patients
worldwide and becomes an important therapeutic option for HCC. A growing number of complete response (CR) patients have been reported since
2008 . Recently, a Japanese multi-center study has reported 18 patients with HCC who achieved CR after sorafenib treatment and precisely
described their characteristics . However, it is still very difficult and extremely rare to maintain CR for long term in patients with
advanced HCC. We herein report a case of advanced HCC that was initially treated with multidisciplinary therapy and has maintained a CR
status for 34 months using reduced doses of sorafenib. We also describe our single-center experience for sorafenib use in patients with HCC
and review previous reports that focused on HCC patients with long-term CR using reduced doses of sorafenib. An 83-year-old Japanese man
underwent distal pancreatectomy for pancreatic body cancer 3 years ago. He had a medical history of hypertension but not of hepatitis virus
infection and alcohol abuse. During a postoperative surveillance examination, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) detected two
tumors, 23 and 13 mm in diameter, in the anterior segment of the liver. The larger tumor was adjacent to the right main Glisson branch, and
the other lesion was below the right diaphragm. Both of them showed early enhancement in the arterial phase (Figure 1A,B) and hypointensity
in the hepatobiliary phase in the gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. The patient’s serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was
elevated to 8,650 ng/ml (normal level is less than 20 ng/ml). A needle biopsy of the larger tumor was performed, and pathological
examination showed that the tumor was a poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. A specimen from the previously diagnosed pancreatic
cancer was re-examined, but the finding of ductal adenocarcinoma was identical to the one diagnosed at the time of surgery; and components
of hepatoid carcinoma were not found in this specimen. Resection was not performed considering the tumor location (right lobectomy was
necessary) and the patient’s hepatic functional reserve (Child-Pugh classification was grade A, but indocyanine green retention rate at
15 min was 21%) and advanced age. Since the larger tumor was adjacent to the right main Glisson branch and only the bordering side appeared
hypervascular, we first performed transcatheter arterial chemoembolization to the hypervascular part of the larger tumor and to the other
tumor and then additionally performed radiofrequency ablation of the hypovascular portion of the larger tumor. Three months after the
treatment, CT imaging revealed a residual tumor of the larger lesion at the ablation site and multiple lung metastases. Thus, continuous
hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy using 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin was performed for 2 months. This was effective in reducing the
residual tumor and lung metastases, but tumor thrombi appeared in the right portal vein (Figure 2A), and his AFP and PIVKA-II levels were
elevated to 41,948 ng/ml and 422 mAU/mL, respectively (Figure 3). Subsequently, sorafenib was administered at a reduced dose of 400 mg per
day considering his advanced age (the manufacturer’s recommended dose is 800 mg per day). The dose of sorafenib was temporarily increased to
800 mg per day but was reduced to 400 mg per day again due to an adverse event of hypertension (grade 3 in Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Effects version 4.0) (doses are described in Figure 3). Eight months after initiation of sorafenib, his AFP level was decreased to
normal level, and both the tumor thrombi in the right portal vein and multiple lung metastases disappeared on CT imaging (Figure 2B). The
dose of sorafenib was further reduced to 200 mg per day or 200 mg per 2 days due to hypertension, but there have been no signs of recurrence
on CT imaging; and his AFP and PIVKA-II levels have also been within the normal limits for the past 34 months.Figure 1 Gadoxetic acid-
enhanced magnetic resonance imaging at tumor discovery. Images in the arterial-phase are shown. (A) A large tumor, 23 mm in diameter, is
adjacent to the right Glisson branch (white arrow). The dorsal side of the tumor is hypervascular (early enhancement is indicated by white
triangles), and the ventral side is hypovascular (indicated by a black triangle). (B) A smaller tumor, 13 mm in diameter, is below the right
diaphragm. The tumor also shows early enhancement (indicated by a white triangle).Figure 2 Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography
before and after sorafenib introduction. (A) Before sorafenib introduction. Massive filling defects with enhancement are seen in the
anterior and posterior branches of the portal vein (indicated by white triangles). An artifact by the catheter and coil placed for hepatic
arterial infusion chemotherapy is seen. (B) After sorafenib introduction. The tumor thrombi disappeared in the portal vein (indicated by
white triangles). Ant. PV, anterior branch of the portal vein; Post. PV, posterior branch of the portal vein.Figure 3 Clinical course as
assessed by tumor markers and therapeutic events from discovery of hepatocellular carcinoma to present. HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; TACE,
transcatheter arterial chemoembolization; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; HAIC, hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy; AFP, alpha-
fetoprotein. Gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging at tumor discovery. Images in the arterial-phase are shown. (A) A large
tumor, 23 mm in diameter, is adjacent to the right Glisson branch (white arrow). The dorsal side of the tumor is hypervascular (early
enhancement is indicated by white triangles), and the ventral side is hypovascular (indicated by a black triangle). (B) A smaller tumor,
13 mm in diameter, is below the right diaphragm. The tumor also shows early enhancement (indicated by a white triangle). Abdominal contrast-
enhanced computed tomography before and after sorafenib introduction. (A) Before sorafenib introduction. Massive filling defects with
enhancement are seen in the anterior and posterior branches of the portal vein (indicated by white triangles). An artifact by the catheter
and coil placed for hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy is seen. (B) After sorafenib introduction. The tumor thrombi disappeared in the
portal vein (indicated by white triangles). Ant. PV, anterior branch of the portal vein; Post. PV, posterior branch of the portal vein.
Clinical course as assessed by tumor markers and therapeutic events from discovery of hepatocellular carcinoma to present. HCC,
hepatocellular carcinoma; TACE, transcatheter arterial chemoembolization; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; HAIC, hepatic arterial infusion
chemotherapy; AFP, alpha-fetoprotein. This patient underwent multidisciplinary therapy including transcatheter arterial chemoembolization,
radiofrequency ablation, and continuous hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy until tumor thrombi were found in the portal vein. We finally
initiated sorafenib treatment, and the patient achieved CR soon afterwards and has maintained the CR status for the past 34 months. Based on
the clinical course of this patient, the achievement of CR was predominantly attributed to sorafenib therapy. It is extremely rare that a
patient with advanced HCC and portal tumor thrombi can achieve long-term CR without resection. According to the published literature, there
were only four cases of HCC who achieved CR using mainly sorafenib and maintained the status for more than 2 years . Table 1 summarizes the
patient characteristics of the four reported cases and the present case. All patients were male, and the mean age was 73.4 years old. The
background liver disease was hepatitis C in three cases, hepatitis B in one case, and nothing in one case (present case). The extent of HCC
was major vascular invasion in three cases, distant metastasis in one case, and both major vascular invasion and distant metastasis in one
case (present case). It is noteworthy that sorafenib was initiated at the recommended dose (800 mg per day) in three cases, but the dose was
soon reduced to 400 mg per day or less in all of them. The final maintenance dose of sorafenib was 400 mg per day in the four reported cases
and 200 mg per day in the present case, although the SHARP and Asia-Pacific studies reported that efficacy of sorafenib for advanced HCC was
maximally observed at the dose of 800 mg per day.Table 1 Cases who achieved complete response for more than 2 years in the literature Case 1
Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Present case Reported year 2011 2011 2013 2013 2014Age/sex70/male69/male71/male74/male83/maleBackground liver
diseaseHepatitis CHepatitis CHepatitis CHepatitis BNon-viral, non-alcoholicTumor status at sorafenib initiation NumberSingleNot
describedMultipleSingle- LocationNot describedThree hepatic lesionsSegment IV and VIIPosterior segmentRight lobe Maximum size6 × 5 cmNot
described9 cm8.6 × 5.7 cm- ExtensionVascular invasionPortal vein thrombosisPortal vein thrombosisVertebral metastasisLung metastasis
Pathological diagnosisNone (based on the computed tomography image)None (based on the computed tomography image)Poorly/moderately
differentiated hepatocellular carcinomaModerately differentiated hepatocellular carcinomaPoorly differentiated hepatocellular
carcinomaPretreatment before sorafenibNoneNot describedSynchro-level, Vitamin ETACE → PEIT, RFATACE + RFA → HAIC (5-FU + CDDP)Doses of
sorafenib (period) Initial doseNot described800 mg/day (10 days)800 mg/day (2 months)800 mg/day (2 weeks)400 mg/day (1 month) Second dose→
400 mg/day (55 months)→ 400 mg/day (3 months)→ 400 mg/day (18 months)→ 400 mg/day (60 months)→ 200 mg/day (1 months) Third dose→
400 mg/2 days (57 months)→ 800 mg/day (4 months) Fourth dose→ 400 mg/day (2 months) Last doses→ 200 → 100 → 200 mg/day (34 months)Total
period of sorafenib60 months62 months20 months60 months42 monthsPeriod of complete
response<27 months38 months28 months54 months34 monthsReported statusAliveAliveAliveAliveAliveTACE, transcatheter arterial
chemoembolization; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; PEIT, percutaneous ethanol injection therapy; HAIC, hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy;
5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; CDDP, cisplatin. Cases who achieved complete response for more than 2 years in the literature TACE, transcatheter
arterial chemoembolization; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; PEIT, percutaneous ethanol injection therapy; HAIC, hepatic arterial infusion
chemotherapy; 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; CDDP, cisplatin. We also surveyed our single department with regard to sorafenib use for advanced HCC.
In 2010, sorafenib became commercially available for advanced HCC in Japan and has been administered to 32 patients with advanced HCC so far
in our department. We applied sorafenib at the recommended dose of 800 mg per day in seven patients (cases 1, 6, 20, 27, 29, 31, and 32 in
Figure 4), but all of the patients did not tolerate this recommended dose due to side effects or disease progression. Thus, the dose had to
be reduced in two cases (cases 1 and 6 in Figure 4), and the treatment itself was discontinued in five cases (cases 20, 27, 29, 31, and 32
in Figure 4) within 3 months after initiation of sorafenib. We also found that 14 cases (cases 1 to 14 in Figure 4) took sorafenib for more
than 12 months and 7 cases (cases 1 to 7 in Figure 4) took sorafenib for more than 18 months. Most of the long-term recipients of sorafenib
were not given the recommended dose of 800 mg per day and had instead reduced doses for most of the treatment period.Figure 4 List of cases
treated with sorafenib for hepatocellular carcinoma in our department and the doses of sorafenib. Cases are shown in descending order of
length of sorafenib treatment. Case 2 represents the present case. Ages shown are at the time of sorafenib initiation. List of cases treated
with sorafenib for hepatocellular carcinoma in our department and the doses of sorafenib. Cases are shown in descending order of length of
sorafenib treatment. Case 2 represents the present case. Ages shown are at the time of sorafenib initiation. We present here a rare case of
advanced HCC, who was initially treated with multidisciplinary therapy including transcatheter arterial chemoembolization, radiofrequency
ablation, and continuous hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy, and achieved long-term CR using reduced doses of sorafenib. Based on our
single-center experience of sorafenib use in patients with HCC and the previously reported cases of long-term CR using sorafenib, it appears
that it is important to continue sorafenib for a long time even if the dose is reduced. We hope that this case presentation and literature
review serves as a stimulus for further investigation to clarify if using reduced doses of sorafenib for maintenance increase the incidence
of CR. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of the case report and accompanying images. This case
report was written in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki following approval from our Institutional Review Board (authorization
number, 20120443). hepatocellular carcinoma complete response computed tomography alpha-fetoprotein Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MS wrote the paper and conducted the whole treatment. NK and SE analyzed the
data in the past cases treated with sorafenib. OI supervised the writing of the paper especially in the ‘Conclusions’ section. AU and AT
prepared the radiological images and wrote the radiological description. YM and MS analyzed the pathological specimens and wrote the
pathological description. MK, YA, TH, and HY prepared the data from the reviewed papers. MT and KA participated in the treatments and
supervised the writing of the paper. YK represents our surgical department and supervised the writing of the paper. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
