Pulmonary epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (PEH) is a rare vascular tumor of borderline malignancy that originates from endothelial cells.
Chest computed tomography (CT) performed during a routine cancer screening revealed multiple small pulmonary nodules in a 50-year-old man
who had previously undergone endoscopic submucosal dissection of early gastric cancer. To rule out metastatic nodules, a wedge resection of
the left upper lobe was performed and the frozen biopsy reported a benign fibrotic nodule. Using immunohistochemistry, the final pathology
was indicated to be PEH, and consecutive surgery for the right-side nodules was planned and performed. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a
rare vascular tumor, originating from endothelial cells, which is histologically characterized by an epithelioid appearance . The term was
initially applied by Weiss and Enzinger to a soft tissue vascular tumor of borderline malignancy . Pulmonary epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma (PEH) is the currently preferred term for the neoplastic process, which was originally described as intravascular
bronchioloalveolar tumor in the lung. Being considered a low to intermediate grade sarcoma, the tumor predominantly involves the liver,
lungs, soft tissues, and rarely bones, and can be aggressive and multicentric, even resulting in systemic metastasis . PEH typically occurs
as bilateral multiple nodules among young women and has a variable clinical course . We describe a case of PEH misdiagnosed as a benign
fibrotic nodule from frozen biopsy analysis following video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). We performed a consecutive operation for
the other nodules after confirming PEH based on the permanent biopsy report. A 50-year-old man who visited the hospital every year after
endoscopic submucosal dissection of early gastric cancer underwent a chest computed tomography (CT) for cancer screening. The patient was a
50-pack-year current smoker, but he did not have any respiratory or systemic symptoms. The chest CT scan showed small nodules on both sides
of the lungs. There was a peripherally located small nodule with lobulation in the apicoposterior segment of the left upper lobe (LUL) and
two tiny nodules in the posterobasal segment of the right lower lobe (RLL) (Figure 1). Levels of tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic
antigen and cancer antigen 19-9, were within the normal range. The preoperative forced expiratory volume in 1 s was 3.02 L (80% of the
predicted value) without an obstructive pattern. Given that the patient was a current smoker, was older than 50 years, and had a gastric
cancer history, we decided to perform a surgical biopsy of the nodules.Figure 1 The initial chest computed tomography scan. (A) There is a
peripheral small nodule with lobulation in the apicoposterior segment of the left upper lobe (arrow). (B, C) Two tiny nodules are noted in
the posterobasal segment of the right lower lobe (arrows). The initial chest computed tomography scan. (A) There is a peripheral small
nodule with lobulation in the apicoposterior segment of the left upper lobe (arrow). (B, C) Two tiny nodules are noted in the posterobasal
segment of the right lower lobe (arrows). Under general anesthesia, the surgeons performed a wedge resection by VATS. The LUL nodule was
palpable to the finger and was 1 cm in size, hard, and capsulated in nature. There was no adhesion with the lung parenchyma or pleura. The
frozen biopsy showed a hypocellular nodule in a fibrotic stroma. It was reported as a fibrotic nodule. The RLL nodules were also considered
as benign because of similar features. A CT follow-up of these nodules was planned rather than surgical resection. Postoperatively, the
patient did not show any surgical complications. The pathological findings of the resected LUL nodule indicated a well-demarcated
hypocellular hyalinized nodule. Generally, the neoplastic cells were loosely embedded in hyalinized fibrous stroma individually, although it
was more dense cellularly at the periphery of the nodule. The neoplastic cells showed no nuclear atypia and contained variably prominent
eosinophilic cytoplasm with or without cytoplasmic vacuoles which was reminiscent of endothelial differentiation. The tumor cells also
showed immunoreactivity for CD31 (Figure 2). These features are consistent with the histological characteristics of epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma . We decided to perform consecutive surgery of the two remnant tiny RLL nodules. Given that the preferred locations of
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma are the liver and soft tissue, we performed an abdominopelvic CT before the second operation. There was no
definite focal wall thickening and no enhanced masses were detected in the intraabdominal organs. The second operation was performed
successfully using VATS; the pathological findings of the two tiny nodules were similar to those of the previous LUL nodule. After the
second surgery, we performed follow-up chest CTs at 6-month intervals. There has been no evidence of recurrence or other metachronous
nodules for 18 months.Figure 2 Pathological findings. (A) The nodule is well-demarcated, hyalinized, and within the lung parenchyma
(hematoxylin and eosin, ×40). (B) Variable-sized and irregularly shaped tumor cells with round to oval shape nucleus are located in the
hyalinized stroma. Some of the neoplastic cells are rich in eosinophilic cytoplasm (×200). (C) There are characteristic intracytoplasmic
vacuoles in the tumor cells (arrow; ×400). (D) The tumor cells are immunoreactive for CD31 in the cytoplasm (×400). Pathological findings.
(A) The nodule is well-demarcated, hyalinized, and within the lung parenchyma (hematoxylin and eosin, ×40). (B) Variable-sized and
irregularly shaped tumor cells with round to oval shape nucleus are located in the hyalinized stroma. Some of the neoplastic cells are rich
in eosinophilic cytoplasm (×200). (C) There are characteristic intracytoplasmic vacuoles in the tumor cells (arrow; ×400). (D) The tumor
cells are immunoreactive for CD31 in the cytoplasm (×400). Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a rare tumor, which mainly affects the liver
and, more rarely, the lung. The other organs affected tend to be superficial or deep soft tissues of the extremities. The estimated
prevalence of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is less than 1 in 1 million . Initially known as intravascular bronchioloalveolar tumor , PEH
is a rare vascular tumor of an indeterminate or low-grade malignancy. PEH affects young people; the median age of onset is 36 years . The
incidence is two times higher in women than that in men. Approximately 50% to 76% of patients are asymptomatic. Some patients have chest
pain, pleuritic pain, cough, dyspnea, or rarely hemoptysis. Although the typical CT findings are multiple small unilateral (23.7%) or
bilateral (76.2%) pulmonary nodules, PEH can also present as multiple pulmonary reticulonodular opacities or diffuse infiltrative pleural
thickening. Diagnosis is mainly achieved by pathological examination of the surgical biopsy and immunohistochemistry indicating diffuse
factor VIII-related antigen cytoplasmic staining in the malignant cells, confirming an endothelial lineage for the tumor cells . The other
cell markers are CD31 and CD34 . Owing to the low incidence of PEH, there are no definite treatment guidelines. The prognosis of this tumor
is unpredictable, with life expectancy ranging from 1 to 15 years . The presence of metastatic lesions at the time of diagnosis does not
correspond with a reduced survival . However, pleural effusion has been shown to correlate with a poor survival . Due to the unpredictable
nature of the outcome, if possible, curative resection should be considered to maximize the possibility of a good outcome. Adjuvant
radiotherapy is used to control residual disease for patients with localized epithelioid hemangioendothelioma. Chemotherapy with
interferon-2α or carboplatin plus etoposide is the preferred therapy for patients with widespread disease, but the benefits are unclear .
Our patient’s age was 50 years, which is somewhat older than the age at which patients typically present with PEH. He had bilateral
pulmonary nodules and showed lobulated lesions without pleural thickening. Given the multiple small round pulmonary nodules, we considered
metastatic nodules to be a possibility. From the results of the frozen biopsy analysis, we did not deem it necessary to resect all of the
nodules; however, the final pathologic finding was indicated to be a PEH, consecutive surgery was performed. In conclusion, this case of PEH
indicates the difficulty in diagnosing this rare tumor. Clinicians should be aware of the possibility of a low-grade malignancy, even if
surgical frozen biopsy analysis indicates benign features. The study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good
Clinical Practice guidelines. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case and for the accompanying images. computed tomography
left upper lobe pulmonary epithelioid hemangioendothelioma right lower lobe video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MAK collected data and drafted the manuscript. JSC and HYC
conceived of the report and collected data. IJO supervised and corrected writing of the manuscript. YCK and CKP conceived of the report and
revised the manuscript. JSY, SYS, and KJN operated the patient and contributed to conception. YDC supervised the pathology and managed the
figures. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by a grant (HCRI14017-1) Chonnam National University
Hwasun Hospital Institute for Biomedical Science. We thank Craig Andrew Besas and Jera Mae Eluna, who provided English editing and
proofreading.
