Intraosseous lipoma is a benign bone tumor, and the tumor occurs more frequently in the lower extremities. We present a very rare case of
intraosseous lipoma occurring in the lumbar vertebral arch and spinous process. A 54-year-old Japanese man presented with a three-month
history of lumbar pain. Magnetic resonance imaging of the L3 vertebral arch and spinous process revealed high intensity on T1- and
T2-weighted imaging, and it was suppressed on fat-suppression imaging and no enhancement showed on gadolinium contrast-enhanced imaging.
Computed tomography imaging revealed an osteolytic change accompanied by marginal osteosclerosis in his third lumbar vertebral arch and
spinous process, as well as a thinned and bulging bone cortex. An analgesic had been administered prior to his visit, but low back pain had
persisted, so we performed curettage and filled the defect with hydroxyapatite bone. His low back pain was improved immediately after
surgery, and no recurrence of tumor has been observed on computed tomography imaging as of three years postoperatively. Symptomatic
intraosseous lipoma of spine is very rare, but the patient may be surgically well-treated by curettage and reconstruction of the benign
tumor. Intraosseous lipoma is a benign bone tumor, and the tumor occurs more frequently in the lower extremities. We present a very rare
case of intraosseous lipoma occurring in the lumbar vertebral arch and spinous process, together with a discussion of the literature. A
54-year-old Japanese man presented to our university-affiliated hospital with a three-month history of lumbar pain. He was 167cm in height
and weighed 58kg. An analgesic had been administered prior to his visit, but low back pain had persisted. His physical examination showed
pressure pain and tapping tenderness at the third lumbar vertebral level, but no sensory or motor disorders of his lower extremities. His
blood biochemistry showed no abnormalities and his medical history was non-contributory. A plain radiography revealed the formation of a
vertebral spur or narrowing of the intervertebral disc between L3 and L4 as an age-related change, but no instability was evident between
vertebrae and no obvious abnormalities were evident. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the L3 vertebral arch and spinous process revealed
high intensity on T1- and T2-weighted imaging (Figure 1A,B,C), and it was suppressed on fat-suppression imaging (Figure 1D) and no
enhancement showed on gadolinium (Gd) contrast-enhanced imaging (Figure 1E). Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed an osteolytic change
accompanied by marginal osteosclerosis in his third lumbar vertebral arch and spinous process, as well as a thinned and bulging bone cortex
(Figure 2). Hounsfield units (HU) of CT for the area at which the osteolytic change was observed was −87HU, a value approximating that of
fatty tissue, and areas of ossification or calcification were observed.Figure 1 Magnetic resonance imaging at the L3 vertebral arch and
spinous process. (A) Sagittal T1-weighted image; (B) Sagittal T2-weighted image; (C) Axial T2-weighted image; (D) Sagittal fat suppression
image; (E) Sagittal T1-weighted gadolinium contrast (+) image.Figure 2 Computed tomography image revealing an osteolytic change accompanied
by marginal osteosclerosis in his third lumbar vertebral arch and spinous process, as well as a thinned and bulging bone cortex. Magnetic
resonance imaging at the L3 vertebral arch and spinous process. (A) Sagittal T1-weighted image; (B) Sagittal T2-weighted image; (C) Axial
T2-weighted image; (D) Sagittal fat suppression image; (E) Sagittal T1-weighted gadolinium contrast (+) image. Computed tomography image
revealing an osteolytic change accompanied by marginal osteosclerosis in his third lumbar vertebral arch and spinous process, as well as a
thinned and bulging bone cortex. Based on the above findings, although we suspected painful lipoma in the third lumbar vertebral arch and
spinous process segment, we decided to perform a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. Since a benign tumor was suspected, we planned to perform
curettage of the tumor and to fill the defect with artificial bone. The operation was performed under general anesthesia. The third lumbar
vertebral arch was exposed, and when an area approximately 1cm × 1cm in the external lamina of the right vertebral arch was opened, a yellow
tumorous lesion with a color and elasticity macroscopically similar to those of ordinary fatty tissue was observed. The tumorous lesion was
curetted away as much as possible, hydroxyapatite bone filler paste (BIOPEX®; HOYA Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was used to fill the defect
and the external lamina of the vertebral arch was replaced. Intraoperative pathological findings included hyperplasia of adipose cells and
blood vessels, a small amount of trabecular bone and adipose cells of different sizes. Intraosseous lipoma was therefore diagnosed
(Figure 3).Figure 3 Intraoperative pathological findings of hyperplasia of adipose cells and blood vessels, a small amount of trabecular
bone and adipose cells of different sizes. (Hematoxylin and eosin ×4 magnification). Intraoperative pathological findings of hyperplasia of
adipose cells and blood vessels, a small amount of trabecular bone and adipose cells of different sizes. (Hematoxylin and eosin ×4
magnification). His low back pain was improved immediately after surgery, and no recurrence of the tumor has been observed on CT imaging as
of three years postoperatively (Figure 4).Figure 4 Computed tomography image three years after surgery. Computed tomography image three
years after surgery. Despite the abundance of adipose connective tissue in bone marrow, intraosseous lipoma is extremely rare ; a search of
PubMed using the keywords ‘intraosseous lipoma’ yielded 177 results. A review of the search results showed that intraosseous lipoma occurs
more frequently in the lower extremities, particularly in the calcaneus and metaphysis of long bones . Campbell et al. reported that lipomas
occur most frequently in the calcaneus (32%), while Milgram found that lipomas occur most frequently in the metaphysis of the proximal femur
(34%). We performed a review of the literature on intraosseous lipoma involving the spine, identifying only 14 cases (Table 1); five cases
(35%) occurred in the lumbar region, four (28%) in the sacral region, three (21%) in the cervical region, one (7%) in the thoracic region
and one (7%) in the coccygeal region . A slight predominance towards the lumbar spine was seen compared with other regions. The lesion in
our patient also occurred in the lumbar region. Intraosseous lipoma in the lumbar region might occur at the vertebral body or in the
posterior element , with a slight predominance toward the vertebral body. However, our patient presented with the lesion in the posterior
element.Table 1 Spinal intraosseous lipoma reported in the literature Author Published year Patient’s age Gender Site of involvement
Treatment Bin et al. 201027MaleC1-2 vertebral bodyCurettage and reconstructionLin et al. 200937FemaleC3 spinous processSurgeryChang and Park
200338MaleT1 laminaExcisionKamekura et al. 200249MaleSacrumExcisionPande et al. 199835MaleL1-2 vertebral bodyBiopsyWilliams et al.
199345MaleL1 vertebral body and neural archBiopsyWilliams et al. 199338FemaleL4 vertebral bodyObservationWilliams et al. 199347MaleL4
vertebral bodyObservationMilgram 199128FemaleSacrumBiopsyEhara et al. 199053MaleSacrumBiopsyMilgram 198820MaleC2 vertebral
bodyN/AMatsubayashi et al. 198027MaleL4 spinous processLaminectomyHanelin et al. 197533MaleCoccyxCoccygectomyZorn et al.
197121MaleSacrumBiopsy Spinal intraosseous lipoma reported in the literature Even though intraosseous lipoma is a benign tumor that can be
successfully treated with conservative treatment, surgery has been recommended for diagnostic confirmation, painful tumors, pathological
fractures and malignant transformation . In our patient, low back pain persisted after conservative treatment, so we performed curettage and
filled the defect with hydroxyapatite bone. Most cases of intraosseous lipoma have no pain, however, micro-movement of the periosteum of the
L3 vertebral arch and spinous process may have caused our patient’s pain. Subsequently, the low back pain of our patient was improved
immediately after filling the curetted defect with hydroxyapatite, and no recurrence of tumor has been observed as of three years
postoperatively. Symptomatic intraosseous lipoma of spine is very rare, but the patient may be surgically well-treated by curettage and
reconstruction of the benign tumor. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Computed tomography Hounsfield units
Magnetic resonance imaging Competing interests No funds were received in support of this work. No benefits in any form have been or will be
received from a commercial party related directly to the subject of this manuscript. Authors’ contributions CT drafted the manuscript,
performed the first selection of articles, and KT and EK assessed the quality of the papers. KK, KT and EK treated the patient surgically,
and TS revised the manuscript critically for its content. YK helped to draft and correct the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
