IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis (IgG4-DS), so-called Mikulicz’s disease, is characterized by elevated serum IgG4 and
infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells in glandular tissues. Recently, several studies reported both malignant lymphoma developed on the
background of IgG4-associated conditions and IgG4-producing malignant lymphoma (non-IgG4-related disease). We report on the case of a
70-year-old man who was strongly suspected IgG4-DS because of high serum IgG4 concentration (215 mg/dl) and bilateral swelling of parotid
and submandibular glands. Biopsies of cervical lymph node and a portion of submandibular gland were performed. These histopathological
findings subsequently confirmed a diagnosis of marginal zone B cell lymphoma. Differential diagnosis of IgG4-DS is necessary from other
disorders, including Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis, Castleman’s disease, Wegener’s granulomatosis, lymphoma, and cancer. We suggest that
biopsy of swollen lesions is important for a definitive diagnosis of IgG4-DS and discuss the mechanism of development in this case.
IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis (IgG4-DS), also known as Mikulicz’s disease (MD), is a unique condition characterized by
enlargement of the lacrimal and salivary glands caused by infiltration of lymphocytes. IgG4-DS has been considered a subtype of Sjögren’s
syndrome (SS) because of certain histopathological similarities, particularly lymphocytic infiltration . However, IgG4-DS patients show
elevated serum levels of IgG4 and infiltrating IgG4-positive plasma cells in the glandular tissues . Similar findings have also been
identified in other diseases such as autoimmune pancreatitis , interstitial pneumonia , retroperitoneal fibrosis , and sclerosing
cholangitis , and these diseases are now referred to as ‘IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD)’ . IgG4-DS is now diagnosed by both ‘Comprehensive
diagnostic criteria for IgG4-related disease (2011)’ and ‘Diagnostic criteria for IgG4-related Mikulicz’s disease D’ approved by the
Japanese Society for Sjögren’s syndrome . However, it is important to differentiate IgG4-RD from malignant tumors (such as cancer, lymphoma)
and similar diseases (such as SS, primary sclerosing cholangitis, Castleman’s disease, secondary retroperitoneal fibrosis, Wegener’s
granulomatosis, sarcoidosis, Churg-Strauss syndrome) by histopathological examination of local lesion. We reported the first case of
IgG4-producing marginal zone B cell lymphoma (MZL) in salivary glands mimicking IgG4-DS. A 70-year-old man was referred to our institution
with bilateral continuous painless swelling of the parotid glands (PGs) and submandibular glands (SMGs) in March 2013. He had previously
attended another hospital with chief complaints of dry mouth and bilateral swelling of SMGs, which were diagnosed as chronic sialoadenitis
by computed tomography (CT) in January 2013. However, he did not receive any treatment at that time and ignored the swelling. He had no
medical history of allergic diseases such as bronchial asthma, atopic dermatitis, or allergic rhinitis. Physical findings showed no fever
(body temperature, 36.6°C), a blood pressure of 124/68 mmHg, a pulse rate of 64 beats per min, and arterial oxygen saturation of 98% in room
air. He had a dry mouth and stomatitis with reduced unstimulated salivary flow rate (0.9 ml/15 min). Bilateral PGs, SMGs, and sublingual
glands were elastic, hard, and swollen, but not painful. Several cervical lymph nodes were enlarged. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET) demonstrated abnormal multiple accumulations in the SMGs (SUVmax, 4.63) and in several systemic lymph nodes
(SUVmax, 3.23–4.12) (Figure 1A). CT and magnetic resonance imaging showed remarkable swelling of bilateral PGs, SMGs, and generalized lymph
nodes, including in the neck (Figure 1b). On ultrasonograms, SMGs showed bilateral nodal hypoechoic areas with high vascularization, whereas
PGs showed normal or slight change (Figure 1C).Figure 1 Imaging findings before treatment. (A) Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET) indicating abnormal multiple accumulations in the submandibular glands (SMGs) (white arrowheads) and in several
systemic lymph nodes (black arrowheads). (B) Computed tomography (CT) findings indicating swelling of the parotid glands (PGs) (white
arrowheads), SMGs (white arrowheads), and generalized lymph nodes (LNs) (white arrows). (C) Sonographic images indicating bilateral nodal
hypoechoic areas in the SMGs. Imaging findings before treatment. (A) Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) indicating
abnormal multiple accumulations in the submandibular glands (SMGs) (white arrowheads) and in several systemic lymph nodes (black
arrowheads). (B) Computed tomography (CT) findings indicating swelling of the parotid glands (PGs) (white arrowheads), SMGs (white
arrowheads), and generalized lymph nodes (LNs) (white arrows). (C) Sonographic images indicating bilateral nodal hypoechoic areas in the
SMGs. Laboratory findings are indicated in Table 1. He had an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (15 mm/h), hemoglobin concentration
of 12.6 g/dl, white blood cell count of 4,680/mm3 (neutrophils 40.7%, lymphocytes 49.8%, monocytes 8.5%, eosinophils 0.4%, basophils 0.6%),
and platelet count of 12.6 × 104/mm3. Serum chemistry data were all within normal limits. His C-reactive protein concentration was
0.07 mg/dl. Immunological tests were negative for anti-nuclear antibody, anti-SS-A antibody, and rheumatoid factor. Serum levels of IgG,
IgA, IgM, and IgE were within normal limits (1,177 mg/dl, 179 mg/ml, 91 mg/dl, and 15 IU/ml, respectively), but his serum IgG4 concentration
was elevated (215 mg/dl). The proportion of total IgG molecules that were subclass IgG4 was 18%. The serum soluble interelukin-2 receptor
(sIL-2R) concentration was abnormally high (1,566.2 U/ml).Table 1 Laboratory data before and after treatment Treatment Reference range
Before After WBC (/mm3)4,6803,6203,500–9,000Neutrophils (%)40.7-40.0–70.0Lymphocytes (%)49.837.018.0–53.0Monocytes (%)8.5 12.5
2.0–12.0Eosinophils (%)0.42.51.0–4.0Basophils (%)0.6 3.0 0.0–1.0Hemoglobin (g/dl) 12.6 13.9 14.0–18.0Palate (104/mm3) 12.6 16.614.0–44.0ESR
(mm/h) 12 -2–10Total protein (g/dl) 6.6 6.5 6.7–8.3Albumin (g/dl)4.04.34.0–5.0LDH (U/L)182177119–229CRP (mg/dl)0.070.02<0.10IgG
(mg/dl)1,177993872–1,815IgG4 (mg/dl) 215 195 4.8–105IgA (mg/dl)17919695–405IgM (mg/dl)916631–190IgE (mg/dl)15-<240sIL-2R (U/ml) 1,566.2
752.0 206.0–713.0 WBC white blood cell, ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP C-reactive protein, sIL-2R soluble interleukin-2 receptor.
Bold and italicized numbers indicate abnormal values. Laboratory data before and after treatment WBC white blood cell, ESR erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, CRP C-reactive protein, sIL-2R soluble interleukin-2 receptor. Bold and italicized numbers indicate abnormal values.
IgG4-DS was initially suspected because of the enlarged glandular tissues and high serum IgG4 concentration. Open biopsies of the cervical
lymph node and a portion of the left SMG were therefore performed for definitive diagnosis. Histologically, all sections showed severe
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with hyperplastic lymphoid follicles, so-called follicular colonization. Furthermore, the plasmacytoid cells
showed nuclear pleomorphism. Immunohistochemical staining showed mild infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells (IgG4-positive/IgG-positive
plasma cell ratio, 10%) and monotypic predominance of kappa-light chain. The infiltrating lymphocytes were positive for B cell markers (CD20
and CD79a) and bcl-2, but negative for T-cell markers (CD3, CD5, CD8, and CD45RO), CD10 and cyclinD1 (Figure 2).Figure 2 Histological
findings in submandibular glands. (A) Severe lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with hyperplastic lymphoid follicles, so-called ‘follicular
colonization’ (white arrowheads). (B) mild infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells (IgG4-positive/IgG-positive plasma cell ratio, 10%).
(C) Monotypic predominance of kappa-light chain. (D) Infiltrating lymphocytes were positive for B cell markers (CD79a), but negative for
T-cell markers (CD3). Histological findings in submandibular glands. (A) Severe lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with hyperplastic lymphoid
follicles, so-called ‘follicular colonization’ (white arrowheads). (B) mild infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells (IgG4-positive/IgG-
positive plasma cell ratio, 10%). (C) Monotypic predominance of kappa-light chain. (D) Infiltrating lymphocytes were positive for B cell
markers (CD79a), but negative for T-cell markers (CD3). These histopathological findings and clinical features confirmed a diagnosis of MZL.
The patient was treated with 600 mg rituximab for six times as currently recommended regimen . Swelling of the SMGs diminished slightly, and
there was no metastatic spread. PGs and LNs showed no remarkably change on all images, whereas SMGs had ill-defined borders of nodal
hypoechoic areas (Figure 3). Laboratory findings after treatment still revealed high concentrations of serum IgG4 (195 mg/dl) and sIL-2R
(752.0 U/ml) (Table 1).Figure 3 Imaging findings after treatment. (A) FDG-PET indicating unchanged abnormal multiple accumulations in the
SMGs (white arrowheads) and in several systemic lymph nodes (black arrowheads). (B) CT findings indicating swelling of the PGs (white
arrowheads), SMGs (white arrowheads), and generalized lymph nodes (LNs) (white arrows). (C) Sonographic images indicating vaguely-outlined
hypoechoic areas in the SMGs. Imaging findings after treatment. (A) FDG-PET indicating unchanged abnormal multiple accumulations in the SMGs
(white arrowheads) and in several systemic lymph nodes (black arrowheads). (B) CT findings indicating swelling of the PGs (white
arrowheads), SMGs (white arrowheads), and generalized lymph nodes (LNs) (white arrows). (C) Sonographic images indicating vaguely-outlined
hypoechoic areas in the SMGs. IgG4-DS is now recognized as a new emerging disorder, characterized by high serum IgG4, marked infiltration of
IgG4-positive plasma cells and severe fibrosis with hyperplastic ectopic germinal centers in lacrimal and salivary glands. We recently
proposed ‘Comprehensive diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD’ . IgG4-RD can be diagnosed using these comprehensive diagnostic criteria combined
with organ-specific criteria. If a diagnosis of IgG4-DS is probable or possible based on these criteria, it can be confirmed according to
the ‘Diagnostic criteria for IgG4-related Mikulicz’s disease’ approved by the Japanese Society for Sjögren’s syndrome in 2008, which include
the following items: (i) persistent (longer than 3 months) symmetrical swelling of more than two lacrimal and major salivary glands, (ii)
raised serum levels of IgG4 (>135 mg/dl), and (iii) infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells in the tissue (IgG4-positive plasma
cells/IgG-positive plasma cells >0.4) by immunostaining. For a positive IgG4-DS diagnosis, any two of these three criteria must be
fulfilled, including item (i). The present case met criteria (i) and (ii), and IgG4-DS was therefore strongly suspected. However, biopsy of
the local lesion is recommended for differential diagnosis from other disorders, including sarcoidosis, Castleman’s disease, Wegener’s
granulomatosis, lymphoma, and cancer. We therefore performed the cervical lymph node and SMG biopsies, resulting in a definitive diagnosis
of MZL. These results suggest that biopsy of the swollen lesion is essential for a definitive diagnosis of IgG4-DS. Moreover, we have
commonly performed incisional open biopsies of swollen SMGs under local anesthesia, with no complications including facial palsy,
sialoceles, or wound infections. Open biopsy is thus a relatively low-invasive procedure and useful for the definitive diagnosis of IgG4-DS
. Isabel et al. reported IgG4 expression in MZLs of various primary sites. According to their paper, 19 out of 49 (38.8%) cutaneous MZLs
were positive for IgG4 expression, while only 1 out of 120 (0.8%) other MZLs were positive, especially all of 20 salivary gland MZLs showed
no IgG4 expression. Therefore, salivary gland MZL positive for IgG4 as in this case is very rare. Several studies have reported
IgG4-associated conditions in parts of malignant lymphoma of the ocular adnexal and lymph nodes . However, IgG4-positive cells were non-
neoplastic, and this IgG4-related chronic inflammation is thought to be a background for the development of malignant lymphoma . In
contrast, IgG4-producing lymphoma (non-associated IgG4-RD) also exists , in which the IgG4-producing cells are neoplastic and monoclonal
rearrangement bands can be observed by Southern blot hybridization. Single-agent therapy of rituximab is not effective for MZL but for
IgG4-RD . In this case, the clinical findings, images, and laboratory examinations showed no remarkably improvement after treatment for
rituximab for six times. His serum IgG4 concentration levels remained high and swelling of salivary glands was nearly unchanged, which
indicated that this case might be IgG4-producing MZL but not on a background of IgG4-related chronic inflammation. Unfortunately, we were
unable to confirm a strong infiltration of IgG4-positive cells in the biopsy specimens, and more case reports and further examinations are
required to clarify the clinicopathological features of IgG4-RD. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication
of this report and any accompanying images. IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis Mikulicz’s disease Sjögren’s syndrome IgG4-related
disease marginal zone B cell lymphoma parotid gland submandibular gland computed tomography F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MO and MM participated in
study design, literature search, data analysis, manuscript writing, and editing. In addition, YG participated in submission of the
manuscript. SK, AT, TM, SF, J-NH, TK, and MS participated in data analysis, manuscript writing, and editing. In addition, YA and SN
supervised the study. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported in part by grants from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan (26293430, 26670869), the ‘Research on Measures for Intractable Diseases’
project, a matching fund subsidy from the Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare, Japan (H26-026, H26-050, H26-064, H26-083) and the ‘Takeda
Science Foundation’.
