Lung cancer is one of the most frequent malignancies, with high mortality rates. It can metastasize in almost all organs, but more often
invades hilar nodes, liver, adrenal glands, bones and brain. There are various data on the incidence of lung cancer metastases in the skin.
In 1-12% of patients with lung cancer are developed skin metastases. Metastases in the skin may be the first sign of lung cancer. Forty-five
years old Albanian male, smoker, was admitted to our department with multiple nodules localized in the skin of the head, neck, back and
chest. The nodules measuring 5–15 millimeters in greatest dimension were round and skin-colored, with telangiectasias, firm and tender. They
appeared in an eruptive form about two weeks before being admitted at our hospital. In addition, the patient exhibited signs of weight loss,
anorexia and fatigue. Excisional biopsy was performed to one of the lesions. Histopathology confirmed metastatic nature of the lesion
namely, malignant tumor of neuroendocrine phenotype consistent with small-cell carcinoma. Chest X-ray and computed tomography revealed an
expansive process in the 7th segment of the left lung, left hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and a suspicious initial secondary deposit
in the left adrenal gland. The patient was referred to the department of oncology for further treatment. After the third cycle of
chemotherapy, the magnetic resonance imaging revealed brain metastases. The patient passed away four months after the diagnosis of lung
cancer first presented with skin metastases. Metastases in skin may be the first sign of lung cancer. Although rare appearing, we should
raise suspicion in cases of atypical lesions in the skin not only of the smokers, but also of the non-smokers. Skin metastases from small-
cell lung carcinoma are a poor prognostic indicator. The appearance of multiple skin metastases with other internal metastases shorten the
survival time. Lung cancer is one of the most frequent malignancies with high mortality rate . It may metastasize in almost all organs, but
more frequent sites are hilar nodes, liver, adrenal glands, bones and brain . There are various data on the incidence of lung cancer
metastases in the skin. According to some data, in men, lung cancer is ranked first with skin metastases (24%), compared to other
malignancies . In women, lung cancer is ranked fourth (4%) with skin metastases, following breast cancer, colorectal cancer, melanoma and
ovarian cancer . The incidence of skin metastases from lung cancer varies between 1-12% of cases . All histological types of lung cancer may
develop metastases in the skin. Metastases from lung cancer may be the first sign of lung cancer and clinically cannot be distinguished from
skin metastases originated from other organs . Most common sites of skin metastases from lung cancer are the chest, abdomen, head and neck .
Clinically, skin metastases occur as round or oval nodules, mobile or fixed, firm, skin-colored (sometimes red, dark red or black). The
nodules are usually painless, sometimes may ulcerate. They may rarely appear in the form of solitary or grouped papules, plaque-like,
zosteriform, erysipelas-like or as cicatricial alopecia on the scalp . Compared to other internal malignancies, lung cancer is the fastest
in developing skin metastases after initial diagnosis . The occurrence of cutaneous metastases from lung cancer is a poor prognostic
indicator . Coexistence of skin metastases with other extracutaneous metastases decreases the average survival time to approximately three
months . The survival time can last up to ten months in cases with skin metastases only . Forty-five years old Albanian male, smoker, was
admitted to our department with multiple skin nodules localized in the head, neck, back and chest. The nodules were firm, tender, skin-
colored and measured 5-15 millimeters in greatest dimension (Figure 1). They occurred two weeks before being admitted. In addition, the
patient exhibited signs of weight loss, anorexia and fatigue, but no symptoms related to respiratory system. Excisional biopsy was performed
to one of the lesions. Histopathology confirmed metastatic nature of the lesion namely, malignant tumor of neuroendocrine phenotype
consistent with small-cell carcinoma (SCC). The pattern consisted of grouped small cells, oval or fusiform, with large hyperchromatic
nuclei. In immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were positive for Pan Cytokeratin (CK-MNF), CD-56 and Synaptophysin. There was no expression of
Cytokeratin 7 or Cytokeratin 20. Leukocyte Common Antigen (LCA, CD45) was positive in scattered inflammatory cells of the tumor stroma
(Figure 2). Proliferative index as measured by Ki-67 was high (approximately 99% of tumor cells). The bronchoscopic biopsy was
nondiagnostic.Figure 1(a, b) Multiple nodules on the back and a nodule with telangiectasias.Figure 2Immunohistochemical stain highlighting
neuroendocrine nature of the tumor cells. Cytokeratin 20 (not shown) was negative. (a, b) Multiple nodules on the back and a nodule with
telangiectasias. Immunohistochemical stain highlighting neuroendocrine nature of the tumor cells. Cytokeratin 20 (not shown) was negative.
Subsequently, chest X-ray (CXR) showed obliteration of the left costophrenic angle and increased inhomogenous density in the left perihilar
zone (Figure 3).Figure 3Chest X-ray showed obliteration of the left costophrenic angle and increased inhomogenous density in the left
parahilar zone. Chest X-ray showed obliteration of the left costophrenic angle and increased inhomogenous density in the left parahilar
zone. Computed tomography (CT) revealed an expansive process in the left lung, left hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Figure 4) and a
suspicious secondary initial deposit in the left adrenal gland. Bone scan was unremarkable. Laboratory results were within normal limits,
except values of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) which was slightly elevated namely, 556 U/l (230-460) and C- reactive protein (CRP) with values
of 15.4 mg/l (0 to 5.0). The patient was referred to the department of oncology where he underwent chemotherapy with cisplatin 130 mg and
etoposide 180 mg with poor clinical response. Meanwhile, skin metastases increased in number and occurred also in the region of the
face.Figure 4(a, b) Computed tomography revealed an expansive process in the left lung, left hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. (a, b)
Computed tomography revealed an expansive process in the left lung, left hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. After the third cycle of
chemotherapy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple brain metastases located in the cortex of the temporal lobe, left
cerebellum, orbital adipose tissue, bilateral extraocular muscles and left lacrimal gland region (Figure 5). The patient passed away four
months after the lung cancer diagnosis. Skin metastases were the first sign.Figure 5(a, b) Magnetic resonance imaging of metastases located
in the cortex of the temporal lobe, scalp (a) and in the left cerebellar hemisphere (b). (a, b) Magnetic resonance imaging of metastases
located in the cortex of the temporal lobe, scalp (a) and in the left cerebellar hemisphere (b). Lung cancer metastases in the skin are rare
. In literature there are various data regarding the frequency of their development. Patients with lung cancer develop skin metastases in
ranges form 1-12% . Although it was thought that lung cancer has the highest incidence of skin metastasizing in men , recent studies have
shown that melanoma leads with skin metastases (32.3%) in men. In women, lung cancer develops metastases in the skin in 2% of cases . It is
reported that in 25% of cases of lung cancer, skin is the first site of metastasis . However, in large series of studies, there are reports
that the skin is the 13th common site of lung cancer metastasizing , while hilar nodes, liver, adrenal glands, bones and brain are more
frequent sites . In a retrospective study with 80 cases , the adjusted skin metastasis prevalence data of various inner cancers indicated
that kidney-, lung- and colorectal cancers have a strong positive preference for skin metastatisation. Most skin metastases occur in regions
close to the primary cancer. A number of cancers demonstrate a colonization preference to the region of origin: lung cancer to the
supradiaphragmatic (mostly chest) and colorectal cancers to the infradiaphragmatic (abdominal) skin regions . It was also found that cancer
of the upper lobes of the lungs have a greater tendency to metastasizing in skin . These findings are clinically relevant and useful
especially in patients where skin metastasis is the first indication of a malignancy . Metastasis of human cancer is an organ-selective
process that is determined by anatomical and biological factors as well as by specific microenvironmental properties . The precise
mechanisms determining the tropism of lung cancer for skin remain unsolved. In small-cell lung cancer, metastatic disease often appears at
the time of or shortly after the initial diagnosis . Several recent studies indicate that there are unique genes and gene signatures that
modulate specific tropisms of a primary tumor . All histological types of lung cancer may develop metastases in the skin . In literature,
various data are reported related to the frequency of skin metastases of different histological types of lung cancer. Some studies
demonstrate that adenocarcinoma (ACC) is the most common type of lung cancer that develops skin metastases . Terashima and Coslett reported
in their studies that large-cell carcinoma (LCC) has the highest incidence of skin metastases, followed by ACC. SCC rarely develops
metastases in the skin .In our case, the primary cancer was a micro-cellular carcinoma located on the lower left lobe. Skin metastases were
the first sign. Although the literature describes cases where metastatic nodules are painless, our patient had painful nodules which made
uncomfortable lying position. Cutaneous metastases in the facial region occur in less than 0.5% of patients with metastatic cancer . In a
report , an unusual case of small-cell lung cancer metastasizing on the face at the time of initial diagnosis is described. In our case,
facial metastases occurred during chemotherapy. Metastases in skin occur when the disease has progressed and are indicator of poor prognosis
and short survival . There are reports that the survival time after the appearance of skin metastases is about 5-6 months . Patients that
present with skin metastases earlier during the disease course, have poorer prognosis compared to those with later developed metastases .
The prognosis is poorer in cases where except cutaneous metastases there are extracutaneous metastases also . Non-resectable primary tumor
or small-cell carcinoma is another poor prognostic indicator . Our patient had three poor prognostic indicators: primary micro-cellular
inoperable tumor, multiple cutaneous metastases and other distant metastases. Metastases in skin may be the first sign of lung cancer. Due
to the non- specific appearance, they can be misdiagnosed as benign lesions. In our case, supradiaphragmatic location of non-specific skin
lesions, weight loss, and positive smoking history indicated suspicion for lung cancer. Even though skin metastases from lung cancer are
rare, we should suspect on it in cases of atypical lesions in the skin in smokers as well as in non smokers. Skin metastases from lung
cancer are a poor prognostic indicator. The prognosis is poorer when small-cell lung carcinoma is the primary. The appearance of multiple
skin metastases with other internal metastases shorten the survival time. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s sister
for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. Adenocarcinoma Pan Cytokeratin C reactive protein Computed tomography Chest X-ray CD45, Leukocyte Common Antigen
Large-cell carcinoma Lactate dehydrogenase Magnetic resonance imaging Small-cell carcinoma Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LP, SRH, ShD, NH, FK and AP analyzed and interpreted the patients’ data. LP was a major
contributor in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to acknowledge the
Oncology Department for the commitment and collaboration.
