Survivors of combat trauma can have long and challenging recoveries, which may be complicated by infection. Invasive fungal infections are a
rare but serious complication with limited treatment options. Currently, aggressive surgical debridement is the standard of care, with
antifungal agents used adjunctively with uncertain efficacy. Anecdotal evidence suggests that antifungal agents may be ineffective in the
absence of surgical debridement, and studies have yet to correlate antifungal concentrations in plasma and wounds. Here we report the
systemic pharmacokinetics and wound effluent antifungal concentrations of five wounds from two male patients, aged 28 and 30 years old who
sustained combat-related blast injuries in southern Afghanistan, with proven or possible invasive fungal infection. Our data demonstrate
that while voriconazole sufficiently penetrated the wound resulting in detectable effluent levels, free amphotericin B (unbound to plasma)
was not present in wound effluent despite sufficient concentrations in circulating plasma. In addition, considerable between-patient and
within-patient variability was observed in antifungal pharmacokinetic parameters. These data highlight the need for further studies
evaluating wound penetration of commonly used antifungals and the role for therapeutic drug monitoring in providing optimal care for
critically ill and injured war fighters. A significant number of combat-related casualties have resulted from the ongoing military
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan . Improvements in tactical combat casualty care have led to increased survival rates , resulting in
prolonged survival of critically ill and injured patients who experience complex treatment courses, often with complications. Invasive
fungal infection is a major complication that affects patients regardless of immune status , with reported risk factors including injury
while serving in riparian environments of southern Afghanistan , dismounted blast injury resulting in polytrauma (severe lower extremity and
groin trauma from stepping on an improvised explosive device), and massive blood transfusion . Inoculation of soil-dwelling molds into
wounds is proposed to occur at the time of injury, with subsequent growth of vegetative mold structures within human tissue. Fittingly,
invasive fungal infection has been recently documented in patients that sustained wounds contaminated with wood, soil, and gravel following
a major tornado . Diagnosis is often delayed by the need for specimen collection, limited microbiological assays in austere field hospitals,
histopathological confirmation, and positive fungal culture. Thus, the median time from infection to diagnosis is 10 days . Treatment is
primarily surgical debridement, as the efficacy of antifungal agents remains unclear . In clinical practice, antifungal agents are
anecdotally observed to be ineffective in halting the progression of invasive infection despite what is perceived to be adequate surgical
debridement. As a result, aggressive debridements into clinically viable tissue are often necessary, resulting in severely disabling
procedures such as extremity amputation, hip disarticulation, or even hemipelvectomy. In lieu of antifungal therapies sufficiently potent as
to eliminate the burden of life-saving but disabling surgeries, optimizing the dose of currently available antifungal agents might help
maximize clinical recovery while limiting toxic side effects. Furthermore, little is known about tissue penetration of antimicrobials,
including antifungals, and whether plasma concentrations are correlated to wound penetration. Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT),
frequently used in the care of wound infections, affords an opportunity to collect wound effluent for evaluation. Previous studies have
examined wound effluent for the presence of bacteria , inflammatory cytokines , and other protein components but the presence of
antimicrobials in wound effluent has not been examined. To gain insight into the penetration of clinically useful antimicrobial agents
across wounds under negative pressure, we undertook two prospective observational studies of antimicrobials, including antifungals, in
patients with trauma-related wounds. Here we report the systemic pharmacokinetics (PK) and effluent antifungal concentrations of five wounds
in two blast-injured combat casualties with proven or possible invasive fungal infection. This study was conducted under a protocol reviewed
and approved by the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command Institutional Review Board and in accordance with approved protocols
BAMC C.2013.095 and H-09-059. Two patients receiving antifungal therapy for proven or possible invasive mold infection were enrolled with
informed consent into institutional review board-approved observational pharmacokinetic (PK) studies examining the adequacy of antimicrobial
dosing in critically ill patients, or in the context of military wound infections. At the time of initial PK steady-state sampling, both
patients were receiving liposomal amphotericin B (L-AmB) with one also receiving voriconazole at recommended maintenance doses (5 mg/kg and
4 mg/kg, respectively). Peripheral blood samples were obtained at time points spanning the dose interval for each agent. Simultaneously,
wound effluent was collected over 24 hours (the dose interval for L-AmB) from available sites treated with NPWT (Wound V.A.C., KCI, San
Antonio, TX) into canisters lacking the congealing agent. Wound effluent was recovered from canisters by syringe aspiration for volumetric
measurement and determination of antifungal concentration. Total and free concentrations of amphotericin B and voriconazole were determined
in plasma and wound effluent using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Data was collected on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 instrument
(ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) equipped with an HPG 3400SD binary pump, WPS autosampler, and DAD-3000 UV-visible detector. For amphotericin B,
analysis was conducted as previously described with slight modifications. The mobile phase consisted of 10 mM acetate buffer (pH 4.0) and
acetonitrile, delivered isocratically at a 63:37 ratio and a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min . The stationary phase was a Phenomenex Luna C18(2)
150x4.6 mm column (100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size) preceded by a 10 mm guard column with matching chemistry. Seven calibration
standards, 150 μL each, were prepared containing 0.1-200 μg/mL amphotericin B on a free drug basis (deoxycholate, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and
50 μL of 25 μg/mL natamycin as an internal standard to correct for losses during sample preparation. One mL of acetonitrile:acetic acid
(9:1) was added to each sample, which was then vortexed briefly and stored at room temperature in darkness for 1 hour. Each sample was
centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min to precipitate protein from the sample, after which the supernatant was loaded onto the HPLC. Detection
was by UV at 405 nm for amphotericin B and 303 nm for natamycin. Injection volume was 50 μL. Retention times were 10 min for amphotericin B
and 4.5 min for natamycin. The calibration curve was constructed using the peak area ratio of the analyte (amphotericin B) and the internal
standard (natamycin). To determine total drug levels in patient samples, 50 μL of 25 μg/mL natamycin was added to 150 μL of plasma or
effluent and the same preparation and analysis procedures were followed. Voriconazole was identified by HPLC as previously described . The
mobile phase consisted of 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and acetonitrile, delivered in a gradient (20-50% acetonitrile over 10 minutes) at
a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The stationary phase was a Phenomenex Luna Phenyl-Hexyl 150x4.6 mm column (100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size)
column preceded by a 10 mm guard column with matching chemistry. Six calibration standards were prepared containing 1–50 μg/mL voriconazole
(SelleckChem, Houston, TX) and 1 μL of 50 μg/mL itraconazole as an internal standard to correct for losses during sample preparation. Sample
cleanup was accomplished by protein precipitation with 400 μL methanol followed by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant
was dried under air (15–20 L/min) and reconstituted in 200 μL MeOH:phosphate buffer (1:1). Detection was by UV at 260 nm for both
voriconazole and itraconazole. Injection volume was 25 μL. Retention times were 3.6 min for voriconazole and 9.8 min for itraconazole. To
determine total drug levels in patient samples, 1 μL of itraconazole (50 μg/mL in methanol) was added to 200 μL of each plasma or effluent
sample and the same preparation and analysis procedures were followed. Free (protein unbound) levels of both drugs in plasma and effluent
were determined using ultrafiltration units as previously described . Briefly, 300 μL of plasma or effluent was loaded into each cartridge
and samples were centrifuged at 1,500 × g for 30 min. The filtrate was assayed by HPLC as described above and the results were volume-
corrected to find the concentration of unbound drug for each sample. From the resulting plasma time-concentration curves, PK parameter
estimates were determined by non-compartmental analysis using standard WinNonLin v6.3 (Pharsight Inc., Sunnyvale, CA). The adequacy of
antifungal concentrations in wound effluent to suppress mold infections were interpreted using minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of
0.5 μg/mL for amphotericin B against Mucorales molds and 1.0 μg/mL for voriconazole against Aspergillus spp. , the lowest concentrations at
which growth of these organisms are reliably inhibited in vitro. Potential drug interactions were evaluated using the Lexi-Interact™ Online
software (Lexicomp, Inc., Hudson, OH). A 30 year-old male suffered a complex blast injury as a result of a dismounted improvised explosive
device blast in southern Afghanistan, resulting in polytrauma including bilateral above-the-knee amputations, perineal/gluteal avulsion and
20% total body surface area burns to the posterior thighs and back. Initial resuscitation and damage control surgery was performed in
Afghanistan, followed by medical evacuation on post-injury day 3 to Landstuhl Regional Medical Center (LRMC) in Germany. At LRMC, tissue
samples of the lower extremity amputation sites and gluteal wounds were collected as part of clinical care for early detection of invasive
fungal infection in accordance with the LRMC “blast protocol” , demonstrating angioinvasive non-septate branching hyphae diagnostic of a
proven invasive fungal infection by a Mucorales mold . Repeated surgical debridements performed at the discretion of the clinical care team
with tissue fungal cultures (post-injury days 3 to 7) resulted in recovery of Aspergillus flavus, A. terreus, Fusarium sp. and an
unidentified Mucorales mold. Following transfer to Brooke Army Medical Center, subsequent tissue fungal cultures from debridements recovered
Saksenea erythrospora on 10 different occasions between post-injury days 12 and 46, with non-septate branching hyphae observed but not
cultured on 5 additional soft tissue specimens collected on 3 separate days. Additionally, Fusarium sp. was recovered on post-injury day 59.
Plasma and effluent sampling was performed on post-injury day 18 (Patient 1, Table 1, antifungal treatment day 15) following a once-daily
dose of L-AmB (5 mg/kg IV), with effluent recovered from two abdominal NPWT sites (midline and left lower quadrant, Figure 1). While the
plasma peak and trough concentrations were 25.5 μg/mL and 6.1 μg/mL, respectively (Table 1), total amphotericin B in the wound effluent was
0.2-0.3 μg/mL and free amphotericin B levels were undetectable by our assay (Table 2). At the time of sampling, NPWT with periodic
instillation of Dakin’s solution was employed to provide local antifungal therapy to the subject’s bilateral lower extremity amputation
sites, precluding effluent collection at these locations. Patient 1 survived to hospital discharge on post-injury day 193.Figure
1Amphotericin B concentrations in plasma and wound effluent in two patients with 5 wounds. Abd, abdomen; LLQ, left lower quadrant.
Amphotericin B concentrations in plasma and wound effluent in two patients with 5 wounds. Abd, abdomen; LLQ, left lower quadrant. A 28 year-
old male was injured by a close-proximity blast from a rocket-propelled grenade, causing multiple penetrating shrapnel injuries to the chest
and abdomen (including liver and duodenal lacerations), as well as fractures of the humerus and calcaneus. Following wound debridements and
exploratory laparotomy with distal gastrectomy, duodenectomy, and abdominal fascia closure, NPWT devices were applied over surgical sites on
the arm, abdomen, and heel. During routine wound debridements, Aspergillus flavus was cultured from soft tissues of the hip and posterior
thigh on post-injury days 10, 13 and 14. On post-injury day 10, histopathology identified fungal elements in viable skeletal muscle tissue
from the groin, and in non-viable connective tissues of the foot as well as non-viable serosal adhesions of the antrum of the stomach and
first part of the duodenum. On post-injury day 21, fungal elements were observed again in necrotic tissues of the groin. No angioinvasion
was observed, thus establishing the diagnosis as probable invasive fungal infection . Plasma and wound effluent were sampled on post-injury
day 15 (Patient 2a, Table 1, antifungal treatment day 4) following doses of L-AmB (5 mg/kg IV every 24 h) and voriconazole (4 mg/kg IV every
12 h). Concurrent medications potentially interfering with voriconazole metabolism given on this date included pantoprazole 40 mg IV every
12 h and quetiapine 25 mg PO every 24 h. Despite apparently adequate plasma levels of amphotericin B (trough 12.8 μg/mL, Figure 1) and
voriconazole (trough 3.0 μg/mL, Figure 2), free concentrations of amphotericin B (unbound to protein) in wound effluent were below the limit
of detection for the assay (<2.5 ng/mL, Table 2) and thus presumed to be sub-inhibitory for Mucorales (MIC ≤0.5 μg/mL). Whereas free
voriconazole was detected at 2.7 μg/mL and 1.6 μg/mL from the arm and abdominal sites, respectively, the concentration in calcaneus effluent
(0.6 μg/mL) was presumed to be sub inhibitory (MIC ≤1.0 μg/mL). In patient 2, plasma PK sampling was again performed for voriconazole only
on post-injury day 21 (Patient 2b, Table 1, treatment day 11, and 7 days after the initial PK sampling). Concurrent medications potentially
interfering with voriconazole metabolism given on this date included pantoprazole 40 mg IV every 12 h and ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV every 8 h.
Notably, the systemic clearance of voriconazole increased nearly three-fold while the weight-adjusted volume of distribution more than
doubled (Table 1). This likely reflected improvement in hepatic function indicated by decreasing aspartate aminotransferase and alanine
transaminase values, as well as discontinuation of quetiapine 6 days previously. Pantoprazole was continued at the same dose and frequency
at both sampling periods. These changes resulted in a significantly reduced 12-hour area under the curve (AUC), a measure of overall
voriconazole exposure, and much lower peak and subtherapeutic trough concentrations. These changes occurred despite an increased mg/kg dose
of voriconazole, which in turn resulted from catabolic loss of 17 kg over 1 week caused by limiting feeding in the setting of penetrating
gastrointestinal trauma. Patient 2 survived to hospital discharge on post-injury day 99.Table 1 Patient characteristics and pharmacokinetic
values Patient12a2bPost-Injury Day181521Treatment Day15411Age (years)302828Weight (kg)78.877.160.1AntifungalL-AmBL-
AmBVoriconazoleVoriconazoleDose (mg)400400320320Dose (mg/kg)5.1 (24 h)5.2 (24 h)4.2 (12 h)5.3 (12 h)Peak (μg/mL)25.558.410.43.5Trough
(μg/mL)6.112.83.00.7AUCτ(μg · h/mL)262.5534.767.524.1T1/2 (h)23.316.37.63.2Vd (L/kg)0.520.210.581.28Clearance
(mL/kg/min)0.320.161.023.69Plasma % bound100%100%32.7 ± 8.222.1 ± 4.1%Effluent % bound55.6% (RUE)N/A100%100%75.0% (abd.)(all sites)(all
sites)90.5% (calc.)eGFR (mL/min/1.73 m2)19.975.8126.1AST/ALT (IU/L)193/59211/31861/72INR1.41.41.2Dose interval: 24 hours for L-AmB, 12 hours
for voriconazole. Abd, abdomen; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; calc, calcaneus; eGFR, estimated glomerular
filtration rate; INR, international normalized ratio; RUE, right upper extremity; T1/2, half-life; Vd, volume of distribution.Figure
2Voriconazole concentrations for Patient 2 in plasma and wound effluent on treatment day 4 (2a), and in plasma only on treatment day 11
(2b). Abd, abdomen.Table 2 Effluent antifungal concentration and negative-pressure wound therapy parameters Amphotericin B (μg/mL)
Voriconazole (μg/mL) Patient Site Pressure (mmHg) Effluent (mL) Total Free Total Free 1Abd−125140.3<LOD----LLQ−125370.2<LOD----
2aArm−125963.0 ± 0.4<LOD2.7 ± 0.21.5 ± 0.002Abd−125601.3 ± 0.1<LOD1.6 ± 0.21.2 ± 0.01Heel−125281.3 ± 0.1<LOD0.6 ± 0.10.6 ± 0.01LOD, limit of
detection (2.5 ng/mL). Abd, abdomen; LLQ, left lower quadrant; LOD, limit of detection. Patient characteristics and pharmacokinetic values
Dose interval: 24 hours for L-AmB, 12 hours for voriconazole. Abd, abdomen; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase;
calc, calcaneus; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; INR, international normalized ratio; RUE, right upper extremity; T1/2, half-
life; Vd, volume of distribution. Voriconazole concentrations for Patient 2 in plasma and wound effluent on treatment day 4 (2a), and in
plasma only on treatment day 11 (2b). Abd, abdomen. Effluent antifungal concentration and negative-pressure wound therapy parameters LOD,
limit of detection (2.5 ng/mL). Abd, abdomen; LLQ, left lower quadrant; LOD, limit of detection. Invasive fungal infection is a complication
of combat injuries, particularly those sustained in southern Afghanistan, with risk factors of dismounted complex blast injury and high
blood transfusion requirements during trauma resuscitation . Necrotizing soft-tissue infections following natural disasters, such as
tornados, have also been documented recently . In an effort to optimize the care of severely injured and critically ill patients with fungal
infections, we measured antifungal concentrations in the plasma of two patients. In addition, we determined antifungal concentrations in
wound effluent to infer the passage of antifungal agent through and across the wounds under negative pressure. Interestingly, free
concentrations of amphotericin (according to theory, the fraction available to exert antifungal activity) were undetectable in the wound
effluent captured from all five sites in two patients with high concurrent plasma concentrations. In one of the patients, free voriconazole
was found at concentrations likely sufficient to inhibit molds with an MIC ≤1.0 μg/mL in the effluent of two sites. However, concentrations
were likely sub-inhibitory in effluent from a wound overlying the calcaneus, a site known to be challenging for adequate drug penetration
due to its limited blood flow . Consistent with the treatment of invasive fungal infection in immunocompromised populations, surgical
debridement has been the primary therapy, with antifungal medications playing an adjunctive role. This is highlighted by the observation
that Patient 1 recovered without receiving voriconazole despite the occurrence of Aspergillus terreus, a species with intrinsically reduced
susceptibility to amphotericin B. We observed significant variation in plasma PK parameters for L-AmB between the two patients who had a
nearly 2-fold increase in the AUC despite identical age and body weight, notwithstanding bilateral lower extremity amputations in Subject 1
(the impact of amputations on systemic PK is undefined). This PK variability may reflect differences in renal excretion as Subject 1 had
renal insufficiency at the time of sampling (Table 1). Likewise, the two patients may have had non-quantifiable differences in their
capacity for hepatic metabolism of L-AmB given their differential elevation in aminotransferase levels (Table 1) . Patient 2 demonstrated
significantly increased voriconazole clearance between treatment days 4 and 11, as demonstrated by trough concentrations of 3.0 and
0.7 μg/mL, respectively. This may reflect, in part, improvements in his capacity for hepatic metabolism through the 2C19, 3A4 and 2C9
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, which constitute the major metabolic pathways for voriconazole . A changing landscape of drug interactions
may also have contributed, as quetiapine is a major substrate for CYP3A4 and minor substrate for CYP2D6, which are both minor metabolic
pathways for voriconazole. Pantoprazole, an inhibitor of the enzyme primarily responsible for voriconazole metabolism (CYP2C19), was
continued at the same dose during both sampling episodes, and thus was unlikely to be the sole contributor to the changes in voriconazole
exposure. Ciprofloxacin is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4, a minor metabolic pathway for voriconazole. These PK parameter changes developed
despite an increase in his mg/kg dose, attributable to significant weight loss while continuing to receive a fixed dose of voriconazole. Had
the effluent been sampled again on treatment day 11, subtherapeutic voriconazole concentrations would likely have been found despite his
dose exceeding the package-insert recommended dose of 4 mg/kg every 12 h. Furthermore, if this functional underdosing could have been
detected via real-time therapeutic drug monitoring, a dose increase suitable for his demonstrated metabolic capacity could have been
recommended. This situation highlights the need for vigilance of patients’ daily weights, and the potential need for frequent adjustments to
medication dosages according to body weight, which can fluctuate significantly in both directions and for a variety of reasons in critically
ill patients. Additionally, the significant degree of between-patient and within-patient PK variability we observed suggests that
individuals requiring antimicrobial therapy, particularly for life-threatening infections, may benefit from real-time pharmacokinetic
monitoring to optimize efficacy and reduce toxicity . Unfortunately such monitoring is not clinically available for the majority of
antimicrobial agents, and advancements in technology are needed to determine drug concentrations in real-time, ideally at or near the point
of care. This study has inherent limitations. Only two patients with 5 wounds were studied, reflecting limitations in the available patient
population at our facility. In Patient 1, wound effluent could not be sampled from the histopathologically proven site of invasive fungal
infection at the extremity amputation sites. Our conclusion that free amphotericin B levels were inadequate in the wound is based upon
levels of protein binding in the wound effluent, outside the actual wound tissue, and we acknowledge that the degree of protein binding in
effluent may not accurately reflect what is occurring in the wound tissue itself. However, free voriconazole was detectable in wound
effluent, as we have also observed for numerous conventional antibacterial agents (unpublished data), and wound effluent cytokine analyses
are currently being used to direct clinical care . Our concern is also predicated on the canonical theory that the protein-bound fraction of
an antimicrobial is inert against microorganisms . Our investigation of effluent levels to reflect wound penetration is based upon practical
limitations stemming from the requirement for an FDA Investigational Device Exemption to sample interstitial fluid concentrations using
tissue microdialysis (the only such catheter currently approved by the FDA for human use is indicated for intracranial placement). Finally,
although multiple fungal species were reported in the clinical record, neither antifungal MICs nor the isolates were available to confirm
pathogen identity or antifungal susceptibility. This preliminary report raises concern for the limited passage of unbound amphotericin B
across wounds in combat casualties with proven or probable wound infections. These initial data require corroboration across larger data
sets to ensure their clinical validity. Preclinical models and broader human sampling may prove useful to further characterize the
penetration of currently available antifungal agents across infected tissues of combat wounds. Additionally, the PK changes we observed
between patients and dynamic changes within one patient demonstrate a need for PK monitoring to optimize care for infections. Insights
gained from such studies may lead to strategies to improve the efficacy of antifungals against invasive fungal infections. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patients for publication of the Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. Alanine transaminase Aspartate aminotransferase Area under the curve Food and drug
administration High performance liquid chromatography Intravenous liposomal amphotericin B Landstuhl Regional Medical Center Minimum
inhibitory concentration Negative pressure wound therapy Pharmacokinetics Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions KSA, KLN, JCG, KM, KKC, and CKM participated in the design of the study and coordinated the data
collection. KSA, MPR, KLN, KM, and CKM analyzed the data. KSA and MPR wrote the first draft of the manuscript. KLN, KM, KKC, and CKM
provided edits of the first draft of the manuscript. KSA, MPR, KLN, JCG, KM, KKC, and CKM participated in the revision of the manuscript,
and approved the final version. This study was conducted under a protocol reviewed and approved by the U.S. Army Medical Research and
Materiel Command Institutional Review Board and in accordance with approved protocols BAMC C.2013.095 and H-09-059. This work was supported
by Defense Medical Research & Development Program (DMRDP) Military Infectious Disease Clinical Trial Award (MID-CTA) #D_MIDCTA_I_12_J2_299,
and in part by an appointment to the Postgraduate Research Participation Program at the U.S. Army Institute of Surgical Research
administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education through an interagency agreement between the U.S. Department of Energy and
USAMRMC. A portion of this material was presented at the 2014 Military Health Systems Research Symposium, Ft. Lauderdale FL. We gratefully
acknowledge the invaluable contributions of Doug Johnson LVN, Kristie Harnisch RN, Crystal Rosemann RN, Charnae Williams BS, and the
participating research subjects, without whom this research would not be possible. The opinions or assertions contained herein are the
private views of the authors and are not to be construed as official or as reflecting the views of the Department of the Army or the
Department of Defense. The view(s) expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or position of Brooke
Army Medical Center, the U.S. Army Medical Department, the U.S. Army Office of the Surgeon General, the Department of the Army and
Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.
