The most common pediatric renal neoplasm is Wilms tumor, but clear cell sarcoma of the kidney or synovial sarcoma of the kidney are also
sometimes encountered. Accurate pathological diagnosis is important, because adjuvant therapies including chemotherapy and radiotherapy
differ according to the pathological type. A 9-year-old boy presented with a headache, and ultrasonography, computed tomography, and
magnetic resonance imaging revealed a heterogeneous enhancement of soft tissue originating from the upper pole of the left kidney, measuring
approximately 11.0 × 10.0 × 8.0 cm. A left radical nephrectomy was performed using an intraperitoneal approach through an anterior subcostal
incision. Pathological examination suggested clear cell sarcoma of the kidney or synovial sarcoma of the kidney based on morphological and
immunohistological features. Using genetic analysis, a final diagnosis of spindle cell pattern clear cell sarcoma of the kidney was made
based on the absence of the SYT-SSX fusion gene. After adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy was administered, no recurrence or metastasis has been
identified as of 60 months postoperatively. In this case, it was difficult to discriminate clear cell sarcoma of the kidney from synovial
sarcoma of the kidney based on histopathological examination alone, and genetic analysis was required. Accurate pathological diagnosis of
pediatric renal tumor is important for determining optimal treatment and preventing recurrence and metastasis. Clear cell sarcoma of the
kidney (CCSK) is a rare malignant renal tumor that primarily occurs in children and was first described by Kidd et al. in 1970 . CCSK has
recently been regarded as a malignancy distinct from Wilms tumor, and it has been classified as a tumor with unfavorable histology, along
with synovial sarcoma of the kidney (SSK) . SSK is also a rare malignant renal tumor, and was first described by Argani et al. in 2000 .
CCSK and SSK are difficult to differentiate pathologically from Wilms tumors, sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma, and undifferentiated
carcinoma. However, a precise diagnosis is important, as these unique tumors require different treatment regimens. Herein we describe our
experience with a 9-year-old boy diagnosed with CCSK that was difficult to discriminate from SSK. A 9-year-old boy presented with a
headache; he was treated for a common cold, but his symptoms did not improve. Further examinations identified that he had high blood
pressure. Ultrasonography (Figure 1A), computed tomography (Figure 1B), and magnetic resonance imaging (Figure 1C) revealed heterogeneous
enhancement of soft tissue originating from the upper pole of the left kidney, measuring approximately 11.0 × 10.0 × 8.0 cm. Further
evaluation including bone scan did not demonstrate any evidence of metastasis. A left radical nephrectomy was performed using an
intraperitoneal approach through an anterior subcostal incision. The tumor was solid, although degenerative necrosis and hemorrhage were
observed inside the tumor (Figure 2A).Figure 1 Images of the left kidney tumor. (A) Ultrasonography showing a solid tumor in the left
kidney. The tumor borders were clear, and the tumor measured 11 × 10 × 8 cm. We detected mixed echogenicity inside the tumor. (B) Contrast-
enhanced computed tomography showing a solid tumor with clear borders and contrasted disproportionate, with no lymph node swelling or tumor
embolism. (C) Magnetic resonance imaging (T2-weighted) showing necrosis and hemorrhage inside the tumor. The tumor was suspected to have
originated from left kidney tissue (arrow; normal kidney).Figure 2 Removed kidney and pathology of the tumor. (A) The tumor was solid,
elastic soft, and light yellow in coloration, with degenerative necrosis, hemorrhage and cystic lesion apparent inside the tumor. The
resected kidney weighed 630 g. The borders of the normal kidney were clear (arrow: normal kidney). (B) This part of the tumor exhibited
clear cells with scant cytoplasm and circular. Nuclei, suggesting clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK). Hematoxylin-eosin staining
(reduced from × 400). (C) This part of the tumor showed spindle-shaped cells with a comparatively high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio. These
findings suggested SSK or spindle-pattern CCSK. Hematoxylin-eosin staining (reduced from × 400). Images of the left kidney tumor. (A)
Ultrasonography showing a solid tumor in the left kidney. The tumor borders were clear, and the tumor measured 11 × 10 × 8 cm. We detected
mixed echogenicity inside the tumor. (B) Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showing a solid tumor with clear borders and contrasted
disproportionate, with no lymph node swelling or tumor embolism. (C) Magnetic resonance imaging (T2-weighted) showing necrosis and
hemorrhage inside the tumor. The tumor was suspected to have originated from left kidney tissue (arrow; normal kidney). Removed kidney and
pathology of the tumor. (A) The tumor was solid, elastic soft, and light yellow in coloration, with degenerative necrosis, hemorrhage and
cystic lesion apparent inside the tumor. The resected kidney weighed 630 g. The borders of the normal kidney were clear (arrow: normal
kidney). (B) This part of the tumor exhibited clear cells with scant cytoplasm and circular. Nuclei, suggesting clear cell sarcoma of the
kidney (CCSK). Hematoxylin-eosin staining (reduced from × 400). (C) This part of the tumor showed spindle-shaped cells with a comparatively
high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio. These findings suggested SSK or spindle-pattern CCSK. Hematoxylin-eosin staining (reduced from × 400).
Pathological examination revealed a high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio, proliferation of short, spindle-shaped tumor cells (Figure 2B), and the
presence of clear cells with scant cytoplasm (Figure 2C). Staining for cytokeratin yielded negative results, while tumor cells were positive
for vimentin, Bcl-2, CD-56, and CD-99 (Figure 3A). Differential diagnosis suggested CCSK or SSK; however, a final diagnosis of spindle cell
pattern CCSK was made based on the absence of the SYT-SSX fusion gene by polymerase chain reaction (Figure 3B) and the negative results for
transducin-like enhancer of split 1 (TLE1) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) staining (Figure 3A). The final pathological stage was
T3aN0M0 stage 1, according to the updated National Wilms Tumor Study-5 definition .Figure 3 Immunohistological staining for Bcl-2, CD-56,
CD-99, TLE1, and EMA and polymerase chain reaction of SYT-SSX . (A) Positive immunohistological staining for Bcl-2, CD-56, and CD-99
(reduced from × 400). Negative immunohistological staining for TLE1, and EMA (reduced from × 400). (B) No SYT-SSX fusion gene was detected
in tumor tissue by polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistological staining for Bcl-2, CD-56, CD-99, TLE1, and EMA and polymerase chain
reaction of SYT-SSX . (A) Positive immunohistological staining for Bcl-2, CD-56, and CD-99 (reduced from × 400). Negative immunohistological
staining for TLE1, and EMA (reduced from × 400). (B) No SYT-SSX fusion gene was detected in tumor tissue by polymerase chain reaction.
Concomitant chemo-radiotherapy was administered. The patient underwent adjuvant radiotherapy to the left nephrectomy bed (1080 cGy). As
adjuvant chemotherapy, vincristine, adriamycin, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide were administered 1 day every 4 weeks over a 6-month period,
in accordance with the Japan Wilms Tumor Study protocol . No serious therapy-related side effects were observed. No evidence of local
recurrence or metastasis has been identified as of 60 months following the operation. In this case, CCSK was difficult to discriminate from
SSK. Differentiating CCSK from SSK, primitive neuroendocrine tumor of the kidney, and sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma remains difficult .
No clinical or imaging characteristics can aid a definitive preoperative diagnosis; thus, a diagnosis of CCSK always requires pathological
confirmation. Pathologically, CCSK is characterized by tumor cells with fine nuclear chromatin, pale cytoplasm, and indistinct cell borders,
these cells form nests separated by fibrovascular stroma . However, CCSK has multiple variant patterns, including myxoid, sclerosing,
cellular, epithelioid, palisading, spindle-cell, storiform and anaplastic patterns . SSK consists of plump spindle cells in a mono- or
biphasic pattern with minimal cytoplasm and active mitotic figures . In addition, cystic lesions are commonly present and are lined with
epithelial cells that possess eosinophilic cytoplasm with apical nuclei, resulting in a hobnail appearance . Immunohistological staining can
help to differentiate CCSK from SSK, as CCSK typically stains positive for vimentin and negative for cytokeratin, Bcl-2, CD-56, and CD-99 .
However, Bcl-2, CD-56, and CD-99 may be expressed in some cases. In the case of SSK, specimens are typically positive for cytokeratin,
vimentin, Bcl-2, CD-56, CD-99, TLE1, and EMA, and are negative for actin, desmin, S-100, and CD-34 . Discriminating between SSK and CCSK
based on morphological findings is often easy, though it can be difficult when spindle-form cells are present. In addition,
immunohistochemical staining sometimes shows atypical results. However, in genetic examinations, polymerase chain reaction testing has
greatly aided the diagnosis of SSK by allowing detection of the SYT-SSX fusion gene that results from translocation of the SYT gene on
chromosome 18 with the SSX gene on the X chromosome . No SYT-SSX fusion gene is present in CCSK, though the chromosomal translocation
t(10;17)(q22;p13) is recognized in 12% of CCSK cases . But, translocation t(10;17)(q22;p13) is not recognized in this case. In the present
case, we observed a high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio and an increased presence of spindle-shaped tumor cells and clear cells with scant
cytoplasm. On immunohistochemical staining, tissues stained positive for vimentin, Bcl-2, CD-56, and CD-99, but were negative for
cytokeratin, TLE1, and EMA. CCSK and SSK were potential diagnoses based on the pathological examination, but a final diagnosis of spindle
-cell CCSK was made based on the absence of the SYT-SSX fusion gene. For CCSK treatment, surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy are
treatment options that may be administered separately or in combination. Benchekroun et al. reported the case of a patient who underwent
surgery followed by combination chemotherapy with cisplatin and doxorubicin; no metastases developed over the course of 4 years, whereas
metastases occurred within months in two patients who did not receive postoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy . In addition, Bhayani et
al. noted that a patient treated with surgery and combination chemotherapy (actinomycin, vincristine and doxorubicin) remained disease-free
at 24 months postoperatively . The National Wilms’ Tumor Study-5 trial showed a 4-year overall survival rate of 75% . While surgical
resection and ifosfamide-based chemotherapy represent the mainstays of SSK management, optimal treatment remains unclear . SSK exhibits an
aggressive clinical course with poor outcomes. Of the first 20 cases reported, 7 patients showed local or metastatic recurrence of the
disease and two patients have died . In the future, pathological and genetic information is likely to influence guidelines regarding
treatment and follow-up in patients with CCSK and SSK. Further studies with a larger number of CCSK and SSK cases are needed to provide more
knowledge regarding the diagnosis of pathological types and appropriate treatments. We report herein the case of a 9-year-old boy who
underwent radical nephrectomy for a tumor in the left kidney. A final diagnosis of CCSK was made based on genetic analysis, and adjuvant
chemo-radiotherapy was administered. Accurate pathological diagnosis of pediatric renal tumor is important for determining optimal treatment
and preventing recurrence and metastasis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of this Case
Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Clear cell
sarcoma of the kidney Synovial sarcoma of the kidney Transducin-like enhancer of split 1 Epithelial membrane antigen Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MH drafted the manuscript. KM was involved in the drafting of
the manuscript. MH, HN, YM, and YH performed the operation. HK performed the clinical follow-up and contributed to the manuscript. KK
supervised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information MH, HK, HN, YM: Postdoctoral fellow, KM:
Assistant professor, YH: Associate professor, and KK: Professor and chairman, Department of Nephro-urology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
