Meningocele and meningoencephalocele of the skull are congenital deformities. Various species, such as pigs, dogs, and cats, are susceptible
to congenital meningocele and meningoencephalocele and the incidence is higher in large white and landrace pigs. In this study, swelling was
observed in the fontanel areas of the median planes of the skull cap in two female piglets of the same litter. Gross clinical examination,
neurological examination, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were conducted on the symptomatic piglets. The
gross clinical and neurological examinations revealed no specific findings, except for the swellings. According to the CT results, the
length of the defect on the sagittal section of the skull was 4.7 mm in case 1 and 20.62 mm in case 2. Connected flow between the skull
swellings and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of the lateral ventricles was observed, and partial herniation was identified in case 2. On MRI,
CSF with high T2 signals was identified in the arachnoid spaces between the cerebrum and the cerebellum in the two cases, which is
consistent with intracranial hypertension. The size of the swelling formed in the parietal bones was 1.6 × 1.1 × 1.8 cm3 (case 1) and
1.2 × 1.38 × 1.7 cm3 (case 2). The increase in intracranial pressure was more obvious in case 2 than in case 1, and was accompanied by
posterior displacements of the mesencephalon and cerebellum. Case 1 was diagnosed as meningocele resulting from meningeal herniation and
case 2 was diagnosed as meningoencephalocele caused by brain tissue herniation. Meningocele and meningoencephalocele of the skull are
congenital deformities. These deformities, which are observed as cyst-like swellings in the median part of the skull cap, occur very rarely.
The intracranial material protrudes through a spontaneous cavity, such as the anterior fontanelle , and they are classified as
encephalocele, meningocele, or meningoencephalocele according to the cranial bifida . The condition is called meningocele when only
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) exists in the meningeal swelling, and it is called meningoencephalocele when brain tissues coexist in the swelling
. Dysraphism or a defect of the anterior fontanelle area triggers meningoencephalocele and meningocele. These defects take place in relation
to agenesis of the surface ectoderm and neuroectoderm . Congenital meningocele and meningoencephalocele occur in various animals, including
horses, pigs, dogs, cats, and goats . Their incidence is higher in large white and landrace pigs . Experimentally, the incidence of
meningoencephalocele upon crossing with a group with meningoencephalocele is between 0.95% and 1.37% . Encephalocele and meningocele mostly
occur in the suture line of the frontal region, and sometimes in the occipital region and the posterior occipital crest, whereas
meningoencephalocele largely occurs in the occipital region . Meningocele and meningoencephalocele have been diagnosed in humans and various
animals by using computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The occurrence of meningocele and meningoencephalocele in
the indigenous pigs of Jeju Island has not been previously reported. In this study, we examined the brains of two Jeju Island indigenous
pigs by using CT and MRI to diagnose meningocele and meningoencephalocele. We obtained two female piglets (age, 2 days; weight, ~1.4 kg)
from a single Jeju native pig litter from a farm in Korea. The physical examination revealed a sac-like protrusion with fluctuant swelling
in the frontoparietal region of the skull vault and a palpable skull defect on the top of the piglets’ heads. A vault swelling may protrude
through a normal opening, such as the anterior fontanelle. An ultrasound scanner (ProSoundAlpha 6, Hitachi Aloka, Japan) was used to examine
the fluctuant swelling. The swelling appeared to be filled with anechoic fluid, which was likely CSF. The presence of brain tissue in the
swelling could not be confirmed by the use of ultrasound examination and radiograph. Therefore, it was difficult to differentiate between
meningocele and meningoencephalocele by using these methods. CT imaging (Asteion Super 4, Toshiba, Japan) and MRI (Vet-MR, Esaote, Italy)
were performed to evaluate the swelling in the skull while the animals were under sedation with azaperone (Stresnil, Janssen Pharmaceutica,
Belgium). The Animal Care Committee at the National Institute of Animal Science approved all experimental procedures (Approved No.
2014-095). Case 1: In a 2-day old female piglet weighing approximately 1.4 kg, lesions connected with the swelling in the brain parenchyma
of the prefrontal level were observed on MRI. The subarachnoid space between the cerebrum and cerebellum was filled with fluid, and the CSF
was open and flowing. In addition, the corpus callosum was open, and the CSF flow measured by the MRI showed that the space was connected to
the lateral ventricle (Figure 1D,E,F). On CT, the fissure lines of the skull and bone discontinuity were disappeared, and the regions in
which the fissure lines met was identified (Figure 1C,D). A swelling containing matter of liquid density at the dorsolateral parietal bone
was identified, and it was connected to the cerebral ventricle. The length of the defect in the cross-section of the skull was measured at
4.78 mm (Figure 1D). On MRI, a swelling with high T2/low T1 signals was identified in the dorsolateral parietal bone in the transverse
cross-section. The size of the swelling was 10.67 × 16.31 (L × H, mm) (Figure 1G). Furthermore, the CSF flow of the lateral ventricle was
connected with the defect of the skull. A swelling with high T2/low T1 signals was identified on the dorsolateral parietal bone from the
median sagittal plane (Figure 1E,F), and bone discontinuity disappearance of the skull was also observed. The swelling on the median
sagittal plane was 18.49 × 10.59 (L × H, mm). With CSF leakage through the defective parietal bone, the mass observed in the parietal region
formed a swelling with high T2/low T1 signals on MRI. The size of the swelling was 1.6 × 1.1 × 1.8 (L × H × W, cm). Case 1 was diagnosed as
meningocele by meningeal herniation based on crania bifida of the skull in the anterior fontanelle region of the parietal bone.
Morphologically, the case was diagnosed as extracranial (transcalvarial) herniation.Figure 1 CT and MRI findings of the pig skull in case 1
(A–G) and case 2 (H–N).Three-dimensional volume reconstruction is shown in A (case 1) and H (case 2). The MRI of the pig’s skull is shown in
B, F, G, I, M, L and N. The imaging of the pig skull is shown in C, D, E, K, L, and M. B, The size of the swelling on the median sagittal
plane on MRI was 18.49 × 10.59 (L × H, mm). C and J, Imaging of three-dimensional volume reconstruction of the pig skull defect,
specifically a canal with irregular edges. D, Transverse-plane section through the skull showing the bone defect in case 1. The length of
the defect was 4.78 mm, and a cyst containing matter of fluid density was apparent. E and F, The matter in the swelling was related to the
cerebral ventricle. G, The size of the swelling on the cross-section was 10.67 × 16.31 (L × H, mm). I and L, Transverse-plane section
through the skull showing the bone defect in case 2. The herniation of the brain tissues from the median sagittal plane to the skull defect
was apparent. Posterior displacement of the cerebellum due to increased intracranial pressure was evident. The size of the swelling was
17.24 × 12.92 (L × H, mm). The transverse cross-section of case 2. The length of the defect was 20.62 mm. A swelling with matter of liquid
density was apparent. Transverse cross-section of case 2 on MRI. A swelling with T2 high/T1 low signals was apparent. The size of the
protruding swelling was 11.66 × 11.38 (L × H, mm). CT and MRI findings of the pig skull in case 1 (A–G) and case 2 (H–N).Three-dimensional
volume reconstruction is shown in A (case 1) and H (case 2). The MRI of the pig’s skull is shown in B, F, G, I, M, L and N. The imaging of
the pig skull is shown in C, D, E, K, L, and M. B, The size of the swelling on the median sagittal plane on MRI was 18.49 × 10.59 (L × H,
mm). C and J, Imaging of three-dimensional volume reconstruction of the pig skull defect, specifically a canal with irregular edges. D,
Transverse-plane section through the skull showing the bone defect in case 1. The length of the defect was 4.78 mm, and a cyst containing
matter of fluid density was apparent. E and F, The matter in the swelling was related to the cerebral ventricle. G, The size of the swelling
on the cross-section was 10.67 × 16.31 (L × H, mm). I and L, Transverse-plane section through the skull showing the bone defect in case 2.
The herniation of the brain tissues from the median sagittal plane to the skull defect was apparent. Posterior displacement of the
cerebellum due to increased intracranial pressure was evident. The size of the swelling was 17.24 × 12.92 (L × H, mm). The transverse cross-
section of case 2. The length of the defect was 20.62 mm. A swelling with matter of liquid density was apparent. Transverse cross-section of
case 2 on MRI. A swelling with T2 high/T1 low signals was apparent. The size of the protruding swelling was 11.66 × 11.38 (L × H, mm). Case
2: Case 2, which was from the same litter as case 1, had two swellings in the frontal lobe region. As in case 1, both MRI and CT were used
to examine case 2. The fluid of the case 1 swelling was an ahemorrhagic-serous exudate, but the fluid in case 2 was a hemorrhagic exudate.
We observed characteristic changes in the brain structure, such as findings of ventrical herniation resulting from the exchange of CSF and
posterior displacement of the cerebellum region due to increased brain pressure in the prosencephalic cavity. The length of the defective
area of the transverse cross-section on CT of the skull was 20.62 mm (Figure 1K). The size of the protruding swelling was 12.02 × 10.62
(L × H, mm), and the matter of the swelling was connected with the cerebral ventricle. On MRI, a swelling with high T2/low T1 signals in the
transverse cross-section was identified, and the size of the protruding cyst was 11.66 × 11.38 (L × H, mm) (Figure 1M). Herniation of the
brain tissue from the median sagittal plane to the defective area of the skull and posterior displacement of the cerebellum resulting from
increased intracranial pressure were observed (Figure 1I). The size of the swelling on the median sagittal plane was measured at
17.24 × 12.92 (L × H, mm) (Figure 1L). As in case 1, case 2 had crania bifida of the skull in the anterior fontanelle region of the parietal
bone. However, case 2 was diagnosed as meningoencephalocele because it was accompanied by herniation of the brain and the meninges encephali
due to increased intracranial pressure. Morphologically, this case was diagnosed as extracranial (transcalvarial) herniation. Encephalocele
is a deformity resulting from the herniation of brain tissue through a skull defect. Encephalocele and meningoencephalocele reflect
imperfect osteogenesis of the skull and largely accompany protrusions of the brain structure . The classification of encephalocele depends
on the degree of brain tissue herniation. The defect is classified as cranium bifidum when only a skull defect is present. Herniation of the
cranial dura mater through the defect is classified as meningocele, and herniation of the cranial dura mater and brain parenchyma are
classified as meningoencephalocele. In humans, cranium bifidum occurs in one to four out of 10,000 live births . Meningoencephalocele that
caused the herniation of the cerebral tissue and meninges was found to occur in the occipital region, the frontal region, and the temporal
region in 75%, 12%, and 13% of cases, respectively. Rare sites for protrusions are through the base of the skull, orbits, nose, or mouth .
Meningocele and meningoencephalocele are the result of a focal failure of the neuroectoderm and surface ectoderm to separate during fetal
development, and these deformities have many potential causes, including genetic factors, nutritional deficiencies, and exposure to
teratogenic agents during gestation . Hereditary meningocele and meningoencephalocele cases have been reported in pigs and cats, and both of
these hereditary diseases showed incomplete penetrance . Cranium bifidum can be diagnosed by radiography, but differentiating between
meningoencephalocele and meningocele with radiography and ultrasonography is difficult. However, meningoencephalocele and meningoceleare
easily recognized by CT. CT scans enable differentiate between a meningocele and meningoencephalocele and measurement of the diameter of the
defect. CT scans are a simple and valuable non-invasive diagnostic technique in animals. Nonetheless, when describing structural changes of
the brain, CT scans should be combined with findings of changes in the brain parenchyma via MRI. An increase in intracranial pressure is
commonly discovered in CT and MRI findings. CSF leakage is considered to occur in relation to the neural canal defect, and such neural canal
defects are also associated with the size of the skull cap defect into meningoencephalocele and meningocele. In this study, CT and MRI were
used to make a diagnosis of encephalocele cases in pigs. The length of the defect on the sagittal section of two piglets’ skull was
estimated by using CT. Case 1 had a defect 4.7 mm in length and connected flow between the skull swellings and CSF. Case 2 had longer defect
length (20.62 mm) than case 1 and partial herniation. On MRI imaging, both cases showed high T2 signals of CSF in the arachnoid spaces
between the cerebrum and the cerebellum. The increase in intracranial pressure was more obvious in case 2 than in case 1, and accompanied
posterior displacements of the mesencephalon and cerebellum. Case 1 was diagnosed as meningocele resulting from meningeal herniation, and
case 2 was diagnosed as meningoencephalocele caused by brain tissue herniation. In-Cheol Cho and Yong-Sang Park contributed equally to this
work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions I-CC, Y-SP, J-GY, S-HH, S-RC,
K-LJ, K-HM, and H-SC performed experiments; Y-SP, K-LJ, K-HM, H-SC, H-BP, and T-YK interpreted results of experiments; I-CC, Y-SP, and T-YK
prepared figures; I-CC, Y-SP, H-BP, and T-YK drafted, edited and revised manuscript. I-CC, Y-SP, and T-YK conceived and designed the
research. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was carried out with the support of “Cooperative Research Program
for Agriculture Science & Technology Development (Project Numbers PJ01012301 and PJ0084972014)”, Rural Development Administration, Republic
of Korea.
