Adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare cancer, with an incidence in the literature of 0.5 to 2 cases per million population per year. Adult
adrenocortical carcinoma has a poor prognosis, underscoring the importance of identifying diagnostic and prognostic markers. We searched our
laboratory database for all cases in the past 15 years with a diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinoma. The original slides were then reviewed
for their histopathological features. A representative paraffin block was subjected to further immunohistochemical staining for Ki-67,
inhibin, steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), p53, and Β-catenin. These slides were scored by the study pathologist who was blinded to all
clinicopathological data. In addition, a comprehensive review of the relevant English literature in the past 15 years was conducted. Eight
cases were identified, including two adrenal sarcomatoid carcinomas. Seven of the eight cases had a disrupted reticulin network. Six of the
eight tumors had >10% Ki-67 expression. Five of the eight tumors had >10% p53 expression. Positive inhibin immunohistochemical staining was
seen in three of the eight tumors, and positive SF-1 staining was seen in five of the seven stained tumors. Abnormal Β-catenin intracellular
accumulation was noted in four of the eight tumors. The two tumors in our series with sarcomatoid histology did not stain positively for
SF-1 or inhibin. Eight cases of adrenocortical carcinoma, including two with sarcomatoid features are presented. The two sarcomatoid
adrenocortical carcinomas in our series did not stain for SF-1 which suggests a possible de novo pathway of tumorigenesis for this rare
variant. The reticulin staining method was a useful tool for rapid differentiation of adrenocortical adenomas and carcinomas. Diffuse p53
staining showed a trend for positive correlation with increased Ki-67 expression. Inhibin staining was inconsistently expressed in our cases
of adrenocortical carcinoma. In conclusion, as adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare disease, we recommend future multicenter studies with
appropriate sample sizes to further evaluate the efficacy of these diagnostic and prognostic markers. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is rare
and has a poor prognosis. Even for patients with resected tumors, the median survival is only 32 months in the United States . While ACC is
uncommon with an annual incidence of 0.5 to 2.0 per million people, adrenal incidentalomas are increasingly being recognized, due to the
availability of superior imaging techniques, with a reported prevalence of 3% to 4% on abdominal CT scan . Most adrenal incidentalomas are
benign, while most malignant adrenal tumors are metastatic in origin . As such, accurate diagnosis of malignant adrenocortical tumors,
particularly distinguishing ACC from adrenal adenomas, is essential for management; however, accurate diagnosis continues to remain a
challenge. There are continued significant areas of uncertainty regarding pathogenesis and risk assessment. In this context, several
histopathological and immunohistochemical markers have emerged in the past two decades as additional adjuncts that include markers, such as
steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) that may be useful in establishing the adrenocortical origin of an adrenal mass, while other markers, such as
Ki-67 and p53, could help stratify tumors into prognostic groups. The aim of this study is to discuss the diagnostic and prognostic features
of ACC through a series of cases treated at our institution over a 15-year period in the context of a comprehensive relevant literature
review. We compared immunohistochemical expression profiles of Ki-67, inhibin, SF-1, p53, and Β-catenin with histopathological features and
patient outcome. All patients in the Saskatoon Health Region Department of Pathology Laboratory Information System with a pathological
diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinoma from 1998 to 2013 were identified. All cases were reviewed on a routine hematoxylin-eosin-stained
slide according to the Weiss criteria to confirm the presence of ACC. Immunohistochemical studies using antibodies to Ki-67, B-catenin,
SF-1, and p53 were performed on a representative deparaffinized tissue section by the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (ABC) technique after
antigen retrieval using appropriate positive and negative controls in all cases. Negative controls were obtained by omission of the primary
antibody from the staining procedure. The antibodies used with their sources, clones, antigen-retrieval techniques, and dilutions are listed
in Table 1.Table 1 Antibodies used in this study Antibody Company and clone Target retrieval solution (TRS) Detection Dilution Link to spec
sheet Beta cateninDako, B-catenin-1HighFlex1:200Monoclonal mouse anti-human beta-catenin, clone β-catenin-1InhibinDako,
R1HighFlex1:5Monoclonal mouse anti-human inhibin α, clone R1Ki67Dako, MIB1HighFlex1:50Monoclonal mouse anti-human Ki-67 antigen, clone
MIB-1Ki67 decalDako, MIB1HighFlex1:20Same as abovep53Dako, D0-7HighFlex1:100Monoclonal mouse anti-human p53 protein, clone
DO-7SF-1InvitrogenDako3in1 high pH on Dako PT instrumentDako-envision + mouse1:150Monoclonal mouse IgG1 anti-human clone N1665IgG1,
immunoglobulin G1; SF-1, steroidogenic factor-1. Antibodies used in this study IgG1, immunoglobulin G1; SF-1, steroidogenic factor-1.
Immunohistochemically stained slides were analyzed in the standard semi quantitative basis incorporating the intensity of the staining
(mild, moderate, strong) coupled with the percentage of positively stained cells in a four-point scale: 0, no stain (up to 10% positive
cells); 1, light (11% to 25% positive cells); 2, moderate (26% to 50% positive cells); 3, heavy (51% to 75% positive cells) and; 4, intense
stain (76% to 100% positive cells). The cells were considered positive when more than 10% of them were stained with the respective
antibodies. The reticulin framework of the tumors was examined by histochemical staining. The study pathologist was blinded to any clinical
information prior to pathological review and interpretation for the purpose of this study. The hospital charts for all patients were
obtained and data was collected on age, sex, mode of presentation of the tumor, and available follow-up. Upon application, this study was
exempt from ethical approval by the University of Saskatchewan Biomedical Ethics Review Board. A literature search using the National
Library of Medicine Interface PubMed was conducted using the search terms ‘adrenocortical carcinoma’ and ‘adrenal cortical carcinoma’ which
was limited to the English language from 1999 to present. The bibliographies of these manuscripts further identified relevant secondary
sources. A detailed review of the published large case series was undertaken. Large case series were defined as those having an ‘n’ greater
than 300. These were compiled for tabulation. From an initial search list of 15 cases of possible ACC, eight patients with a ‘bonafide’
histopathological diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinoma were identified using the Weiss criteria as a guideline for diagnosis. There were
five females and three males with an average age at diagnosis of 53.5 years (range 25 to 79). Necrosis was the most common histopathological
feature, found in six of eight tumors. Vascular invasion was identified in five of eight, marked nuclear pleomorphism in two of eight, and
capsular invasion in one of eight. Increased mitotic rate greater than 5/50 high-powered fields (HPFs) was seen in seven cases. Atypical
mitoses were easily observed in five cases. All cases had a diffuse architecture. Venous and sinusoidal invasion were present in five of the
eight cases. In summary, seven cases had more than four Weiss criterion thereby meeting the histological criteria for ACC. In one case,
though there was diffuse architecture with high grade nuclei and increased mitoses, diffuse necrosis, atypical mitoses, capsular,
sinusoidal, or venous invasion were not identified. Reticulin staining revealed loss of the reticulin network in seven of the eight tumors.
Ki-67 was overexpressed in all of the cases. Aberrant nuclear staining for p53 was noted in all but one case. Increased intracellular
accumulation of Β-catenin was present in 50% of the cases. Three of the eight tumors had positive immunohistochemical staining for inhibin.
Five of the eight tumors stained positively for SF-1, while two were negative, and one did not have adequate tissue available for staining.
The results of immunohistochemical staining are summarized in Table 2.Table 2 Results of immunohistochemical staining for eight patients
with adrenocortical carcinoma Case number Age Sex Ki-67 (%) Β-catenin intracellular accumulation P53 (%) Inhibin SF-1
159M80Present85PositivePositive225F40Present30NegativePositive365M20Absent30NegativeNegative466F50AbsentFocalPositiveTissue not
available579M10Present10PositivePositive634F85Present90NegativePositive768F60Absent60NegativeNegative832F10AbsentAbsentNegativePositiveF,
female; M, male; SF-1, steroidogenic factor-1. Results of immunohistochemical staining for eight patients with adrenocortical carcinoma F,
female; M, male; SF-1, steroidogenic factor-1. Two of the eight patients had tumors with sarcomatoid features. Interestingly, lack of SF-1,
inhibin, and aberrant Β-catenin expression was noted in the sarcomatoid regions of these tumors. Seven of the eight patients had surgical
resection. One patient presented with metastatic disease identified as ACC on lung biopsy. The median length of follow-up was 8 months
(range 0.8 to 60.2). The most common presentation was an incidentally discovered mass during imaging (six of eight patients). One patient
was presented with Cushing’s syndrome, and one was presented with symptoms related to metastatic lung disease. Three patients experienced
recurrence, 2.3 to 6.5 months after resection. Of the four patients who died, three died with metastatic ACC and one died due to other
medical comorbidities without ever having identified disease recurrence. The clinical data for all of the patients are summarized in
Table 3.Table 3 Clinical data for eight patients with adrenocortical carcinoma Case number Age Sex Presentation Time to recurrence (days)
Time to death (days)
159MCushingoidN/AN/A225FIncidentally119N/A365MIncidentallyN/AN/A466FMetastatic025579MIncidentallyN/A353634FIncidentally195254768FIncidentally68223832FIncidentallyN/AN/AF,
female; M, male; N/A, not available. Clinical data for eight patients with adrenocortical carcinoma F, female; M, male; N/A, not available.
Case 3 in Tables 2 and 3 is a 65-year-old male who, during work-up for claudication, was found incidentally to have a large adrenal mass as
well as a renal mass. He had an open radical nephrectomy. The suprarenal tumor measured 12.8 × 8.9 × 7.5 cm. Microscopically, the suprarenal
tumor was composed of solid sheets of epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and spindled cells, which in some areas formed
a fascicular growth pattern as seen in Figure 1. There was marked nuclear pleomorphism including occasional malignant multinucleated giant
cells. There was no heterologous differentiation although a few cells had eosinophilic rhabdoid-like globules. Both typical and atypical
mitoses were identified with an average of 20 mitoses per 20 HPF as seen in Figure 1b. Based on WHO recommendations, this tumor with a
spindled morphology qualified for being a sarcomatoid variant .This patient remains disease-free at 4 months.Figure 1 Photomicrograph
showing (a) epithelioid spindled cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm in a fascicular pattern and (b) increased mitotic activity (*)
with typical and atypical mitoses. Photomicrograph showing (a) epithelioid spindled cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm in a
fascicular pattern and (b) increased mitotic activity (*) with typical and atypical mitoses. Case 7 in Tables 2 and 3 is a 68-year-old lady
who was incidentally found to have a large adrenal tumor during follow-up imaging for a previous lung adenocarcinoma. She had a radical
nephrectomy. The adrenal tumor measured 13.0 × 11.0 × 9.0 cm. Microscopically, much of the tumor was hemorrhagic and necrotic. The neoplasm
showed marked pleomorphism with frequent multinucleated giant cells as seen in Figure 2a. There were epithelioid areas and sarcomatoid areas
with spindled cells in a myxomatous background as seen in Figure 2b. There were numerous typical mitoses, five per single HPF in some areas,
and atypical mitoses. In agreement with WHO recommendations, this is a sarcomatoid carcinoma . This patient had disease recurrence invading
the gastroduodenal artery within 68 days. She required multiple transfusions and embolization of the artery for control of bleeding. She
succumbed to her disease 223 days after initial surgery.Figure 2 Photomicrograph showing (a) malignant cells with marked nuclear
pleomorphism (#) and the presence of a multinucleated tumor giant cell (*) and (b) sarcomatoid areas with spindled cells in a myxomatous
background. Photomicrograph showing (a) malignant cells with marked nuclear pleomorphism (#) and the presence of a multinucleated tumor
giant cell (*) and (b) sarcomatoid areas with spindled cells in a myxomatous background. Adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare malignancy with
an annual incidence of 0.5 to 2.0 per million people with a female-to-male ratio of 1.2 to 1.5:1 . The average age of presentation reported
by Bilimoria et al. (n = 3,982) and Kutikov et al. (n = 4275) in the United States National Cancer Data Base is 55 years . This is similar
to the average age in our case series of 53.5 years. The demographic information from the five largest published case series (n > 300, from
unique databases) on ACC, is tabulated in Table 4 .Table 4 Largest ACC case series published to date ( n > 300) Reference Published year
Country Database Number of patients Average Age (years) Male-to-female ratio Median tumor size (cm) Proportion of tumors with distant
metastasis at presentation (%) Kutikov et al. 2011United StatesNational Cancer Database4,27554.541.9% to 58.1%11.534.4Kebebew et al.
2006United StatesSurveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Database72551.245.9% to 54.1%1234.8Fassnacht et al. 2009GermanyThe
German ACC Registry41646.737.3% to 62.7%11.329.3Else et al. 2014United StatesMichigan Endocrine Oncology Repository39147.440% to
60%11.829Kerkhofs et al. 2013NetherlandsNetherlands Cancer Registry3595645% to 55%Not available35Ayala-Ramirez et al. 2013United StatesTumor
Registry Database at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center33048.535.8% to 64.2%11 cm25.8 Largest ACC case series published to
date ( n > 300) Cases series with data from identical databases were not included. In this manuscript, we have elected to tabulate
publications with the largest n from their independent databases. In this context, the following studies that are not represented are as
follows: Bilimoria et al. (National Cancer Database, n = 3,982) , Lughezzani et al. (SEER, n = 573) , Sturgeon et al. (SEER, n = 457) ,
Johanssen et al. (German ACC Registry, n = 387) , and Tran et al. (SEER, n = 320) . ACC, adrenocortical carcinoma. Pediatric ACCs have
several important differences compared to adult ACCs. The incidence in children is much lower with only 25 new cases of ACC being diagnosed
in the USA every year . The incidence for children is greatest in the first year of life . ACC is more common than adrenocortical adenoma in
children (approximately 3:1 in newborns and 2:1 in older children) . The clinical presentation of these tumors in children is also different
with more pediatric patients presenting with symptoms of adrenal hormone hypersecretion. The most common presentation in children is
virilization, followed by Cushing’s syndrome . In fetal and newborn patients, the main presentation was an abdominal mass found on physical
examination or antenatal sonography, but this is followed closely by virilization . However, pathological diagnosis of pediatric ACC is more
challenging because frequently used adult histopathological criteria, such as the Weiss criteria, have not been shown to accurately predict
tumor behavior in children and therefore their use is not recommended. Instead, adrenocortical tumors in children should be classified as
clinically benign or clinically malignant based on their clinical course . Outcomes in children are better than in adults, with a reported
5-year overall survival of 57%, which is even higher (91.1%) in patients under the age of 5 . Clinical presentation of ACC is variable.
While most ACCs are biochemically functional, in many patients this does not manifest clinically, and a large proportion of tumors are
discovered incidentally or are metastatic at the time of presentation , with the most common sites of distant metastasis being, in
decreasing frequency, the liver, lungs, and bone . In our series, six out of eight patients presented with incidentally discovered tumors,
and only one patient had metastatic disease on presentation. One patient presented with Cushing’s syndrome. The reported proportion of
functioning ACC varies in the literature, but the majority is functioning, and most functional tumors secrete cortisol . While imaging is
not able to definitively diagnose malignancy in an adrenal mass, modern modalities can correctly differentiate adrenal masses before
histopathological diagnosis in most cases. The most obvious characteristic noted on cross-sectional imaging of an adrenal mass is the size
of the lesion. A cut-off of 4 cm has a sensitivity of 93% for identifying adrenal carcinoma and, while this is a conservative size cut-off,
it should be used due to the aggressive nature of ACC and the importance of early diagnosis . Higher cut-offs of 5 or 6 cm have been
suggested with sensitivities of 90% or greater in smaller studies . Beyond size, few other features of the mass on unenhanced and contrast-
enhanced CT help to steer accurate radiographic identification. The density of the adrenal lesion has been proposed as a valuable tool, and
benign adenomas tend to be more lipid-rich and have Hounsfield unit densities less than 10 . Tumor extension into the IVC with a tumor
thrombus is seen in a proportion of tumors, particularly in right-sided tumors, and is indicative of malignancy. On contrast-enhanced CT,
little enhancement is seen in the central necrosis of malignant tumors compared to the peripheral tumor . Lastly, on contrast-enhanced
imaging, the relative percentage of contrast agent enhancement washout seen in malignant tumors after 15 min is generally less than 40% .
Abdominal CT can be combined with chest imaging in order to establish the presence of any metastatic lung disease. The efficacy of MRI is
relatively equivalent to that of CT and in patients where radiation is not a concern, CT scan is recommended as the initial radiographic
modality . Since not all patients with functioning tumors present with symptoms of hormonal excess, a careful endocrine work-up should be
performed and the absence of secretion should alert clinicians to the possibility that the mass is not an ACC . In contrast, adrenal
adenomas are less likely to be functioning and are generally significantly smaller than adrenal carcinomas when discovered incidentally .
Biopsy of adrenal masses has a low diagnostic accuracy and may promote needle track metastases. As such, biopsy is not suggested as part of
the diagnostic work-up except in patients with metastatic disease, not scheduled for surgery, in whom the diagnosis remains unestablished or
in patients with a suspicious endocrine-inactive adrenal mass and a history of an extra-adrenal malignancy . In patients who do not meet
these conditions, biopsy of the adrenal mass unnecessarily delays the diagnosis of malignancy. Three histopathological scoring systems for
distinguishing benign from malignant ACCs have been proposed. The Hough system employs 12 criteria, 7 histologic and 5 non-histologic. Each
criterion is assigned a numeric value, and the total score is predictive of the biologic behavior of the tumor . The Hough criteria are
tabulated in Table 5. Slooten et al. have also proposed a scoring system . Their system includes seven histological criteria and no non-
histological criteria. In contrast to the Hough system, the Slooten criteria are not limited by the availability of clinical findings. The
Slooten system also assigns numeric values to its criteria and a total value greater than eight is correlated with tumor behavior . The
Slooten criteria are tabulated in Table 6.Table 5 Hough system criteria Criteria Numeric value HistologicalDiffuse growth
pattern0.92Vascular invasion0.92Tumor cell necrosis0.69Broad fibrous bands1.00Capsular invasion0.37Mitotic index (>1/10
HPFs)0.60Pleomorphism0.39NonhistologicTumor mass (>100 g)0.60Urinary 17-ketosteroids (10 mg/1 g creatinine 24 h)0.50Response to ACTH
(17-hydroxysteroids increased two times after 50 mcg of IV ACTH)0.42Cushing syndrome with virilism, virilism alone, or no clinical
manifestations0.42Weight loss (>10 lb/3 months)2.00ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; HPFs, high-powered fields.Table 6 van Slooten criteria
Criteria Numeric value Regressive changes such as necrosis, hemorrhage, fibrosis, or calcification5.7Loss of normal structure1.6Nuclear
atypia2.1Nuclear hyperchromasia2.6Abnormal nucleoli structure4.1Mitotic activity >2/10 HPFs9.0Capsular or vascular invasion3.3HPFs, high-
powered fields. Hough system criteria ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; HPFs, high-powered fields. van Slooten criteria HPFs, high-powered
fields. The Weiss criteria introduced in 1984 , later revised , and then modified in 2002 , are the current standard of practice to
establish the diagnosis of ACC. Histopathological diagnosis of ACC is made when tumors meet three of the nine Weiss criteria as listed below
: 1) grade 3 or 4 nuclear grade (enlarged, oval to lobulated nuclei with coarsely granular to hyperchromatic chromatin and easily
discernible, prominent nucleoli); 2) mitotic grade >5/50 HPFs; 3) atypical mitoses; 4) clear cells comprising 25% or less of the tumor; 5)
diffuse architecture greater than one third of the tumor; 6) necrosis; 7) invasion of venous structures; 8) invasion of sinusoidal
structures; and 9) invasion of the tumor capsule. To simplify the Weiss system, while retaining diagnostic value and improving interobserver
reliability, a revised system was proposed by Aubert et al. . Their system requires assessment of only five Weiss criteria: i) mitotic
grade, ii) percent of clear cells comprising the tumor, iii) abnormal mitoses, iv) necrosis, and v) capsular invasion. Though the total
Weiss score has been shown to have high interobserver agreement , the interobserver reliability of individual criteria has been criticized .
In particular, nuclear grade, proportion of clear cells, and architectural assessment may have high variability among different observers.
Recently, the reticulin method simplifies the Weiss system. This method requires histochemical staining for reticulin with microscopic
examination of the reticulin/basal membrane network. Any tumor with a disrupted reticulin framework as well as the presence of mitosis >5/50
HPFs, necrosis, or venous invasion meets the algorithm’s criteria and is considered malignant . This most recent algorithm has been
validated and is shown to have relatively high interobserver agreement , albeit lower than reported for the total Weiss score . In light of
this finding, we stained specimens in our study for reticulin and seven of the eight tumors had a disrupted reticulin framework. On blinded
review, the tumor which had an intact reticulin framework (case 5) also lacked Weiss criteria on examination by the study pathologist.
Having been initially reported as having diffuse necrosis, >5 mitotic figures per 50 HPFs, and capsular invasion, these histological
features were not seen on re-examination of select slides. Furthermore, the tumor weighed only 46 g (4.7 cm). Therefore, whether this tumor
truly represents an adrenal carcinoma remains debatable. Unfortunately, clinical correlation was impossible in this patient because they
died of unrelated causes within 1 year of initial diagnosis. An incorrect initial diagnosis is not uncommon in adrenocortical carcinoma. A
large audit of cases in Germany identified a high histopathological misclassification rate of 13% . The TP53 tumor suppressor gene, linked
with La-Fraumeni syndrome, is frequently mutated in cancers, including adrenocortical carcinoma. In Southern Brazil, the incidence of
adrenocortical tumors is unusually high, coinciding with a high prevalence of the germ line TP53 mutation R337H which is present in up to
0.5% of newborns in specific regions of Southern Brazil . Carriers of this particular mutation have been found to have a penetrance of 2.39%
to 9.9% for adrenocortical tumors , with most tumors being carcinomas . Interestingly, this particular TP53 mutation was not found to
predispose to extra-adrenal cancers, although this relationship was not studied rigorously . In Caucasian patients with ACC, TP53 germ line
mutation analysis has revealed a frequency of 3.9% in adult patients which suggests a specific role for TP53 in ACC tumorigenesis . Loss of
heterozygosity of 17p13, on which TP53 is encoded, is studied as a valuable diagnostic marker. In one series, 74% of ACCs, compared with 14%
of adenomas, had loss of heterozygosity at 17p13 . Gicquel et al. also noted the value of 17p13 loss of heterozygosity as an independent
predictor of disease-free survival . Immunohistochemical staining for p53 expression in ACC has found aberrant nuclear staining in a varying
proportion of carcinomas, 5% to 60% . As such, use of p53 expression to help distinguish benign from malignant adrenal tumors may be an
important adjuvant to the current histopathological criteria. This is particularly true since aberrant expression is extremely rare in
adenomas . Patients with increased p53 staining tend to have higher grade tumors, reflected by higher Ki-67 expression, higher tumor stage,
and poorer disease-free survival . However, p53 has not been shown to be related to overall survival , and its correlation with poor
clinical outcomes is likely due to its association with higher tumor grade. In our series, five of the eight tumors had >10% cells with
aberrant expression of p53, and the two cases with highest aberrant p53 expression (>85%) also had the highest proliferative activity
(Ki-67 > 80%). SF-1 expression is specific to the adrenal cortex . It plays an important role in adrenal development and remains expressed
into adulthood . Consequently, adrenal tumorigenesis is influenced by the proliferative effect of SF-1, and SF-1 overexpression has been
shown in tumors originating from the adrenal cortex . In particular, this has been noted in childhood adrenal tumors where an increased copy
of the SF-1 gene is associated with tumorigenesis . SF-1 immunohistochemical staining has particular clinical value because its expression
has high sensitivity and specificity in determining adrenocortical origin of an adrenal mass . As such, it should be used to differentiate
adrenal masses . Interestingly, SF-1 has been found to have independent prognostic value in multivariate analysis. Strong SF-1 expression is
associated with poor clinical outcome in ACC even after adjustment for stage . In the future, the utility of SF-1 may extend to treatment.
Inverse agonists of SF-1 have been studied in vitro on human ACC cells with success and may have some clinical utility, although this is yet
to be trialed . Five out of eight of our cases stained positively for SF-1. Interestingly, case 3 and 7, which were histologically
sarcomatoid, did not stain for SF-1 in the sarcomatoid areas of the tumors. This is shown in Figure 3a,b. Given the role of SF-1 in
adrenocortical cellular development, the lack of SF-1 staining in sarcomatoid adrenal tumors suggests an alternative pathway of development
for these tumors. These findings suggest that sarcomatoid adrenocortical carcinoma may arise from a de novo rather than a dedifferentiation
mechanism. SF-1 staining was unfortunately not performed in other published cases of sarcomatoid ACC. This finding needs to be confirmed in
the future, potentially in a meta-analysis of published sarcomatoid ACC cases with SF-1 staining.Figure 3 Photomicrograph of SF-1 stained
slide showing (a) adrenocortical carcinoma demonstrating positive staining for SF-1 and (b) sarcomatoid region of adrenocortical carcinoma
with absent staining for SF-1. Photomicrograph of SF-1 stained slide showing (a) adrenocortical carcinoma demonstrating positive staining
for SF-1 and (b) sarcomatoid region of adrenocortical carcinoma with absent staining for SF-1. Wnt/Β-catenin signaling is thought to be
integral to adrenal gland cellular growth and regulation . Activation of this pathway has been shown to be an important factor in
tumorigenesis in both benign and malignant tumors of the adrenal cortex . Β-catenin is normally found on the plasma membrane, associated
with E-cadherins, or in the cytoplasm and nucleus where its accumulation influences the Wnt signaling pathway. When accumulation is
abnormally increased due to activating mutations, there is abnormal Wnt pathway activation resulting in tumor formation . This has been
demonstrated in a mouse model, where constitutive activation of Β-catenin in the adrenal glands has been shown to induce adrenocortical cell
hyperproliferation and loss of differentiation . In the older mice, this process resulted in malignant transformation . Immunohistochemical
staining for Β-catenin can identify abnormal activation, demonstrated as cytoplasmic or nuclear staining. Both adenomas and carcinomas have
been shown to have abnormal Β-catenin staining, with more diffuse and frequent immunostaining in malignant tumors . Abnormal Β-catenin
staining has been associated with high-grade ACC, correlating with both high mitotic rate and poor prognosis . However, in multi-variate
analysis, when the effects of tumor grade are considered, Β-catenin has not been shown to have independent prognostic value . In our series,
cytoplasmic staining for Β-catenin was found in 50% of the tumors, including tumors with increased co-expression of Ki-67. Adrenal inhibins
have been shown to stain specifically to the adrenal cortex, and particularly to the zona reticularis, with weaker staining in the zona
fasciculata and no staining in the zona glomerulosa . Thus, immunohistochemical staining for adrenal inhibin expression is useful to
distinguish tumors of adrenal origin. In an early study, Fetsch et al. demonstrated immunoreactivity to an adrenal inhibin antibody in all
adrenocortical carcinomas and adenomas . However, later studies revealed that a proportion of adrenal tumors are immunonegative, and that
negative staining does not exclude the diagnosis of ACC . High expression of adrenal inhibin is seen particularly in virilising tumors .
Unfortunately, immunopositivity to adrenal inhibin antibodies does not help distinguish benign from malignant adrenal tumors . In our
series, only three of eight tumors stained positively for adrenal inhibin. Genetic alterations at the 11p15 chromosomal locus result in an
overexpression of IGF-2 in adrenal cortex cells and are fairly specific to both sporadic and syndromic adrenocortical carcinomas but not
adenomas . Signaling of IGF-2 through its receptor IGF-1R is thought to play an important role in ACC tumorigenesis ; however, recent in
vivo experiments have demonstrated that isolated over expression of IGF-2, while specific for malignant cells, is not a driving factor in
ACC malignant progression . Nonetheless, IGF-2 and IGF-1R antagonists are considered targets for drug development. IGF-1R antagonists have
been tested in vitro with promising results on human ACC cells . Unfortunately, there has been little success with IGF antagonists in-vivo .
ACC, particularly in children, is often associated with familial syndromes . La-Fraumeni syndrome, associated with germ line mutations in
the TP53 gene, is present in the majority of children with adrenocortical tumors but is seen less commonly in adults . Patients with
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome have overexpression of IGF-2 due to loss of the maternal locus, 11p15 . This mutation is associated with tumors
exclusive to childhood and frequently results in benign, and rarely malignant, adrenal tumors . Although the majority of adult ACC has been
thought to be sporadic, there is growing evidence of the co-existing presence of hereditary cancer syndromes such as Lynch syndrome ,
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 , and familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome . Identification of tumor features which stratify patients
into high and low risk groups is of upmost clinical importance. The most obvious is tumor stage which can be characterized by either the
older International Union Against Cancer system or the newer European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumors (ENS@T) system. The ENS@T
system has demonstrated better prognostic stratification and is currently more widely used. It is summarized as follows with corresponding
5-year disease-specific survivals :Stage I - tumor size less than or equal to 5 cm; 82%.Stage II - tumor size greater than 5 cm; 58%.Stage
III - any tumor size with at least one positive lymph node or tumor infiltrating into surrounding adipose tissue or adjacent organs
including the presence of venous tumor thrombus in the inferior vena cava or renal vein; 55%.Stage IV - any metastatic disease; 18%. Stage I
- tumor size less than or equal to 5 cm; 82%. Stage II - tumor size greater than 5 cm; 58%. Stage III - any tumor size with at least one
positive lymph node or tumor infiltrating into surrounding adipose tissue or adjacent organs including the presence of venous tumor thrombus
in the inferior vena cava or renal vein; 55%. Stage IV - any metastatic disease; 18%. Further stratifying prognosis beyond disease stage is
an important area of ACC research. Weiss first noted the importance of mitotic figures as one of the most useful criteria in distinguishing
benign from malignant tumors , and Volante et al. further suggested stratifying patients into prognostic groups based on mitotic grade with
a cutoff of 9 per 50 HPF indicating a high risk tumor . In metastatic ACC, a higher mitotic rate cutoff of 20 per 50 HPF has been shown to
be useful in predicting poor outcome . Recently, immunohistochemical analysis of the cellular proliferation marker Ki-67 has been recognized
as a more reliable method than the mitotic index in diagnosing ACC and stratifying prognosis . Few other tumor features have been identified
as having possible prognostic importance. One might expect that functioning tumors may have better prognosis due to clinical cues and
earlier diagnosis, however, in addition to higher patient age at diagnosis, functional tumors are independently associated with poorer
survival . In metastatic ACC, involvement of fewer tumoral organs is a predictor of better disease-specific survival . As discussed
previously, loss of heterozygosity at 17p13 and SF-1 protein staining have been shown to be stage-independent prognostic factors, while p53
and Β-catenin staining have not. As such, there are relatively few useful independent prognostic markers for ACC and a nomogram using only
three variables (age, stage, and surgical status) achieved up to 80% accuracy for survival prediction in a large cohort (n = 205) of
patients . Despite significant advancement in the past 15 years, accurate diagnosis of ACC remains challenging. The Weiss criteria remain
the gold standard for histopathological diagnosis, but lack of interobserver reliability in their assessment has led to the emergence of
newer techniques such as the reticulin method. Even in our case series, the challenge of ACC diagnosis is demonstrated. We identified one
patient where the initial diagnosis of ACC may have been incorrect on re-examination of histopathological and reticulin staining criteria
(case 5). Immunohistochemistry is a growing area of research and several markers have been identified to have clinical value. SF-1
overexpression establishes the adrenal cortex as the origin of adrenal tumors, and the intensity of SF-1 staining is related to prognosis.
Interestingly, in our series, sarcomatoid regions in cases 3 and 7 did not express SF-1. This raises the possibility of a de novo mechanism
of pathogenesis for these rare and highly aggressive tumors. Accuracy in stratification of malignant adrenocortical tumors may be improved
by staining for Β-catenin and p53 which are more frequently expressed in ACC but have not been found to have independent prognostic value.
Our case series adds eight cases to the existing literature, with very high expression of p53 and Β-catenin seen in the cases with the
highest proliferative activity. Sarcomatoid ACC is extremely rare with very few cases reported in the literature, and these tumors are
usually associated with a very poor patient outcome. The published cases, in the English literature, of sarcomatoid ACC are tabulated in
Table 7 . In summary, as adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare disease, we recommend future multicenter studies with appropriate sample sizes
to further evaluate and identify reliable diagnostic and prognostic markers.Table 7 Features of sarcomatoid adrenal cortical carcinomas
reported to date Reference Age Sex Clinical presentation Laterality Size Treatment Time to recurrence Time to death Okazumi et al.
46MAbdominal distention + back painRight14 cmRight adrenalectomy and nephrectomy followed by removal of the tumor
thrombus5 months206 daysCollina et al. 68FAbdominal discomfortRight11 cmSurgical resection followed by radiotherapy after tumor
recurrence2 months6 monthsDecorato et al. 42FAbdominal painLeft19 cmSurgical resection3 months7 monthsFischler et al.
29FVirilizationLeft12.5 cmNephroadrenalectomy and splenectomy followed by systemic chemotherapy (cisplatin and etoposide) after
recurrence4 months8 monthsBarksdale et al. 79FSevere hypertensionRight9 cmRight adrenalectomy and cavotomy4 monthsNot reportedLee et al.
61MFlank pain + hypertensionRight12 cmRadical nephrectomy and right hepatic lobectomyNo recurrence noted2 daysSturm et al. 31MAbdominal
painLeft12 cmAdrenalectomy followed by systemic chemotherapy (VP16-cisplatinum) after recurrence2 months3 monthsColi et al. (2009)
75FAbdominal painLeft15 cmAdrenalectomy and splenectomy3 months12 monthsFeng et al. 72MLeft lumbar painLeft7.1 cm on CT scanSurgical
resectionNot reportedNot reportedSasaki et al. 45MAbdominal pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, hypertensionLeft17 cmRadical
nephrectomy, splenectomy, distal pancreatectomy, left partial colectomy, and wedge biopsy of one hepatic lesionHepatic metastasis at
presentation. Locoregional recurrence at 3 months3 monthsBertolini et al. 23FIncidentally during work-up of metastatic rectal
massLeft14 cmLeft adrenalectomy with systemic chemotherapy for metastatic rectal cancerNot reported, however patient had metastatic lesions
on presentation which were presumed to be rectal cancer based on the co-existence of a metastatic rectal cancer lesion in the adrenal
gland14 monthsThway et al. 45MAbdominal bloating + back painLeft24 cmLeft radical nephrectomy and splenectomy followed by palliative
chemotherapy (vincristine, ifosfamide, carboplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide)Metastatic at presentation11 monthsYan et al. 72MFlank
painRight13 cmAdrenalectomy2 years2.5 yearsKao et al. 48FAbdominal pain + hypokalemia + weight lossRight15 cmAdrenalectomy, partial
nephrectomy, and partial hepatectomy followed by systemic chemotherapy (cisplatin and ifosfamide) after distant metastasis2 monthsAlive with
disease at 7 month follow-upMark et al. 58MFlank painRight12 cmRadial nephrectomy followed by eternal beam radiotherapy to the tumor siteNot
reported after 16 month follow-upNot reported after 16 month follow-upShaikh et al. 62FAbdominal
painRight6.5 cmAdrenalectomy3 months4 monthsCT, computed tomography; F, female; M, male. Features of sarcomatoid adrenal cortical carcinomas
reported to date CT, computed tomography; F, female; M, male. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions KW performed the collection and analysis of the clinical data. KW wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. RK
performed the blinded pathological review and supervised the project. Both authors were involved in the study concept and design, review of
the literature, and manuscript editing. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
