Urethral caruncles are the most frequent benign tumors of the female urethra. Most of them are found in post-menopausal women, and they are
rare in childhood. Only a few pediatric cases have been published in the literature. In this report, we present an unusual case of a
pediatric patient with a urethral caruncle, along with a review of the literature. A 9-year-old Mongolian girl was referred to our hospital
with a 2-week history of frequent adherence of a small amount of blood to her underwear. We found a sessile smooth margin, a clear boundary
and an elastic, soft red tumor over the entire circumference of the urethral meatus. At the beginning, because of the child’s age, urethral
prolapse was suspected. There was no response after 3 weeks of conservative treatment with steroid ointment. With the patient under general
anesthesia, a partial tumor resection was performed for the purpose of histological examination. The tumor excision was limited to about 1/2
laps of the urethral meatus to prevent the development of urethral stricture. On the basis of clinical and histopathological examinations, a
diagnosis of a urethral caruncle was made. Post-operatively, steroid ointment application to residual masses was continued, and these
disappeared about 6 months later. Our patient was free of recurrence and had had no complications after 3 years of follow-up. Urethral
caruncles are rare in children, and the possibility of malignancy is slight during this period. Biopsy of the mass is not required for
diagnosis. It should be indicated only if the mass has other characteristics that raise suspicion of malignancy. In previously reported
cases, all of the tumor was removed. However, the trigger of the caruncle in childhood is chronic inflammation. Conservative therapy with
steroid ointment should be the core treatment. However, it may be necessary to proceed to treatment because caruncles take a long time to
heal. The case that we describe in this report will serve as an example for similar cases in the future. Urethral caruncles are benign and
pedunculated and appear as sessile polypoid lesions of the posterior lip of the urethral meatus. They represent the most common lesion of
the female urethra and occur primarily in post-menopausal women . Only 14 pediatric cases have been published in the English-language
literature to date . In this report, we present a case of a urethral caruncle in a 9-year-old girl and review the relevant literature. A
9-year-old Mongolian girl was referred to our hospital with a 2-week history of frequent adherence of a small amount of blood to her
underwear. The girl’s mother’s pregnancy and the girl’s birth and neonatal history were uneventful. She had no history of hospitalization or
surgery. We found a sessile smooth margin, a clear boundary and an elastic, soft red tumor over the entire circumference of the urethral
meatus (Figure 1a). The patient experienced no pain or difficulty with urinating, although the tumor was hemorrhagic. No other abnormalities
were found during the physical examination. All of the results of the complete blood count and biochemical examinations were normal. At the
beginning, because of the girl’s age, urethral prolapse was suspected. No clinical response was achieved after 3 weeks of conservative
treatment with steroid ointment. The exclusion of malignant tumors such as rhabdomyosarcoma and malignant lymphoma was also required, so we
performed enhanced computed tomography. We observed no muscle layer invasion or distant metastases. With the patient under general
anesthesia, a partial tumor resection was performed for the purpose of histological examination. The tumor excision was limited to about 1/2
laps of the urethral meatus, 10×15mm in size, to prevent the development of urethral stricture (Figure 1b). A histological examination
revealed interstitial edema with inflammatory cell infiltration, papillary hyperplasia of the connective tissue and coverage with stratified
squamous epithelium. There was no evidence of malignant change throughout the specimen (Figure 2). On the basis of the clinical and
histopathological examinations, the diagnosis of a urethral caruncle was made. Post-operatively, steroid ointment application to residual
masses was continued, and these disappeared about 6 months later. Our patient was free of recurrence and had no complications after 3 years
of follow-up.Figure 1 Photographs showing the pre- and post-operative appearance of the lesion. (a) Pre-operative photograph showing an
elastic, soft red tumor originating from the urethral meatus. (b) Post-operative appearance of the surgical site. The dorsal mass excision
was about 1/2 laps of the urethral meatus. (tumor resection: 10×15mm).Figure 2 Microscopic image of the patient’s tumor. Histological stain
shows interstitial edema with inflammatory cell infiltration, papillary hyperplasia of the connective tissue and coverage with stratified
squamous epithelium (hematoxylin and eosin stain; original magnification, ×100). Photographs showing the pre- and post-operative appearance
of the lesion. (a) Pre-operative photograph showing an elastic, soft red tumor originating from the urethral meatus. (b) Post-operative
appearance of the surgical site. The dorsal mass excision was about 1/2 laps of the urethral meatus. (tumor resection: 10×15mm). Microscopic
image of the patient’s tumor. Histological stain shows interstitial edema with inflammatory cell infiltration, papillary hyperplasia of the
connective tissue and coverage with stratified squamous epithelium (hematoxylin and eosin stain; original magnification, ×100). Urethral
caruncles are usually confined to the female urethra. They most often occur in middle-aged and elderly women and are rarely found in young
females . A total of 14 cases of young females have been described in the English-language literature . Because the details of the 11 cases
that Campbell reported are unknown, only 4 pediatric cases, including ours, are summarized in Table 1. The polypoid lesions in pediatric
cases were present at the urethral meatus in all patients; in adult patients, they occur most frequently at the posterior lip. Unlike adult
cases, bleeding was the only symptom other than persistent pain or difficulty with urinating in this case. In adult patients, chronic
inflammation can also be present, in addition to atrophy and curing of the urethral mucosa due to decreased secretion of estrogen .
Therefore, a variety of symptoms associated with reduced secretion of estrogen appear in adults, but they differ in children. The trigger of
the caruncle in childhood is also chronic inflammation; however, the exact etiology is unknown. The female urethra is particularly
susceptible to infection as well as to inflammation. Further study of the pathogenesis of urethral caruncles may be required.Table 1 Summary
of four cases reported in the literature Patient Sex/age Site/size Treatment Histological type Prognosis 1F/2 yr, 5moPosterior lip of mid-
urethra/0.6cm1 wk conservative management, complete resectionVasodilatation typeNo recurrence for 2 yr2F/9 yrAnterior lip of
urethra/1.0cmComplete resectionVasodilatation typeNo recurrence for 2 yr3F/2 yr, 7moPosterior lip of urethra/0.7cmComplete
resectionGranulomatous type (included intestinal heterotopia)UnknownOur patientF/9 yrAll around the circumference of urethra/2.0cm3 wk
conservative management, partial resection, 6 mo conservative managementGranulomatous typeNo recurrence for 3 yrF; female. yr; year. wk;
week. mo; month. Summary of four cases reported in the literature F; female. yr; year. wk; week. mo; month. The clinical differential
diagnosis for a urethral or peri-urethral mass in pediatrics is urethral prolapse and peri-urethral gland abscess. Although uncommon, a
spectrum of neoplasms may mimic urethral caruncle clinically, including sarcoma . Biopsy of the mass is not required for diagnosis, but it
should be indicated if the mass is irregular or has other characteristics that raise suspicion of malignancy. The management of such
patients can be divided into conservative treatment and surgical resection. Conservative therapy with application of estrogen ointment is
common in adults , and steroid ointment is used in children because chronic inflammation is also a trigger. In previously reported cases,
short-term steroid ointment treatment was ineffective and all of the tumor was ultimately removed. Recurrences have also been seen in adult
cases , but the curability of these tumors with surgical resection is high in pediatric patients. No cases of recurrence have been reported
(Table 1). However, if the lesion covers the entire circumference of the urethral meatus, as in our patient, meatal stenosis after surgical
excision is a potential problem . Therefore, in our patient, we restricted the surgery to a partial resection and made a pathological
diagnosis after the procedure. After surgery, we used a long-term treatment period of 6 months, and the patient’s urethral caruncle was
completely cured with steroid ointment. In conservative treatment, it may be necessary to proceed to treatment, considering the fact that
these lesions take a long time to heal. Urethral caruncles are rare in children, and the possibility of malignancy is slight during this
period. Biopsy of the mass is not required for diagnosis. Biopsy should be indicated only if the mass has other characteristics that raise
suspicion of malignancy. In previously reported cases, all of the tumor was removed. However, the trigger of caruncles in childhood is
chronic inflammation. Conservative therapy with steroid ointment should be the core treatment. However, it may be necessary to proceed to
treatment because these lesions take a long time to heal. Because this disease is rare in children, the treatments employed for our patient
and in the other cases reported in the literature should be borne in mind when such patients are encountered. The case that we describe in
this report will serve as an example for similar cases in the future. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal
guardian for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MC
wrote the manuscript and is the corresponding author. AT provided significant advice. AS and RS performed histopathological examinations.
SO, RI, TN, JS, YW, SK and KS participated in the treatment of the patient. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
