Hepatic portal venous gas associated with non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia is indicative of a serious pathology that leads to bowel
necrosis and it has a high mortality rate. Although non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia is acknowledged as a condition that requires early
surgical treatment, it has been reported that bowel necrosis and surgical resection of the gangrenous lesion may be avoided if the condition
is identified quickly and the cause is detected at an early phase. However, no reports or guidelines have been published that describe the
management of patients in whom bowel necrosis and surgical treatment were avoided. We report the case of a patient who presented with non-
occlusive mesenteric ischemia who was managed with non-resectional treatment at an early phase and had a delayed small-bowel stricture. A
24-year-old man presented to the hospital with fever, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Abdominal computed tomography confirmed a diffuse
gaseous distention with small-bowel pneumatosis and hepatic portal venous gas. An urgent laparotomy was performed, because septic shock
associated with diffuse peritonitis and bowel necrosis was strongly suspected. Although we found purulent ascites and a perforated appendix
at the time of surgery, gangrenous and transmural ischemic changes were not evident in the small bowel and colon. We performed an
appendectomy without a bowel resection, and the patient was discharged on an oral diet. However, he was re-admitted to hospital, because
4 days after discharge he developed postoperative paralytic ileus. Non-operative management was chosen, but his symptoms did not improve. We
decided to perform a laparotomy 40 days after the initial operation, and a considerable adhesion was detected. Therefore, only a synechotomy
was performed. On day 57, he experienced symptoms that were associated with bowel obstruction once again. On day 59, a partial resection of
the jejunum was performed. Severe luminal strictures were apparent within the jejunum, and marked structural changes were evident. While
non-surgical management can be chosen for selected patients with non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia, continuous observation to evaluate the
development of delayed strictures that lead to bowel obstructions is required in patients who undergo non-resectional treatment. Hepatic
portal venous gas (HPVG) was first described by Wolfe and Evans in infants with necrotizing enterocolitis in 1955 . It has been reported
that before the era of computed tomography (CT), the mortality of patients with HPVG that was diagnosed by plain abdominal radiography
reached 75% . HPVG is reported to be frequently associated with acute mesenteric ischemia, and this accounts for most of the HPVG-associated
mortality. Recently, high-resolution CT has revealed a host of benign conditions that do not require emergency surgery in which the presence
of HPVG including abdominal trauma, digestive tract dilation, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, gastric ulcers, and complications
associated with endoscopic procedures. However, the mortality of patients with HPVG-associated bowel ischemia remains high, and it demands
immediate surgical intervention . HPVG is most frequently associated with bowel necrosis that is caused by acute mesenteric ischemia, for
which it has a 43% to 70% incidence, and it is associated with a high mortality rate of up to 75% in the presence of bowel necrosis . Non-
occlusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI) is a serious pathology that leads to bowel necrosis, and it is associated with many types of critical
condition, including shock, hypovolemia, myocardial infarction, heart failure, aortic insufficiency, renal or hepatic disease, during
abdominal or cardiac surgery, and during vasopressor treatment . NOMI has a high mortality rate of 45–55%, and an early diagnosis and
appropriate surgical treatment are important to improve survival in patients with this condition; however, the early symptoms and
characteristics are unclear. In many cases, the disease will have advanced to an irreversible stage before a definitive diagnosis is made .
Contrast-enhanced CT scanning reveals patent mesenteric vessels, but the intestinal wall shows a reduced level of enhancement, both of which
are indicative of a diagnosis of NOMI. Surgical intervention is required if the ischemic damage progresses in a way that is similar to that
in suspected HPVG caused by NOMI . On the other hand, it has been reported that bowel necrosis and the surgical resection of gangrenous
lesions can be avoided if the condition is identified quickly and the cause is determined at an early stage . Although bowel stenoses that
present after non-surgical treatment have been demonstrated in patients with abdominal trauma , inflammatory enterocolitis, and ischemic
enterocolitis , there are no specific reports or guidelines that describe the management and follow up of patients with NOMI in whom bowel
necrosis and surgical treatment have been avoided. We report the case of a patient with NOMI and HPVG who was managed with non-resectional
treatment at an early stage and who developed a delayed small-bowel stricture. A 24-year-old Japanese man presented to the emergency
department (ED) with fever, abdominal pain, and vomiting. He had a history of mental retardation and epilepsy, and he could not express his
emotions verbally. On arrival at the ED, the patient had a blood pressure of 75/30 mmHg, a pulse rate of 160 beats/min with a sinus rhythm,
and a respiratory rate of 44 breaths/min. A physical examination revealed that his whole abdomen had a board-like rigidity. Laboratory
investigations revealed leukocytosis of 20,600 cells/μl, an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 28.6 mg/dl, and a procalcitonin level
of 278.99 ng/ml (reference range: ≤0.03 ng/ml). Arterial blood-gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.411, bicarbonate at
12.6 mmol/l, and lactate at 6.8 mmol/l. A plain abdominal radiograph revealed a diffuse gaseous distention of the small bowel and HPVG. A
non-contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan confirmed the presence of the diffuse gaseous distention that was accompanied by pneumatosis of the
small bowel and a dendritic gas image that extended to the liver surface on both the right and left lobes (Figure 1).Figure 1 Computed
tomography (CT) findings on the day of admission. The unenhanced CT scan shows diffuse gaseous distention with pneumatosis of the small
bowel (A) and extensive hepatic portal venous gas (B). Computed tomography (CT) findings on the day of admission. The unenhanced CT scan
shows diffuse gaseous distention with pneumatosis of the small bowel (A) and extensive hepatic portal venous gas (B). Following aggressive
fluid resuscitation, an urgent laparotomy was performed because septic shock with diffuse peritonitis caused by perforated appendicitis and
bowel necrosis caused by NOMI were strongly suspected. Although we found purulent ascites and a perforated appendix when we explored the
abdomen surgically, neither gangrenous nor transmural ischemic changes were observed within the small bowel or colon (Figure 2). Therefore,
we performed an appendectomy without a bowel resection and we selected open abdomen management with negative-pressure wound therapy, because
a planned re-operation was scheduled. After the initial operation, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit where he was
mechanically ventilated under sedation, and he was required a continuous intravenous infusion of noradrenaline. We administered a meropenem
(0.5 g) infusion via a drip 4 times per day. On postoperative day 3, the planned re-operation was performed, and we did not find any
ischemic changes within the small bowel or colon. We completed the operation with a formal abdominal closure. His leukocyte, CRP, and
procalcitonin levels improved after the initial operation. On postoperative day 9, contrast-enhanced CT was performed, which demonstrated a
thickening of the small-bowel wall, but no evidence of bowel ischemia or vascular occlusion. The patient’s blood cultures at the time of
admission were positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis, and cultures of the intraoperative ascites fluid were positive for Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Streptococcus anginosus, all of which are sensitive to meropenem, which was administered for 14 days. His
postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on an oral diet.Figure 2 Intra-operative findings during the initial operation.
Although a perforated appendix was evident, and swelling and serosal inflammatory findings were observed throughout the entire small bowel
and colon, gangrenous and transmural ischemic changes were not observed. Intra-operative findings during the initial operation. Although a
perforated appendix was evident, and swelling and serosal inflammatory findings were observed throughout the entire small bowel and colon,
gangrenous and transmural ischemic changes were not observed. Four days after discharge, the patient returned to the ED having experienced
several vomiting episodes. A plain abdominal radiograph revealed a partial gaseous distention of the small bowel. Abdominal CT scanning,
which was performed on the day following the patient’s readmission to hospital, enabled us to diagnose postoperative paralytic ileus. The
patient’s only symptom was vomiting, and he had no symptoms that suggested an abdominal abscess. Non-operative management was chosen that
including nasogastric tube decompression. After the discharge from the nasogastric tube declined, we began oral nutrition; however, the
patient vomited again and we managed him using a long intestinal tube. The patient’s symptoms did not improve under non-operative
management, and we decided to perform a laparotomy 40 days after the initial operation, because an upper gastrointestinal series using a
long intestinal tube had revealed a small intestinal stenosis. A considerable adhesion was present in the upper jejunum to the abdominal
wall, which were considered to be the cause of the passage disorder, and there was no evidence of a bowel stricture. Based on these
intraoperative findings, we performed a synechotomy only. After undergoing the re-operation, the patient’s course was uneventful. However,
57 days after the initial operation, the patient experienced symptoms associated with a bowel obstruction. An upper gastrointestinal series
revealed a small intestinal stenosis within the proximal jejunum. Fifty-nine days after the initial operation, a partial resection of the
jejunum was performed. A severe luminal stricture of the jejunum was evident that was accompanied by marked structural changes, which were
not apparent during the second operation (Figure 3). The pathological findings revealed an ischemic inflammation accompanied by an ulcer and
necrosis. A wide-ranging exclusion of the membranes had occurred, with ulcer formation, and the inflammation and fibrosis reached the sub-
mucosal and sub-serosal layers were observed (Figure 4). After the third operation, the patient’s course was uneventful, and he was
discharged on an oral diet.Figure 3 Intra-operative findings during the third operation. Marked small-bowel stenosis (black arrow) was
evident, which was not observed during the second operation (A). The macroscopic findings of the small-bowel stenosis included a severe
luminal stenosis and marked structural changes accompanied by thickening caused by scarring mainly in the luminal side (black arrow)
(B).Figure 4 Pathological findings within the small-bowel specimen. Wide-ranging membrane exclusion and ulcer formation (black circle), and
inflammation and fibrosis that extended from the sub-mucosal to the sub-serosal layers were observed. These pathological changes were
associated with significant infiltration by a variety of inflammatory cells. Intra-operative findings during the third operation. Marked
small-bowel stenosis (black arrow) was evident, which was not observed during the second operation (A). The macroscopic findings of the
small-bowel stenosis included a severe luminal stenosis and marked structural changes accompanied by thickening caused by scarring mainly in
the luminal side (black arrow) (B). Pathological findings within the small-bowel specimen. Wide-ranging membrane exclusion and ulcer
formation (black circle), and inflammation and fibrosis that extended from the sub-mucosal to the sub-serosal layers were observed. These
pathological changes were associated with significant infiltration by a variety of inflammatory cells. In a recent survey of HPVG, Kinoshita
et al. reported a mortality rate of 39% among all 182 cases reported by 2001. HPVG occurs in different clinical scenarios, including bowel
necrosis, digestive tract dilation, intraperitoneal abscesses, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, gastric ulcers, complications associated
with endoscopic procedures, and intraperitoneal tumors. Most frequent cause of HPVG is mesenteric vascular occlusion and subsequent bowel
necrosis. The mortality rate is high among cases of HPVG that is associated with bowel necrosis (75%), and emergency surgery is recommended
for these potentially lethal cases . Given the high mortality rate of HPVG associated with bowel necrosis, the underlying disease might be
an important factor that contributes to patient survival. The degree of bowel necrosis also seems to be associated with the mortality rate.
Although NOMI is an important pathology associated with HPVG and it has the highest mortality rates when it is associated with different
critical conditions, an increasing number of patients managed using conservative treatment have been reported . In 1958, Ende described the
first cases of NOMI in 3 patients with heart-failure-associated low outputs . Recently, a variety of predisposing factors for NOMI have been
reported, including heart failure/cardiogenic shock, aortic insufficiency, the administration of vasoconstrictive medications, and dialysis
. Although a relatively low level of mortality has been demonstrated among dialysis patients without bowel necrosis, NOMI has the poorest
survival rate among the different mesenteric ischemia etiologies, primarily because of the severity of the comorbid conditions that
precipitate reductions in mesenteric perfusion and diagnostic delays. NOMI is associated with 20–30% of all cases of acute mesenteric
ischemia and has a mortality rate of 70–90%, which has changed little over time, it is associated with 20–30% of all cases of acute
mesenteric ischemia. It leads to extensive irreversible intestinal necrosis for which the prognosis is very poor, despite the absence of
organic obstructions in the principal arteries. Contrast-enhanced CT scanning reveals patent mesenteric vessels, but the intestinal wall
shows a reduced level of enhancement, both of which are indicative of a diagnosis of NOMI, and surgical intervention might be required if
the ischemic damage progresses. In this case, we were unable to perform contrast-enhanced CT because the patient had acute kidney injury due
to septic shock. However, portal venous gas secondary to NOMI was strongly suspected, because the patient had septic shock with diffuse
peritonitis, extended pneumatosis intestinalis on CT, and no evidence of vascular occlusion with segmental circulatory insufficiency during
surgical exploration. Pathological investigations of delayed strictures of the small bowel caused by ischemia have reported that the
membranous exclusion and ulcer formation are caused by bowel perfusion disorders. Inflammation and fibrosis then reach the sub-mucosal and
sub-serosal layers and extend to incorporate the entire circumference of the bowel lumen . In the current case, the same pathological
findings were observed, and these formed part of the rationale for our diagnosis of a delayed intestinal stricture caused by NOMI. NOMI can
be treated surgically or non-surgically. Surgical treatment should be considered for patients with suspected bowel necrosis or peritonitis,
and for those whose laboratory investigations reveal leukocytosis, elevated levels of liver enzymes, creatinine phosphokinase, serum urea,
creatinine, and amylase, and acidosis . Presently, early angiography is performed on patients in whom mesenteric ischemia is suspected and
there are no signs of sepsis or peritonitis. If NOMI without the evidence of bowel necrosis or peritonitis is diagnosed, vasodilators will
be initiated, for example, prostaglandin E1 and nitroglycerin . If gangrenous or transmural ischemic changes in the bowel are found during
surgical exploration, resectional treatment is recommended. However, a bowel that is not infarcted but is of questionable viability should
not be resected, and a second-look laparotomy is indicated in these cases . The risks and benefits associated with resectional and non-
resectional treatments are yet to be determined. While non-resectional treatment could avoid the complications associated with laparotomy
and intestinal resection, a delayed intestinal stricture as occurred in this case, might be a risk associated with non-resectional
treatment. Bowel stenoses that present after non-surgical treatment have been reported in patients with blunt abdominal trauma ,
inflammatory bowel disease, tuberculosis , ischemic colitis , and in non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-related enteropathy . Pneumatosis
that is accompanied by neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis has also been reported in 10–20% of the cases who present with delayed strictures
. A literature search performed on Medline (Ovid) and PubMed using the key words “non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia” and “stricture” or
“stenosis”, from 1965 to 2013, uncovered only 2 cases , and no cases have been reported since the use of CT technology became routine.
Previously, NOMI was recognized as an acute phase critical condition that required early identification and appropriate surgical
intervention. However, the possibility of delayed structural changes in the ischemic bowel of NOMI patients who are managed without
resection of the involved bowel must be acknowledged, as has been demonstrated in the present case report. While non-surgical management can
be considered for selected patients with NOMI, continuous observation is required to evaluate the development of delayed strictures that
will lead to bowel obstructions in patients who undergo non-resectional treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Hepatic portal venous gas Computed tomography Non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia Emergency department Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions SM drafted the manuscript and assisted in all of the operative
procedures described. MF and TS are members of the attending staff of the department who discussed and provided advice about the treatment
and performed the initial operation. SK is the chief of the department and he supervised the management of the patient and contributed
supportive information. MF, TS, and SK revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. All of the authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
