Avian reoviruses (ARVs) cause a range of disease presentations in domestic, captive and free-living bird species. ARVs have been reported as
a cause of significant disease and mortality in free-living corvid species in North America and continental Europe. Until this report, there
have been no confirmed cases of ARV-associated disease in British wild birds. Sporadic individual magpie (Pica pica) mortality was detected
at a single site in Buckinghamshire, England, April-September 2013. An adult female magpie was found moribund and subsequently died. Post-
mortem examination identified hepatomegaly and splenomegaly as the most severe macroscopic abnormalities. Histopathological examination
revealed extensive hepatic and splenic necrosis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) identified virions of a size (circa 78 nm diameter)
and morphology consistent with ARV in both the liver and the small intestinal (SI) contents. Nucleic acid extracted from pooled liver and
spleen was positive on both a pan-reovirus nested PCR targeting the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase gene and a PCR using primers specific to
the ARV sigma C protein gene. Virus isolated from the liver and the SI contents was characterised by a syncytial-type cytopathic effect, a
reovirus-like appearance on TEM and sequence identical to that from PCR of tissues. In situ hybridisation confirmed co-localisation of ARV
with lesions in the liver and spleen, implicating ARV as the causative agent. Splenic lymphoid atrophy and necrotic stomatitis associated
with Aspergillus fumigatus infection were consistent with generalised immunosuppression and resultant opportunistic infection. The pathology
and comprehensive virus investigations in this case indicate ARV as the primary pathogen in this magpie, with concurrent secondary infection
subsequent to immunosuppression, as has been observed with reoviral infections in other bird species. ARV should be considered as a
differential diagnosis for magpie, and potentially other corvid, disease and mortality incidents. This is the first demonstration of ARV-
associated mortality in a wild bird in Britain. The prevalence and significance of ARV infection in British wild birds, and its implications
for poultry and captive bird health, are currently unknown. Avian reoviruses (ARVs) comprise a diverse genus of non-enveloped, double-
stranded RNA viruses with a segmented genome within the family Reoviridae . ARVs are associated with a range of disease presentations in
birds from various orders. In chickens (and to a lesser extent in turkeys), arthritis/tenosynovitis is the most common disease presentation
caused by ARVs . Myocarditis, pancreatitis, hepatitis and enteric syndromes have also been reported in Galliformes . Necrotising hepatitis
and splenitis are typically reported in psittacine and anseriform species with ARV infection . Reoviruses have been isolated from both
healthy and diseased birds and are frequently diagnosed with concurrent infections; careful evaluation is required to determine their
clinical significance in each case. Faeco-oral transmission is considered to be the primary route of transmission . ARV has been reported as
a cause of significant disease and/or mortality in free-living corvid species in North America [(American crow, Corvus brachyrhynchos) in
the USA, 2001 and Canada, 2004 and Europe [(hooded crow, Corvus corone cornix) in Finland, 2002 and carrion crow (Corvus corone) in Belgium,
2004 . To date, there are no reports of ARV infection associated with clinical disease in British wild birds. Here, we present a case of ARV
infection in a wild magpie (Pica pica) from southern England, associated with hepatic and splenic necrosis, where the pathological findings
indicate the reovirus infection is likely to be the primary and significant disease contributing to the cause of death. A single magpie was
observed with non-specific signs of malaise in a rural garden in Buckinghamshire, England, in April 2013. The bird was in a moribund
condition and died soon after capture. Two other magpies, also with lethargy and non-specific malaise, were subsequently observed at the
same site, one in May 2013 and the second in September 2013. The observed development of disease in these birds was similar, with
progressive weakness developing over an approximately two week period. The first bird was found dead. The latter two were presumed to have
died, but their carcases were not recovered for further investigation, illustrating one of the challenges of wildlife disease surveillance .
Pathological examination of the recovered carcase (the first case seen) was performed using a standardised protocol comprising systematic
external and internal examination of body systems, as described by . This confirmed it was an adult female magpie in emaciated body
condition with wasted pectoral muscle mass and absence of body fat. The carcase had not been frozen and was in a good state of preservation
(the interval from the carcase being found to examination was circa 72 hours). The skin was tightly adherent to the subcutis, suggestive of
generalised dehydration. The wing and tail plumage were in poor condition with fractured vane tips and stress marks of moderate severity,
consistent with chronic poor health. Macroscopic examination revealed severe hepatomegaly with markedly swollen liver lobes, orange
parenchymal discolouration with pale tan-coloured miliary stippling of the hepatic parenchyma (Figure 1). Concurrent splenomegaly was
present with diffuse parenchymal congestion and haemorrhage. No evidence of the bursa of Fabricius was observed. Bilateral lung congestion
was grossly visible. The air sacs and pericardium had pale orange discolouration, with mild thickening and a cloudy appearance.Figure 1
Macroscopic appearance of the liver. The liver at gross post-mortem examination showing enlargement, orange discolouration of the parenchyma
and miliary distribution of pale tan foci. Macroscopic appearance of the liver. The liver at gross post-mortem examination showing
enlargement, orange discolouration of the parenchyma and miliary distribution of pale tan foci. Generalised, severe necrotic stomatitis was
present with cream-coloured, crumbly debris adherent to the palate and floor of the mouth extending around the base of the tongue. The
proventriculus and gizzard were empty. The small intestine contained a moderate volume of brown fluid content with some blood-staining,
whilst the small intestinal (SI) serosal vessels appeared grossly congested. The large intestine contained a moderate volume of paste-like
dark brown-coloured contents. The adrenal glands were both prominent, possibly enlarged. Congestion of the cerebral vasculature was noted on
gross inspection. No other significant macroscopic abnormalities were detected. Bacteriological examination of liver, SI contents and the
oral lesion was performed, including incubation under aerobic, anaerobic and microaerophilic conditions, following the protocols described
by . Confluent near pure growths of Escherichia coli were recovered from the liver and SI contents with no other significant organisms
isolated. Anaerobic cultures of the liver and SI contents were negative for Clostridium spp. A liver impression smear with Ziehl-Neelsen
staining was negative for acid-fast bacilli. Aspergillus fumigatus was isolated and identified on the basis of colony and conidial
morphology following culture from the oral lesion using Sabouraud’s Dextrose agar with chloramphenicol (Oxoid, UK; Reference P00358A) at
25°C. Direct microscopical examination of a saline mount crush preparation of the oral lesions was negative for protozoan or metazoan
parasites. A circa 5 mm3 section of oral lesion was inoculated into Trichomonas media 2 (Oxoid, UK; Reference LR0027A) and incubated at 30°C
in an aerobic incubator for 5 days; media was observed for trichomonad parasites at 2, 3 and 5 days as per the protocol described by and was
negative for T. gallinae. There was no evidence of parasites on direct microscopical examination of the SI contents. A range of tissue
samples was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin and prepared for histopathological examination using standard techniques. In addition to
the standard H&E preparation, sections were examined with special stains: Giemsa, Gram-Twort, Perls’ Prussian Blue, Periodic Acid-Schiff,
and Ziehl-Neelsen. Histopathological examination identified coalescing, submassive areas of acute hepatic necrosis, associated with
haemosiderin deposition (identified using the Perls’ stain) and considered sufficient to account for death due to hepatic failure
(Figure 2A). Mild, focal cholangitis with bile duct ectasia was noted in association with luminal trematodes. Focally extensive, acute,
fibrinous splenic necrosis was seen, with severe congestion and focal haemorrhages throughout the parenchyma (Figure 2B). Diffuse lymphoid
atrophy was also present in the spleen. Diffuse adrenocortical hyperplasia was noted. No lesions were detected in the sections of brain
examined histologically. No significant organisms were detected on examination of sections stained with H&E or any of the special stains
used.Figure 2 Histopathology and in-situ hybridisation. A. Discrete focal to coalescent acute hepatic necrosis. H&E. 200x. B. Fibrinous
splenic necrosis. H&E. 200×. C-D. Demonstration of ARV RNA by in-situ hybridisation in intralesional cells (arrowheads) in liver (C) and
spleen (D). 400x. Histopathology and in-situ hybridisation. A. Discrete focal to coalescent acute hepatic necrosis. H&E. 200x. B. Fibrinous
splenic necrosis. H&E. 200×. C-D. Demonstration of ARV RNA by in-situ hybridisation in intralesional cells (arrowheads) in liver (C) and
spleen (D). 400x. Nucleic acid was extracted from pooled brain and kidney using TRIzol® Reagent (Life Technologies) following the
manufacturer’s protocol, and screened using a pan-flavivirus and West Nile virus specific real-time PCR : both tests were negative. Nucleic
acid was extracted from pooled liver and spleen using the EZ1 RNA Universal Tissue Kit (Qiagen) on an EZ1 Advanced XL robot following the
manufacturer’s protocol and was screened using a pan-herpes virus PCR which was negative. Negative contrast TEM was performed on both SI
contents and liver homogenate using standard protocols . Virus particles of a size (circa 77–78 nm diameter), shape and surface morphology
consistent with reovirus were identified in both samples. A pan-reovirus nested PCR targeting the L2 genome segment was performed on the
nucleic acid extracted from pooled liver and spleen. Complementary DNA was generated from 200 ng nucleic acid using SuperScript™ III reverse
transcriptase (Life Technologies) at 50°C for 30 minutes as instructed by the manufacturer. Conditions for the PCR were as described , but
using the Fast Cycling PCR kit (Qiagen). ARV PCR product was purified using the MinElute PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen) and DNA sequencing
was performed using BigDye Terminator Ready Reaction Mix (Life Technologies) on an ABI 3130xL genetic analyser platform (Life Technologies).
Sequence reads were checked for ambiguities using SeqMan software of the DNASTAR Lasergene Core Suite (DNASTAR, Inc.) and primer sequences
were edited out before BLAST search (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). An amplicon of the size expected for reovirus L2 gene RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase (circa 274 bp) was obtained. Virus isolation of liver, kidney and SI contents was attempted; a pool of kidney and
liver homogenate, and a sample of SI contents were separately used to seed Vero cell line C1008 in the presence of 10% foetal calf serum
(FCS) and Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (Life Technologies). Both the liver/kidney pool and SI contents cultures resulted in a syncytial-
type cytopathic effect. TEM on the cell pellet of the fourth tissue culture passage from each culture revealed virus particles (Figure 3)
with an indistinguishable appearance to those in the post-mortem tissues.Figure 3 Transmission electron micrograph of a reovirus detected in
the magpie. Image from magpie liver tissue culture material. Bar = 100 nm. Transmission electron micrograph of a reovirus detected in the
magpie. Image from magpie liver tissue culture material. Bar = 100 nm. A biotin-labelled probe for the magpie reovirus in-situ hybridisation
(ISH) assay was generated using first round pan-reovirus PCR as the template. The labelling PCR mastermix consisted of 5 μl 10x AccuTaq™ LA
DNA Polymerase buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 μl of each second round PCR primer (Eurofins, 20 pmol/μl), (1 mM of each dATP, dCTP, dGTP, 0.65 mM
dTTP and 0.35 mM biotin-16-dUTP, Roche Applied Science), 0.5 μl AccuTaq™ LA DNA Polymerase (Sigma-Aldrich, 5 u/μl), 28.5 μl water and 5 μl
template. The cycling conditions were 95°C for 5 minutes, 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds, 47°C for 20 seconds, 72°C for 30 seconds and
72°C for 2 minutes. Porcine enteric diarrhoea virus (PEDV) nucleic acid was labelled in a similar manner and used as a negative target
control. The labelled products were purified using the MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and quantified with a Nanodrop 2000
Spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies). Tissue sections were deparaffinised, dehydrated and endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched
with a 15 minute incubation in a hydrogen peroxide/methanol solution (30 ml H2O2 in 1000 ml methanol; VWR). Sections were labelled using a
modified version of a previously published ISH protocol . Briefly, sections were pre-treated with proteinase K (20 μg/ml, Roche Applied
Science) for 30 minutes at 37°C and immersed in 0.3% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). The biotin-labelled magpie reovirus and PEDV probes
(500 ng/ml) were added to hybridisation buffer [100 mM Tris, 0.9 M NaCl, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) in DEPC treated water, pH
adjusted to 7.2 with 1 M HCl, (VWR)], denatured at 95°C for 2 minutes, and chilled immediately on ice before application to the sections
overnight at 37°C. After post-hybridisation washes, the hybridisation was amplified using an avidin-biotin-peroxidase conjugate (Vectastain
ABC elite, Vector Laboratories) and visualised with 3,3′-diaminobenzidene tetrahydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich), before the sections were
counterstained with Mayer’s haematoxylin (Surgipath) and permanently mounted. ISH for ARV demonstrated labelling predominantly of
mononuclear cells in areas of necrosis and surrounding parenchyma in the liver and spleen (Figure 2C and D). The open reading frame (ORF)-3
region of the small 1 (S1) gene segment of the magpie reovirus genome, which codes for the sigma C protein, was amplified. Use of this
variable surface protein has been recommended by previous studies for ARV strain characterisation . The primer pairs, forward
5′-atggcgggtctcaatccat-3′ and reverse 5′-gatgcckgtacgcacggt-3′, were employed to amplify the ORF-3 using Fast Cycling PCR Kit (Qiagen) and
PCR conditions of 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 2 minutes. PCR product
purification, DNA sequencing and scans of sequence reads for ambiguities were performed as described above. Deduced amino acid sequences of
the magpie reovirus ORF-3 and those of other reoviruses were aligned using the MegAlign software of the DNASTAR Lasergene Core Suite
(DNASTAR, Inc.). Phylogenetic analysis was undertaken using Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) version 5.03 to construct a
neighbour-joining tree. The neighbour-joining phylogenetic tree constructed on 285 amino acids of the magpie reovirus sigma C protein
(GenBank accession number KJ576829) shows that it clustered in a well-supported clade with viruses isolated mainly from poultry, with a
global distribution including India, USA and China, and distinct from representative ARVs from continental Europe (Figure 4). Amplification
and direct Sanger sequencing of the sigma C protein gene from the cell pellet derived from the fourth tissue culture passage demonstrated
identical sequence to that derived from the post-mortem tissue samples.Figure 4 Avian reovirus phylogeny for 285 amino acids of sigma C
protein. Phylogeny was constructed using the neighbour-joining method implemented in the MEGA 5.03 software. Each sequence on the tree is
identified by GenBank accession number, isolate name, host and country of origin. The magpie reovirus is underlined and fruit bat reovirus
is included as an outgroup. The reliability of phylogenetic tree branching was assessed in bootstrap analysis with 2000 replications.
Bootstrap values less than 50% are not shown. NA; not available. Avian reovirus phylogeny for 285 amino acids of sigma C protein. Phylogeny
was constructed using the neighbour-joining method implemented in the MEGA 5.03 software. Each sequence on the tree is identified by GenBank
accession number, isolate name, host and country of origin. The magpie reovirus is underlined and fruit bat reovirus is included as an
outgroup. The reliability of phylogenetic tree branching was assessed in bootstrap analysis with 2000 replications. Bootstrap values less
than 50% are not shown. NA; not available. Here we describe a case of ARV infection in a single free-living adult magpie from southern
England. This report of ARV infection associated with disease and mortality in a wild bird in Great Britain has implications for wild bird
disease surveillance and our understanding of ARV transmission between domestic and wild birds. Corvids are known to be highly sensitive to
West Nile virus infection in North America; therefore, they are used as a sentinel for flavivirus surveillance in the USA and in Europe .
Corvids are numerous and frequently considered to be a pest species, but there is a relative paucity of information on their infectious
diseases . ARV infection should be included as a differential diagnosis for magpie morbidity or mortality. Previous reports of ARV infection
in free-living corvids have reported haemorrhagic and necrotising enteritis as a significant macroscopic abnormality . Blood-stained SI
contents and SI serosal vessel congestion were noted in this magpie. Autolysis of the SI tract precluded histopathological examination,
making it impossible to further investigate the significance of these gross observations. The liver and spleen were severely affected in
this magpie, similar to descriptions of ARV disease in psittacines . Splenic necrosis has also been reported in cases of ARV infection in
crows . Neurological signs associated with reovirus infection have been reported in other corvids ; gross evidence of meningeal vessel
congestion was seen in this case, but histopathological examination of the brain was unremarkable. This magpie had evidence of chronic
disease: it had poor body and plumage condition, dehydration and adrenocortical hyperplasia. The bird may have had generalised
immunosuppression, as evidenced by splenic lymphoid atrophy and necrotising mycotic stomatitis associated with Aspergillus fumigatus, which
often is an opportunistic pathogen. Bacterial and fungal co-infections and lymphoid necrosis have been features of ARV infections in other
avian species . Since histopathological examinations failed to identify disseminated bacterial colonies or a florid inflammatory response,
recovery of Escherichia coli from multiple sites was considered more likely to be the result of post-mortem tissue invasion than
disseminated systemic infection. The amino acid sequence obtained from the magpie reovirus sigma C protein grouped with greatest similarity
with ARVs from poultry with a widespread distribution in China, India, Israel and North America. Only a few ARV sigma C protein sequences
are publicly available from North Western Europe (all from poultry, none from the UK), but they are distinct from the clade which contains
the UK magpie reovirus (Figure 4). It is plausible that wild birds may act as a reservoir of infection for poultry or vice versa. Further
interpretation, however, is currently limited since the coverage and representativeness of available ARV sequences is not systematic (in
space, time or by avian species). Additional sequence data of ARVs from both poultry and wild birds is required to elucidate the dynamics
and risk pathways of ARV transmission between captive and free-living birds. We describe severe hepatic and splenic necrosis in a single
magpie with ARV infection. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report of ARV infection associated with significant disease in a
wild bird in Great Britain. Continued surveillance is required to determine the frequency of magpie mortality incidents associated with
magpie reovirus and the distribution and prevalence of ARV infections in other wild bird species. Further ARV sequence data is required to
inform the epidemiology and transmission of ARVs between wild birds and poultry. Any implications of this magpie reovirus for poultry and
other captive bird health should be investigated. Avian reovirus Foetal calf serum In situ hybridisation Small intestinal Transmission
electron microscopy Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions BL performed the
post-mortem examination, co-ordinated diagnostic testing and led the manuscript preparation; AD, SS, DLH and RMI conducted and co-ordinated
the molecular genetic studies and virology testing and/or ISH and contributed to the manuscript preparation; DE undertook the negative stain
transmission electron microscopy examinations and contributed to the manuscript preparation: AN, AP and DH conducted the histopathological
examination and/or in-situ hybridisation studies and contributed to the manuscript preparation. AAC obtained surveillance funding and
assisted with scheme co-ordination and manuscript preparation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the member of
the public who reported this wild bird mortality incident and our colleagues, Shinto John, Shaheed Macgregor, Tim Hopkins and Ricardo Castro
Cesar de Sa, from the Zoological Society of London and Fiona McCracken from the Animal and Plant Health Agency for their assistance with
this investigation. This work was financially supported by Defra through the GB Wildlife Disease Surveillance Partnership and projects WC
1027, SE0537, SV3040 and SV3032, CoVetLab CF0004, the Esmée Fairbairn Foundation and the Institute of Zoology. The funding bodies played no
role in the design of this study, in collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision
to submit the manuscript for publication.
