Gorham’s disease is a rare osteolytic disorder characterized by progressive resorption of bone and replacement of osseous matrix by a
proliferative non-neoplastic vascular or lymphatic tissue. A standardized treatment protocol has not yet been defined due to the
unpredictable natural history of the disease and variable clinical presentations. No single treatment has proven to be superior in arresting
the course of the disease. Trials have included surgery, radiation and medical therapies using drugs such as calcium salts, vitamin D
supplements and hormones. We report on our advantageous experience in the management of this osteolyic disorder in a case when it affected
only the skull vault. A brief review of pertinent literature about Gorham’s disease with skull involvement is provided. A 25-year-old
Caucasian male presented with a skull depression over the left fronto-temporal region. He noticed progressive enlargement of the skull
defect associated with local pain and mild headache. Physical examination revealed a tender palpable depression of the fronto-temporal
convexity. Conventional X-ray of the skull showed widespread loss of bone substance. Subsequent CT scans showed features of patchy erosions
indicative of an underlying osteolysis. MRI also revealed marginal enhancement at the site of the defect. The patient was in need of a
pathological diagnosis as well as complex reconstruction of the afflicted area. A density graded CT scan was done to determine the variable
degrees of osteolysis and a custom made allograft was designed for cranioplasty preoperatively to allow for a single step excisional
craniectomy with synchronous skull repair. Gorham’s disease was diagnosed based on histopathological examination. No neurological deficit or
wound complications were reported postoperatively. Over a two-year follow up period, the patient had no evidence of local recurrence or
other systemic involvement. A single step excisional craniectomy and cranioplasty can be an effective treatment for patients with Gorham’s
disease affecting the skull vault only. Preoperative planning by a density graded CT aids to design a synthetic bone flap and is beneficial
in skull reconstruction. Systemic involvement is variable in this patient’s population. Gorham’s disease is a rare and potentially disabling
osteolytic disorder. It is characterized by uncontrolled proliferation of non-neoplastic vascular or lymphatic tissues, leading to
progressive resorption and replacement of osseous matrix which may extend to the adjacent tissues . It was first described by Jackson in
1838 who reported a case of “boneless arm” and much later presented as a distinct clinical syndrome by Gorham and Stout in 1954, who
characterized its main pathological features . Other terms such as “massive osteolysis”, “disappearing bone disease” and “phantom bone
disease” have also been used . Gorham’s disease usually occurs in children and young adult patients, most commonly in the 2nd and 3rd
decades although any age group may be affected (with cases reported spanning from 1.5 to 72 years) and without any race or gender
predilection . Histologically, Gorham’s disease is characterized by inflammatory osteolysis of bony segments which are then replaced by
localized proliferative lymphatic channels . These osteolytic characteristics may be accompanied by several types of non-neoplastic
developmental vascular malformations, including capillary, venous and lymphatic malformations without endothelial cell proliferation . Here,
we present a case of Gorham’s disease affecting only the skull vault which was managed by a single-stage craniectomy and skull
reconstruction, using a synthetic bone flap generated preoperatively via distinct computer aided planning technique. To put this into an
appropriate context we included a review of the pertinent literature. A 25-year-old Caucasian man presented with a skull defect over the
left frontotemporal region that had progressively enlarged over a 3-year period. He complained of mild dull local aching headaches with
short term memory impairment of one year duration, occasional visual symptoms, and subjectively decreased hearing. Symptoms were explained
by the polysubstance abuse and the patient’s past medical history of depression. General physical examination was unremarkable with the
exception of a clearly visible osseous depression of the left frontoparietotemporal region associated with mild tenderness on palpation and
interspersed softness embedded in a thinned but firm skull. The patient was neurologically intact. X-ray of the skull (Figure 1A & B) showed
widespread loss of calvarial structure secondary to an osteolytic process. Subsequent head CT scan (Figure 2A, B & F) showed the typical
features of a patchy erosive osteolysis of the left frontoparietotemptoral skull region indicative of an active underlying process. Coronal,
sagittal and lambdoid sutures were shown to be patent radiographically in skull-scouts (Figure 1A & B) and CT-cuts (Figure 3A & B) in order
to exclude craniosynostosis. Post-contrast MRI study revealed marginal enhancement of the calvarial defect with no evidence of brain
invasion or soft tissue component. (Figure 2C & D) Bone survey as well as chest x-ray were done to exclude skeletal and pulmonary
involvement, respectively. Furthermore, the metabolic and chemical labs’ profile of the patient did not reveal any abnormality indicative of
metabolic or endocrinologic disease. This study was approved by the institutional review board (IRB) of our hospital using an IRB protocol
number (2013-P-000253/3). An informed patient’s consent was obtained to submit this article to the journal in order to be published.Figure
1Plain skull films as obtained from CT-scouts: (A) Anteroposterior and (B) lateral projections show the skull preoperatively together with a
view C) of the upper cervical spine (lateral view). No other lesions were evident, nor did we observe cervical fractures or misalignment.
Sagittal and coronal sutures are visible.Figure 2Preoperative images. A. and B. Preoperative CT of the skull bone window axial and coronal
respectively showing frontparietotemporal bone thinning, erosion and defect. C. and D. Preoperative MRI brain T1-WI with contrast showing
the marginal enhancement. E. and F. CT skull with 3D reconstruction showing the variable degrees of osteolysis from outside and inside
respectively.Figure 3Postoperative CT skull images following excision and reconstruction. A) axial view of bone window, B) coronal view of
bone window and C) CT skull with 3D reconstruction. Plain skull films as obtained from CT-scouts: (A) Anteroposterior and (B) lateral
projections show the skull preoperatively together with a view C) of the upper cervical spine (lateral view). No other lesions were evident,
nor did we observe cervical fractures or misalignment. Sagittal and coronal sutures are visible. Preoperative images. A. and B. Preoperative
CT of the skull bone window axial and coronal respectively showing frontparietotemporal bone thinning, erosion and defect. C. and D.
Preoperative MRI brain T1-WI with contrast showing the marginal enhancement. E. and F. CT skull with 3D reconstruction showing the variable
degrees of osteolysis from outside and inside respectively. Postoperative CT skull images following excision and reconstruction. A) axial
view of bone window, B) coronal view of bone window and C) CT skull with 3D reconstruction. Based on a density graded CT scan, the severity
of erosion at the affected skull region was determined. A custom made cranioplasty allograft was designed preoperatively (Figure 4) using a
digital computerized software (Stryker®, Kalamazoo, Michigan) to define the size, site and shape of the synthetic bone flap enabling a
single-staged surgery of excisional craniectomy, allograft duraplasty and synchronous skull reconstruction. (Figure 3) The pre-fabricated
implant was made of Poly Methyl Methacrylate (PMMA). This patient’s pre-manufactured implant configuration was designed using specific
software (Mimics, Materialise Company, Belgium) which generated allograft models based on variable degrees of osteolysis seen in the
affected part of the skull bone on CT. The extent of calvarial bone to finally be excised and replaced was decided from a density-graded CT
scan. To this end, we randomly selected 10 representative points within diseased and healthy skull regions, and obtained the respective
Hounsfield units. This yielded a range of bone density values. The mean value for diseased bone was 342 HU (range: 158 to 643 Hounsfield
units) whereas the mean value for healthy bone was 1489 HU (range: 1274 to 1630 units), respectively.Figure 4Preoperative planning. A.
Variable densities of the resorbed bone are illustrated in different colors based upon CT. B. The measurements of the expected bone defect
after removal of all regions (1, 2 and 3) giving an area of 90 × 110 mm which is the size of the designed implant synthetic bone flap. C.
The expected final design of the bone flap replacing the defect and preserving the same skull contour. Preoperative planning. A. Variable
densities of the resorbed bone are illustrated in different colors based upon CT. B. The measurements of the expected bone defect after
removal of all regions (1, 2 and 3) giving an area of 90 × 110 mm which is the size of the designed implant synthetic bone flap. C. The
expected final design of the bone flap replacing the defect and preserving the same skull contour. To generate the final allograft
construct, we then color-coded the prospective craniectomy area on the CT scan using the highest obtained density value of diseased skull
(643 Hounsfield units). We used this particular value as a cut off since its density was about half that of the mean value obtained from the
density measurements of healthy bone. A visual overlay was then used to confirm that the chosen implant shape matched all areas of diseased
bone. Surgery as such was then performed in a standard fashion. The patient underwent general endotracheal anesthesia and was position
supine in three point skeletal fixation pins (Mayfield). Preoeprative density graded CT and MRI data were loaded on an intraoperative image
guidance system (BrainLab) to map the affected area onto the scalp. The incision was planned accordingly and a conventional myocutaneous
flap was raised. The affected area was visually identified. The optimal extent of the resection was taken from the CT and sketched onto the
bony surface. For corroboration, the pre-generated bone allograft was put as a stencil onto the marked and affected skull area and it was
confirmed that it could be used for the ensuing craniectomy. This way we could excise a bone segment that matched precisely the custom made
implant for later repair. After standard craniectomy employing a side cutting saw (Anspach, DePuy; West Chester, PA), we separated the
affected bone from the underlying layer of dura and repaired a very small dural defect with a pericranial autograft before we proceeded
immediately with vault reconstruction using the prefabricated bony allograft (see Figure 5). The wound was hemostased and closed in layers
without the need of subgaleal drains. The patient recovered from anesthesia immediately in the operative room. The postoperative period was
uneventful and the patient showed no neurological deficit.Figure 5Intraoperative images. A. Exposure of the bony lesion following temporalis
muscle separation. B. Final view following surgical excision and reconstruction using a synthetic bone flap fixed to the surrounding
apparently healthy bone with miniplates and screws. Intraoperative images. A. Exposure of the bony lesion following temporalis muscle
separation. B. Final view following surgical excision and reconstruction using a synthetic bone flap fixed to the surrounding apparently
healthy bone with miniplates and screws. Routine hematoxylin and eosin was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections after
decalcification of the submitted bone specimen. The sections revealed distinct areas of bone resorption with replacement by fibrous tissue
with variable degrees of vascularity and collagen depositions (Figure 6A). In focal areas adjacent to zones of active bone resorption were
numerous thin-walled, predominantly capillary-sized blood vessels (Figure 6B). In other areas, the zones of bone resorption were composed of
densely collagenized fibrous tissue with interdispersed small blood vessels (Figure 6C). Beyond these characteristic features there were
patchy areas with chronic inflammatory cells, including foamy macrophages (Figure 6D).Figure 6Histopathology. A) Replacement of bone by
fibrous tissue with variable amount of collagen deposition and vascularity. (H&E, 10X objective) B) Presence of marked number of thin-walled
vessels next to an area of active bone resorption. The blood vessels are predominantly capillaries, but smaller arterioles and venules are
also seen. (H&E, 10X objective) C) Bone replacement by dense fibrous tissue with occasional small blood vessels. (H&E, 10X objective) D)
Patchy area of chronic inflammatory infiltration with scattered foamy macrophages. (H&E, 40X objective). Histopathology. A) Replacement of
bone by fibrous tissue with variable amount of collagen deposition and vascularity. (H&E, 10X objective) B) Presence of marked number of
thin-walled vessels next to an area of active bone resorption. The blood vessels are predominantly capillaries, but smaller arterioles and
venules are also seen. (H&E, 10X objective) C) Bone replacement by dense fibrous tissue with occasional small blood vessels. (H&E, 10X
objective) D) Patchy area of chronic inflammatory infiltration with scattered foamy macrophages. (H&E, 40X objective). The postoperative
period was uneventful without local wound complications or any neurological deficit and the patient was discharged four days
postoperatively. Over a two-year follow up period, the patient did not show any evidence of resorption of the adjacent skull bone or any
other skeletal involvement. Gorham’s disease is a non-hereditary progressive osteolytic disorder that typically affects bones with
subsequent lymphatic vascular malformation . Gorham’s disease can be monostotic or polyostotic, however multicentric involvement is rare .
The most commonly involved sites are the mandible (15%), scapula (10%), ribs (12%), humerus (8%), pelvis (10%), femur (11%) and less
commonly the skull . Clinical presentations vary based on the site of bone involvement and presence of systemic manifestations. To our
knowledge, less than 30 cases of Gorham’s disease with any skull involvement, including this case report, have been reported in the
literature. Table 1 Published case reports of Gorham’s disease involving the skull .Table 1 Review of reported cases of cranial involvement
in Gorham’s syndrome ReferenceAge of onsetGenderLocationSymptomsTreatmentF/U outcomeChiang et al. 46MaleOccipital boneNo neurol. Symptoms.--
Wildförster et al. -femaleSquamofrontalNo neurol. symptoms-Zhang et al. 40MaleParietooccipital regionNo neurol. symptomsStableKawasaki et
al. 29FemaleLeft temporal bone, facial mandibular and vertebral bonesPain, hoarsenes, swallowing disturbace, postural instability of the
neck and associated dyspnea and dysphagia, deafness and dumbness, left facial palsy, loss of visionAt age 34 years radiation therapy (total,
31 Gy) was performed. At age 35 years, further irradiation of the skull base (total, 28 Gy) was tried, but the osteolytic lesion expanded
further. At the age of 36 years posterior cranio-vertebral fixation, tracheotomy and gastrostomy were performed because of postural
instability of the neck andDeathChai et al. 38MaleFronto-parietal-CranioplastyLo et al. 23MaleLeft parietal regionNo neurol. symptomsLeft
parietal craniectomy was performed, Reconstructive surgery with artificial bone graft will be scheduled in the next hospital course, 3
months.StablePapeix et al. 40MaleParietal poneNo neurol. symptomsRadiotherapy and surgery-Rao et al. 20FemaleLeft parietal boneNo neurol.
symptoms--Frankel et al. 14FemaleCalvariumRhinorrhoe, sensorineural hearing loss, immobile left palate, atrophy of the left side of the
tongue with fasciculations2340 cGy in 13 fractions12 months, stabilisation and sclerosisHasegawa et al. 49MaleLeft parietal
boneHeadacheSurgery-Parihar et al. 35FemaleLeft parietal boneNo neurol. SymtomsLeft parietal craniotomy, cranioplasty-Iyer et al.
58FemaleFrontal boneHeadache, vomiting, delirium, rhinorrhoea, meningitisPt. refused surgery-Girisha et al. 16
monthsFemaleCalvariaDevelopmental delay, failure to thrive--Kurczynski et al. 14FemaleLeft orbit, zygoma, mandible, sphenoid, and
occiputLeft enophthalmiaRadiotherapy with 2000 rad to the entire skull, mandible, and upper cervical vertebrae24 months, no further
progression, slight remineralizationKhorsovi et al. 62MaleOccipital boneNo neurol. symptomsTotal of 4000cGy24 months, arrest of disease
process with new bone formationMawk et al. 7MaleRight skull base and cervical spineNeck pain, lymphatic fluid within middle ear spaces and
paranasal sinuses.Surgery, 4140 cGy3 months, no clinical or radiological progressionPlontke et al. 54FemaleSkull BaseRight hearing
lossCranio-cervical stabilisation, radiation total 30,6 Gy8 months, no clinical or radiological progressionGirn et al. 2FemaleSkull
baseClinical signs mimicking raised intracranial pres- sure and deafnessHalo application disease process did not respond to palmidronate and
radiotherapy ( Five courses of radiotherapy with a dose of 35Gys in 20 fractions)Continuous disease process, deathSchiel et al.
14FemalePosterior wall of the maxillary sinus, the orbit and base of the skull as fas as the apwx of the os petrosusRight maxillary
painRemoval of right palatal mucoperiosteum and 40 Gy total77 months, No evidence of further bone lysisHernández-Marqués et al.
2MaleTemporal boneSecondary cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakagePatient required two surgical interventions. The second intervention included
mastectomy and placement of a patch and a lumbar drainage device during 50 days, after which the leakage ceased-Mowry et al. 29FemaleLeft
temporal boneIntermittent aural fullness, egophony, tinnitus bilaterally--Tsutsumi et al. 82FemaleBilateraly parietal regionsPainless scalp
depressionsOpen biopsy for histological verification- Review of reported cases of cranial involvement in Gorham’s syndrome The pathogenesis
of Gorham’s disease remains poorly understood and a number of possible causes have been reported in literature. While Radhakrishnan and
Rockson suggested that Gorham’s disease is a disease of disordered lymphangiogenesis, Aviv and colleagues suggested that it might occur
independently from disseminated lymphangiomatosis, therefore representing two varieties of a rare disease etiology. Pathophysiological
aspects regarding the presence or absence of osteoclasts in pathological tissue as well as effects of hyperemia and changes in local pH-
stimulating hydrolytic enyzmes remain controversial . While Gorham and Stout originally suggested that “osteoclastosis” was not a necessary
feature, Foult and colleagues pointed out that osteolysis occurred secondary to angiomatosis, and Spieth and colleagues demonstrated a clear
relationship between osteoclast activity and Gorham’s disease. This is further corroborated by the work of Möller and colleague , who
described a large number of multinucleated osteoclasts with hyperactive resorptive function in his patients. To determine the presence of
blood and lymphatic vessel markers on the endothelial cells of the pathological proliferating vasculature in Gorham’s disease Hagendorn and
coworkers stained specimens for specific makers such as panendothelial marker CD 31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule), lymphatic
vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor-1 (LYVE-1), and VEGF receptor (VEGFR)-3. Over 90% of endothelial cells expressed CD-31 and were also
found staining positive for LYVE-1, suggesting that the proliferating vasculature associated with Gorham’s lymphangiomatosis consists
predominantly of lymphatic endothelium . The reported clinical manifestations of Gorham’s disease were quite variable and largely depend on
the site and extent of involvement. The presentation may be limited to local symptoms, such as pain and swelling of the affected extremity,
soft tissue atrophy, and weakness of the involved limb or pathological fractures. However, systemic involvement, such as respiratory or
neurological complications, was also frequently reported . The neurological symptoms of Gorham’s disease vary greatly. Skull involvement may
lead to progressive headache, migraines , nausea, vomiting, otitis media or recurrent episodes of meningitis secondary to chronic
cerebrospinal fluid leakage . Furthermore, some patients with temporal bone involvement may have auricular fullness, tinnitus, hearing loss
or deafness . Vertebral column involvement leading to pathological fractures, spine deformities and/or paraplegia has also been reported .
Skull X-rays may initially show radiolucent foci which may subsequently extend into progressive dissolution and disappearance of a portion
of the calvarial bone . The osteolysis may extend to the contiguous bone and cross the intervening joint . Kotecha and colleagues emphasized
the advantage of using quantitative computed tomography in the assessment of bones in patients with Gorham’s disease . Among other benefits,
it assesses the stage of the disease and aids in the decision-making processes at the time of initiating a particular treatment regimen also
allowing to monitor individual patient response to any given therapy . In addition to CT scans, thin cut fat-suppressed MRI T1-weighted
contrast enhanced images help in visualizing a reticular pattern typical for the vascular component of the lesion . Tc-99 scintigraphy is
suitable in tracking the course of the disease activity as it may demonstrate increased uptake of radiopharmaceutical agents during initial
active stages of the disease and subsequently show areas of decreased uptake corresponding to the diminished bone region in later stages of
the disease or in response to treatment . Torg and coworkers classified Gorham’s disease progression by radiographic criteria allowing the
differentiation of four sequential stages:An initial stage in which radiolucent foci resembling patchy osteoporosis are present.A second
stage defined by an increase of bone deformity along with progressive loss of bone mass.A third stage in which the cortical layer is
disrupted by endothelial invasion into adjacent soft tissues or jointsLastly a stage characterized by some shrinkage of the ends of affected
bones. An initial stage in which radiolucent foci resembling patchy osteoporosis are present. A second stage defined by an increase of bone
deformity along with progressive loss of bone mass. A third stage in which the cortical layer is disrupted by endothelial invasion into
adjacent soft tissues or joints Lastly a stage characterized by some shrinkage of the ends of affected bones. The diagnosis is made via a
combination of suspicious clinical and radiologic data as well as distinct histopathological features in conjunction with the exclusion of
other hereditary, traumatic, metabolic, neoplastic, endocrinologic, infectious and inflammatory sources of osteolyses . Although other
osteolytic disorders of the skull (such as multiple myeloma, osteolytic metastases, juvenile Paget’s disease, eosinophilic granuloma and
brown tumor) may show similar imaging findings, the CT, MRI and Tc-99 findings in combination with the long asymptomatic clinical course
facilitate the differentiation of Gorham’s disease. Identifying areas of distinct vascular or lymphatic proliferation in early disease
stages or the transformation to fibrous tissue in late disease stages can be achieved by generous biopsies of the affected bone and is
essential for the unequivocal diagnosis of Gorham’s disease . To this end, Heffez and colleagues published a case report in which they
suggested specific criteria distinguishing Gorham’s disease from other diseases of bony destruction which include:Positive biopsy with the
presence of angiomatous tissueAbsence of cellular atypiaMinimal or no osteoblastic response or dystrophic calcificationsEvidence of local
bone progressive osseous resorptionNon-expansile, non-ulcerative lesionsAbsence of visceral involvementOsteolytic radiographic
patternNegative hereditary, metabolic, neoplastic, immunologic, or infectious etiology. Positive biopsy with the presence of angiomatous
tissue Absence of cellular atypia Minimal or no osteoblastic response or dystrophic calcifications Evidence of local bone progressive
osseous resorption Non-expansile, non-ulcerative lesions Absence of visceral involvement Osteolytic radiographic pattern Negative
hereditary, metabolic, neoplastic, immunologic, or infectious etiology. The differential diagnosis should further include, but is not
limited to: Paget’s disease, metastases, angiosarcoma, essential osteolysis and progressive parietal bone thinning. The latter is an age-
related benign process not associated with metabolic or endocrine abnormalities and is usually seen on imaging as an incidental finding . In
contrast to Gorham’s disease, progressive thinning of the outer aspect of the vault is the main feature of biparietal thinning, occurring in
pediatric skulls, although this has also been described in adults . Differential diagnosis in children should include: juvenile
fibrosarcoma, juvenile fibromatosis, and chondromyxoid fibroma in Hajdu-Cheney-syndrome which is a rare fibroblastic tumor with a
predilection for the scalp of infants. Current treatments are only experimental as no single treatment has proven to be superiorly effective
in arresting the course of the disease owing to its unpredictability . Spontaneous arrest or regeneration of the destroyed bone without
treatment has been reported , although the disease process generally requires multiple treatment attempts. This may be particularly relevant
in cases in which vital organs such as the spinal cord or lungs are involved, the latter of which can even result in pleural effusions or
chylothorax . However, the progressive involvement of vital structures in some cases may be fatal , resulting in an overall mortality of
approximately 13.3% . The prognosis of Gorham’s disease is otherwise considered to be good when disease is limited to the limbs or pelvic
bones . Surgical intervention has been suggested as the method of choice and includes resection of the lesion and possible re-grafting using
various constructs . However in the advanced stages of the disease, surgical procedures may be limited by technical issues such as the lack
of bone substance for fixation of autologous or alloplastic material or by the extent of systemic involvement. The pre-fabricated implant we
used in our case allows a better cosmetic outcome by providing the exact natural skull contour compared to the conventional use of mesh and
bone cement with excellent patient’s satisfaction. Although it may take more time preoperatively to design the compatible shape of the skull
graft, it may save a lot of time intraopreratively to do both craniectomy and reconstruction in the same session applying the preformed
skull implant precisely to replace the defect following the excision of the pathological bone. As there is no need for cement preparation
and allograft molding this minimizes intraoperative time. The implant used in our case was formed of Poly Methyl Methacrylate (PMMA) which
is known to have adequate impact resistance similar to native skull bone with less risk of bone resorption compared to autologous bone flaps
. Furthermore, the pre-fabricated PMMA allows the surgeon to avoid any cement preparation phase, with its subsequent exothermic reaction
which must be alleviated with cooling-irrigation to minimize the risk of thermal injury to the underlying structures such as the dura and/or
the brain . A limitation of this technique might be the high cost of such detailed preoperative planning when using density-graded CT
scanning with 3D reconstruction as well as designing a patient-specific implant. Beyond this, its use is highly elective as the lag time
makes it not suitable for neurosurgical emergencies (e.g. compound depressed skull fractures). When planning surgery for patients with
Gorham’s disease, certain precautions should be considered, as they may influence surgical management and strategies. Anesthesia induction
must be done cautiously, as patients with maxillary or mandibular bone involvement may have difficult endotracheal intubation, which can be
especially difficult in pediatric age groups. Protection of the spine is also important during induction and positioning . Furthermore,
postoperative ventilatory problems have been reported, emphazising that extubation has to be planned carefully and may involve prolonged
intensive care management, as chylothorax is a possible life threatening complication that may occur even postoperatively. Reconstruction
techniques using prostheses seems to be effective despite potential obstacles since Woodward and colleagues , Kulenkampff and colleagues and
Paley and coworkers have reported that the progression of adjacent disease has led to failure of reconstructions. Based on the experience of
Vinee and colleagues , medical treatment with hormones in combination with calcium salts and vitamins alone seem to be inefficient. Other
treatment options include drug management and have been attempted using bisphosphonates, due to their antiosteoclastic and antiangiogenic
activity. Lehmann and coworkers reported a case of Gorham’s disease that was successfully treated with bisphosphonates for a period of 17
years. Hammer and colleagues reported on bisphosphonate monotherapy (30 mg intravenous/3 months) controlling the disorder during a two year
follow-up period. A successful conservative management was also reported by Avelar and colleagues , whose patient received monthly
intravenous bisphosphonate infusions (at a dose of 4 mg) in addition to daily calcium (500mg) and vitamin D (400 UI) over the course of one
year, showing maintenance of bone volume and symptomatic improvement of pain. Interferon may also be useful because of its antiangiogenic
effects and its use has been reported by Dupond and colleagues who treated a patient successfully based on a dosage of 7.5 to 15 million IU
3x/week over 5 years. However, this is contrary to results by Deveci and coworkers who reported on a patient who died 4 months after the
time of diagnosis, after being treated with interferon alpha-2b and bisphosphonates. In the case we are presenting here, the patient did not
need to receive any adjuvant radiotherapy or complementary medical treatment affecting bone remodeling, since disease was limited to one
site only which was treated by excision. Girn and colleagues reported on the management of a two-year-old girl with skull base and cervical
spine involvement using radiotherapy and pamidronate therapy but this regimen resulted in failure to arrest the disease process and
subsequent failure of surgery providing stabilization. In contrast, Heyd and colleagues , demonstrated that radiation therapy with the
addition of intravenous zoledronic acid therapy may prevent the progression of the disease in 77% to 80% of cases with applied total doses
ranging from 30 to 45 Gy. Similar results were presented in case reports by other authors (Bruch-Gerharz et al. , Johnstun et al. , Browne
et al. and Dunbar et al. ), who all came to the conclusion that radiation therapy in moderate doses (40-45 Gy at 1.8 Gy to 2 Gy per
fraction) is effective. Due to the increased risk of radiation-induced secondary neoplasms and severe delayed toxicity, judicious use of
radiation therapy is advised particularly in young adults and children . Gorham’s disease is one of the rare osteolytic disorders which may
affect the skull or any other bone with or without systemic involvement. Surgical management by an excisional craniectomy and synchronous
skull reconstruction is an effective and safe modality of treatment for Gorham’s disease presented with a solitary skull lesion.
Preoperative planning by a density graded CT and special software to design a synthetic bone flap allows for single step reconstruction in
this patient’s population for elective settings and complicated diseases such as Gorham’s, this seems to yield superior cosmetic results.
Competing interests All others certify that they have NO affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial
or non-financial competing interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. Authors’ contributions VO has drafted
the primary manuscript with collection of most of the online published data. AB drafted the final manuscript adding more to the intellectual
content of the article by extensive editing of both the format and content of the discussion adding the technical details of pre-operative
planning. AB has also designed the final attached figures and was responsible for proper referencing as well as addressing all the major and
minor revisions as requested by the reviewers of different journals to reach the final submitted version. MH and MA carried out the
histopathological analysis of the tissue sample and reviewed the paragraphs related to the pathogenesis of this rare disease. EK is the
neurosurgeon who performed this surgical procedure and proposed the design of this article. EK has also revised the final draft extensively
adding more impact to the clinical assessment of the illustrated case, technical surgical details and the strategy of preoperative planning
in order to approve the final manuscript to be submitted. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information First
authorship was shared by Victoria Ohla and Ahmed B. Bayoumi.
