Hepatic endometriosis is one of the rarest disorders characterized by the presence of ectopic endometrium in the liver. To our knowledge,
only 21 cases of hepatic endometrioma have been described in the medical literature. We report a case of a 36-year-old primiparous female
with hepatic endometriosis forming a large cystic mass. The patient presented once with severe right quadrant pain as her only symptom and
no history of endometriosis. Complete blood count and biochemical tests were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography scans
suggested the presence of a 6.5 × 6.0 cm cystic mass in segment III of the liver. The mass was completely removed by local liver resection.
The intraoperative frozen sections suggested a diagnosis of hepatic endometriosis. The diagnosis was confirmed through histological
immunostaining without intrinsic abnormality. A preoperative diagnosis of hepatic endometriosis is made on the basis of considering the
possibility in advance. Hepatic endometriosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a cystic liver mass despite conducting
exhaustive investigations in the absence of characteristic clinical and radiological features. Histological examination is essential, and
surgery remains the treatment of choice. Endometriosis is a benign condition most commonly noted in the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries,
and local pelvic peritoneum . It affects approximately 10% of women of reproductive age and 2.5% of postmenopausal women . However,
endometriotic lesions have also been described in almost all other remote organs of the human body, including the omentum, gastrointestinal
tract, peritoneum, operative scars, lymph nodes, umbilicus, skin, lungs, pleura, bladder, kidneys, pancreas, and even in males . Hepatic
endometriosis, one of the rarest forms of atypical endometriosis, was first described in 1986 . To our knowledge, only 21 cases of hepatic
endometriosis have been previously reported in the literature. We herein describe the 22nd case of hepatic endometriosis and evaluate the
current literature addressing the diagnosis of hepatic endometriosis focusing on advances in the clinical manifestation, pathogenesis, and
diagnostic workup. A 36-year-old woman, primigravida, consulted our hospital for investigation of a cystic hepatic lesion in August 2013.
The patient had no history of endometriosis. Half a year previously, the patient had presented with severe right quadrant pain in the
midnight which only lasted for 3 h just before menstruation. An upper abdominal ultrasound showed a 6-cm lesion within the left lobe of the
liver. The patient was diagnosed with a hepatic cystic mass in segment III of the left lobe. A laparotomy had been considered and postponed
since the patient had managed to cope with her symptoms. The patient refused further treatment at that moment. The patient was not currently
undergoing menopause. The patient had no exposure to hepatotoxic drugs, estrogens, progestins, or oral contraceptives. There were no other
significant symptoms. On physical examination, no definite abdominal mass lesion was palpable and no lymphadenopathy was noted. Complete
blood count was within normal range as were the liver function tests. Serological tests for hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C
virus antibodies were negative. The tumor markers (carcino-embryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, alpha-fetal protein, carbohydrate
antigen 125) were normal, as was the routine lab work. A preoperative computed tomography scan showed a well-circumscribed cystic lesion of
6.5 × 6.0 cm located in segment III (Figure 1). The wall appeared thick with complex septate. A preoperative tentative diagnosis included
liver cystadenoma or liver cystadenocarcinoma.Figure 1 Hepatic CT scan showing a well circumscribed cystic lesion of 6.5 × 6.0 cm located in
segments III of the left liver lobe. Hepatic CT scan showing a well circumscribed cystic lesion of 6.5 × 6.0 cm located in segments III of
the left liver lobe. An exploratory operation was performed, which revealed a large cystic tumor occupying segment III of the liver
(Figure 2). There was no evidence of metastases. Biopsies were taken from the cyst wall, and the intraoperative frozen section histology
suggested a diagnosis of hepatic endometriosis. The endometriosis was completely removed by a pericystectomy. An abdominal cavity
exploration revealed no other pathologic events. The pelvis was examined and no evidence of endometriosis was found. We did not detect any
other abnormalities during the operation. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged on the ninth postoperative day. After
3 months of follow-up, the patient is asymptomatic with no evidence of recurrent disease.Figure 2 Macroscopic examination of the liver mass.
A 6.5 × 6.0 × 5.5 cm cystic mass was presented in the left lobe of the liver with thick fibrous capsule. Macroscopic examination of the
liver mass. A 6.5 × 6.0 × 5.5 cm cystic mass was presented in the left lobe of the liver with thick fibrous capsule. Histopathology analysis
revealed a lobulated cyst with adjacent normal hepatic parenchyma. The cyst wall was partially composed of endometrial glandular and stromal
elements (Figure 3a), characteristic of endometriosis. Immunostaining of the stromal cell and epithelial cells expressed strong coloring for
estrogen and progesterone receptor (Figure 3b,c). This was further confirmed by positive immunostaining of CD10, CK7, as well as HepPar-1,
which proved the epithelial origin of the cyst (Figure 3d,e,f). Since no atypical cells were detected, we concluded the diagnosis to be
benign intrahepatic endometriosis.Figure 3 Microscopic examination of the endometriosis cyst of the liver. Cyst and normal liver tissue
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (a) and with immunohistochemistry with estrogen receptor antibody (b), progesterone receptor antibody
(c), CD10 antibody (d), CK7 antibody (e), and HepPar-1 antibody (f) (×100 magnification). No hyperplasia or atypia was observed in
epithelial or stromal component. Microscopic examination of the endometriosis cyst of the liver. Cyst and normal liver tissue stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (a) and with immunohistochemistry with estrogen receptor antibody (b), progesterone receptor antibody (c), CD10
antibody (d), CK7 antibody (e), and HepPar-1 antibody (f) (×100 magnification). No hyperplasia or atypia was observed in epithelial or
stromal component. Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial-like tissue outside the uterus, which induces a chronic,
inflammatory reaction . It affects approximately 10% of women of reproductive age and 2.5% of postmenopausal women, from all ethnic and
social groups . Although clinical and imaging features of typical endometriosis within the pelvis can be highly suggestive, the gold
standard for diagnosis is based on the histologic examination of appropriately sampled tissue . Endometriosis was first described by
Rokitansky in 1860. The most commonly affected sites are the pelvic organs (ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterosacral ligaments, Pouch of
Douglas) and peritoneum, although other parts of the body such as the lungs are occasionally affected. However, endometriotic lesions have
also been described in some other unusual remote organs of the human body, including the omentum, gastrointestinal tract, operative scars,
lymph nodes, umbilicus, skin, pleura, bladder, kidneys, pancreas, and even in males [3, 6]. However, the mechanism by which endometriosis is
involved is still largely unknown. Significant effort has been undertaken to identify potential causes in the development of endometriosis,
including retrograde menstruation, coelomic metaplasia, iatrogenic injury, and hematogenous or lymphatic dissemination . Retrograde
menstruation is believed to cause transcoelomic spread and implantation within the pelvis due to its predilection for gravity-dependent
pelvic deposits in most observed lesions. However, this theory cannot explain distant and intraparenchymal lesions in atypical cases while
the haematogenous or lymphatic dissemination may offer a better explanation for these atypical locations. The possible transportation of
endometrial fragments is based on these vessels as vehicles in a fashion analogous to metastatic spread of neoplasm. The coelomic metaplasia
may be, at least in part, due to chronic inflammation, hormonal alternation, or trauma to promote endometriosis and that might be amenable
to disruption in the male or heart [6, 8]. However, laboratory findings and clinical data of hepatic endometriosis fell short of metaplasia
theory as most of the hepatic lesions are intraparenchymal. Hepatic endometriosis, first described by Finkel et al. in 1986, is an extremely
rare disorder characterized by the presence of ectopic endometrial tissue in the liver . The first reported patient was a 21-year-old female
who presented with epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting. The patient was found to have an endometrial cyst measuring 13 cm in diameter
located in the left lobe of the liver. Subsequently, 21 cases of this rare form of endometriosis have been described in the medical
literature. All cases of previously reported hepatic endometrioma and our present case are presented in Table 1. In our present case, the
patient had no history of endometriosis or previous pelvic operation. By profiling the clinical and biological properties of the hepatic
lesion, we may therefore identify vascular dissemination whose importance in hepatic intraparenchymal endometriosis was poorly recognized.
We have now determined that in our case, the liver maybe a transportation target of endometrial fragments by lymphatic or blood
vessels.Table 1 Feature of reported cases of hepatic endometriosis in literature Reference Age (years) Liver involvement Endometrial history
Pre-operation diagnosis Treatment Finkel et al. 21Left lobeNoNoCyst enucleationGrabb et al. 21Left lobeNoNoDeroofing + danazolRovati et al.
37Left lobeYesYesSegmentectomy + danazolVerbeke et al. 62Left lobeNoNoExcisionVerbeke et al. 34Right lobeNoNoRight hepatectomyChung et al.
40Left lobeYesNoSegmentectomyWeinfeld et al. 60Right lobeYesNoLeft hepatectomy + excisionInal et al. 25Right lobeYesNoDanazolN’senda et al.
54Right lobeNoYesRight hepatectomyHuang et al. 56Left lobeYesNoLeft hepatectomyJeanes et al. 31BilobarYesYesRight hepatectomyKhan et al.
31BilobarYesYesRight hepatectomy + goserelinKhan et al. 59Right lobeYesYesRight hepatectomyTuech et al. 42Right lobeNoNoExcisionReid et al.
46Right lobeYesNoRight hepatectomy + goserelinGroves et al. 52Right lobeNoNoRight hepatectomyGoldsmith et al. 48Left lobeYesNoNon anatomical
resectionAsran et al. 61BilobarYesYesUnknownSchuld et al. 39Right lobeNoNoSegmentectomyFluegen et al. 32Right lobeNoNoPericystectomyRivkine
et al. 51Left lobeNoNoLeft hepatectomyLiu et al., this study36Left lobeNoNoPericystectomy Feature of reported cases of hepatic endometriosis
in literature The clinical, biological, and morphological characteristics of hepatic endometriosis need to be reported in the literature to
allow for the creation of a better diagnostic approach. These reported data suggest that, no specific diagnostic marker may be sufficient to
isolate hepatic endometriosis from hepatic lesions except a histological examination, despite conducting a complete investigation, in the
absence of clinical and radiological characteristics. Prospective identification of hepatic endometriosis has limitations that contribute to
the controversy surrounding their existence. Although transhepatic biopsy for hepatic endometriosis have been sufficient to differentiate
other hepatic lesions, it is difficult to make a preoperative diagnosis for the majority of hepatic endometriosis patients due to the
potential adverse effects often available after transhepatic biopsy review. It is therefore enticing to suggest that systematic use of
intraoperative frozen sections should be useful to avoid radical hepatectomy in order to decrease morbidity and mortality. Hepatic
endometrioma should always be considered in the differential diagnosis for a woman of any age presenting with a hepatic mass, with or
without previous endometriosis history. The diagnosis is made on the basis of a histological examination, and a pericystectomy has been
recommended. In summary, our 36-year-old Chinese primiparous female with hepatic endometriosis forming a large cystic mass was diagnosed
with endometriosis through histological immunostaining without intrinsic abnormality. Our present case suggested that the liver maybe a
transportation target of endometrial fragments by lymphatic or blood vessels, which provides a theoretical basis for the complex mechanisms
of endometriosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests. Authors’ contributions KL and YL were responsible for the
conception and design of the study. KL, YW, FT and YT were responsible for the acquisition of data. KL, YW, and FT drafted the manuscript.
All authors participated in interpretation of the findings. KL and YL revised and commented on the draft, and all authors read and approved
the final version of the manuscript. All authors confirm that the content has not been published elsewhere and does not overlap with or
duplicate their previously published work. This work was supported by grants from the Development and Reform Commission of Jilin Province
(Grant No. 20130023-6).
