Sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia is a rare morphological variant of thyroid carcinoma associated with Hashimoto’s
disease. To date, only three such tumors have been reported in the minor salivary glands. We describe the first case, to the best of our
knowledge, of recurrent sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia in the minor salivary glands of the upper lip. A 61-year-old
Japanese man was referred to our hospital with a mass in his median upper lip of four years’ duration. An examination of his median upper
lip revealed a well-defined tumor measuring 9×12mm in diameter, which was subsequently resected. Three years after the first surgery, the
tumor recurred and was resected. Both tumors were confirmed by histopathology to be sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia.
Neither recurrence nor metastasis was observed in three and a half years of follow-up after the second surgery. Our findings indicate that
sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia can originate in the minor salivary glands and may be clinically or pathologically
misdiagnosed as other conditions. In 1991, sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia (SMECE) was proposed to be a rare
morphological variant of thyroid carcinoma associated with Hashimoto’s disease . Approximately 30 cases involving the thyroid have been
reported in the literature. Similar to thyroid lesions, SMECE occurring in the salivary glands generally has a lower malignancy and better
prognosis than conventional mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC). To date, only three of these tumors have been reported in the minor salivary
glands. Here, we report the case of a 61-year-old Japanese man with recurrent SMECE in his median upper lip and present a review of the
relevant literature. A 61-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with a mass in his median upper lip of four years’ duration. He
had received interferon-ribavirin combination therapy for chronic hepatitis C several years earlier. He had no history of any other illness.
Our patient was aware of the mass, which had slowly grown over several years with occasional epithelial detachment or bleeding; however, he
never sought treatment. The tumor was located in his median upper lip, was well-defined, measured 9×12mm in diameter, and was elastic, hard
and ulcerated (Figure 1). Regional lymph nodes were not palpable.Figure 1 Gross appearance of the primary tumor. (A) The tumor was located
in the median upper lip, was well-defined, measured 9×12mm in diameter, and was elastic and hard. (B) Partial ulceration of the mucous
membrane was evident. Gross appearance of the primary tumor. (A) The tumor was located in the median upper lip, was well-defined, measured
9×12mm in diameter, and was elastic and hard. (B) Partial ulceration of the mucous membrane was evident. The tumor appeared to be benign
from its appearance and growth rate and was resected under local anesthesia. Preoperative imaging such as computed tomography (CT) or
magnetic resonance imaging was not performed because the boundary of the lesion was clear. The tumor surface was smooth and covered with a
capsule-like structure, and its cut surface was solid and pale yellow. We assumed that it was a benign tumor such as an atheroma or
pleomorphic adenoma. Beneath the erosive epithelium, small neoplastic nests surrounded by markedly hyperplastic fibrous connective tissue
had formed. The tumor cells had pale eosinophilic cytoplasm and round nuclei that included small nucleoli (Figure 2). We also observed
eosinophil-rich infiltrates in the tumor nests, tubular structures containing periodic acid-Schiff-positive mucus in the lumen, goblet
cells, and venous invasion (Figure 3). The specimen was lined by normal muscular tissue.Figure 2 Macroscopic view of the primary tumor
(hematoxylin and eosin staining). Small neoplastic nests surrounded by markedly hyperplastic fibrous connective tissue were evident. The
lining of this specimen consisted of normal muscular tissue.Figure 3 Histological and immunohistochemical features of the tumor. (A) Tumor
nests consisted of epithelial cells and pseudoglandular structures (hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining; ×40). (B) Marked eosinophilic
infiltration in the tumor stroma (H&E; ×200). (C) The tubular structure contained periodic acid–Schiff-positive mucus in the lumen and
goblet cells (×100). (D) Venous invasion can also be observed (Victoria blue–H&E; ×100). Macroscopic view of the primary tumor (hematoxylin
and eosin staining). Small neoplastic nests surrounded by markedly hyperplastic fibrous connective tissue were evident. The lining of this
specimen consisted of normal muscular tissue. Histological and immunohistochemical features of the tumor. (A) Tumor nests consisted of
epithelial cells and pseudoglandular structures (hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining; ×40). (B) Marked eosinophilic infiltration in the
tumor stroma (H&E; ×200). (C) The tubular structure contained periodic acid–Schiff-positive mucus in the lumen and goblet cells (×100). (D)
Venous invasion can also be observed (Victoria blue–H&E; ×100). We performed immunostaining of the resected specimen. The ductal structure
was positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and the solid structure was positive for cytokeratin.
The mindbomb E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (MIB-1)-positivity rate was 7.9%. There was no histological capsule; the macroscopic capsule-like
structure observed may have been connective tissue covering the margin of the resected specimen. On histopathology, the tumor was diagnosed
as SMECE originating from the minor salivary glands of the lip. Based on its MIB-1-positivity rate, we designated the malignancy of the
tumor as intermediate. On microscopy, the tumor nests were close to the surgical margin: 1mm at the nearest point. However, additional
surgery was not performed at our patient’s request. We performed contrast-enhanced CT of his neck and scintigraphy of his whole body,
neither of which revealed any metastases. Considering the potential for metastasis from the thyroid gland or autoimmune disease, blood tests
were also performed. He had no abnormalities in his thyroid hormone levels (tri-iodothyronine, thyroxin and thyroid-stimulating hormone),
autoantibody levels (antinuclear antibody, anti-Sjögren’s syndrome antigens A and B), or whole-blood eosinophil count. Nevertheless, we
closely monitored our patient, with regular check-ups every three months and contrast-enhanced CT imaging of his cervical region once every
year. Three years after the first resection, a mass measuring 2mm in diameter was detected in the same region. Local recurrence was
suspected, and the tumor was resected with a 5mm safety margin. Again, the resected specimen was diagnosed on histopathology as SMECE. Its
histologic features were similar to those of the primary tumor (Figure 4), with a lower density of fibrous connective tissue. This specimen
also had tumor-free margins on histology. Its MIB-1 positivity rate was 5.8%.Figure 4 Histological features of the recurrent tumor. (A) The
density of the fibrous connective tissue was lower than that of the first specimen (hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining; macroscopic view,
×100). (B) Tumor-associated tissue eosinophilia and fibrous stroma were also evident in the recurrent tumor (H&E; ×200). Histological
features of the recurrent tumor. (A) The density of the fibrous connective tissue was lower than that of the first specimen (hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) staining; macroscopic view, ×100). (B) Tumor-associated tissue eosinophilia and fibrous stroma were also evident in the
recurrent tumor (H&E; ×200). A physical examination and contrast-enhanced CT of his neck revealed no signs of recurrence or metastasis three
and a half years after the second surgery. SMECE is a rare variant of thyroid carcinoma, and only approximately 30 cases have been reported
to date. The tumor is a low-grade malignancy with a good prognosis . In 1987, Chan and Saw reported a low-grade MEC showing an unusual
pattern of extensive central sclerosis in the parotid gland and termed it sclerosing MEC. In their case, tissue eosinophils were not
present. Since then, 20 cases of tumors in the major salivary glands and three of tumors in the minor salivary glands have been reported .
In many of these cases, marked eosinophilic infiltration was observed (Table 1). In the latest World Health Organization classification ,
the sclerosing variant of MEC was mentioned; however, eosinophilia associated with MEC was not addressed.Table 1 Past reports of sclerosing
mucoepidermoid carcinoma Source Age (years) Gender Site Size (cm) Grade Treatment Follow-up TATE Chan and Saw 36FParotid
gland6×3×2LowSuperficial parotidectomyNA− Muller et al. 17FParotid gland2IntermediateTotal parotidectomyNA+ Muller et al. 60FParotid
gland4.5×4IntermediateResection + RTNA+ Sinha et al. 65MMinor salivary glands (parapharyngeal space)5×4×3HighResection +RTNA− Urano et al.
57FParotid gland2.5×2LowSuperficial parotidectomyLymph node metastasis/3y+ Urano et al. 43MSubmandibular gland4.5×2.5LowTotal excision of
submandibular glandDead of disease/7y+ Fadare et al. 44FParotid gland4×2LowTotal parotidectomy + RTNED/7y− Ide et al. 28MMinor salivary
glands (retromolar pad)2×2IntermediateTotal excisionNA+ Heavner et al. 23FParotid gland2×1LowTotal parotidectomy + RTNED/1y+ Veras et al.
70FParotid gland4×3LowSuperficial parotidectomyDead of other disease/11y+ Veras et al. 37MParotid gland2.2×1×1LowSuperficial
parotidectomyNED/17y+ Veras et al. 49FParotid gland2.6×1.7LowSuperficial parotidectomyNED/4mo+ Veras et al. 16FParotid
gland2×2IntermediateSuperficial parotidectomyNED/10mo+ Aguiar et al. 43FMinor salivary glands (palate)4×4LowPartial maxillectomyNED/19mo+
Shinhar 57FParotid gland2IntermediateSuperficial parotidectomy + RTNED/3y− Mendelson et al. 21FParotid gland2LowTotal parotidectomy + level-
II neck dissectionNED/3y− Tian et al. 42FParotid gland1.5LowLocal excisionNED/19mo− Tian et al. 52FParotid gland1.4LowLocal
excisionNED/31mo− Tian et al. 62FParotid gland2LowLocal excisionLost to follow-up− Tian et al. 28MParotid gland1.2LowLocal excisionNED/8mo−
Tian et al. 65FParotid gland1.5LowLocal excisionNED/4mo− Tian et al. 32MSubmandibular gland1.1LowLocal excisionLost to follow-up− Tasaki et
al. 79MSubmandibular gland5.6LowTotal excision of submandibular glandNED/15mo+Current case61MMinor salivary glands (upper
lip)1.2×0.9IntermediateResectionLocal recurrence/30mo+F, female; M, male; mo, month(s); NA, not available; NED, no evidence of disease; RT,
radiotherapy; TATE, tumor-associated tissue eosinophilia; y, year(s). Past reports of sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma F, female; M,
male; mo, month(s); NA, not available; NED, no evidence of disease; RT, radiotherapy; TATE, tumor-associated tissue eosinophilia; y,
year(s). On histopathology, SMECE consists of islands of cancer cells of low nuclear grade, with a sclerotic stroma heavily infiltrated by
chronic inflammatory cells and eosinophils. A mixture of mucinous epithelial cells and glandular structures is also evident, and these
components can merge with the squamoid islands or form discrete tubules . Differential diagnoses of our case would include squamous cell
carcinoma, adenosquamous cell carcinoma, low-grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma and microcystic adnexal carcinoma. Immunostaining for
markers such as EMA and CEA was useful for diagnosis. We designated the malignancy of the first resected tumor as intermediate on the basis
of venous invasion and the MIB-1-positivity rate. From an epidemiological perspective, previous reports of SMECE in the salivary glands have
described its features as similar to those of ordinary MEC, with more frequent occurrence in women (16 of 24 reported cases, including
ours), a wide age distribution (16 to 79 years) and predominant occurrence in the parotid glands (17 cases). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first case of SMECE in the minor salivary glands of the lip; it is also the first case of local recurrence. Most reported cases
had a good therapeutic outcome, although one patient developed lymph node metastasis and one died from pulmonary metastasis . According to
our survey of past reports, tumor-associated tissue eosinophilia is not necessarily related to malignancy. In addition, cases in which
secondary metastasis occurred had a low grade of malignancy. Although local excision was effective in most cases, our experience suggests
that SMECE has invasive characteristics. Many previous reports have classified tumors with eosinophilic infiltration into carcinomas and
lymphomas. In past studies, tissue eosinophils have been suggested to indicate an inflammatory host response against a tumor or to be an
eosinophilotactic factor derived from tumor cells themselves; however, the mechanism underlying eosinophilic infiltration remains unclear .
In addition, reports on the prognosis of tumors with eosinophilic infiltration are inconsistent . In some hematopoietic tumors, such as
Hodgkin’s disease or mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, lymphoma tissue fibrosis has also been observed . Samoszuk showed that eosinophils
stimulate DNA synthesis in fibroblasts, and may be involved in the remodeling of host connective tissue and blood vessels in response to a
growing tumor. The tissue sclerosis and venous invasion evident in our case were probably a result of eosinophilic infiltration. Whether
SMECE in the salivary glands represents a distinct tumor type or merely a morphological variant of conventional MEC remains controversial .
In most cases with thyroid involvement, SMECE occurs in the setting of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. However, consistent with findings from other
patients with salivary gland involvement, our patient developed no complications such as Sjögren’s syndrome or other autoimmune diseases. In
this case, we resected the tumor with no consideration of the possibility of malignancy and subsequently encountered recurrence three years
later. Although it is probable that the secondary tumor originated from residual tumor cells, its growth was slow. It was necessary to
perform the second surgery as soon as the diagnosis was made because the surgical margin was close to the tumor. We reported a case of local
recurrence of SMECE. Our experience with the present case indicates that SMECE can originate in the minor salivary glands and that this rare
variant of thyroid carcinoma may be clinically or pathologically misdiagnosed as other conditions, such as inflammatory lesions, benign
metaplasia, or different types of malignant tumor with tissue sclerosis. Although the prognosis of SMECE is relatively good according to
published reports, we continue to monitor our patient carefully. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
carcinoembryonic antigen computed tomography epithelial membrane antigen mucoepidermoid carcinoma mindbomb E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1
sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions YK reviewed the literature and wrote the manuscript. KS and HM investigated the disease concepts and checked the
structure of the text. TA performed the surgery and followed up with the patient. MU and MK performed the histopathological diagnoses. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank our patient for his cooperation and consent for us to use his medical
data and photographs for this article.
