Spontaneous gastric perforation in the absence of chemotherapy is extremely rare. The authors encountered a case of spontaneous perforation
of primary gastric lymphoma. A 58-year-old man visited the authors’ hospital with acute severe epigastralgia. A large amount of free gas and
a fluid collection around the stomach were noted on an abdominal computed tomography scan. The results of imaging studies indicated a
perforated gastric ulcer, and a distal gastrectomy was performed. There was a large perforation about 50 mm in diameter in the anterior wall
of the middle part of the stomach body. Microscopically, the full thickness of the gastric wall was diffusely infiltrated by a population of
large atypical lymphoid cells. The lymphoid nature of these cells was indicated by the strongly positive immunohistochemical staining for
CD20 and CD10. This confirmed the diagnosis of a germinal center B-cell-like type of diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Rituximab plus
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone were administered after the operation. Gastrectomy should be considered if a
giant ulcer with necrotic matter on the ulcer floor is seen on upper gastrointestinal endoscopy because of the possibility of gastric
perforation. If upper gastrointestinal endoscopy shows a finding similar to the abovementioned one during chemotherapy, dose reduction of
chemotherapy or gastrectomy should be considered. Gastrointestinal non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the most common form of extranodal lymphoma. The
vast majority of gastric lymphomas are extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) and
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), which were previously considered as low-grade and high-grade gastric lymphomas, respectively .
Primary gastric lymphoma is rare, accounting for only 1%–5% of all gastric tumors . Perforation of the gastric malignant lymphoma during
chemotherapy is a well-known event. However, the incidence is not high. Furthermore, spontaneous gastric perforation in the absence of
chemotherapy is extremely rare. In recent years, the standard therapy for aggressive gastric lymphoma has shifted from surgery to
chemotherapy and medical therapy. Primary surgical resection is no longer the standard of care. However, it is difficult to make a
preoperative diagnosis of spontaneous perforation of primary gastric lymphoma. The authors encountered a case of spontaneous perforation of
primary gastric lymphoma, and it was considered in terms of pathological findings. On 6 November 2008, a 53-year-old man presented to a
nearby hospital with the chief complaints of epigastric pain and black stool. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a large deep
ulceration in the gastric antrum. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes. The
other lymph nodes were not enlarged. Positron emission tomography/CT showed abnormal accumulations of fluorodeoxyglucose in the gastric
angle, para-aortic lymph nodes, pelvic lymph nodes, and prostate. They suspected malignant lymphoma or prostate cancer. The prostate biopsy
showed prostate cancer, and a definitive diagnosis of gastric malignant lymphoma could not be made despite gastric biopsies that were
performed every 6 months. There were no abnormal findings in the bone marrow biopsy. Because of the high-serum level of prostate-specific
antigen (833 ng/ml) and prostate capsular invasion on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), they made the diagnosis of metastasis of prostate
cancer to the para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes (cT3aN1M1). Treatment was initiated for the prostate cancer rather than the gastric
malignant lymphoma. They started medical therapy for prostate cancer (bicalutamide and leuprorelin acetate). After medical therapy, enhanced
abdominal CT showed that the para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes had become progressively smaller and the level of prostate specific antigen
had decreased. On the other hand, upper gastroscopy showed that the gastric tumor had enlarged gradually. Once control of prostate cancer
was achieved, they had planned to start medical treatment for the gastric tumor. The presence of Helicobacter pylori infection was
demonstrated by the positive results of histologic examination, rapid urease test, and serology. They performed H. pylori eradication
therapy. In November 2013, the patient visited the authors’ hospital with acute abdominal pain. He had severe epigastralgia that had started
after breakfast. He was 58 years old, 166-cm tall and weighed 62 kg, with a body temperature of 35.9°C, a pulse rate of 81 beats/min, and a
blood pressure of 127/82 mmHg. On physical examination, abdominal distension and severe tenderness were present. Blood tests showed normal
results for the white blood cell count (4,900/μl), C-reactive protein (0.1 mg/dl), lactate dehydrogenase (200 IU/l), and interleukin-2
receptor (264 U/ml). Abdominal CT scan showed a large amount of intraperitoneal free gas and a fluid collection around the stomach, liver,
and spleen. Also, the site of gastric perforation at the anterior wall of the body of the stomach was identified (Figure 1). A diagnosis of
perforation of gastric ulcer and pan-peritonitis was made, but details of the gastric lymphoma were unknown because it was his first visit
to the authors’ hospital. The results of imaging studies indicated a perforated gastric ulcer, and an emergency operation was performed. At
first, a laparoscopic omental implantation repair was planned. On laparoscopic visualization of the abdominal cavity, purulent ascites and
food residue were observed. There was a large perforation about 50 mm in diameter in the anterior wall of the middle part of the stomach
body (Figure 2). Because a large amount of food residue had escaped through the large perforation, removal of the food residue around and
within the stomach was attempted but it was unsuccessful. Therefore, an emergency laparotomy was performed. A distal subtotal gastrectomy
with Roux-en-Y anastomosis and lymph node dissection was performed. Macroscopically, the gastric ulcer was 4.2 × 1.5 cm in size, and the
perforation was 4.0 × 1.3 cm in size and located on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum (Figure 3a, b). It was ulcerative and
infiltrative and was the excavated type according to Sano’s classification . Microscopically, a population of large atypical lymphoid cells
diffusely infiltrated the full thickness of the gastric wall. Tumor cells were mainly centroblasts. Tumor cells diffusely infiltrated the
muscle and subserosal layers (Figure 4). Tumor cells and necrotic matter were detected around the perforation and ulcer floor. The lymphoid
nature of these cells was confirmed by the strong positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20, CD38, and CD10; the slightly positive
staining for Bcl-6; and partial positivity for MUM-1 (Figure 5). On the other hand, the results for CD3, CD5, Bcl-2, and EBER ISH were
negative. The MIB-1 labeling index was about 80%. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of germinal center B-cell-like type of DLBCL. There
was no evidence of a low-grade MALT lymphoma. The number of metastatic lymph nodes was 3/31. Based on the Lugano International
Classification, the stage was II1E (perforation and pan-peritonitis) since lymph node metastasis was present around the left gastric artery
and greater curvature of the stomach and distant metastasis was absent.Figure 1 Abdominal CT scan. The site of gastric perforation at the
anterior wall of the body of the stomach was identified. There were free gas and fluid collections around the stomach, liver, and
spleen.Figure 2 Laparoscopic visualization of the abdominal cavity. There was a large perforation about 50 mm in size in the anterior wall
of the middle part of the stomach body (arrow) with purulent ascites and a large amount of food residue.Figure 3 Resected specimen and
macroscopic appearance of the tumor. (a) Resected specimen. (b) Macroscopic appearance of the tumor. The gastric ulcer was 4.2 × 1.5 cm in
size while the perforation was 4.0 × 1.3 cm in size, and they were located on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum.Figure 4 Histological
specimen. The full thickness of the gastric wall was diffusely infiltrated by a population of large, atypical lymphoid cells. Tumor cells
and necrotic matter were seen around the perforation and ulcer floor (hematoxylin & eosin staining; ×1.25, ×60).Figure 5 Immunohistochemical
staining. The lymphoid nature of these cells was indicated by the strong positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20, CD38, and CD10 and
negative staining for CD5. The MIB-1 labeling index was about 80% (×60). Abdominal CT scan. The site of gastric perforation at the anterior
wall of the body of the stomach was identified. There were free gas and fluid collections around the stomach, liver, and spleen.
Laparoscopic visualization of the abdominal cavity. There was a large perforation about 50 mm in size in the anterior wall of the middle
part of the stomach body (arrow) with purulent ascites and a large amount of food residue. Resected specimen and macroscopic appearance of
the tumor. (a) Resected specimen. (b) Macroscopic appearance of the tumor. The gastric ulcer was 4.2 × 1.5 cm in size while the perforation
was 4.0 × 1.3 cm in size, and they were located on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum. Histological specimen. The full thickness of the
gastric wall was diffusely infiltrated by a population of large, atypical lymphoid cells. Tumor cells and necrotic matter were seen around
the perforation and ulcer floor (hematoxylin & eosin staining; ×1.25, ×60). Immunohistochemical staining. The lymphoid nature of these cells
was indicated by the strong positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20, CD38, and CD10 and negative staining for CD5. The MIB-1 labeling
index was about 80% (×60). He recovered from the operation uneventfully and was discharged from hospital 16 days postoperatively. He was
administered rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) therapy at the previous hospital. Malignant
lymphoma of the gastrointestinal tract can be classified as nodal or extranodal. Nodal lymphomas originate in the lymphatic tissue adjacent
to the gastrointestinal tract and invade it, whereas extranodal lymphomas, which are more common, originate in the gastrointestinal tract .
Dawson et al. described five major features as the criteria for primary malignant lymphoma of the intestinal tract: 1) no palpable
superficial lymphadenopathy, 2) no enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes evident on chest radiographs, 3) normal total and differential white
blood cell counts, 4) prominent bowel lesions at laparotomy, and 5) no tumors in the liver or spleen. The patient had a large ulcer in the
stomach, and infiltration of other organs was not found. The present case met all of the abovementioned criteria, so this case was
considered to be primary gastric lymphoma. Primary gastric lymphoma is rare, accounting for only 1%–5% of all gastric tumors . In recent
years, the standard treatment for aggressive gastric lymphoma has shifted from surgery to chemotherapy. The treatment varies with the
histology of the malignant lymphoma. First-line chemotherapy for DLBCL of the stomach is CHOP with or without rituximab. On the other hand,
antibiotic treatment to eradicate H. pylori is the first-line therapy for MALT lymphoma. Bayerdolffer et al. reported that about 70% of
patients showed complete regression and about 12% had partial regression of lymphoma but 18% had no change after eradication of H. pylori
infection. Radiation treatment for H. pylori-negative gastric MALT lymphoma has a high-success rate of 90% or better after 5 years. Also,
there were some reports strongly supporting the hypothesis that some gastric de novo H. pylori-positive DLBCL might remain H. pylori-
dependent and are therefore responsive to H. pylori eradication therapy . In the present case, the presence of H. pylori infection was
indicated by the positive results of the histologic examination, rapid urease test, and serology. Despite H. pylori eradication therapy in
the present case, there was no size reduction of the gastric malignant lymphoma. Primary gastric lymphoma often presents with nonspecific
symptoms, and the diagnosis is often delayed. Nonspecific abdominal pain (50%) and dyspepsia (30%) are the most common presentations. B
symptoms (fever, night sweat, and weight loss) are uncommon in contrast to nodal lymphomas; thus, the diagnosis might be delayed . It is
widely known that perforation occasionally occurs in patients receiving chemotherapy. Yoshino et al. and Maisey et al. reported that
perforation of gastric lymphoma in patients receiving chemotherapy occurs in about 0.9% to 1.1% of cases. On the other hand, spontaneous
perforation of malignant gastric lymphoma is rare compared with perforation of gastric lymphoma in patients receiving chemotherapy. Table 1
shows 15 cases of spontaneous perforation of primary gastric lymphoma that required gastrectomy in Japan between 1985 and 2013 . Of these 15
patients, nine were men and six were women with an age range from 22 to 91 years and a mean age of 61.4 years. The mean tumor size was
91.3 mm (15–200 mm), and the mean diameter of the perforation was 14.5 mm (3–40 mm). Patients with spontaneous perforation of primary
gastric lymphoma requiring gastrectomy had larger tumors and perforations. The present patient had the largest perforation out of those in
past reports.Table 1 Literature reviewed Case Author Year Age Sex Location Tumor size (mm) Diameter of perforation (mm) Sano’s
classification Operation Pathology Lugano Adjuvant chemotherapy 1Kanzaki et al. 198542MaleU325ExcavatedDGBurkittII1E+2Ando et al.
199222MaleL15NDUlcerativeDGDLBCLIIE+3Yanagi et al. 199265MaleL18525ExcavatedDGDLBCLII1E+4Shiomi et al.
199771MaleM15020ExcavatedTGDLBCLII2E+5Fukuda et al. 199845MaleM907ExcavatedDGDLBCLII1E+6Miyamoto et al.
199946MaleML306UlcerativeDGMALTIIE−7Yabuki et al. 200053MaleM10010ExcavatedDGDLBCLIIE+8Mori et al.
200565FemaleU30NDUlcerativeTGDLBCLIV+9Tanaka et al. 200784FemaleM90NDExcavatedDGDLBCLII2E+10Matsunaga
200873MaleM1353UlcerativeTGDLBCLII1E+11Saito et al. 201067FemaleML85NDExcavatedDGDLBCLIIE+12Ishimaru and Kitsukawa
201154FemaleM2005ExcavatedTGDLBCLII1E+13Sunagawa et al. 201191FemaleM1208ExcavatedDGDLBCLII1E−14Shimada et al.
201385FemaleL6530UlcerativeTGDLBCLII1E−15Present case201358MaleM4240ExcavatedDGDLBCLII1E+ U upper, M middle, L lower, ND no description, DG
distal gastrectomy, TG total gastrectomy, DLBCL diffuse large B cell lymphoma, MALT mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Literature
reviewed U upper, M middle, L lower, ND no description, DG distal gastrectomy, TG total gastrectomy, DLBCL diffuse large B cell lymphoma,
MALT mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. The cause of perforation of gastric lymphoma in cases receiving chemotherapy is different
from those in cases that did not receive chemotherapy. Ono et al. reported that the causes of perforation in patients receiving chemotherapy
are weakening of the gastric tissue associated with rapid tumor necrosis, tumor lysis, and exuberant granulation due to chemotherapy. On the
other hand, Shiomi et al. reported that there are two different patterns of spontaneous perforation. First, the spontaneous perforation
results from an ulcer and tumor necrosis that has reached the subserosa. Second, the perforation results from an ulcer that has thin
connective tissue with the absence of tumor. In the present case, tumor cells and necrotic matter were seen microscopically around the ulcer
floor and perforation site, so it was considered that spontaneous perforation resulted from the existence of an ulcer and necrosis of the
tumor that had reached the subserosa. It is difficult to make a preoperative diagnosis of spontaneous perforation of primary gastric
lymphoma. In recent years, the standard treatment for aggressive gastric lymphoma has shifted from surgery to chemotherapy. However,
gastrectomy should be considered if a giant ulcer and necrotic matter on the ulcer floor are present on upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
because of the possibility of gastric perforation. If upper gastrointestinal endoscopy shows a finding similar to the abovementioned one
during chemotherapy, dose reduction of chemotherapy or gastrectomy should be considered. In conclusion, a case of spontaneous perforation of
primary gastric malignant lymphoma was reported and the literature was reviewed. Further research and examination of similar cases are
required to confirm this relationship (the indication of surgery and pathological findings), and further assessment of the clinical
significance of spontaneous perforation of primary gastric lymphoma is needed. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YOh, SL, DK, and YOt
designed the research, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper. YOh drafted the article and revised it critically for important intellectual
content; YOh, SL, DK, YOt, SH, YT, HS, MU, and HU created study materials or recruited the patient. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We thank Caryn Johns who provided medical writing services on behalf of Think SCIENCE Ltd.
