Cystic lymphangioma is a rare tumor of the lymphatic vessels that occurs more frequently in women. Location of this pathology can be diverse
but most commonly occurs in the neck or axilla. Cystic lymphangioma originating from the adrenal tissue represents a very rare entity. We
report here the case of a 38-year-old woman who was diagnosed with a cystic retroperitoneal mass. After further investigations, the patient
was suspected to have a left adrenal cystic lymphangioma. She underwent successful open left adrenalectomy as curative treatment, and the
diagnosis of cystic lymphangioma of the left adrenal gland was confirmed at histology. The postoperative course was uneventful. This case
report and review of the literature bring new insights into the diagnostic difficulty and management of cystic lymphangioma of the adrenal
gland. Cystic lymphangiomas are rare benign lesions of the lymphatic vessels . These tumors originate from the lymphatic endothelial cells
and are thought to be due to ectasia or abnormal development of lymphatic vessels . Most of the time, these tumors appear in the neck or
axilla , whereas intra-abdominal lymphangiomas only account for 5% of all lesions . Adrenal cysts in general are uncommon entities occurring
in about 0.06% of the population , in which cystic lymphangiomas account for a minority of cases. The majority of cystic lymphangioma cases
were described in women . Therefore, the rarity of this disease and the lack of report render the diagnosis and management of this entity
challenging. We report a case of left adrenal cystic lymphangioma in a female patient and review the current literature. A 38-year-old woman
known for anxiety disorder developed constant epigastric pain without radiation toward the back. She mentioned that the pain was not related
to the food intake and scored it between four and six (out of ten) on a visual analog scale. She had multiple episodes of vomiting, no bowel
movement problems, and no fever. Her past medical and surgical history was otherwise uneventful. She went to her general practitioner who
first performed an ultrasonography (US) and a CT scan. These exams showed a cystic-like retroperitoneal mass on the left side measuring
13.4 × 7.2 × 5.2 cm. Laboratory tests were normal. No further exams were undertaken at this point. The pain slightly diminished with
paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. However, after a couple of months, the pain reappeared, and the patient was scheduled
for a CT-guided puncture of this cyst. At first, the radiologist was not able to puncture the cyst due to a thick capsule. The cyst was
finally punctured under US control but could not be completely evacuated due to technical problems (dysfunctional guide wire). Cytology came
back negative for malignant cells and was compatible with a cystic lymphangioma. Unfortunately, the puncture of the cyst did not help to
relieve the patient’s symptoms. The patient then underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assess more precisely the location of this
retroperitoneal cyst and its anatomic relations. T2-weighted turbo spin-echo MR-sequences showed a lesion compatible with a cystic
lymphangioma originating from the left adrenal gland (Figure 1). The cystic lesion extended inferiorly to the renal vein and superiorly to
the diaphragmatic pillar. Due to persisting invalidating pain, a surgical resection of this cystic lesion was proposed. The patient accepted
the operation and signed the informed consent form.Figure 1 Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the cystic lymphangioma. Coronal (a)
T2-weighted turbo spin-echo and axial (b) T1-weighted contrast-enhanced gradient-echo MR images show an ovoid left adrenal lesion (arrow).
It is homogeneously hyperintense on T2-weightening (a) and hypointense on T1-weightening (b), thus confirming the fluid content without
loculation neither solid component. The thin wall surrounding the lesion is barely perceptible. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the
cystic lymphangioma. Coronal (a) T2-weighted turbo spin-echo and axial (b) T1-weighted contrast-enhanced gradient-echo MR images show an
ovoid left adrenal lesion (arrow). It is homogeneously hyperintense on T2-weightening (a) and hypointense on T1-weightening (b), thus
confirming the fluid content without loculation neither solid component. The thin wall surrounding the lesion is barely perceptible. Due to
the size and position of the cyst, and to avoid a rupture of the cyst during laparoscopy, a left subcostal laparotomy was performed. During
surgery, the adrenal origin of the cyst was confirmed, and an ‘en bloc’ left adrenalectomy was performed without rupture of the cyst. No
drain was left in place. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. The patient was
seen at the outpatient clinic one month after surgery and described no more symptoms. The specimen consisted of an ovoid, cystic mass
measuring 8.5 × 4.3 × 2.8 cm (Figure 2). An unremarkable adrenal gland, measuring 3 × 1.2 × 0.7 cm, partially surrounded the cyst. The inner
and outer surfaces of the cyst were smooth with no evidence of rupture. The wall of the lesion was thin with no tumor excrescences. The cyst
was filled with clear fluid. Hematoxylin and eosin stain showed a cystic space lined by a single layer of flattened cells, with occasional
pseudopapillae formation and bands of smooth muscle in the wall (Figure 3). The lining cells had oval, regular nuclei and showed no atypia.
The lining cells showed strong immunoreactivity for D2-40, PROX1, and CD31 and absence of staining for CD34 and CKAE1/AE3 (Figure 4). The
diagnosis of cystic lymphangioma originating from the left adrenal gland was then confirmed.Figure 2 Pathological macroscopic image.
Macroscopic views of the resected adrenal specimen measuring 8.5 × 4.3 × 2.8 cm.Figure 3 Histological view of the cystic lymphangioma of the
left adrenal gland (hematoxylin and eosin staining, 40×). Figure 4 Immunohistochemistry images. D2-40 (a), PROX1 (b), CD31 (c), CD34 (d),
and CKAE1/AE3 (e) immunohistochemical stains. Pathological macroscopic image. Macroscopic views of the resected adrenal specimen measuring
8.5 × 4.3 × 2.8 cm. Histological view of the cystic lymphangioma of the left adrenal gland (hematoxylin and eosin staining, 40×).
Immunohistochemistry images. D2-40 (a), PROX1 (b), CD31 (c), CD34 (d), and CKAE1/AE3 (e) immunohistochemical stains. This article reports a
rare case of symptomatic cystic lymphangioma originating from the left adrenal gland in a female patient successfully treated by complete
surgical resection. The majority of intra-abdominal cystic lymphangiomas is located in the mesentery, in contrast to adrenal location that
is very rare . No more than 30 cases of adrenal cystic lymphangioma have been described in the literature . Table 1 summarizes the English-
written cases reported in the literature since 2000. As confirmed in this case report, age at symptom onset usually ranges from 30 to
50 years with a peak incidence during the fourth decade . Cystic lymphangioma can occur in both adrenals , but the right side is more often
affected . It also occurs more frequently in women .Table 1 Cases of cystic lymphangioma of the adrenal gland reported in the English-
written literature from 2000 Authors Publication year Patient number Gender Age Open (O) or laparoscopic ablation (L) Symptom related to
lymphangioma Left/right adrenal gland 1Akand et al. 20131F44OPainL2Sourial et al. 20131F52L Nihil L3Makni et al. 20122F/M40/40O/L
Nihil/pain2 L4Ellis et al. 201196 F/3 M28 to 56a Not precised5 Nihil/4 pain6 R/3 L5Chien et al. 200886 F/2 M31 to 59a Not precised4 Nihil/2
pain/1 fever/1 HTNb 4 R/4 L6Bettaïeb et al. 20071F22Not precisedPainL7Ates et al. 20051F26OWeaknessR8Garcia et al. 20041F22Not
precisedPainR9Longo et al. 20001F30OPainR10Trojan et al. 20001M40Not precised Nihil R aRange; bhypertension. Cases of cystic lymphangioma of
the adrenal gland reported in the English-written literature from 2000 aRange; bhypertension. Of note, lymphangioma is the generic term for
a tumor arising from the lymphatic vessels and is often found in children. Lymphangiomas have an endothelial origin. The exact pathogenesis
is currently not completely elucidated, and whether lymphangioma of the adrenals is a real neoplasm remains unclear . The most likely
etiology is a developmental abnormality or ectasia of the lymphatic vessels . Cystic lymphangioma develops when a blockage of the lymphatic
vessels occurs due to a benign proliferation. It should not be confused with lymphangioma-like adenomatoid tumors which have a different
embryonic origin . Differential diagnosis of a retroperitoneal cystic-like lesion includes primary adrenal tumors, metastatic
adenocarcinomas, angiosarcomas, multicystic mesotheliomas, or adrenal cysts . Adrenal cysts can be further subdivided into pseudocysts,
endothelial cysts (lymphangiomatous or angiomatous), and epithelial cysts . Most of the time, lymphangiomas are non-secreting and are
discovered incidentally during a radiological exam or a surgery. Symptomatic tumors can induce pain, fever, gastrointestinal disturbances,
or hypertension . Complications of this kind of tumors mainly are enlargement-causing pain or hemorrhage into the cyst. Diagnostic suspicion
is based on clinical presentation, radiological images, and cytological exams. Cystic lymphangioma of the adrenals does not have a
pathognomonic radiological presentation, but new imaging modalities bring useful information helping the diagnosis . As the lesion is rare
in this organ, the radiological images lack specificity. On US, adrenal lymphangioma appears as an anechoic lesion in the suprarenal
location . US can be a good first exam modality . Usually adrenal lymphangioma appears hypodense with smooth borders on CT scanner . On MRI,
cyst borders are delineated by injection of contrast. T1- and T2-weighted MR images are not pathognomonic, but adrenal lymphangioma usually
appears as hypointense on T1-weighted sequences and homogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences. MRI being far more specific than
CT, it usually allows distinguishing malignant adrenal lesions from benign ones . Differential diagnosis includes metastatic tumors,
carcinomas, or pheochromocytomas. Moreover, MRI is more sensitive than CT scan to detect degeneration of the cyst or intracystic hemorrhage
. Immunohistochemistry is an important tool to differentiate this pathological entity from other diagnoses. Lymphangiomas usually display
D2-40, PROX1, and CD31 positivity and absence of CD34 and CKAE1/AE3 stains . Final diagnosis is made by histopathology combined with
immunohistochemistry . Asymptomatic cystic lymphangioma discovered incidentally can just be followed clinically or with control imaging, as
there is no risk of malignant degeneration . Puncture of the cyst can help the diagnosis but is not a therapeutic measure, as a punctured
cystic lymphangioma will recur rapidly as demonstrated in this case. Puncture with injection of sclerosing agents like bleomycin have been
tried but showed the same recurrence risk . Surgical resection represents the definitive treatment if the cystic lymphangioma is
symptomatic. Complete resection of the cyst is recommended, and associated parenchymal resection (adrenalectomy) depends on the location of
the cyst and on the intraoperative dissection . Decision to undertake a laparotomy or a laparoscopy depends on the position, the size, and
the risk of rupture of the cyst. No data on the recurrence risk if intraoperative cyst perforation occurs are currently available in the
literature. If the cystic lymphangioma is bleeding, preoperative embolization can also be considered . In summary, cystic lymphangioma of
the adrenal gland is a rare pathology that should be included in the differential diagnosis of cystic lesions of the adrenal glands. Its
diagnosis can be difficult and challenging. MRI seems to be a good diagnostic modality to detect degeneration or intracystic hemorrhage. If
the patient is symptomatic, definitive treatment is surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging ultrasonography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions GRJ and RD reviewed the patient case. GRJ and RD performed the first draft of the manuscript. GRJ, EM, RD,
and NH followed the patient pre- and postoperatively. SF and PY made the pathological diagnosis and reviewed the case from a pathological
point of view. SS made the initial radiological diagnosis and reviewed the case from a radiological point of view. EM, SS, PY, ND, and NH
supervised the draft of the manuscript. EM, SS, SF, PY, ND, and NH reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. None.
