HOXA genes cluster plays a fundamental role in embryologic development. Deletion of the entire cluster is known to cause a clinically
recognizable syndrome with mild developmental delay, characteristic facies, small feet with unusually short and big halluces, abnormal
thumbs, and urogenital malformations. The clinical manifestations may vary with different ranges of deletions of HOXA cluster and flanking
regions. We report a girl with the smallest deletion reported to date involving the entire HOXA cluster at 7p15.2-p14.3. The patient was the
third child born to a healthy and non-consanguineous Italian couple. She was born at the 34th week of gestation by caesarean section due to
cholestasis of pregnancy. Her birth weight, length, and occipitofrontal circumference were 2,140 g (25-50th centile), 46 cm (50th centile),
and 33 cm (75-90th centile), respectively. The Apgar scores were 8 at both the 1st and 5th minutes. The patient presented with typical mild
facial anomalies, hand and feet abnormalities, urinary anomalies, and mild speech delay. Unexpectedly, the patient demonstrated complex
unusual features of multiple episodes of oxyhemoglobin desaturation, laryngeal stridor and a branchial cyst. Chromosome analysis of the
patient revealed an apparently normal karyotype at the 550 band level. Based on array comparative genomic hybridization, a 2.5 Mb
interstitial deletion was detected at 7p15.2p14.3 (chr7: 26,333,553-28,859,312), involving the entire HOXA cluster and a small number of
other genes as SNX10, SKAP2, EVX1, HIBADH, TAX1BP1, JAZF1, and CREB5. This report improves our understanding of the genotype-phenotype
correlations of HOXA genes cluster deletions via the identification and characterization of the smallest deletion (as well as critical
region) reported to date. In particular we discuss the possible implications of preterm and haploinsufficiency in the pathogenesis of the
unusual findings, furthermore opening new discussion and interpretation cues. The homeobox (HOX) genes family consists of 39 genes, which
encode transcription factors playing a fundamental role in proper embryologic development. Four HOX genes clusters have been identified on
different chromosomal regions in humans, the HOXA on 7p15.3, HOXB on 17q21.3, HOXC on 12q13, and HOXD on 2q31 . All these four clusters are
members of highly conserved gene families that are essential for the development of central nervous system (CNS), axial skeleton, limbs,
gut, hematopoietic and urogenital tract, and internal and external genitalia. A number of studies stated that HOX genes have partially
overlapping expression patterns, and consequently a considerable functional redundancy in the cited tissues . Consequently, full cluster
deletion might reveal any HOX cluster-specific function. Mice lacking all HOXA genes functions suffer from respiratory, cardiac and
hematopoietic defects which cause early postnatal death . Individual mutations in some HOXA genes as HOXA1, HOXA2, HOXA11, and HOXA13 are
known to cause respectively Athabaskan brainstem dysgenesis syndrome (OMIM #601536), microtia, hearing impairment and cleft palate (OMIM
#612290), radioulnar synostosis with amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (OMIM #605432), and hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS, OMIM#140000) or
Guttmacher syndrome (GUTTS OMIM #176305) . Only a few studies have reported the heterogeneous chromosomal aberrations of the region 7p15-p14
. Genotype-phenotype analyses suggest that deletions involving HOXA13 show HFGS features, which is characterized by small feet with
unusually short and big toes and abnormal thumbs, and urogenital malformations. Smaller deletions of this region usually cause clinically
recognizable symptoms and signs with mild developmental delay, characteristic facies, and HFGS, but larger deletions may cause more complex
phenotypes, leading to difficulties of clinical diagnosis and interpretation . Here we report a girl with a deletion of about 2.5 Mb at
7p15.2-p14.3 that contains the entire HOXA cluster. To the best of our knowledge, this is the smallest deletion involving HOXA genes
reported to date. Unexpectedly, the patient demonstrated complex unusual features of multiple episodes of oxyhemoglobin desaturation and
laryngeal stridor. The aim of this report is to compare this unusual case to previously reported HOXA cluster deletions in order to achieve
a closer genotype-phenotype correlation of the only HOXA cluster deletion. The patient was the third child born to a healthy and non-
consanguineous Italian couple. The pregnancy was normal, except for platelet incompatibility between the mother and fetus, treated with
periodic intravenous immunoglobulin from the 29th week of gestation. The girl was born at the 34th week of gestation by caesarean section
due to cholestasis of pregnancy. Her birth weight, length, and occipitofrontal circumference were 2,140 g (25-50th centile), 46 cm (50th
centile), and 33 cm (75-90th centile), respectively. The Apgar scores were 8 at both the 1st and 5th minutes. She received nasal continuous
positive airways pressure (NCPAP) ventilation for the first six days due to frequent oxyhemoglobin desaturation, which recurred in the first
months especially during feeding, but gradually improved. Bilateral frontal pseudocysts were detected by transfrontal ultrasonography and
confirmed by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). She suffered from bradycardia and sporadic supraventricular extrasystoles, without
visible anomalies based on echocardiography examination. Renal ultrasonography detected bilateral bifid pelvis with left vesicoureteral
reflux (VUR) of grade III. At night she suffered from laryngeal stridor that gradually improved and disappeared. A fibroscopy of the larynx
was performed and excluded any structural defects of the larynx. She also suffered from gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) that was
improved by Omeprazole and Domperidone, but recurred at three years of age. A poor growth was evident, while the psychomotor development was
normal with the exception of a mild speech delay. The physical examination at 1 year of age showed short stature (<3rd centile, −2.5 SD) and
relative macrocephaly (75-90th centile). She exhibited facial dysmorphisms such as frontal bossing, mild hypertelorism, short palpebral
fissures, wide nasal bridge, long philtrum, thin lips, micrognathia, uplift of ear lobules, prominent anti-helix, and broad and short neck
(Figure 1). She also showed small feet with brachydactyly. Ophthalmological or audiological involvement and genital anomalies were not
detected, and complete blood count and chemistry panel were all within the normal range. Hand X-ray showed mild bilateral hypoplasia of the
distal phalanges, especially of the first and second fingers (Figure 2). In addition, the parents noted a small cervical mass, which was
identified as a branchial cyst by ultrasound examination. A clinical re-evaluation at 3 years of age confirmed the reported findings and the
presence of a normal IQ with only an isolated mild speech delay, evaluated with Griffiths Mental Development Scales.Figure 1 Characteristics
of the facial gestalt of the patient: frontal bossing, mild hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, wide nasal bridge, long philtrum, thin
lips, micrognathia, prominent anti-helix, uplift of ear lobules, and broad and short neck. Figure 2 Hands showing tapering fingers and mild
bilateral hypoplasia of the distal phalanges of the first and second finger (part a), confirmed by X-ray (part b); small feet with
brachydactyly (part c). Characteristics of the facial gestalt of the patient: frontal bossing, mild hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures,
wide nasal bridge, long philtrum, thin lips, micrognathia, prominent anti-helix, uplift of ear lobules, and broad and short neck. Hands
showing tapering fingers and mild bilateral hypoplasia of the distal phalanges of the first and second finger (part a), confirmed by X-ray
(part b); small feet with brachydactyly (part c). Conventional karyotyping of peripheral blood lymphocytes was carried out according to the
standard laboratory procedure. Chromosome analysis was performed at 550 banding level, according to the ISCN and the European General
Guidelines and Quality Assurance for Cytogenetics and revealed an apparently normal karyotype. Based on a-CGH, a 2.5 Mb interstitial
deletion was detected at 7p15.2p14.3 (chr7: 26,333,553-28,859,312), involving the entire HOXA cluster and a small number of other genes as
SNX10, SKAP2, EVX1, HIBADH, TAX1BP1, JAZF1, and CREB5 (Figure 3). This deletion was not identified in her parents, indicating the de novo
origin of the alteration. Submicroscopic genomic alterations were detected by array comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) on genomic DNA
from peripheral blood lymphocytes, using Agilent SurePrint G3 human 8x60K kit according to the manufacture’s instruction. Data were analysed
using CytoGenomics 2.0.6.0 (Agilent Technologies, Cernusco sul Naviglio, Milan, Italy). Aberrations were considered if at least three
adjacent probes were involved. Copy number variations were not reported if they are listed in the Database of Genomic Variants
(http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/). This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy, and written informed consent was obtained from patient’s parents.Figure 3 Array CGH results of the patient: a
2.5 Mb deletion at 7p15.2p14.3 involving the HOXA cluster genes. The breakpoints are according to the 37 build (March 2009) of the Human
Genome Reference Consortium (GRch37/hg19). Array CGH results of the patient: a 2.5 Mb deletion at 7p15.2p14.3 involving the HOXA cluster
genes. The breakpoints are according to the 37 build (March 2009) of the Human Genome Reference Consortium (GRch37/hg19). All previously
reported deletions involving HOXA13 show HFGS features, namely bilateral and symmetrical limb malformations with incompletely penetrant
urogenital defects, and some additional findings in comparison to mutation of the single gene, such as mild dysmorphic facies, developmental
delay, feeding difficulties in the first months of life, and mild intellectual disability. These observations are based on clinical findings
of seven patients with deletions of about 8.8 ± 3.2 Mb (the deletion described by Kosaki , was detected by FISH, so the breakpoints are not
available, but it was visible at G-banding chromosome analysis) encompassing the entire HOXA cluster (Figure 4; Table 1) . Here we report a
girl with a 2.5 Mb deletion at 7p15.2-p14.3, which is the smallest deletion among all previous reports, involving the entire HOXA cluster
and seven additional genes.Figure 4 Overlapping deletions of the present and of the previous cases. The dotted line means that the exact
breakpoints of these patients are unknown (Kasaki and Devriendt ). The new smallest region of overlap (26,408,229-28,859,312) is defined by
the distal breakpoint of the deletion of Dunø’s patient 2 n and the proximal breakpoint of the aberration of the present case. The
breakpoints are according to the 37 build (March 2009) of the Human Genome Reference Consortium (GRch37/hg19).Table 1 Genetic and clinical
features of the patients included in this study and previous reports Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Patient 4 Patient 5 Patient 6 Patient 7
Patient 8 Present case 3y, female Devriendt et al., 1999 [ 5 ] 21y, male Dunø et al., 2004 [ 6 ] 5y, female Dunø et al., 2004 [ 6 ] 4y, male
Kosaki et al., 2005 [ 7 ] 1y, male Jun et al., 2011 [ 3 ] 4y, male Hosoki et al., 2012 [ 4 ] 13y, male Fryssira et al., 2011 [ 8 ] 2y, male
Chromosomal deletion 7p15.2p14.37p15.3p14.27p15.3p14.37p15.2p14.27p15.2p217p15.3p15.17p15.3p15.17p21.1p14.3 Size (Mb) 2.5129,89NA5,66,913
Inheritance De novoDe novoDe novoDe novoDe novoDe novoDe novoDe novo Neonatal feeding problem Yes, due to GERDYes, due to velopharingeal
insufficiencyNANANAYes, due to dysphagiaYesYes, due to GERD Developmental delay YesNoYesYesYesYesYesYes Intellectual disability NoBorderline
IQYesYesYesYesNoYes Speech delay YesNoYesYesYesYesYesYes Ear anomalies Uplift of ear lobules, hyperplastic anti-helixLow-set,
malformedNAShort, slightly deformedProminent ear crusLow-set, posterior angulated, mild EAM stenosisLow-set, posterior rotatedLow-set, Helix
hypoplasia, hyperplastic anti-helix and anti-tragus, prominent intertragic notch Palpebral fissures
ShortUpslantedUpslantedDowslantedNAUpslantedNoShort, epicanthic folds, ptosis Other facial anomalies Frontal bossing, mild hypertelorism,
wide nasal bridge, long philtrum, thin lips, micrognathia, short neckRetrognathia, upturned nostrils, large mouthFlat nasal bridge, broad
nose, anteverted nostrils, broad lipsBroad neckDepressed supraorbital ridge on the left, maxillary hypoplasiaFlat nasal bridge, frontal
bossingBifrontal narrowingAsymmetry, hypertelorism, low nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, long and smooth philtrum, short neck Small hands
and feet Small feetNAYesYesNoYesYesYes Clinodactyly NoYesYesYesNoNoYesYes Other fingers anomalies Hypoplasia of distal phalanges of thumbs
and 2nd fingersPointed distal phalanxShort fingersShort fingersHypoplasia of 5th fingersLimited extensionNoDigital webbing and abnormal hand
creases Great toe anomalies NoShortened, laterally deviatedShort and broadNANoHypoplasiaCurved and broadRelatively long, broad and medially
deviated Other toes anomalies Short toesTriangular distal phalanxNAShort toes, pes planusNoNoShortShort Genital anomalies NoCryptorchidism,
ventral-bowed penisNANoRectoperineal fistulaHypospadiaNoHypospadia, left cryptorchidism and scrotum hypoplasia Urinary anomalies Bifid
pelvis with left VURNoNoNoNoNoNoModerate renal insufficiency Velopharyn-geal anomalies NoYesNoNoNoNoNoYes Heart malformations No, only
bradycardia and sporadic supraventricular extrasystolesPatent ductus BotalliNoNoPatent ductus arteriosusPatent ductus arteriosus, partial
pulmonary venous returnNoOpen foramen ovale, aortic insufficiency Other features Desaturation episodes, GERD, stridorNoNoHypermetropiaAnal
atresia, cranio-synostosisAccessory nipplesNoCraniosynostosis, desaturation episodes (abnormal sleep EEG)EAM: external acoustic meatus;
GERD: gastroesophageal reflux; IQ: intelligence quotient; y: year-old; NA: not available; VUR: vesicoureteral reflux; EEG:
electroencephalogram. Overlapping deletions of the present and of the previous cases. The dotted line means that the exact breakpoints of
these patients are unknown (Kasaki and Devriendt ). The new smallest region of overlap (26,408,229-28,859,312) is defined by the distal
breakpoint of the deletion of Dunø’s patient 2 n and the proximal breakpoint of the aberration of the present case. The breakpoints are
according to the 37 build (March 2009) of the Human Genome Reference Consortium (GRch37/hg19). Genetic and clinical features of the patients
included in this study and previous reports EAM: external acoustic meatus; GERD: gastroesophageal reflux; IQ: intelligence quotient; y:
year-old; NA: not available; VUR: vesicoureteral reflux; EEG: electroencephalogram. Hosoki tried to compare the previous reports and found a
small region of overlap (SRO; chr7: 26,374,754-29,360,960) involving nine genes plus the HOXA cluster, and defined it as the critical
region. This region almost completely overlaps the alteration of our patient, but exceeds 535 kb containing 2 more genes (CVPL and CHN2).
So, we can now redefine and reduce the former critical region. The girl in the present study showed a number of typical manifestations of
HOXA13 deletion, such as speech delay, short stature (below the 3rd centile), VUR, small feet with brachydactyly, bilateral mild hypoplasia
of distal phalanges of some fingers of the hands, and some mildly dysmorphic facial features that were highly similar to the case 2 reported
by Dunø . In the present study, the psychomotor development of the patient was normal, except for a mild speech delay. It is notable that
different degrees of intellectual impairments have been reported to date, that goes from borderline or even normal IQ, to severe disability
. Interestingly, our patient exhibited a number of additional features, such as bradycardia and sporadic supraventricular extrasystoles in
absence of heart malformations, GERD, oxyhemoglobin desaturation during feeding, and laryngeal stridor. These manifestations, together with
frontal pseudocysts, may be related to preterm delivery. Respiratory distress caused by oxyhemoglobin desaturation , especially during
feeding, as well as GERD, bradycardia , and frontal pseudocysts, are indeed well documented in preterms . However, interestingly, one of the
HOXA genes, HOXA5, is known to be essential for organogenesis and function of respiratory tracts . Moreover in homozygous newborn mutant
mice, abnormal morphogenesis of respiratory tracts and tracheal occlusion have been observed, which led to respiratory distress immediately
after birth . Loss of HOXA3 function in mouse results in larynx anomalies that are similar to the phenotypes caused by HOXA5 mutations.
Homozygous defects of HOXA3 actually seem to cause lethal cardiovascular dysfunctions, loss and malformations of throat cartilages and jaw
bones, disorganization of the throat musculature, absent thymus and parathyroids, and thyroid hypoplasia , while heterozygous defects are
associated to ectopic thymus and/or parathyroids so haploinsufficiency of this gene has been suggested as the cause of these anomalies. The
presence of a cervical branchial cyst in our patient, never pointed out in the previous reported cases, is intriguing too, given the cited
role of HOXA3 in the differentiation of neck tissues. The previously reported cases of velopharyngeal insufficiency and dysphagia , and the
manifestations of our patient may be related to the haploinsufficiency of HOXA3 and/or HOXA5 as already stated by Devriendt ; alternatively
in our case, they may be explained by the additive effects of haploinsufficiency and mild prematurity. Concerning the other genes involved
in our deletion, only JAZF1 and SNX10 were designated as morbid genes, according to the OMIM database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/).
JAZF1 is known as participant in the fusion gene resulting from recurrent t(7;17) (p15;q21) translocation in endometrial stromal sarcoma ,
while homozygous mutations in SNX10 cause autosomal recessive Osteopetrosis . It is notable that in 2004 Lehoczky et al. demonstrated that
EVX1, HIBADH, TAX1BP, JAZF1 and CREB5 show embryonic distal limb and genital bud expression, but at this time it is not known whether they
have a role in their development. In conclusion, this report improves our understanding of the genotype-phenotype correlations of HOXA genes
cluster deletions via the identification and characterization of the smallest deletion (as well as critical region) reported to date,
furthermore opening new discussion and interpretation cues on the unusual findings outlined. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient’s parents for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. array comparative genomic hybridization Central nervous system Gastroesophageal reflux disease Guttmacher
syndrome Hand-foot-genital syndrome Homeobox Magnetic resonance imaging Nasal continuous positive airways pressure Small region of overlap
Vesicoureteral reflux Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LP, DM, and FM
drafted the manuscript. MB, RS and SG performed the analysis and interpretation of data. SE revised the manuscript and made substantial
scientific contributions. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. The authors thank the patient and her
parents for allowing us to publish this case report.
