Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)-producing pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs) are rare, and the few reported cases usually coexisted with other
malignant components such as adenocarcinoma or hepatoid carcinoma. We present here the first case of pure AFP-producing pNET. A 56-year-old
male patient underwent resection of the pancreatic tail and body because of elevated serum AFP levels and pancreatic mass. Microscopy showed
that the tumor tissue consisted of large and small solid nests of polygonal cells. The tumor cells were positive for chromogranin A,
synaptophysin, CD99, cytokeratin 19, pan-cytokeratin and β-catenin, and also showed diffuse immunoreactivity for AFP and human chorionic
gonadotrophin. The mitotic rate was nearly 30 per 10 high-power fields and the Ki-67 index was nearly 25%. The histopathologic findings
supported the diagnosis of an AFP-producing pNET. Other malignant components were not found. Serum AFP levels decreased to near-normal after
operation and gradually increased to >1000 ng/ml at 5 months post-surgery. Recurrence and hepatic metastases were revealed by computed
tomography. The patient died 21 months after surgery. This was the first case of pure AFP-producing pNET to be reported in the English
literature. Serum AFP levels may provide useful information for monitoring the therapeutic effectiveness, early recurrence or metastases.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs) are rare malignant tumors of the pancreas and account for approximately 1-2% of all pancreatic
neoplasms . The origin of pNETs is not completely understood, but these tumors may arise from pluripotent stem cells within the exocrine
pancreas . pNETs may be divided into functional and nonfunctional tumors according to whether or not there is an associated clinical
syndrome caused by the release of biologically active peptides. Because there are no specific clinical symptoms associated with
nonfunctional pNETs, these neoplasms are frequently found incidentally and diagnosed at late stages . Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) has long been
used as a tumor marker for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and embryonic cell tumors. Elevated serum levels of AFP were also found in
patients with carcinoma metastasis to the liver or non-neoplastic liver injury. Several cases of pNETs with elevated serum AFP levels have
been reported, but most of these cases had liver metastasis at the time of diagnosis . Rare cases of AFP-producing pNETs have been described
in the English literature , but these tumors usually coexisted with other malignant components such as adenocarcinoma or hepatoid carcinoma.
Here, we present the first case of pure AFP-producing pNET, in which the AFP-producing site was immunohistochemically confirmed in the tumor
tissues. The clinico-pathological characteristics of this tumor were evaluated, and the literature about AFP-producing pNETs was reviewed. A
56-year-old man was admitted to the Peking University Third Hospital in December of 2011 because of abnormal imaging of the pancreas and
high serum AFP levels found during routine health checkup. He had no symptoms of hypoglycemia, diarrhea or abdominal pain. Fifteen months
earlier, he suffered from a liver abscess with normal serum AFP, which was treated successfully with antibiotics. Cholecystolithiasis was
diagnosed at that time. One month earlier, he had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallstones at another hospital. Enlargement of
the tail and body of the pancreas was demonstrated by computed tomography (CT), and a diagnosis of pancreatitis was considered. The patient
did not smoke but drank alcohol occasionally. Physical examination on admission revealed no specific findings. Laboratory tests showed that
serum AFP levels were elevated to 321.4 ng/ml (normal: 0–20 ng/ml). The levels of other tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen ,
carbohydrate antigen 19–9 , carbohydrate antigen 125, and prostatic antigens) were all within normal limits. There was no serologic evidence
of hepatitis B or C. Blood cell counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and coagulation tests were normal. Levels of serum
aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, albumin, urea nitrogen, creatinine, amylase, lipase, glucose, human
chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG), and immunoglobulins were all normal. Testicular ultrasonography revealed a cystic mass in the left
epididymidis. Imaging examinations are shown in Figure 1. Abdominal CT revealed diffuse enlargement of the body and tail of the pancreas,
which appeared as a region of low-attenuation with an indistinct margin. A mass measuring 5.2 × 4.8 × 4.1 cm showing probable encasement of
the splenic vein was found in the enlarged pancreas by contrast-enhanced CT. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed enlargement of the body
and tail of the pancreas with poor enhancement after gadolinium administration. Some enlarged peripancreatic lymph nodes were also noted.
None of the imaging examinations showed abnormal findings in the liver. The main pancreatic duct, common bile duct, and intrahepatic bile
ducts were normal on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. The patient underwent a resection of the tail and body of the pancreas,
splenectomy, and resection of four regional lymph nodes in January 2012. No metastatic neoplasm was found on the liver surface or in lymph
nodes during surgery.Figure 1Imaging examinations. MRI showed enlargement of the pancreas body and tail with poor enhancement after
gadolinium injection. Some enlarged peripancreatic lymph nodes were noted (A, B). Abdominal CT revealed diffuse enlargement of the pancreas
body and tail, which appeared to be hypoattenuated with an unclear margin. A mass measuring 5.2 × 4.8 × 4.1 cm with probable encasement of
the splenic vein was observed in the enlarged pancreas on contrast-enhanced CT (C, D). None of the imaging examinations revealed abnormal
findings in the liver. The main pancreatic duct, common bile duct, and intrahepatic bile ducts were normal on endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (E). Imaging examinations. MRI showed enlargement of the pancreas body and tail with poor enhancement after
gadolinium injection. Some enlarged peripancreatic lymph nodes were noted (A, B). Abdominal CT revealed diffuse enlargement of the pancreas
body and tail, which appeared to be hypoattenuated with an unclear margin. A mass measuring 5.2 × 4.8 × 4.1 cm with probable encasement of
the splenic vein was observed in the enlarged pancreas on contrast-enhanced CT (C, D). None of the imaging examinations revealed abnormal
findings in the liver. The main pancreatic duct, common bile duct, and intrahepatic bile ducts were normal on endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (E). Grossly, a grey ill-define nodular mass, measuring 5 × 4.5 × 3.5 cm, was shown at the body and tail of the
pancreas (Figure 2). Necrosis, hemorrhage and parapancreatic adipose tissues invasion were observed. Light microscopy revealed that the
tumor tissue consisted of large and small solid nests of polygonal cells with a scattering of pancreas islets among them. No residual
pancreatic tissue was found within the tumor. The tumor cells had moderate amounts, granular and eosinophilic cytoplasm, and round to oval
nuclei with mild to moderate atypia. One or two red, moderately sized nucleoli were noted in some tumor cells. The mitotic rate was nearly
30 per 10 high-power fields. There was no differentiated component characteristic of adenocarcinoma, acinar cell carcinoma or hepatoid
carcinoma of the pancreas. The surgical margins were negative for neoplastic infiltration. There was no evidence of vascular or perineural
invasion. No lymph node metastasis was shown. Transmission electron microscopy showed that the tumor cells contained electron-dense
neuroendocrine granules measuring 230 nm in diameter.Figure 2Histopathological findings. The tumor was predominantly composed of
circumscribed cellular islands (A, 100×) comprised of large and small solid nests of polygonal cells that had moderate amounts of cytoplasm,
and round to oval nuclei with minimal to moderate atypia (B, 400×). The mitotic cells were easy to find. The tumor cells widely expressed
pan-cytokeratin, which appeared as typical dot-like positive on the nuclear side (C, 400×). CgA expression was patchy (D, 400×). Tumor cells
exhibited partial strong AFP immunoreactivity with a granular pattern (E, 400×). Tumor cells focally showed strong HCG immunoreactivity (F,
400×). Transmission electron microscopic examination showed that the tumor cells contained electron-dense neuroendocrine granules measuring
230 nm in diameter (G). Histopathological findings. The tumor was predominantly composed of circumscribed cellular islands (A, 100×)
comprised of large and small solid nests of polygonal cells that had moderate amounts of cytoplasm, and round to oval nuclei with minimal to
moderate atypia (B, 400×). The mitotic cells were easy to find. The tumor cells widely expressed pan-cytokeratin, which appeared as typical
dot-like positive on the nuclear side (C, 400×). CgA expression was patchy (D, 400×). Tumor cells exhibited partial strong AFP
immunoreactivity with a granular pattern (E, 400×). Tumor cells focally showed strong HCG immunoreactivity (F, 400×). Transmission electron
microscopic examination showed that the tumor cells contained electron-dense neuroendocrine granules measuring 230 nm in diameter (G).
Immunohistochemistry showed patchy expression of chromogranin A (CgA) and synaptophysin (Syn). Tumor cells also showed diffuse
immunoreactivity for AFP and focal strong immunoreactivity for hCG. Dot-like pan-cytokeratin (CKpan) reactivity near the nucleus, β-catenin
reactivity at the cell membrane, diffuse CD99 expression in cytoplasm, and wide CK19 expression in tumor cells were observed. There was no
expression of HapPar-1, CD10, CD56, or progesterone receptor (PR) in tumor cells. Ki-67 index was nearly 25%. The histopathology findings
supported the diagnosis of a pure AFP-producing neuroendocrine carcinoma according to the forth edition of WHO Classification of
neuroendocrine tumors . Serum AFP levels decreased to 23.15 ng/ml on day 29 post-surgery, but increased to 180.9 ng/ml on day 80. Lymph
nodes metastasis and a recurrent mass in the residual pancreas were detected by CT. The patient was treated with a somatostatin (SS) analog
(Sandostatin LAR) for 4 months. Serum AFP levels gradually increased to 1200 ng/ml 5 months after surgery, and liver metastases were found
on CT. Hepatic metastases were treated with hepatic artery embolization and percutaneous radiofrequency ablation (RFA) in another hospital,
and the serum AFP levels fluctuated around 700 ng/ml. His clinical condition gradually worsened, and he died 21 months after the original
surgery. Other tumor markers (such as CEA and CA19-9) remained within the normal range during follow-up. AFP is a tumor marker for HCC and
had been used in the clinical practice for a long time. Because there is a large population of patients with hepatitis B or C virus
infection in China, serum levels of AFP are measured routinely during health checkups to screen for HCC. The high levels of AFP in this
patient originally raised the question as to whether there was a tumor or another condition causing the expression of AFP. Pancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms are rare, sporadic pancreatic tumors. Many pNETs are diagnosed at late stages because of the lack of symptoms in
the case of non-functional tumors. The apparent incidence of pNETs had increased in recent years, likely due to improved detection methods,
but it is still difficult to diagnosis pNETs at an early stage when the tumor do not invade adjacent tissues or produce distant metastases .
Histologically, pNETs consist of relatively homogeneous, small, round cells with uniform nuclei and cytoplasm. The expression of CgA is
widely used to identify gastrointestinal NETs . Only 23 cases of pNETs with elevated serum AFP levels have been described in the English
literatures, and liver metastases were confirmed in most of these patients . Among these cases, the AFP-producing sites were identified by
immunohistochemical examination of the resected tumor in 7 cases only (see Table 1, including the current case). Interestingly, the presence
of another malignant component such as adenocarcinoma (1 case) or hepatoid carcinoma (5 cases) coexisted with the neuroendocrine neoplasm in
all these 7 cases except the present case. In our case, there were no histopathological features and patterns of immunoreactivity typically
usually seen in carcinoma arising from pancreatic ducts, acinar cell, or hepatoid carcinoma. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
reported case of histologically-confirmed pure AFP-producing pNET without another coexisting malignant component.Table 1 Studies of AFP-
producing pNETs or AFP-producing pancreatic tumors with a neuroendocrine component confirmed by immunohistochemistry StudyYear of
publicationAge/sexLocationOther componentsMetastasis to the liverFollow-up (months)/outcomePaner et al. 200057/MTailHepatoidYes102/DODLam et
al. 200164/FTailHepatoidYes22/DODOh et al. 200621/MHeadHepatoidNA>7Hameed et al. 200741/FHeadHepatoidNo27/DODBrandi et al.
200868/FTail/bodyAdenocarcinomaYes12/DODJung et al. 201046/MHeadHepatoidNo>4Present caseNA56/MTail/bodyNoneYes21/DODDOD: dead of disease;
NA: not available. Studies of AFP-producing pNETs or AFP-producing pancreatic tumors with a neuroendocrine component confirmed by
immunohistochemistry DOD: dead of disease; NA: not available. In the present case, tumor cells exhibited dot-like CKpan reactivity near the
nucleus, which is the classical CK expression pattern in neuroendocrine tumors. CD56 is usually expressed in pNETs , but was negative in
this case. In the present case, tumor cells were positive for β-catenin at the cell membrane, not in the nucleus. Cells were diffusely
positive for CD99 in the cytoplasm, but dot-like immunoreactivity was not observed near the nucleus. CD10 and PR were both negative. These
findings suggested that the tumor was not a solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas. Previous studies described elevated serum HCG
levels in patients with pNETs . In the present case, serum HCG levels were normal, but immunohistochemisrty for HCG was positive in the
resected tumor tissues. Surgery is the only treatment that has the potential to cure patients with pNETs. Although the present patient was
treated with radical surgery that achieved free resection margins and that did not exhibit regional lymph node metastases, the tumor
relapsed and metastasized within months after surgery. More than 90% of pNETs express SS receptors, and biotherapy with long-acting SS
analogs had been shown to slow tumor growth and improve survival in patients with pNETs . However, recurrence and liver metastases were
noted during the course of SS analogs treatment in the present case, suggesting that SS analogs are not always effective in preventing tumor
growth or metastasis. Treatments with arterial embolization and percutaneous RFA for hepatic metastases may prolong the patient’s life.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms include well-differentiated (low- to intermediate-grade) neuroendocrine tumors and poorly differentiated
(high-grade) neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs). NECs are defined by the presence of >20 mitoses per 10 high-power fields (and/or, >20% Ki67
index) according to the WHO Classification of neuroendocrine neoplasms of the pancreas . On the basis of morphological criteria and the
assessment of proliferation fraction, the grade of present case was NEC. According to the TNM classification system, the present case was
Stage IIA (T3N0M0) at diagnosis. The grade (based on the proliferation rate) and stage (extent of disease) of this tumor were coincident. In
an analysis of the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database, the 5-year survival of patients with poorly differentiated
tumors was <38% for local disease, 21% for loco-regional disease, and <4% for metastatic disease, and the median survival for distant
metastatic disease was only 5 months in patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma . Some histological features such as necrosis,
expression of CK19 and loss of PR expression are important factors for predicting the malignant behavior and prognosis . Several studies
have suggested that patients with elevated serum AFP levels have a poor prognosis, and liver metastases were noted in most of these patients
. In the present case, serum AFP levels were used as an indicator of therapeutic effectiveness and a marker for monitoring early recurrence
and metastasis. The serum AFP levels apparently correlated with the tumor burden and increasing AFP levels might give a warning for timely
interventions. We described the first case of pure AFP-producing pNEC. Serum AFP levels may provide useful information for monitoring the
therapeutic effectiveness, early recurrence or metastases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Alpha-
fetoprotein Neuroendocrine tumors Neuroendocrine tumors of pancreas Hepatocellular carcinoma Computed tomography Carcinoembryonic antigen
Carbohydrate antigen Human chorionic gonadotrophin High-power fields Chromogranin A Synaptophysin Pan-cytokeratin Progesterone receptor
Somatostatin Radiofrequency ablation Neuroendocrine carcinomas Xiang Zhu and Huijuan Yong contributed equally to this work. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LZ carried out the study, drafted the manuscript
and revised it. XZ participated in histopathology and wrote the contents of Histopathological findings of the manuscript. HY collected
information of patient and wrote the contents of Clinical course of the manuscript. YH was in charge of the imaging examinations. CL
participated in histopathology. JZ checked the histopathology. DX was in charge of the operation. PZ followed the patient. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
