Here we present our clinical experience in a case of esophagus perforation due to the swallowing of a bone piece causing acute angina
pectoris and leading to misdiagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. A 73-year-old Caucasian man underwent urgent coronary angiography with
possible diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. His coronary arteries were found to be normal. A computed tomography examination revealed
esophagus perforation by a foreign body (a piece of bone), and he underwent urgent left thoracotomy and the foreign body was removed.
Sometimes, even a piece of bone within a meal can lead to esophagus perforation, and injure the pericardium and myocardium. The symptoms of
esophagus perforation may be confused with acute coronary syndrome due to their similarities and lack of knowledge about the detailed
clinical history as shown in our case. Thus, careful consideration of detailed clinical history as well as choosing an appropriate medical
imaging modality, such as computed tomography, should always be kept in mind in order to promptly diagnose and start early treatment to
reduce mortality. Esophagus foreign bodies are mostly encountered in childhood. Although they are rarely seen in adults, the rate of
mortality and morbidity is high in cases of perforation. Most esophagus perforations are iatrogenic . Perforations due to foreign bodies are
rare, and complications are mostly encountered with sharp-edged objects . Foreign bodies in the esophagus should be removed immediately
because of the risk of complications . A few cases of cardiac tamponade due to esophagus perforation have been reported, but the symptoms
were not confused with acute coronary syndrome . Esophagus perforation should be kept in mind in patients referring with acute chest pain.
Although clinical history and radiological evaluation are usually sufficient for the diagnosis, computed tomography (CT) is the most
sensitive diagnostic modality. Patients may refer with shortness of breath and chest pain. Prompt diagnosis and early treatment are
important in preventing high mortality and morbidity rate in cases of esophagus perforation . Early surgery should be the first treatment
choice. Here we present our clinical experience in a case of esophagus perforation due to swallowing of a bone piece causing acute angina
pectoris and leading to misdiagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. A 73-year-old Caucasian man was referred to another health care center with
complaints of severe chest pain and palpitation that had started immediately after he had eaten his dinner. He underwent urgent coronary
angiography with possible diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. His coronary arteries were found to be normal. Since his symptoms were
partially relieved, he was discharged. He was referred to our hospital 3 days later, with aggravation of the same complaints. On admission,
his abdominal physical examination was normal except for mild epigastric tenderness. His respiratory sounds were diminished in his left
lower hemithorax. His pulse rate was 112/minute and blood pressure was 90/50mmHg. His body temperature was 37.5°C. He had sinus rhythm in
electrocardiography (ECG). A hemogram and biochemical test results were as follows: white blood cell count 17,280/mm3 (4.8 to 10.8mm3), urea
65mg/dL (5 to 23mg/dL), creatinine 4.2mg/dL (0.6 to 1.3mg/dL), total bilirubin 3.5mg/dL (0.2 to 1.2mg/dL), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
78U/L (12 to 64U/L), aspartate transaminase 105U/L (5 to 34U/L), alanine transaminase 118U/L (0 to 55U/L), and C-reactive protein 314mg/dL
(0.0 to 5.0 mg/dL). A CT examination was performed to exclude aortic aneurysm or dissection. There was pleural fluid in both sides; an air
bubble containing pericardial fluid reaching to 2cm thickness was noted. There was minimal free fluid in perihepatic, perisplenic and
retrovesical spaces. With these findings and clinical situation, severe mediastinitis was considered, and his detailed clinical history was
taken into consideration once again. The patient later told that he had eaten chopsteak (meat on the bone) in his dinner just before the
onset of his symptoms. Then the CT images were checked again, and a dense 2cm-long linear foreign body was found in the posterior aspect of
his left atrium (Figure 1).Figure 1 Findings of esophageal perforation by foreign body on computed tomography. Abbreviations: FB, Foreign
body; Per. Eff., Pericardial effusion; Pl. Eff., Pleural effusion. Findings of esophageal perforation by foreign body on computed
tomography. Abbreviations: FB, Foreign body; Per. Eff., Pericardial effusion; Pl. Eff., Pleural effusion. These findings revealed a
perforation of esophagus by a foreign body, and the patient underwent urgent left thoracotomy. At surgery, a sharp contoured piece of bone
was found, perforating the 1/3 distal aspect of the posterior wall of his esophagus. It reached to the pericardium, penetrating it and
eroding his left atrium. The adventitia of the aorta was affected on the left. There was pus in his pericardium. The foreign body was
removed (Figure 2). After abundant serum irrigation, his esophagus was repaired by primary sutures, and pleura was attached on the defect
side and supported by tissue adhesives. Finally, a percutaneous jejunostomy was performed for feeding by laparotomy. Parenteral broad
spectrum antibiotic therapy and feeding from the jejunostomy was started. No postoperative complication was observed, and the patient was
discharged from our hospital on the 15th day. After 3 days, he was readmitted and hospitalized again with the complaints of fever and
weakness. Contrast extravasation from the primary suture zone was found in a CT examination, then he underwent endoscopic stent placement.
His clinical condition deteriorated rapidly due to mediastinitis and he died because of sepsis and multiorgan failure.Figure 2 Surgically
removed bone fragment. Surgically removed bone fragment. Esophagus perforations due to foreign bodies have high mortality and morbidity
rates. Diagnosis can be made by detailed clinical history, physical examination and CT. Immediate diagnosis and early treatment are
important in preventing high mortality and morbidity in a case of esophagus perforation. The treatment depends on preventing and controlling
sepsis and infection, and maintaining the continuity of digestive tract and nutrition. While early intervention performed within the first
24 hours of injury offers favorable outcomes, delayed surgery has increased mortality and morbidity rates . In our case, his first
complaints were confused with acute coronary syndrome in the previous hospital; therefore, the patient underwent coronary angiography. He
was discharged because of normal findings in coronary angiography and partial relief of chest pain. The aggravation of his chest pain and
his admission to our hospital took 3 days. The main reason for his mortality may be due to this delayed diagnosis and treatment. It is
crucial that a clinician inform the radiologist about a patient’s clinical history and situation to establish a rapid and true radiological
diagnosis. In our patient, although mediastinitis was diagnosed, the radiologist did not indicate the etiology in the lack of clinical
history. After sufficient information, he revisited the CT and was able to demonstrate the bone piece and set the diagnosis of esophagus
perforation. In our case, the most prominent cardiac symptoms including chest pain and palpitation were due to the perforation of esophagus
and pericardium, and close relation of the bone piece to the left atrium and aorta. There was no sign of arrhythmia in the preoperative ECG.
In cases of esophagus perforations or foreign bodies, a right or left thoracotomy decision is made according to the level of esophageal
disease. While right intercostal thoracotomy is more convenient for 2/3 proximal esophagus lesions, left lower thoracotomy should be
performed for 1/3 distal lesions. There is a publication that suggests the benefits of strengthening the defect or wound by pleural,
pericardial or intercostal muscle patch grafts in addition to primary suturing . Mediastinal pleural space must be debrided and irrigated
and drainage is also important . In our case, we preferred primary repair which was supported by pleural autograft. Despite developments in
diagnosis and treatment of esophagus perforations, mortality rates still remain above 20% . If there is no delay in diagnosis, the patient
might survive. Sometimes, a piece of bone can cause esophagus perforation and injure the pericardium and myocardium. Lack of knowledge of
detailed clinical history may cause confusion because of the similarity between the symptoms of acute coronary syndrome and those of
esophagus perforation. Because of this, the patient’s detailed clinical history should always be checked and an appropriate medical imaging
technique (that is, CT) chosen. Early proper diagnosis and treatment may reduce the mortality rate. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient’s next of kin for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Computed tomography Electrocardiography Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions UE helped in acquisition of data and preparation of the first draft; UE, DM and KT were
responsible for conception of the idea, overall preparation and revision of the manuscript; NI and IAM and BH were responsible for
management of the patient and revising the manuscript for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
