Retroperitoneal lipomas are an extremely rare condition with only 17 cases described in the literature since 1980. They can reach enormous
size and cause significant abdominal symptoms. The most important differential diagnosis is the well-differentiated liposarcoma, which
preoperatively often may not definitely be ruled out. We present the case of a 73 year-old Caucasian patient with a giant retroperitoneal
lipoma of 9 kg measuring 55 cm in diameter. The patient presented with abdominal pain and swelling that had been slowly progressive for the
last 15 years. On computerized tomography an immense retroperitoneal tumor was revealed. Intraoperatively, the tumor did not show any signs
of infiltrative growth, therefore sole tumor extirpation was performed. Retroperitoneal lipomas are not clearly distinguishable from well-
differentiated liposarcomas on imaging and even biopsies may be misleading. Moreover, abdominal symptoms, i.e. pain, obstipation and
dysphagia may occur due to mechanical displacement. Therefore, surgical exploration with complete oncological resection is the therapy of
choice if malignity cannot be ruled out. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13104-015-1038-7) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users. Lipomas are benign tumors of mature adipocytes which are commonly located in the subdermal tissue of
the trunk and extremities, but rarely retroperitoneally . The etiology of lipomas remains unclear. Lately a positive adipocyte stem cell
turnover has been supposed as the underlying mechanism . Retroperitoneal lipomas are a rare condition and only 17 cases of retroperitoneal
lipomas in adults have been described in the literature since 1980 (Table 1). Here we present the case of a 73 year-old female with a giant
retroperitoneal lipoma filling great parts of the abdomen and measuring 55 x 40x 10 cm. While retroperitoneal lipomas are rare by
themselves, only few retroperitoneal lipomas of greater size have been reported in the literature.Table 1 Summary of all case reports
describing retroperitoneal lipomas resected in adults since 1980 Age Sex Tumor size Weight Saito S. et al., 2013 65male30 cm in diameterNo
dataWei D. et al., 2013 25female20 x 12 x 10 cm1650 gChander et al., 2012 36female13,6 x 11,2 x 9,1 cm1300 gSingh G. et al., 2011 65male25 x
12 cmNo dataUkita S. et al., 2009 61female15 cm in diameterno dataIda C. et al., 2008 65male22 x 14 x 5 cmno dataDrop A. et al., 2003
72female12 x 9 x 4 cmno dataDrop A. et al., 2003 60female13 x 12 cmno dataMartinez C. et al., 2003 32female20 x 13 x 10 cm3400 gRaftopoulos
I. et al., 2002 62male20 x 15 x 10 cm790 gFoa C. et al., 2002 52male10,5 x 9,5 x 2 cm145 gForte et al., 2002 61maleno datano dataMarshall M.
et al., 2001 47maleno data4990 gMatsubara N. et al., 2000 65male12 x 13 cmno dataAcheson A. et al., 1997 76female20 x 20 x 12 cm596 gZhang
S. et al., 1987 65male50 cm in diameter19.5 kgDeppe G. et al., 1985 26female11 x 8 x 3 cmno data Summary of all case reports describing
retroperitoneal lipomas resected in adults since 1980 A 73 year-old, Caucasian female was referred to our center with a giant
retroperitoneal mass. The patient complained about significant abdominal swelling and recurrent episodes of abdominal pain and obstipation.
The tumor had been slowly progressive over the past 15 years. On physical examination the patient’s abdomen was greatly distended and non-
tender on palpation. Blood tests showed no significant pathologies. A computerized tomography (CT) scan showed the giant retroperitoneal
mass (Figure 1). CT-guided core biopsy samples of this mass demonstrated histology of a benign lipoma with no signs of malignancy. Due to
the massive size the mass was considered as radiologically highly suspect for low grade liposarcoma. After interdisciplinary discussion of
this case in our sarcoma tumor board, exploratory laparotomy was indicated with the aim of complete tumor resection for potential malignancy
or at least tumor debulking to reduce abdominal symptoms.Figure 1 The tumor on computerized tomography and on 3D-reconstruction. On the left
the tumor is displayed on coronal plane, showing massive shifting of the intestines and kidneys. On the right the tumor is shown on
3D-reconstruction, nearly filling the whole abdomen with encasement of the inferior mesenteric artery (white arrow). The tumor on
computerized tomography and on 3D-reconstruction. On the left the tumor is displayed on coronal plane, showing massive shifting of the
intestines and kidneys. On the right the tumor is shown on 3D-reconstruction, nearly filling the whole abdomen with encasement of the
inferior mesenteric artery (white arrow). Intraoperatively a giant, clearly demarcated fatty tumor adherent to the right retroperitoneal
fatty tissue measuring 55 x 40 x 10 cm was evident (Figure 2). Although the tumor was distending the mesenteric artery the mass was
completely extirpated without resection of adjacent tissue or organs. The patient’s postoperative course was complicated due to prolonged
paralytic ileus and intestinal distention, which was successfully managed conservatively. The patient was discharged on the 18th
postoperative day from the hospital. The pathologic specimen showed a lipomatous tumor weighing 8.95 kg with mature adipocytes and without
signs of nuclear atypia. The staining for MDM2 (MDM2 proto-oncogene) and CDK4 (cyclin-dependent kinase 4) was negative, therefore the lesion
was diagnosed as a lipoma.Figure 2 The tumor shortly after en bloc-resection. On the left the tumor is shown with a metric tape measure of
30 cm. On the right the tumor is being held by one of the operators shortly after en-bloc resection. The tumor shortly after en bloc-
resection. On the left the tumor is shown with a metric tape measure of 30 cm. On the right the tumor is being held by one of the operators
shortly after en-bloc resection. Giant retroperitoneal lipomas in adults are scarce, with a total number of 17 cases described in the
literature since 1980 (Table 1). Subcutaneous lipomas are associated with hypercholesterolemia , obesity and trauma , whereas such data does
not exist for retroperitoneal lipomas. Moreover, the patient was not described positive for any of these factors. . Retroperitoneal lipomas
are usually asymptomatic for a long time before they cause abdominal swelling or symptoms due to obstruction or shifting of adjacent organs
and structures. At this point, they may have already reached enormous size. This may be explained by the great retroperitoneal space that
allows them to grow before they get symptomatic and the slowness of their enlargement. The diagnosis is based on a MRI (magnetic resonance
imaging) or CT-scan, yet both imaging modalities may not exclude a well-differentiated liposarcoma. Furthermore, biopsies often remain
inconclusive. The incidence of soft-tissue sarcomas in general is described with 4 cases per 100.000 and year , of which liposarcomas are
the most common and are located in one third of cases in the retroperitoneum . The incidence of retroperitoneal lipomas on the other hand is
thought to be extremely rare. Hence, a well-differentiated liposarcoma may not be ruled out preoperatively, even if a benign lipoma is
clinically suspected. Therefore, intraoperative judgment about tumor characteristics and subsequent decision making about the extent of
resection is of great importance. Resection with negative margins (R0) is crucial to the patient’s prognosis in case of a liposarcoma,
therefore a wide excision should be carried out if infiltrative growth is suspected or if there is any doubt about dignity . Sole
extirpation should be reserved for clearly circumscribed tumors. However, due to the enormous size of the tumor preoperative judgment about
resectability based on CT-scans is difficult. Therefore, tumor debulking for symptom relief can also be discussed if oncological resection
is not feasible. Due to the possible malignant nature of such retroperitoneal tumors resection should be carried out by a trained
oncological surgeon in a center of excellence for soft-tissue sarcomas . In this case the tumor was clearly demarcated macroscopically and
without any sign of infiltrative growth. Moreover, the enormous size did not allow accomplishing an oncological correct resection. Thus,
sole extirpation was performed. Since clinical and experimental data on tumor progression and tumor recurrence of retroperitoneal lipomas
are lacking a close and regular follow-up is indicated. Retroperitoneal lipomas are a rare condition. The presented case points out that
abdominal lipomas can grow to enormous size and cause clinically significant symptoms and, even if massively enlarged, are resectable with
good clinical outcome. Further research is required to fully understand the underlying etiology and genetic mechanisms. The most important
differential diagnosis is the more frequent well-differentiated liposarcoma, therefore oncological resection should always be considered.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Computerized tomography MDM2 proto-oncogene Cyclin-dependent
kinase 4 Magnetic resonance imaging Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MW
was involved in treatment of the patient, performed the literature review and drafted the manuscript. JGDH was involved in treatment of the
patient and helped to draft the manuscript. WK was responsible for the 3D-reconstructions of the patient’s CT-scans. SP, MG and JW were
involved in treatment of the patient and helped to draft the manuscript. MKA conceived of the idea for the case report and was involved in
treatment of the patient. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the patient described for allowing us to share her
details.
