Adult intussusception is rare and usually caused by a tumor acting as the lead point. Therefore, laparotomy should be considered for the
treatment. Laparoscopic procedures for use in cases of adult intussusception have been recently reported; however, there is no consensus
regarding the safety and efficacy. Here, we describe a successful case of laparoscopic management of an octogenarian adult intussusception
caused by an ileal lipoma, which was preoperatively suspected. An 87-year-old male presented with progressive abdominal distention and
vomiting. Contrast radiography of the small intestine showed an ileal tumor, and magnetic resonance imaging indicated a target-like mass,
consistent with an ileal intussusception. The patient was suspected with an intussusception due to an ileal lipoma, and laparoscopic surgery
was performed. An approximately 10-cm-long ileal intussusception with a preceding tumor was present, and partial resection of the ileum,
including the tumor, was performed. Macroscopic examination of the excised specimen showed a pedunculated tumor measuring 4.0 × 3.5 × 1.9 cm
with an uneven surface, yielding a histological diagnosis of lipoma. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on
postoperative day 8. This successful case showed that laparoscopic surgery can be a useful, safe, and efficacious procedure for adult
intussusception, even in octogenarians. Adult intussusceptions constitute approximately 5% to 10% of all intussusceptions and are usually
caused by a tumor that acts as the lead point . While laparoscopic devices and surgical techniques have recently been improved and applied
to adult intussusceptions, there is no consensus regarding safety and efficacy. This report presents a case of an octogenarian adult
intussusception caused by an ileal lipoma, which was preoperatively suspected and successfully managed by laparoscopic surgery. An 87-year-
old male presented at our department with progressive abdominal distention and vomiting for 2 weeks. His medical history included
hypertension and revealed that he had undergone laparoscopic-assisted ileocecal resection for cecal cancer in January 2004. Physical
examination revealed a distended abdomen and a tender right lower quadrant. Laboratory test results, including serum levels of
carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9, were within normal limits. Abdominal radiography revealed a prominently dilated
small intestine with some air-fluid interfaces. A long tube was inserted to reduce the internal pressure of the small intestine, and
Gastrografin contrast radiography was performed. It showed an approximately 40-mm-diameter ileal tumor (Figure 1). The ileus temporally
improved, and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a target-like mass consistent with an ileal intussusception (Figure 2A,B).
The patient was diagnosed with intermittent intussusception with an ileal tumor, which was suspected to be a lipoma. Laparoscopic surgery
was performed in May 2014.Figure 1 A Gastrografin contrast radiography film revealing a filling defect. Approximately 40 mm in diameter, in
the ileum (arrow).Figure 2 T2-weighted magnetic resonance image. Reveals an intussusception as a target-like mass (A) and a hyper-intense
tumor as the lead point (B). A Gastrografin contrast radiography film revealing a filling defect. Approximately 40 mm in diameter, in the
ileum (arrow). T2-weighted magnetic resonance image. Reveals an intussusception as a target-like mass (A) and a hyper-intense tumor as the
lead point (B). The patient was placed under general anesthesia in the supine position. A 12-mm cannula for a camera was inserted in the
periumbilical region by the open technique, and 10 mmHg of abdominal pressure was established by carbon dioxide insufflation of the
pneumoperitoneum. Using direct laparoscopic visualization, two 5-mm ports were created in the left upper and lower quadrant for the surgeon,
and two 5-mm ports were created in the right middle quadrant and just above the pubic bone for the assistant. An approximately 10-cm-long
ileal intussusception with a preceding tumor was identified 40 cm proximal to the neo-terminal ileum (Figure 3A). Manual repositioning under
laparoscopy did not reduce intussusception. There were sparse adhesions between the intussuscepted ileum and the retroperitoneum, which were
exfoliated with a harmonic scalpel. Once the entire intussuscepted ileum had been mobilized within the abdominal cavity, a 4-cm incision was
made in the periumbilicus, through which the intussuscepted ileum was delivered (Figure 3B). Partial resection of the delivered ileum
including the tumor and a functional end-to-end anastomosis were performed. There were no signs of lymphadenopathy, and the liver had an
unremarkable surface. Surgical blood loss was 5 ml, and operating time was 115 min. The excised tumor measured 4.0 × 3.5 × 1.9 cm and had an
uneven surface with mucosal erythema (Figure 4A). Ulcerative mucosal change caused by the intussusception was observed in the oral side of
the ileum from the tumor. Sectioning of the tumor revealed a solid, yellowish tissue. Histological examination of the excised tumor showed
mature fat cells in the submucosa to the muscularis propria of the ileum (Figure 4B). Thickened mucosa on the tumor showed abundant micro
vessels and epithelial ductal hyperplasia; however, no tumor was observed in that location.Figure 3 An approximately 10-cm-long ileal
intussusception with a preceding tumor. (A) Laparoscopic image. (B) Intussuscepted ileum delivered from the small laparotomy.Figure 4
Macroscopic examination and histological analysis of the excised specimen. (A) Pedunculated tumor, measuring 4.0 × 3.5 × 1.9 cm, with an
uneven surface and mucosal erythema. (B) Mature fat cells in the submucosa to muscularis propria of the ileum (hematoxylin and eosin, ×100).
An approximately 10-cm-long ileal intussusception with a preceding tumor. (A) Laparoscopic image. (B) Intussuscepted ileum delivered from
the small laparotomy. Macroscopic examination and histological analysis of the excised specimen. (A) Pedunculated tumor, measuring
4.0 × 3.5 × 1.9 cm, with an uneven surface and mucosal erythema. (B) Mature fat cells in the submucosa to muscularis propria of the ileum
(hematoxylin and eosin, ×100). The patient had an uneventful recovery; he passed flatus on postoperative day (POD) 1, commenced oral fluids
on POD 2, and was discharged on POD 8. Intussusception is rare in adults compared with that in children, and the frequency is approximately
5% to 10% of all intussusceptions . Of the cases of intussusception in children, 95% are idiopathic with no structural lead points. On the
other hand, adult intussusception is caused by an identifiable etiology in approximately 80% of the cases . Previous reports have suggested
that approximately 70% of the cases of adult small intestinal intussusception are caused by benign entities, such as lipomas, hamartomatous
polyps, inflammatory polyps, hyperplastic polyps, and Meckel’s diverticulum . Preoperative diagnosis is difficult because of the variability
of the clinical presentation. Namikawa et al. reviewed 50 cases of lipoma with intussusception and reported that the accuracy of
preoperative diagnosis was 39.1% to 44.4%. There are several reasons why the accuracy of preoperative diagnosis is low. Patients develop
intussusception as an acute abdominal condition, and there is a limit to preoperative diagnostics, particularly in the case of small
intestinal intussusception. In the present case, contrast radiography showed a tumor in the ileum, and MRI findings were typical of an
intussusception, that is, a target-like mass . We had two reasons to preoperatively suspect that this ileal tumor was a lipoma. First, MRI
showed a hyper-intense tumor in the T2-weighted image, and second, lipoma is the most common benign tumor that causes adult intussusception
confined to the small intestine . First treatment for adult intussusception is debatable. Many cases of adult intussusceptions are caused by
an identifiable etiology; laparotomy should be considered as the first line of treatment. As a result of the marked improvement in
laparoscopic devices and surgical techniques, there are reports of its use in cases of adult intussusception . However, there is no
consensus on whether laparoscopic surgery can be applied to adult intussusception with respect to safety and efficacy. Siow et al. and
Tartaglia et al. reported that laparoscopic surgery for adult intussusception was a safe and feasible treatment, particularly in cases with
an uncertain preoperative diagnosis. In the present case, laparoscopic surgery was selected for the following reasons: i) the patient’s
clinical condition was stable, so he was able to undergo relaparotomy; ii) the patient was an octogenarian; therefore, we had to reduce the
risk of postoperative complications, such as obstructive pneumonitis or disuse syndrome, as much as possible, which could develop from wound
pain; and iii) the patient had previously undergone ileocecal resection for cecal cancer, and laparoscopic surgery would be able to
exfoliate any adhesions identified in the abdominal cavity. In the English literature from the PubMed database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/), there have been 14 reported cases described by the words ‘adult intussusception,’ ‘lipoma,’ and
‘laparoscopy’ including the present case (Table 1) . The average age of the patients in these reports was 59.3 years (range 36 to 87 years),
and the present case involved the oldest patient who was successfully managed by laparoscopic surgery. In most of these patients, the tumors
were preoperatively diagnosed as lipomas (78.6%), and this is different from those reported by Namikawa et al. . This difference may be
attributed to the fact that laparoscopic surgery tends to be selected because of a correct preoperative diagnosis of lipoma. Eight cases
(57.1%) were classified as enteric intussusceptions, which suggest that laparoscopic surgery was an effective method for adult enteric
intussusception. In most cases, the number of ports was three to five; however, Chen et al. reported on a single-port laparoscopic surgery.
Although there were no data in two patients, the average postoperative stay was 7.4 days (range 3 to 15), and there were no postoperative
complications. From these results, laparoscopic surgery may safely and efficaciously be used as the therapeutic method for adult
intussusceptions with lipomas, even for oldest patients.Table 1 Summary of adult intussusceptions with lipoma managed by laparoscopic
surgery First Author Reported year Age (year) Sex Preoperative diagnosis Tumor location Intussusception classification Tumor size (mm)
Number of the ports Surgical treatment Surgery time (m) Surgical bleeding (ml) Postoperative complication Postoperative stay (days) Park
KT200139FLipomaIleumEnteric403PR16250(−)4Ladurner R200375MGiant intraluminal polypDescending colonColocolic≥50N.D.LHCN.D.N.D.(−)10Jelenc
F200556MIntraluminal massAscending colonColocolic60 × 45 × 40N.D.RHCN.D.N.D.(−)N.D.McKay
R200663MLipomaCecumIleocolicN.D.N.D.RHCN.D.N.D.(−)5Tsushimi T200763FLipomaIleumEnteric25 × 22 × 203PR93N.D.(−)15Lin
MW200747FN.D.IleumEnteric30 × 303PRN.D.N.D.(−)4Oyen TL200754MLipomaIleumEntericN.D.N.D.PRN.D.N.D.(−)7Ako
E201043FLipomaIleumEnteric24 × 20 × 203PR78Minimal(−)9Lucas LC201073MLipomaJejunumEnteric213PRN.D.N.D.(−)3Ferrara
F201278FLipomaJejunumEnteric30 × 30 × 253PRN.D.N.D.N.D.N.D.Hou YC201264FLipomaIleumIleocolicN.D.4ICR123N.D.(−)7Chen JH201336MCecal
submucosal tumor or ileal lipomaIleocecal valveIleocolic25 × 25 × 22Single portICR18030(−)7Son
DN201352FLipomaCecumIleocolic50 × 405RHCN.D.N.D.(−)10Present case87MLipomaIleumEnteric40 × 35 × 195PR1155(−)8F, female; ICR, ileocecal
resection; LHC, left hemicolectomy; M, male; N.D., no data; PR, partial resection; RHC, right hemicolectomy. Summary of adult
intussusceptions with lipoma managed by laparoscopic surgery F, female; ICR, ileocecal resection; LHC, left hemicolectomy; M, male; N.D., no
data; PR, partial resection; RHC, right hemicolectomy. Laparoscopic surgery in experienced hands may be considered for the treatment for
adult intussusception, even in octogenarians, as it is a safe and efficacious procedure. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Magnetic resonance imaging Postoperative day Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions JS wrote the manuscript. TN and Takanobu T performed surgery. SS, HU, and Takafumi T drafted the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank Enago (www.enago.jp) for reviewing the
English language of the original manuscript.
