We report a case of gastric cancer in a patient with non-cirrhotic hyperammonemia secondary to a spontaneous portacaval shunt. The patient,
a 69-year-old male, had more than 40 years of abdominal discomfort. On gastroscopy, 2.0 × 1.5-cm irregular uplift ulcers were seen on the
lesser curvature of the stomach, and tissue biopsy revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. His hyperammonemia was found on celiac
angiography to be due to the formation of a spontaneous portacaval shunt. Imaging revealed no evidence of cirrhosis or portal hypertension.
The patient ultimately underwent a distal gastrectomy and gastroduodenal anastomosis; the spontaneous portacaval shunt was left untreated.
Postoperatively, there were no short-term complications such as anastomotic leakage, stricture, or bleeding, and the patient’s blood ammonia
level decreased to within the normal range. Radical gastrectomy without splenectomy or closure of the abnormal shunt was feasible for the
treatment of gastric cancer in a patient with non-cirrhotic hyperammonemia. Hyperammonemia is associated with high perioperative morbidity
and mortality in patients undergoing gastric surgery. The operative indications are difficult to determine for gastric cancer patients with
hyperammonemia. We report a case of surgical treatment for gastric cancer in a patient with hyperammonemia. A 69-year-old man with a history
of hyperammonemia presented to the First Hospital of China Medical University with more than 40 years of abdominal discomfort. This
discomfort was described as having no regular pattern or relationship to diet and was slightly relieved by oral omeprazole. He underwent
gastroscopy at a local hospital that revealed 2.0 × 1.5-cm irregular uplift ulcers in the lesser curvature of the stomach. The tissue was
friable, bled easily, and had a dirty-moss appearance and surrounding mucosal edema. And, peristalsis had not been present. Tissue biopsy
revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. His medical history included hypertension for 20 years and coronary heart disease for more
than 10 years. Two years earlier, the patient had been diagnosed with a spontaneous portacaval shunt with recurrent headache and an
extremely elevated blood ammonia concentration. He had no history of diabetes, chronic hepatitis, or tuberculosis and no surgical or trauma
history. The patient was in good overall condition. His vital signs were stable and his weight was stable. His skin and mucous membranes
were not scleral icterus. He had no liver palms or spider angiomata. His abdomen was flat and symmetric, without peristaltic wave, or caput
medusae. He had normal bowel sounds without succussion splash or vascular murmur and no abdominal tenderness or rebound tenderness. No mass
was palpated in the liver or spleen. There was no shifting dullness. Laboratory examination demonstrated no anemia and a carbohydrate
antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) of 55.73 U/mL (reference range 0 to 27 U/mL). The patient’s blood ammonia concentration was 123 μmol/L, which was
significantly higher than the upper limit of normal (reference range 9 to 33 μmol/L). Other laboratory values were within the normal range.
Enhanced three-dimensional computed tomography (3D-CT) showed gastric wall thickening, an uneven mucosal surface, and ulcer formation at the
gastric angle. There were clear boundaries between thickened and normal areas of the gastric wall. The gastric serosal surface was smooth.
Unenhanced CT scan demonstrated a thickened parietal layer with a value of about 36 Hounsfield units, which increased after enhancement.
There was no lymph node enlargement in the peri-gastric or peri-aortic areas, including the posterior abdominal wall and inferior vena cava,
and no abnormal soft tissue density in the peritoneum, omentum, or mesentery. On unenhanced CT, multiple round hypodensities were seen in
the liver. Color Doppler ultrasound did not demonstrate any abnormalities in the gallbladder, spleen, or pancreas. Abdominal aortic CT
showed that the walls of the abdominal aorta, bilateral common iliac arteries, and bilateral internal iliac arteries were not smooth, and
multiple punctate calcifications were seen in the local vascular walls. There was no significant luminal narrowing. The celiac trunk and
branches of the superior mesenteric artery, bilateral renal arteries, and superior mesenteric arteries were normal (Figure 1).Figure 1
Abdominal aortic CT. (A) Abdominal aorta. (B) Right common iliac artery. (C) Left common iliac artery. (D) Right internal iliac artery. (E)
Left internal iliac artery. (F) Right external iliac artery. (G) Left external iliac artery. (H) Right renal artery. (I) Left renal artery.
Abdominal aortic CT. (A) Abdominal aorta. (B) Right common iliac artery. (C) Left common iliac artery. (D) Right internal iliac artery. (E)
Left internal iliac artery. (F) Right external iliac artery. (G) Left external iliac artery. (H) Right renal artery. (I) Left renal artery.
After discussion in the surgical oncology department, the patient underwent celiac angiography. During the procedure, we observed an
abnormal communication of the superior mesenteric vein with the spermatic vein, which demonstrated compensatory enlargement and an abnormal
shunt direction from the portal vein to the superior mesenteric vein, spermatic vein, left renal vein, and inferior vena cava. After
successful puncture of the right femoral vein using Seldinger technique, a super-smooth guidewire with a Cobra tip (Terumo Interventional
Systems, Somerset, NJ, USA) was advanced to the left renal vein, then into the portal vein via the abnormal shunt. Portal vein and superior
mesenteric vein angiography was performed using a high-pressure syringe, with smooth delivery of contrast agent. No clear stenosis was seen
(Figure 2). Therefore, this abnormal shunt was considered congenital condition and no treatment. The patient was given lactulose 10 g orally
twice a day and ornithine aspartate 15 g intravenous infusion once a day, for 7 days prior to surgery to reduce blood ammonia. He also
received two water enemas the night before the operation.Figure 2 Celiac angiography. (A) Inferior vena cava. (B) Left renal vein. (C)
Spermatic vein. (D) Superior mesenteric vein. (E) Portal vein. Celiac angiography. (A) Inferior vena cava. (B) Left renal vein. (C)
Spermatic vein. (D) Superior mesenteric vein. (E) Portal vein. At a multidisciplinary meeting, we discussed performing interventional
embolization of the shunt if ammonia continued to be elevated after gastrectomy in this elderly patient with normal liver function and no
cirrhosis. The patient underwent radical subtotal resection of the distal stomach under general anesthesia without splenectomy or closure of
the abnormal shunt. Intraoperative exploration revealed a lesion in the lesser curvature of the gastric body. Postoperative pathology
revealed a 3.5 × 3 × 1.5-cm main focus located primarily in the lesser curvature of the gastric body. General classification: Borrmann III;
histological type: poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet ring-cell carcinoma; infiltration depth: subepithelial; growth pattern:
diffuse growth; vein thrombosis: none; lymphatic invasion: none; residual stump: none; lymph node metastases: none (0/18). The patient
recovered well postoperatively. Blood ammonia was well controlled and within the normal range (Figure 3). The patient was discharged on
postoperative day 12. At 3-month follow-up, no abnormalities were seen on physical or laboratory examination. In particular, blood ammonia
concentration continued to be within the normal range.Figure 3 Blood ammonia value changed during hospitalization. The blood ammonia value
was 123 μmol/L when the patient admitted to the hospital. And, it was delined from 100 to 27 μmol/L during the operation. And, it had a one-
time increase postoperative, and then it was normal. Blood ammonia value changed during hospitalization. The blood ammonia value was
123 μmol/L when the patient admitted to the hospital. And, it was delined from 100 to 27 μmol/L during the operation. And, it had a one-time
increase postoperative, and then it was normal. Gastric cancer is one of the most common gastrointestinal cancers worldwide, with a high
incidence and cancer-related mortality ; radical gastrectomy remains the primary cure . Not only hyperammonemia is commonly found in
patients with liver failure because of the reduced ability of the liver to synthesize urea, but it is also seen in patients with
portosystemic branch circulation, in which increases in intestinal ammonia have direct access to the systemic circulation, thus elevating
blood ammonia. Encephalopathy, including recurrent headache, acute mental status changes, asterixis, tremor, and consciousness, is the main
complication of the hyperammonemia in patients with and without liver cirrhosis . We have reported the case of a 69-year-old man with
gastric cancer and non-cirrhotic hyperammonemia. To prevent encephalopathy and reduce perioperative risks during radical gastrectomy, it is
important to determine the etiology of the hyperammonemia preoperatively. Ultrasonography was shown to be a reliable and noninvasive
diagnostic method in 90 dogs with hyperammonemia . Ubara et al. reported the use of color Doppler ultrasonography, in a hyperammonemic
patient without liver function abnormalities, to identify a large shunt between the left gastric vein and left renal vein leading to portal
flow entering the systemic circulation via the renal vein . However, color Doppler ultrasonography of our patient demonstrated a portal
system without expansion and revealed no abnormal shunt. Ultimately, percutaneous angiography revealed an unusual diversion that was the
most likely cause of elevated blood ammonia. Following radical gastrectomy, the patient’s blood ammonia decreased significantly to within
the normal range, where it remained at 3-month follow-up. We believe this supports the effect of gastric cancer on blood ammonia levels in
our patient without cirrhosis; however, this will require further study. After clarifying the source of hyperammonemia, appropriate
treatment may not only help control blood ammonia to prevent hepatic encephalopathy but also could reduce perioperative risk and extend the
lives of patients with gastric cancer. Takeda et al. reported spontaneous portacaval shunts in two patients with gastric cancer and hepatic
cirrhosis; one underwent a proximal gastrectomy and end-to-side esophagogastrostomy with splenectomy, including the closure of the shunt,
and the other underwent a distal gastrectomy with devascularization around the gastric cardia, including splenectomy, with preservation of
the short gastric vessels . In another report, a 61-year-old woman with gastric cancer and a large-caliber portohepatic venous shunt
underwent left lateral hepatic segmentectomy and subtotal gastrectomy with splenectomy . Fenves et al. reported on five women with no
history of liver disease who developed fatal hyperammonemic encephalopathy after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery . Our patient also
underwent a distal gastrectomy and gastroduodenal anastomosis (Billroth I procedure); however, we did not perform a splenectomy or specific
treatment for the spontaneous portacaval shunt. While the patient had no history of cirrhosis or portal hypertension, this abnormal shunt
could have been addressed with interventional embolization if the hyperammonemia had persisted after gastric resection. Although the patient
had an abnormal shunt, the gastric structure was normal. After the gastrectomy, there were no short-term complications of anastomotic
leakage, stricture, or bleeding, and blood ammonia remained within the normal range, except for transient increases before the defecation.
We believe this may be a feasible surgical approach in these patients. Postoperative treatment continues to be important for gastric cancer
patients with hyperammonemia. The patient may develop distant metastases postoperatively if the patient has portal vein metastasis and
thrombosis, which may aggravate hyperammonemia and induce encephalopathy ; however, postoperative chemotherapy should not include
5-fluorouracil for these patients. A number of studies have shown that patients with advanced gastric cancer who received 5-fluorouracil-
based chemotherapy may develop with mild toxicity, including hyperammonemia, which may result in hyperammonemia-related death . Subsequent
treatment must therefore be undertaken with caution. The most important factor affecting the prognosis for a hyperammonemia in patients with
gastric cancer without hepatic cirrhosis is a definitive preoperative diagnosis. It is also important to determine which type of operation
should be performed and to use medications such as oral lactulose and ornithine aspartate to lower blood ammonia in high-risk patients.
Finally, gastrectomy without splenectomy or closure of the shunt is feasible. The patient signed an informed consent for the publication of
this report and any concomitant images. carbohydrate antigen 19-9 Three-dimensional computed tomography Computed tomography Bo Liu and Miao
Yu contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
Z-nW conceived the idea for the manuscript. BL and MY conducted a literature search and drafted the manuscript. Y-xS and PG participated in
the design of the study. H-mX and Z-nW critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Hui-
mian Xu and Zhen-ning Wang for the conception and design and drafting the manuscript.
