The use of cardiac implantable electrical devices continues to increase with the validation of new beneficial indications. While the risks
of device implantation decreased significantly over time, significant risk remains associated with their extraction when indicated. A high-
risk pacemaker lead extraction case is described, wherein a chronically implanted lead that had perforated the right atrium was successfully
removed without the need for cardiopulmonary bypass. In this report we share our approach to this challenging extraction case and describe
an infrequently utilized off-pump hybrid technique that we term the “lead-inverting stitch”. A 74 year-old Caucasian woman with complete
heart block and remote pacemaker implantation presents with a swollen and erythematous infected pacemaker pocket necessitating device
extraction. Chest computerized tomographic imaging revealed a chronically perforating right atrial lead tip approximately 2 cm within the
pericardial space. A successful hybrid transvenous and open surgical extraction approach was undertaken without the need for cardiopulmonary
bypass; this was made possible due to a successfully positioned “lead-inverting stitch”. Implantable cardiac electrical device infections
are amongst the most dreaded post implant complications. Risks of device extraction are further complicated in cases of chronic lead
perforations. Extraction strategies that avoid cardiopulmonary bypass initiation are preferred. The use of cardiac implantable electrical
devices (CIEDs) continues to increase with the validation of new beneficial indications. While the risks of device implantation decreased
significantly over time, significant risk remains associated with their extraction when indicated. A high-risk pacemaker lead extraction
case is described, wherein a chronically implanted lead that had perforated the right atrium was successfully removed without the need for
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). In this report we share our approach to this challenging extraction case and describe an infrequently utilized
off-pump hybrid technique that we term the “lead-inverting stitch”. A 74 year-old Caucasian woman with complete heart block had dual chamber
pacemaker implanted in 1990. Her initial system included a Medtronic 4504 passive fixation atrial lead and a Medtronic 4004 passive fixation
ventricular lead. She subsequently underwent replacement of her pulse generator in 1998 and insertion of a new Medtronic 5568 active
fixation atrial lead and a Medtronic 4068 ventricular leads in August 2003 due to lead failure. She underwent a subsequent generator change
in June 2011. The original atrial and ventricular leads were abandoned when the new leads were added in 2003. All procedures had been
undertaken at a referring institution and she had not had any prior open-heart surgical procedures. The patient presented at her home
hospital with a swollen and erythematous pacemaker pocket in February 2014. Blood cultures did not grow any bacterial or fungal organisms. A
trans-esophageal echocardiogram was performed to assess for vegetations on the leads. No vegetations were identified, but there was
suspicion that one her atrial lead was extravascular. She underwent chest computerized tomographic imaging and this study revealed that one
of her right atrial lead tips was approximately 2 cm within the pericardial space (Figure 1). The patient was treated with vancomycin and
ceftriaxone based on a diagnosis of suspected pacemaker pocket infection. She underwent pacemaker pocket exploration and debridement, but
extraction was not undertaken due to the increased risks involved with the lead being extra-vascular. No organism was identified from
samples of fluid cultured during that initial debridement procedure. Despite that debridement procedure and prolonged antibiotics there was
clinical recurrence of the infection and the patient was subsequently transferred to our center for complex lead extraction.Figure 1 Non-
contrast computerized tomography image depicting the extravascular portion of the right atrial pacemaker lead (arrow). Non-contrast
computerized tomography image depicting the extravascular portion of the right atrial pacemaker lead (arrow). To minimize the risk of
vascular disruption and tamponade given the chronic right atrial lead perforation, a combined transvenous and open surgical extraction
approach was undertaken. Using a dedicated hybrid operating theatre with cardiopulmonary bypass support if necessary, midline sternotomy was
performed. Dense adhesions were found within the pericardial space consistent with likely prior pericarditis. Given the location of the RA
lead, care was taken to leave the right atrial dissection until all other vascular structures were exposed. With uneventful dissection of
the right atrium, direct visualization of the protruding passive fixation lead was obtained (Figure 2). To avoid the risks associated with
cardiopulmonary bypass and given the good visualization of the perforating atria lead, an off-pump technique was considered using a “lead-
inverting stitch”. To achieve hemostatic control over the region of the atrial wall where the lead exited, a purse-string stitch was placed
circumferentially around the lead tip using 3–0 prolene with multiple pledgets (Figure 3A). The externalized tip of the perforating atrial
lead was then mobilized by cutting a rim of surrounding atrial tissue. This allowed the end of the lead to be dunked within the right atrial
chamber while the purse-string suture was tightened for hemostasis (Figure 3B and C). With this “lead inverting stitch”, the lead was free
within the right atrium and could now be safely extracted using transvenous laser extraction techniques.Figure 2 Midline sternotomy
depicting the pacemaker lead perforation through the right atrium (white arrow). Figure 3 Illustration of the “lead inverting stitch”. A.
Purse-string suture applied around the perforating lead. B. Atrial lead-tip severed with heavy scissors followed by inversion of the remnant
atrial lead fragment and surrounding scar beneath the tightened purse-string. Note: the epicardial pacing lead is already in place. C.
Cross-section illustration of the severed and inverted atrial lead following tightening of the purse string around the lead (i.e., “lead
inverting stitch”). Midline sternotomy depicting the pacemaker lead perforation through the right atrium (white arrow). Illustration of the
“lead inverting stitch”. A. Purse-string suture applied around the perforating lead. B. Atrial lead-tip severed with heavy scissors followed
by inversion of the remnant atrial lead fragment and surrounding scar beneath the tightened purse-string. Note: the epicardial pacing lead
is already in place. C. Cross-section illustration of the severed and inverted atrial lead following tightening of the purse string around
the lead (i.e., “lead inverting stitch”). With the heart partially verticalized, the lateral wall of the left ventricle was exposed and an
epicardial lead (Medtronic 4968) was placed. It was then tunnelled through the subcutaneous tissue above the rectus sheath, secured and
connected to the new pacemaker. The new pacemaker was then placed in a newly created pocket, below the left costal margin. The sternotomy
wound was covered with sterile surgical towels. The infected pacemaker pocket was then opened and direct visualization confirmed the
presence of a small amount of murky fluid. This fluid was sent for culture. The pocket was then extensively debrided and the four
transvenous pacemaker leads were prepared for complex extraction in a standard manner beginning with retraction of the distal screw to
facilitate separation of the active fixation lead tip from the myocardium interface during laser extraction. A purse string suture was
subsequently positioned along the pectoral muscle around each lead at its insertion site to avoid any significant bleeding when the leads
are completely removed. The lumen of each lead was then probed for patency with a standard stylet to ensure that a lead-locking-stylet can
be utilized and advanced deep into the lead lumen for adequate gripping during the extraction process. Appropriate sizing of each lumen and
distal delivery of the locking stylets was subsequently performed. A long silk suture thread was then tied to the outside of the lead near
its insertion site, extended along the length of the lead, and tied to its end to provide further support along with the lead-locking-stylet
when applying traction on the lead during laser extraction. Now that the leads have been prepared, transvenous lead extraction with a #14
French laser sheath was attempted. Due to the presence of multiple biding sites, up-sizing to a #16 laser sheath was required along with the
use of a less compliant outer sheath (Visi-sheath). All the leads were removed entirely, with the perforating atrial lead removed last.
There was no hemodynamic compromise throughout the procedure and no mechanical complications related to the procedure. The “lead inverting
stitch” retained its integrity and hemostasis was preserved throughout the transvenous lead extraction. Following successful lead
extraction, the median sternotomy and old pacemaker pocket incisions were closed in a standard fashion and the patient was transferred to
the intensive care unit for post-operative monitoring. The total procedure time from incision to wound closure was 5 hours and 24 minutes.
Post-operative course was complicated with hypoxia secondary to atelectasis and aspiration pneumonia that resolved after 5 days. The patient
was discharged back to her home hospital for ongoing rehabilitation. A high-risk pacemaker lead extraction case is described, wherein a
chronically implanted (>20 years) passive fixation lead that had perforated the right atrium was successfully removed without the need for
CPB. To our knowledge such combined surgical and transvenous (hybrid) lead extraction procedures are typically completed with the patient on
cardiopulmonary bypass. Our case presentation highlights how an off-pump hybrid approach utilizing a “lead-inverting stitch” can be
considered and is likely preferred since it allows for an extravascular lead to be safely removed while avoiding the risks associated with
cardiopulmonary bypass. This less invasive approach should be considered if adequate visualization of the perforating lead can be achieved.
The use of CIEDs continues to increase yearly with the validation of new beneficial and life saving clinical indications. In 2009 alone over
1.3 million CIEDs were implanted world-wide . While the risks of device implantation have decreased significantly over time, there are
significant risks associated with the removal of implanted devices as illustrated in the described case. Based on a recent Danish nationwide
cohort of over 5,000 consecutive patients undergoing CIED placement nearly 10% of recipients experienced at least one complication. Risk
factors for complications included patient factors, an implant centre annual volume of < 750 CIED procedures, an annual operator volume <50
CIED procedures, system upgrade or lead revision and emergency or out-of-hours procedures. The most common major complication was lead
related re-intervention, followed by infection. Cardiac perforation was identified in 0.6% of cases . Complete CIED system removal,
typically related to infection, is problematic. In high-volume centers, the risk of lead extraction still exceeds 5% and includes both major
(1.8%) and minor (3.6%) complications . In more typical centers the risk are likely much higher. For example, the risk of complications with
lead revisions has been shown to be as high as 14.5%, with 7.25% of these being categorized as major complications . Predictors of major
complications with transvenous lead extraction include a history of cerebrovascular disease, an ejection fraction <15%, a reduced platelet
count, an international normalized ratio >1.2, the need for mechanical sheaths or powered sheaths for lead removal . Predictors of all-cause
mortality within 30 days of extraction include a low weight, end-stage renal disease, higher New York Heart Association function class,
lower haemoglobin, lead extraction for infection and extraction of a dual-coil implantable cardioverter defibrillator leads . Thus, it is
essential to carefully weigh the benefit and risk ratio when considering a patient for extraction. Most leads are presently removed via
transvenous extraction. In experienced centers procedural success exceeds 95.1% . The presence of a lead or portion of it outside of the
normal vascular space is an absolute contra-indication to transvenous lead extraction . The case described is an example of such a patient.
These patients are at much higher risk due to the potential for rapid exsanguination. A hybrid lead extraction approach involving midline or
minimally invasive right thoracotomy in addition to transvenous extraction has been described and is reserved for high-risk cases where
surgical intervention is deemed necessary for patient safety and to achieve clinical success . Hybrid lead extraction procedures are not
devoid of additional risks compared to isolated transvenous lead removal, particularly when cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is required. The
incidence of intra- and post-operative complications associated with CPB, including mortality, increase exponentially with age . The adage
of “less is better” applies to every step of a hybrid lead extraction procedure. The described surgical technique of a “lead inverting
stitch” allows the safe removal of an extravascular lead without the need for CPB; initiating patients on CPB is commonly done nowadays
during hybrid extraction procedures where an atriotomy is necessary to surgically removal a perforating lead. This “lead inverting stitch”
offers an alternative surgical approach in cases where avoidance of CPB is desirable. While the described technique is by no means
infallible, this case illustrates that with adequate direct visualization, careful monitoring and direct surgical standby an extravascular
lead can be removed without the initiation of CPB. Further, the described hybrid procedure was reasonably time efficient, with a procedural
time of 5 hours and 24 minutes versus mean operative times of 13 hours when CPB is used as part of hybrid extraction procedures . Cardiac
device infections represent serious complications, since complete system removal is typically necessary. Complex lead extraction is further
complicated in cases, like that presented, where the lead or part of the lead is extra-cardiac. Recognition of this situation pre-
operatively is essential to appropriate operative planning. A hybrid approach that avoids the need for cardiopulmonary bypass, like that
described in this case, is preferred in order to minimize risk. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Cardiac implantable electrical devices Cardiopulmonary bypass Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions JR, WK, VK, JB, DE were equally involved in the care of the patient and case report composition. JR was the artist
and creator of Figure 3. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
