Invasive lobular carcinomas have an increased propensity for distant metastases, particularly to the peritoneum, ovaries, and uterus. In
contrast, distant metastases of nonpalpable lobular carcinomas are extremely rare, and the causes of underlying symptoms of primary
carcinomas remain unclear. We report a case of an asymptomatic invasive lobular carcinoma with a primary mammary lesion in a patient with
rectal stenosis. A 69-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital for treatment of constipation. Although rectal stenosis was
confirmed, thorough testing of her lower digestive tract did not identify its cause. Thus, an exploratory laparotomy and tissue biopsy was
performed, and the presence of an invasive lobular carcinoma was confirmed. Subsequent breast examinations showed that the invasive lobular
carcinoma that led to the rectal stenosis was a metastatic lesion from a primary lesion of the breast duct. As the present breast lobular
carcinoma was asymptomatic and nonpalpable, we did not initially consider metastatic breast cancer as a cause of her symptoms, and the final
diagnosis was delayed. Peritoneal metastasis from nonpalpable invasive lobular carcinomas is very rare. However, breast cancer metastasis
should be considered when carcinomatous peritonitis is present in a patient with an unknown primary cancer. Compared with invasive ductal
carcinomas, invasive lobular carcinomas have an increased propensity for distant metastases, particularly in the peritoneum, ovaries, and
uterus . However, although such metastases are rare for small asymptomatic lesions, the presence of a distant metastatic invasive lobular
carcinoma may reflect a detectable primary breast lesion, as shown for invasive carcinomas . Therefore, such metastases can be traced back
to their primary lesions with relative ease. However, if unnoticed, primary carcinomas are not easily identified as the cause of underlying
symptoms. In our case report, asymptomatic, nonpalpable invasive lobular carcinoma from a primary breast lesion was discovered, following
assessments of the symptoms caused by rectal stenosis. Prior to suspicion of a primary breast lesion, investigations were primarily focused
on our patient’s lower digestive tract, and a final diagnosis was made only after an exploratory laparotomy. Herein, we describe diagnostic
strategies and suggest practices that may avoid diagnostic pitfalls during initial evaluations of symptoms. A 69-year-old Japanese woman
with unremarkable personal and family medical histories presented to the general surgery department of our hospital with constipation for
approximately one month. Her rectal examination revealed rectal stenosis and possible rectal cancer. Her subsequent barium enema examination
showed rectosigmoid stenosis (Figure 1), but no irregularities in her mucosa. Accordingly, a biopsy specimen was taken from her mucosa by
lower abdominal gastrointestinal endoscopy, and showed no evidence of cancer cells in the area of the stenosis. Her blood tests revealed
slightly elevated levels of the cancer antigens carbohydrate antigen 15-3 (CA15-3) and cancer antigen 125 (CA12-5), but all other values
were within normal ranges.Figure 1A barium enema image showing rectosigmoid stenosis but no mucosal abnormalities. Arrows show locations of
stenosis. A barium enema image showing rectosigmoid stenosis but no mucosal abnormalities. Arrows show locations of stenosis. Apart from
thickening of her rectosigmoid wall in the stenotic region (Figure 2), no other abnormalities were detectable in her abdominal and chest
computed tomography (CT) scans. Full-length positron emission tomography (PET) was suggested as a non-invasive procedure for detecting the
primary lesion, but she declined for financial reasons. Hence, an exploratory laparotomy was performed to identify the cause of her
rectosigmoid stenosis.Figure 2An abdominal computed tomography image showing rectal stenosis with thickening of the rectosigmoid wall. An
abdominal computed tomography image showing rectal stenosis with thickening of the rectosigmoid wall. Her surgical examinations revealed
nodules dispersed throughout her abdominal cavity, and additional stenosis in her rectum and ileocecum, suggesting peritoneal metastasis.
Histopathological findings from a biopsy specimen of the peritoneal material from around the rectosigmoid region were consistent with a
diagnosis of peritoneal metastasis of an invasive lobular carcinoma, likely from the breast (Figure 3). However, subsequent breast
examinations by the breast oncology department revealed no visible or palpable abnormalities or secretions in either of her breasts.Figure
3Histopathological findings of a peritoneal sample. The Indian file pattern of small cells (hematoxylin and eosin, ×400 magnification)
suggests peritoneal metastasis from an invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast. Histopathological findings of a peritoneal sample. The
Indian file pattern of small cells (hematoxylin and eosin, ×400 magnification) suggests peritoneal metastasis from an invasive lobular
carcinoma of the breast. Subsequent mammogram images showed a spiculated structure of lactiferous ducts in area C of her right breast
(Figure 4). Moreover, a ductal ultrasonography revealed a lesion of approximately 5 × 6mm in the same area (Figure 5). A subsequent biopsy
specimen of the duct showed cells with histopathological characteristics similar to those in her peritoneal nodules.Figure 4Mammogram
showing abnormal tissue in the right breast (category four). Arrows indicate abnormal tissue.Figure 5A ductal ultrasonogram showing an
irregularly shaped mass of approximately 5 × 6mm with unclear boundaries in area C of our patient’s right breast. The internal echogenicity
was uneven and the posterior echo was dissipated. Mammogram showing abnormal tissue in the right breast (category four). Arrows indicate
abnormal tissue. A ductal ultrasonogram showing an irregularly shaped mass of approximately 5 × 6mm with unclear boundaries in area C of our
patient’s right breast. The internal echogenicity was uneven and the posterior echo was dissipated. Therefore, the final diagnosis was of
rectal stenosis caused by carcinomatous peritonitis arising from a metastatic invasive lobular breast cancer. After her diagnosis, courses
of hormone therapy and taxane- and anthracycline-based drugs were administered. Her rectal stenosis symptoms improved immediately after
completion of two courses of weekly paclitaxel, and she was able to start ingestion. After discharge, a sequential regimen of paclitaxel,
docetaxel, and anthracycline was administered in the out-patient department of our institution for one year, followed by hormone therapy for
three years. However, the disease gradually progressed and she died four years after the initial diagnosis. Distant metastases occur more
frequently from lobular carcinomas than from more common invasive breast cancers. Furthermore, invasive lobular carcinomas metastasize to
the peritoneum and retroperitoneum in 93% of cases (including autopsies), the ovaries in 36% of cases, and the uterus in 43% of cases , and
can metastasize to other areas and organs of the digestive tract . However, such distant metastases are rare in the absence of palpable
primary lesions. Although it is well known that invasive lobular carcinoma tends to metastasize to the peritoneum, patients with initial
symptoms that are exclusively abdominal are rare. We performed PubMed searches using the search terms ‘invasive lobular carcinoma’,
‘peritoneum’, ‘metastatic’, ‘unknown origin’, and ‘occult breast cancer’. The resulting studies showed only a few cases in which initial
symptoms in the retroperitoneum and digestive tract were caused by metastasis of palpable invasive lobular carcinomas , and some recurrent
cases had reported involvement of symptoms in digestive organs more than 10 years postoperatively . However, only two case studies reported
the appearance of initial symptoms in the digestive tract due to metastasis of nonpalpable invasive lobular carcinomas . One of these
cancers metastasized to the stomach and the other metastasized to the colon, and both cases were diagnosed preoperatively, following
identification of adenocarcinoma in endoscopic specimens from mucosal lesions with invasions of lobular carcinoma. In our case report, a
biopsy specimen of our patient’s associated mucosa showed no evidence of cancer cells in the area of her stenosis. This negative result
reflected the presence of a specific metastatic form of invasive lobular carcinoma known as a peritoneal metastasis, which reportedly
invades perirectal areas and causes rectal stenosis, but does not reach the mucosal layer. Moreover, pathological analyses of perirectal
tissue specimens from her laparotomy showed invasive lobular carcinoma, as indicated by lobular carcinoma histology showing a non-polarized,
even distribution of small cancer cells that had diffusely invaded her interstitial tissue. These cells typically appear in a single row,
which is often referred to as an Indian file , and usually form a solid nest or occasionally a signet-ring shape, but rarely a glandular
structure. Intercellular mucus is also frequently present. Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) expression are more
frequent in lobular carcinomas than in other invasive carcinomas , although human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) overexpression
is rare . Furthermore, E-cadherin gene mutations are present in more than 85% of invasive lobular carcinomas, likely reflecting
characteristically low protein expression of E-cadherin . Our patient’s pathological examination revealed characteristics of an invasive
lobular carcinoma, including a row of small cells (Indian file), negative staining for E-cadherin and HER2, and positive staining for both
ER and PgR. However, the clinicopathological mechanisms that induced this metastasis from a non-palpable cancer are unclear. In our case
report, extensive initial assessments failed to reveal the cause of our patient’s intestinal stenosis, and a conclusive diagnosis was only
made after a biopsy during an exploratory laparotomy. PET/CT imaging has proven utility as an imaging modality for visceral metastases, and
it might have been effective in this case. However, despite its high accuracy in breast cancer staging, PET/CT was not deemed cost-effective
for this initial evaluation of breast cancer , according to the absence of financial support for the procedure from the national health care
system in Japan. In retrospect, a tentative diagnosis could have been made according to the guidelines for unknown primary neoplasms.
Specifically, the 2012 National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Guidelines for Diagnosis of Unknown Primary Cancers recommend a
comprehensive review of medical histories for patients in whom such cancers are suspected, including careful examination of mammary,
urinary, and reproductive tissues. Following identification of the potential location of the primary lesion by biopsy, further testing using
mammography should be performed to confirm tentative findings . As the present breast tumor was non-palpable, visual or palpable
confirmation of abnormalities in our patient’s breast tissue was not immediately possible. However, a mammography or ultrasonography upon
admission may have limited the physical trauma of the laparotomy, and would have warranted treatment earlier. Thus, primary breast lesions
should be considered as possible underlying sources of invasive lobular carcinomas in cases of unknown primary cancer. Subsequently,
noninvasive tests for breast cancers are warranted as a part of routine clinical assessments to determine the presence of such lesions. We
report a case of nonpalpable invasive lobular carcinoma presenting with symptoms that were suggestive of carcinomatous peritonitis. Although
peritoneal metastasis from a nonpalpable breast lesion is rare, breast cancer metastasis should be considered as a potential cause of
carcinomatous peritonitis in patients with unknown primary cancers. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin for
publication of this case report and all accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Cancer antigen 125 Carbohydrate antigen 15-3 Computed tomography Positron emission tomography Estrogen receptor Progesterone
receptor Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 National Comprehensive Cancer Network Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TO analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript. HO analyzed and interpreted the patient
data, drafted the manuscript, supervised TO, and revised the manuscript. SM made the figures. YK, FS, and SK provided valuable insights
during manuscript preparation. HK supervised the entire case. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We wish to thank Dr
Tetsuya Maeda in the Department of Surgery, Toho University School of Medicine, Japan, for advice on the diagnosis of peritoneal metastasis
of invasive lobular carcinoma. No funding was received by any of the authors.
