Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 7 Final Diagnosis: Purulent pericarditis with quadruple valve endocarditis
Symptoms: — Medication: (4S,4aS,5aR,12aS)-9--4,7 bis(dimethylamino)-1,4,4a,5,5a,6,11,12aoctahydro-3,10,12,12a-tetrahydroxy-1,11-dioxo-2
naphthacenecarboxamide Clinical Procedure: Pericardiocentisis Specialty: Cardiology Rare disease Infective endocarditis (IE) is a disease
with a highly varied clinical picture. Spread of the infection to the pericardium from the infective endocardium is uncommon and IE
involving all 4 cardiac valves is also a very rare occurrence, being more common in intravenous drug users (IVDU). A 7-year-old boy had
purulent pericarditis with infective endocarditis (IE) on all 4 cardiac valves and vegetation in the left ventricular and right atrial
cavity. Culture of the pericardial fluid grew methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) sensitive to tigecycline. The child made a
dramatic improvement with tigecycline treatment. Aggressive management with pericardiocentesis and appropriate antibiotics can show
remarkable clinical improvement. Tigecycline can be used safely and effectively as a life-saving drug in children. Infective endocarditis is
a disease with a highly varied clinical picture. Spread of the infection to the pericardium from the infected endocardium is uncommon and IE
involving all 4 cardiac valves is also a very rare occurrence, being more common in intravenous drug users (IVDU) . We report the case of a
7-year-old boy who had a bicuspid aortic valve with non-compaction of the left ventricle (LV) and the septum, and had a rare combination of
purulent pericarditis with quadruple-valve endocarditis of the cardiac valves. This infection was caused by methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus and the child responded dramatically to parenteral tigecycline administration. A 7-year-old boy had a history of fall
and sustained fracture of the head of the humerus with hemarthrosis of the left shoulder. Aspiration and open nailing had been done 1 week
ago. He presented to us with history of fever with chills, rigors, and breathlessness. On clinical examination, the child was very sick,
toxic, listless, febrile, and moribund with puffiness of the face and distension of the abdomen. Pulse was 118/min, regular, and low-volume,
and blood pressure was 80/60 mm of Hg. On auscultation, the heart sounds were muffled. Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly and electrocardiogram
showed sinus tachycardia with low-voltage complexes. The echocardiogram on admission showed a large pericardial effusion with tamponade and
a large mobile vegetation on the bicuspid aortic valve (Figure 1A). There was mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation with trivial aortic
regurgitation. There was also non-compaction of the LV and the septum (Figure 2). Emergency pericardiocentesis was done, which revealed
frank pus. The pus was sent for analysis and for culture and sensitivity testing. The total white blood cell count was 23,800/cu mm, with
80% being neutrophils. He was started on injections of vancomycin 200 mg every 8 hours and amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid 750 mg every 8
hours. On the second day, repeat echocardiogram showed vegetations on the aortic, mitral, tricuspid, and the pulmonary valves. Fuzzy mobile
echoes were also seen on the mitral valve, papillary muscle, the aortic valve, and tricuspid valve (Figure 1B, 1C). The vegetation was also
seen on the pulmonary valve with the pus flakes churning around the heart, giving an appearance of contrast echocardiogram in the
pericardium (Figure 1D). The bacteria detector (VITEK 2 COMPACT BIOMERIEUX) detected the organism as MRSA. The pericardial fluid culture and
sensitivity report showed maximum sensitivity to tigecycline with ≤0.12 minimal inhibitory count (MIC) and quinupristin/dalfopristin with
≤0.25 MIC. The child started deteriorating and the repeat pericardial cultures showed an increasing MIC from 0.5 to 1 to Vancomycin.
Immediately, 50 mg of intravenous tigecycline was administered followed by 25 mg every 12 hours. The child made a dramatic clinical
improvement within 24 hours. He became alert, started taking food, and his edema decreased. The echocardiogram repeated after 5 days of
tigecycline therapy showed minimal pericardial effusion and vegetation only on the aortic valve. All the other vegetations had completely
disappeared. Intravenous tigecycline was given for 14 days. Daily pericardial cavity lavage was done with vancomycin. The repeat culture of
the pericardial fluid after 5 days showed no MRSA. After 6 months of follow-up, the child’s echocardiogram was normal with a normal
pericardium with no vegetations. The majority of IE cases involve a single cardiac valve; the demonstration of double, triple, or even
quadruple valve involvement by echocardiography is rare . Attachment of the vegetation to the chordae tendineae is also not common.
Staphylococcus aureus is able to infect the previously normal heart valves and usually causes an acute illness. In most cases, the etiologic
microorganisms are methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus . The incidence of purulent pericarditis has declined since the introduction
of broad-spectrum antibiotics; untreated, the combination of tamponade and sepsis results in a mortality rate approaching 100% . The overall
survival rate is about 30% with antibiotic therapy alone and 50% when combined with early complete surgical drainage . Standard management
consists of parenteral antibiotics and surgical drainage. In infants and children, development of purulent pericarditis is associated with
pharyngitis, pneumonia, meningitis, otitis media, impetigo, endocarditis, bacterial arthritis, and osteomyelitis . Although the clinical
spectrum of bacterial purulent pericarditis has changed over the past 4 decades, Staphylococcus aureus is still the most commonly detected
microorganism in purulent pericarditis . Methicillin-resistant strains are resistant to all β-lactam antibacterials but usually remain
susceptible to vancomycin . In our case, the organism isolated from the pericardial fluid was MRSA. It was sensitive to vancomycin with an
MIC of <0.5. Although the child was initially started on vancomycin injections, he started deteriorating. Tigecycline with ≤0.12 MIC and
quinupristin/dalfopristin with ≤0.25 MIC were the other highly sensitive drugs, as per the pericardial fluid sensitivity report. The drug
tigecycline was available, whereas quinupristin/dalfopristin were not available. Tigecycline is glycycline antibiotic structurally similar
to tetracyclines. The safety and efficacy in pediatric patients younger than 18 years of age has not been established; hence, it is used
only in very highly selected cases. Its use in children less than 8 years old is not recommended as it is likely to cause bone and tooth
discoloration. Other potential adverse events include photosensitivity, pseudo tumor cerebri, pancreatitis and anti-anabolic effects. The
dosage in children aged 12 years and older has been suggested as 1.5 mg/kg followed by 1 mg/kg (not to exceed 50 mg) every 12 hours . In our
case, we used half the adult dose, with no adverse effects and it was lifesaving. There are only 2 previous case reports on the use of
tigecycline in children . This is the first case report of quadruple valve endocarditis, in a 7-year-old child with purulent pericarditis
who responded dramatically to tigecycline. Aggressive management with pericardiocentesis and appropriate antibiotics achieve remarkable
clinical improvement. Tigecycline can be used safely and effectively as a life-saving drug in children, in whom there are no other
alternative treatment options. However, further studies on the safety of tigecycline in pediatric patients are needed. Conflict of interest
Nothing to report. No financial grants were received. Transthoracic echocardiogram in: (A) Parasternal long axis view shows a large
vegetation on the aortic valve. (B) Parasternal long axis view shows minimal pericardial effusion, non-compaction of the left ventricle and
apical septum with vegetation on the mitral valve, papillary muscle, and the aortic valve. (C) Five-chamber view shows vegetation on the
aortic, tricuspid, and mitral valves. (D) Short axis view shows vegetation on the pulmonary valve and pus appearing like a contrast echo.
Parasternal long axis view shows left ventricular and septal non-compaction with a large vegetation on the aortic valve.
