Epicrania Fugax is a paroxysmal, short-lasting, head pain moving across one hemicranium, describing a linear or zag trajectory, starting and
ending in territories of different nerves. Between attacks, patients are usually free of symptoms. We describe an Epicrania Fugax patient
complaining of interictal pain. The interictal pain was line-shaped and extended across the usual starting and ending points of the typical
Epicrania Fugax paroxysms. Although rarely encountered, persistent linear pain may be a feature of Epicrania Fugax. Epicrania Fugax is a
paroxysmal, short-lasting (1–10 s), head pain moving across one hemicranium, describing a linear or zag trajectory, starting and ending in
territories of different nerves . At the end of the attacks, ipsilateral autonomic signs such as lacrimation, conjunctival injection or
rhinorrhoea may occur. Between attacks, patients are usually free of symptoms. However, we have recently encountered an Epicrania Fugax
patient complaining of interictal pain. This finding was not a surprise as interictal pain may be a feature of paroxysmal headaches and
trigeminal neuralgia . A 39-year-old female patient complained of one-day-lasting episodes of linear-shaped pain in her right hemicranium.
In the past few months she had been suffering from paroxysms of severe pain lasting 5–10 seconds, starting in the posterior parietal area of
the right hemicranium and rapidly moving with a lineal trajectory to the internal canthus of the ipsilateral eye. As a rule, once the pain
reached the eye, lacrimation ensued. The frequency ranged from 1 to 3 paroxysms daily, in the symptomatic days (2–3/week). In between
attacks, the patient felt a continuous, moderate pain, confined to the territory where the motion was perceived. The patient clearly
delineated the painful lineal area in her head and could finely draw it, thus giving a definite impression of the localization of such an
interictal pain. Wang Y et al. described headaches with pain episodes localized in a line-shaped area of one hemicranium. Topographically,
this description parallels that of our patient. However, the patients of Wang Y et al. did not report moving paroxysms. More evidences are
needed before we can decipher the nosologic position of linear headaches, but as far as Epicrania Fugax is concerned, its clinical features
may rarely include a linear interictal pain that may even become the main complaint. Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JAP: made the clinical observation and wrote the manuscript. PB: contributed to the final
draft of the article. Both authors commented on the manuscript and approved the final version of the manuscript.
