Thrombocytopenia may develop in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) due to myelosuppression of chemotherapy or relapse. Here we
report a pediatric patient with ALL whose platelet counts decreased at the 102nd week of maintenance treatment. Thrombocytopenia was
refractory to platelet infusions and bone marrow aspiration revealed remission status for ALL along with increased megakaryocytes. The
cessation of chemotherapy for 2 weeks caused no increase in thrombocyte counts. The viral serology was unrevealing. A diagnosis of immune
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) was established. After administration of intravenous immunoglobulin, the thrombocytopenia resolved. When
thrombocytopenia occurs in patients with ALL in remission, ITP should be kept in mind after exclusion of the more common etiologies. Akut
lenfoblastik lösemi (ALL) tanılı hastalarda trombositopeni, kemoterapiye ikincil kemik iliği baskılanması veya hastalığın relapsı sonucu
gelişebilir. Olgumuz ALL idame tedavisinin 102. haftasında gelişen trombositopeni nedeniyle incelendiği sırada immün trombositopenik purpura
(İTP) tanısı almıştır. Trombositopeninin trombosit infüzyonuna rağmen dirençli olması üzerine yapılan kemik iliği aspirasyonunda löseminin
remisyonda olduğu ve megakaryositlerin artmış olduğu görüldü. Kemoterapiye iki hafta ara verilmesine rağmen trombosit sayısında artma
olmadı. Viral seroloji sonuçları aktif enfeksiyon ile uyumlu değildi. Hastaya İTP tanısı konuldu. İntravenöz immünoglobulin tedavisi ile
trombositopeni düzeldi. Remisyondaki ALL hastalarında trombositopeni geliştiğinde, daha sık görülen nedenler dışlandıktan sonra İTP de
akılda bulundurulmalıdır. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is an acquired autoimmune disorder characterized by isolated
thrombocytopenia due to increased platelet destruction and impaired platelet production . Autoimmunity in ITP develops because of a failure
in the regulatory checkpoints of the immune system, resulting in a loss of self-tolerance to platelet glycoproteins. The events that trigger
this pathway are largely unknown . Association of ITP with hematologic malignancies such as Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma or chronic
lymphocytic lymphoma is a well-known phenomenon. ITP has also been reported to accompany acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), albeit
extremely rarely . Herein we report a patient with ALL who developed ITP during maintenance therapy for ALL. A 3-year-old girl was admitted
with fever, bone and joint pain, and malaise. Complete blood count showed a hemoglobin level of 7.4 g/dL, platelet count of 97x109/L, and
white blood cell count of 3.8x109/L with 34% blasts on the peripheral blood smear. Bone marrow aspiration revealed CALLA (+) pre-B cell ALL.
A modified St. Jude Total XV protocol was initiated with institutional modifications in the induction phase concerning the dose of steroids,
and remission was achieved . Maintenance treatment was planned according to the patient’s low risk status . Nothing was remarkable up to the
102nd week of maintenance. After the 68th week of treatment, maintenance included weekly parenteral methotrexate (40 mg/m2) and daily oral
6-mercaptopurine (75 mg/m2/day) with pulses of dexamethasone and vincristine every 4 weeks until the 100th week, after which only
6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate were given. At that time, routine blood count showed hemoglobin of 12.8 g/dL, white blood cell count of
5.4x109/L, and platelet count of 43x109/L. Physical examination revealed no hepatosplenomegaly. She was free of bleeding symptoms despite
ecchymoses of the lower extremities. Treatment was ceased for 2 weeks and, at the end of 2 weeks of follow-up, thrombocytopenia persisted.
Since the platelet count had decreased to 16x109/L, irradiated and filtered platelet transfusion was administered, but the next day the
platelet count was found to still be as low as 21x109/L. Viral tests for parvovirus B19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Epstein-Barr virus
PCR, and cytomegalovirus PCR were all negative. Antinuclear, antidouble-stranded DNA antibodies and direct Coombs test were negative.
Vitamin B12 and folate levels were within normal ranges. In order to exclude the possibility of associated hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis, testing of plasma fibrinogen, serum triglyceride, and ferritin levels was ordered and all were found to be within the
normal range. Bone marrow aspiration was performed in order to exclude relapse of ALL. The bone marrow examination revealed a cellular bone
marrow in remission for ALL with erythroid hyperactivity and increased megakaryocytes (up to 9-10/field at 10x magnification). A diagnosis
of acute ITP was established and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy was given (1 g/kg/day, for 1 day). Three days after IVIG
treatment, platelet count was found to have increased to 272x109/L. During follow-up, thrombocytopenia showed no recurrence, despite
continuation of the maintenance treatment without any modification. Informed consent was obtained. Thrombocytopenia seen in patients with
ALL is generally secondary to chemotherapy or relapse of primary disease. Both of these conditions manifest with reduced platelet production
. Impaired megakaryocytopoiesis may also be seen in ITP, but commonly accelerated destruction of platelets results in increased
megakaryocytes in bone marrow as a distinctive finding of ITP . In our patient, we did not check for antiplatelet antibodies; however, bone
marrow findings, as well as the response of thrombocytopenia to IVIG treatment, were strongly suggestive for the diagnosis of ITP.
Classically, the pathophysiology of ITP is attributed to opsonization of platelets by immunoglobulin G antibodies and then phagocytosis and
destruction by macrophages in the reticuloendothelial system within the spleen . T cell-mediated immunity is also important in ITP
pathogenesis . Regulatory T cells (Treg cells) marked by CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ have essential roles in self-tolerance by suppression of humoral
and cellular immunity response . Treg cells have been blamed for a role in ITP. Reduction in number and/or function of circulating Treg
cells in ITP patients has been shown in several reports . Increased numbers of CD4+ Th17 cells and higher levels of T cell-related cytokines
are other T cell abnormalities detected in ITP . In the English-language literature, 9 pediatric patients who developed ITP subsequent to a
diagnosis of ALL were reported in 7 reports; 6 of them were on chemotherapy and 3 patients’ ITP developed after cessation of chemotherapy
(Table 1) . It seems paradoxical to diagnose ITP in patients with ALL who are under extensive immune suppression with chemotherapeutics for
the primary disease. Because of the intensive chemotherapy used in ALL, autoimmune diseases have rarely been reported among patients with
ALL who are under treatment . Of the reported cases, ITP was detected during the maintenance period in 4 of the patients, in 1 patient after
reinduction, in 1 patient after induction therapy, and in 3 patients after cessation of chemotherapy . In the majority of these reports, ITP
was diagnosed during treatment with 6-mercaptopurine, similar to our case . In 2 of these reports, 6-mercaptopurine treatment was continued
without recurrence of ITP; in 1 case, due to resistant thrombocytopenia, maintenance therapy was administered with the support of IVIG; and
in 1 report, continuation of 6-mercaptopurine after development of ITP was not stated clearly . 6-Mercaptopurine is a purine nucleoside
analogue that disturbs DNA synthesis and induces apoptosis . Purine nucleoside analogues cause profound depletion of T cells . Consequently,
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ cell counts also decrease, and this will result in immune dysregulation. This cascade has been thought of as a mechanism of
ITP seen in ALL . In the literature, 2 patients were reported to have developed ITP after treatment with cyclophosphamide . Cyclophosphamide
also has suppressive effects on Treg cells, similar to purine analogues, and this may support the association of Treg cells with ITP in
patients with ALL . In conclusion, newly developed persistent thrombocytopenia in patients with ALL may indicate ITP. After exclusion of
other common causes including recurrence of the primary disease, chemotherapy-related myelosuppression, folate deficiency, or viral
etiologies, the coexistence of ITP should be kept in mind as a rare etiology for unexplained thrombocytopenia in order to initiate
appropriate treatment as early as possible. Informed Consent: Informed consent was obtained, Concept: Mualla Çetin, Design: Turan Bayhan,
Şule Ünal, Data Collection or Processing: Fatma Gümrük, Mualla Çetin, Analysis or Interpretation: Şule Ünal, Literature Search: Turan
Bayhan, Fatma Gümrük, Mualla Çetin, Writing: Turan Bayhan, Şule Ünal. Conflict of Interest: The authors of this paper have no conflicts of
interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials included.
