An 8-month-oldboy diagnosed with T-B+NK- SCID underwent peripheral blood hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) from MSD without
conditioning. However, he developed pancytopenia and became transfusion dependent by post-transplant 2nd month. Bone marrow
aspiration/biopsy revealed an aplastic marrow with 98% donor chimerism. With a diagnosis of T-cell engraftment of the donor but no
engraftment of the other lineages, a 2nd HSCT with conditioning (BU/FLU/ATG) was performed at post-transplant +23rd month from the same
donor. Due to hyperferritinemia pre-transplant desferoxamine was given. On post-transplant day +2, he developed hyperpigmented patches
(Figure 1). Platelet count was 22x109/L and aPTT and PT were normal. Platelet transfusion was given; however the lesions did not subside
with the expected color change of ecchymoses. Skin biopsy from medial thigh was obtained (Figure 2). Generalized hyperpigmentation, after
conditioning, is a common finding after HSCT . However, in our patient the lesions were patchy. There are few reports of melanoderma after
HSCT and in one, melanoderma was reported as a finding of chronic GvHD . Based on the absence of clinical signs of GvHD and lack of typical
histological evidence, the melanoderma in our patient was attributed to drugs used in conditioning. The transfusional iron loading may cause
a generalized darkening of the skin; however in our patient the lesions were patchy and developed just after completion of the conditioning
regimen and subsequent stem cell infusion. The patient did not develop acute or chronic GvHD signs throughout the follow-up. The lesions’
color faded after engraftment gradually, although did not disappear totally. Currently, the patient is alive at post-HSCT 6th month.
Informed Consent: Informed consent has been obtained from the parents of the patient, Concept: Şule Ünal, İlhan Tezcan, Şafak Güçer, Meryem
Seda Boyraz, Deniz Çağdaş, Duygu Uçkan Çetinkaya, Design: Şule Ünal, İlhan Tezcan, Şafak Güçer, Meryem Seda Boyraz, Deniz Çağdaş, Duygu
Uçkan Çetinkaya, Data Collection or Processing: Şule Ünal, İlhan Tezcan, Şafak Güçer, Meryem Seda Boyraz, Deniz Çağdaş, Duygu Uçkan
Çetinkaya, Analysis or Interpretation: Şule Ünal, İlhan Tezcan, Şafak Güçer, Meryem Seda Boyraz, Deniz Çağdaş, Duygu Uçkan Çetinkaya,
Literature Search: Şule Ünal, İlhan Tezcan, Şafak Güçer, Meryem Seda Boyraz, Deniz Çağdaş, Duygu Uçkan Çetinkaya, Writing: Şule Ünal, İlhan
Tezcan, Şafak Güçer, Meryem Seda Boyraz, Deniz Çağdaş, Duygu Uçkan Çetinkaya. Conflict of Interest: The authors of this paper have no
conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to the subject matter or
materials included.
