Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema has recently been recognized as a syndrome but remains under-diagnosed. Neither clinical
management nor therapeutic approaches have been clearly defined. Pulmonary rehabilitation has not been considered within the therapeutic
options for combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema. In this case we explored the potential benefits of a specific aerobic physical
retraining program in the management of combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema. We describe the case of a 65-year-old Caucasian man with
combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema and respiratory failure who was receiving long-term oxygen therapy. Our patient underwent physical
retraining with moderate intensity aerobic and breathing exercises for four weeks. Clinical and motor tests, as well as questionnaires
assessing quality of life and depression levels, were performed prior to and following the retraining. At the end of the retraining program
a relevant reduction of long-term oxygen therapy requirement was registered; improvements in terms of physical performance, quality of life,
and mood were observed in our patient but no change in respiratory parameters. A program of aerobic physical retraining appears to be
beneficial to patients with combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema and may be considered as an additional therapeutic option. High-
resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scanning has enhanced recognition of the simultaneous occurrence of emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis
and, recently, combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) has been defined as a syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by upper lobe
emphysema and lower lobe fibrosis . Common risk factors resulting in epithelial lung alterations may contribute to emphysema and pulmonary
fibrosis despite clinical, radiological, and pathologic differences . Coexistence of emphysema and fibrosis are more likely to occur in
smoking-induced parenchymal pulmonary damage . CPFE is still under-diagnosed and clinical management as well as therapeutic approaches have
not yet been clearly defined. In this case we explore the potential benefits of a specific aerobic physical retraining program, which has
not yet been considered within the therapeutic options for CPFE. We report the case of a 65-year-old Caucasian man who had previously smoked
cigarettes (40 pack-years) who had CPFE with several comorbidities, including hypertension, type II diabetes, and depression. Before his
CPFE diagnosis our patient had been affected by chronic bronchitis for 12 years. His diagnosis of CPFE was confirmed by thoracic HRCT
showing areas of intralobular interstitial and septal thickening with peripheral bilateral distribution in addition to centrilobular
emphysema of both his upper lobes. On admission to our rehabilitation clinic, our patient exhibited chronic respiratory failure, reporting
dyspnea on exertion and productive cough; our patient was receiving long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) with 2.5L/min of flow during 24 hours as
his peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) steeply declined when oxygen therapy was discontinued (SpO2= 84%). Spirometry showed a
relatively mild restriction although his diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was 44% of predicted. Concurrent pulmonary
hypertension (PAP 60mmHg) was diagnosed by color doppler echocardiography. Our patient’s pharmacological therapy consisted of high dose
inhaled steroids, acetyl-cysteine 1200mg once daily, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (Lisinopril) 10mg once daily, and aspirin 100mg
once daily. Respiratory and physical exercise test assessments were carried out at admission and discharge; in addition, quality of life
(St. George Respiratory) and depression level (Geriatric Depression Scale) questionnaires were administered by a clinical psychologist. Our
patient performed the six-minute walk test (6MWT) to evaluate his aerobic physical performance according to the European Respiratory
Society/American Thoracic Society recommendation, 2014. The test was performed by an exercise physiologist indoors, along a long, flat,
straight, enclosed corridor with a hard surface of 30 meters, and results reported as distance (meters) covered in six minutes. His usual
medical regimen was continued and oxygen therapy during the test was administered via a portable oxygen tank. As required by standard
protocol, our patient decided the speed of the walk, stopping as required and resuming the test when recovered. Before, during, and after
the test, his heart rate and oxygen saturation were reordered using a professional oximeter, and dyspnea levels and overall fatigue were
assessed according to the Borg Scale and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) before and immediately after exercise test. After two weeks in our
rehabilitation unit, our patient was clinically stabilized and enrolled in the retraining program for four weeks. The retraining program
took place in the cardiorespiratory gymnasium of our rehabilitation unit. Written consent was obtained from our patient before starting the
exercise program. Each retraining session was supervised by an exercise physiologist monitoring heart and respiratory rate, oxygen
saturation, blood pressure, and level of dyspnea. Our patient underwent the exercise program for two sessions per day up to 30 minutes each,
five days per week, for a four-week period. The training included one session of aerobic exercise and one session of breathing technique.
For aerobic training, he exercised on a treadmill, with a speed of 2.5km per hour and 0% of slope. The intensity of aerobic exercise was
adapted to our patient’s functional capacity on the basis of his 6MWT results, in accordance with aerobic exercise intensity recommended by
American Thoracic Society Guidelines 2006 for pulmonary rehabilitation. Therefore, the work rate of training corresponded to 50% to 60% of
his maximum heart rate and the training began at a work rate equal to 50%. When our patient reached the level of exercise at 10 minutes
without intolerable dyspnea (Borg rating of breathlessness of <5), the workload (speed and/or elevation) and duration of exercise were
increased by 10% . Progressive exercise training was employed for his respiratory muscles; the training consisted of diaphragmatic breathing
and inspiratory muscle training, through an inspiratory threshold, at 40% to 50% of his initial maximal inspiratory pressure (PiMax). During
training our patient received oxygen therapy to maintain SpO2 >92%; a flow reduction of 15% was made each week. After the four-week
retraining program, because his arterial blood gas analysis showed a PaO2 increase of 11% and PCO2 decrease of 5.6% on oxygen with a flow of
2.5L/min, it was possible to reduce his LTOT to a flow of 1.5L/min for 24 hours to compensate hypoxemia. The oxygen requirement reduction
observed may have been due to the strengthening of his respiratory muscles, which allowed improvement of his exercise capacity . His
pulmonary artery systolic pressure, estimated by transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography, improved by 16% in terms of cardiac index
and pulmonary vascular resistance ; no significant lung function changes were observed. Relevant improvements in exercise capacity, dyspnea
rating, health-related quality of life, and levels of depression were also demonstrated after the pulmonary rehabilitation program. His 6MWT
showed an increase of distance walked by 133%. His dyspnea scores were reduced: the level of dyspnea at rest (the Modified Medical Research
Council Dyspnea Scale) decreased from 3.0 to 2.0, Borg Scale during exercise was reduced from 9.0 to 5.0, and his post-exercise VAS
decreased from 8.0 to 5.0; there was only a minor increase in PiMax of 17%. Our patient’s adherence to the retraining program was good and
no adverse events occurred. Table 1 reports the test results collected before and after the retraining program.Table 1 Results of
cardiorespiratory and clinical tests before and after a retraining program in a patient with combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema Test
Assessment before retraining program Assessment after retraining program Respiratory functional testsFEV1/FVC 78% FEV1/FVC 77% •
SpirometryFEV1 79% of predicted valueFEV1 82% of predicted valueFVC 73% of predicted valueFVC 75% of predicted value • Diffusion lung
capacity for carbon monoxideDLCO 44% of predicted valueDLCO 47% of predicted valuePaO2 63.4mmHgPaO2 70.4mmHgArterial blood gas analysisPaCO2
35.6mmHgPaCO2 33.6mmHgon oxygen 2.5L/minpH 7.46 pH 7.369 Dyspnea scales • Modified Medical Research Council 3.0 2.0 • Visual Analogue Scale
8.0 5.0 • Borg Scale 9.0 5.0 Transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiographyPAP 60mmHgPAP 50mmHgRight ventricular hypertrophyRight
ventricular hypertrophyPhysical exercise test • Respiratory muscle strengthPiMax 40mmHgPiMax 53mmHgPeMax 25mmHgPeMax 60mmHgSix-minute walk
test 90ma 210mGeriatric Depression Scale 25/30 severe depression 16/30 mild depressionSymptoms 77.51 Symptoms 50.18 Quality of lifePhysical
activities 85.66 Physical activities 62.55 St. George QuestionnaireImpact 70.39 Impact 50.64 Total score 83.86 Total score 71.54 Long-term
oxygen therapyFlow 2.5L/min for 24 hoursFlow 1.5L/min for 24 hours aThe six-minute walk test, before the retraining program, was stopped due
to patient breathlessness. DLCO, diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV 1, Forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC, forced
vital capacity; PaO2, partial arterial pressure of oxygen; PaCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PAP, pulmonary artery pressure; PiMax,
maximal inspiratory pressure; PeMax, maximal expiratory pressure. Results of cardiorespiratory and clinical tests before and after a
retraining program in a patient with combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema aThe six-minute walk test, before the retraining program, was
stopped due to patient breathlessness. DLCO, diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV 1, Forced expiratory volume in one second;
FVC, forced vital capacity; PaO2, partial arterial pressure of oxygen; PaCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PAP, pulmonary artery
pressure; PiMax, maximal inspiratory pressure; PeMax, maximal expiratory pressure. In this case study we evaluated whether a patient with
CPFE, a disease which has not yet been considered for pulmonary rehabilitation, can benefit from an aerobic retraining program. Emphysema
and pulmonary fibrosis are progressive lung diseases that may be associated with comorbidities and systemic consequences . CPFE syndrome
typically occurs in male smokers and is frequently complicated by pulmonary hypertension, acute lung injury, and lung cancer, which affect
disease progression and survival. In the literature there are no reports on the efficacy of physical retraining in patients with CPFE, in
contrast with other lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis where clinical studies have
demonstrated the benefits of pulmonary rehabilitation . Clinically relevant improvements and short-term benefits were clearly demonstrated
in this report as a result of a retraining program. Although clinical studies on long-term effects within a large patient population are
required for definitive conclusions, our observations suggest that integrating pulmonary rehabilitation with pharmacological treatments
would be beneficial for patients with CPFE. In the literature there are no reports on the effects of pulmonary rehabilitation in patients
with CPFE. The potential efficacy of aerobic exercise on quality of life and psychological well-being and exercise capacity function in a
patient with CPFE has been demonstrated in this case. Our results suggest that exercise should also be considered as a therapeutic option
for patients with CPFE, although further studies considering the impact of different types of training in this patient population are
required. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide Forced Expiratory Volume in one
second Forced Vital Capacity high-resolution computed tomography long-term oxygen therapy partial arterial pressure of oxygen partial
pressure of carbon dioxide pulmonary artery pressure maximal inspiratory pressure maximal expiratory pressure six-minute walk test, VAS,
Visual Analogue Scale Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions GDS, GM, AB, and
GC analyzed and interpreted the patient data and wrote the article. GDS, GA, and CDG planned and carried out the pulmonary rehabilitation
program. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
