Thrombotic microangiopathies are a group of diseases presenting as microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and end-organ
dysfunction. As the role of the complement system was elucidated in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome pathogenesis, eculizumab was
successfully introduced into clinical practice. We present a large pedigree with multiple individuals carrying a functionally significant
novel factor H mutation. We describe the proband’s presentation following a presumed infectious trigger requiring plasma exchange and
hemodialysis. A 32-year-old Caucasian woman presented with pyrexia and headache lasting one week to our Emergency Department. She gave no
history of diarrhea or other symptoms to account for her high temperature. She was not taking any medication. She was pyrexial (38°C),
tachycardic (110bpm) and hypertensive (160/110mmHg). Her fundoscopy revealed grade IV hypertensive retinopathy. She had mild pretibial and
periorbital edema, with oliguria (450mL/day). She had a pregnancy one year previously, during which she had hypertension, proteinuria and
edema, with successful delivery at term. Her mother had died in her early 30s with a clinical picture consistent with thrombotic
microangiopathy. Her laboratory evaluation showed microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. After 22 sessions of plasma exchange, her lactate
dehydrogenase levels started to climb. As a result, she was classified as plasma resistant and eculizumab therapy was instituted. Her
lactate dehydrogenase level and platelet count normalized, and her renal function recovered after three months of dialysis. We demonstrate
that, even in patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and prolonged dialysis dependence, recovery of renal function can be seen
with eculizumab treatment. We suggest a treatment regime of at least three months prior to evaluation of efficacy. Thrombotic
microangiopathies (TMAs) are a group of conditions characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and microvascular
occlusion. These include thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), Shiga toxin-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, secondary TMAs (such as those caused by drugs and malignancy) and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). The
last 20 years has seen the elucidation of the pathogenesis of these conditions but, until recently, this had no bearing on the treatment of
disease . TTP, an acquired or congenital deficiency of ADAMTS13, and aHUS, an over-activation of the alternative complement pathway (most
commonly inherited), were both treated with plasma exchange. More recently eculizumab, a recombinant monoclonal antibody directed against
complement component C5, has been successfully used in the management of aHUS . A non-randomized uncontrolled trial has suggested improved
efficacy over plasma exchange . Despite its expense, it has revolutionized the management of aHUS, but has necessitated the rapid
differentiation of aHUS from ADAMTS13 deficiency to allow its use in a timely manner. Without plasma exchange TTP can be rapidly fatal, and
the clinician needs to be certain that a deficiency of ADAMTS13 is not the cause of the TMA before plasma exchange can be withdrawn and
eculizumab is initiated. We demonstrate a functionally significant complement factor H (CFH) genetic mutation in the proband and demonstrate
incomplete penetrance in her family. We describe the clinical course, with plasma resistance necessitating the introduction of eculizumab.
We show that even following prolonged dialysis dependence, eculizumab can prevent the TMA process, allowing renal recovery and dialysis
independence. A 32-year-old Caucasian woman presented with pyrexia and headache lasting one week to our Emergency Department. She gave no
history of diarrhea or other symptoms to account for her high temperature. She was not taking any medication. She was pyrexial (38°C),
tachycardic (110bpm) and hypertensive (160/110mmHg). Her fundoscopy revealed grade IV hypertensive retinopathy. She had mild pretibial and
periorbital edema, with oliguria (450mL/day). An evaluation of her medical history revealed that she had hypertension, proteinuria and edema
during a pregnancy one year previously, which she had successfully completed to term. No laboratory investigations were undertaken at that
time. Her mother had died in her early 30s with a clinical picture consistent with a TMA (Figure 1).Figure 1Family pedigree. Family pedigree
demonstrating affected individuals and unaffected carriers. Current age or age at presentation of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome are
given in years (y) or months (m). Arrow indicates current patient. Family pedigree. Family pedigree demonstrating affected individuals and
unaffected carriers. Current age or age at presentation of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome are given in years (y) or months (m). Arrow
indicates current patient. Her laboratory evaluation showed microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin: 6.6g/dL; unconjugated
bilirubinemia: 2.1mg/dL; lactate dehydrogenase: 1610U/L (<480U/L); haptoglobin: 10mg/dL (41 to 165mg/dL); schistocytosis: 5%; negative
Coombs test; reticulocytes: 3.68%), thrombocytopenia (120×109/L), albumin 3g/dL and elevated serum creatinine (12.65mg/dL). Her urinary
examination showed +++ proteinuria and the presence of eight to ten erythrocytes and two to three leucocytes; 2.4g protein excretion in a
24-hour urine sample. Viral serologic markers for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV were negative. A stool culture was negative for Shiga
toxin-producing Escherichia coli. Her ADAMTS13 activity was within the normal range (73%), and she was negative for ADAMTS13 auto-antibodies
(13UI/L). Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-extractable nuclear antigens and anti-double stranded DNA antibodies were negative. Her C4
level was normal (280mg/L) but her C3 level was low (80mg/dL (85 to 200mg/dL)). An ultrasonography of her abdomen revealed a normal right
kidney but left kidney agenesis precluded a renal biopsy. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal failure and a likely
family history in the setting of normal ADAMTS13 activity led us to the diagnosis of aHUS, and plasma exchange (40mL/kg fresh frozen plasma
per exchange) was immediately instituted. Hemodialysis was also required because of hypervolemia as evidenced by tachypnea, dyspnea, jugular
venous distention and intractable hypertension, and pulmonary congestion on her chest X-ray. Plasma exchange initially improved the
biochemical and hematological markers of disease and treatment continued. After 22 sessions of plasma exchange, her LDH level increased to
869U/L and her platelet count fell to 85×109/L, and it was decided to institute eculizumab therapy (Figure 2).Figure 2Disease course and
treatment response. The timeline from presentation detailing platelet and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) response to plasma exchange (PE) and
eculizumab (Ecu). Disease course and treatment response. The timeline from presentation detailing platelet and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
response to plasma exchange (PE) and eculizumab (Ecu). Following vaccination against Neisseria meningitides, eculizumab was introduced at
900mg weekly for the first four weeks, followed by 1200mg for the fifth dose one week later and then 1200mg every two weeks thereafter. Her
LDH level normalized and no further plasma exchange was required. She had remained dialysis-dependent throughout her treatment, but
following two months of eculizumab treatment her renal function improved to the extent that renal replacement therapy was not required. At
20 months into eculizumab treatment her creatinine level was 1.50mg/dL, with no evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. The drug was
well tolerated, with no significant adverse effects. While management proceeded, genetic analysis was undertaken to screen for predisposing
aHUS risk factors as previously described. A heterozygous CFH rare genetic variant in exon 21 was found (c.3454T>A; p.C1152S), with no other
genetic risk factors identified. This resulted in low levels of circulating CFH 0.32g/L (0.35 to 0.59g/L). She was negative for factor H
autoantibodies. A factor H analysis of her father (I:1) and sister (II:5) revealed that they did not carry the variant, but her three
brothers (II:2, II:3, II:4) carried the same mutation. The brothers’ renal function was normal and their urine analysis was unremarkable. It
is therefore probable that the CFH mutation was inherited from her mother, and that the clinical syndrome which led to her death was aHUS;
DNA was not available to confirm this hypothesis. Over the past 15 years, the pathogenesis of aHUS has been demonstrated to be a disease
caused by hyper-activation of the alternative complement pathway . Mutations in the complement regulators, CFH , complement factor I (CFI) ,
and membrane cofactor protein (CD46) , the complement components (C3) and complement factor B (CFB) have been shown to create a
predisposition to aHUS. This ultimately led to the successful introduction of the complement inhibitor eculizumab in aHUS management . In
our case report, our patient carried a mutation in CFH. Mutations in CFH are the most common mutation found in aHUS, accounting for around
25% of cases . The majority of mutations in CFH are heterozygous and usually do not result in a quantitative deficiency of factor H. Instead
they result in a secreted protein which is unable to bind to, and regulate, complement on endothelial cells, including glomerular
endothelium . In our case report, however, the mutation of the invariant cysteine C1152 prevented the formation of the CysI-CysIII disulfide
bond with C1109, and thus prevented the formation of a stable protein. These predicted structural effects are in keeping with the low plasma
factor H levels of our patient. As is frequently seen, carriers of CFH mutations may remain well for many years before presenting with aHUS
following an initiating trigger, such as upper respiratory tract infections, fevers, pregnancy, drugs and non E. coli diarrheal illnesses .
Infectious events, mainly upper respiratory tract infections or gastroenteritis, trigger onset of aHUS in at least half of patients .
Likewise, in pregnancy-associated aHUS, Fakhouri et al. showed that 86% of patients for whom this was a trigger carried a complement gene
mutation. In our case report it appears likely that, given our patient’s pyrexia on admission, an unidentified infection was the trigger. It
is also of interest that during a previous pregnancy she developed hypertension, proteinuria and edema. Mutations in the complement system
have also been described in pre-eclampsia . The inheritance pattern in aHUS is most commonly autosomal dominant, with incomplete penetrance
. The proband’s brothers all carry the CFH mutation and are at risk of aHUS. They have been counselled to attend for routine hematological
and biochemical tests at times of known triggers, such as infection. The proband has elected not to screen her children (III:1, III:2,
III:3) and as such, they must be considered to be at risk for aHUS, with similar advice given. Early treatment of aHUS is essential in
preserving renal function. It has been suggested that retinal changes, such as the cotton wool spots, flame hemorrhages and papilledema seen
in our patient, are rare in HUS and TTP . Retinal examination has been shown to be non-discriminatory for TMAs and should not lead to a
diagnosis of malignant hypertension, with a consequent delay in appropriate treatment . Our patient presented with a platelet count
(136×109/L) and creatinine level (12.65mg/dL) not suggestive of severe ADAMTS13 deficiency . Her low C3 level, however, was suggestive of
complement alternative pathway activity, in keeping with aHUS. Eculizumab is now considered to be the gold standard for management of aHUS.
It should not, however, be used until an ADAMTS13 assay excludes TTP. Plasma exchange was therefore initiated immediately, but after an
initial response there appeared to be signs of plasma resistance, and eculizumab was introduced. Biochemical markers of microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia improved and renal function subsequently recovered despite three months of hemodialysis, as has been reported in other
cases . Due to the cost of eculizumab, plasma exchange remains the only treatment available in some parts of the world. In one study from
the Italian Registry, 63% of patients with a CFH mutation who received some form of plasmatherapy (plasma infusion or plasma exchange) had a
response to plasma therapy, either complete or partial (hematological remission with renal sequel) . However, the percentage of complete
recovery under plasmatherapy was only 5%, and evolution to death or end-stage renal disease was 77%. Our patient continues on eculizumab;
however, a recent report has suggested that eculizumab may be safely discontinued in some patients, given adequate monitoring . A trial of
continuous versus disease-driven eculizumab therapy is required to elucidate the optimal length of treatment. In conclusion, we report a
case of familial aHUS associated with a CFH mutation precipitated most likely by an infectious trigger. We demonstrate grade IV hypertensive
retinal changes and severe hypertension as a consequence of aHUS, confirming this as a non-discriminatory sign for malignant hypertension.
Although our patient was dialysis-dependent, initial treatment with plasma exchange, and subsequently eculizumab, controlled the disease.
After three months on eculizumab therapy, she became dialysis independent. This suggests that, in individuals treated with eculizumab, a
minimum duration of three months should be given prior to cessation in the absence of renal recovery. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome Complement factor H Complement factor I Lactate dehydrogenase Thrombotic
microangiopathy Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura Competing interests Two of the authors, Tim Goodship and David Kavanagh, have received
fees from Alexion Pharmaceuticals for their invited lectures, whereas other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions DK and VB carried out the molecular genetic studies, participated in the sequence alignment and reviewed the manuscript. DK
carried out the immunoassays. MS participated in the design of the study and performed the statistical analysis. MS conceived of the study,
participated in its design and coordination and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. DK is a Wellcome
Trust intermediate clinical fellow.
