Although catatonia is a well defined syndrome, the treatment of chronic catatonia remains an unresolved issue. Here, we report a successful
treatment of a 30-year-old patient with treatment-resistant catatonic schizophrenia in 10 years by augmentation of selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). We present a 30-year-old man with treatment-resistant catatonic schizophrenia who failed to respond to the
treatment of benzodiazepines and antipsychotics for 10 years. He markedly improved after taking SSRIs. Now, he does not hold odd postures
and begins to talk and show more facial expressions. We postulate that the therapeutic effect is related to the enhancement of 5-HT
neurotransmission. SSRIs can be a considerable choice to treat chronic catatonia. Catatonia is characterized by immobility, mutism,
negativism, and peculiar motor behavior.1 Catatonia may be caused by physical or psychiatric disorders. It has been described in different
psychiatric conditions including schizophrenia and affective disorders. Approximately 10% to 15% patients with catatonia meet the criteria
for schizophrenia.2 Although there are some new therapeutics being developed to treat catatonia, such as N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor
antagonists, antipsychotics, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation,3 benzodiazepines, and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) are still
the mainstay treatments.4 Previous studies indicated that different psychiatric diseases with catatonia responded differently to
benzodiazepines. Catatonic patients with affective disorder show some response to benzodiazepines. Compared to patients with affective
disorder, those with schizophrenia may have worse response to benzodiazepines.5 A difference in response to benzodiazepines also existed
between acute and chronic catatonia.6 To treat chronic catatonia effectively remains an unresolved issue until now. Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are used to treat obsessive–compulsive disorders, panic disorders, eating disorders, and depression.7 Many
studies have examined the effectiveness of antidepressants in treating psychiatric conditions other than depression. A meta-analysis showed
that SSRIs may be effective for negative symptoms of schizophrenia.8 The aforementioned studies found that SSRIs can be widely applied to
treat many other psychiatric disorders. We present a patient with chronic catatonic schizophrenia who failed to respond to the treatment
with benzodiazepines and antipsychotics, but he markedly improved after taking SSRIs. The patient is a 30-year-old man. He had auditory
hallucinations and delusions of persecution and reference since senior high school. He gradually entered a catatonic state, which included
catalepsy, mutism, posturing, mannerism, agitation, and grimacing. He had no apparent extrapyramidal symptoms after taking antipsychotics.
Due to chronic psychosis with marked deterioration of psychosocial function, he has been admitted to our psychiatric day ward for
rehabilitation since he was 19-years old. His laboratory examinations and brain image study showed no obvious abnormality. The catatonic-
type schizophrenia was diagnosed according to The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th Ed; DSM-IV) criteria. His
younger brother had a diagnosis of schizophrenia and was treated with trifluoperazine 15 mg/day, but he does not have apparent catatonic
symptoms. Because his family considered the adverse effects of ECT, they refuse to let the patient receive ECT. He received sulpiride
800 mg/day, and benzodiazepines (lorazepam 1 mg/day, clonazepam 8 mg/day), for approximately 3 years, with minimal improvement in catatonic
symptoms. Then, his prescription was changed from sulpiride to haloperidol and lithium carbonate. He received lorazepam 1.5 mg/day,
haloperidol 20 mg/day, and lithium carbonate 600 mg/day for 7 years. His positive symptoms mildly improved, but the catatonic symptoms
persisted. He maintained odd postures, such as half-squatting while gazing at the floor or holding one hand up horizontally in front of the
mirror for around 2 hours every day. He became skinny because of poor nutrition. We added fluoxetine 40 mg/day for him. Two weeks later,
some interruptive behavior occurred. Fluoxetine was replaced directly by paroxetine, which has more sedative effect (paroxetine 40 mg/day).
After another 2 weeks, catatonic symptoms dramatically improved. We kept his regimen of medications for the next 19 months. The Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale improved from 148 to 106. There was partial remission of psychotic symptoms but no relapse of catatonic symptoms. He
does not hold odd postures anymore. He is able to interpret the contents of the voice hallucination that he had experienced and described a
female voice that commanded him to maintain a certain posture. In addition, he began to show more facial expressions and even chat with
hospital staff and his family. The present case is characterized by treatment-resistant to antipsychotics and catatonic symptoms with
insufficient response to benzodiazepines. Surprisingly his symptoms markedly improved after using SSRIs. According to Huang study, more than
two-thirds of catatonic patients responded to high doses of lorazepam.9 However, in our case, using benzodiazepine, haloperidol, and lithium
carbonate, his psychotic and catatonic symptoms did not improve. Some studies indicated that benzodiazepines were effective in the treatment
of acute catatonia, but were less effective in patients with chronic catatonic schizophrenia.6 According to the review article, there is one
case report showed that the use of fluoxetine might be useful in treating catatonic symptoms.6 Consoli et al10 reported that a catatonic
patient, who had a moderate response to lorazepam treatment, improved after using fluoxetine for 40 days. A study about baclofen-induced
catatonia rats found that enhanced 5-HT neurotransmission significantly reversed baclofen-induced catatonia via 5-HT uptake inhibitor (eg,
fluoxetine) or 5-HT releaser. In contrast, 5-HT1A antagonist (eg, Pindolol) and 5-HT2 antagonist (eg, sulpiride), which inhibit the 5-HT
neurotransmission, exacerbated catatonia. It appears that the manipulations of the central serotonergic mechanisms may modulate catatonia.11
In this case, SSRI augmentation improves the catatonia and then his negative symptoms improved subsequently. It may be due to his catatonic
symptoms were severe and would inhibit him to interact with others. However, it needs further investigation to clarify the mechanism. We
replaced fluoxetine by paroxetine. The two SSRIs have similar pharmacologic property except paroxetine with antimascarinic effect. Previous
studies indicate that fluoxetine has efficacy in the treatment of catatonia. Our report is the first one to suggest that using paroxetine
may also have efficacy in the treatment of catatonia. Psychiatrists may consider using paroxetine augmentation to treat catatonia in
schizophrenia patients, because its sedative benefit would decrease interruptive behavior during recovering from catatonia. This case
implies that there are other possible treatments to catatonic schizophrenia. Further studies for mechanism of catatonia treatment are
needed. Abbreviations: ECT = electroconvulsive therapy, SSRIs = elective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. The authors have no funding and
conflicts of interest to disclose.
