Nummular headache (NH) is most commonly a localized unifocal headache; however, some patients infrequently exhibit multifocal symptomatic
painful head areas retaining all features of NH. We present the pressure pain sensitivity map of an adolescent with multifocal NH. We
describe a case of a 14 year-old-girl with a 3-year history of continuous pain in four rounded areas, all of them with the same size and
shape. Pressure pain thresholds (PPT) were assessed on 21 points over the scalp and over the symptomatic areas. A pressure pain sensitivity
map of the head was constructed. The neurological exam was unremarkable, with neither sensory symptoms nor trophic changes within the
painful areas. As previously shown, symptomatic points exhibited lower PPTs compared to the surrounding areas. The map reflected 4
restricted areas of mechanical hyperalgesia confined just to the painful areas. Treatment with gabapentin achieved complete remission. This
is the first pain sensitivity map of a patient with multifocal NH. Our results support peripheral mechanisms are maintained in multifocal
NH. Nummular headache (NH) was described in 2002 by Pareja et al. . It has been included in the main body of the International
Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition, beta version (ICHD-3 beta) under the category of other primary headaches . NH has been
characterized as a focal pain, either continuous or intermittent, which remains confined to a small round or elliptical area of the scalp.
Pain intensity is generally mild or moderate, but superimposed in situ exacerbations are frequently described . The painful area is usually
located in the parietal scalp and commonly presents with variable combinations of hyperesthesia, dysesthesia, paresthesia or allodynia .
Though, NH is typically unifocal, a small number of patients have been reported with focal head pain in at least 2 separate areas . The
shape and size of the painful areas were quite similar in each particular patient, but, in contrast, spatial and temporal relations, pain
intensity, exacerbations or response to therapy could differ between different areas in the same patient. For the first time, we have
obtained a pressure pain sensitivity map of the scalp in a patient presenting with multifocal NH. A 14 year-old-girl presented with a 3-year
history of continuous pain in four rounded areas of 4 cm in diameter, symmetrically located at the parietal and occipital regions of the
scalp, all of them equal in size and shape. The pain was described as oppressive, and graded 5 out of 10 on a numerical pain rate scale
(NPRS; 0: no pain, 10: the worst imaginable pain). The patient did not identify any trigger. Neurological and general examinations were
unremarkable with neither sensory symptoms nor local trophic changes present within the affected regions of the head. The occipital and
auriculotemporal nerves were not tender to palpation. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and routine blood work-up with erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and immunological screening were obtained with no abnormalities. The patient had used acetaminophen with no substantial
relief of her symptoms. We decided to conduct a cartographic study of pressure pain sensitivity on the patient’s scalp to evaluate the
presence of localized or generalized hyperalgesia. The procedure was conducted following previously published guidelines . Pressure pain
thresholds (PPT) were assessed on 21 points distributed over the scalp. The locations and nomenclature of these points were based on
standard position of international 10/20 and 10/10 systems for electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings: eight points on the right (Fp2, F4,
F8, C4, T4, P4, T6 and O2), eight points on the left (Fp1, F3, F7, C3, T3, P3, T5 and O1) and five points along the mid-sagittal curve (Fpz,
Fz, Cz, Pz, and Oz). In addition, PPTs were evaluated on the 4 symptomatic areas. Thereby, the patient had 25 matching points for PPT
assessments (the 21 standardized points plus the four symptomatic points). The parietal symptomatic areas were located behind C3 and C4
points, and the occipital areas were respectively located between O2-T4 and O1-T5. All these points were marked with a pen over the scalp.
PPTs were measured using a pressure algometer. This device is a 1 cm2 rubber disk attached to the pole of a pressure gauge, which displays
pressure values in kg/cm2. The patient indicated verbally to stop the pressure stimulation when the threshold was reached. PPT was defined
as the minimal amount of pressure where a sense of pressure first changed to pain. Three consecutive measurements at intervals of 30 seconds
were obtained on each point, and then converted to kPa (SI unit) for the analysis. The order of point assessment was randomized . The
results of PPT measurements can be observed on Table 1. PPT data were used to construct a map of the spatial distribution of pressure pain
sensitivity over the scalp with appropriate software applications . Figure 1 graphs the pressure pain sensitivity map of the scalp. As
previously shown in NH , symptomatic points had lower PPT values than the surrounding scalp areas. Therefore, the map clearly showed four
patches of hyperalgesia at the painful zones (Figure 1). Preventive treatment with 900 mg/day of gabapentin achieved complete pain remission
at short and long-term follow-ups (20 months).Table 1 Mean pressure pain thresholds (PPT, kPa) over the scalp Localization Mean PPT
Fpz205.9Fp1186.3Fp2192.2Fz106.1F3176.5F4186.3F7166.7F8205.9CZ205.9C3156.9C4176.5T3166.7T4186.3PZ176.5P3156.9P4147.1T5147.1T6186.3OZ225.6O1106.1O2186.3Painful
point behind C4147.1Painful point behind C3147.1Painful point O2-T4147.1Painful point O1-T5147.1Figure 1Topographical pressure pain
sensitivity map of the case report with multifocal nummular headache. Mean pressure pain thresholds (PPT, kPa) over the scalp Topographical
pressure pain sensitivity map of the case report with multifocal nummular headache. This case report fits diagnostic criteria for NH
according to ICHD-III. Multifocal pain, though rarely described in the literature, is in fact mentioned in the classification system . In
multifocal NH, shape and size of symptomatic areas are identical, as in our patient, or quite similar. There are more differences when
considering spatial relationship between the painful areas since the most frequently observed pattern is pain over symmetrical points on
both sides of the scalp . Yet, there are also reports of pain in asymmetrical points on each side , and location of painful areas on the
same side of the head . Regarding the temporal sequence of pain felt in different areas, it may be synchronous, additive, or even migratory
. Confinement of symptoms observed in NH suggests that pain stems from terminal branches of sensory nerves located in epicranial tissues .
Nevertheless, appearance of multifocal NH reports could encourage a discussion regarding its pathogenesis, as they may correspond to either
a generalized disorder or a peripheral dysfunction occurring in multiple areas. Both the absence of trophic changes and the response to low
doses of gabapentin make it unlikely to be the presence of a generalized skin disorder in our patient. Pressure algometry has good
reliability and is considered a useful tool for research on headache pathophysiology . In previous studies in NH, only the symptomatic zone
had shown local decreases of the pain thresholds to pressure, with a characteristic appearance in the map of sensitivity , in our study the
map showed four patches of hyperalgesia at the painful zones, and the symptomatic points had lower PPT values than the surrounding scalp
areas, as previously shown in NH . To the best of the author’s knowledge, this is the first pressure pain sensitivity map of multifocal NH
in the scientific literature. According to our results, peripheral mechanisms seem to be maintained within each painful area as our patient
did not show widespread hyperalgesia. Instead, she had separate patches of hyperalgesia corresponding to local decreases of PPT in each of
the painful areas. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Conception and Design CR, SHV, ALG. Acquisition of Data SHV, MR, JB, AC, ERV.
Analysis and Interpretation of Data PM, MLC, CFP. Drafting the Manuscript CR, ALG, MLC, CFP. Revising It for Intellectual Content. SHV, ALG.
Final approval of completed manuscript all authors.
