Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically heterogeneous ciliopathy caused by ultrastructural defects in ciliary or flagellar
structure and is characterized by a number of clinical symptoms including recurrent respiratory infections progressing to permanent lung
damage and infertility. Here we describe our search to delineate the molecular basis in two affected sisters with clinically diagnosed PCD
from a consanguineous Saudi Arabian family, in which all known genes have been excluded. A homozygosity mapping-based approach was utilized
that ultimately identified one single affected-shared region of homozygosity using 10 additional unaffected family members. A plausible
candidate gene was directly sequenced and analyzed for mutations. A novel homozygous missense aberration (p.Lys1154Gln) was identified in
both sisters in the DNAH1 gene that segregated completely with the disease phenotype. Further confirmation of this interesting variant was
provided by exome-wide analysis in the proband. Molecular variation in DNAH1 may play a role in PCD and its potential contribution should be
considered in patients where all known genes are excluded. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12881-015-0162-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD, CILD, MIM 244400) is a clinically and
genetically heterogeneous disorder of motile cilia dysfunction typically caused by an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. PCD is
characterized by various clinical manifestations, including chronic sinusitis, otitis media and chronic bronchitis leading to permanent lung
damage (bronchiectasis). Situs inversus occurs in approximately 50% of PCD cases, a cohort who are specifically sub-diagnosed with
Kartagener Syndrome (KS) based on a triad of symptoms . Clinically, PCD affected female patients can present with sub-fertility due to
defective oviduct cilia and males can be infertile due to immotile sperm flagella . Occasionally hydrocephalus arises from a decrease of
cerebrospinal fluid flow as a consequence of ependymal cilia dysmotility . Previous estimates of the worldwide incidence of PCD is
1:15,000-1:30,000 live births but these figures are thought to be underestimated due to under diagnosis due to such reasons as unfamiliarity
with the disease and non-distinct signs and symptoms . However, this estimate is reported to be elevated in certain consanguineous and
isolated populations . Clinically, only half of PCD patients are diagnosed before 5 years of age and diagnosis is often delayed until
adolescence, with approximately one-third of these patients at adulthood . Motile cilia are organelles with a microtubule cytoskeleton core,
known as the axenome comprising of nine outer-doublet microtubules, which encircle a central microtubule pair (i.e., 9 + 2 pattern). Outer
dynein arms (ODAs) and inner dynein arms (IDAs), which are attached to the peripheral microtubules, provide the power by hydrolyzing ATP to
the cilia that generate the force for motility for a number of biological functions and modulate beat frequency . Dynein arms contain
varying numbers of heavy (responsible for motor activity), intermediate and light chains . Radial spokes and central pair projections are
also present in most motile cilia and are further structures known to regulate dynein function . PCD is characterized by ultrastructural
defects in the axonemal structure of the 9 + 2 pattern of motile cilia and sperm flagella, for example, a complete or partial loss of inner
and/or outer dynein arms, central microtubular abnormalities and defects of radial spokes. Thus, such biological defects are demonstrated
clinically by recurrent or chronic sinusitis and bronchiectasis caused by immotile cilia in the upper and lower airways and infertility due
to impaired oviduct cilia and sperm flagella . To date, mutations in 20 different genes involved in the structure and function of the motile
cilia have been reported to cause PCD, including those that encode the dynein axonemal heavy chain (DNAH) proteins (CILD3 (MIM 608644),
caused by mutations in the DNAH5 gene on chromosome 5p (one of the most common involved in PCD) and CILD7 (MIM 611884), caused by mutations
in the DNAH11 gene on chromosome 7p21. Recently, Ben Khelifa and colleagues reported that homozygous variants in DNAH1 in five unrelated
males were the cause of infertility without any other PCD symptoms, a disorder they proposed to call “multiple morphological anomalies of
the flagella (MMAF)”. In this study, because of the genetic heterogeneity of PCD, a homozygosity mapping approach using SNP-microarray
analysis was performed in a Saudi Arabian consanguineous family with two clinically affected sisters. This study adhered to institutional
guidelines (Research Advisory Council; King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre) and to the Helsinki Declaration
(http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/). Genomic DNA from whole blood was isolated from the affected siblings and 10
additional family members using the Gentra DNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Germantown, Maryland, USA). Genome-wide genotypes for all individuals
were obtained using the Axiom® CEU Human Array (Affymetrix, Inc., Santa Clara, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol.
Homozygosity mapping was performed using both HomozygosityMapper and AutoSNPa softwares. Intronic primers were designed to flank each of the
77 coding exons of the DNAH1 (Genbank accession no. NM_015512.4) using the Primer3 v.0.4.0 program (http://bioinfo.ut.ee/primer3-0.4.0/).
PCR reactions were typically performed in a 25 μl reaction volume containing standard reagents and 20 ng of genomic DNA. Primer sequences
used are available in the supplementary material (Additional file 1: Table S1). Thermocycling consisted of an initial denaturation at 95°C
for 10 min followed by 30 cycles of PCR. Each cycle of PCR consisted of denaturation at 94°C for 60 s, annealing at 62–68°C for 60 s and
extension at 72°C for 60 s. A final extension step of 10 min at 72°C was added. Sequence analysis was performed using the SeqMan 6.1 module
of the Lasergene (DNA Star Inc. WI, USA) software package and then compared to the reference GenBank sequence on which mutation nomenclature
was based. Numbering commenced with the A of the ATG initiation codon as +1. Commercially available next-generation sequencing Gene panel
version DGD_15112013 (Additional file 2: Table S2) was performed on the proband. In addition, whole exome sequencing was also carried out on
the proband using the Illumina® HiSeq2000 platform using TruSeqv3 chemistry by preparing and enriching the sample according to the
manufacturer’s standard protocol. Concentration of the each library was determined using Agilent’s (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA,
USA) QPCR NGS Library Quantification Kit (G4880A) and the sample was sequenced at a final concentration of 10 nM. Mapping and alignment was
performed on read files (Fastq) generated from the sequencing platform via the manufacturer’s proprietary software and using human genome
(hg19/b37) using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) package, version 0.6.1 . Further realignment and variant analysis were performed
eventually determining SNP novelty against dbSNP (Human Build 135) . Variants were annotated with gene and gene function from Ensembl
(http://www.ensembl.org/index.html) and further analysis of possible causative variants by filtering the full exome dataset for all
deletions, insertions, nonsense and canonical splice-site mutations, as well as missense mutations (with a PhyloP score of >3.5 of the
underlying base change) were determined and reported. The proband had a previous medical history at 13 years of age with chronic rhinitis,
frequent coughing and wheezing, nasal discharge, and was diagnosed with left lung bronchitis. She also presented with a multi-nodular goiter
confirmed by fine needle aspiration that revealed a colloid goiter with cystic degeneration. She was treated for hypothyroidism and an
adenoidectomy was performed. She was referred to King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre at the age of 29 for IVF for infertility
spanning 5 years. All clinical laboratory tests were within the normal ranges but a chest X-ray and CT scan showed the other two classic KS
symptoms in combination with infertility; situs inversus (Figure 1A) and bronchiectasis (Figure 1B). Audiometric evaluation also revealed
mild conductive hearing loss. Detailed clinical information was not available for the affected sister of the proband who was diagnosed with
KS at a similar age.Figure 1 Clinical and molecular genetic findings. Panel A) AP Chest X-ray of proband indicating (i) dextrocardia with
(ii) right-sided aortic arch. The gastric air bubble is also in the right side (iii) that is most likely representing situs inversus. Panel
B) AP Chest X-ray of proband where arrows are indicating bronchial wall thickening with mild bronchiectasis in the left middle lobe and also
in the right lower lobe. Panel C) Family pedigree showing the genotypes for the p.Lys1154Gln variation in DNAH1 for all family members that
were sequenced. (+) indicates the wild-type allele and (−) indicates the mutant allele. Arrow indicates the proband. Panel D) Results of
analysis of genotyping data with Homozygosity Mapper, showing 4 ROHs shared among the affected individuals. The ROH on chromosome 3p23-p14.2
containing DNAH1 is indicated by an arrow. Panel E) Narrowing the single valid ROH by two unaffected family members on chromosome 3 by
AutoSNPa analysis. Panel F) Sequence chromatogram of exon 20 where the mutant arrow points to the site of the c.3460 A > C transversion and
Panel G) Multiple protein sequence alignment of DNAH1 orthologs showing complete conservation of the p.Lys1154 residue compared to the
altered residue (indicated by red box). Clinical and molecular genetic findings. Panel A) AP Chest X-ray of proband indicating (i)
dextrocardia with (ii) right-sided aortic arch. The gastric air bubble is also in the right side (iii) that is most likely representing
situs inversus. Panel B) AP Chest X-ray of proband where arrows are indicating bronchial wall thickening with mild bronchiectasis in the
left middle lobe and also in the right lower lobe. Panel C) Family pedigree showing the genotypes for the p.Lys1154Gln variation in DNAH1
for all family members that were sequenced. (+) indicates the wild-type allele and (−) indicates the mutant allele. Arrow indicates the
proband. Panel D) Results of analysis of genotyping data with Homozygosity Mapper, showing 4 ROHs shared among the affected individuals. The
ROH on chromosome 3p23-p14.2 containing DNAH1 is indicated by an arrow. Panel E) Narrowing the single valid ROH by two unaffected family
members on chromosome 3 by AutoSNPa analysis. Panel F) Sequence chromatogram of exon 20 where the mutant arrow points to the site of the
c.3460 A > C transversion and Panel G) Multiple protein sequence alignment of DNAH1 orthologs showing complete conservation of the p.Lys1154
residue compared to the altered residue (indicated by red box). According to Homozygosity Mapper, the proband and her affected sister shared
4 distinct regions of homozygosity (ROH) the largest being on chromosome 3p21.31-p21 (Figure 1D). Further analysis using AutoSNPa
corroborated these results for the 4 ROH but three of these were cancelled out due to unaffected members of the family being homozygous in
the same regions and further narrowed down the remaining single region (Figure 1E and Figure 2). This single region,
chr3:31,261,252-54,307,163 (hg19 assembly Human Browser Gateway: https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgGateway?db=hg19) harbored the DNAH1 gene
(RefSeq NM_015512.4) encoding the dynein axonemal heavy chain 1 protein that was initially sequenced in genomic DNA in all 12 family members
as a primary candidate.Figure 2 Detailed AutoSNPa homozygosity mapping analysis for all chromosomes in 12 family members. The four shared
ROH’s in the affected sisters are indicated by red boxes, whose coordinates are detailed in the table. The arrows point to the unaffected
individuals that cancel out three of the ROHs on chromosomes 1 and 4. In addition, narrowing of the remaining ROH on chromosome 3 containing
DNAH1 is indicated by red arrows due to shared region present in 2 unaffected siblings (III:3 and III:5). Detailed AutoSNPa homozygosity
mapping analysis for all chromosomes in 12 family members. The four shared ROH’s in the affected sisters are indicated by red boxes, whose
coordinates are detailed in the table. The arrows point to the unaffected individuals that cancel out three of the ROHs on chromosomes 1 and
4. In addition, narrowing of the remaining ROH on chromosome 3 containing DNAH1 is indicated by red arrows due to shared region present in 2
unaffected siblings (III:3 and III:5). Sequence analysis of DNAH1 identified a novel homozygous missense variation in exon 20
(g.52387629A > C; c.3460 A > C; p.Lys1154Gln) present in both affected sisters (Figure 1F) that completely segregated with the disease
phenotype (Figure 1C). The variant was not found in 600 ethnically matched normal chromosomes. Protein sequence alignment of DNAH1 orthologs
demonstrated that the lysine residue is highly conserved across species (Figure 1G). In addition, p.Lys1154Gln is predicted to be probably
damaging with a score of 0.998 on Polyphen (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/index.shtml), damaging (0.05) using SIFT (Sorting
Intolerant from Tolerant; http://sift.jcvi.org/www/SIFT_enst_submit.html) and disease-causing (0.999) using Mutation Taster
(http://www.mutationtaster.org/). There were no causative pathogenic mutations detected in the genes described in Gene panel version
DGD_15112013. In exome-wide analysis on the proband the p.Lys1154Gln in DNAH1 was detected as the only possibly causative variant
(Additional file 3: Table S3). In this case report, using a combination of homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing methodology, we
describe the identification of a novel variation (c.3460 A > C; p.Lys1154Gln) in the DNAH1 gene in PCD affected sisters born from a
consanguineous union. In addition to the results described here, a previous study described that the phenotype of the DNAH1 mouse homolog
MDHC7 knockout resulted in asthenozoospermia (decrease in the motility of the spermatozoa) and reduced tracheal ciliary beat frequency using
a photo-electrical method and by a study by Blouin and colleagues who identified a potential novel PCD locus on chromosome 3p21 both
indicative that aberrations in DNAH1 may cause PCD. Tissue expression studies showed that DNAH1 is heavily expressed in the testis and
trachea, both of which contain axonemal structures that are altered in PCD patients . The lysine residue altered in these patients is
located in the highly conserved N-terminal stem of the DNAH1 protein. This component is known to interact with other heavy chains and
additional essential subunits of the axonemal complex . Hence, the substitution of a basic, strongly positive lysine to a polar uncharged
glutamine residue may alter the 3D confirmation and stability of the protein structure; disrupt interaction with other dynein chains and arm
subunits and in the function of this heavy chain with regards to ATP hydrolysis used in ciliary and flagellar motility. As mentioned
previously , variants in DNAH1 have been reported to cause asthenozoospermia without any accompanying PCD symptoms. They suggested that
DNAH1 function in ciliated cells is probably compensated by other HC dyneins, such as DNAH12 (MIM 603340) as it is the closest paralog.
However, the authors noted that none of the parents of their subjects could be analyzed to confirm transmission and hence segregation of the
identified variants nor could they exclude the possibility that some of the variants might be hemizygous with a deletion on the other
allele. Furthermore, they could not obtain biological samples from their subjects to exclude a reduction of ciliary beats that was seen in
the mouse knockout and proposed that future work would require them to perform thorough physical analysis of their male subjects to indicate
whether their patients might be at risk of developing late onset PCD. It is pertinent to note that the patients in this study were female
and all of the subjects in Ben Khalifa and colleagues were male, possibly suggesting for now that for unknown reasons, females may be more
sensitive to a more severe phenotype and/or that the p.Lys1154Gln variant may have a more severe affect than the variants identified in the
first study. In addition, the authors cannot exclude the probability that although this variant was the only one found and may play a role
in PCD, it is possible that a pathogenic causal variant may be located in an uncharacterized gene or in a known gene that may have missed by
the constraints of the methodology used in this study. Further investigation including functional analysis is necessary to determine the
effect of this variant on the protein and to explore the presence of SNPs or molecular variants working in parallel with the p.Lys1154Gln
variant causing the expanded phenotype seen in the patient described here. With regards to our proband, IVF was successful and pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis was cancelled as genotyping of the husband indicated that he was wild-type normal (Figure 1C) and hence all
offspring would be obligate carriers. The pregnancy continued uneventfully until term and the proband delivered a healthy baby boy by
cesarean section. In summary, we have identified PCD patients from the same family with a missense variation that segregates with the
disease phenotype in the DNAH1 gene. In addition to adding DNAH1 as a gene that may be involved in giving rise to PCD, the clinical
diagnosis and the subsequent genetic findings have translated into an overall positive and beneficial outcome for the index patient and
family and will be of benefit for future preventative and counseling measures in the future. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor
of this journal. Additional file 1: Table S1. Primers used to amplify the coding exons of the DNAH1 gene. Additional file 2: Table S2. List
of genes that are present on the Mendelian-inherited disorders (gene panel version DGD_15112013). Additional file 3: Table S3. A table
showing all of the potential homozygous deleterious variants identified by exome sequencing in the proband. The variants identified in
chromosome 3 are highlighted in yellow. The p.Lys1154Gln change is highlighted in red and was reported as the likely variant in the patient
after numerous filtering and analysis criteria had been applied. Primers used to amplify the coding exons of the DNAH1 gene. List of genes
that are present on the Mendelian-inherited disorders (gene panel version DGD_15112013). A table showing all of the potential homozygous
deleterious variants identified by exome sequencing in the proband. The variants identified in chromosome 3 are highlighted in yellow. The
p.Lys1154Gln change is highlighted in red and was reported as the likely variant in the patient after numerous filtering and analysis
criteria had been applied. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions FI:
generated and analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. RA and KR: generated and analyzed data. MAS: Provided all the clinical information,
collected and analyzed data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to express our gratitude to the family for
their willing participation. We would also like to extend our appreciation to the Sequencing and Genomics Core Facilities at KFSH&RC for
their technical support.
