Dear Editor Flavobacterium species are nonfastidious, oxidase-positive, glucose nonfermenting, gram-negative rods. Few Flavobacterium
species have been extensively studied . Flavobacterium ceti was first isolated from the lung and liver of two beaked whales, as described in
2007 by Vela et al. . Flavobacterium species are mainly found in aquatic animals and are rarely isolated from human clinical specimens. We
present a case in which F. ceti was identified in the blood of a patient admitted to Seoul Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University
Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. A 43-yr-old man with alcoholic liver cirrhosis presented with mild fever and abdominal distension.
Laboratory investigation revealed mild leukocytosis with neutrophilia (10.34×109/L; neutrophils, 83%) and hepatic dysfunction. Ascitic fluid
showed leukocyte counts >1×109 cells/L (neutrophils, 62%), whereas the serum ascites albumin gradient was >1.1 g/dL, total protein was 0.8
g/dL, glucose was 107 mg/dL, and lactate dehydrogenase was 97 U/L. Blood culture was drawn from two separate sites on the day of admission,
but ascites cultures were not performed. Intravenous antibiotics were administered from the day of admission: one day of cefotaxime followed
by ceftriaxone for the next 20 days. Follow-up blood cultures on day 4, 11, and 14 were all negative. Ascitic cultures performed after 14
days of antibiotics revealed no organisms. Signs of inflammation were gradually resolved, and the patient was discharged 25 days after
admission. After two days of incubation, bacterial growth was detected in aerobic culture bottles of two separate blood cultures. The next
day, circular, orange-colored, non-hemolytic colonies were observed on the blood agar plates (Fig. 1A), and gram stain smear revealed gram-
negative rods (Fig. 1B). No colonies were observed on MacConkey agar plates. Vitek2 GN system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France)
identified the isolated organism as Brevundimonas diminuta/vesicularis with 95% probability. The contraindicating typical biopattern was
phosphatase negative, enzyme activity that is almost always observed in Brevundimonas . Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-
flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; BrukerDaltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) revealed the most matched pattern as Acinetobacter lwoffii,
but showed no reliability with a score of 1.191 (Biotyper Version 3.1, Bremen, Germany). To confirm the identification, 16S rRNA sequence
was analyzed by using polymerase chain reaction with 27F and 1492R primers and sequencing with 518F and 801R primers in order to span all
bacteria . Sequencing reactions were performed by using a DNA Engine Tetrad 2 Peltier Thermal Cycler (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) with a ABI
BigDye(R) Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and were analyzed by using electrophoresis in an
ABI 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) with ChromasPro 1.7.6 (Technelysium Pty Ltd, South Brisbane, Australia). The 1,367 bp of the
16S rRNA gene sequence shared 99% identity with the GenBank sequence NR_042540 (F. ceti strain 454-2). Flavobacterium species are well-known
pathogens of bacterial cold-water disease, with some causing opportunistic infections. There have been some reports of human infections due
to pathogens that were previously known as Flavobacterium but are currently classified under other genera such as Chryseobacterium and
Myroides . Thus, known human infections from current Flavobacterium are limited, with only a few reports of different species [7, 8].
Mosayebi et al. reported a Flavobacterium sepsis outbreak due to contaminated distilled water in a neonatal intensive care unit. To our
knowledge, our report discusses the first case of F. ceti infection in human. Physical examination and ascites lab findings were consistent
with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. F. ceti was considered the causative pathogen because it was isolated from two separate blood
cultures collected on the day of admission and the cause of bacteremia was presumed to be peritonitis although ascitic culture was not
performed. Clinical manifestations were relatively mild, with good outcomes. Identification of gram-negative non-fermenting rods is quite
challenging, and commercial systems often provide unreliable results. Molecular sequencing is one of the most accurate ways characterizing
these bacteria to the species level. In this case, conventional methods and MALDI-TOF MS were insufficient in identifying Flavobacterium.
The MALDI database contained a limited number of Flavobacterium species, and F. ceti was not included. 16S rRNA sequence analysis
successfully confirmed the isolate as F. ceti. Here, we report the first probable human case of F. ceti detected in the blood of a patient
with liver cirrhosis. Flavobacterium may cause an opportunistic infection in humans, although its significance remains unclear owing to the
limited number of human infections reported. Molecular sequencing is currently the most reliable method for identifying this unusual
pathogen. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were
reported.
