Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 38 Final Diagnosis: Behçet’s disease Symptoms: Severe abdominal pain • fever
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Parsiyel colectomy Specialty: Surgery Unusual clinical course Behçet’s disease is a chronic inflammatory
disease involving multiple systems, with vasculitis being the most important pathological feature. Multiple colon perforations are thought
to be secondary to vasculitis and they occur in patients with ulcers. These may be encountered within the entire colon but most commonly in
the ileocecal region. Intestinal perforation and Budd-Chiari syndrome are infrequent in Behçet’s disease, and are associated with high
mortality and morbidity. Budd-Chiari syndrome results from occlusion of either hepatic veins or adjacent inferior vena cava, or both. We
report a patient with Behçet’s disease having multiple perforations in the transverse colon, descending colon, and sigmoid colon. The
patient also had Budd-Chiari syndrome due to inferior vena cava thrombosis extending into the right and middle hepatic vein. Our
observations are presented with a review of the literature. In Behçet’s disease, treatment of colon perforation necessitates urgent surgery,
whereas management of Budd-Chiari syndrome is directed towards the underlying cause. Behçet’s disease, as a chronic multisystemic disease
with various forms of vasculitis, is resistant to medical and surgical treatment. Prognosis is worse in Behçet’s disease with colon
perforation than that in Budd-Chiari syndrome alone. Behçet’s disease is a chronic inflammatory disease involving multiple systems, with
vasculitis being the most important pathological feature. Multiple colon perforations are thought to be secondary to vasculitis and they
occur in patients with ulcers. These may be encountered within the entire colon but most commonly in the ileocecal region. Intestinal
perforation and Budd-Chiari syndrome are infrequent in Behçet’s disease, and are associated with high mortality and morbidity. Budd-Chiari
syndrome results from occlusion of either hepatic veins or adjacent inferior vena cava, or both. A 38-year-old woman presented to our
Emergency Department with severe abdominal pain. She had no history of drug use or constipation. She said that she had intermittent bloody
diarrhea. Physical examination revealed rebound tenderness and guarding over the abdomen. Stool microscopy was negative for amoeba
trophozoites or any parasites. Fecal occult blood was found. Sedimentation was 27 mm/s, CRP (nephelometry) was 65.6 mg/L (normal range 0–5),
anti-nuclear antibody was 0.4 (0–0.8 negative), anti-ds DNA <10 (<20 negative), white blood cell count was 14.98 (normal range 4–10),
hemoglobin level was 10.9, neutro-phil count was 13.14, platelet count was 473 (100–300), urea level was 17 mg/dl, BUN level was 7.94 mg/dl,
creatinine level was 0.56 mg/dl, AST was 20 U/L, and ALT was 24 U/L. HIV was negative. Abdominal ultrasound scanning showed free fluid at
the right paracolic, perihepatic, left paracolic gutters and pelvis. Upon detection of air-fluid level and free air under the diaphragm on
erect abdominal x-ray, emergency laparotomy was performed. In the operation, multiple perforation areas were found in the sigmoid colon,
descending colon, and transverse colon. Wide resection of the transverse colon with descending and sigmoid colon resection was undertaken
(Figure 1). Pathergy test was positive. The patient had recurrent oral and genital aphthous ulcers 4–5 times within the past year. Eye
examination results were normal. Computed tomography revealed extensive thrombus within the inferior vena cava extending through the right
and middle hepatic vein (Figure 2). The patient received corticosteroid, anticoagulant, and immunosuppressive therapy. Our patient is still
alive and healthy 53 weeks later (Figure 3). In macroscopy, the transverse colon was 50 cm and sigmoid and descending colon specimens were
27 cm in length. Specimens of both colon segments were 4 cm in diameter. Perforation areas were evident in the serosal surface. Colonic wall
and bowel mucosa was edematous and hyperemic. Plicae were regular in their course. There were 3 roundish, punched-out perforations in the
transverse colon and 4 in the descending and sigmoid colon, which were somewhat separate from the colonic wall, with the largest being 2 cm
in diameter (Figure 4). There were multiple ulcers (the largest was 1 cm in diameter) in different locations, which were not merging
together, and were somewhat separate from the surrounding mucosa via a certain limit, covered with exudate and surrounded by a hyperemic
region. There were no macroscopic lymph nodes in the serosa. Numerous samples were taken from ulcerated and perforated regions and normal
mucosa. The samples were submitted for routine microscopic tissue follow-up. Hematoxylin-eosin, tissue Giemsa and PAS-stained slides were
prepared for examination. In microscopic examination, there were neutrophil leukocyte and lymphocyte reaction around and within the walls
and lumens of arterioles, and venules around the perforated and ulcerated lesions (Figures 5 and 6). There were well-organized thrombi and
intimal proliferation within some vessels (Figures 7 and 8). There was marked acute peritonitis. Surface epithelium and colonic crypts were
regular within the colonic mucosa apart from the ulcerated or perforated lesions. Samples were free of parasites or their eggs. Since its
first description by Hulusi Behçet in 1937 , criteria for diagnosis and classification of Behçet’s disease (BD) has undergone several
modifications by various study groups. Finally, participants from 27 different countries reached a consensus on the International Criteria
for Behçet’s Disease (ICBD), which showed high diagnostic sensitivity (98.2%), specificity (95.6%), and accuracy (97.3%). Main topics of
ICBD criteria were; a. recurrent oral ulcerations, b. recurrent genital ulcerations, c. eye lesions, d. skin lesions, e. positivity of
pathergy test . BD is a chronic, inflammatory, multisystemic, and vasculitic disease . Its exact etiology is unknown . Considering its
geographical distribution, the presence of a genetic predisposition has been suggested and there is strong evidence indicating that the
disease is linked to human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51 gene locus . Currently, the focus in pathogenesis of BD is on extrinsic factors such
as bacterial and viral infectious microorganisms and on intrinsic factors such as abnormal immunological response, together with
environmental factors . The prevalence of BD in Turkey was reported to range from 20 to 421 per 100,000 adult population . Gastrointestinal
tract involvement is present in 10% to 50% of patients with BD , with the ratios being 70% in Japan, 50% in the United Kingdom, and 1.4% in
Turkey . GIS involvement is more common from the Far East to the Mediterranean region, along the historical “silk road” . The ileocecal
region is involved in 75% of patients . Intestinal lesions are irregularly distributed over antimesenteric region . Ulcerative changes are
present in less than 1% of patients . Longitudinal ulcers are rare . Ulcerations may occur in 2 major types – localized and diffuse .
Intestinal ulcers are aphthous or deep punched-out lesions (Figures 4 and 5) and these ulcers are round and oval shaped, single or multiple
lesions . Localized lesions occur in the ileocecal region; they are deeply located and penetrate into the serosal surface , whereas diffuse
lesions, as in our case, are located more diffusely and separately in the colon as multiple punched-out lesions . Perforation, penetration,
and bleeding occur in 50% of patients with ulcers . Kasahara et al. reported in their series of 136 patients that multiple ulcers were
present in 73%, localized ulcers frequently located around the terminal ileum was present in 76%, and perforation or penetration was present
in 56% of patients with enteric BD. The pathogenesis of mucosal ulcerations is not clearly understood and the condition has been explained
by lymphocytic venulitis of submucosal veins in Behçet colitis . Characteristic vasculitis is better evaluated in resection specimens, as in
our case. Small calibrated veins, especially venules, are generally involved . This pattern of vasculitis is characterized by intramural
mononuclear cells and neutrophil infiltration; subsequently, fibrosis and luminal occlusion ensue . Involvement of large calibrated vessels
may result in intestinal ischemia and infarction . In our case, we observed neutrophilic vasculitis, perivenular lymphocyte reaction, and
focal luminal occlusion of small calibrated venules in the colonic wall, especially around ulcers and perforations. Among the other
histomorphological findings of BD, near-normal mucosa is observed in regions away from the lesions, and lymphoid aggregates or granulomas
are not found . In general, mortality of colonic perforation ranges from 35% to 47% . Kasahara et al. reported that postoperative ulcer
recurrence within 6 months occurred in 22 of 34 patients (65%), whereas recurrence did not occur in 5 patients after more than 3 years of
treatment. In our case, in addition to colonic ulcer and perforations, we also detected presence of diffuse thrombus in the inferior vena
cava and hepatic veins in computed tomography. Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) is characterized by obstruction of hepatic venous flow (due to any
cause) from the level of hepatic venules and large hepatic veins through the inferior vena cava and the right atrium . The most common
causes are hypercoagulation states . The frequency of vascular involvement (superficial and deep venous thrombosis, arterial aneurysms, and
occlusions) in BD ranges from 7% to 29% . Incidence of BCS in patients with BD was reported at between 1.1% and 5.8% . Uskudar et al.
reported in their series of 75 patients that web was 16%, hydatid cyst was 12%, and BD was 9% responsible in BCS etiology in Turkey. Desbois
et al. reported that among a total of 807 BD patients, venous thrombosis occurred in 586 cases, inferior vena cava thrombosis occurred in
7.5% (n=44), and BCS occurred in 2.4% (n=14). Bayraktar et al. reported in their series of 493 BD patients that there were 14 patients
(26.4%) with BCS among 53 patients with large vein thrombosis. Ten (60%) of those 14 patients died within an average of 10 months . Davatchi
et al. included a total of 6500 BD patients within a period of 35 years and reported that vascular involvement occurred in 8.3% of patients,
whereas large vein (vena cava) thrombosis occurred in 1.1% of patients. Arterial thrombus occurs more infrequently . The pathogenetic
mechanism underlying the formation of thrombus is unclear . However, it is attributed to vascular inflammation and endothelial ischemia
similar to that is seen in pathogenesis of colonic ulcers . High levels of endothelial products, such as Von Willebrand factor, contribute
to the development of endothelial injury-related vasculitis . In Okuda H et al. study on 157 patients, etiology was idiopathic in 141
patients, protein C deficiency in 2 patients, protein S deficiency in 2 patients, and antithrombin deficiency in 1 patient. Ozoran et al.
reported that genetic prothrombotic factors such as Prothrombin 20210 G-A mutations are associated with a marked increase in risk of
thrombosis. Gul et al. reported that factor V gene mutation was present in 15 of 64 BD patients with venous thrombosis. Orloff et al.
reported that hepatic vein occlusion resulted in liver fibrosis within a period of 6 months and centrilobular congestion and necrosis were
found in microscopic examination of liver biopsies. They also reported that 1 patient with BCS due to BD died of colon infarction secondary
to diffuse vasculitis. Liver congestion that occurs due to occlusion of hepatic veins may lead fibrosis and resultant liver cirrhosis .
Urgent surgical intervention is essential in management of colon perforation. BD, as a chronic, multisystemic, and vasculitis-related
disease, is resistant to medical and surgical treatment . Besides the specific treatment of vasculitis, treatment options for BSC include
corticosteroid, immunosuppressive, anticoagulation, thrombolytic, and radiological interventions, as well as surgical decompression,
placement of surgical shunts, and surgical correction of the lesion . In this paper we reported a patient with BD accompanied by BCS. Our
case was interesting because it was complicated with multiple colon perforations and hepatic vein and inferior vena cava thrombosis. We
described the histomorphological findings observed and discussed the findings in light of the literature. In conclusion, our
histomorphological findings support the view that colonic small vessel vasculitis may act as precursor lesions in ulcer pathogenesis.
Patients with BD not only suffer from disease recurrence, but also become at high risk of mortality when the disease is associated with BCS.
Therefore, BD should be taken into consideration in patients with colon perforations, ulcers, or large vessel thrombus and BCS, and in those
with histological signs of vasculitis. Thus, appropriate treatment should be based on a multidisciplinary assessment. (A, B) Perforation
areas on the serosal surface of the colon and the macroscopic view indicative of peritonitis. (A) Thrombus within the inferior vena cava
lumen extending through right and middle hepatic vein. (B) Absence of flow within the inferior vena cava lumen due to total occlusion.
Intrahepatic segment of the inferior vena cava filled by thrombus with absence of flow in coronal view. Distal bed is patent. (A) Transverse
colon, (B) descending colon and sigmoid colon. Punched-out oval or circular perforations on the luminal surface. Hematoxylin-eosin-stained
slides prepared from sharply demarcated, punched-hole shaped perforation (long arrow) and ulcer (short arrow). Sharply demarcated, ischemic
ulceration areas. HE, (A) ×4, (B) ×10. Vasculitis findings; (A) arteriolitis and (B) venulitis. Polymorphonuclear leukocyte-rich
inflammatory cell reaction accompanied by lymphocytes can be seen within entire wall layers. HE, ×40. Well-organized thrombus and
vasculitis. (A) HE, ×40, (B) PAS, ×40.
