We report a successful ongoing pregnancy obtained in a case of total globozoospermia after intracytoplasmic morphologically selected sperm
injection (IMSI) with oocyte activation. The first semen analysis on investigation showed partial globozoospermia. However, under high
magnification assessment at oocyte retrieval only round headed sperm were observed. Considering the high risk of a complete failure to
fertilize from IMSI the couple gave written informed consent to the use of oocyte activation media post IMSI. One embryo fertilized,
developed to a hatching blastocyst and was transferred resulting in an ongoing pregnancy. This successful outcome shows the use of IMSI is
useful in the evaluation of total globozooozpermia and therefore aids in the justification of the use of oocyte activation media. The online
version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12978-015-0031-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. In
globozoospermia the main morphological defect is characterized by the absent or severely malformed acrosome. The pathogenesis occurs during
spermiogenesis and probably originates in the acrosomic vesicle fusion impairment and cytoskeleton disorders, although precise mechanisms
remain to be determined . Total (100% round headed spermatozoa) or partial (less than 100%) globozoospermia have been described . The
introduction of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and then morphologically selected sperm injection (IMSI) lead the way for males with
severe globozoospermia to have the ability to father their own children. However, rates of fertilization remained poor for this cohort of
males and it quickly became evident that round headed sperm did not have the ability to trigger oocyte activation . In 1997, the first
reports of assisted oocyte activation (AOA) and improved fertilization could be achieved by applying calcium ionophore in such cases . Here
we will report on a successful ongoing pregnancy after IMSI with oocyte activation. A 32 years old couple attended for fertility
consultation reporting a history of 5 years trying for pregnancy with no success. On investigation of the female the fertility workup
included: check ovarian reserve by anti-mullerian hormone 3.72 ng/mL and antral follicle count 18 follicles on both ovaries, ultrasound
examination of uterus and office diagnostic hysteroscopy. All showed no abnormalities. Semen analysis on the male showed a volume of 5.6 mL,
concentration of 23 million/mL, 44% motile of which only 5% were progressively motile. Sperm morphology was reported as 2% normal with
evidence of acrosome abnormalities (strict criteria, Figure 1). DNA fragmentation index was 10.6% and high DNA stainability was 14.9%. Both
were found by flow-cytometry method.Figure 1Microscopy image of sperm morphologic assessment.The staining was performed with SpermBlue
(Microptic, Spain). Magification with the oil immersion, 100 x objective (Leica GX, L3200, Leica Application Capture Software). Microscopy
image of sperm morphologic assessment.The staining was performed with SpermBlue (Microptic, Spain). Magification with the oil immersion, 100
x objective (Leica GX, L3200, Leica Application Capture Software). Male factor infertility was diagnosed and the couple counseled for IMSI.
Informed consent was obtained. No history was known regarding other male family members fertility. The female patient was treated with
antagonist protocol using ganirelix (Orgalutran – MSD) and the administration of 150 IU rFSH (Puregon - MSD) daily for 9 days. Oocyte
retrieval was undertaken 36 hours post hCG priming 10,000 IU (Pregnyl - MSD). A total of 7 oocytes were collected of which 5 were mature and
suitable for injection. Semen analysis on the day of oocyte retrieval on high magnification using an inverted microscope equipped with
Nomarski differential interference contrast optics (Leica AM 6000) showed no normal morphology only total round heads (globozoospermia). Due
to the concern of a total failure to fertilize the couple were informed that IMSI would be the method of choice to continue to observe the
sperm sample, trying to identify any sperm with a partial or small acrosome to avoid the use of oocyte activation media. However none were
observed and post IMSI the use of oocyte activation media was undertaken. The couple were fully informed of the limited data available on
the use of calcium ionophore with regard to the long-term health of resultant offspring. Written consent was obtained to carry out this
procedure. The characteristics of the sperm used for insemination showed total round head nucleus with no acrosome present, however all were
motile. Following IMSI the 5 oocytes were placed into oocyte activation media (GM508, Cult Active, GYNEMED) for 15 minutes at 37 degrees 5%
02 and 6% CO2. The oocytes were then washed free of calcium ionophore through 8 drops of culture media. The oocytes were cultured over night
in CSCM media (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, CA) in the embryoscope time lapse incubator (Fertilitech-Unisence Denmark). Sixteen hours post
injection only one oocyte showed signs of fertilization and developed normally (Figure 2; an additional movie file shows this in details,
see Additional file 1).Figure 2Different stages of embryo development captured with a Time Lapse System. The images were captured
(Embrioscope, Fertilitech-Unisence Denmark, Embryo-Viewer Software) at different stages of the embryo’s development post injection: a – 2
pro-nucleai, 16 hours, b – 2 cells (30 hours), c – 4 cells (39 hours), d – 8 cells (65 hours), e – start of blastocyst (88 hours), f –
expanded blastocyst (99 hour), g – hatching blastocyst (106 hours). Different stages of embryo development captured with a Time Lapse
System. The images were captured (Embrioscope, Fertilitech-Unisence Denmark, Embryo-Viewer Software) at different stages of the embryo’s
development post injection: a – 2 pro-nucleai, 16 hours, b – 2 cells (30 hours), c – 4 cells (39 hours), d – 8 cells (65 hours), e – start
of blastocyst (88 hours), f – expanded blastocyst (99 hour), g – hatching blastocyst (106 hours). The embryo was cultured to day 5
uninterrupted in the embryoscope (Unisense FertiliTech, Aarhus, Danemarca) and a blastocyst grade 6AA was transferred under ultrasound
guidance. BhCG level on day 12 post embryo transfer was 468.9 mUI/mL, 2 days later BhCG level was 916.1 mUI/mL. Ultrasound evaluation at
12 weeks and 5 days of gestation (Figure 3) showed Fetal Heart Beat 149 bpm, CRL (crown–rump length 63 mm, nuchal transluency – 1.6 mm and
intracranianal transluency 2.1 mm, ductus venosus dopller without notch, nasal bone present and tricuspid doppler in normal range. First
trimester biochemical and ultrasound screening reveal low risk for trisomy.Figure 3Ultrasound image of the fetus at 12 weeks and 2 days of
gestation. Ultrasound image of the fetus at 12 weeks and 2 days of gestation. As yet, it is unclear whether patients whose ejaculate
contains both 100% globozoospermicornormal and globozoospermic cells (partial globozoospermia) suffer from a variation of the same syndrome
and still remains to be elucidated. Yoon et al. reported absence of PLCz in both the normal and round-headed sperm of a partial
globozoospermic patient, in line with the inability of partial globozoospermic sperm cell types to activate mouse oocytes as reported by
Heindryckx et al. . Numerous reports studying familial cases have suggested that globozoospermia is a genetic syndrome . However, the
specific mode of inheritance remains unclear, although recently it was reported that a mutation in the SPATA16 gene appears to be associated
with certain types of globozoospermia in men . To our knowledge this is the first reported ongoing pregnancy after IMSI using
globozoospermic spermatozoa with AOA in Romania. This report shows the use of high magnification tools such as IMSI in the assessment of
sperm morphology can aid in the reduction of complete failure to fertilize in cases of suspected globozoospermia with the introduction of
AOA when necessary. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Morphokinetic illustration of the embryo
development, captured with a Time Lapse System. The images were captured using the Embrioscope from Fertilitech-Unisence Denmark; the
software used was Embryo-Viewer Software. Images were capture every 15 minutes, using 4 focal planes. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection
Morphologically selected sperm injection Assisted oocyte activation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions All authors read and approved the final manuscript and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the
work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. BD
conceived of the treatment scheme, and participated in its design and coordination, helped to draft the manuscript, and have given final
approval of the version to be published, has been involved in patient’s treatment, follow-up, ultrasound evaluation and has made substantial
contributions to interpretation of data. MZ has been involved in drafting the manuscript, revising it critically for important intellectual
content, and performed the DNA fragmentation analysis by flow-cytometry. GS has been involved in patient’s treatment, follow-up, ultrasound
evaluation and has made substantial contributions to interpretation of data and manuscript revision. RM has been involved in patient’s
treatment, follow-up, ultrasound evaluation and has made substantial contributions to interpretation of data. SC has been involved in
revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and performed the sperm analysis, culture and assessment of the
embryos. GE has been involved in drafting the manuscript, revising it critically for important intellectual content, has made substantial
contributions to conception and design of the manuscript and interpretation of data, and performed the IMSI procedure, culture and
assessment of the embryos. Authors' information BD: MD, PhD, Affiliations: University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Obstetrics and Gynecology
Department, Iasi; Teaching Hospital Obgyn “Cuza Voda”, Iasi, Romania; Origyn Fertility Center, Iasi, Romania MZ: PhD;Affiliations: Regional
Institute of Oncology, Iasi, Romania; Origyn Fertility Center, Iasi, Romania GS: MD; Affiliations:Teaching Hospital Obgyn “Cuza Voda”, Iasi,
Romania; Origyn Fertility Center, Iasi, Romania RM: MD; Affiliations: Teaching Hospital Obgyn “Cuza Voda”, Iasi, Romania; Origyn Fertility
Center, Iasi, Romania SC: Affiliation: Origyn Fertility Center, Iasi, Romania GE: PhD;Affiliation: Origyn Fertility Center, Iasi, Romania.
The current survey was supported by National Authority of Scientific Research of Romania (POSCCE Grant 1357 "Infertility a tree pieces
puzzle: couple investigation, infertility diagnostic, possible therapy”).
