Phelan-Mc Dermid syndrome is a contiguous disorder resulting from 22q13.3 deletion implicating the SHANK3 gene. The typical phenotype
includes neonatal hypotonia, moderate to severe intellectual disability, absent or delayed speech, minor dysmorphic features and autism or
autistic-like behaviour. Recently, point mutations or micro-deletions of the SHANK3 gene have been identified, accompanied by a phenotype
different from the initial clinically description in Phelan McDermid syndrome. Here we present two case studies with similar psychiatric and
genetic diagnosis as well as similar clinical history and evolution. The two patients were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders in
childhood and presented regression with catatonia features and behavioural disorders after a stressful event during adolescence.
Interestingly, both patients presented mutation/microdeletion of the SHANK3 gene, inducing a premature stop codon in exon 21. Different
pharmacological treatments (antipsychotics, benzodiazepines, mood stabilizer drugs, antidepressants, and methylphenidate) failed to improve
clinical symptoms and lead to multiple adverse events. In contrast, lithium therapy reversed clinical regression, stabilized behavioural
symptoms and allowed patients to recover their pre-catatonia level of functioning, without significant side effects. These cases support the
hypothesis of a specific SHANK3 phenotype. This phenotype might be linked to catatonia-like deterioration for which lithium use could be an
efficient treatment. Therefore, these cases provide an important contribution to the field of autism research, clinical genetics and
possible pharmacological answers. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12888-015-0490-1) contains supplementary material, which
is available to authorized users. Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) include a wide range of phenotypes represented by a continuum from slight
to severe dysfunction of social interaction and communication as well as restrictive and stereotyped behaviour . Among multiple etiologies
of ASD, studies underlie a strong genetic component with mutations and deletions described in multiple genes . The SHANK3 gene on chromosome
22q13.3 appears to be of special interest as it is implicated in about 2% of ASD patients with intellectual deficiency . SHANK3 is a post-
synaptic scaffolding protein, involved in the regulation of the structural organization of dendritic spines, and a binding partner of
neuroligins . Deletions of chromosome region 22q13.3 including the SHANK3 gene are responsible of the clinical manifestations of
Phelan–McDermid syndrome (PMS) . This syndrome is characterized by neonatal hypotonia, moderate to severe intellectual disability (ID),
absent or delayed speech, minor dysmorphic features and autism or autistic-like behaviour. In addition, a clinically significant progressive
loss of skills, atypical bipolar disorders, catatonia and behavioural disorders have been described . The SHANK3 gene is thought to play a
major role for neurobehavioral phenotype, clinical evolution and neurological deterioration in PMS . Interestingly, recent advances suggest
that SHANK3 mutations may lead to different phenotypes than PMS, which have not yet been clearly identified . Here we describe two patients
with ASD and a mutation/microdeletion of the SHANK3 gene. Both patients presented regression, catatonia features and behavioural disorders.
Importantly, clinical symptoms were reversed by lithium therapy, after failure and multiple side effects of other psychotropic medications
(Additional files 1 and 2). Patient 1 is a 21-year-old man with ASD diagnosis based on the DSM-5 criteria as well as on the Autism
Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) . He is the second child of non-consanguineous
parents and had no perinatal history. He was first evaluated at age 6 (see Table 1). At the verbal level, his language was limited to simple
vocabulary of everyday life, with literal comprehension. He used words and short sentences to make a request and presented echolalia and
stereotypic language. At the cognitive level, he has severe intellectual disability. At the motor level, he had no early psychomotor delay
and liked to do sports and practiced biking for several hours a week. At age 13, as he moved from usual autism day-care centre to a non-
specific autism unit, major clinical changes were observed.Table 1 Summary of patients’ early development and first evaluation (y: years, m:
months) Patient 1 Patient 2 Diagnosis (DSM 5) ASD ASD Early development Perinatal historyNoNoWalking (y,m)1,21,3Cleanliness day and night
(y)33Language (first words) (y,m)3,52,3 Age of first evaluation 69Autism intensity (CARS-T)3634.5Intellectual level (Terman-Merill)
(y,m)2,92,9Speech delay, echolalia, stereotypical languageyesyesVineland I : Communication (y,m)2,32,8 Daily living skills (y,m)2,42,1
Socialization (y,m)1,82,3 Summary of patients’ early development and first evaluation (y: years, m: months) In the following, patient 1
progressively reduced motor and verbal initiative, stopped his favourite activities, presented a language regression and lost autonomy
skills. Additionally, behavioural disorders (impulsive acts, unpredictable gesture and opposition) alternated with apathy. At last, sleep
disturbances and insomnia appeared. At age 15, behavioural disorders required a hospitalization in an inpatient child and adolescent
psychiatric unit. Neurological evaluation including brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Electroencephalography (EEG) as well as
biological analysis did not show any abnormalities. Genetic evaluation diagnosed a microdeletion of 4 bases in exon 21 of the SHANK3 gene
(c.3653_3656delCCCT), responsible of a premature stop codon (p.Ser1218CysfsX81). Patient 1 received different psychotropic medications which
were partially effective but accompanied by multiple side effects. (1) Antipsychotics were able to control aggressive behaviours and
insomnia, but induced catatonia with positive evaluation by Bush Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS) and elevated muscle enzymes
(creatine phosphokinase = 1286 UI/l, normal <175, and lactate dehydrogenase = 735 UI/l, normal: 200–480). (2) Benzodiazepines reduced
catatonia symptoms but didn’t control impulsive actions, and induced verbal and motor excitement, confusion and insomnia. (3) Mood
stabilizer drugs had no clinical efficacy and induced somatic problems such as cytolysis with valproic acid, and DRESS syndrome (Drug
Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms) with carbamazepine. (4) Antidepressants didn’t show any efficacy. (5) Among multiple drug
associations only the co-therapy of aripiprazole and clonazepam showed partial efficacy improving regression, autonomy, language and motor
skills for about 12 months, but without behaviour stabilization. (5) Methylphenidate was not effective and induced insomnia, violence and
shouting. (6) Lithium was initially introduced in association with other psychotropic drugs (e.g. methylphenidate) and for a short period
(<2 months), without clear clinical effects. As there was no symptoms improvement, the diagnosis of atypical bipolar disorders was
suspected. Therefore, it was decided to re-introduce lithium (1500 mg/day), only associated with melatonin (4 mg/day). In the following,
symptoms progressively stabilized during the next 3 months. Agitation, hetero-aggressiveness and impulsivity disappeared. The patient
regained autonomy in everyday life, and urinary and faecal incontinence stopped. In addition, the patient did no longer show opposition and
participated again in different activities with other patients. Finally, he began riding his bike again. As the patient did no longer
present sleep disturbances, melatonin could be stopped after 3 months of lithium therapy. With a follow-up of 2 years, lithium treatment
permitted to reverse regression and to stabilize behavioural disorders and is well tolerated (1500 mg/day, blood lithium level =0.8 mEq/l,
normal: 0.6-1). One year after the beginning of lithium therapy, the patient integrated a unit of life for adults. He recovered a level of
functioning similar to the level he had before regression (see Figure 1 and Figure 2).Figure 1Clinical Global Improvement - Severity and -
Improvement scale at different time points of the follow-up of patient 1. The Clinical Global Impression scale (CGI) has two components: the
CGI-Severity (CGI-S), which is a seven-point scale rating severity of illness (1-normal to 7-extremely ill) and the CGI-Improvement (CGI-I),
which assesses the change of patient’s illness since the initiation of treatment (1-very much improved to 7-very much worse) .Figure
2Vineland Adaptative Behavior Scale Age Equivalents for patient 1. The Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scale (VABS) was used to measure the
level adaptive of functioning (Communication, Daily Living Skills and Socialization). VABS age equivalents are expressed in months (Y-axis)
at different time points of the follow-up of patient 1 (diagnosis, before, during and after regression). Clinical Global Improvement -
Severity and - Improvement scale at different time points of the follow-up of patient 1. The Clinical Global Impression scale (CGI) has two
components: the CGI-Severity (CGI-S), which is a seven-point scale rating severity of illness (1-normal to 7-extremely ill) and the CGI-
Improvement (CGI-I), which assesses the change of patient’s illness since the initiation of treatment (1-very much improved to 7-very much
worse) . Vineland Adaptative Behavior Scale Age Equivalents for patient 1. The Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scale (VABS) was used to measure
the level adaptive of functioning (Communication, Daily Living Skills and Socialization). VABS age equivalents are expressed in months
(Y-axis) at different time points of the follow-up of patient 1 (diagnosis, before, during and after regression). Patient 2 is a 17-year-old
female adolescent with ASD diagnosis based on the DSM-5 criteria as well as on ADI-R and ADOS. She has first evaluation at age 9 (see
Table 1). She is the only child of non-consanguineous parents without perinatal history. At the verbal level, she presented echolalia and
stereotypic language with words and short sentences used in everyday life and in context. At the cognitive level, she has severe
intellectual disability. At the motor level, she had no early psychomotor delay and she liked sports, especially rock climbing and gym. At
age 12, major clinical changes were observed at the same time as she changed the day-care centre for a specific autism unit. After age 12,
the patient presented regression and behavioural disorders. She lost night urinary autonomy, slowly reduced her initiative affecting motor
and verbal skills, and developed impulsive and aggressive behaviours against other children. In the following, the patient modified her body
posture getting vaulted and remained frequently motionless needing physical stimulation in order to be able to move. At last, she presented
deterioration of skills and autonomy, urinary and faecal incontinence as well as sleep disturbances (insomnia). Brain MRI, EEG and
biological analysis were normal. The genetic evaluation found a point mutation in exon 21 of the SHANK3 gene (c.2425G > T) responsible of a
premature stop codon (p.Glu809X). The clinical presentation suggested the diagnosis of catatonia-like symptoms without the full picture of
catatonia (negative evaluation by BFCRS and normal blood analyses including muscle enzymes). In line with this hypothesis, we decided to
introduce benzodiazepine treatment with clonazepam (0.9 mg/day). The patient rapidly improved and regained motor abilities, normal body
posture, language, participation, and autonomy in a few months. Sleep disturbances and faecal incontinence stopped but night urinary
incontinence persisted. These improvements continued for about 8 months. However, verbal and motor excitement progressively increased.
Surprisingly, the patient progressively lost weight whereas she continued to ate normally (loss of 8 kg in 8 months) and without other
clinical symptoms such as vomiting. Her initial body mass index (BMI) of 19.7 decreased to 16.4. We therefore decided to progressively
withdrawal clonazepam. During the 4 following months, the patient regained weight (BMI =18.1), but then regressed again by losing motor and
verbal skills. At last, she presented once more catatonia-like symptoms including behavioural disorders (hetero-aggressiveness) and
insomnia. Clonazepam (0.9 mg/day) was re-introduced. Two days after, motor and verbal excitement, sudden impulsive actions, and total
insomnia were observed requiring hospitalization in the inpatient psychiatric unit. Clonazepam was switched to lorazepam (3 mg/day),
complicated by confusion, faecal incontinence, agitation and insomnia. Based on the clinical similarities between patient 1 and 2, our
clinical experience with patient 1 and the hypothesis of atypical bipolar disorder, we decided to introduce lithium, associated with very
low dose clonazepam (0.2 mg/day). Patient 2 stabilized behavioural symptoms and progressively improved verbal and motor abilities,
participation, sleep and autonomy. However, night urinary incontinence persisted. Clonazepam was discontinued after 4 months. After one year
with lithium treatment (1000 mg/day, lithium blood level 0.7 mEq/l, normal 0.6-1), the patient recovered a similar level of functioning as
before regression (see Figure 3 and Figure 4). Lithium reversed regression and stabilized behavioural disorders without side effects.Figure
3Clinical Global Improvement – Severity (CGI-S) and - Improvement scale (CGI-I) at different time points of the follow-up of patient
2.Figure 4Vineland Adaptative Behavior Scale Age Equivalents for patient 2. VABS age equivalents are expressed in months (Y-axis) at
different time points of the follow-up of patient 2 (diagnosis, before, during and after regression). Clinical Global Improvement – Severity
(CGI-S) and - Improvement scale (CGI-I) at different time points of the follow-up of patient 2. Vineland Adaptative Behavior Scale Age
Equivalents for patient 2. VABS age equivalents are expressed in months (Y-axis) at different time points of the follow-up of patient 2
(diagnosis, before, during and after regression). The two patients described in this article had a similar psychiatric (ASD) and genetic
diagnosis (mutation/microdeletion of the SHANK3 gene inducing a premature stop codon in exon 21) as well as similar clinical, history and
evolution (regression with catatonia features after a stressful event in adolescence). In contrast, multiple psychotropic medications were
partially or not effective and accompanied by important side effects. Finally, lithium therapy permitted reversibility of regression and
catatonia, and the stabilization of behavioural disorders without significant side effects. Unlike most clinical descriptions of patients
presenting SHANK3 deletions and Phelan–McDermid syndrome, our patients present a somewhat different phenotype which might be linked to the
size and location of the molecular anomalies . There was no history of hypotonia and the motor level permitted the regular practice of
sports . The progressive loss of skills (verbal, motor and autonomy) associated with catatonia features, behavioural disorders and sleep
disturbances is suggestive of “catatonia-like deterioration” described in ASD patients after a stressful event . Nevertheless, we describe
for the first time two cases for which reversibility of those symptoms was found after lithium treatment. Lithium is a mood stabilizer drug
with a long history in psychiatry. It is mainly used in adult patients to treat manic episodes in bipolar disorder and for treatment-
resistant depression . Our finding of clinical efficacy of lithium is in line with the recent idea that SHANK3 patients with ASD may present
an atypical form of bipolar disorders . Importantly, lithium therapy was proposed after several therapeutic failures leading to severe side
effects. Indeed, studies suggest that SHANK3 ASD patients might be more vulnerable to psychotropic drugs than other ASD patients . In
addition, lithium has been identified having an action on synaptic modulation with a possible neuroprotective role in neurodegenerative
diseases . Lithium might be a rescue therapy for some patients presenting shankopathies by partially reversing impaired synaptic function
and neural circuit defects . Further clinical and biological studies are required to explore this hypothesis. The current report underlines
the importance of building bridges between genetics and clinical follow-up, not only for further understanding of genetic psychiatric
disorders but also for treatment decisions. While this report presents limitations (two cases and after only one year), it opens new avenues
to the study of shankopathies for which phenotype descriptions and treatment recommendations are still sparse. Patients’ legal guardians
have given their written consent for this case reports being published. Additional file 1: CARE Checklist (2013). Additional file 2:
Timeline. CARE Checklist (2013). Timeline. Autism diagnostic interview-revised Autism diagnostic observation schedule Autism spectrum
disorders Bush-Francis catatonia rating scale Body mass index Childhood autism rating scale Clinical global impression - severity Clinical
global impression - improvement Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms Electroencephalography Intellectual disability
Magnetic resonance imaging Phelan–McDermid syndrome Vineland adaptative behavioural scale Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions SS was the primary clinician involved in the assessment, management, and follow-up of
the patients. ED, ST and FA were involved in patients follow-up. All authors contributed to the literature review and manuscript
preparation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We are grateful to the patients and their families as well as all persons
implicated in the patients care, clinical assessments and investigations.
