Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability disorders are characterized by constant muscle fiber activity. Acquired neuromyotonia manifests
clinically in cramps, fasciculations, and stiffness. In Morvan’s syndrome the signs of peripheral nerve hyperexcitability are accompanied by
autonomic symptoms, sensory abnormalities, and brain disorders. A 70-year-old Caucasian man developed, in the course of 3 months,
polyneuropathy with unpleasant dysesthesia of lower extremities and gradually increasing fasciculations, muscle stiffness and fatigue.
Subsequently, he developed a prominent insomnia with increasing psychological changes and then he attempted a suicide. Electromyography
confirmed a sensory-motor polyneuropathy of a demyelinating type. The findings included fasciculations as well as myokymia, doublets and
multiplets, high frequency discharges, and afterdischarges, following motor nerve stimulation. No auto-antibodies were found either in his
blood or cerebrospinal fluid. Magnetic resonance imaging of his brain showed small, unspecific, probably postischemic changes. A diagnosis
of Morvan’s syndrome was confirmed; immunoglobulin (2g/kg body weight) was applied intravenously, and, subsequently, carbamazepine 2×200mg,
venlafaxine 150mg, and mirtazapine each night were prescribed. His sleep improved, suicidal tendencies stopped, less fasciculations
occurred, and muscle hypertonia also improved. Hyperexcitation also partially remitted including the electromyography finding. We described
here the case of a patient with Morvan’s syndrome; his case is rare because of severe psychical changes with a suicide attempt, short
admission to a psychiatric ward, prominent electromyographic changes, and because antibodies were not detected. After therapy with
immunoglobulins followed by corticosteroids with sodium channel blocker, his motor, autonomic, psychical signs and symptoms, and
electromyography changes substantially improved. Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability disorders are characterized by constant muscle fiber
activity due to hyperexcitability in the distal motor axons . Acquired neuromyotonia is characterized by continual ectopic nerve activity,
which manifests clinically in cramps, fasciculations, and stiffness. These symptoms are accompanied by autonomic symptoms, sensory
abnormalities, and, in the case of Morvan’s syndrome, by brain disorders. Apart from neuromyotonia, Morvan’s syndrome manifests central
symptoms (insomnia, hallucinations, anxiety, agitation, confusion), autonomic symptoms (hyperhidrosis, tachycardia, obstipation) . On
neurophysiological examination, neuromyotonia manifests prominent spontaneous activity: fibrillations, positive waves, fasciculations,
myokymia, multiple discharges, neuromyotonic discharges, doublets and multiplets. After voluntary contraction, and after electric
stimulation of motor fibers, multiple and long-lasting afterdischarges occur . There is no clear consensus as to the part of the peripheral
motor neuron in which this ectopic activity arises. Most authors locate the ectopic focus in distal terminal motor fibers. Both antidromic
propagation of excitation and axon reflex can participate in triggering this ectopic activity. In some conditions (inflammatory changes of
the central nervous system; CNS) ectopic activity sites appear in the area of the anterior horn of the spinal cord as well as in higher
levels of the CNS . This case report describes a 70-year-old Caucasian man with presented, and electrophysiologically confirmed,
neuromyotonia with significant autonomic and psychological changes (insomnia, anxiety, suicidal behavior), and subsequent successful
treatment. In April 2014, the 70-year-old man developed crural and leg pain, chills, tingling, hypersensitivity to mechanic stimuli, and
slight weakening of lower limbs with mild foot-drop. This disorder developed quickly and no trigger was identified. In June 2014, he
developed insomnia, anxiety, confusion, even auditory hallucinations, and he attempted suicide by slashing his left wrist. For a short
period of time, he was admitted to a psychiatric ward. He was referred to our neurological clinic electromyography (EMG) laboratory because
of muscle weakness with prominent fasciculations, myokymia, and suspected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. An EMG confirmed fibrillations,
positive waves, fasciculations, and multiple myokymic and neuromyotonic discharges, occasional high frequency fasciculations, doublets and
multiplets (Figure 1). Contraction curve was reduced with unstable motor unit potentials with neurogenic changes. A motor nerve conduction
study showed multiple afterdischarges with long-lasting repetitions, which prevented F-waves assessment (Figure 2). His grip strength was
weakened. He could briefly stand on tiptoes but only with difficulties; walking on heels was only barely attempted. He also presented
tactile, thermic and vibratory hypesthesia of his lower and upper limbs.Figure 1Neuromyotonic discharge in musculus gastrocnemius medialis;
right.Figure 2High voltage and long-lasting afterdischarges F-wave study in tibial nerve; left. Neuromyotonic discharge in musculus
gastrocnemius medialis; right. High voltage and long-lasting afterdischarges F-wave study in tibial nerve; left. His blood test showed high
levels of creatine kinase (CK) 12.26 (nkat/L; normal value 3.60), CK myocardial bound 0.52, but no other abnormalities. No antibodies
(contactin associated protein-like 2, CASPR2; leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 protein; contactin 2; anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase) were
found in his blood or in his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Oligoclonal protein synthesis was not confirmed. Cancer was not detected
(oncological markers were negative; the results of chest X-ray, ultrasonography of abdomen, endoscopic investigation of gastrointestinal
tract and urological examination were negative). His CSF showed borderline results: protein 0.40g/L and 1 mononuclear cell/1mm3. The
findings were evaluated as neuromyotonia associated with central cerebral symptoms consistent with Morvan’s syndrome. No antibodies
(including voltage-gated potassium channel, VGKC, and CASPR2) were found either in his blood or CSF. For a period of 5 days, immunoglobulin
was applied intravenously at a dosage of 0.4g/kg body weight. A rapid improvement in his muscle strength occurred, his fasciculations
decreased, and his pain sensation disorders were alleviated, including hyperalgesia. Subsequently, venlafaxine 150mg, carbamazepine 2×200mg,
and mirtazapine 30mg each night were prescribed. Both his sleep disorder and daytime fatigue were alleviated. A follow-up EMG showed an
increased A-sensory nerve action potential and shortened duration of afterdischarges. His blood CK level decreased to 2.31nkat/L. He was
discharged after 14 days. A follow-up examination confirmed stable state; he had no sleep disorder, hallucinations or depression. The
findings were assessed as Morvan’s syndrome of an autoimmune type with undetected specific antibodies. He has been treated with prednisolone
and carbamazepine for more than 8 months and is still without substantial cramps, profuse sweating and psychical problems. We expect from
the facts that his outcome will be good . We described here the case of a 70-year-old man with Morvan’s syndrome; his case is rare because
of his severe psychical changes (a suicide attempt and short admission to a psychiatric ward), prominent electromyographic changes, and
because antibodies were not detected. In patients with Morvan’s syndrome without antibodies their therapy should begin with intravenous
immunoglobulins (IVIGs) followed by corticosteroids and with sodium channel blocker. After this recommended therapy the motor, autonomic,
psychical signs and symptoms, and some of the neurophysiologic changes in our patient substantially improved. An acquired neuromyotonia is
frequently associated with autoimmune disorders, thymus cancer, lymphoma, or lung cancer. Morvan’s syndrome is characterized by
neuromyotonia, prominent autonomic symptoms (hyperhidrosis, obstipation, and tachycardia) and cerebral symptoms: insomnia, agitation,
anxiety, confusion, and hallucinations. Patients with Morvan’s syndrome display prominent leg pain, which sometimes becomes a burning
sensation, and myalgia . In Morvan’s syndrome, antibodies against VGKCs are confirmed. These antibodies cause a reduction in the number of
potassium channels, and thus prolong nerve action potential on the axon membrane . Antibodies against VGKC occur in hyperexcitability of the
peripheral nerve, as well as in limbic encephalopathy, epileptic seizures, and myoclonus; that is the reason why some authors use the term
“VGKC syndromes”. Antibodies are found in 30 to 50% of patients with neuromyotonia and in the majority of patients with Morvan’s syndrome .
We failed to detect any antibodies or tumor in our patient. Also other authors describe patients with Morvan’s syndrome of autoimmune origin
without detection of VGKC. Our diagnosis was based on clinical findings, medical history, and predominantly on neurophysiological findings.
Therapy of Morvan’s syndrome is focused on suppression of antibody production, influencing ion channels, and, subsequently, neuropathic pain
control. In patients with positive findings of VGKC antibodies it is recommended to commence the therapy with plasmapheresis with subsequent
oral immunosuppressive therapy applying corticoids or azathioprine . In patients without VGKC antibodies plasmapheresis is not efficient,
and it is recommended to start with a full dose of IVIG (2g/kg body weight), and then continue with a maintenance dose of corticoids .
Carbamazepine at a dose of 400 to 600mg per day leads to disappearance of fasciculations and neuropathic pain . Morvan’s syndrome is
characterized by motor symptoms (neuromyotonia), neuropathic pain, autonomic dysfunction and cerebral symptoms (including insomnia and
confusion). Clinical presentation and neurophysiological findings are essential for diagnosis determination, whereas VGKC antibodies are
detected only in 50% of cases. In Morvan’s syndrome without detected antibodies, it is efficient to apply IVIG with subsequent oral therapy
by corticosteroids and potassium channel blockers to reduce autonomic symptoms and neuropathic pain. An efficient therapy significantly
alleviates a patient’s complaints and clinical findings (fasciculation, pseudomyotonia), as well as improvement of typical changes detected
by neurophysiological examination (myokymia, discharges, afterdischarges). We described here a case of a 70-year-old man with severe
Morvan’s syndrome; his case is rare because of prominent psychical changes (short hospitalization in psychiatric ward, suicide attempt),
severe neurophysiological findings, and because he had no antibodies. After immunomodulation therapy his clinical and electrophysiological
findings partially improved. He was recommended to our EMG lab with suspicion of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis because of the prominent
fasciculations in his muscles and weight loss. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Contactin associated
protein-like 2 Creatine kinase Central nervous system Cerebrospinal fluid Electromyography Intravenous immunoglobulin Voltage-gated
potassium channel Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions EE made the clinical
and neurophysiological examination and wrote the paper. AM cared for the patient during his stay in hospital, then she made the regular out-
patient examination and participated in writing the paper. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Edvard
Ehler is a head of Department of Neurology and specializes in neuromuscular disorders. Alena Meleková is a resident in the Department of
Neurology and she begins to specialize in neurophysiology.
