Acinetobacter lwoffii is a rare cause of endophthalmitis. We report a case of acute postoperative endophthalmitis in a female, who was
treated successfully with pars plana vitrectomy and intravitreal antibiotics. Infective endophthalmitis is a devastating condition that can
result in permanent loss of vision. The clinical outcomes of the infective endophthalmitis often depend on the nature of the infective
strain. Acinetobacter lwoffii is a rare cause of endophthalmitis with only two previously published reports, which were posttraumatic in
etiology.12 We report the first case of postoperative endophthalmitis caused by this bacteria and describe the trends of drug sensitivity. A
57-year-old diabetic, nonhypertensive female presented to with complaints of severe pain and decreased vision in left eye, 5 days after
uneventful phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation. On examination, the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/40 in right eye
and light perception in the left eye. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the left eye showed lid edema, congested conjunctiva, microcystic corneal
edema with severe anterior chamber reaction and a 2 mm brown hypopyon [Figure 1]. There was no view of the fundus in her left eye.
Ultrasonography of the left eye revealed an attached retina with dense vitreous echoes. Anterior segment photograph of the left eye at
presentation reveals diffuse corneal edema and a thick brown hypopyon (arrow) She underwent a standard undiluted vitreous biopsy, pars plana
vitrectomy with removal of the intraocular lens, followed by administration of intravitreal antibiotics twice (vancomycin 1 mg, ceftazidime
2.25 mg and dexamethasone 0.1 mg). Acinetobacter lwoffii was isolated from more than one media. Identification was performed to the species
level by application of standard biochemical reactions. Antibiotic-disc diffusion test was performed according to CSLI guidelines. The
organism was sensitive to cefotaxime and ceftazidime, and was resistant to ciprofloxacin, amikacin, gentamicin and vancomycin. The patient
was prescribed intensive topical therapy. In addition, intravitreal injections of ceftazidime and dexamethasone were administered thrice
during follow-up. At last visit, 8 weeks postoperatively, the best-corrected visual acuity improved to 20/120. The anterior segment was
quiet with a clear vitreous cavity and an attached retina [Figure 2a and b]. (a) Postoperative anterior segment photograph reveals a clear
cornea and a good red glow. (b) Postoperative fundus photograph of the left eye reveals clear media with a healthy disc and an attached
retina Acinetobacter is a nonmotile Gram-negative coccobacilli classified under the family Moraxcellaceae. These organisms have variable
virulence but can be multidrug resistant. Being ubiquitous in nature, this bacterium is part of the normal flora of the oropharynx, human
skin, and the perineum in approximately 20–25% of healthy individuals.3 In patients with an impaired or compromised immune system, the
bacteria turn into an opportunistic pathogen that can cause nosocomial infection. Cohen et al.4 reported growth of A. lwoffii in intraocular
fluid culture after routine pars plana vitrectomy. In our patient, A. lwoffii was isolated from more than one media [Figure 3] and to the
best of our knowledge, this is the first report of postoperative acute endophthalmitis induced by A. lwoffIi in the English peer review
literature. Although A. lwoffii are an important cause of nosocomial infections, our case was exogenous in origin. The present case had an
early presentation indicating the virulence of the organism. One striking feature was the presence of a brown colored hypopyon. Hypopyon
that are brown in color has been reported in the setting of necrotic intraocular melanoma as well as endophthalmitis due to Listeria
monocytogenes, Serratia marcescens and Streptococcus bovis.5 It may be an important distinguishing sign for A. lwoffii induced
endophthalmitis as well. However, further studies are required prior to establishing A. lwoffii as the cause for brown hypopyon.
Antimicrobial resistance of Acinetobacter species is a serious concern. The resistance pattern of the A. lwoffii isolate could be similar to
other Acinetobacter species, which produce an AmpC beta-lactamase that inactivates aminopenicillins and narrow-spectrum cephalosporins, but
remain susceptible to ceftazidime, cefepime, imipenem, aminoglycosides, cotrimoxazole and systemic fluoroquinolones such as levofloxacin and
ciprofloxacin. Though Gopal et al.6 had reported a high level of sensitivity to ciprofloxacin by the Acinetobacter species; our isolate was
resistant to ciprofloxacin. Our patient had a favorable outcome at final visit similar to previous reports on A. lwoffii endophthalmitis.
MacConkey agar shows growth of round colonies (1–2 mm in diameter) with irregular margins which are pale (nonlactose fermenting) consistent
with Acinetobacter To conclude this study adds to the body of literature on endophthalmitis caused A. lwoffii and provides the drug
sensitivity patterns. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
