Article first published online 4 May 2015. Dr. Peter N. Le: Clinical Fellow, III, 2013 to 2014, Yale University School of Medicine, Section
of Digestive Diseases. The patient is a 58-year-old woman with a 33-year history of Crohn's disease and 2 prior cancers who presents to Yale
University for management of her inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). She was diagnosed with Crohn's disease in 1980 after undergoing a small
bowel follow-through. Her family history of IBD was negative. Her medical and surgical histories are remarkable for stage I infiltrating
lobular breast carcinoma diagnosed in 2004 for which she underwent bilateral mastectomy and breast reconstruction. Her tumor was estrogen
and progesterone receptor–positive, and she received adjuvant hormonal therapy. For her Crohn's ileocolitis, she has been treated
intermittently with short courses of systemic steroids, antibiotics, and mesalamine. In 2006, she underwent a colonoscopy that demonstrated
a proximal colonic stricture that was described as being “pinhole opening” with ulcerations. Random biopsies taken at the stricture site and
throughout the colon were negative for dysplasia but revealed chronic active colitis with noncaseating granulomas. In 2007, imaging
suggested a subclinical small bowel obstruction. The patient was referred to a surgeon but decided against stricturoplasty or resection.
Between 2008 and 2009, she developed refractory anemia and was referred to the Hematology/Oncology service where she underwent a
comprehensive workup that was unremarkable for a hematologic malignancy. Repeat esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy in 2009 again
demonstrated a smooth-walled stricture at the proximal colon similar in appearance to the pinhole narrowing noted in 2006. Her upper
gastrointestinal (GI) tract was negative for Crohn's disease, dysplasia, or an active bleed. Between 2009 and 2010, the patient describes
having more frequent and severe postprandial epigastric pain, nausea, bloating, and nonbloody loose bowel movements. A small bowel series
demonstrated that she had 2 jejunal strictures and a 16 to 20 cm long stricture of the ileum. The patient was referred to colorectal surgery
and, in June of 2010, she underwent resection of 2 jejunal strictures and an ileocecectomy. At surgery, a large mass was seen at the
proximal jejunum that had bulky adenopathy that reached to the base of the mesentery. The tumor was lobulated and circumferential with
serosal umbilication causing stricture at the proximal jejunum. The surgeon noted enlarged lymph nodes extending to the aorta and to the
perisuperior mesenteric artery chain; some of these lymph nodes could not be resected. Pathology of the mass indicated that it was invasive
adenocarcinoma measuring 7.0 × 5.5 × 1.3 cm. Initially, the tumor was staged as IIIB but was upstaged to stage IV after a chest computed
tomography (CT) was positive for thoracic lymph nodes. The patient was referred to the Yale University Oncology Service where it was
recommended that she be treated with 12 cycles of FOLFOX (Folinic Acid Fluorouracil Oxaliplatin). After treatment, her serum tumor markers
normalized. From April 2011 until today, serial positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scans have not demonstrated any signs of cancer
recurrence. Now, she presents to the Yale University Digestive Disease service. She has never been treated with immunomodulators or
biologics. She complains of progressively worse postprandial epigastric discomfort, bloating, weight loss, and intermittent nausea but
denies any vomiting. Her most recent CT scan in September of 2013 demonstrates a new distal ileum stricture with neoterminal ileum
thickening and adjacent fat stranding (Fig. 1). A colonoscopy shows active Crohn's disease with stenosis in the distal ileum (Fig. 2). A
representative photograph of a recent contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis. The distal small bowel demonstrates a significant
amount of stricturing and some intestinal thickening. Photograph of distal ileum with narrow lumen from colonoscopy performed in October of
2013. Pathology taken from this area was negative for malignancy or dysplasia but was positive for chronic active inflammation. In summary,
this is a 58-year-old woman with a history of breast cancer in 2004, status after bilateral mastectomy and adjuvant antiestrogen therapy,
with long-standing enterocolonic Crohn's disease complicated by small bowel strictures. In 2010, she underwent stricture resection with the
discovery of stage IV jejunal adenocarcinoma that is currently in remission after treatment with adjuvant chemotherapy. She currently has
evidence of an ileal stricture and active inflammation. This case is quite challenging. Her breast cancer was an early stage tumor that was
treated and currently is in remission. We should assume that the jejunal adenocarcinoma was a primary adenocarcinoma of the small bowel
secondary to Crohn's disease rather than breast cancer metastasis. She's never received immunosuppressive therapy, and she now has a Crohn's
recurrence and stenosis at the ileocolonic anastomosis. Her symptoms are consistent with a partial small bowel obstruction. The important
questions are (1) can we treat, and potentially reverse, this process with medication or is surgery required? and (2) if we choose
medication, is anyone concerned about using immunosuppressive treatment given her cancer history? I'd like to ask our surgeon for his
opinion. Dr. Wolfgang Schraut, looking at the CT scan, what do you think? Is this patient destined to have another surgery or could we try
medication first? Given this woman's history and what I can see on that recent CT scan, I certainly don't think that we should wait another
9 years to do an operation. I would proceed with resection. However, I would not discount the possibility that she has metastatic disease at
the current time, perhaps even in a different area than her original adenocarcinoma. Given her high risk of recurrence, she will not respond
to anything else but a resection, realizing that she will have another segment of intestine removed. Ah, spoken like a true surgeon, Dr.
Schraut is recommending that the patient has a surgical resection and not even consider medication. Let's turn to our gastroenterology
colleagues. How safe are IBD meds, specifically anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha agents (anti-TNFs) and immunosuppressants, in a patient
with a history of cancer? Corey, you've done considerable research in the area of malignancy risk with IBD medications. What are your
thoughts on treatment in this specific case as well as treatment of IBD in the setting of an active or prior cancer? This case represents an
unfortunate situation that we often experience. Sometimes our patients get cancer and, when they have completed treatment, we have to
determine how we should best manage their IBD. Let me give a quick summary on my thoughts about using our immunosuppressant drugs in the
setting of a history of cancer or a recurrence of cancer, which might be true for this case. Then, I'll make a comment on what I would do in
her case specifically. To date, there is no compelling evidence that anti-TNF monotherapy plays a role in solid tumor development. Our group
evaluated this relationship in a study that was recently published in the journal Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. We looked across all disease
states and all indications for anti-TNFs and immune modulators, and we did not find any indication that anti-TNF monotherapy is associated
with the development or the occurrence or recurrence of solid tumors. There was a similar type of study conducted by the CESAME national
French cohort, which looked at recurrent types of cancer that patients with IBD developed after being treated for an initial cancer. The
interesting thing in the CESAME study was that some patients did get cancers after treatment for their bowel disease, but they often got a
different type of cancer from their original tumor, which is similar to the woman whom we are discussing today who may be predisposed to
cancer. In this recent CESAME study, the risk of getting new or recurrent cancer was not found to be linked to treatment with
immunosuppressants. I don't know if anything we do for this patient is either going to prevent her cancer or stimulate it further. I'm not
at all convinced that she's cured of this cancer. However, we need to deal with her GI disease because, just as it may be inevitable that
her cancer is going to come back, it's also inevitable that her Crohn's will be a problem for her. Although I agree that her distal ileal
stricture will not be “fixed” by medication therapy, the patient has had diffuse aggressive small bowel Crohn's disease and she will need
treatment. Assuming that she survives long enough from her cancer, which we certainly hope that she does, she is going to experience a huge
quality of life problem if she undergoes 1 or more surgery to resect her small bowel. The ambiguity here is that we don't know what is going
to happen with her cancer. But whether her long-term survival is less than 5 years or much longer, we have to do something to treat her
Crohn's or things are only going to get worse in regards to her bowel disease. In a recent study, Osterman et al evaluated cancer risk
across all adalimumab Crohn's disease trials. They looked at the rates of cancer development across all of the studies in patients with
Crohn's disease treated with single agent adalimumab, and they compared them with cancer rates in patients with Crohn's disease treated with
a combination of adalimumab and an immunomodulator. For the first time, an increased risk of solid tumors was noted among patients on
combination therapy. However, their analysis was based on solid tumors as an aggregate, meaning that they did not examine the risk of
adenocarcinoma of the thyroid, breast, or colon separately. Their results showed that adalimumab monotherapy did not increase the risk of
solid tumors but there was a concerning signal that patients who received treatment with combination therapy did have a higher rate of
developing a solid tumor compared with patients who were treated only with adalimumab. Based on all of this, for this patient, I would use
anti-TNF monotherapy. Anti-TNF monotherapy will help her to maintain a good quality of life while she deals with these other issues going
forward. Now I'd like to see if one of our colorectal surgeons, Stefan Holubar, wants to share any additional comments that he may have on
this topic. First off, I feel that it's imperative to know about the status of her adenocarcinoma. When exactly was the most recent PET/CT
done and which tumor markers were followed? Given the overall poor prognosis of small bowel adenocarcinoma, I'd want to know whether she is
truly in a remission. Clearly, she needs an operation for her symptomatic stricture, perhaps in the setting of a diagnostic laparoscopy to
assess for cancer recurrence. However, there are almost always alternatives worth considering, and it's our ethical obligation to examine
alternatives to surgery. The literature on small bowel stenting is limited, but a colleague from residency, Dr. Rebecca Levine, reported a
small case series at the Ferguson Clinic of Crohn's patients with strictures who were managed with endoluminal stenting with self-expanding
metal stents and had a good long-term success rate. Subsequent case series have suggested similar results. This patient had advanced small
bowel adenocarcinoma with metastases to the para-aortic lymph nodes, so she most likely will not have great long-term survival. Perhaps
palliating any symptoms, she may have with a self-extending metal stent or any other biodegradable stent might be an alternative treatment.
The main risk of the stent is perforation that, if the patient were on a palliative pathway, would be a life-shortening event. However, I
would only consider this option if her current circumstances dictate that her priority is palliative care. The longest stent is 15 cm long.
I'm concerned that it would not be long enough. I certainly think that they could put in multiple stents and bridge this 15 cm stricture.
Additionally, there are new stents coming on line from Korea that may offer improvements over our current options. I'm not suggesting that
this is the ultimate therapy for her but I do believe that it's an alternative that should be considered by her team if she is already
metastatic. Otherwise, I agree that surgical exploration is the next step. The other major alternative to consider is a stricturoplasty but,
given her prior cancers, I would be reticent to leave the 15 cm long segment in situ indefinitely over concern for a metachronous small
bower cancer. Dr. Ray Cross, how would you or another colleague at Maryland manage this case? I agree with what Corey said but there are
some additional things that I would consider. Some of the symptoms of postsurgical patients may be from small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth or choleretic diarrhea. I'm sure that her pain and obstructive symptoms are not due to those entities but there may be other
mechanisms at play contributing to her GI symptoms. Given her overall poor prognosis, if she responds to budesonide, I would consider
continuing the budesonide to keep her well; I might even give it at higher doses. Although it was called a long stricture on imaging,
endoscopically, it looked like the ileocolonic stricture was fairly short. We talked about dilation and stents but perhaps we could do
periodic stricture dilations; you can dilate more than 1 stricture at a time, especially if they're segmental. I realize that this method
would not offer a durable solution, but performing repeated endoscopies to dilate these strictures is a reasonable way to help alleviate
some of her symptoms. I agree with Corey that although there is no association between anti-TNF monotherapy and solid tumors, you would
prefer to try to get this patient out farther from her malignancy before starting anti-TNF therapy. Having said that, I think she's going to
need to escalate therapy in the near future. I would have no problem using an anti-TNF agent. However, if you have reservations about anti-
TNFs, you might consider using methotrexate because it is less immunosuppressive and is one of the safest drugs that we have. She's not
childbearing age so methotrexate would be a reasonable start. Peter and Yanni, please correct me if I'm wrong. To Ray's point about dilating
this stricture, you probably saw the tip of the stricture, meaning that you got to the area of the anastomosis. Were you able to traverse
it? We were not able to traverse it. In addition, on the CT scan, there was a long segment of thickening and inflammation above the area of
the stricture. Overall, it seems to me that there is a short segment of stricture and proximal to that is a long segment of neoterminal
ileal inflammation. From a medical and surgical standpoint, I'd like to ask our clinicians at Hershey Medical Center what they might do for
this patient. A lot of good points have been raised. When we see these patients, we like to know what type of cancer the patient has, its
stage, and if it has been adequately controlled. These types of small bowel cancers in the setting of long-standing Crohn's disease, as was
mentioned, have a very poor prognosis—stage for stage, they're considerably worse than colon cancer. It's great that she's 2 years out but
there's a high chance that the cancer is going to come back and that ultimately she will succumb to it. Therefore, I'd like to buy her more
time. She may end up needing surgery but I think budesonide is reasonable. I also like the idea of using methotrexate. Although the data is
somewhat reassuring that there is not a clear risk, I'm hesitant to introduce an anti-TNF in the setting of what might still be an active
cancer. I would like to give her the best chance of avoiding a recurrence, and I'm not completely comfortable with having her initiate a
biologic anti-TNF. The only other thought that I have is that we could consider using vedolizumab. Although we do not have long-term data
about vedolizumab, this agent might be reasonable. Given its specific mechanism of action, I would not expect it to be associated with
increased cancer risk. I agree with Dr. Schraut but I have a question. Has a PET/CT scan been performed recently to stage possible
recurrence of her small bowel adenocarcinoma? A PET/CT scan has been done, and there has been no sign of recurrence. Her most recent scan
was in the September of the last year, approximately 4 months ago. Thank you. I still agree with Dr. Schraut that the most effective
treatment for this patient would be surgical resection. This patient has had a 3 decade experience with Crohn's disease and a mid small
bowel lesion, which was left behind for quite some time. We don't normally think that the most likely diagnosis of small bowel Crohn's
disease with obstructive symptoms as being a small bowel adenocarcinoma. However, this is the exact scenario in which it presents, which is
in the rare person with small bowel disease that does not get resected fairly early in his or her disease course. There are some relevant
articles in the literature including a recently published French study that characterized small bowel adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease and
found it to occur in a clinical setting just like what we're discussing for today's patient. So, historically, patients go to the operating
room due to obstructive complications for Crohn's, which probably provides them an additional long-term benefit of removing areas of damage
that would be at risk for developing dysplasia and cancer. When we talk to patients about surgery, we should tell them that removing a
damaged segment that may have been inflamed for 2 or 3 decades may help to prevent a more serious complication from developing. Doing a
primary stricturoplasty is probably not the right answer for patients with long-standing areas of damage. In terms of what this patient is
experiencing, I'm highly suspicious that carcinomatosis is contributing to her symptoms. There clearly is inflammation on the imaging but I
am more concerned that what she is suffering from is actually metastatic complications of her previous stage IV adenocarcinoma in the small
bowel. Peter and Yanni, you have just heard completely different viewpoints and opinions about this case. Although I don't know if there is
necessarily a single correct answer for how to manage your patient, I'll take the chair prerogative and end with my thoughts. Looking at the
CT scan, I agree with both surgeons that I'm not sure if that area will recover. I'm of similar opinion with the other points that were made
about possible residual cancer even in the face of negative PET/CTs. The way that I look at it is that if her obstructive symptoms are
significant, I would talk to her about surgery. Undergoing surgery could also simultaneously confirm that she does not have carcinomatosis,
which would impact all of her future treatment decisions. If her obstructive symptoms were mild or minimal, I would probably bite the bullet
and give her 6 months of fairly aggressive treatment with a very frank discussion about the fact that she may have an adenocarcinoma right
now. To that end, I would probably give an anti-TNF with methotrexate. I know that some of the previous studies have examined thiopurines
but I would probably use methotrexate at a lower dose in combination with an anti-TNF agent. I would give her 6 months on this regimen,
restage her, and at that point decide which direction to take. The downside to that is that if you're missing an adenocarcinoma, could it
potentially worsen? Yes. At the same time, I think that her Crohn's, like Corey said, is going to be aggressive for the remainder of her
life. So, I think it depends on the degree of obstruction whether you go to surgery first or whether you go to combination therapy first. If
you go to surgery first, I would use aggressive treatment postoperatively if she does not have a cancer. To my point, I would use an anti-
TNF, and if you were worried about immunogenicity, I'd give her methotrexate. Constituting fewer than 2 percent of all the malignant tumors
of the GI tract, small intestinal adenocarcinoma (SBA) is a very rare form of neoplasia.1 According to the American Joint Committee on
Cancer Manual of 2010 (Seventh Edition), the 5-year survival rate of SBA is 5%.2 Although the cancer most frequently encountered in patients
with IBD is colon cancer, recent work has noted standardized incidence or mortality ratios of SBA in patients with Crohn's disease to be as
much as 40- to 46-fold higher than expected.3,4 Case reports and small series of Crohn's patients have noted that SBA can develop within a
stricture or stricturoplasty site, especially when the patient has long-standing disease and has been treated with medical therapy rather
than surgery.5–8 Additional factors that have been associated with SBA among patients with Crohn's disease include prolonged treatment with
salicylates, longer duration of disease, fistulas, surgically excluded loops of small bowel (after jejunal or ileal bypass), and the use of
immunosuppressive medications.3,9–16 A study published almost 40 years ago in Archives of Surgery compared SBA in Crohn's disease with SBA
not associated with Crohn's disease and noted that those associated with Crohn's (1) occurred more frequently, (2) were discovered at a
younger mean age (46 versus 64 yr), (3) were more likely to occur in the ileum, and (4) were less successfully diagnosed and cured.17
Symptoms of SBA include anemia, nausea, cramping abdominal pain, weight loss, and blood in the stool. Because many of these presenting
features mimic a flare of active or obstructing Crohn's disease, a delay in diagnosis and treatment may occur, which may partly explain
their later stage at diagnosis compared with other individuals who develop this malignancy.9,18,19 Patient risks and benefits must be
evaluated when choosing treatment for IBD. It is well known that the use of immunosuppressants after organ transplant is associated with
elevated rates of malignancy.20 In addition to their direct oncogenic effects, immunosuppressant medications decrease immunosurveillance of
both oncogenic viruses and emerging cancers.20,21 Anti-TNFs and immunomodulators have been associated with some forms of skin cancer and
lymphoma, especially when both agents are used synchronously.21–23 Three recent European studies also observed that thiopurine use in IBD
might be associated with an increased overall risk of malignancy.24–26 In addition to experiencing a cancer recurrence, individuals with a
history of cancer have a slightly elevated risk of developing a second cancer.27 Although the overall cancer risk associated with
immunosuppressant medications is very low, an individual who has been diagnosed and treated for cancer has often been through a traumatic
life-altering experience. Fears of developing a recurrence or a second cancer may interfere with selecting the most disease-effective
treatment whether it's surgery or a highly therapeutic IBD medication. Combination therapy with an anti-TNF agent and an immunomodulator has
been shown to be superior to treatment with either agent alone in achieving corticosteroid-free clinical remission; additionally, induction
therapy with an anti-TNF is more effective when a thiopurine is added to the regimen.21,28,29 Among the 17,047 patients of the French
Cancers Et Surrisque Associé aux Maladies Inflammatoires Intestinales En France (CESAME) prospective observational cohort study, 405
individuals were diagnosed with cancer before study inception and 23 cases of incident cancer occurred during the 2.25- to 3.5-year study
duration. One Crohn's patient who was diagnosed with small bowel cancer older than 21 years before study entry developed another small bowel
cancer during the short study. This patient was not receiving immunosuppressants before or during the study. In sum, neither new nor
recurrent cancers were associated with the use of immunosuppressants in this large-scale study.30 In reference to the patient who was just
presented, a previous experience with breast cancer and a possible gynecologic malignancy may have caused her to be overly cautious when
selecting medication and made her reluctant to undergo surgery. Early in her disease course, strictures were noted in her small bowel but
they were not surgically removed. Recent work has shown that strictures that appear to be more active on imaging demonstrate prominent signs
of inflammation on histology that contributes to their potential for dysplastic transformation.31 Management options for this patient are
not mutually exclusive. Surgery to remove the strictured and inflamed segment of distal small bowel would be the most aggressive option and
would simultaneously evaluate recurrent cancer. However, more surgery is not without risk, and this patient could develop short gut
syndrome. In patients with active IBD and a history of solid tumors, such as adenocarcinoma, consultation with the oncologist is advised.
Generally, patients who have been cancer-free for at least 1 year may be considered for biologic and/or immunomodulator treatment.32 There
is a paucity of data in this area, and each case is individualized, but the risk of cancer recurrence is probably low. Most
gastroenterologists do not stent Crohn's disease strictures. However, dilation using biodegradable or self-expanding metal stents has been
shown to be effective for controlling obstructive symptoms in patients with CD with strictures of the colon and the ileocolonic anastomosis.
Stent migration and complications requiring surgery can occur.33–35 A recent single institution review of all patients with Crohn's disease
undergoing endoluminal stenting for anastomotic strictures between 2001 and 2010 achieved 100% technical and 80% clinical success with a
mean long-term luminal patency of 34.8 months and only 1 complication requiring surgery.36 In conclusion, IBD medications may be given to
patients with prior cancer. This decision should be made as part of a multidisciplinary discussion between the patient, gastroenterologist,
surgeon, and oncologist. J. B. Greer currently holds a grant with Abbvie. I. Oikonomou has past research grants with Janssen Pharmaceutica,
Pfizer, and Celgene. C. A. Siegel currently consults for Janssen Pharmaceutica, Abbvie, and UCB, and has ongoing research grants with
Janssen Pharmaceutica, Abbvie, and UCB. R. K. Cross consults, participates in advisory boards, and has research grant support with Abbvie
and Janssen Pharmaceutica; Dr. Cross also participates in Takeda's advisory board. A. Tinsley has previously consulted for Janssen
Pharmaceutica and is involved in ongoing consulting and lecturing for Abbvie. D. G. Binion has an ongoing grant with Janssen Pharmaceutica
and has previously consulted for Abbvie, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Cubist Pharmaceuticals, Salix Pharmaceuticals, and Takeda. M. D. Regueiro
has previously consulted for UCB, Takeda, Shire Plc, Abbvie, and Janssen Pharmaceutica.
