Solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancer is rare. There are few reports of such cases with neuroendocrine differentiation. A 50-year-
old man presented to our hospital with a chief complaint of dysuria. Histological examination revealed prostate cancer, which was classified
as cT4 N0 M0, stage IV adenocarcinoma. Since the patient was at high risk, endocrine and radiation therapies were started. One year after
starting radiation therapy, the patient developed bloody sputum. Chest radiography revealed a nodular shadow in his left lung (S5). Although
18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed abnormal accumulation in the lesion, the cytological diagnosis was class
IIIa, which did not yield a definitive diagnosis. Given that prostate specific antigen (PSA) was not elevated, a primary lung tumor was
suspected, and thoracoscopic segmental resection of the lung was performed with lymph node dissection. The final pathological diagnosis was
solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancer with neuroendocrine differentiation and mediastinal lymph node metastasis. The specimen showed
a mixed pattern of conventional prostatic and neuroendocrine carcinomas. We herein report a case with neuroendocrine differentiation (NED),
along with a review of the relevant literature, including histopathological findings. According to previous case reports, some patients with
solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancer achieved relatively good long-term survival. We consider establishing the correct diagnosis
and implementing an appropriate treatment plan to be essential in prostate cancer patients with oligometastases that have the potential to
be neuroendocrine (NE) tumors. Solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancer is rare. To date, only 22 cases have been reported (including
our present patient). There are few reports of such cases with neuroendocrine differentiation (NED). NED in prostate carcinoma occurs in the
form of a small cell carcinoma, carcinoid or carcinoid-like tumor, and as focal NED in conventional prostatic adenocarcinoma .
Neuroendocrine (NE) cells exist in the normal prostate and are considered to be involved in the differentiation and proliferation of
prostatic cells through various growth factors, without mediation by androgen receptors (AR) . In addition, NE tumors can be classified
according to the conditions at the time of detection into three types as follows: pure NE prostate carcinoma at the time of initial
examination, mixed pattern of conventional and NE prostatic carcinomas at the time of initial examination, and NE carcinoma (NEC) developing
during endocrine therapy . We herein report a case with NED, along with a review of the literature describing similar cases, including
histopathological findings. A 50-year-old man presented with a chief complaint of dysuria. At the Outpatient Ward of our hospital, he was
clinically suspected of having prostatic cancer based on the results of various clinical examinations including a high prostate-specific
antigen (PSA, 61.77 ng/ml) value. A prostatic needle biopsy was thus performed. Histopathologically, the biopsy specimens showed
adenocarcinoma forming medium to small glandular and cord-like structures. The patient was thus diagnosed as having a poorly differentiated
conventional prostate adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 4 + 5 = 9 (Figure 1A, B). According to the imaging and biopsy findings, the
tumor was classified as cT4 N0 M0, stage IV.Figure 1Histopathology of the prostatic needle biopsy at the time of initial examination.
Conventional prostate adenocarcinoma with tubular and cord-like structures, corresponding to Gleason score 4 + 5 = 9, is seen in the
specimen (A, ×100; B, ×200). Histopathology of the prostatic needle biopsy at the time of initial examination. Conventional prostate
adenocarcinoma with tubular and cord-like structures, corresponding to Gleason score 4 + 5 = 9, is seen in the specimen (A, ×100; B, ×200).
Cystoscopic examination revealed an erythematous velvety appearance of the bladder mucosa, indicating that the tumor was attributable to
direct infiltration of prostate carcinoma, consistent with the classification cT4 N0 M0, stage IV. The patient was considered to be at a
high risk for the spread of prostatic cancer, and endocrine therapy was started using goserelin acetate and bicalutamide. One month after
starting this endocrine therapy, the patient underwent local radiation treatment at a dose of 66 Gy. After these endocrine and radiation
therapies, his PSA levels gradually decreased but remained above the upper limit of the reference range. One year after starting radiation
therapy, the patient developed bloody sputum. A computed tomographic scan showed 3-cm nodes, with spicula, notch, and pleural indentation,
in the lingual segment of the left lung (Figure 2A, B). We then applied 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography which revealed
selective accumulation in the nodes, strongly suggesting a malignant tumor. Given that the PSA level was not markedly elevated, the patient
was suspected to have a primary lung tumor and underwent thoracoscopic segmental resection of this portion of the lung with lymph node
dissection. Histopathological examination of the resected lung revealed a neoplastic lesion. The tumor was highly cellular and composed of
eosinophilic tumor cells with swollen ovale nuclei and prominent nucleoli. The tumor cells exhibited a sheet-like pattern, and a partly
glandular pattern, of growth (Figure 3A, B). Furthermore, the tumor cells proliferated along the alveolar septae, replacing the alveolar
lining epithelial cells. There was no evidence of pleural infiltration of the tumor cells. Immunohistochemical analysis results were
positive for not only PSA (Figure 4A) but also chromogranin, synaptophysin (Figure 4C), and CD56/CD57 (Figure 4D), suggesting NED. None of
the tumor cells was immunopositive for surfactant apoprotein (Figure 4B) or CK20/CK7. Therefore, although this tumor with NED proliferated
along the alveolar septae and showed a relatively infrequent glandular pattern of growth, we considered the lung tumor to be a solitary
pulmonary metastasis from prostate adenocarcinoma.Figure 2Plain computed tomographic image (lung window) showing the nodes with spicula
(arrowhead), notch (arrow), and pleural indentation in the lingual segment of the left lung. There is no evidence of calcification. (A) Lung
window and (B) mediastinal window.Figure 3Histopathology of the lung tumor. Pathological tissues stained with hematoxylin-eosin. The lung
tumor (T) is well-demarcated from the non-neoplastic lung tissue (NT) (A, ×20). The tumor is composed of eosinophilic tumor cells with
swollen ovale nuclei and prominent nucleoli showing a sheet-like pattern of growth (B, ×200).Figure 4Immunohistochemistry of the lung tumor.
The lung tumor was positive for PSA (A), synaptophysin (C), and CD56 (D), but negative for surfactant apoprotein (B). All images are ×200.
Plain computed tomographic image (lung window) showing the nodes with spicula (arrowhead), notch (arrow), and pleural indentation in the
lingual segment of the left lung. There is no evidence of calcification. (A) Lung window and (B) mediastinal window. Histopathology of the
lung tumor. Pathological tissues stained with hematoxylin-eosin. The lung tumor (T) is well-demarcated from the non-neoplastic lung tissue
(NT) (A, ×20). The tumor is composed of eosinophilic tumor cells with swollen ovale nuclei and prominent nucleoli showing a sheet-like
pattern of growth (B, ×200). Immunohistochemistry of the lung tumor. The lung tumor was positive for PSA (A), synaptophysin (C), and CD56
(D), but negative for surfactant apoprotein (B). All images are ×200. The patient subsequently received chemotherapy. In this case,
relatively high doses of paclitaxel (120 mg/m2) and carboplatin (dosed to a target area under the concentration-time curve of 6.0) were
administered every 4 weeks for 2 cycles. After adjuvant chemotherapy, the patient was treated with irradiation of the entire mediastinal
field at a dose of 60 Gy with a boost field of 10Gy. Thereafter, the patient developed systemic metastases and received both chemotherapy
and radiation therapy for multiple lesions. He survived for approximately 30 months before dying of systemic metastases. The incidence of
lung metastasis from prostate cancer reported ranges from 5% to 27% . Fabozzi et al. reported the incidence of solitary lung metastasis from
prostate cancer to be only 0.86% . Our search of PubMed identified 46 articles with prostate cancer and solitary pulmonary metastasis. In
total, seven publications on cases similar to ours were identified, and all full texts were retrieved. In total, 12 articles describing 22
cases were identified, but we looked for 5 articles from references of past reports (Figure 5). To date, only 23 cases (including our
present patient) with solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancers have been reported (Table 1) . The present patient is the first, to our
knowledge, with solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancer with NED.Figure 5Flow chart of search strategy. Twelve articles were
identified.Table 1 Clinical data of patients with solitary lung metastasis of prostatic cancer Author Year Age (years) Initial
characteristic Initial treatment Adjuvant/salvage treatment Lung meta. characteristics Solitary lung meta. treatment Pathology Outcome
Present case50PSA 61.7, cT4, GS4 + 5Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy radiation therapyNoneLeft S5, 3 cmLobectomy and mediastinal LNDPSAP (+),
chromogranin (+), synaptophysin (+), CD56/CD57 (+), surfactant apoprotein (−), CK20/CK7 (−), mediastinal LN metaDied 2.5 years after
metastases detectedPepe et al. 201275PSA 8.3, pT3a, GS4 + 3, mixed acinar and ductal prostate caRadical prostatectomyNoneLeft S6, 2
cmMetastatectomyPSAP (+), TTF-1 (−)UndetectableSakai et al. 201074UnknownNeoadjuvant endocrine therapy radiation therapyNeoadjuvant
endocrine therapyLeft S8, 2.2 cmWedge resectionPSAP (+), P504 (+), pleural disseminationUndetectableGoto et al. 201073PSA 14.37, GS4 + 5,
pT4, P/D adenoca with sarcomatoid carcinoma componentNneoadjuvant endocrine therapy. pelvic eviscerationNoneLeft S3, 2 cmWedge resectionPSAP
(−), cytokeratin A/E1/3 (+), cytokeratin7 (−), cytokeratin20 (−), vimentin (−), undifferentiated carcinomaUndetectableBoyer et al. 200965PSA
3, GS3 + 3, pT2Radical prostatectomyNoneLeft upper lobe, 2.8 cmSurgical resectionUnknownUndetectableKhandani et al. 200978Prostate cancer
onlyRadiation therapyNoneLeft S10, 5 cmLobectomy and mediastinal LNDPSAP (−)UndetectablePruthi et al. 200772PSA 4.1, GS3 + 3, pT2bradical
prostatectomysalvage radiation therapyleft S8, 2 cmendocrine therapy and surgical resectionPSAP (+), GS 8, subcarinal LN meta3-year disease
free follow upChao et al. 200468PSA 6.7, GS4 + 5, pT2aRadical prostatectomyNoneLeft lower lobe, 1.2 cmWedge resectionPSAP (+), W-M/D
adenoca12-year disease free follow upHofland et al. 200049GS 4 + 5, pT3c, P/D adenocaRadical prostatectomySalvage radiation therapy,
endocrine therapy and orchiectomyLeft lower lobe onlyLobectomyPSAP (+), P/D adenocaMetastases, undetectableSmith et al. 199970GS4 + 5,
pT2Radical prostatectomyNoneRight S7, 2 cmSurgical resectionPSAP (+), P/D adenocaUndetectableRockey et al. 199083Low grade prostate cancer
onlyRadiation therapyNoneLeft lower lobe onlyOrchiectomyPSAP (+), meta. OnlyUndetectableFabozzi et al. 199511 cases: details
unknownVarkarakis et al. 1974One case, details unknown‘+’, Positive; PSA: prostate-specific antigen; NEC: neuroendocrine carcinoma; NET:
neuroendocrine tumor; NENs: neuroendocrine neoplasms; GS: Gleason score; PSAP: prostate-specific antigen phosphatase; CD56/57: Neural cell
adhesion molecule/Leu 7; adenoca: adenocarcinoma; LND: lymph node dissection. Flow chart of search strategy. Twelve articles were
identified. Clinical data of patients with solitary lung metastasis of prostatic cancer ‘+’, Positive; PSA: prostate-specific antigen; NEC:
neuroendocrine carcinoma; NET: neuroendocrine tumor; NENs: neuroendocrine neoplasms; GS: Gleason score; PSAP: prostate-specific antigen
phosphatase; CD56/57: Neural cell adhesion molecule/Leu 7; adenoca: adenocarcinoma; LND: lymph node dissection. In the early years of the
study of this tumor type, endocrine tumors were designated differently depending on the site of origin. In 1907, Oberndorfer proposed the
name ‘carcinoid’ for endocrine tumors that develop in the gastrointestinal tract . Then, the idea that these tumors arise from endocrine
cells and disperse throughout the body gained acceptance and led to a shared recognition of carcinoid and other endocrine tumors. In 2004,
the World Health Organization (WHO) proposed including the ambiguous term carcinoid in the category of endocrine tumors. According to the
2004 WHO classification, NE tumors (NET) in the lung were classified into small cell carcinoma, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, typical
carcinoid tumor, and atypical carcinoid tumor . In this classification, the former two tumor types (small cell and large cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas (NECs)) were defined as poorly differentiated NEC, whereas the latter two (typical and atypical carcinoid tumors) were deemed
endocrine tumors arising in the gastrointestinal tract and defined as well-differentiated NET. Furthermore, in 2010, the WHO proposed giving
pancreatic and gastrointestinal tumors with an endocrine phenotype the name neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) . In this classification system,
NENs are divided into well-differentiated NETs and poorly differentiated NECs, and the NETs are further subdivided according to the number
of mitoses and the percentage of ki67 staining, both of which are indices of cellular proliferation. Since the 1990s, NE prostate cancers
have been classified into small cell carcinoma, carcinoid or carcinoid-like tumor, and prostate adenocarcinoma with NED . NE cells exist in
the normal prostate and secrete growth factors and cytokines, including serotonin, calcitonin, secretin, and other peptide hormones. In
addition, NE cells are considered to be involved in the differentiation and proliferation of prostatic cells through growth factors, and
these processes are not mediated by ARs . However, there are various hypotheses explaining their possible histogenesis, including the
following: 1) the tissues are derived from preexisting NE cells in the prostate gland, 2) the tissues develop through differentiation of
adenocarcinoma, and 3) the tissues arise from multi-potential stem cells . NET in prostate cancer is rare, with reported prevalences of 0.2%
to 1% . NETs can be classified according to the conditions at the time of detection as pure NE prostate carcinoma at the time of initial
examination, mixed pattern of conventional and NE prostatic carcinomas at the time of initial examination, or NEC that develop during
endocrine therapy. A Japanese study found the incidence rates of these three conditions to be 35%, 18%, and 47%, respectively . Japan has a
higher incidence of NED in prostate cancer during endocrine therapy than other countries . We speculate that, in the present case, NE cancer
developed during endocrine therapy for conventional prostate adenocarcinoma. In this patient, the lung mass was not definitively diagnosed
preoperatively. The tumor was considered to be an adenocarcinoma replacing the alveolar lining cells based on an intraoperative rapid
diagnosis, but we were unable to determine whether or not the tumor was a metastasis at this time. Imaging studies revealed spicula, notch,
and pleural indentation findings, which also made differentiating between lung metastasis and a primary lung tumor difficult. One reason for
the difficulty in differentiating between primary and metastatic lung tumors is that the replacement growth of alveolar lining epithelial
cells is also observed in approximately 15% of metastatic lung tumors. Such a growth pattern occurs in many cancers, including colon,
gallbladder, breast, gastric, prostate, thyroid, and kidney malignancies . As a result, our present patient who was considered to have a
primary lung cancer, underwent thoracoscopic segmental resection of the lung with lymph node dissection and then, finally, the lung mass was
diagnosed as a metastatic adenocarcinoma with NED from the prostatic cancer. Among the 23 case reports describing solitary lung metastasis
(including the present patient), the treatment procedure was described for 11. Ten of these eleven patients underwent surgery, and most had
good outcomes, but there were two the exceptions (case 6 and our present patient). In addition, the effectiveness of surgical treatment for
solitary metastasis from prostate cancer has also been reported . The present patient developed systemic metastases after surgery,
necessitating chemotherapy and radiotherapy. This patient survived for approximately 30 months. NE cancer in the prostate gland has been
regarded as having a poor prognosis, with reported median survival times of 9.8 months and 13.1 months . The relatively long survival time
in the present case may be attributable to the pathological status of the disease; that is, the tumor demonstrated a mixed pattern
consisting of conventional and NE prostatic carcinomas. The long-established protocol for patients with this condition is to administer
treatment that includes chemotherapy for small cell lung cancer. Considering that the standard treatment of pulmonary small cell carcinoma
has not changed since the 1990s , it may be difficult to achieve prognostic improvement, at least for now. We therefore consider
immunostaining to be advisable at the time of biopsy for young patients with high-grade tumors in order to investigate the possible presence
of NE tumors or NE components. Establishing the correct diagnosis and implementing the most appropriate treatment plan are important for
reducing the impact of this disease. Solitary lung metastasis from prostate cancer is rare. We advocate that clinicians be aware of the
possible presence of metastasis from prostate cancer when a patient has a solitary lung tumor histologically diagnosed along with NED or has
a history of prostate cancer. According to the previously published case reports, some patients with solitary lung metastasis from prostate
cancer achieved relatively good long-term survival. We consider establishing the correct diagnosis and implementing the most appropriate
treatment plan to be essential in prostate cancer patients with oligometastases, if they have a NE tumor. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. neuroendocrine differentiation neuroendocrine androgen receptors World Health Organization
prostate-specific antigen neuroendocrine carcinoma neuroendocrine tumor neuroendocrine neoplasms gleason score prostate-specific antigen
phosphatase neural cell adhesion molecule/Leu 7 adenocarcinoma lymph node metastasis thyroid transcription factor-1 well to moderate
differentiated poorly differentiated Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
T. Maebayashi drafted the manuscript. NK and T. Matsui examined the patient and initially suggested radiation therapy. T. Maebayashi, KA,
TA, MS, SF, and NI examined the patient, then planned and carried out the radiation therapy. TH and YK diagnosed solitary lung metastasis
from prostate cancer with neuroendocrine differentiation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the late
Katsumi Abe M.D., Ph.D. for helpful advice.
