Aquaporin-4 antibody (AQP4-Ab)-positive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is a rare but often severe autoimmune disease with
median onset around 40 years of age. We report characteristics of three very-late-onset NMOSD (including complete NMO) patients >75 years of
age, in whom this diagnosis initially seemed unlikely because of their age and age-associated concomitant diseases, and briefly review the
literature. All three patients, aged 79, 82 and 88 years, presented with a spinal cord syndrome as the first clinical manifestation of
AQP4-Ab-positive NMOSD. They all had severe relapses unless immunosuppressive therapy was initiated, and one untreated patient died of a
fatal NMOSD course. Two patients developed side effects of immunosuppression. We conclude that a first manifestation of NMOSD should be
considered even in patients beyond the age of 75 years with a compatible syndrome, especially longitudinally extensive myelitis. Early
diagnosis and treatment are feasible and highly relevant. Special attention is warranted in the elderly to recognize adverse effects of
immunosuppressive therapies as early as possible. Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a rare but often severely disabling autoimmune disease of
the central nervous system affecting predominantly women, most frequently in their 30s to 40s [1, 2]. Aquaporin-4 antibodies (AQP4-Ab) are
present in about 80 % of NMO patients and in a subset of patients with isolated longitudinally extensive myelitis or isolated optic
neuritis, who are then considered to have formes frustes of NMO. NMO and its incomplete forms are referred to as NMO spectrum disorders
(NMOSD) . AQP4-Ab are highly specific for NMOSD, even in the elderly . A 79-year-old man was admitted to a municipal hospital with a
bilateral sensory level below T3 and gait ataxia since the last month (EDSS 6.5). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed spinal cord
lesions at vertebra C1-4, at T3/4, and brain microangiopathy. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed mildly increased albumin, but normal
immunoglobulin G (IgG), negative oligoclonal bands (OCB), and a normal cell count. Autoimmune myelitis was suspected, and symptoms improved
after intravenous glucocorticoids (EDSS 5.0). Four months later, a second attack occurred with severe left-sided optic neuritis and
worsening of sensorimotor symptoms (EDSS 9.0). MRI revealed an enlarged myelon lesion (medulla oblongata to vertebra C5, partially
gadolinium-enhancing). CSF analysis showed pleocytosis (32/µl). Symptoms improved after intravenous steroids (EDSS 8.0). After another
month, a third attack occurred with dysphagia, a high-cervical transverse spinal cord syndrome with marked tetraparesis, and another severe
optic neuritis (blindness in left eye; EDSS 9.0). He was admitted to a university hospital. MRI revealed a lesion extending over the entire
myelon and brainstem involvement (Fig. 1a). CSF analysis showed 43 cells/µl including granulocytes. AQP4-Ab were positive in serum and CSF
(ΔMFI 816 and 181, respectively, FACS-based assay), and diagnosis of AQP4-Ab positive NMO as part of NMOSD was established. Intravenous
steroids were given, followed by plasma exchange, without improvement. After further deterioration with respiratory insufficiency because of
high cervical myelon involvement (EDSS 9.5) and pneumonia, he required intensive care and died shortly thereafter.Fig. 1MRI scans of case
1–3 showing longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions. Yellow solid arrows indicate extensions of lesions. The lesion extended throughout
the entire myelon and there were also lesions in the brainstem in case 1 (a) (upper inset in a). Blue dashed lines in the sagittal images
indicate the levels of related axial scans. med. obl. axial scan at level of medulla oblongata, C and T indicate the respective cervical and
thoracic vertebrae; T2 T2 weighed MRI sequence, T1 T1 weighed MRI sequence, +Gd gadolinium-enhanced sequence MRI scans of case 1–3 showing
longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions. Yellow solid arrows indicate extensions of lesions. The lesion extended throughout the entire
myelon and there were also lesions in the brainstem in case 1 (a) (upper inset in a). Blue dashed lines in the sagittal images indicate the
levels of related axial scans. med. obl. axial scan at level of medulla oblongata, C and T indicate the respective cervical and thoracic
vertebrae; T2 T2 weighed MRI sequence, T1 T1 weighed MRI sequence, +Gd gadolinium-enhanced sequence An 88-year-old woman experienced
numbness in her legs and moderate paraparesis with impaired gait since 2 days. Spinal MRI demonstrated a myelon lesion from vertebra T6-9
(Fig. 1b-c), which was initially attributed to compression myelopathy because of concomitant vertebral disc protrusions. Without specific
treatment, she recovered partially and was able to walk with a crutch for >100 m (EDSS 6.0). Her previous medical history was negative for
prior potential attacks, but included a transient ischemic attack with dysarthria for <24 h 1.5 years before; cerebral MRI had not shown
inflammatory lesions. Eight months later, she was re-admitted with an anew gait impairment and sensorimotor paraparesis (MRC grade 2–3, EDSS
8.5). MRI demonstrated a new T2 hyperintense myelon lesion from vertebra T10–T12 with central gadolinium enhancement (Fig. 1d–f). Visual
evoked potentials had low amplitudes bilaterally and normal latencies. CSF showed mild lymphomonocytic pleocytosis and positive OCB. Serum
AQP4-Ab were positive (1:3200, cell-based immunofluorescence assay), as were antibodies against dsDNA and cardiolipin. Diagnosis of AQP4-Ab
positive NMOSD was established, and the first myelon lesion was retrospectively attributed also to NMOSD. Treatment included
methylprednisolone 5 × 1 g, a second cycle of 5 × 2 g, and then plasma exchange. She recovered partially (EDSS 7.0). Azathioprine was given
up to 150 mg/d (2.2 mg/kg); thiopurine S-methyltransferase activity was normal. After 5 months of therapy, regular blood testing revealed
pancytopenia. Azathioprine was stopped, but thrombocytopenia persisted and she died of intestinal bleeding. In addition to azathioprine as a
likely cause for bone marrow suppression and thrombocytopenia, she had also developed anti-platelet antibodies. A woman was admitted shortly
before her 83rd birthday with numbness and weakness in her right arm, impaired sensation below T10 bilaterally, and high-graded paraparesis
since 2 days (EDSS 8.0). Her previous medical history and family history was unremarkable, in particular, for previous attack-like clinical
events or immunological disease. Infectious myelitis was suspected, and antimicrobial treatment started. MRI demonstrated two longitudinally
extensive myelon lesions (foramen magnum to vertebra C4, T6-9), both with dorsal gadolinium enhancement (Fig. 1g–i), but no inflammatory
brain lesions. CSF analysis showed mild pleocytosis (10 cells/µl, 3 % neutrophils) with one CSF-restricted band, negative MRZ reaction, and
normal IgG and albumin ratios. An extensive search for microbial pathogens in serum and CSF was negative. She reported no visual symptoms,
but visual evoked potentials demonstrated delayed P100 latencies bilaterally with normal amplitudes. Screening for rheumatic disease showed
high titers for antinuclear antibodies (1:12,800, negative for standard ENA panel) without further clinical or laboratory evidence of
rheumatologic disease. Autoimmune myelitis being suspected, she received methylprednisolone (5 × 500 mg i.v.). Serum AQP4-Ab turned out
positive (1:320, immunofluorescence assay), and diagnosis of AQP4-Ab positive NMOSD was established. Since there was no improvement and the
patient refused plasma exchange, she received a second cycle of methylprednisolone (5 × 2 g i.v. with oral taper), and azathioprine was
started (up to 125 mg/d). She improved continuously and was able to walk with a walking frame and lived independently again (EDSS 6.5).
Three months later, she developed cytomegalovirus pneumonia and hepatopathy, probably related to azathioprine. At the time of admission, she
had normal leukocyte counts and moderate lymphopenia (11 % ≙ 570/µl). Azathioprine was discontinued. She recovered completely after
receiving ganciclovir. Immunosuppression was switched to mycophenolate mofetil which is well tolerated (1.5 g/d). Until now, she has
remained relapse-free for 2 years. According to independent cohorts, the mean onset of NMO is around 40 years [1, 2]. We report three
patients who were much older at the time of first manifestation, so that initially NMOSD was considered unlikely. Patients with very late-
onset NMOSD (>75 years) have hitherto only rarely been reported in detail, and case 2 is, to our knowledge, the oldest patient described so
far (Table 1).Table 1Screening Pubmed for NMOSD cohorts and case reports with at least 1 patient with onset >60 years did not reveal
patients at least as old as our NMOSD patient with very late-onset at 88 years. Onset >50 years is usually defined already as late-
onsetLocation/ethnicity (age limit for study inclusion)Number of patientsMax. onset (age in years)Clinical characteristicsReferencesKorea
(–)9263Patients with onset >50 year (22 %): more often myelitis onset and higher ARRFrance, 87 % Caucasian (–)1256620 % onset >50 yearAnglo-
Saxon Americans and Hispanic Americans (–)873Oldest patient with ON onset. No LTI, relapse after 4 months, fatal course (before
AQP4-Ab)Australia (–)7179.6Patients with onset >50 year: less often optic neuritis onsetEurope, 93 % Caucasian (late-onset NMOSD
>50 year)10882.5Myelitis onset in 67 %. Mean follow-up 4.6 year, 82 % with relapsesJapan (–)58386Patients with onset >60 year: more often
myelitis onsetItaly (late-onset case report)164Optic neuritis and myelitis onset. Two relapses within months, fatal course (before
AQP4-Ab)USA (late-onset case report)169Optic neuritis and myelitis onset (before AQP4-Ab)France (late-onset case report)177Myelitis onset.
W/o LTI, relapse after 1 yearUSA (late-onset case report)181Brainstem and myelitis onset. No LTI, several relapses and death within about
1 year (before AQP4-Ab)USA (late-onset case report)185Myelitis onset, no long-term follow-up ARR annualized relapse rate, before AQP4-Ab
study performed before availability of AQP4-Ab testing, LTI long-term immuno-suppressive therapy Screening Pubmed for NMOSD cohorts and case
reports with at least 1 patient with onset >60 years did not reveal patients at least as old as our NMOSD patient with very late-onset at
88 years. Onset >50 years is usually defined already as late-onset ARR annualized relapse rate, before AQP4-Ab study performed before
availability of AQP4-Ab testing, LTI long-term immuno-suppressive therapy Of note, all our patients initially presented with myelitis. More
frequent myelitis (vs. optic neuritis) as initial presentation is consistent with recent reports for patients with late-onset (>50–60 years)
from Europe, USA and Japan (see also Table 1). Interestingly, also multiple sclerosis late-onset patients had more often spinal cord lesions
compared to young-onset (<50 years) patients . Both patients (case 1 and 2) who did not receive immunosuppression after their first attack
experienced one or more subsequent relapses shortly afterwards, and case 1 who never received immunosuppression had a fulminant course and
died of NMO sequelae within 1 year from disease onset. An older age at onset was associated with earlier death due to myelitis and infection
. Unlike in multiple sclerosis, relapse activity in NMO does not seem to decrease with age; even very old patients are at risk of further
disabling attacks (our cases, ref , and Table 1). This suggests that also patients with late-onset need long-term prophylactic treatment to
prevent subsequent relapses. The benefits of an immunosuppressive therapy have to be weighed against an increased risk of adverse effects in
the elderly. Clearly, attention and alertness is warranted especially in older individuals to recognize adverse effects as early as
possible. Further NMOSD treatment studies should pay special attention to patients with late-onset. In all three cases, NMOSD initially was
not considered as the first-line diagnosis, mainly because of the old age and past medical history. In this age group, seemingly competing
explanations of myelon lesions are common, including vascular, infectious, and orthopedic causes, as initially falsely suspected also here.
However, delayed diagnosis and treatment can lead to subsequent relapses and fatal outcome. Therefore, it is mandatory to consider NMOSD
irrespective of age and past medical history in patients with a compatible syndrome, especially longitudinally extensive myelitis. The
diagnostic workup should include MRI, CSF investigations including differential cell count, serum AQP4-Ab testing using recombinant cell-
based assays, and electrophysiology to detect and treat NMOSD as early as possible. Members of the Neuromyelitis Optica Study Group (NEMOS)
in alphabetical order: P. Albrecht, University of Düsseldorf; O. Aktas, University of Düsseldorf; K. Angstwurm, University of Regensburg; A.
Berthele, Technische University of München; N. Borisow, Charite Berlin; T. Böttcher, Bonhoeffer Klinikum Neubrandenburg; J. Brettschneider,
University of Ulm; B. Ettrich, University of Leipzig; J. Faiss, Asklepios Klinik Teupitz; A. Gass, University Hospital Mannheim; C. Geis,
University of Würzburg; K. Guthke, Klinikum Görlitz; H-P. Hartung, University of Düsseldorf, K. Hellwig, Ruhr-University Bochum; B. Hemmer,
Technical University Munich; F. Hoffmann, Krankenhaus Martha-Maria Halle; M. Kaste, Nordwest-Krankenhaus Sanderbusch, Sande; U. Hofstadt-van
Oy, Klinikum Bayreuth; S. Jarius, University of Heidelberg; P. Kermer, Nordwest-Krankenhaus Sanderbusch, Sande; P. Kern, Asklepios Klinik
Teupitz; C. Kleinschnitz, University of Würzburg; I. Kleiter, Ruhr-University Bochum; W. Köhler, Fachkrankenhaus Hubertusburg; E.
Kolesilova, Asklepios Klinik Teupitz; M. Krumbholz, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich; T. Kümpfel, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich;
S. Langel, Landeskrankenhaus Rheinhessen; F. Lauda, University of Ulm; M. Liebetrau, Evangelische Bathildiskrankenhaus Bad Pyrmont gGmbH; R.
Linker, University of Erlangen; W. Marouf, Heliosklinik Stralsund; M. Marziniak, Isar-Amper Klinik Ost Munich; I. Metz, University of
Göttingen; C. Mayer, University of Frankfurt; A. Melms, University of Erlangen; C. Münch, Charité University Medicine Berlin; O. Neuhaus,
Kreiskrankenhaus Sigmaringen; S. Niehaus, Klinikum Dortmund; F. Pache, Charité University Medicine Berlin; F. Paul, Charité University
Medicine Berlin, H. Pellkofer, University of Göttingen; R. Reuss, Bezirkskrankenhaus Bayreuth; A. Riedlinger, Asklepios Klinik Teupitz; M.
Ringelstein, University of Düsseldorf; S.P. Rommer, University of Rostock; K. Ruprecht, Charité University Medicine Berlin; S. Schippling,
University of Zürich (Switzerland); S. Schuster, University of Tübingen; M. Schwab, University of Jena; M. Stangel, Medizinische Hochschule
Hannover, J. Stellmann, University of Hamburg; F. Then-Bergh, University of Leipzig; C. Trebst, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover; H. Tumani,
University of Ulm; C. Veauthier, Heliosklinik Stralsund; KP. Wandinger, University of Schleswig–Holstein; R. Weissert, University of
Regensburg; B. Wildemann, University of Heidelberg; C. Wilke, Nervenzentrum Potsdam; A. Winkelmann, University of Rostock; L. Zeltner,
University of Tübingen; C. Zentner, Martha Maria, University of Halle; U. Zettl, University of Rostock; U. Ziemann, University of Tübingen.
Aquaporin 4 Aquaporin-4 antibodies Cerebrospinal fluid Expanded disability status scale (0–10 points, 0 = normal, 10 = death due to MS)
Immunoglobulin G Medical Research Council (scale for muscle strength 0–5, 5 = full strength) Magnetic resonance imaging Neuromyelitis Optica
Study Group Neuromyelitis optica Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder Oligoclonal bands on behalf of the Neuromyelitis Optica Study group
(NEMOS). We wish to thank Tim Wesemann for expert technical assistance. No specific funding was obtained for this study. M. K. received
grant support, traveling expenses and scientific advisory board honoraria from Novartis, the Novartis foundation and Genzyme. U. H.-v. O
reports no conflict of interest. K. A. received support for patient education und travel expenses from Bayer Schering, Biogen-Idec, Teva,
Merck/Serono, and Novartis. I. K. received travel expenses and personal compensations from Bayer Healthcare, Biogen-Idec, and Chugai, as
well as research support from Bayer Healthcare, Novartis Pharma, and Biogen-Idec. S. J. was directly supported by a research grant from the
European Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis (ECTRIMS) and indirectly by research grants from the Dietmar Hopp
Foundation and from Merck Serono to the Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. P. F. received research
support from the Guthy Jackson Charitable Foundation and serves on the steering committee of MedImmune for an NMO trial. O. A. received
grants by the German Research Foundation (DFG), Eugène Devic European Network (EDEN/EU-FP7), German Ministry for Education and Research,
Schaufler Foundation, honoraria for lectures by Novartis, Bayer Schering, Teva, Biogen-Idec, and he holds patents and received
travel/accommodations/meeting expenses by Novartis, Bayer Schering, and Merck Serono with permission by the Rector of Heinrich-Heine-
University Düsseldorf. G. B., P. K., and A. S. report no conflict of interest. T. K. received travel expenses and personal compensations
from Bayer Healthcare, Teva Pharma, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis/Genzyme and Biogen-Idec as well as grant support from Bayer-
Schering AG and Novartis. Written informed consent was obtained from patient 3. Patient 2 had repeatedly given oral consent, but died before
she could give written consent. Attempts to find next of kin were not successful. The attending physician, who had discussed potential
publication of this case with the patient, documented her oral consent in writing. Patient 1 was not able to give his consent to the
publication as he experienced a fulminant course and died several years ago. Attempts to contact his custodian and his family were not
successful. Therefore, we have anonymized the description as much as possible. Also, the responsible ethics committee of the University of
Regensburg does not require patient’s consent in case of anonymous publication of retrospective data (see http://www.uni-
regensburg.de/medizin/ethikkommission/antragstellung/index.html).
