Pazopanib is an oral multitargeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor, used as a single agent to treat advanced renal cell carcinoma. Treatment with
other tyrosine-kinase inhibitors is known to be associated with asymptomatic elevations of serum amylase and lipase levels. As regards the
pazopanib, data are lacking in literature. We report one case of pancreatic toxicity associated with pazopanib administration. Before
starting treatment, patient had no risk factors for pancreatitis. The patient, an Italian 68 years old woman, started pazopanib at doses of
800 mg daily as first-line therapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Six months after the start of treatment, blood tests showed for the
first time a significant increase in serum lipase and amylase in the absence of symptoms and radiological findings of pancreatitis. The
patient continued treatment without interruptions or dose reductions. However, the continuation of the treatment led to a further increase
of pancreatic enzymes. We tried to continue the treatment by reducing the dose but only the discontinuation was associated with
normalization of amylase and lipase’s levels. On the other hand the treatment with pazopanib got prolonged response of the disease in the
absence of signs of pancreatitis. We therefore decided to continue treatment with pazopanib 400 mg daily with close monitoring of blood
levels of pancreatic enzymes. We hypothesize that the increase of pancreatic enzymes is not a dose-dependent event. The mechanism for
pancreatic toxicity induced by tyrosine-kinase inhibitors is unknown and no predictive factors have been identified. There are no clear
guidelines on the management of the drug in the presence of pancreatic enzyme increase. In any case, we believe that a careful monitoring of
pancreatic enzymes during treatment with pazopanib is advisable. Pazopanib is an oral multitargeted TKI (tyrosine-kinase inhibitor), used as
a single agent to treat advanced renal cell carcinoma . Treatment with other TKIs such as sorafenib and sunitinib is known to be associated
with asymptomatic elevations of serum amylase and lipase levels, which may occur in up to 50 % of patients treated. Acute pancreatitis has
been reported as a rare complication . As regards the pazopanib, data are lacking: in a single-arm RCC (Renal Cell Carcinoma) trial,
increases in lipase values were observed for 27 % (48/181) of patients. In the RCC trials of pazopanib, clinical pancreatitis was reported
in <1 % (4/586) of patients . We report one case of pancreatic toxicity associated with pazopanib administration. Before starting treatment,
patient had no risk factors for pancreatitis: no history of alcoholism or smoking habit, cholelithiasis and biliary-pancreatic infections;
we also excluded by MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) or CT-SCAN (Computed Tomography-scan) the presence of cysts or pancreatic metastasis.
This patient, an Italian 68 years old woman, started pazopanib (800 mg/die) as first-line therapy for renal cell carcinoma metastatic to
liver and right and left adrenal glands, classified as favorable-risk according to MSKCC prognostic score (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center score) . The thorax CT scan and MRI of abdomen performed after 3 and 6 months of treatment showed liver and adrenal glands partial
response. Six months after the start of treatment, blood tests showed for the first time an increase in serum lipase (2.5 × ULN − Upper
Limit of Normal) and amylase (6 × ULN) in the absence of syntoms and MRI findings of pancreatitis. The patient continued treatment without
interruptions or dose reductions. Blood tests showed a fluctuating trend of lipase and amylase (until 2 × ULN for lipase and 4 × ULN for
amylase) until after about 18 months of treatment with stable disease, when it was documented a further significant increase in blood levels
(lipase × 3 ULN and amylase × 5.5 ULN). Discontinuation of the drug led to a sharp reduction in these levels after only a week: serum lipase
level was normalized, while serum amylase level was 4.5 × ULN. But the recovery of the treatment led to a persistent asymptomatic increase
in lipase and amylase, therefore short interruptions of the drug were needed. This period of about 6 months was characterized by
discontinuous treatment and parallel ups and downs of pancreatic enzymes. After 2 years and 3 months of treatment with stable disease, there
was a dramatic increase in lipase (5 × ULN; amylase 5.5 × ULN) which led to discontinuation of the drug for almost a month before the levels
for both pancreatic enzymes reach normal values. For this reason, the patient continued treatment with pazopanib at the dose of 600 mg/die.
Nevertheless 3 weeks after resumption of treatment an increase in lipase even more significant was recorded: lipase 5 × ULN, amylase
5 × ULN. As a result of such events, after restoring the levels of lipase and amylase, we have decided to continue treatment with pazopanib
but further reducing the doses to 400 mg/die. Four weeks after the start of this new treatment schedule amylase and lipase showed a new
significant increase. We therefore decided to continue treatment with pazopanib 400 mg/die with close monitoring of blood levels of
pancreatic enzymes. Throughout the course of treatment, no other significant alteration was found to blood tests about liver (transaminase
and bilirubin levels) or kidney function (creatinine levels). After 2 months of intermittent pazopanib 400 mg/die, no clinical or
radiological signs of pancreatitis appeared (Fig. 1). Despite repeated dose reductions and treatment interruptions pazopanib has so far
achieved a prolonged disease control.Fig. 1Correlation between amylase and lipase serum levels with pazopanib administration Correlation
between amylase and lipase serum levels with pazopanib administration The mechanism for pancreatic toxicity induced by TKIs is unknown. No
predictive factors have been identified. Hypothetical mechanism regarding acute pancreatitis induced by TKIs is the microvascular ischemia
due to the anti-angiogenic effect that may predispose to pancreatic inflammation . Other possible mechanism consist in the activation of
pancreatic enzymes caused by the reflux of duodenal contents induced by decreased gastrointestinal motility. The increase of pancreatic
enzymes could also be linked to apoptosis of acinar cells induced by inhibition of VEGF (Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor) . Nevertheless
specific data regarding pazopanib are lacking in literature. In the reported case, the increase of pancreatic enzymes did not appear to be a
dose-dependent event. There are no clear guidelines on the management of the drug in the presence of pancreatic enzyme increase and no data
regarding the real negative predictive role of enzyme increase in pancreatitis evolution. Further studies to identify the mechanisms of
pancreatic toxicity and establish the management and the safety of treatment with pazopanib are needed. In any case, we believe that a
careful monitoring of pancreatic enzymes during treatment with pazopanib is advisable. Hypothetically, the increase of pancreatic enzymes in
the absence of obvious signs of pancreatitis may require changes to the schedule of treatment with pazopanib but not necessarily lead to a
prolonged suspension of the treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Tyrosine-kinase inhibitor Renal
cell carcinoma Magnetic resonance imaging Computed Tomography-scan Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center prognostic score Upper Limit of
Normal Vascular endothelial growth factor Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions MR, BV, OV, LD, RR, FMG, GT, DS made substantial contributions to concept and design of the study, drafting and revising the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. MR, BV, OV, LD, RR, FMG, GT, DS made equal contributions for the manuscript
preparation.
