Autoimmune and inflammatory mechanisms in psychotic disorders have attracted increasing scientific attention in recent years. In this
regard, we performed routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) basic diagnostics and CSF/serum analyses for antibodies directed against neuronal
intracellular and surface antigens in psychotic patients. In this context, the patient presented in this paper was diagnosed. We present the
case of a 20-year-old female patient with a first episode of a drug-induced psychotic syndrome but without neurological deficits. Further
investigations showed a reproducible low-titre positive anti-Yo reactivity in the CSF and serum with two independent immunoblot assays.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed frontoparietal and cerebellar atrophy. On fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, a mild
cerebellar hypometabolism was found. No underlying tumor was detected. Despite the presence of anti-Yo reactivity, the diagnostic criteria
for a paraneoplastic neurological syndrome were not fulfilled. Previously published data indicate the possible association between low-titer
antibodies against intracellular localized, onconeural antigens, and psychotic disorders. Large prospective studies that investigate the
prevalence and clinical significance of antibodies against intracellular onconeural antigens in psychiatry are needed. In recent years,
discrete immunological encephalopathy (IE) has been increasingly recognized as a possible cause of psychotic and affective disorders . In
the majority of cases, other more or less subtle findings, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), electroencephalography (EEG) pathology,
or neurological soft signs point to an “organic cause” of the psychotic syndrome; however, a number of case reports in the literature
indicate that IE is identified in psychotic cases without these findings (Endres D, Perlov E, Stich O, Tebartz van Elst L: Steroid
responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT) - presenting as major depression, in preparation). For this reason,
in our institution, we have been offering serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses for antibodies directed against neuronal
intracellular and surface antigens as well as CSF basic diagnostics as a routine diagnostic measure to all psychotic patients since 2009. In
this paper, we report the case of a schizoaffective patient with low-titer anti-Yo reactivity in the CSF and serum, respectively, whom we
have identified in this context. Anti-Yo antibodies belong to the so-called “well-characterized” paraneoplastic antibodies against
intracellular onconeuronal antigens . They target the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum and are therefore called the Purkinje cell
cytoplasmic antibodies type 1 . The anti-Yo syndrome in association with high-titer anti-Yo antibodies is the most common reason for
paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD). In PCD, global cerebellar deficits typically arise sub-acutely and progress over months.
Disturbances in cognitive impairment with memory deficits and emotional instability are also described . The anti-Yo syndrome is primarily
associated with gynecological (typically ovarian but also breast, uterine, or tubal) carcinomas . We present the case of a 20-year-old
female high school graduate with an acute schizoaffective syndrome. She complained of auditory (contrasting voices) and visual (images on
the sky or migratory objects) hallucinations. She also experienced a sensation as if the wind was blowing into her face (delusional
atmosphere), and she believed this to be a sign from her unfamiliar environment (delusion of influence). She interpreted these signs as a
call for suicide. Moreover, she reported depressive symptoms, such as sadness, loss of motivation and energy, social withdrawal, insomnia,
and lack of appetite. Her capability to think or concentrate adequately was reduced, and her overall thinking processes were slow. After
being admitted to the hospital, she also complained of a headache. Comprehensive medical and neurological examinations indicated no relevant
abnormalities, with the exception of a mild dysdiadochokinesia and a moderate hirsutism. This was the first episode of psychiatric symptoms
for the patient. She had no history of complications during pregnancy or delivery, and early development was unremarkable and without any
evidence of a neurodevelopmental disorder. She was socially integrated and successfully completed her academic career. However, the patient
reported a diffuse episode of earlier intermediate gait disorder resembling ataxia. The onset of symptoms was temporally related to short-
term consumption of hallucinogenic mushrooms and rare but repeated low-dose cannabis abuse. The psychotic symptoms developed over a
subsequent five-month period prior to admission to our hospital despite drug abstinence. No tumor in the patient’s own history was known,
but a family history of breast cancer was positive (grandmother: breast cancer at age of 30 years). Serum and CSF investigations with the
“ravo blot” using recombinant onconeural antigens as a substrate showed a weak but reproducible anti-Yo specific reactivity (ravo blot:
immunoblot using recombinant onconeural antigens as a substrate; ravo Diagnostika, Freiburg, Germany ) but no evidence of an anti-Yo
specific intrathecal antibody synthesis. In the Euroimmun immunblot for serum and CSF an anti-Yo specific, reactivity was found too.
Moreover, a weak anti-Ma2-reactivity was found in the serum (without confirmation in the ravo blot; Euroimmun blot: EUROLINE –Neuronal
Antigens Profile 4, Euroimmun, Luebeck, Germany ). No antibodies were found against other intracellular onconeural antigens (Hu, CV2/CRMP5,
Ri, Ma1, SOX1) or intracellular synaptic antigens (GAD, amphiphysin) in the serum. Immunological screening in the serum for rheumatoid
autoimmune disorders was negative. In addition, serological analysis showed no exposure to neurotropic infectious agents, such as borrelia,
lues, HIV, and FSME. CSF analysis was unremarkable (white blood cell count: 1/μL, no dysfunction of the lood-brain-barrier [albumin-
quotient: 4.1], no intrathecal IgG synthesis). Moreover, no antibodies against neuronal cell surface antigens (NMDAR, AMPA-1/2-R, GABA-B-R,
VGKC-complex [LGI1, Caspr2]) were found in the CSF. EEG was normal, whereas MRI illustrated a discrete frontoparietal and cerebellar
atrophy, which was clearly abnormal given the young age of the patient (Figure 1). In addition, a small arachnoidal cyst was detected in the
left temporopolar region. The arachnoidal cyst is an incidental finding without a substantial space-occupying effect; therefore, it is not
very likely that it leads to clinical symptoms. fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) depicted a mild, borderline
significant cerebellar hypometabolism. Otherwise, the PET was unremarkable. In particular, mesiotemporal hypermetabolism, which is typically
seen in limbic encephalitis, was not observed (Figure 2). The broad diagnostic work-up in search for primary tumors remained unremarkable
(breast ultrasonography, whole-body FDG-PET/computed tomography, chest MRI). However, a polycystic ovary syndrome (with secondary
amenorrhea, polycystic ovaries, and hirsutism) was diagnosed.Figure 1Magnetic resonance imaging shows a slight but atypical age-related
frontoparietal and cerebellar atrophy.Figure 2fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed a mild, borderline
significant cerebellar hypometabolism. Otherwise, the PET was unremarkable. No mesiotemporal hypermetabolism as typically seen in limbic
encephalitis was observed. FDG-PET was performed at the Department of Nuclear Medicine of the University Hospital Freiburg after injection
of 320 MBq FDG (Gemini True Flight, Philips Electronics, The Netherlands). Upper and lower row images show transaxial FDG-PET images and 3D
surface projections of regions with decreased FDG uptake (colour-coded Z-score, compared to age-matched healthy controls), respectively.
Magnetic resonance imaging shows a slight but atypical age-related frontoparietal and cerebellar atrophy. fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed a mild, borderline significant cerebellar hypometabolism. Otherwise, the PET was unremarkable. No
mesiotemporal hypermetabolism as typically seen in limbic encephalitis was observed. FDG-PET was performed at the Department of Nuclear
Medicine of the University Hospital Freiburg after injection of 320 MBq FDG (Gemini True Flight, Philips Electronics, The Netherlands).
Upper and lower row images show transaxial FDG-PET images and 3D surface projections of regions with decreased FDG uptake (colour-coded
Z-score, compared to age-matched healthy controls), respectively. On a clinical basis, we started a combined therapy with risperidon
(4mg/day) and quetiapine (300mg/day). Psychotic symptoms declined under medical treatment after one to two weeks. Depressive symptoms, such
as loss of motivation or energy and a diminished ability to think or concentrate, deteriorated. Interestingly, anti-Yo reactivity in the
serum disappeared four months after the first positive result without any immunosuppressive treatment. We present the case of a 20-year-old
woman suffering from a schizoaffective syndrome. Laboratory diagnostics showed a weak and transient anti-Yo-specific reactivity in the CSF
and serum, respectively. This abnormal laboratory finding was confirmed by examination of consecutive samples with two independent
immunoblot assays using highly specific and recombinant onconeural antigens that showed reproducible anti-Yo reactivity until its
spontaneous disappearance after fourth months. MRI depicted a slight but clearly abnormal frontoparieto-cerebellar atrophy, and FDG-PET
detected a hypometabolism of both cerebellar hemispheres. While assuming that the psychiatric symptoms were triggered by the transient drug
abuse is plausible, according to present knowledge and thinking, it does not explain the MRI and FDG-PET findings nor the anti-Yo
reactivity. Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) are characterized by high and permanent concentrations of antineuronal antibodies
and are frequently associated with intrathecal antigen-specific antibody synthesis, inflammatory CSF changes, distinct neurological
syndromes, and, very often but not always, the detection of cancer during further diagnostic work-up . PCD is a well-established PNS. Our
patient here showed suspicious findings in the cerebral MRI and FDG-PET for this syndrome, although additional frontoparietal atrophy is
uncommon. At the time of imaging acquisition, no clinical cerebellar signs were observed, and the patient’s history indicated only one
transient episode of ataxia. Interestingly, cerebellar dysfunction might be associated with cognitive deficits, affective changes
(“cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome”), and even psychotic symptoms . In our case, the diagnostic criteria for PNS recommended by an
international panel of PNS experts were not fulfilled . Following Graus et al. , we can postulate a “possible non-classical PNS”, but the
low-titer and the transient presence of anti-Yo reactivity argues against this hypothesis. The most probable primary diagnosis for our
patient is a drug-induced psychotic disorder, possibly based on an increased vulnerability to short-term drug consumption in the context of
the structural and functional cerebral/cerebellar changes depicted in the MRI and FDG-PET, respectively. We speculate that the temporary
presence of anti-Yo reactivity might mirror an underlying autoimmune process. However, the role of onconeural antibodies in the pathogenesis
of PCD remains unclear because of the predominant intracellular localization of their targets . Other neurodegenerative disorders with
frontoparietal atrophy, such as corticobasal degeneration or with parieto-(occipital) atrophy, such as posterior cortical atrophy , are
unlikely because of the young age of the patient, her family history, and the otherwise normal FDG-PET scan. Conversely, we found no
clinical clue that the cerebellar hypometabolism and atrophy might have been caused by an unrelated disease (e.g., neurodegenerative
disorders such as SCA or MSA-C). Why do we report this case even though we were unable to diagnose paraneoplastic anti-Yo syndrome? One
reason is to illustrate the complexity of the clinical work-up in this rapidly evolving field of research. While drug induced psychosis
might still be the most likely diagnosis for our patient, we still wonder about the causal role of our findings of transient anti-Yo-
antibodies, fronto-parieto-cerebellar atrophy, and the cerebellar PET finding. Do these results indicate that we can stop antipsychotic
medication once the antibodies disappeared? Do we have to watch out for future gynecological tumors? One might speculate that a
paraneoplastic psychotic syndrome heralded a not-yet detectable gynecological tumor. In this constellation, a paraneoplastic psychotic
syndrome could function as a life-saving warning sign. Furthermore, which therapeutic approach is the best in such constellations? Should we
stick to symptomatic antipsychotic medication or try immune-modulating interventions? All of these questions are important but unanswered to
date. A growing body of knowledge focuses on the association between psychiatric diseases and autoimmune phenomena, including the detection
of antibodies against intracellular neuronal antigens. Remarkably, Laadhar et al. reported confirmed well-characterized antineuronal
antibodies in five of 103 psychiatric inpatients (4.9%) who were routinely screened for antineuronal antibodies; they found none in the
control group. Aside from three anti-Yo cases (one in schizophrenia, two in bipolar disorder), two schizophrenic patients with anti-Ri
reactivity were detected. Interestingly, none of the antibody-positive patients developed a tumor, at least up to a follow-up period of five
years . From a pathophysiological point of view, cytotoxic T-cell activity and not autoantibodies is assumed to be responsible for neuronal
damage in classical PNS . Therefore, we speculate that misled T-cell responses might be a different pathogenetic mechanism in a subgroup of
antineural antibody-associated psychotic snydromes. This view might lead to alternative treatment concepts . In summary, in accordance with
the study of Laadhar et al. , our case report indicates that reactivity against intracellular neuronal antigens might be associated with
psychiatric symptoms without a clinical manifestation of PNS or cancer. Similar results with low-antibody titers are known from anti-N-
Methyl-D-aspartate-receptor (NMDAR) antibodies in schizophrenia . However, in a large study investigating the prevalence of anti-NMDAR
antibodies, unexpectedly high rates of serum positivity were also found in schizophrenic patients (8.6%), as well as in healthy control
subjects (10.8%) , a result that challenges the clinical significance of isolated serum antibodies without clinical deficits or signs of a
disruption of the blood-brain barrier. As in the case of Hashimoto encephalitis, NMDAR antibodies alone might not be the critical
pathophysiological agent but are just a heralding marker of a yet unknown immune process that causes neuronal network dysfunction and
psychiatric symptoms as a consequence. The currently available data on the prevalence of antibodies against intracellular onconeural
antigens and their relevance in psychiatric disorders are sparse. Therefore, case reports are essential to gain an improved understanding of
the possible links between structural brain changes, antibody findings, and clinical symptoms. Large, prospective studies that examine the
prevalence and possible pathophysiological role of antineuronal antibodies in psychiatry are needed. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the editor of this journal. Competing interests DE: None. EP: None. OS: Reports receiving consulting and lecture fees, grant and research
support from Bayer Vital GmbH, Biogen Idec, Genzyme, Merck Serono, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis and Teva. PTM: Funding of an ongoing research
study by GE. NL: None. LTVE: Advisory boards, lectures, or travel grants within the last three years: Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis,
Shire, UCB, GSK, Servier, Janssen, and Cyberonics. Authors’ contributions DE and LTVE treated the patient. DE conducted the data analysis
and wrote the paper. NL critically reviewed the MR results, and PTM, the FDG-PET results. OS performed the CSF analysis. LTVE, OS, and EP
were crutially involved in the theoretical discussion and performing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of
the manuscript. Authors’ information DE: Physician at the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy – University Medical Center Freiburg –
Germany. EP: MD at the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy – University Medical Center Freiburg – Germany. OS: MD at the Department
of Neurology – University Medical Center Freiburg – Germany. PTM: MD, Director of the Department of Nuclear Medicine – University Medical
Center Freiburg – Germany. NL: MD at the Department of Neuroradiology – University Medical Center Freiburg – Germany. LTVE: MD, Department
Director at the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy – University Medical Center Freiburg – Germany.
