A rare complication of chronic pancreatitis is the formation of single or multiple mediastinal pseudocysts, which are fueled from the
pancreas through anatomical openings of the diaphragm. We present a rare case with a difficult diagnosis, treatment and potentially
catastrophic complications. A 53-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment of a large
heterogeneous mass situated in the posterior mediastinum, and bilateral pleural effusions which had developed after recent multiple episodes
of pancreatitis. He had a history of chronic alcoholism. Laboratory and imaging modalities established the diagnosis of a pancreatic
mediastinal pseudocyst. Despite successful initial conservative treatment, our patient had a relapse and underwent emergency surgical
intervention due to internal hemorrhage. We present his diagnostic and imaging workup, along with the multidisciplinary intervention, and a
literature review referring to the diagnosis and treatment of mediastinal pancreatic pseudocysts. One of the most common complications of
chronic pancreatitis is the development of pseudocysts due to stenosis or disruption of the pancreatic duct. These can be numerous and their
size varies from a few centimeters to 30cm in some cases. They are rich in enzymes and are held together by fibrous and granulomatous
tissue, hence the term pseudocyst. In some cases they can invade adjacent organs, such as the liver and spleen , and sometimes may extend
above the diaphragm. We herein present a patient with a history of alcohol abuse who was referred to our hospital for further investigation
and treatment of a mass in the posterior mediastinum, and bilateral pleural effusions, which had developed after recent multiple episodes of
pancreatitis. A 53-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history of recurrent pancreatitis for the last 18 months, depression, alcohol
and tobacco abuse, was referred to our hospital after a 10-day hospitalization in a pulmonary clinic, where he was admitted due to dyspnea
and two episodes of hemoptysis. An extensive workup had already been performed, including bronchoscopy, gastroscopy, chest and upper abdomen
computed tomography (CT) scans. A diagnostic paracentesis had already been carried out and fluid samples were sent for further analysis. His
upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and bronchoscopy did not show any remarkable findings, and his pleural fluid was plenteous in protein and
amylase. His cytology reports were negative for malignancy and his pleural fluid adenosine deaminase levels showed no evidence of
mycobacterial infection (Table 1). He had a good clinical status, except for a mild shortness of breath on exertion. He reported no fever or
chills and, despite having a good appetite the last six months, he noted a weight loss of 25kg. Additionally, he mentioned that over the
last four months he had experienced difficulty in swallowing solid food. On admission, his physical examination revealed bilateral
diminished breath sounds at the lung basis and a firm liver edge 5cm below the right costal margin. His laboratory results showed anemia,
malnutrition and slightly elevated serum amylase (360U/L) (Table 1). His chest CT scan revealed bilateral pleural effusions and a mass in
the lower mediastinum (Figure 1); these radiological findings were not present on his previous examinations nine months ago (Figure 2).
After a successful chest drainage clinical improvement was noticed, however, further chest CT imaging showed a longitudinal fluid collection
in the mediastinum, along the lower esophagus, measuring 3×8cm (Figure 3A, B). This collection extended beyond the diaphragm and seemed to
be connected with a small pseudocyst at the pancreatic tail (Figure 4). He was on a specific enteral diet, lipase supplementation and
octreotide (administered subcutaneously). Further evaluation with magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed the pancreatic duct to
be slightly dilated. No further interventions were performed at that time. A month later he was discharged in good clinical status and
scheduled for outpatient observation.Table 1 Biochemistry Peripheral blood laboratory results Pleural fluid results
WBC4,88K/μLCa8mg/dLcells1600Hb9.8g/dLMg1.5mg/dLRBC224.000PLT246K/μLSGOT24U/LTP4.8gr/dLPT14.5secSGPT44U/LALB2.8gr/dLAPTT35.6secALB3.1gr/dLGLU82mg/dLD-
Dimers6.810md/dLTGL80mg/dLLDH609U/LFIB521μg/dLAMS360U/LAMS12,881U/LWBC, white blood cells; Hb, hemoglobin; PLT, platelets; PT, prothrombin
time; APTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; FIB, fibrinogen; Ca, Calcium; Mg, Magnesium; SGOT, serum glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase; SGPT, serum glutamate-pyruvate transaminase; ABL, albumin; TGL, triglycerides; AMS, amylase; RBC, red blood cells; TP, total
protein; GLU, glucose; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase.Figure 1Axial post-contrast computed tomography scan at the level of the lower mediastinum
reveals a mass (arrow) and bilateral pleural effusions (arrow heads).Figure 2Nine months earlier, an axial post-contrast computed tomography
scan reveals no abnormality in the mediastinum. A small pleural effusion is present at the left hemithorax (arrow).Figure 3Post-contrast
chest computed tomography scan after successful pleural drainage. Panel A: Fluid collection (*) in front of esophagus (arrow) and a small
pleural effusion is present (arrow head). Panel B: Sagittal reconstructed images demonstrate a longitudinal fluid collection (* *) in the
mediastinum, along the lower esophagus (arrow), measuring 3×8cm. The lesion was compatible with a mediastinum pseudocyst.Figure 4Post-
contrast computed tomography scan of the upper abdomen reveals a small pseudocyst of 2cm at the pancreatic tail (arrow). Biochemistry WBC,
white blood cells; Hb, hemoglobin; PLT, platelets; PT, prothrombin time; APTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; FIB, fibrinogen; Ca,
Calcium; Mg, Magnesium; SGOT, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase; SGPT, serum glutamate-pyruvate transaminase; ABL, albumin; TGL,
triglycerides; AMS, amylase; RBC, red blood cells; TP, total protein; GLU, glucose; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase. Axial post-contrast computed
tomography scan at the level of the lower mediastinum reveals a mass (arrow) and bilateral pleural effusions (arrow heads). Nine months
earlier, an axial post-contrast computed tomography scan reveals no abnormality in the mediastinum. A small pleural effusion is present at
the left hemithorax (arrow). Post-contrast chest computed tomography scan after successful pleural drainage. Panel A: Fluid collection (*)
in front of esophagus (arrow) and a small pleural effusion is present (arrow head). Panel B: Sagittal reconstructed images demonstrate a
longitudinal fluid collection (* *) in the mediastinum, along the lower esophagus (arrow), measuring 3×8cm. The lesion was compatible with a
mediastinum pseudocyst. Post-contrast computed tomography scan of the upper abdomen reveals a small pseudocyst of 2cm at the pancreatic tail
(arrow). Two months after his discharge he was readmitted with clinical signs of respiratory distress and bilateral pleural effusion was
visible on his radiology chest imaging. The results from his serum blood and pleural fluid laboratory tests were similar to his first
admission. As similar findings were identified on his chest and abdomen CT scan compared to the images from his last admission, a decision
for surgical intervention was made. Upon completion of the preoperative diagnostic workup he was transferred to the general surgery ward. He
was on a triple antibiotic regimen (meropenem, vancomycin and fluconazole) and was scheduled for elective surgery. On the fourth
hospitalization day he suffered from nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. His physical exam showed that his abdomen was rigid, with noted
pain on the upper abdomen and guarding. His laboratory tests showed a significant drop in his hemoglobin level and his vital signs revealed
borderline tachycardia. After resuscitation with fluids and blood transfusions, a CT scan of his abdomen was performed where an extended
hematoma at the lesser sac was identified with no active bleeding. Subsequently, he underwent an elective embolization of the splenic artery
followed by an emergency laparotomy. Intraoperatively, a sizable hematoma was found at the lesser sac, pushing his stomach anteriorly. Due
to chronic inflammation his pancreas was fibrous and hard. The splenic vein was thrombosed and splenomegaly with left-sided portal
hypertension was present. A distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed; his post-operative course was uneventful and he was
discharged on the 11th postoperative day. Tumors that are most commonly located in the posterior mediastinum are of esophageal and nervous
origin. Hernias, aortic aneurysms and duplication cysts can also be found in this anatomic area. Some cases of extramedullary hematopoiesis
and pancreatic pseudocysts are also reported in the literature. After a rupture of the posterior pancreatic duct, the pancreatic fluid is
usually confined in the retroperitoneal space, but can occasionally slip into the posterior mediastinum from the esophageal or the aortic
hiatus, leading to the formation of pseudocysts. If the diaphragm is penetrated through the inferior vena cava hiatus or the foramen of
Morgagni, the pseudocyst will be formed in the middle and anterior mediastinum, respectively . Published data report that these cysts can
occur at any age from 7 months to 73 years, and the leading cause in adults is chronic alcoholic pancreatitis and trauma in children . The
related symptoms may vary from chest pain, palpitations, dysphagia, pleural effusion with concomitant dyspnea, cough and hemoptysis, to
severe life-threatening complications such as hemothorax, cardiac tamponade, esophagobronchial fistula and acute airway obstruction .
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging are the most commonly used imaging modalities to reveal the size, location and possible
communications of the pseudocysts with the pancreas. Furthermore, magnetic resonance computed pancreatography in conjunction with esophageal
retrograde cholangiopancreatography can unveil strictures and disruption of the pancreatic duct. A transesophageal fine needle aspiration
can be performed when a differential diagnosis problem is raised, but the patient’s medical history and CT imaging study are usually
adequate for the diagnosis to be established. The management of a mediastinal pancreatic pseudocyst is a difficult task. Relapses are common
and procedural complications are many. At the moment there are no guidelines addressing this problem. A literature review revealed only a
few scant reports of spontaneous resolution , but in the vast majority of cases intervention was mandatory, and the approach has to be
individually tailored. Conservative treatment with strict diet, enzyme supplementation and complete abstinence from alcohol is indicated to
all stable patients. In addition, bromhexine hydrochloride and somatostatin analogues have been used in a few cases . Somatostatin and its
analog octreotide are peptide hormones that inhibit the release of insulin, glucagon, gastrin, secretin, pancreozymin and pepsin. In our
patient, octreotide was successfully administered at a dose of 0.5mg (administered subcutaneously), three times daily, for one month
following his first admission. In certain cases, minimally invasive procedures can resolve the problem and help patients to avoid surgery.
Patients with pancreatic duct disruption and stenosis can be treated with the placement of stents or with naso-pancreatic drainage, in order
to restore the duct patency and seize the pseudocyst fuelling. For other patients with large abdominal pseudocysts that communicate with the
mediastinum, CT-guided abdominal percutaneous drainage may be the optimal treatment . In our patient, the magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography showed no patency problems of the pancreatic duct, and the 2cm cyst beside the pancreatic tail was too small to be
accessed and drained. To date, surgery with or without pancreatectomy is the most commonly used treatment, alongside internal drainage of
the stomach, or percutaneous drainage when applicable. Mediastinal pancreatic pseudocyst is a rare complication of alcohol related
pancreatitis, with potentially catastrophic complications and a difficult treatment course. A multidisciplinary approach is mandatory for
achieving an optimal outcome. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions VK was the main author. DK wrote the surgical part of the
manuscript. CK provided the CT images and was a contributor in writing the radiological comments. DV was the co-author and provided final
review of the manuscript. FK conducted the literature search. DS provided guidance and general support. CG provided guidance and general
support. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
