We report a case of Benson's Syndrome, a form of occipital Alzheimer's disease, with posterior cortical atrophy on magnetic resonance
imaging, in a 62-year-old male, who presented with visual problems, ascribed to the eyes, and had even undergone cataract/intraocular lens
surgery in the right eye; and change of glasses 21 times over the past 2 years, with no apparent benefit. This case is of interest both on
account of its rarity, and to highlight its features since the diagnosis may be missed in an ophthalmological setting where such patient may
go for first consult. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an acquired, incurable and progressive disorder that leads to social and occupational
malfunctioning on account of impaired cognition and behavior with memory loss as a predominant feature. Pathologically, it is associated
with plaques in the cerebral cortex. The criteria for diagnosing AD require the finding of slowly progressive memory loss of insidious onset
in a conscious patient and excluding the possibilities of toxic metabolic conditions and cerebral neoplasms. AD can be classified into three
stages: Asymptomatic preclinical, mild cognitive impairment, which is a symptomatic predementia phase, and frank AD dementia. A visual
variant of AD, Benson's syndrome, also called posterior cortical atrophy is a localized neurodegenerative condition primarily affecting the
occipital, parietal and occipito-temporal cortices. First described by Benson et al. in 1988, Benson's syndrome is a clinicoradiologic
syndrome associated with a decrease in visuospatial and visuoperceptual capabilities with relatively intact language, learning and cognition
in the early stages. Its exact prevalence and incidence are unknown. Despite efforts to develop diagnostic criteria, no clear consensus has
emerged. Its co-features include in addition, evidence of complex visual disorders including features of Balint's syndrome (simultanagnosia,
saccadic initiation failure, deficit in reaching to visual goals, environmental agnosia) and Gerstmann's syndrome (acalculia, agraphia,
finger agnosia, left/right disorientation), field defects and visual agnosia, with an absence of stroke or tumor. Supportive features
include a presenile onset (mid-50s or early 60s), alexia, dressing apraxia, prosopagnosia and prolonged color after-images. With an onset
much earlier than that for a typical AD, patients usually present to an ophthalmologist with change in vision, difficulty reading and
writing, diplopia and problems with depth perception. They have trouble reaching out to pick objects of interest, poor contrast sensitivity
and difficulty recognizing colors. Visual field may show hemianopia. Visual crowding or visual hallucinations may also be present.
Anterograde memory, linguistic skills and executive functions are preserved in the early stages, but as the disease progresses patients may
develop misrecognition of familiar faces and objects, and calculation skills and co-ordinated movements may get affected. Later problems
with memory and cognitive impairment may occur. Neuropsychological evaluation, blood tests, brain scans and neurological examination is
required to exclude any treatable cause including infection, inflammation or tumor. We report the case of a 62-year-old male diagnosed with
Benson's syndrome, of interest due to its extreme rarity, and its largely ophthalmological presentation. A 62-year-old man reported with a
history of bilateral progressive, painless blurring of vision for the last 2 years. Two years ago, admittedly for visual problems, he
underwent uneventful cataract surgery with intraocular lens implantation in the right eye, but with no visual benefit. He complained of
diplopia (binocular) following cataract surgery. He continued to experience difficulty in reading and writing and problems judging distance
and depth, as evident in difficulty in reaching out precisely for objects and during ambulation. He also complained of inability to perceive
objects in the right visual field: Would miss food on the right half of the plate and not notice the right half of his reflected face in the
mirror. He had met with an accident 2 years ago, while riding his motorcycle, injuring his right arm that he confessed was on account of not
perceiving objects to his right: He has stopped driving since. His visual difficulties worsened in dim-light; while he also had increased
sensitivity to bright light. He had started wearing glasses for presbyopia around 25 years ago, and would periodically get them altered
every couple of years, but in the last 2 years, had changed them 21 times with no improvement in his vision. During this period, he
consulted both ophthalmologists and optometrists, more often the latter in “optical shops,” and was often advised a change of a minor
nature, although more often than not, he did not perceive any worthwhile improvement in vision. During this period, his vision continued to
deteriorate from a recorded 20/30 Snellen at the time of cataract surgery to the present state. He denied any hallucinations and weakness.
There was no family history of dementia, and he was not a hypertensive or diabetic. On examination, his vitals were stable, and systemic
examination was within normal limit. His corrected VA was 20/60 in each eye: With +0.5–2.0 × 90 OD and +1.0–2.0 × 90 OS. The right eye was
pseudophakic. Biomicroscopy and ophthalmoscopy were unremarkable; with no RAPD, and a normal fundus [Fig. 1]. Fundus photographs show normal
fundus, OU He tended to have a head turn to the right, keeping his eyes straight, and appeared to look askance, and clarified that this
allowed him to get his better seeing left field on his object of interest. Ocular movements were full and free. There was no misalignment,
with symmetrical Bruckner's reflexes. The confrontation tests suggested a right hemianopia. The full-field perimetry revealed a bilateral
field defect, denser in the right fields, but involving the periphery of the left fields too [Fig. 2]. Full-field perimetry shows bilateral
field defect, denser in the right fields, but also involving the periphery of the left fields in both the eyes This co-relates well with the
existing magnetic resonance imaging (August 2014) findings of bilateral occipital cortical atrophy, more marked on the left [Fig. 3].
Magnetic resonance imaging brain shows prominent cortical sulci in bilateral occipital lobes with prominent occipital horns with mild
periventricular hyperintensities on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images On Ishihara color plates test, in bright day-
light, with the near correction, the patient could barely decipher digit ‘1’ from the ‘12’ available on the explanatory first plate: He
failed to notice any other number. On attempting the Pelli-Robson contrast sensitivity function, with great difficulty he could make out the
letter-triad with logarithmic contrast sensitivity value of 1.35 each eye. General neurological examination showed no cognitive deficits, no
ataxia or extrapyramidal signs. Both long and short term memory were preserved. In consultation with our psychiatrist, we applied the mini-
mental state examination (MMSE), and the patient scored 28/30 (>23 being normal). Orientation, attention, calculation and speech fluency
were normal. The Geriatric Depression Scale score did not indicate depression. The patient was diagnosed as a case of Benson's syndrome. In
consultation with our psychiatrist, since the patient lacked any cognitive loss, no medicines were prescribed. The patient was advised a
healthy diet, regular exercise, and recommended for follow-up every 6 months, with the freedom to contact us anytime he needed to. Given the
history, clinical findings and supporting investigations, our patient fits into the profile of a case of Benson's syndrome. This is borne
out by the fact of its presenile insidious onset, primarily with visual presentation, and cortical atrophy centered in the occipital cortex,
while sparing memory and cognition: The last two more characteristic of AD. Yet, since both diseases are progressive in nature, there occurs
considerable overlap. Simple tests of visual perception and copying can help to differentiate the two disorders. Because tasks with
significant visual component (e.g., visual memory recall) may not be very valid in the presence of posterior cortical atrophy, those with
minimal visual demands (e.g., auditory-verbal memory tasks, naming from verbal description) are therefore required for accurate cognitive
assessment. We used the MMSE which showed normal cognition and memory. If available, single photon emission computed tomography and
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography have reportedly shown selective hypometabolism and hypoperfusion in the occipito-parietal
region, worse on the right hemisphere, in cases of Benson's syndrome as compared to AD. Cross-sectional voxel-based morphometry is reported
to have revealed significant reductions in regions of the occipital and parietal lobes, and only later in the temporal lobe. However, the
neuroimaging findings of the two, merges over time. Also the neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques characteristic of AD, have been
found in the autopsy of Benson's syndrome patients, distributed mainly in the posterior cortical areas. These features suggest that Benson's
syndrome is an atypical variant of AD. Acetyl cholinesterase inhibitors, e.g., donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine are frequently
prescribed, given that AD is statistically the most likely underlying pathology, with limited single case reports suggesting some clinical
benefit, most likely in patients with underlying Alzheimer's. Anti-depressant medications may be given in patients with the persistent low
mood. Cognitive rehabilitation including psychoeducation, compensatory strategies and cognitive exercises improve functioning in Benson's
syndrome. Since in our patient cognition was normal with no symptoms of depression, except for regular follow-up, no medical therapy was
advised. This case highlights the fact that on account of the overwhelming visual problems, an ophthalmologist may first confront such
patients. Only with a high degree of suspicion will attention be drawn to such a possibility, and unnecessary vision enhancing surgery and
pointless multiple change of glasses be avoided. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
