Polytetrafluoroethylene is ubiquitous in materials commonly used in cooking and industrial applications. Overheated polytetrafluoroethylene
can generate toxic fumes, inducing acute pulmonary edema in some cases. However, neither the etiology nor the radiological features of this
condition have been determined. For clarification, we report an illustrative case, together with the first comprehensive literature review.
A previously healthy 35-year-old Japanese man who developed severe dyspnea presented to our hospital. He had left a polytetrafluoroethylene-
coated pan on a gas-burning stove for 10 hours while unconscious. Upon admission, he was in severe respiratory distress. A chest computed
tomographic scan showed massive bilateral patchy consolidations with ground-glass opacities and peripheral area sparing. A diagnosis of
polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema was made. He was treated with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation and a
neutrophil elastase inhibitor, which dramatically alleviated his symptoms and improved his oxygenation. He was discharged without sequelae
on hospital day 11. A literature review was performed to survey all reported cases of polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema.
We searched the PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and OvidSP databases for reports posted between the inception of the databases and 30
September 2014, as well as several Japanese databases (Ichushi Web, J-STAGE, Medical Online, and CiNii). Two radiologists independently
interpreted all chest computed tomographic images. Eighteen relevant cases (including the presently reported case) were found. Our search
revealed that (1) systemic inflammatory response syndrome was frequently accompanied by pulmonary edema, and (2) common computed tomography
findings were bilateral ground-glass opacities, patchy consolidation and peripheral area sparing. Pathophysiological and radiological
features were consistent with the exudative phase of acute respiratory distress syndrome. However, the contrast between the lesion and the
spared peripheral area was striking and was distinguishable from the common radiological features of acute respiratory distress syndrome.
The essential etiology of polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema seems to be increased pulmonary vascular permeability caused
by an inflammatory response to the toxic fumes. The radiological findings that distinguish polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary
edema can be bilateral ground-glass opacity or a patchy consolidation with clear sparing of the peripheral area. Polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE), or Teflon® (DuPont, Wilmington, DE, USA), is ubiquitous in materials commonly used in cooking and industrial applications owing to
its thermal stability and non-stick properties. However, overheated PTFE generates toxic fumes that can occasionally cause acute pulmonary
edema . To date, neither the etiology nor the radiological features of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema has been determined . We therefore
report an illustrative case and have conducted the first comprehensive literature review to clarify the etiology and radiological features
of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema. A previously healthy 35-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with dyspnea and dry cough.
He had fallen asleep while leaving a PTFE-coated pan on the stove, which caught fire. He awoke 10 hours later with severe dyspnea and
noticed that the room was filled with white smoke. The PTFE coating of the pan was completely burned off, although the fire had not spread
outside the pan. Upon admission, his vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 37.1°C; heart rate, 100 beats/min; blood pressure,
131/97mmHg; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; and percutaneous oxygen saturation, 98% (on oxygen 10L/min via a non-rebreather mask). The
patient was alert and denied using any medications, including illicit drugs. Auscultation revealed bilateral coarse crackles. His white
blood cell count was 22,100/μl with 91.2% neutrophils, and his arterial oxygen pressure was 233.5mmHg while he was on 10L/min oxygen. A
chest X-ray showed bilateral infiltration (Figure 1A). Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed massive, bilateral, patchy consolidations
with ground-glass opacities and sparing of the peripheral areas (Figure 1B). These lesions were distributed in a dorsally dominant manner
(Figure 1B). The patient’s echocardiogram and electrocardiogram were normal, so a diagnosis of PTFE fume–induced, non-cardiogenic pulmonary
edema with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) was made. The patient was admitted and treated with non-invasive positive pressure
ventilation (NPPV) and intravenous sivelestat (Elaspol®; Ono Pharmaceutical, Osaka, Japan). NPPV was initiated in a setting of positive end-
expiratory pressure of 8cmH2O and intravenous sivelestat at a dosage of 4.8 mg/kg/day, which dramatically alleviated his symptoms and
improved his oxygenation on the day of admission. His respiratory status rapidly improved, and a second chest CT scan on day 9 revealed
complete resolution of the infiltrates (Figure 1B). The patient was discharged to home without any sequelae on hospital day 11.Figure 1Chest
X-ray and computed tomographic scan obtained upon admission and on day 9 of hospitalization. (A) Bilateral infiltration shadows were
detected on admission (left), which had completely disappeared at day 9 (right). (B) On admission, bilateral patchy consolidations with
ground-glass opacities and sparing of peripheral areas were found (left). On day 9 of the patient’s hospitalization, these shadows had
completely disappeared (right). Chest X-ray and computed tomographic scan obtained upon admission and on day 9 of hospitalization. (A)
Bilateral infiltration shadows were detected on admission (left), which had completely disappeared at day 9 (right). (B) On admission,
bilateral patchy consolidations with ground-glass opacities and sparing of peripheral areas were found (left). On day 9 of the patient’s
hospitalization, these shadows had completely disappeared (right). On 30 September 2014, we searched for all reported cases of PTFE
fume–induced pulmonary edema on the PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, OvidSP and several Japanese databases (Ichushi Web, J-STAGE, Medical
Online and CiNii), without language restriction and using the following keywords: “polymer fume fever,” “Teflon®,”
“polytetrafluoroethylene,” “pulmonary/lung edema” and “acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).” Three of the authors
(RH, YO and RI) performed independent screenings. Cross-referencing was performed, and all the relevant case reports and studies were
included. We excluded the following: (1) cases without evidence of pulmonary edema, (2) cases without an association with PTFE fumes and (3)
academy meeting abstracts. The search produced 121 articles, of which 17 were potential candidates . Next, clinical features including
patient characteristics, the situation under which exposure occurred, symptoms, treatment and outcome were reviewed by three intensivists
(RH, YO, and RI). One report was excluded because of insufficient information , leaving 16 reports and 17 relevant cases for inclusion in
this review. The temperature of the overheated PTFE was estimated based on information in the relevant reports (molding settings ,
cigarettes and an overheated pan ). SIRS was defined according to the criteria originally proposed by the American College of Chest
Physicians/Society of Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference . All CT images of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema were interpreted
independently by two chest radiologists (KK and TT). The distribution of the disease and the dominant lesion were also noted. Thirteen
reports without CT findings were excluded , resulting in four reports and eight cases ultimately being eligible for inclusion in this
review. The clinical characteristics of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema described in this review, including our patient, are summarized in
Table 1. The patient demographics of the cases in the literature review consisted of 16 men and 2 women, aged 21 to 59 years. Many patients
were smokers (12 of 18), and most did not have any comorbidities (15 of 18). Among all of the reports included here, seven cases involved
exposure to PTFE-containing materials in factories or laboratories, 6 cases were of patients who had smoked PTFE-contaminated cigarettes and
5 reports described exposure to fumes from overheating PTFE-coated kitchenware in the home. Common symptoms were dyspnea (17 of 18), cough
(12 of 18) and flu-like symptoms such as fever (9 of 18) and chills (6 of 18). SIRS was frequently present (10 of 18). All patients had
evidence of exposure to fumes developed from overheated (391 to 875°C) PTFE. One patient was exposed to PTFE fumes for 9 hours and died
5 hours after admission despite intensive treatment that included intubation . Neither NPPV nor neutrophil elastase inhibitor was used in
previously reported cases. Transbronchial lung biopsy was performed in one case, which revealed marked neutrophil migration into the alveoli
with edema in the alveolar septa . Table 2 shows the chest CT characteristics of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema, including our patient.
Four patients underwent chest CT on the day of admission: two on day 2 and two on day 4. Common findings were ground-glass opacities (eight
of eight), peripheral area sparing (six of eight) and patchy consolidation (four of eight). With the exception of a single patient, these
lesions were distributed bilaterally (seven of eight) and predominantly on the back in most cases (five of eight).Table 1 Summary of
clinical characteristics of polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema a Patient Authors Sex Age (yr) Comorbid disease Smoking
Situation Overheated temperature (°C) Exposure time SIRS Symptoms Treatment Outcome (treatment period) 1Harris et al. Male38NoN/RHeating
PTFE extruder in an oven at a laboratoryN/RN/RYesDyspneaAbsolute restDischarged (1 day)2Lee et al. Male43NoN/RMolding PTFE-containing
materials at a factory, dayshift worker>410 to 5109 hrYesDyspnea, malaiseIntubation, antibiotics, inotropicsDied (5 hr)3Lee et al.
Male37NoYesForeman of patient 2, with job different from that of patient 2 (monitoring, cutting and packing)>410 to 5109 hr (intermittently
exposed)NoDyspnea, fever, chest pain, chills, malaiseO2 Discharged (7 days)4Lee et al. Male22NoN/RColleague of patient 2, a night shift
worker with job different from that of patient 2 (monitoring, cutting and packing)>410 to 5109 hr (intermittently exposed)NoDyspnea, cough,
chest painN/RDischarged (9 days)5Robbins et al. Male38NoYesWelding PTFE-containing materials at a factory.>5603 hrYesDyspnea, cough, fever,
chest painO2, antibioticsDischarged (3 days)6Evans et al. Male49NoYesMolding PTFE-containing materials at a factory7401 hrN/ADyspnea, cough,
fever, throat painO2 Discharged (2 days)7Haugtomt et al. Male33NoN/RSanding Teflon-coated surface at a factoryN/R15 minYesDyspnea, fever,
chest pain, blood sputumDiuretics, antibiotics, dopamine, O2 Discharged (7 days)8Brubaker et al. MaleN/RNoYesSmoking PTFE-contaminated
cigarettes during commute470 to 812<10 minN/ADyspnea, cough, chest pain, chillsN/RDischarged (N/R)9Patel et al. Male40NoYesSmoking PTFE-
contaminated cigarettes in the home470 to 812<10 minYesDyspnea, cough, fever, chillsAlbuterolDischarged (2 days)10Tanino et al.
Female25NoYesSmoking PTFE-contaminated cigarettes in the home470 to 812<10 minutesNoDyspnea, cough, feverSteroidDischarged (10 days)11Silver
et al. Male21NoYesSmoking PTFE-contaminated cigarettes at a factory470 to 812<10 minYesDyspnea, cough, chills,
nausea/vomitingAntibioticsDischarged (1 day)12Strøm et al. Male36NoYesSmoking PTFE-contaminated cigarettes in the home470 to
812<10 minYesDyspnea, chillsAntibiotics, O2 Improved (1 day)13Myhre et al. Male25NoYesSmoking PTFE-contaminated cigarettes during commute470
to 812<10 minN/ADyspnea, chills, cough, headacheN/RImproved (19 hr)14Shimizu et al. Male29NoN/ROverheating PTFE-coated pan on fire in the
home>3916 hrNoDyspnea, coughO2 Discharged (3 days)15Toyama et al. Male59OSASYesOverheating PTFE-coated kitchenware in oven in the
home>3914 hrYesFever, throat painO2, diureticsDischarged (9 days)16Son et al. Male30BAYesOverheating PTFE-coated pan on fire in the
home>3917 hrNoDyspnea, cough, feverObservationDischarged (6 days)17Zanen et al. Female26Wilms’ tumorNoOverheating PTFE-coated kitchenware in
microwave oven in the home>391<10 minYesDyspnea, cough, fever, chest painO2, steroidDischarged (1 day)18Our patientMale35NoYesOverheating
PTFE coated pan on fire in the home>39110 hoursYesDyspnea, coughNPPV, sivelestatDischarged (11 days) aBA, Bronchial asthma; N/A, Not
available; NPPV, Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation; N/R, Not recorded; OSAS, Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome; PTFE,
Polytetrafluoroethylene; SIRS, Systemic inflammatory response syndrome.Table 2 Chest computed tomography characteristics of
polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema patients, n = 8 (%) Graphic pattern Patchy
consolidation4 (50)Ground-glass opacity8 (100)Peripheral area sparing6 (75)Interlobular septal thickening2 (25) Distribution Bilateral7
(87.5)Unilateral1 (12.5) Dominant lesion Dorsal5 (62.5)Ventral1 (12.5)No dominant lesion2 (25.0)CT, Computed tomography; PTFE,
Polytetrafluoroethylene. Summary of clinical characteristics of polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema a aBA, Bronchial
asthma; N/A, Not available; NPPV, Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation; N/R, Not recorded; OSAS, Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome;
PTFE, Polytetrafluoroethylene; SIRS, Systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Chest computed tomography characteristics of
polytetrafluoroethylene fume–induced pulmonary edema CT, Computed tomography; PTFE, Polytetrafluoroethylene. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first systematic review of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema. Because of the ubiquity of this material, all health care
providers need to be aware of the characteristics of this disease. Our search revealed that (1) the essential etiology can be inflammatory
pulmonary vascular hyperpermeability, (2) the radiological features can be bilateral ground-glass opacity or a patchy consolidation with
clear peripheral area sparing and (3) the duration of PTFE fume exposure is a possible aggravating factor. First, the essential etiology of
PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema can be inflammatory pulmonary vascular hyperpermeability. Flu-like symptoms and SIRS frequently accompany
exposure, which are probably associated with pulmonary inflammation as a result of the toxic fumes. In one report, authors described the
transbronchial lung biopsy findings in a patient with PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema, revealing marked neutrophil migration into the
alveoli with alveolar edema . In a laboratory study, remarkable neutrophil infiltration and an increased level of inflammatory cytokines
were found in the pulmonary lavage of rats that had been exposed to PTFE fumes . Both are consistent with the pathological findings
regarding the exudative phase of ARDS. NPPV and neutrophil elastase inhibitors are known to work effectively in treating disease of this
etiology. Second, the radiological features of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema can be bilateral ground-glass opacity or patchy
consolidation with clear peripheral area sparing. Bilateral ground-glass opacity and patchy consolidation are consistent with the chest CT
findings regarding the exudative phase of ARDS, supporting the above-mentioned etiology. However, the contrast between the lesion and the
spared peripheral area was striking, and these characteristics were clearly distinguishable from the common radiological features of ARDS.
One plausible explanation for the spared area is that it is more difficult for the toxic fumes to reach the peripheral alveoli;
consequently, this area escapes inflammation. The other explanation is related to the characteristics of lymph flow in the lungs. Tiny
particles in PTFE fumes may be removed by the lymphatic drainage system, directly or by means of macrophage ingestion and migration . The
lymph proceeds in two opposite directions: centripetally in the center of the lung and centrifugally in the periphery . Centrifugal lymph
flow in the lung periphery may effectively remove PTFE particles to the pleural lymphatics rather than centripetally by means of the lymph
flow to the hilum . Dorsally dominant infiltration can also be shown by the characteristic of the lymph flow in the lungs. Lymphatic
function is known to be poorest in dorsal lungs, resulting in poor clearance of particles . The above-mentioned radiologic features can be
helpful in making a diagnosis. We also noted that a temperature of approximately 400°C may be the threshold for developing PTFE fume–induced
pulmonary edema in humans. Animal studies involving rats have shown the development of lethal pulmonary edema when the rats were exposed to
fumes produced by overheated PTFE at around 450°C , which is consistent with our findings. Finally, the duration of PTFE fume exposure is a
possible aggravating factor. Lee and colleagues proposed a dose–response relationship between PTFE fume exposure and disease severity in
that the most heavily exposed worker (patient 2) died, whereas less-exposed workers (patient 3, a foreman not restricted to the PTFE room;
and patient 4, a nightshift molder) recovered . Our survey also supports this finding. Lesser-exposed patients, such as those whose PTFE
fume exposure was related to smoking, recovered quickly, whereas more heavily exposed patients, such as our patient, required longer
treatment periods. As discussed, the patient who was exposed to PTFE fumes for 9 hours died despite intubation . In comparison, we
successfully treated a similar patient (exposed to fumes for 10 hours) with NPPV and early administration of a neutrophil elastase
inhibitor, suggesting that these are suitable treatments for cases involving pulmonary edema of this etiology . Our experience with our
patient, as well as our literature review, suggest that the essential etiology of PTFE fume–induced pulmonary edema is increased pulmonary
vascular permeability caused by an inflammatory response to the toxic fumes. The CT findings that distinguish PTFE fume–induced pulmonary
edema can be bilateral ground-glass opacity or a patchy consolidation with clear peripheral area sparing. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Acute respiratory distress syndrome Bronchial asthma Computed tomography Not available Non-
invasive positive pressure ventilation Not recorded Obstructive sleep apnea Polytetrafluoroethylene Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RH, YO, YC, and KS contributed to
patient management. RH and YO performed systematic literature surveys independently, and drafted the initial manuscript. RI performed a
systematic literature survey independently, and participated in drafting of the paper. KK and TT conducted a systematic radiological review,
and critically reviewed the manuscript. KS, YC, and CT critically reviewed the manuscript, and participated in drafting of the paper. All
the authors have read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Megumi Okada and Akinori Matumoto (Department of Anesthesiology and
Critical Care Medicine, Ohta Nishinouchi Hospital, Koriyama, Japan) for their assistance with patient management.
