Fibromas are benign tumors that are composed of fibrous or connective tissue. They can grow in all organs, arising from mesenchymal tissue
(a type of loose connective tissue). The term “fibroblastic” or “fibromatous” is used to describe tumors like the fibroma. This 69-year-old
male presented to us with giant, multiple, very slowly progressive, painless, noninflammatory, soft, trans-illuminant, pedunculated lid
swellings with a two decade history. There were no other swellings on the body. He was clinically normal on systemic examination except for
the immature cataracts in both eyes. The diagnosis was confirmed on histopathology. Simple excision removed all the soft fibromas virtually
leaving no scar. A review of literature world-wide using Medline Plus/PubMed revealed this to be the only reported case of multiple giant
soft fibromas of the lid. Few reports have described similar lesions elsewhere. In one of the studies reviewing 855 cases of primary lid
tumors, fibro-epithelial polyps (FEP) (n = 56) represented 8.6% of all benign lesions. There was a slight preference for the right eyelid,
and most cases were diagnosed in males in this report. This lesion was evenly distributed on both the upper and lower eyelids. Other studies
have shown higher prevalence with an incidence of 46%, and an equal presence was observed in either sex. FEP are also known as acrochordons
and skin tags. The exact etiological cause still remains unknown. A 69-year-old male presented to us with a history of droopy skin over the
eyelids since the past 2 decades. Being advised to seek medical opinion from elsewhere over a decade ago, he did not undergo any clinical
examination because he was neither motivated nor did the lid mass cause him any difficulty except for abnormal cosmesis [Fig. 1]. The
lesions developed initially as small folds in the skin of the lid [Fig. 2 – left upper lid] and over two decades assumed the current
proportions. The fibromas were multiple in number (one on each lid), very slowly progressive, soft and trans-illuminant [Fig. 3]. The larger
of the masses encompassed the lid fold [Fig. 4] and was pedunculated. Solitary lid masses Close up of small fibro-epithelial polyps
developing on the left upper lid Trans illumination of fibro-epithelial polyps Base encompassing lid There were no episodes of pain or
inflammation. There were no associated findings suggestive of neurofibromatosis. The patient's daughter was getting married in the coming
month. It was at her advice and suggestion that the father finally decided to undertake the surgical removal of the lesions. He underwent
simple excision [Fig. 5] of the lesions on December 7, 2011 and had an uneventful recovery. The base of lesions was clamped with a small
artery forceps and crushed. Surgical scissors were used to excise the crushed area thereby removing the lesion from its base. The
availability of loose skin led to overlap of tissue thereby requiring no suturing in layers. Histopathologic examination using hemotoxylin
eosin staining revealed stratified squamous epithelium lining a connective tissue stalk showing loose fibro-collagenous tissue containing
congested blood vessels and chronic inflammatory infiltrate. No adnexal structures were seen. This confirmed the diagnosis [Fig. 6]. Simple
excision of lesions Histopathologic examination at ×100 revealing details Fibromas are benign tumors that are composed of fibrous or
connective tissue. The term fibrosarcoma is reserved for malignant tumors. There are two common fibroma types seen on the skin. They are the
hard fibromas (dermatofibroma) and the soft fibroma (skin tag). The hard fibroma (fibroma durum) consists of many fibers and few cells. If
seen on the skin it is known as a dermatofibroma, a special form of which is the keloid. A dermatofibroma is a round, brownish to purple
growth commonly found on the legs and arms. Dermatofibromas contain scar tissue and feel like hard lumps in the skin. Soft fibromas also
called “FEP,” “acrochordons,” or “cutaneous tags” occur as three types: (a) Multiple small, furrowed papules, especially on the neck and in
the axillae, generally only 1–2 mm long; (b) single or multiple filiform, smooth growths in varying locations, about 2 mm wide and 5 mm
long; and (c) solitary bag-like, pedunculated growths, usually about 1 cm in diameter but occasionally much larger, seen most commonly on
the lower trunk. The soft fibroma consists of many loosely connected cells and less fibroid tissue then the hard dermatofibroma. Most FEP
vary in size from 2 to 5 mm in diameter, although larger FEP up to 5 cm in diameter are sometimes evident. The most frequent localizations
are the neck and the axilla, but any skin fold, including the groin, may be affected. These tumors are usually asymptomatic, and they do not
become painful unless inflamed or irritated. Pedunculated lesions may become twisted, infarcted, and fall off spontaneously. Only on rare
occasions, histological examination of a clinically diagnosed FEP reveals a basal or squamous cell carcinoma. Various methods of removal
include cryotherapy for smaller lesions and ligation with a suture or a copper wire have been described; however, freezing of the
surrounding skin during liquid nitrogen cryotherapy may result in dyschromic lesions. Taking hold of the acrochordon with forceps and
applying cryotherapy to the forceps may provide superior results when the lesions are multiple and smaller in size. In our case, simple
excision gave excellent cosmesis leaving virtually no scar [Figs. 7–9]. An online search using Medline Plus/PubMed and other medical search
engines revealed this to be the only published case with photographs in detail. These lesions can easily be treated at any center using
simple techniques. Postoperative photograph right eye close up Postoperative photograph left eye close up Postoperative photograph overview
of scar and appearance of face Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
