A 53 year-old male presented with a one-day history of a swollen arm and dull, aching pain in the right upper extremity. The patient
reported commencing exercising daily over the prior week with a modified, oscillating dumbbell; commonly referred to as a Shake Weight.
Imaging revealed an occlusive thrombus in the right axillary, proximal brachial and basilic veins. The patient was treated with a 24-hour
tPA infusion followed by mechanical thrombectomy, balloon angioplasty, and stent placement for a residual thrombus and stenosis. The patient
was discharged the following day on warfarin and aspirin. This is the first report of effort-induced thrombosis of the upper extremity
following the use of a modified, oscillating dumbbell. Due to the growing popularity of modified dumbbells and the possible risk for
axillary vein thrombosis, consideration should be made to caution consumers of this potential complication. The online version of this
article (doi:10.1186/s13019-015-0264-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Upper extremity deep venous
thrombosis (UEDVT) is a thrombus within the subclavian, axillary or brachial vein. UEDVT is much less common than it’s lower extremity
counterpart, but is associated with similar complications including: post-thrombotic syndrome, recurrent thrombosis, and rarely, pulmonary
embolism. Thrombosis of the upper extremity is divided into primary and secondary causes; primary UEDVT occurs spontaneously in the setting
of strenuous upper extremity effort or in the absence of known thrombotic risk factors. Secondary UEDVT is related to a known risk factor
such as malignancy or central venous catheters . The thoracic outlet is bound by the clavicle and subclavius muscle anteriorly, the scalenus
anticus muscle laterally, the first rib posterior-inferiorly and the costoclavicular ligament medially. Compression of the neurovascular
bundle within the thoracic outlet is termed thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) and is present in approximately 60% of patients with UEDVT .
Effort-induced thrombosis, or Paget-Schroetter syndrome, is a clinical manifestation of TOS caused by distortion and narrowing of the vein
within the tunnel by repetitive upper extremity exercise. Historically, Paget-Schroetter syndrome has been associated with unusual pursuits
or occupations including: golf, tennis, baseball, football, weight lifting, painting, etc. A literature review of recent case reports
reveals UEDVT associated with baseball, surfing, and weight lifting . Per Urschel and Razzuk, the preferred treatment for Paget-Schroetter
syndrome is thrombolytic therapy followed by prompt resection of the first rib for neurovascular decompression . However, surgery is not
without its risks (e.g. pneumothorax, nerve injury, etc.) and no randomized controlled trials have been performed to investigate the optimal
treatment of UEDVT . This is the first report of the development of effort-induced thrombosis of the upper extremity following the use of an
increasingly popular, modified, oscillating dumbbell. This is a 53 year-old African American male, with no significant past medical history
who presented with a one-day history of right arm swelling. He woke up with a swollen arm and dull, aching pain in the right upper
extremity. Our patient, a retired office manager, reported exercising daily over the prior week with a new “vibrating device” (Figure 1).
Patient denies any past interventions to the right upper extremity.Figure 1Oscillating dumbbell exercise device. A photograph of the
patient’s modified, oscillating dumbbell, which he commenced exercise with one week prior to presentation with an upper extremity deep vein
thrombosis. Oscillating dumbbell exercise device. A photograph of the patient’s modified, oscillating dumbbell, which he commenced exercise
with one week prior to presentation with an upper extremity deep vein thrombosis. Patient denied: known malignancy, personal or family
history of DVT, trauma, intravenous therapy, and drug abuse. Physical examination was unremarkable except for extensive right upper
extremity swelling. See Additional file 1. Laboratory testing revealed CBC, CMP, PT/INR and aPTT all within normal limits. A venous doppler
study revealed an occlusive thrombus in the right axillary, proximal brachial and basilic veins. Access via a forearm vein was achieved and
venography confirmed extensive occlusion of the right axillary, proximal brachial and basilic veins (Figure 2).Figure 2Venogram 1.
Venography confirmed extensive occlusion of the right axillary, proximal brachial and basilic veins. Venogram 1. Venography confirmed
extensive occlusion of the right axillary, proximal brachial and basilic veins. An infusion catheter was positioned to allow tPA infusion of
the thrombus throughout its entire length over the ensuing 24 hours. The following day, a venogram revealed the presence of a small residual
thrombus and a 50% stricture in the right axillary vein (Figure 3). Mechanical thrombectomy using an angiojet device, followed by balloon
angioplasty and deployment of a 12 × 6 mm stent resolved the residual thrombosis and stenosis. Completion angiography showed complete
resolution of the stricture and thrombus (Figure 4).Figure 3Venogram 2. Venography following 24 hours of tPA infusion revealed small
residual thrombus and 50% stricture in the right axillary vein.Figure 4Venogram 3. Completion angiography showed complete resolution of the
stricture and thrombus following mechanical thrombectomy, balloon angioplasty, and stent placement. Venogram 2. Venography following
24 hours of tPA infusion revealed small residual thrombus and 50% stricture in the right axillary vein. Venogram 3. Completion angiography
showed complete resolution of the stricture and thrombus following mechanical thrombectomy, balloon angioplasty, and stent placement. The
patient was discharged the following day on warfarin and aspirin. There were no adverse or unanticipated events. Our patient exercised
regularly for years and began using the device only one week prior to developing an UEDVT. The device is a modified dumbbell with a
centralized spring and weight attached to either end. When shaken, the weight bounces off either end creating self-perpetuated oscillations
and increased resistance. The resistance leads to sustained thoracic wall and arm muscle contraction, purportedly increasing the effects of
exercise by forcing the muscles to work harder. Fitness IQ, the company that makes the original device, the Shake Weight, has termed this
technology “dynamic inertia” . In 2010, Shake Weight sales had reached $40 million with the expectation of selling 10 million more units .
In the absence of any other etiology for thoracic outlet syndrome or other precipitating factors, we hypothesize that our patient developed
an axillary vein thrombosis as a result of the recently initiated exercise with the device. We hypothesize the mechanism of injury to the
axillary vein when such devices are used is repeated compression and traumatization to the vein by the contracted muscles that form the
boundaries of thoracic outlet, thereby initiating clot formation. In this case, first rib resection was not pursued due to the belief that
it was initiation with the device alone that caused the thrombosis. However, should the patient experience a recurrence, first rib resection
would be a viable treatment option. This is the first report of the development of effort-induced thrombosis of the upper extremity
following the use of an increasingly popular, modified, oscillating dumbbell. This association has never been reported and is worth further
monitoring. Due to the growing popularity of modified dumbbells and the possible risk for axillary vein thrombosis, consideration should be
made to caution consumers of this potential complication. Pharmacological and mechanical thrombolysis is effective in resolving the axillary
vein thrombosis and should be considered in healthy, athletic individuals. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Additional file 1: Timeline of interventions and outcomes. Timeline of interventions and outcomes. Upper extremity deep vein thrombosis
Thoracic outlet syndrome Tissue plasminogen activator Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions KH carried out the literature review, gathered imaging and drafted the manuscript. BB participated in the design of
the study and helped to draft the manuscript. HS conceived of the case report, participated in its design, and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
