An 11-year-old healthy female presented to the emergency department with three days of worsening suprapubic pain, urinary retention, and
constipation. She was afebrile with normal vital signs. Her physical examination was notable for suprapubic distention and bulging pink
vaginal tissue at the introitus. Bedside ultrasound suggested a distended bladder. Placement of a Foley catheter returned 550mL of urine
with improvement of the patient’s discomfort, but repeat ultrasound visualized a persistent hypoechoic mass adjacent to the newly
decompressed bladder (Figure). The obstructive cause of her abdominal pain and urinary retention was revealed by magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the pelvis, which confirmed distal vaginal agenesis with uterine distention from hematometrocolpos (Figure). A Foley catheter was
temporarily left in place, and after pediatric and gynecological consultation and operative intervention, she was later free of obstructive
symptoms after surgical correction of her vaginal agenesis and hematometrocolpos. Müllerian duct abnormalities, such as imperforate hymen,
transverse vaginal septum, and vaginal agenesis, may be associated with abdominal pain or other symptoms of pelvic outlet obstruction,
hematocolpos, and amenorrhea in the early adolescent years.1–4 While the prevalence of congenital uterine anomalies is estimated at 6.7%,
Müllerian agenesis with lack of vaginal or uterine development is thought to only occur in one out of every 4,000–10,000 females.1,2 These
errors in development are strongly associated with a number of other congenital anomalies including urinary tract abnormalities such as
renal agenesis in an estimated 18–40% of patients, particularly when a hymen is absent.3–5 Visualization of vaginal-appearing tissue on
physical examination instead of bulging bluish tissue more indicative of an imperforate hymen may suggest vaginal agenesis, but both
ultrasound and MRI are recommended to adequately characterize pelvic and neighboring anatomy.6 Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full
text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Long axis transabdominal sonographic view (left) of the patient’s
abdomen revealing intrauterine low-level echogenic material (asterisk) communicating with the vaginal vault and a Foley catheter within a
decompressed bladder (arrow). Sagittal magnetic resonance image (right) demonstrating fluid-filled distention (asterisk) of the patient’s
uterus and vagina to the level of the introitus and a Foley catheter within the decompressed bladder (arrow).
