Aortic pseudoaneurysm formation subsequent to concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT) for esophageal cancer patient with esophageal metallic
stent insertion is a rare condition. A 52-year-old man with esophageal cancer, cT4N1M0, stage IIIC, was treated with concurrent weekly
cisplatin (30 mg/m2) and 5-Fluorouracil (500 mg/m2) as well as radiotherapy (50.4 Gy in 28 fractions) for 6 weeks. An esophageal metallic
stent was inserted for dysphagia 1 week after initiation of CCRT. During the treatment regimen, the platelet count dropped to less than
200 × 103 /μL. One month after the completion of CCRT, chest CT revealed the presence of an aortic pseudoaneurysm as well as aortoesophageal
fistulas. A thoracic aortic endografting was performed and the patient responded well to surgery. However, the patient died 2 months later
due to a nosocomial infection. Multimodality treatment for esophageal cancer comprising cisplatin-based CCRT and esophageal metallic stent
placement near a great vessel may increase the risk of pseudoaneurysm formation. Treatment options for patients with esophageal cancer and
malignant dysphagia include endoluminal stenting, surgery, radiotherapy, brachytherapy, chemotherapy, and chemoradiotherapy (concurrent
chemoradiotherapy, CCRT).1,2 Eldeeb and El-Hadaad3 showed that radiotherapy combined with stenting offers a survival advantage. However,
metallic stents have been shown to cause irradiation dose perturbation between the stent and surrounding tissues, resulting in intimal
thickening, proteoglycan deposition and increased inflammatory cell content, thereby increasing the risk of vascular disease development in
cancer patients who undergo RT.4,5 Cisplatin (CDDP) and 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) are reported to be the most active chemotherapeutic regimens
for patients with esophageal cancer.6 Both drugs are radiosensitizors that enhance the cytotoxic effect of irradiation.7,8 Additionally,
they also cause the damage of the arterial endothelium.9,10 Aortic arch pseudoaneurysm is a rare condition but carries a high risk of
rupture. Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy followed by esophagectomy caused aortic fistula and related to sudden death for esophageal carcinoma
had been reported.11 However, pseudoaneurysm development as a result of intraluminal stenting and CCRT in patients with esophageal cancer
has never been reported. Herein, we present a case of aortic pseudoaneurysm development in a patient who underwent CCRT for esophageal
cancer and metallic stent placement for cancer-induced dysphagia. A 52-year-old man, with history of hypertension, was diagnosed with stage
IIIC (cT4N1M0, American Joint Committee on Cancer, 7th Edition) squamous cell carcinoma at the middle third of the esophagus (Figures 1A and
2) underwent neoadjuvant CCRT comprising concurrent weekly CDDP (30 mg/m2) and 5-FU (500 mg/m2) as well as radiotherapy (50.4 Gy in 28
fractions) for 6 weeks (Figure 3). The regimen in the clinical trial of Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB 9781) was 4-weekly schedule of
chemotherapy.6 However, the regimen would be modified to be weekly regimen12 for patients who could not be treated in hospitalization or
with poor compliance. Therefore, 4-weekly and weekly schedule both were the standard CCRT protocols in our hospital for esophageal cancer
patients. Retrospective data were collected with the approval of the Institutional Review Board of Far Eastern Memorial Hospital (FEMH-
IRB-103174-C). Approximately 1 week after beginning the CCRT regimen, however, the patient reported having difficulty swallowing semi-liquid
food. A WallFlex™ esophageal stent (18 mm × 123 mm, Boston Scientific Corporation, MA) with metallic radiopaque material that is formed into
a cylindrical mesh and was partially covered with a translucent silicone polymer to restrict tumor ingrowth through the wire mesh. After the
stent was inserted, the CCRT regimen was continued. Platelet count at the time of stent insertion was 234 × 103/μL. In the following weeks,
the platelet counts ranged from 91 × 103 to 153 × 103/μL. One month after completion of the CCRT regimen, histopathologic analysis of biopsy
specimens of the esophageal tumor revealed inflammation with ulceration change (Figure 1B) and positron emission tomography (PET)–computed
tomography (CT) showed a residual esophageal tumor and persistently enlarged lymph nodes with intact aortic vessel (Figure 4A). However, a
few days after the PET-CT study the patient developed midthoracic pain and a hemorrhagic cough. Chest CT at the emergency department
revealed a pseudoaneurysm arising from the medial aspect of the proximal descending aorta (Figure 4B). Massive hematemesis was subsequently
noted. Emergency surgery was performed to repair the pseudoaneurysm. During the surgery, aorto-esophageal fistulas with active bleeding
located about 2 cm distal to the left subclavian artery orifice were noted. Aortography revealed no evidence of rupture at the descending
aorta. A thoracic aortic endografting with an aortic stent (8.7 cm in length) was performed and the patient responded well to surgery. One
month later, he received adjuvant chemotherapy with CDDP (70 mg/m2) and 5-FU (1000 mg/m2) for residual esophageal cancer (Figure 4A).
However, the patient developed symptoms of fever and cough with leukocytosis. The chest X-ray revealed increased infiltrations over left
lower lung. Hospital-acquired pneumonia was impressed, and empirical antibiotics were prescribed firstly. The culture of sputum and blood
were negative findings, respectively. Unfortunately, progressive pneumonia with septic shock and respiratory failure was noted even through
aggressive treatment. Patient expired 2 months after the thoracic aortic endografting. Autopsy was suggested. However, patient's families
want to maintain the patient's body completely without surgery procedure especially after patient expired. To obey the wish of family,
autopsy was not conducted for determining the reason of the patient's death. (A) Histopathologic analysis revealed predominantly small blue
round cells with invasive nests that had grown beyond the mucosa (hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification ×100), findings suggestive of
squamous cell carcinoma. (B) Representative hematoxylin eosin staining after chemoradiation therapy (magnification ×100). Note the large
number of leukocytes, the marked accumulation of eosinophilic nucleoli, mixed inflammation, and debris in the mucosal layer. Chest computed
tomography (CT) shows an esophageal tumor with obstruction at the middle third portion of the esophagus invading the adventitia. Also note
the enlarged lymph node between the esophagus and the distal trachea. The dose distribution in the tumor and surrounding tissues. The high-
dose regions with radiation dose of 53.2 Gy are adjacent to the wall of the aorta. (A) Follow-up positron emission tomography scan 1 month
after the completion of concurrent chemoradiotherapy revealed a residual esophageal tumor and enlarged lymph nodes with intact aortic
vessel. (B) Chest CT shows a pseudoaneurysm arising from the medial aspect of the proximal descending aorta. A pseudoaneurysm is an
outpouching of a vessel involving a defect of the tunica intima and media that contains a hematoma.13 Numerous causes of pseudoaneurysm
formation have been reported, including infection, traumatic reaction, iatrogenic injury, suture dehiscence or loosening, infiltrating
neoplasms, tissue necrosis, and a low platelet count (<200 × 103 /μL).14–16 Radiotherapy is a well-known cause of vascular disease
especially when vessels are exposed to radiation doses ranging from 25 to 40 Gy.17 In our patient, the aortic pseudoaneurysm developed in a
region that received a total radiation dose of 53.2 Gy (Figures 3 and 4B). The metallic stent irradiated that could result in an overdose of
14% to 21% at a depth of 0.5 mm in the esophageal wall.18 Nevertheless, the dose perturbation caused by the backscatter of WallFlex™
esophageal stent ranges from 6% to 13%,4 resulting in an effective dose of 56.5–60.3 Gy for the patient reported here. These influences
might contribute to better tumor eradication but increases the probability of vascular changes. Radiotherapy also increases the production
of free radicals and oxidative stress, processes that upregulate numerous pathways pertinent to vascular disease, including matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP), adhesion molecules, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and smooth muscle cell proliferation and apoptosis, while
inactivating vasculoprotective nitric oxide (NO).19 Furthermore, fractionated doses increase the adhesiveness of aortic endothelial cells
through chemokine-dependent signaling from endothelial cells to leukocytes and significantly increase intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) mRNA and endothelial adhesiveness, which also accelerate vascular inflammation.20,21 Interestingly, neutrophils localized at
inflammatory sites can potentially degrade collagen by releasing members of the MMP family.22 Moreover, histological examination has shown
that radiotherapy can induce intimal thickening and inflammatory cell infiltrates.5 Histologic examination of biopsy specimens from our
patient also disclosed neutrophil accumulation and mixed inflammation in the mucosal layer after CCRT (Figure 1B). Papalambros et al23 found
that the concentration of MMP-9 in the arterial wall correlates positively with aneurysm size and radiotherapy has been shown to increase
the expression of MMP-9.24 Wilson et al25 found that the concentration of MMP-8 is increased at the site of abdominal aortic aneurysm
rupture, and radiotherapy also enhances the expression of MMP-8, which modulates the pharmacokinetics of anticancer drugs.26 CDDP and 5-FU
are radiosensitizors that enhance the cytotoxic effects of radiotherapy.7,8 Although CCRT is more effective at tumor eradication than
radiotherapy alone, the combined use of CDDP, 5-FU, and radiotherapy can cause unpredictable localized and systemic vascular inflammation
with a higher incidence of atherosclerotic disease, coronary artery disease, and myocardial infarction.9,10 A previous study showed that
CDDP results in a decrease in NO production and the upregulation of ICAM-1 expression in endothelial cells that accelerate vascular
inflammation.20,21,27 Furthermore, an experimental study in rabbits showed that damage to the intima caused by 5-FU occasionally results in
thrombus formation.10 Cwikiel et al28 found that the severity of endothelial injury was proportional to the incidence of thrombus formation.
It could be reasonably hypothesized that CDDP-based regimens concurrent with radiotherapy not only sensitize the treatment effects of
radiotherapy but also synchronize endothelial injury. Aortic degeneration and atherosclerosis are the major causes of aotic aneurysms.29
Hypertension is a well-known predisposing factor for vascular degeneration and atherosclerosis. Vardulaki et al30 found that hypertension
was an important risk factor for the development of abdominal aortic aneurysm, which increased the risk by 30% to 40%. Also, the prevalence
of hypertension was over 60% in populations with thoracic aortic aneurysm.31 The degradation of extracellular matrix proteins by proteases
like MMP has the primary role for vascular degeneration and atherosclerosis, and will weaken the aortic wall.29 Combined with the increased
concentration and enhanced expression of MMP by RT, and vascular inflammation correlated to the radiosensitizors of CDDP and 5-FU, the
underlying hypertension of our patient may accentuate the impairment of aortic wall, and probably increase the incidence of aneurysms
formation. The insertional procedure of metallic stent might contribute to the traumatic injury of aortic and esophageal walls to form the
fistula. Schweigert et al32 found that among 17 patients with anastomotic leakage after esophagectomy who underwent endoscopic esophageal
stent implantation, 18% developed aortic erosion followed by aortoesophageal fistula. Homann et al33 revealed that patients with esophageal
metallic stent implantation experienced esophageal wall and respiratory tract impairment, and the incidence of delayed complications of
esophagorespiratory fistula was 9%. A platelet count below 200 × 103/μL has been shown to be a predictor of iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm after
percutaneous endovascular procedures.15 In our patient, platelet counts ranged from 91 to 153 × 103/μL 2 weeks after initiation of CCRT that
perhaps increased the incidences of iatrogenic psuedoaneurysm also. Multimodality treatment for esophageal cancer comprising CDDP-based CCRT
and esophageal metallic stent placement near a great vessel may increase the risk of pseudoaneurysm formation. Abbreviations: CCRT =
concurrent chemoradiotherapy, CDDP = Cisplatin, CT = computed tomography, 5-FU = 5-Fluorouracil, ICAM-1 = intercellular adhesion molecule 1,
MMP = matrix metalloproteinases, NO = nitric oxide, PET = positron emission tomography. The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.
