This clinical case reports the treatment of an Angle Class II malocclusion in a young woman with a balanced face affected by agenesis of
second and third mandibular molars and subsequent extrusion of second maxillary molars. The atypical and peculiar occlusal anomaly led to
individualized treatment proposed in order to normalize dental malpositions, with subsequent rehabilitation of edentulous areas by means of
a multidisciplinary approach. This case was presented to the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics (BBO) in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for obtaining the title of certified by the BBO. O presente caso clínico relata o tratamento de uma má
oclusão de Classe II de Angle, em uma jovem com face harmoniosa, porém agravada por agenesias de segundos e terceiros molares inferiores e
consequente extrusão dos segundos molares superiores. A anomalia oclusal atípica e peculiar levou a uma proposta de tratamento
individualizada, visando normalizar os maus posicionamentos dentários e uma posterior reabilitação das áreas edêntulas, por meio de uma
abordagem multidisciplinar. O presente caso foi apresentado à Diretoria do Board Brasileiro de Ortodontia e Ortopedia Facial (BBO), como
parte dos requisitos para a obtenção do título de Diplomado pelo BBO. A female patient presented for initial examination at the age of 14
years and three months and was found to be in good general health. No significant information was found in her past medical and dental
records. She did not have, nor did she report having, any deleterious oral habits. As chief complaint she reported that some mandibular
teeth were missing, which resulted in the presence of spaces, rotations and difficulty chewing in the posterior region. She had little
growth potential, as she reported that her menarche had occurred when she was about 12 years old. While in many subjects the hereditary
component is involved in determining partial anodontia, this aspect was not investigated in this case. She had a rather well-balanced
mesofacial pattern without any serious neuromuscular functional changes, as well as a slightly convex profile and slightly protrusive
maxillary and mandibular lips (UL-S line = 3mm LL-S line = 2 mm). This feature seemed fully compatible with the patient's age group (Fig 1
and Table 1). Figure 1 -Initial facial and intraoral photographs. Table 1 -Initial (A) and final (B) cephalometric values. Measurements
Normal A B Dif. A/B Skeletal pattern SNA (Steiner) 82° 78° 78° 0 SNB (Steiner) 80° 76° 76.5° 0.5 ANB (Steiner) 2° 2° 1.5° 0.5 Angle of
convexity (Downs) 0° 2° 1° 1 Y axis (Downs) 59° 61° 62° 1 Facial angle (Downs) 87° 87° 87° 0 SN-GoGn (Steiner) 32° 31° 30° 1 FMA (Tweed) 25°
26° 24° 2 Dental pattern IMPA (Tweed) 90° 85° 89° 4 1.NA (degrees) (Steiner) 22° 17° 18° 1 1-NA (mm) (Steiner) 4 mm 3.5 mm 2 mm 1.5 1.NB
(degrees) (Steiner) 25° 20° 20° 0 1-NB (mm) (Steiner) 4 mm 3.5 mm 3 mm 0.5 - Interincisal angle (Downs) 130° 145° 147° 2 1-APo (Ricketts) 1
mm 0.5 mm 0 mm 0.5 Profile Maxillary lip — S-line (Steiner) 0 mm 3 mm 2.5 mm 0.5 Mandibular lip — S-line (Steiner) 0 mm 2 mm 1 mm 1 Dental
analysis (Figs 1 and 2) disclosed Angle Class II malocclusion, subdivision right, aggravated by the absence of second and third mandibular
molars, distal migration of mandibular posterior teeth, and extrusion of second maxillary molars. In addition to the aforementioned teeth,
tooth #18 was also missing. She presented asymmetry of maxillary canines in the anteroposterior direction and no coincidence between
maxillary and mandibular midlines and the midsagittal plane. The maxillary midline was shifted to the left while the mandibular one was
shifted to the right.1 , 2 She had an increased overbite with sharp incisal disocclusion and well-adjusted anterior centric stop. In the
mandibular dental arch, there was generalized diastema, pronounced in the region between canines and first premolars. Figure 2 -Initial
casts. Panoramic radiograph (Fig 3) revealed good root formation of all teeth, in addition to absence of teeth #37 and 47. As regards third
molars, it was observed that only tooth #28 was going through early stages of formation, about Nolla stage 4, with all other teeth missing.
Figure 3 -Initial panoramic radiograph. Profile cephalometric radiograph and cephalometric tracing (Fig 4) revealed good maxillomandibular
relationship in the vertical (SN-GoGn = 31o; FMA = 26o), and anteroposterior direction, with Class I skeletal pattern (SNA = 78o; SNB = 76o;
ANB = 2o). Maxillary and mandibular incisors were slightly upright (1.NA = 17o; 1.NB = 20o), thereby increasing the interincisal angle (1/1
= 145o). These and other cephalometric values ​​are shown in Table 1. Figure 4 -Initial profile cephalometric radiograph (A) and
cephalometric tracing (B). Due to dental asymmetry, treatment planning aimed to produce a distal movement of maxillary molars on the right
side and, at the same time, maintain vertical control of maxillary second molars already extruded due to absence of antagonists. This could
allow retraction of the maxillary right quadrant so as to correct the anteroposterior asymmetry of canines and gain space to correct the
deviation in the maxillary midline. As anchorage, one alternative would be to use mini-implants, which would allow a more effective control
of distalization of maxillary teeth. However, the patient's legal guardians rejected this alternative, perhaps because it was not popular at
that time. A removable appliance was therefore used encapsulating teeth #17 and 27 to prevent extrusion, along with an expansion screw for
distalization (Fig 5). A hook was also placed on the right side to deploy Class II mechanics as soon as the mandibular arch had been
leveled. Thereafter, a fixed orthodontic appliance would be placed with a stop on the already distalized posterior teeth, and mechanics
applied to retract tooth #13, thereby achieving symmetry with its antagonist and space for midline correction. Figure 5 -Occlusal and right
lateral views of the removable orthodontic appliance. In the mandibular arch, the fixed orthodontic appliance would allow not only the
leveling of the occlusal plane, a necessary step to correct severe overbite, but also the mesialization of posterior teeth, especially on
the right side, to correct the most distal position of the right canine relative to the left. As a result, diastemata would be eliminated,
providing ideal canine and first molar occlusion and adjusting the spaces for rehabilitation with dental implants osseointegrated in the
region of second molars, in addition to correcting the mandibular midline. Treatment began eight months after completion of the initial
examination, when the patient was almost 15 years old. This waiting time was meant to postpone, albeit slightly, the completion of
treatment, bringing it a little closer to the end of patient's overall growth, when other rehabilitation resources, including dental
implants, would be available. For the maxillary arch, a removable orthodontic appliance was fabricated and installed.3 It consisted of a
Hawley retainer in the anterior region, Adams clasps on the first molars and bilateral screws to distalize teeth #17 and 27 (Fig 5). These
teeth were kept encapsulated in the acrylic to prevent further extrusion during distalization. The appliance also featured a hook on the
right side for Class II elastics. The patient was instructed to wear the appliance full time, removing it only to eat, engage in extreme
sports and learn foreign languages. The recommended activation was 1/4 of a turn, in each screw, every five days. To ensure better vertical
control, the maxillary second molars were replenished with self-curing acrylic resin every six weeks. Orthodontic bands were placed on the
mandibular first molars, and Roth prescription brackets with 0.018 x 0.030-in slots were bonded to all other teeth. Alignment and leveling
were then achieved using up to 0.016-in round stainless steel archwires. Class II elastics were thereafter introduced to be worn on the
right side, anchored on the removable appliance. After creating spaces between first and second molars, maxillary fixed orthodontic
appliance (Roth prescription, 0.018 x 0.030-in slot) was bonded after alignment and leveling, using the same sequence of round stainless
steel archwires. All teeth received a mesial stop after distalization to progressively move first molars, premolars and canines distally;
more so on the right side, to ensure symmetry between homologous teeth. A 0.016 x 0.022-in TMA archwire with T loops was used to intrude and
level the second molars. Then, 0.016 x 0,016-in and 0.016 x 0,022-in Elgiloy archwires were used for both maxillary and mandibular arches,
while intrusive steps4 were incorporated to second molars (Fig 6). At this treatment stage, Class II elastics were used bilaterally to
finish the relationship between molars and canines in an ideal occlusion. After obtaining the interocclusal space needed for rehabilitation
with dental implants osseointegrated in the region of mandibular second molars, the appliance was kept passive. It is noteworthy that
implant surgery was delayed by about six months in order to make it coincide, as much as possible, with the end of patient's growth. After
the osseointegration period, the prosthetic phase was performed concurrently with the removal of the fixed orthodontic appliance. Figure 6
-Bite-wing radiograph. Note intrusive step on the archwire in teeth #17 and 27. A removable plate with a Hawley retainer was used for
retention in the maxillary arch in the anterior region, and a fixed intercanine retainer made of round 0.028-in stainless steel wire was
used in the mandibular arch. In assessing the patient's final records (Figs 7-10) it is clear that all intended objectives were achieved.
Given that the patient did not grow during this period and no significant changes were implemented in the anterior region, only subtle
facial changes were noted. In correcting the dental problems, such as intrusion of maxillary second molars and correction of the curve of
Spee, the occlusal plane was leveled. Ideal occlusion was achieved between canines and molars at the expense of distal migration of
maxillary teeth, and especially the mesial migration of mandibular teeth, particularly on the right side. Correction of maxillary and
mandibular canine asymmetry in the anteroposterior direction, midline deviations, extrusion of mandibular second molars, reduced overbite,
closing of mandibular spaces, and rotations were all solved in stages by means of specific mechanics. Figure 7 -Final facial and intraoral
photographs Figure 8 -Final casts. Figure 9 -Final panoramic radiograph. Figure 10 -Final profile cephalometric radiograph (A), and final
cephalometric tracing (B). Figure 11 -Total (A) and partial (B) superimpositions of initial (black) and final (red) cephalometric tracings.
By correcting deep overbite, the mandible was probably moved to a more anterior position, thus contributing to a mild improvement in facial
harmony and providing, cephalometrically, a slight decrease in the value of the ANB angle (Steiner) from 2 to 1.5° (Table 1). As previously
mentioned, treatment was deliberately delayed by approximately eight months. However, it was later found that this delay should have lasted
longer, given that in the final phase, in agreement with the implant dentist, it proved more advisable to wait another six months before
performing surgery, which increased treatment time unnecessarily. On the other hand, delaying the process might probably mean increased
extrusion of maxillary second molars.5 - 11 Despite treatment time increase, patients and legal guardians were very pleased with the end
result, especially with regard to pleasant smile and balanced face. The goals initially set were met especially thanks to proper planning
and use of biomechanical and rehabilitation resources based on individualized and thorough diagnosis as required by all atypical cases.
Treatment of these cases should not follow predetermined classical protocols, but rather prompt professionals to hone their diagnostic
skills in planning and carrying out a treatment tailored to suit individual peculiarities. » Patients displayed in this article previously
approved the use of their facial and intraoral photographs. » The author reports no commercial, proprietary or financial interest in the
products or companies described in this article. Case report, approved by the Brazilian Board of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics
(BBO).
