An Amyand’s hernia is a rare occurrence of an inguinal hernia, with an estimated prevalence of 1%. The major complications of an Amyand’s
hernia include necrotizing fasciitis of the anterior abdominal wall and secondary intestinal perforation. Though the incidence of this type
of hernia is low, the appendix may easily become initially incarcerated, possibly leading to strangulation and perforation. A 92-year-old
female patient presented to our emergency department with clinical signs of an incarcerated right inguinal hernia, accompanied by fever. A
clinical examination revealed localized abdominal pain, reflecting to the right side of her groin. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis
(13,200/μL), while an abdominal X-ray showed colon distension with evidence of intestinal obstruction. Ultrasonography was performed and
confirmed the presence of an inflamed tubular structure inside her right inguinal canal. Our patient underwent emergency surgery. We started
with a right inguinal incision, which revealed an incarcerated right inguinal hernia, containing her ruptured appendix and showing
macroscopic evidence of malignancy. A specimen biopsy was immediately performed and the results showed a ruptured cecal adenocarcinoma. The
incision was slightly extended upwards, and a right hemicolectomy performed. Diagnosis of an Amyand’s hernia occurs primarily as an
incidental finding during surgery and the optimal therapeutic approach must be considered individually for each case. Owing to the rarity of
Amyand’s hernia and the wide variance of its clinical characteristics, every case provides useful information toward the treatment of this
type of hernia. An Amyand’s hernia is an extremely rare condition in which the hernia sac contains the appendix. This rare surgical problem
is estimated to occur in about 1% of adult patients who undergo surgery for an incarcerated inguinal hernia and has symptoms similar to
those of acute appendicitis. Amyand’s hernias can be classified into four subtypes: (I) Amyand’s hernia with a normal-appearing appendix in
the inguinal sac; (II) Amyand’s hernia with an inflamed appendix; (III) Amyand’s hernia with a perforation of the vermiform appendix; and
(IV) complicating intra-abdominal pathology. We describe a rare case of acute appendicitis with the simultaneous rupture of a cecal
carcinoma in a patient with an Amyand’s hernia. Coexistence of a malignancy of the appendix with an Amyand’s hernia is an unusual condition
because neoplasms of the appendix are very rare. A 92-year-old female patient presented to our emergency department with clinical evidence
of an incarcerated right inguinal hernia, accompanied by fever and local skin inflammation. During a clinical examination, our patient
reported abdominal tenderness, reflecting to the right side of her groin. Laboratory tests showed an increased number of white blood cells
(13,200/μL, neutrophils 72%), while an abdominal X-ray revealed a distended colon and signs of intestinal obstruction. Groin ultrasonography
showed an inflamed tubular structure in her right inguinal canal (Figure 1). This tubular structure looked similar to the appendix and was
extending along her inguinal canal, entering her right iliac fossa, with no remarkable adjacent free fluid collection in her
peritoneum.Figure 1Ultrasonography revealed an inflamed tubular structure inside the right inguinal canal. This tubular structure looked
similar to the appendix and was extending along the inguinal canal demonstrating the decision of emergency surgery treatment.
Ultrasonography revealed an inflamed tubular structure inside the right inguinal canal. This tubular structure looked similar to the
appendix and was extending along the inguinal canal demonstrating the decision of emergency surgery treatment. Our patient underwent
surgery, which revealed an incarcerated right inguinal hernia. The hernia sac included her appendix as well as a possibly malignant cecal
tumor, which had ruptured in the sac (Figure 2). Immediately, the right groin incision was slightly extended upwards and a right
hemicolectomy was performed. Βiopsy was taken and results returned before the hemicolectomy was performed. A histological examination of a
biopsy specimen showed adenocarcinoma of the cecum, stage Dukes B.Figure 2Emergency appendectomy for an incarcerated Amyand’s hernia
revealed a malignant rupture. Emergency appendectomy for an incarcerated Amyand’s hernia revealed a malignant rupture. The postoperative
course for our patient was uneventful but for a postoperative lung respiratory infection. She was discharged on the ninth postoperative day.
Amyand’s hernia was first described by Claudius Amyand in 1735, when he performed an appendectomy through a groin incision . Amyand’s hernia
is considered rare, with prevalence estimated to be around 1% among all known cases of incarcerated right inguinal hernias, most cases being
identified incidentally during surgery . They are more common in men and occur in people of all ages, from premature babies to elderly
patients . The majority of Amyand’s hernia cases involve right-sided inguinal hernias, most of which present with groin pain. Few cases of
left-sided inguinal Amyand’s hernia have been published; those that have were in patients with intestinal malrotation or a mobile cecum .
Reports in the literature show that an appendix located within an inguinal sac is more frequently inflamed compared to an appendix located
normally within the abdominal cavity. An explanation for this finding could be that when an appendix is located within a hernia sac inside
the inguinal canal it is more vulnerable to injury and secondary inflammation . In addition, contractions of the abdominal muscles can cause
intermittent compression of the appendix, which leads to ischemia of the appendix, infection and severe inflammation . Although localization
of the appendix within the inguinal canal does not always lead to appendicitis, this finding is not unusual . The major complications of
Amyand’s hernia include perforation of the appendix , necrotizing fasciitis of the anterior abdominal wall and secondary intestinal
perforation. Kueper et al. reported that perforation of an Amyand’s hernia can cause a peri-appendicular abscess . This type of hernia can
also present with testicular ischemia in newborn babies , hyperemia, and hemorrhagic infiltration into the hernia sac . Francko et al.
published a report of an Amyand’s hernia variant in which the appendix was localized in the inguinal canal, but undetected in the hernia sac
. An Amyand’s hernia is therefore a rare condition and is often diagnosed incidentally during hernia surgery. Quite often, the diagnosis is
only made in the operating room . It is often connected with rupture and peritonitis and can be a life-threatening condition, with mortality
rates ranging between 14% and 30% . Losanoff et al. proposed a classification system for Amyand’s hernias. When there is no described
appendix inflammation, the hernia is classified as type I; type II describes acute appendicitis within the hernia sac; and type III acute
appendicitis complicated with peritonitis. Finally, type IV acute appendicitis is accompanied by other diseases . Regarding the treatment of
Amyand’s hernias, many authors suggest that prophylactic appendectomy is not necessary when the appendix is found without signs of
inflammation . By contrast, other authors suggest that all patients have an appendectomy because the appendix could reherniate or,
especially in younger patients, cause appendicitis . Prophylactic resection of a left Amyand’s hernia should be performed in many cases
because a mobile vermiform appendix to mobile cecum can be reherniated or lead to appendicitis . However, an appendectomy increases the
surgical risk and could spread infection to an otherwise clean surgical field, which leads to unnecessary risk for superficial or deep
infection . In some cases of appendicitis, it has been suggested that surgical repair of the hernia increases wound contamination and
fistula formation, and may lead to hernia recurrence . In cases with a non-inflamed appendix, some authors suggest the use of a mesh to
treat an Amyand’s hernia . There have been few cases reported of a malignancy of the appendix coexisting with an Amyand’s hernia . This may
be because neoplasms of the appendix are rare and only found in 1% of cases. Most malignancies are carcinoids (80%) . It is noteworthy that
a number of cases have been reported of mucoceles associated with left colon cancer; in these cases, resection should be performed . Acute
appendicitis is a potential complication of an Amyand’s hernia. In these cases, the appendix appears in the inguinal sac, is inflamed, and
the hernia is usually diagnosed incidentally. During surgery for an incarcerated inguinal hernia, we should also keep in mind that
malignancy can be involved. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions IK, AI, PS, GE, ID and EN participated in the surgery, as well as
manuscript preparation. IK, AI, ID participated in the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. We would like to thank consultants of Department of Surgery, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Athens, for kindly
allowing their patient to be included in the study.
