CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: None. A 43-year-old woman with a unilateral cleft lip and palate, presenting a totally edentulous maxilla and
mandible with marked maxillomandibular discrepancy, attended the Prosthodontics section of the Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial
Anomalies, University of São Paulo for treatment. She could not close her mouth and was dissatisfied with her complete dentures. Treatment
planning comprised placement of six implants in the maxilla, four in the mandible followed by prostheses installation and orthognathic
surgery. The mandibular full arch prosthesis guided the occlusion for orthognathic positioning of the maxilla. The maxillary complete
prosthesis was designed to assist the orthognathic surgery with a provisional prosthesis (no metal framework), allowing reverse treatment
planning. Maxillary and mandibular realignment was performed. Three months later, a relapse in the position of the maxilla was observed,
which was offset with a new maxillary prosthesis. This isa complex interdisciplinary treatment and two-year follow-up is presented and
discussed. It should be considered that this type of treatment could also be applied in non-cleft patients. Treatment of adult patients with
cleft lip and palate who do not receive proper treatment at the appropriate age is challenging for prosthodontists. The situation becomes
worse in adulthood if teeth are lost and patients become edentulous, making prosthetic reconstruction even more challenging 5 . The lack of
information and limited surgical and dental expertise often preclude the proper facial reconstruction and dental rehabilitation for patients
with clefts presenting maxillomandibular discrepancies and malocclusion in adolescence. The appropriate timing and planning of surgical
reconstruction significantly reduce functional and esthetic disorders in patients with cleft lip and palate. Ideally, the treatment of
patients with clefts should begin at an early age. Many patients with clefts are partially or totally edentulous, and this condition is
nearly always associated with a deficient maxillomandibular skeletal relationship. Thus, orthognathic surgery for these patients should
fulfill the essential needs for prosthesis placement and also re-establish balance in the facial architecture, which is fundamental to
stability 3 . Studies have demonstrated that the functionality of the stomatognathic system is significantly reduced in patients with
complete dentures compared with that in individuals with natural teeth 14 . Endosseous implants increase the treatment efficacy of
edentulous patients, who may be rehabilitated by the placement of four to six implants, followed by fabrication of an implant-supported
fixed partial denture. Since the 1990s, implants have been used to restore acquired and developmental maxillocraniofacial defects, including
the rehabilitation of patients with clefts 18 . In 1995, Posnick and Tompson 15 reviewed the complications and long-term results of a
consecutive series of adolescents with clefts who underwent primary repair in childhood and later developed maxillary deformity and
malocclusion requiring orthognathic surgery. The methods used to manage maxillary deformity, malocclusion, residual oronasal fistula, and
bone defects in these adolescents were safe and reliable and offered the patients an enhanced quality of life. These aforementioned problems
affect patients’ psychosocial well-being, function, and esthetics, to some extent impairing their ability to integrate into society. A
follow-up study of young adults with cleft lip and palate showed that up to 30% of them experienced psychosocial maladjustment, with highest
levels of dissatisfaction with appearance, hearing, speech, dentition, and social life. As for education, occupation, and marital status,
the psychosocial difficulties observed during childhood persisted, with consequences in adolescence and adulthood, presenting problems in
terms of education, self-confidence, assertiveness, and independence, which generate inhibition 16 . Craniofacial morphology in patients
with cleft palate shows a short and retrusive maxilla in relation to the cranial base 6 . Also, the mandible is small and retrusive, with an
obtuse gonial angle and a steep mandibular plane. The Le Fort I osteotomy is commonly used for correction of maxillary deficiency in
patients with and without clefts, but differences in post-operative skeletal stability and soft-tissue changes exist. The tendency toward
relapse and the extent of relapse tend to be higher in patients with clefts 10 . Several factors related to the cleft itself, such as
surgery, method of fixation, neuromuscular adaptation, and orthodontics, might contribute to the tendency toward relapse 7 . Reverse
planning is fundamental when implants are used for the rehabilitation of edentulous patients, especially when orthognathic surgery is
required. Treatment planning in these cases should focus on the esthetic and functional outcomes expected. The present clinical case
involved functional features, mainly, but esthetic concepts were evaluated, since the patient was totally edentulous and could not close her
mouth completely. The rehabilitation of patients with cleft lip and palate at the Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies
(HRAC-USP) in Bauru, Brazil, includes interventions by an interdisciplinary team at appropriate times to achieve complete rehabilitation.
This paper reports the interdisciplinary orthognathic surgery/prosthesis treatment in a patient presenting marked maxillomandibular
discrepancies. The treatment was planned in collaboration by a maxillofacial surgeon and a prosthodontist. Scarce clinical cases are
reported in the literature with remarkable maxillomandibular discrepancy in cleft patients. Intensive scarring and tension of the soft
tissue have been reported as potential causes of relapse in patients with clefts 13 . As Bailey, et al. 1 (2004) wrote about the stability
and predictability of orthognathic surgery, downward movement of the maxilla is troublesome: if the maxilla is moved both forward and
downward, the vertical component is likely to relapse, although the horizontal component has a good chance of being retained. The purpose of
this article was to report the interdisciplinary orthognathic surgery/prosthesis treatment in a patient presenting significant
maxillomandibular discrepancies and totally edentulous. A surgeon and a prosthodontist planned the treatment. Although this is a rare case,
it should be taken into consideration the relevance of interdisciplinary treatments because the beneficial aspects could be more efficient
to the patient. A 43-year-old female patient, presenting unilateral cleft lip and palate (UCLP), sought care at the Hospital for
Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies (HRAC-USP). Her complaints were difficulties in functioning, poor esthetics, and poor prostheses
(two complete dentures), since the maxillomandibular relationship was distorted (Figure 1A and B). Her psychological state was also a
concern, and the patient’s expectations were high. Figure 1Initial condition presented by the patient when seeking care at the hospital (A)
observe the discrepancy in the maxillomandibular relationship (B) Figure 2Location and size of implants placed in the patient’s maxilla
(Titanium Fix, A. S. Technology, São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil) Six implants were placed in the maxilla and four in the mandible
(Figures 2 and 3). Maxillary and mandibular protocols were planned and mandibular full arch prosthesis was concluded before the orthognathic
surgery, to guide the occlusion. Figure 3Location and size of implants placed in the patient’s mandible (Conexão, Conexão Sistemas de
Prótese, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil) The first prosthesis was fabricated without consideration for the correct maxillomandibular
relationship. Conversely, an adequate relationship between the prosthesis with soft tissue and lip support was achieved. This new prosthesis
was fabricated in only acrylic resin, without metal framework, and its primary function was anchored to the orthognathic surgery. Since the
maxilla is presented in two segments, the maxillary prosthesis was sectioned to facilitate the orthognathic surgery planning, and leveling
the maxilla (Figure 4A). The newly achieved position was registered (Figure 4B) and duplicated, and two casts were obtained and mounted in a
semi-adjustable articulator (Figure 5A) to aid in the planned surgery (Figure 5B). Figure 4The prosthesis was cut to level the maxilla (A)
and new position was registered (B) Figure 5Casts mounted in a semi-adjustable articulator (A) and positioned correctly in the semi-
adjustable articulator (B) During surgery, the maxilla and the mandible were positioned correctly. A guide was used to direct this new
position, and a new maxillomandibular relationship was established. Note that the implants inserted before the surgery were important in
assisting the surgeon to obtain and maintain the suitable maxillomandibular position. After 3 months, as expected, the maxillomandibular
relationship relapsed (Figure 6A). A new maxillary complete prosthesis, with a favorable maxillomandibular relationship and metal framework,
was carried out to correct the occlusion (Figure 6B). Figure 6Relapse, 3 months after surgery (A), and case concluded, with a correct
maxillomandibular relationship (B) The case was concluded after orthognathic surgery and the patient was satisfied with the cosmetic and
functional outcome and was reintegrated into society. Two years later we can see the stability of the case report (Figures 7A, 7B). Figure
7Two years later, lateral (A) and frontal view (B) An interdisciplinary team should treat patients with clefts from early ages. These
individuals may present esthetic, functional, and psychological problems and occasionally, when they seek subsequent treatment, may present
remarkable maxillomandibular discrepancies. In this case report, a 43-year-old woman with unilateral cleft lip and palate could not close
her mouth and was dissatisfied with her complete dentures. Six upper and four lower implants were installed; however, her maxillomandibular
relationship was incorrect. Patients who undergo lip and palate repair in childhood often show restricted maxillary growth to a greater or
lesser extent, which may cause significant changes in the maxillomandibular relationship. These patients often exhibit a retruded maxilla in
relation to the anterior cranial base, compared with individuals without clefts 2 , 9 . Xu, et al. 19 (2014) reported that the maxilla in
patients with clefts is shorter and retroclined, which causes a significant maxillomandibular discrepancy. This problem must be addressed in
the treatment planning for patients with clefts 17 . Many cases at HRAC-USP require a combined approach between orthognathic surgery and
prosthodontics, as reported in the present case. Orthognathic surgery to correct facial disharmony is part of the normal follow-up for
patients with complete cleft lip and palate. Many factors are taken into account in the planning of corrective surgery, such as facial
profile, intermaxillary discrepancies, and the dentoalveolar relationship. Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy and advancement in patients with
cleft lip and palate are the procedures of choice, but have inherent limitations, such as vertical and horizontal relapse 7 , 8 .
Orthognathic surgery is recommended for patients with cleft lip and palate and having moderate to severe maxillary deficiency after growth.
Analysis of unofficial data indicates that around 40% of patients with complete cleft lip and palate at HRAC-USP undergo orthognathic
surgery, especially maxillary advancement surgery or combined maxillary advancement and mandibular retroposition. In such cases, the degree
of maxillary advancement required is considered clinically significant, usually around 4 mm; therefore, partial relapses are frequent 4 . In
a clinical study, Kumari, et al. 12 (2013) evaluated nine patients, pre- and postsurgically, and concluded that Le Fort 1 advancement in
surgically repaired cases of cleft lip and cleft palate has inherent potential for relapse. In our case, three months later, we observed
relapse and fabricated a new prosthesis for the patient. In cases with severe maxillomandibular discrepancy, reverse planning allows for
analysis of the actual situation, to highlight the importance of orthognathic surgery 11 . Reverse planning is critical before implant
insertion, because implants placed without planning can lead to prosthesis failure. In this case, reverse planning consisting initially of
registration of the desired maxillomandibular relationship was used to address the patient’s situation. Reverse planning consists of the
mounting of models in a semi-adjustable articulator and waxing the case in its intended final position. A guide is fabricated based on this
new relationship, then used during surgery to bring the maxilla and mandible into the new position. Cases of maxillomandibular discrepancies
are observed in patients with cleft lip and palate, yet severe cases, such as with limited mouth-opening, as in the present case, are rare,
making this case report unique in terms of prosthetic planning and surgery. Other cases with smaller discrepancies may involve surgery,
orthodontics, or even prosthodontics to a lesser extent, yet they should also be guided by careful planning, similar to the present report.
The present treatment combined orthognathic surgery/prostheses and implants, with esthetic, functional, and psychologically beneficial
results. The interdisciplinary team is important in managing patients with unique maxillomandibular relationships. Only orthognathic surgery
can solve these kinds of discrepancies, and reverse planning will aid both the surgeon and the prosthodontist.
