IgG4-related kidney disease is a comprehensive term for renal lesions associated with IgG4-related disease, which mainly manifests as plasma
cell-rich tubulointerstitial nephritis with increased IgG4+ plasma cells and fibrosis. IgG4-related kidney disease in the renal pelvis is
rare. We describe a 53-year-old Asian woman who was referred to our hospital with a space-occupying renal lesion discovered by medical
examination. A physical examination and laboratory evaluation revealed no significant abnormalities. Computed tomography scans showed a
soft-tissue mass with an irregular border and mild homogeneous enhancement in the right renal pelvis and calyces. A positron emission
tomography/computed tomography scan revealed soft-tissue density shadows with increased radionuclide uptake. To investigate a suspected
pelvic carcinoma, a right ureteronephrectomy was performed. A pathologic examination of the renal sections showed a dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrate rich in IgG4+ plasma cells, with fibrosis beneath the urothelial epithelium of the renal pelvis. Postoperatively, the serum IgG4
level was significantly elevated. The patient was diagnosed with IgG4-related kidney disease. We present a case of IgG4-related kidney
disease mimicking urothelial carcinoma in the renal pelvis. When a buried and solitary hypovascular tumor is detected in the kidney, we must
consider IgG4-related kidney disease as a differential diagnosis. Accordingly, elevated serum IgG4, radiologic findings, and pathologic
examination may improve the diagnosis. IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) has recently been proposed and is considered to involve conditions of
systemic inflammatory fibrosis, including autoimmune pancreatitis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, chronic sclerosing cholangitis, and
inflammatory pseudotumor. IgG4-RD has now been reported in nearly every organ, though it was first identified in the pancreas and salivary
glands . This disease manifests as organ enlargement or nodular/hyperplastic lesions in various organs concurrently or metachronously as a
result of marked infiltration of lymphocytes and IgG4-positive plasma cells as well as fibrosis. IgG4-related kidney disease (IgG4-RKD) is a
comprehensive term for renal lesions associated with IgG4-RD, which mainly manifests as plasma cell-rich tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN)
with increased IgG4+ plasma cells and fibrosis (IgG4-related TIN, IgG4-TIN) [6, 7]. Few data exist on the epidemiological and clinical
features of large series of patients. The mean age at diagnosis of the reviewed cases is 65 years, and 73–87 % are men . IgG4-RKD is common
and predominantly involves the cortex of the kidney; however, we report a rare case of IgG4-RKD involving a renal pelvic lesion that
mimicked urothelial carcinoma. A 53-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a space-occupying renal lesion that was discovered
incidentally by an ultrasound scan. The patient’s past medical history was positive for a gastric ulcer. A physical examination revealed no
significant abnormalities. Laboratory evaluations, including urinalysis, were within normal limits, and urinary cytology was negative.
Computed tomography (CT) scans showed a soft-tissue density mass with an irregular border and mild homogeneous enhancement in the right
renal pelvis and calyces (Fig. 1). A positron emission tomography/CT scan revealed soft-tissue density shadows with increased radionuclide
uptake, which suggested a malignant lesion.Fig. 1Abdominal computed tomography scans. These scans showed a soft-tissue density mass with an
irregular border and mild homogeneous enhancement in the right renal pelvis and calyces Abdominal computed tomography scans. These scans
showed a soft-tissue density mass with an irregular border and mild homogeneous enhancement in the right renal pelvis and calyces Because
pelvic carcinoma was suspected, a right ureteronephrectomy was performed. Gross examination revealed only thickened mucosa of the renal
pelvis but no obvious abnormalities in the renal cortex or medulla (Fig. 2). A pathologic examination of the renal sections showed numerous
lymphoid follicles and prominent fibrosis beneath the urothelial epithelium of the thickened mucosa (Fig. 3a). Additionally, numerous plasma
cells and scattered eosinophils were identified in the interfollicular area (Fig. 3b). The infiltrating lymphocytes and plasma cells did not
show significant cytological atypia. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that more than 40 % of the plasma cells were IgG4+ (Fig. 3c, 3d). All
of these histologic changes were confined to the renal pelvis and did not involve the renal parenchyma. The postoperative serum IgG4 level
was 3250 mg/L (80–1400 mg/L). The patient was diagnosed with IgG4-RKD and no specific therapy was administered. The postoperative serum IgG4
level decreased from 3250 mg/L to 2450 mg/L at 2 months.Fig. 2Gross examination revealed thickened mucosa of the renal pelvisFig.
3Pathologic examination of the renal sections. (a). Numerous lymphoid follicles and prominent fibrosis beneath the urothelial epithelium of
the renal pelvis; (b). Numerous plasma cells and scattered eosinophils were identified in the interfollicular area. Immunohistochemistry
showed numerous IgG+ (c) and IgG4+ (d) plasma cells Gross examination revealed thickened mucosa of the renal pelvis Pathologic examination
of the renal sections. (a). Numerous lymphoid follicles and prominent fibrosis beneath the urothelial epithelium of the renal pelvis; (b).
Numerous plasma cells and scattered eosinophils were identified in the interfollicular area. Immunohistochemistry showed numerous IgG+ (c)
and IgG4+ (d) plasma cells IgG4-RKD is a comprehensive term for renal lesions, including renal parenchymal lesions and renal pelvic lesions,
related to IgG4-RD, which is a recently recognized and proposed clinical entity characterized by a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate rich
in IgG4+ plasma cells with fibrosis that affects several organs [6, 9]. TIN involving tubules and/or the interstitium of the kidney is the
most dominant feature of IgG4-RKD ; however, IgG4-RKD in the renal pelvis is rare . Here, we report a rare case of IgG4-RKD that mimicked
renal pelvic carcinoma. A comprehensive English and non-English search for all articles pertinent to IgG4-RD of the renal pelvis was
conducted using PubMed. Since Naoto Kuroda first reported a case of IgG4-RD arising in the renal pelvis in 2009, six cases of IgG4-RD of the
renal pelvis have been reported previously in the world literature (Table 1) . The mean age at diagnosis was 59.8 years (range: 49 to
80 years), with a male: female ratio of 1:1. Most patients presented with renal lesions in the left kidney, with a left-to-right
presentation ratio of 2:1. Patients visited the hospital with or without complaints of non-characteristic presentations (i.e., flank pain),
and none of the patients had hematuria. Hypocomplementemia and elevated serum IgG are characteristic features of IgG4-RD. Elevated serum IgG
and IgG4 were found in all patients, but no hypocomplementemia was found in these seven cases, including our case (Table 1). Although
hypocomplementemia is a distinct feature of IgG4-RD, a relatively low proportion of patients actually have it.Table 1Previous reports of
IgG4-related kidney disease arising in the renal pelvisRef.Age (years)SexManifestationsHypocomplementemiaExtra-renal lesionsLocationSerum
IgG4TherapyFindings at follow-up1258MNoneNAIgG4-related
MDLeftElevatedSurgery + corticosteroidDead1380MNANANoneRightNASurgeryNA1469MNANANoneRightElevatedSurgery + corticosteroidRegression of the
manifestations1149FNoneNoneIgG4-related MDLeftElevatedSurgeryNA1549FBilateral lumbagoNANoneLeftElevatedCorticosteroidRegression of the
manifestations1654FLeft flank discomfort and palpebral edemaNoneNoneLeftElevatedCorticosteroidRegression of the manifestationsF, female; M,
male; MD, mikulicz’s disease; NA, unavailable Previous reports of IgG4-related kidney disease arising in the renal pelvis F, female; M,
male; MD, mikulicz’s disease; NA, unavailable Patients with IgG4-RD often have lesions in several organs, either synchronously or
metachronously, although others may show the involvement of only a single organ. Renal lesions are recognized as extra-pancreatic
manifestations of IgG4-RD; the condition can develop as IgG4-RKD singly or associated with the lesions of other organs. In previous cases,
renal and extra-renal (salivary gland) involvements in IgG4-RD have presented simultaneously in two patients [11, 12]. In the current case,
a systemic examination showed no other abnormal findings, inclusive of the salivary glands, lacrimal glands, and pancreas. Thus, the
condition was diagnosed as IgG4-RD isolated in the renal pelvis without the involvement of other organs. On the basis of the results of a
diagnostic algorithm procedure and with references to several diagnostic criteria for AIP, Mitsuhiro Kawano proposed diagnostic criteria for
IgG4-RKD: (1) presence of some kidney damage, as manifested by laboratory examination; (2) kidney imaging studies showing abnormal renal
findings, i.e., multiple low-density lesions on enhanced CT; (3) elevated serum IgG4 levels exceeding 135 mg/dL; (4) renal histology showing
dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with infiltrating IgG4+ plasma cells and fibrosis; and (5) extra-renal histology showing prominent
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with infiltrating IgG4+ plasma cells. The diagnosis is classified into three stages—definite, probable, and
possible—according to the combinations of the above conditions. In their diagnostic criteria, abnormal renal imaging findings were essential
for making a definitive diagnosis. In the present case, all of these conditions, including imaging studies that identified low-density
lesions, pathologic examinations that revealed characteristic changes, and elevated serum IgG4, prompted the definitive diagnosis of
IgG4-RKD. A rapid response to corticosteroid therapy is a characteristic feature of IgG4-RD, and corticosteroids are typically the first
line of therapy, although no controlled trial has been performed. Moreover, the protocol used for corticosteroid therapy varies among
countries and institutions . Because of the decreased level of serum IgG4 after ureteronephrectomy, our patient received a close follow-up
without corticosteroid therapy. In the reported cases, patients with IgG4-RKD arising from the renal pelvis were treated according to
different strategies, including surgical treatment alone for two patients, corticosteroid therapy alone for two patients, and surgical and
corticosteroid treatment for the remaining two patients. The renal lesions improved or resolved after the corticosteroid treatment in three
patients who received corticosteroid treatment (Table 1). Takahashi and colleagues also found that lesions progressed in three IgG4-TIN
patients receiving no corticosteroid treatment or surgical resection and that lesions regressed in all IgG4-TIN patients who underwent
corticosteroid treatment. These observations indicate that effective interventions should begin as soon as possible for irreversible
fibrosis in IgG4-RKD. Because corticosteroid treatment has a remarkable effect in this type of disease, at least in the short term, this
treatment is vital to avoid unnecessary surgery. CT-guided biopsy or laparoscopic biopsy of the original tumor might help to rule out
malignancy. Recent studies have revealed several characteristic clinical features of IgG4-RKD, including predominance in middle-aged to
older men, frequent association with IgG4-RD in other organs, high levels of serum IgG and IgG4, and a good initial response to
corticosteroids. However, longer follow-up data for IgG4-RKD, including relapse information, are still sparse. Takako Saeki and his
colleagues retrospectively analyzed the longer-term clinical course of 43 patients with IgG4-TIN in detail in a larger cohort. This analysis
included the largest series on the long-term outcomes of corticosteroid treatment of IgG4-RKD. Saeki et al. showed that 1 month after the
start of treatment, most of the abnormal serology and radiology parameters had improved, and relapse of IgG4-related lesions occurred in 8
of 40 treated patients. These studies indicate that the response of IgG4-RKD to corticosteroids is rapid and partial, and that irreversible
lesions may remain, especially in patients with advanced renal damage. Patients with renal dysfunction should receive corticosteroid
therapy, although spontaneous improvement of lesions can also occur in IgG4-TIN and the indications for corticosteroid therapy in IgG4-RKD
have not been established. Careful attention should be paid to renal function during follow-up without therapy [18, 19]. A large-scale
prospective study is necessary to determine a more useful treatment strategy for IgG4-RKD. We present a case of IgG4-RKD that mimicked
urothelial carcinoma in the renal pelvis. When a deep and solitary hypovascular tumor is detected in the kidney, we must consider IgG4-RKD
as a differential diagnosis. Accordingly, elevated serum IgG4, radiologic findings, and pathologic examination may be helpful for the
diagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. IgG-
related disease IgG-related kidney disease Tubulointerstitial nephritis Computed tomography Hui Zhang and Xinyu Ren contributed equally to
this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HZ and XYR drafted the
manuscript and participated in the final diagnosis. WZ, DY, and REF critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual content and
gave final approval of the version to be published. The final manuscript was read and approved by all authors. The authors thank Yufeng Luo,
Department of Pathology, for her technical assistance with immunohistochemistry staining. We also thank Shuo Li, Department of Radiology,
for help with the preparation of the radiological materials.
