Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: YM JH QL XD WL YZ.
Performed the experiments: YM JH QL XD WL YZ. Analyzed the data: YM YZ. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: JH QL XD WL YZ. Wrote
the paper: YM YZ. Final approval: YZ. Collection documents required: QZ. The presence of donor-specific alloantibodies (DSAs) against the
MICA antigen results in high risk for antibody-mediated rejection (AMR) of a transplanted kidney, especially in patients receiving a re-
transplant. We describe the incidence of acute C4d+ AMR in a patient who had received a first kidney transplant with a zero HLA antigen
mismatch. Retrospective analysis of post-transplant T and B cell crossmatches were negative, but a high level of MICA alloantibody was
detected in sera collected both before and after transplant. The DSA against the first allograft mismatched MICA*018 was in the recipient.
Flow cytometry and cytotoxicity tests with five samples of freshly isolated human umbilical vein endothelial cells demonstrated the
alloantibody nature of patient’s MICA-DSA. Prior to the second transplant, a MICA virtual crossmatch and T and B cell crossmatches were used
to identify a suitable donor. The patient received a second kidney transplant, and allograft was functioning well at one-year follow-up. Our
study indicates that MICA virtual crossmatch is important in selection of a kidney donor if the recipient has been sensitized with MICA
antigens. Due to ethical restrictions related to patient confidentiality, all relevant data is available upon request. Requests may be
submitted to Dr. Yizhou Zou (zouyizhou@hotmail.com). Although selective immunosuppressive drugs and biologic agents generally alleviate
acute rejection in the solid organ transplant patients, treatment of antibody-mediated rejection (AMR) remains challenging . In order to
avoid the risk of AMR in kidney transplantation, a prospective complement-dependent cytotoxicity crossmatches (CDC) and/or flow crossmatches
(FXM) are performed prior to renal transplant in many centers . These experiments can detect alloantibodies against donor HLA-I and II
antigens, but neither test detects alloantibodies against MHC class I related chain A (MICA), because the lymphocytes used in the test do
not express MICA antigens on their cell surfaces [5, 6]. The polymorphic MICA molecules, which are expressed on the surface of vascular
endothelial cells, might be antigenic targets for AMR . Zou and his collaborators were the first to detect MICA alloantibodies in 14
patients with failed kidney allografts . In a large blinded retrospective renal transplant observational study, pre-transplant MICA
antibodies were associated with kidney allograft rejection and shorter graft survival . As a well-documented case of acute rejection due to
antibodies against MICA has not been reported, screening for MICA antibodies is not used in routine clinic testing prior to renal
transplantation. In this report, we present a case of a patient who suffered early aggressive AMR in the presence of donor specific
antibodies (DSA) against MICA after the first renal transplant. During donor selection for re-transplant, a donor with a negative MICA
virtual crossmatch and negative lymphocyte CDC and FXM crossmatches was selected. The patient received the second kidney transplant, and her
allograft was functioning well at one-year follow-up. Human umbilical cord samples were obtained from the maternity ward at Xiangya Hospital
in collaboration with the Department of Obstetrics according to the research plan and protocol approved by Xiangya Hospital Ethnics
Committee (EC201403157). Collection of clinic samples for the research was approved by the Ethnics Committee of the 3rd Hospital of Xiangya
Medical School (2014-S091). The kidney donor was a 34-year-old man killed in a car accident. Our organ procurement of organization (OPO)
obtained the consent from the next kin. All other participants provided written informed consent to participate in this study. Donor typing
for HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR was performed using a PCR-SSP kit (Invitrogen). HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, HLA-DRB1, and HLA-DQB1 typing for the
patient and two donors were confirmed using PCR and sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes (PCR-SSOP, Luminex Bead Array, Gen-Probe)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. MICA typing was performed using Sanger sequence-based typing as described previously . IgG
antibodies against HLA class I (A, B, and C) and class II (DR, DQ, and DP) were detected using a single antigen bead array on a Luminex
platform (Gen Probe) according to the protocol suggested by the manufacturer. MICA antibody testing was performed on patient serum samples
using single antigen beads conjugated with recombinant MICA*001, *002, *004, *007, *008, *009, *012, *016, *017, *018, *019, and *045. This
kit was prepared in our laboratory and validated using the reference sera obtained from the 15th International Histocompatibility and
Immunogenetics MICA workshop . Antibody specificity was based on normalized mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) greater than 2000. DSAs were
identified based on the reaction of patient sera to the mismatched antigens for a given donor. Some serum samples were also tested for
antibody-C1q binding using a commercially available kit (C1qScreen, One Lambda). Umbilical cord veins were cannulated, washed with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) solution, and treated with 0.2% collagenase (Sigma) at 23°C for 20 min. Endothelial cells were collected and cultured
for 3 to 5 days in medium prepared using Endothelial Media BulletKits (Lonza Inc.) at 37°C in a humid atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air. Cultured
cells were harvested and washed with PBS and used for flow cytometry assays. Cultured HUVECs were used within five passages. The purity of
isolated endothelial cells was determined by staining with anti-CD31-PE (BD Biosciences) to facilitate endothelial cell gating. MICA
expression on the surface of endothelial cells was detected using MICA-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) 6B3 as described previously .
Briefly, 50,000 cells were incubated with mAb 6B3 at 1.0 μg/ml at room temperature for 30 min. Goat anti-mouse IgG conjugated with FITC
(Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) was added after three washes, and cells were analyzed using a Gallios flow cytometer (Beckman). A
standard flow cytometry crossmatch assay (FXM) was used to analyze the patient’s sera and donor’s T and B lymphocytes prepared from
peripheral blood by three-color staining with anti-human CD3-PE, CD19-APC, and IgG-FITC mAbs (BD Biosciences). Retrospective FXM was
performed using the donor T and B lymphocytes from donor spleen which had been stored at liquid nitrogen. Approximately 0.5 x 106 cells with
or without pronase treatment were incubated at room temperature for 30 min with 25 μl of patient serum diluted 1:4. Random endothelial FXM
was performed using freshly isolated human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). HUVECs were incubated with patient serum which
had been treated by pooled normal human platelet absorption. Mouse monoclonal antibodies against human IgG conjugated with FITC (BD
Biosciences) was added after three washes. Samples were analyzed using a Beckman Gallios flow cytometer. Cutoff values were set with 50 mean
channel shift (MCS) for T cells, 70 MCS for B cells, and 60 MCS for HUVECs. The FXM results in IgG MFI values were converted to MCS values
using the following formula: MCS value = 1024 * (log(lgG_MFI) + 1)/4. The complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) crossmatch assay was used
to evaluate cell death in the patient’s serum in the presence of complement. Random HUVEC crossmatches were performed by the modified Amos
method (using three washes). Serum was treated using pooled human platelet absorption to exclude anti-HLA antibodies before addition to the
endothelial cells. Briefly, 1 μl of negative control, positive control mAb, normal human serum, or patient treated serum was dispensed into
individual wells of Terasaky microplates, followed by addition of 1 μl of HUVEC suspension (approximately 5000 cells), and samples were
incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. After three washes with PRMI-1640 medium, rabbit complement (One Lambda) was added. After further
30-minute incubation at room temperature, the cells were stained with EB/AO and FluoroQuench (One Lambda) to enable detection of the killing
ratio by fluorescence microscopy. Since T and B lymphocyte crossmatches do not response to the presence of anti-MICA antibodies, and it is
difficult to obtain donor endothelial cells, MICA ‘virtual crossmatch’ was therefore used to detect sensitivity to MICA antigens. We
determined whether the patient had MICA-DSA for a given donor by performing MICA genotyping of donor and recipient and testing recipient
MICA antibodies using single antigen Luminex flow cytometry. The algorithm of MICA virtual crossmatch was based on the results of missed
MICA allele or alleles of a given donor and the specificity of MICA antibodies in recipient’s serum. The patient is a 48-year-old Han female
of blood type A with end-stage renal disease due to glomerulonephritis. She received a kidney transplant from a donor after cardiac death
(DCD) in January 2013. Although the patient had HLA-I antibodies (panel reactive antibody, PRA, of 32%) before transplant, the transplant
was performed because of the negative CDC and FXM crossmatch with the donor; importantly, the donor was zero-antigen mismatched to the
recipient at HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR loci. The recipient’s serum creatinine levels decreased by 75% relative to pre-transplant levels one
week after transplantation, but an acute rejection episode occurred after two weeks. The pathological tissue sections from renal biopsy were
positive for C4d (Fig 1) and revealed endothelial cell swelling and hemorrhage. The patient’s serum creatinine levels further increased to
the level pre-transplantation. Allograft AMR was not reversed despite treatment including plasmapheresis exchange with albumin and followed
by low dose intravenous immunoglobulin (100 mg/kg). The recipient received hemodialysis and the kidney allograft was removed three months
after transplantation (Fig 2). Immunofluorescent microscopic magnification×400. Serum creatinine levels (Cr, μmol/L) were monitored pre-
transplantation, after the first transplant (TX-1) and for one year after the second transplant (TX-2). Times of treatments, AMR diagnosis,
and allograft removal are also shown. In order to investigate the possible reason why a zero antigen mismatched kidney allograft failed due
to antibody mediated rejection, we tested both pre- and post-transplant serum samples for the presence of HLA-I and II antibodies using the
Gen-Probe single antigen Luminex microbeads assay. Both samples had HLA antibodies against antigens of HLA-B7, B64, B65, B27, B2708, B35,
B39, B42, B47, B56, B82, DQ6, DQ8, and DQ9. The MFI values were between 2000 and 12000 for these antibodies. There were no significant
differences in MFI values of these antibodies before and after transplantation (Fig 3A). Retrospective flow crossmatch was performed between
recipient’s serum samples and the donor T and B lymphocytes, which were derived from the donor spleen that had been stored at liquid
nitrogen. There were no detectable antibodies in the patient pre- or post-transplant sera that bound donor T or B cells (data not shown).
Using MICA single antigen Luminex bead assay, we observed high levels of alloantibodies against MICA group 1 antigen (MICA-G1) in both pre-
and post-transplant serum samples (Fig 3B). After normalization, MFI values of antibodies against MICA*001,*002, *007, *012, *017, and *018
antigens were above 10000 and the others were negative. To determine whether the MICA antibodies were donor specific, MICA genotyping was
performed using Sanger sequence-based typing of donor and recipient. The recipient’s MICA genotype is MICA*008/MICA*009, and the 1st donor’s
genotype is MICA*008/MICA*018 (Table 1). Alloantibodies against MICA*018 antigens were detected in recipient sera; these DSAs likely explain
rejection of the first transplant. A C1q binding assay indicated that patient’s MICA antibodies in both pre- and post-transplant serum were
complement fixable (Fig 3B). In addition, since two alleles of MICA*008 and MICA*018 were detected in the recipient’s husband DNA sample
with MICA genotyping (SBT), the recipient might have been sensitized during her multiple pregnancies prior to transplantation. IgG
antibodies against HLA class I and II antigens and MICA antigens were measured by single antigen Luminex beads arrays. MFI values represent
the quantitation of alloantibodies detected. (A) The donor’s and recipient’s HLA antigen types and the positive reacted HLA antigens
(others) with test serum samples are labeled as grouped.The MFI values of antibodies detected from patient serum before (gray bars) and
after the first transplant (solid bar) are given. (B) Anti-MICA antibodies were detected using 11 common MICA antigens. MICA001, MICA002,
MICA007, MICA012, MICA017, and MICA018, all from the MICA-G1 antigen group were present in pre- and post-first transplant patient sera;
other antigens tested were negative. DSA to the antigen produced by MICA*018 allele is indicated with an arrow. C1q-PE, rather than goat
anti human IgG conjugated with PE, was used to demonstrate the complement fix (C1q, white bars). To further characterize the MICA-DSAs in
the recipient’s serum, we evaluated binding to human endothelial cells. Five freshly isolated HUVEC samples were obtained and cultured for 7
days. Each of the samples was positive for staining with anti-MICA-specific monoclonal antibody 6B3 (Fig 4A). In order to exclude HLA
class-I alloantibody in recipient serum sample, platelet antibody absorption was employed to remove HLA-class I antibodies from the patient
serum. The efficacy of antibody absorption was verified by the HLA-I and MICA single antigen Luminex bead assays. In the treated serum, HLA
class I antibodies were present at MFI values less than 1000, but MFI values of MICA antibodies were more than 8000. Random flow crossmatch
analyses were performed between HUVEC samples and patient serum (pretreated by antibody absorption and diluted 1:4). HUVECs from donors
EC#01, EC#03, and EC#04 were bound by IgG antibodies in tested serum, whereas HUVECs from donors EC#02 and D#05 showed no antibody binding
(Table 2). Further, antibodies in patient serum recognized HUVEC samples that expressed membrane molecules encoded by MICA*002, MICA*012,
and MICA*018 alleles (Table 2). Further HUVEC CDC crossmatches showed cytotoxicity to these same three HUVEC samples (Fig 4B). Result of in
vitro experiments indicated that MICA-DSA in recipient serum had cytotoxicity to cells that expressed MICA-G1 group antigens. (A) HUVECs
were freshly isolated from five umbilical cord samples. Cells were stained with mAb W6/32 for HLA class I antigens (solid profile), 6B3 for
MICA antigens (open profile; dark line) and normal mouse IgG as control (open profile; light line). (B). HUVECs were incubated with normal
human serum (NHS), pooled PRA+ sera (POS), or patient serum (after first transplant, with platelet absorption). Cytotoxicity is reported as
percent lysis. a: Serum samples were pre-absorbed with pooled human platelets. b: MICA genotype was determined by Sanger sequence-based
typing; MICA alleles are shown in the brackets. The value given is the median channel shift (MCS); c: NHS (normal human serum) used as
negative control, a value of zero indicates MCS background. d: PC indicates a mixture of pooled MICA-Ab positive sera. Six months after her
first kidney transplant, the patient was evaluated for a second kidney transplant. The potential donor was blood type A. HLA-B52, HLA-DR4,
and HLA-DQ4 antigens were mismatched (Table 1), but recipient did not have HLA antibodies against these mismatched antigens. T and B
lymphocyte flow crossmatch was negative as expected. To evaluate MICA histocompatibility, a MICA virtual crossmatch was performed. Donor
MICA genotyping showed that MICA*004 was mismatched (Table 1); however, among detectable recipient MICA antibodies, no antibodies responded
to the MICA*004 antigen (Fig 3B). These data led us to conclude that the MICA virtual crossmatch was negative. The recipient received the
secondary kidney transplant in July 2013, and the kidney allograft was tolerated under the regimen of regular immunosuppressive treatment
(Fig 2). The patient has been followed for one year after the second renal transplant. Measurement of serum creatinine level was performed
each week in the first month post-transplantation, then once per month. The serum creatinine levels dropped after the second transplant and
have remained with normal levels (<120 umol/L, Fig 2). Single antigen bead assays were used to monitor anti-HLA and anti-MICA antibodies at
six and twelve months post-transplantation. No de novo antibody production was observed. Alloantibodies against human leukocyte antigens
(HLA) continue to be the major barrier for the successful renal transplantation. Antibodies against non-HLA antigens such as MICA/B
antigens, vimentin , angiotensin II type 1 receptor[13, 14], tubulin, myosin, and collagen may also interfere with allograft. Like HLA, MICA
antigens are polymorphic and expressed on endothelial cells, dendritic cells, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and many types of tumor cell;
MICA antigens are not expressed on peripheral blood lymphocytes. Sensitization against HLA and MICA can be due to pregnancy, blood
transfusions, or previous transplantation. Patients with high levels anti-HLA antibody wait longer for donor organs than those with lower
levels unless a zero antigen mismatched donor is assigned. Even with a zero antigen mismatched donor, some of these patients will have been
sensitized to non-HLA antibodies such as MICA antibodies . According to the new Banff standard of AMR diagnosis, anti-donor specific
alloantibodies (DSA) should be considered prior to transplantation. In the case reported here, the recipient was given a DCD kidney with a
zero antigen mismatch, but this allograft was rejected one month after transplantation. Analyses indicated that kidney allograft failed due
to AMR, even though there was no HLA-A, B, DR, DQ antigen mismatched to the first donor and negative prospective T and B cell crossmatches.
To determine the cause of the AMR in our patient, we performed a retrospective analysis of MICA genotyping, which revealed potential for
MICA-DSAs in the patient. We used pooled normal human platelets to absorb HLA-class I antibodies from patient serum samples as previous
described , and used this patient sera to perform the random endothelial crossmatches. Our investigation demonstrated that MICA is expressed
on human endothelial cell surfaces. The MICA-DSA in recipient serum bound to the cultured HUVECs that expressed MICA-G1 antigens, and the
patient’s serum was cytotoxic to these HUVECs, but not to those that did not express MICA-G1, in the presence of complement. This result
supports our hypothesis that the failure of the first renal transplant in this patient was due to the presence of MICA-DSAs. Routine T and B
cell crossmatch is not able to detect donor-specific MICA alloantibodies. If a transplant patient has MICA-DSAs, donor kidney endothelial
cells become the target of injury. The patient in our study had been sensitized to MICA antigens as well as HLA before transplantation. The
patient’s HLA alloantibodies were not specific to the first kidney donor, but the MICA alloantibodies were. The titer of MICA-DSA was very
high (MFI > 12,000). Fortunately, the second renal transplant with a negative MICA virtual crossmatch has been successful. In conclusion, a
virtual crossmatch for MICA, performed in addition to the HLA histocompatibility assay, will benefit organ transplant recipients.
