Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare cancer predisposition syndrome classically associated with remarkably early onset of cancer in families with
a typical spectrum of malignancies, including sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma. Because the risks of
cancer development are strikingly high for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, aggressive cancer surveillance is often pursued in these individuals.
However, optimal screening methods and intervals for Li-Fraumeni syndrome have yet to be determined. In addition, there may be a significant
psychosocial burden to intensive cancer surveillance and some prevention modalities. Here, we describe a case of a young woman with a de
novo mutation in TP53 and multiple malignancies, with her most recent cancers found at early, curable stages due to aggressive cancer
screening. The potential benefits and risks of intensive cancer surveillance in hereditary cancer syndromes is discussed. Li-Fraumeni
syndrome is a rare cancer predisposition disorder that dramatically increases the risk of developing cancer, especially at an early age. The
cancers most often associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome include sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although
the spectrum of associated cancers can be quite broad. Li-Fraumeni syndrome is known to be linked to germline mutations of the TP53 tumor
suppression gene, located on chromosome 17p13. P53 is a transcription factor that normally regulates the cell cycle and prevents genomic
mutations. When individuals harbor a defective copy of the TP53 gene, they become prone to cancer development if the cell can no longer
utilize a functional p53 protein to repair DNA or initiate normal apoptosis. While mutations in TP53 are typically inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner, some families with Li-Fraumeni cancer phenotypes do not harbor an identifiable mutation or, on other occasions, TP53
mutations can arise de novo in an individual without a remarkable family history. Observations of multiple, early-onset cancers in families
led to the description of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in 1969 . In 2009, DNA sequencing of 525 patients with clinical suspicion of Li-Fraumeni
syndrome found mutations in 91 patients. All families with a TP53 mutation had at least one family member with a sarcoma, breast, brain, or
adrenocortical carcinoma, and these were identified as “core cancers” in this syndrome . Melanoma, gastric cancer, lymphoma, Wilms tumor,
leukemia, and colorectal carcinoma are also associated with this syndrome . Risks of cancer development in individuals with Li-Fraumeni
syndrome are strikingly high. For female carriers of a TP53 mutation, lifetime risk of cancer by age 60 approaches 90 percent, with average
age of first cancer diagnosis reported to be 28 . Male carriers face a slightly lower lifetime risk of 73 percent, though age of onset of
first cancer has been reported to be lower as well, at age 21 . Risks of developing a second malignancy are high as well, described to be as
high as 60 percent in the 30 years following initial cancer diagnosis . Despite these risks, precise cancer screening guidelines for those
with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have yet to be defined. Individuals affected by Li-Fraumeni syndrome may be offered a battery of screening tests,
which can include frequent physical exams, blood tests, breast MRI, colonoscopy, and body imaging with CT, ultrasound, and/or body MRI
starting as young as age 20 — or even earlier in some cases. Here, we report a case of a young woman with de novo Li-Fraumeni syndrome who
initially presented with sarcoma at age 11 and has gone on to develop a total of five different malignancies by the age of 28. We present
her case as a noteworthy example of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, illustrating both the potential benefit and the potential burden of cancer
screening and subsequent management for these patients. An 11-year-old girl presented in 1998 with a “bump” on her left calf that gradually
increased in size. A biopsy was performed, which revealed a rhabdomyosarcoma. The patient was treated with combination chemotherapy that
included cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, doxorubicin, actinomycin D, vincristine, and carboplatin along with radiation therapy to the left
calf. She initially did well, but developed a local recurrence 1 year later, which ultimately required a below-the-knee limb amputation at
the age of 12. Later that year, she developed a palpable “bump” on one of her right lower ribs. This was resected and found to be a
chondrosarcoma. She had a local recurrence at the rib surgical bed within 18 months, requiring wider surgical resection of the rib and
adjacent lung. At the age of 18, she developed what appeared to be a cyst on one of her vulva. This was resected and found to be a small
Stage I leiomyosarcoma. Because of her history of three separate, early-onset sarcomas, she started annual surveillance MRI of chest,
abdomen, and pelvis at the age of 18. She did well until the age of 22, at which time she was found to have a new, small left renal mass on
MRI. She underwent left partial nephrectomy, with pathology showing a Stage I, 0.9 cm clear cell renal carcinoma. Though she was originally
referred at the age of 18 for genetic counseling at the time of her third sarcoma diagnosis, she declined specific testing for TP53
mutations at that time. Her family history was notable only for a maternal grandfather with bladder cancer at age 85, a maternal great aunt
with uterine cancer around age 40, and a paternal great uncle with lung cancer at an unknown age. Neither her parents nor her brother were
ever diagnosed with cancer. She was followed closely by her physicians for possible Li-Fraumeni syndrome with body imaging and colonoscopy.
At age 27, she underwent germline genetic testing with whole exome analysis for a wide panel of genes that might be relevant to the
patient’s phenotype including: MUTYH, MSH2, EPCAM, MSH6, MLH1, APC, PMS2, CDKN2A, BMPR1A, PTEN, CDK4, CDH1, PALB2, TP53, SMAD4, STK11,
CHEK2, SDHB, SDHC, FH, VHL, MET, TSC1, PTEN, SDHD, TSC2, and FLCN. Testing revealed a heterozygous splice site mutation in TP53, IVS6-2A>G,
and no other mutations in cancer-related genes. Both parents tested negative for the mutation, indicating that it either arose de novo in a
sperm or egg cell or that one parent was a gonadal mosaic. Genetic testing in the patient’s brother was recommended because of the
possibility of gonadal mosaicism in a parent. The patient has no children of her own at this time, but she was counseled that as a confirmed
TP53 germline mutation carrier, she has a 50 percent chance of passing the mutation on to her future children. Shortly following her formal
diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, she underwent her first routine screening breast MRI at the age of 27. The breast MRI revealed a 5 mm
abnormality in the left breast. Biopsy of this area revealed an invasive ductal carcinoma, ER positive, PR positive, HER2 positive (3+ on
immunohistochemistry). She initially underwent lumpectomy, with pathology revealing a Stage I invasive ductal carcinoma measuring 4 mm,
grade 3, negative margins with no lymph node involvement. She was treated with adjuvant paclitaxel and trastuzumab, followed by trastuzumab
alone to complete 1 year of therapy. She underwent bilateral prophylactic mastectomies and was subsequently started on endocrine therapy
with a 5- to 10-year course of tamoxifen planned. She is currently undergoing aggressive ongoing cancer surveillance as per published
guidelines, comprised of annual brain MRI, annual total body MRI, colonoscopy every 2 years, annual dermatologic exam, and complete blood
counts and LDH screening every 3 months. She no longer requires breast imaging due to her choice of bilateral mastectomies. She soon will
undergo an additional 3-month short interval chest MRI based on a new, small rib abnormality seen on total body MRI. The case above
illustrates several fundamental lessons, including the importance of recognizing hereditary cancer syndromes and the profound benefit of
cancer screening and early detection, as well as the potential heavy burden for patients to be under constant surveillance for future
cancers. This patient’s specific presentation of Li-Fraumeni syndrome was notable in several ways. The diagnosis of her initial cancer at an
early age, the multiple cancer diagnoses, and the types of cancers she developed (sarcoma, breast) are classic features of Li-Fraumeni
syndrome. While the lack of a strong family history in this case is unusual for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, de novo TP53 mutations are felt to
arise in 7 to 20 percent of all cases. As such, providers should maintain a high level of suspicion for the possibility of Li-Fraumeni
syndrome in individuals with early onset cancers, even in the absence of a strong family history. In addition, while patients with Li-
Fraumeni syndrome often develop multiple cancers, this patient’s cancer history is unusually strong with five separate cancers diagnosed by
the age of 27. As a comparison, in a case series of 200 individuals diagnosed with cancer from 24 different Li-Fraumeni kindreds, 15 percent
of individuals developed a second cancer, 4 percent had a third cancer, and 2 percent had a fourth cancer . Her specific germline TP53
mutation, namely IVS6-2A>G, might be predicted to yield a mild phenotype. In general, splice site mutations and other mutations that
completely inactivate the gene are felt to produce a milder phenotype than missense mutations in the DNA-binding domain , but clearly the
genotype-phenotype correlation in this disease is not precise. The specific mutation found in this patient was previously reported in a
patient with milder features . It should be noted, however, that the daughter of the reported patient had two sarcomas diagnosed before age
18. Our patient’s genetic testing included whole exome analysis, and no additional oncogenic mutations or alterations were found; thus, we
reason that her aggressive cancer phenotype is attributed primarily to the single splice site mutation identified in TP53. This patient has
been fortunate to have all of her cancers diagnosed at early stages. This has allowed for the benefit of long-term, disease-free survival
intervals, but also has provided the opportunity for new cancers to develop during those times. Indeed, as the recognition of hereditary
cancer syndromes improves in parallel with enhanced cancer diagnosis and treatment, there may be an increasing number of Li-Fraumeni
patients who go on to develop high numbers of serial primary malignancies. Though this patient’s case was unusual in some ways for Li-
Fraumeni syndrome, the fact that this patient developed multiple cancers of any kind, especially starting at a young age, would be important
red flags for the clinician to recognize and should prompt referral for genetic counseling. The differential diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni
syndrome includes other inherited cancer syndromes, including hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome, typically characterized by
mutations in BRCA 1 and 2, and hereditary non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma (Lynch) syndrome. Both syndromes can overlap with Li-Fraumeni
syndrome in terms of cancer types and age of onset and, in fact, are more prevalent in the general population than Li-Fraumeni syndrome. As
such, these syndromes should also be considered in any patient with a strong personal and/or family history of cancer. General criteria for
referral for cancer genetic counseling are listed in Table 1. If mutations in BRCA 1/2 and/or Lynch syndrome-associated genes have been
considered and not found, screening for Li-Fraumeni syndrome may be appropriate. Table 2 lists guidelines regarding whom to test
specifically for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In general, the Classic and Chompret criteria can help identify families at risk for germline p53
mutation, though it is important to remember that negative results do not rule out a diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome if the personal or
family history is suggestive of the syndrome . While most guidelines generally suggest testing for TP53 mutations in families with classic
tumor types (sarcoma, breast, adrenocortical carcinoma, and brain tumors) and with cancer onset < age 45, an important independent testing
criteria for clinicians to recognize is that all women with early-onset breast cancer (age of diagnosis < 35), regardless of family history,
should also be considered for TP53 mutation testing, particularly if the breast tumor is Her2-positive . Thus, our patient would still have
qualified for TP53 testing even if her only cancer diagnosis had been her breast cancer at age 27. Before genetic testing is performed, risk
assessment and counseling should be performed by a certified genetic counselor and informed consent should be obtained . Reproductive
options and counseling regarding possible inherited cancer risk to relatives should also be addressed . A major goal in recognition and
prompt diagnosis of a hereditary cancer syndrome is to provide the opportunity for patients and families to undergo aggressive cancer
screening and pursue cancer prevention strategies so that the impact of a cancer diagnosis can be minimized or avoided altogether. In our
patient, aggressive cancer screening specifically led to early diagnoses of her renal cell carcinoma and her breast cancer. Though both
diseases are ultimately fatal when found at advanced stages, the prognosis for Stage I disease in both renal cell carcinoma and breast
cancer is excellent, with cure rates exceeding 90 percent. Early cancer detection also can help minimize the need for aggressive treatment.
For example, in our patient, her renal cell carcinoma was treated with curative intent with surgery alone, and her breast cancer
chemotherapy regimen was less rigorous than would have been needed for a larger tumor. Knowing she carried a TP53 mutation, she then opted
to pursue bilateral mastectomies, not only to avoid radiation treatment but primarily to prevent future breast cancers from developing.
Despite these seemingly clear benefits, optimal screening methods and intervals for Li-Fraumeni syndrome have yet to be determined. Though
periodic surveillance and risk-reducing interventions have been shown in more common hereditary syndromes such as BRCA 1/2 and Lynch
syndrome to reduce morbidity and mortality , similar medical benefits from screening and aggressive cancer prevention modalities remain
unclear and unproven. There has been only one small observational study regarding screening for patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In 33
asymptomatic TP53 mutation carriers, Villani et al. described aggressive cancer screening, including whole-body MRI and other biochemical
tests such as complete blood counts and blood chemistries, to be feasible . Meanwhile, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)
cancer surveillance consensus guidelines for Li-Fraumeni syndrome include consideration of breast and colon cancer screening starting at age
20 and an annual comprehensive physical exam, as well as discussion of other screening modalities such as brain MRI and total body MRI.
After discussion of her screening options, our patient desired aggressive surveillance and is being followed per Villani et al. guidelines
as described in Table 3. While the intent of aggressive cancer screening is to help patients enjoy a prolonged, healthy life with minimal
cancer burden, there may be significant trade-off in psychosocial burden for some patients related to aggressive surveillance. The common
occurrences of incidental findings on repeated screenings, associated “false positive” scans leading to biopsy, and the anxiety of a
possible cancer diagnosis can lead to significant psychosocial distress and screening fatigue in some patients with hereditary cancer
syndromes. At the time of the discovery of her deleterious TP53 mutation, this patient expressed a sense of “exhaustion” about her clinical
course thus far and indicated her worry about how many times she would have to go through cancer diagnosis and treatment before “enough was
enough.” This patient was appropriately referred to a therapist by her genetic counselor and later reported that she found this very helpful
in coping with her fears and frustrations. Very little exists in the literature specifically addressing psychosocial distress in Li-Fraumeni
syndrome, though one small study reported that 36 percent of TP53 carriers report unnecessary worry as a barrier to screening adherence .
However, no significant difference in psychosocial distress was found between those undergoing aggressive surveillance compared to those who
were not . It is essential that all patients diagnosed with a hereditary cancer syndrome be counseled by their providers about the potential
benefits and the potential burden of cancer surveillance and be offered support and counseling around potential psychosocial distress. Here,
we present a case of de novo Li-Fraumeni syndrome in a young woman with multiple malignancies and her subsequent management. Though rare, a
diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome has significant implications for cancer screening and prevention. Clinicians must be vigilant about
recognizing potential hereditary cancer syndromes and refer for appropriate genetic counseling. Individualized risks and benefits and
specific attention to the potential for psychosocial distress must be taken into account when managing such patients. National Comprehensive
Cancer Network AJ, AB, and EH wrote and edited the manuscript; all other authors reviewed the manuscript
