The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1006600359152743 The online version
of this article (doi:10.1186/s13000-015-0287-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Malignant
neuroendocrine tumour of the appendix is a rare finding in the paediatric population. Metastases to the loco-regional lymph nodes at time of
diagnosis are very rare. The literature reviewing the treatment and follow up of such cases is not definitive regarding best practice and
management guidelines vary due to the complexity and rarity of these tumours. A twelve year old girl presented acutely to the emergency
department, with a two day history of right iliac fossa pain associated with nausea and vomiting. No fevers or rigors were reported. The
patient denied urinary symptoms and was pre-menstrual. She had a background of recurrent presentations to the emergency department with non
specific abdominal pain in the preceding months. This girl had also been investigated by the paediatric service regarding episodes of
dizziness, headaches and recurrent epistaxis. All previous investigations were normal. On this occasion, she had tenderness, localised
guarding and rebound in the right iliac fossa. Her inflammatory markers were elevated, white cell count (WCC) 14.2 and a C reactive protein
(CRP) of 23.4. Intravenous antibiotics were commenced and a plan for surgical intervention was made. The patient underwent an emergency
uncomplicated laparoscopic appendicectomy. At the time of surgery, it was noted that the apex of the appendix was distended. (Figure 1)
There were no signs of acute inflammation or purulent fluid. The base of the appendix was ligated using endoloops and the specimen was
submitted for histology. The patient made an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged forty eight hours later.Figure 1Intra-operative image
of the appendix at initial operation. Intra-operative image of the appendix at initial operation. Pathological examination of the appendix
(measuring 60 mm in length) demonstrated a rare case of infiltrating neuroendocrine tumour of the appendix. The tumour penetrated the
mucosa, submucosa and muscularis propria with extraluminal extenstion into the mesoappendix. This tumour was well differentiated measuring
25 mm in maximal diameter. The tumour stained positive for chromogranin, CD 56 and synaptophysin. The Ki67 proliferative index measured 15%,
therefore consistent with a Grade 2 (G2) neuroendocrine tumour. A microscopic lymph node of the mesoappendix was also analysed which stained
positive for chromogranin A, confirming a small metastatic deposit in the centre of the lymph node. (Figure 2) The provisional staging of
pT3, N1 Mx was assigned and the patient proceeded to staging investigations. A computerised tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and
pelvis was performed demonstrating a cluster of sub-centimetre lymph nodes in the right paracolic gutter of indeterminate significance.
(Figure 3) Urinary 5 HIAA testing was also completed and a normal level reported.Figure 2Highlights the histological appendix specimen with
staining. A: Base of the appendix with accompanying mesoappendiceal lymph node. B: Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the appendix located at the
apex with extramural extension into the mesoappendix. C: Chromogranin A, neuroendocrine marker positive. D: Mesoappendiceal lymph node
showing small focus of metastatic tumour.Figure 3CT scan identifying the sub centimetre lymph nodes in right paracolic gutter. Highlights
the histological appendix specimen with staining. A: Base of the appendix with accompanying mesoappendiceal lymph node. B: Neuroendocrine
carcinoma of the appendix located at the apex with extramural extension into the mesoappendix. C: Chromogranin A, neuroendocrine marker
positive. D: Mesoappendiceal lymph node showing small focus of metastatic tumour. CT scan identifying the sub centimetre lymph nodes in
right paracolic gutter. After discussion at the gastrointestinal multidisciplinary meeting, the decision to perform a laparoscopic right
hemicolectomy was made. The pathological examination of the subsequent right hemicolectomy specimen showed no evidence of residual tumour
grossly or microscopically. Forty seven loco-regional lymph nodes were retrieved. Two of these lymph nodes were positive for metastatic
neuroendocrine tumour. These were located at 1 cm and 5 cm from the appendicectomy site. All peri-ileal lymph nodes were free of disease.
The immunohistochemistry profile again was positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD 56. (Figure 4).Figure 4Shows the histological
lymph node specimen with staining. A and B: Large lymph node from right hemicolectomy specimen showing metastatic tumour. C and D: Immuno
staining positive for chromogranin A (C) and synaptophysin (D). Shows the histological lymph node specimen with staining. A and B: Large
lymph node from right hemicolectomy specimen showing metastatic tumour. C and D: Immuno staining positive for chromogranin A (C) and
synaptophysin (D). The patient is currently doing well and has been enrolled on a clinical and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) surveillance
programme. Laparoscopic appendicectomy is a common procedure in the paediatric age group. Rarely has an unexpected diagnosis of a malignant
neuroendocrine tumour of the appendix been noted. Interestingly benign neuroendocrine tumours are the most common tumour of the
gastrointestinal tract in children, however malignant neuroendocrine tumours are rare . Table 1 highlights the key publications on malignant
neuroendocrine tumours within the paediatric population. Definitive incidence reporting across the literature is lacking, with varying
incidences being reported. However, Parkes et al. has been referenced widely in the literature with an incidence of 1.14 per million
children. The other large study by Boxberger et al. concluded that the incidence was 1 per 100,000 children, a value that is widely
referenced in the literature.Table 1Highlights the incidence of malignant neuroendocrine tumours in the literature Author Number of children
in series Incidence reported Parkes et al. 1993 40 children over 24 years1.14 per million childrenPelizzo et al. 2001 10 children over
8 years1.14 per million childrenD’Aleo et al. 2001 2 children1 per 100,000 childrenO’Donnell et al. 2006 3 children over 9 years1 per
100,000 childrenBoxberger et al. 2013 237 children over 5 years1 per 100,000 children Highlights the incidence of malignant neuroendocrine
tumours in the literature Up to 90% are diagnosed incidentally after laparoscopic appendicectomy . Usually there is a large female
predominance . This is interesting, when one considers the recent trend in the literature looking at the conservative management of acute
appendicitis in children . The presenting features of both benign and malignant neuroendocrine tumours usually follow that of acute
appendicitis as highlighted in our case. The well described carcinoid syndrome of flushing, diarrhoea and cardiac disease is rarely reported
within the paediatric population as this is associated with liver or retroperitoneal metastases. It is in such cases that the 5
hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) testing is positive . Boxberger et. al studied neuroendocrine tumours in children over a five year period.
They noted that mean age of presentation was 13 yrs (4.5-19.5), the majority of those presented with signs of acute appendicitis and the
diagnosis was made histologically. The location of the tumour similar to our case primarily was at the apex of the appendix (70%) with
extension into the mesoappendix in 63%. Extension into the mesoappendix was more likely if the size of the primary tumour was over 15 mm. It
has been confirmed across the literature that site, size and grade are significant in predicting aggressive behaviour of tumours . Prognosis
has been found to be directly related to tumour size. Rossi et al. questioned whether or not mesoappendiceal involvement was an indicator or
poor prognosis, however their study confirmed previous studies findings, that size is the main determinant of prognosis . Decision on
further operative treatment after histological confirmation of malignant neuroendocrine tumours is based on the size of the tumour. If the
tumour is less than 2 cm appendicectomy alone is the operation of choice. A low proliferative index, an apical location of the tumour, and
lack of angiolymphatic or mesoappendiceal invasion are other factors that influence surgery. A right hemicolectomy is the operation of
choice if the tumour is greater than 2 cm, or if there is histological evidence of mesoappendiceal extension or location of the tumour at
the base with caecal extension. However it must be noted that only 20% of resected specimens will show any residual disease. The World
Health Organisation revised the classification system for neuroendocrine tumours in 2010 and places considerable emphasis on the Ki67
proliferative index. The Ki67 index is used to subdivide the neuroendocrine tumours into G1 or G2 neoplasms. If the Ki67 index is less than
3%, these are classified as G1. A Ki67 index between 3-20% classifies the tumours as G2. G3 is represented by a Ki67 greater than 20%. Ki67%
has been studied as a factor for predicting metastases or recurrence. In 2013 Yamaguchi et. al investigated Ki67 as a predictive index of
tumour spread. This important study reported that a Ki67 index of 2.8% or greater gave a specificity of 86.8% of having metastases or
recurrence . When assessing Ki67 as a marker for the biologic behaviour of tumours, it must be considered that Ki67 expression varies during
the disease progression. This is not fully understood at present, but literature available suggests that Ki67 expression does vary and
depending on the time of measurement, Ki67 can result in the WHO classification being upgraded. This has significant implications for
treatment and follow up of these patients . The presence of lymph node involvement as in our case, is rare and has been reported
sporadically in 4-5% of paediatric cases . A review of 414 cases looking at neuroendocrine tumour and metastases found that only 4.1% of the
cases had metastases identified. MacGillivary et. al confirmed that tumours greater than 2 cm and mesoappendiceal invasion are associated
with metastatic disease . D’Aleo et. al suggested that a right hemicolectomy for a child with a neuroendocrine tumour of the appendix is a
radical procedure as the prognosis is quite good. 5 year survival is reported between 90-100%. There is a trend towards limited resection as
an alternative option to the classic right hemicolectomy, with perhaps an ileocaecal resection deemed appropriate . No definitive follow up
has been quoted in the literature. Despite the incidence of recurrent disease being low, follow up is recommended. In general terms clinical
follow up, including chromogranin A (CgA) and 5 HIAA testing is recommended. No studies have assessed the sensitivity of these biologic
markers to detect metastases or local recurrence . The ENETS guidelines recommend that if the tumour is less than 1 cm then no specific
follow up is needed. However if there is involvement of lymph nodes, long term follow up is recommended. MRI or CT is recommended in cases
where the initial tumour is greater than 2 cm, local invasion or metastatic disease are present at diagnosis. MRI should be considered in
the young and in females of childbearing age due to the lower radiation doses when compared to serial CT scanning. It is recommended that
these high risk patients are followed up at 6 months and 12 months post operatively and annually thereafter. Consent was obtained from the
patient for publication. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RFL was
involved in concept design, literature review and writing manuscript. MI, RW and NB all contributed to literature review and collection of
radiological imaging. FB and TM contributed histological analysis and slide preparation. WK undertook a review of manuscript. KB was
involved in concept generation, contribution to manuscript design and final review of manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
