Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 50 Final Diagnosis: Adrenal pseudocys Symptoms: Abdominal pain • fever
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: — Unusual clinical course Most abdominal cysts, including adrenal pseudocysts, are benign and
asymptomatic. Rapid enlargement, hemorrhage, infection, rupture with leakage of cyst contents, or pressure on adjacent organs can cause
symptoms. Although usually diagnosed incidentally on imaging, determining the origin of a cyst can sometimes be challenging. In these
situations, surgical excision and pathological analysis is crucial to diagnosis and management. We report here a case of a giant symptomatic
adrenal pseudocyst that closely mimicked a hepatic cyst at presentation. A 50-year-old man, with a history of an incidentally detected
hepatic cyst, presented with severe abdominal pain, fevers, leukocytosis, and mildly abnormal liver function tests. CT scan revealed a large
well defined cystic space-occupying lesion within the liver, with findings suggesting cyst rupture and possible infection. Early laparotomy
was performed, and the origin was determined intraoperatively to be right adrenal, which was later confirmed by pathology. Contrast-enhanced
CT scan is the criterion standard for evaluation for abdominal cystic masses. Precise diagnosis of a giant abdominal cyst can be
challenging. Surgery is both diagnostic and curative in such situations. We also discuss the specific situations in which surgery should be
considered in cases of adrenal cystic masses. Most abdominal cystic masses are benign. Determining the origin of a cyst preoperatively can
sometimes be challenging. A large right-sided adrenal cystic mass can rarely be mistaken for a hepatic cyst by imaging. We report here a
case of a giant symptomatic adrenal pseudocyst that closely mimicked a hepatic cyst. It was intraoperatively determined to be of adrenal
origin. After successful excision, it was confirmed to be an adrenal pseudocyst by pathology. A 50-year-old African-American man presented
with severe intermittent right upper-quadrant abdominal pain, nausea, and fever episodes for 4 days. His medical history was significant for
an incidental hepatic cyst detected by computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen 2 years ago at another hospital, at which time he
was asymptomatic. On clinical examination, the patient’s temperature was 39.6°C, blood pressure was 112/66 mm Hg, and heart rate was 110
beats per minute. Abdominal examination demonstrated a soft abdomen but was significant for diffuse tenderness. There was also tender
hepatomegaly extending 15 cm below the right costal margin. There was no guarding, rigidity, or rebound tenderness. Laboratory investigation
revealed a total leukocyte count of 16 800/mm3 with 80% neutrophils. Liver function tests revealed a mild hyperbilirubinemia with a total
bilirubin of 3.3 mg/dl, direct bilirubin of 2.3 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase of 135 U/L, and normal transaminases. Serum amylase, lipase, and
basic metabolic profile were within normal limits. Urinalysis, chest X-ray, and electrocardiogram were within normal limits. A prior CT scan
from 3 months earlier had revealed a 21×18×15 cm rim-calcified cyst in the right hemi-abdomen, exerting mass effect on the liver and
inferiorly displacing the right kidney. No plane of separation was visible between the cyst and either the right lobe of the liver or the
right kidney. However, because the liver appeared to wrap around the cyst and only a small portion of the right kidney abutted the cyst, a
hepatic origin was favored. While the appearance was not typical of an echinococcal cyst, this is not entirely excluded (Figures 1, 2). A
9-mm cystic hypodensity in the head of the pancreas was noted, likely representing a cystic pancreatic neoplasm, such as a side-branch
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). Nonspecific, mildly enlarged, mesenteric lymph nodes were also seen. A repeat CT scan was
performed on admission, which showed a large, well defined, cystic space-occupying lesion measuring 21×18×14 cm in the right upper quadrant
of the abdomen with inferior-medial displacement of the right kidney and mass effect on the right lobe of the liver (Figure 3A, 3B). The
interior of the cyst measured higher density than water (22 Hounsfield Units). There was stranding in the adjacent mesenteric fat, with
fluid surrounding the cyst and extending into the right pararenal and retrocolic space, suggesting a retroperitoneal location of the cyst. A
small hypodensity was again noted in the pancreas with sub-centimeter nodes in the mesentery (Figure 4A, 4B). These findings suggested
rupture of the cyst with possibility of infection, and an early laparotomy was performed after starting the patient on appropriate
antibiotics. A large cyst adherent to the surrounding right-sided abdominal structures was found. After meticulous dissection, the cyst was
separated from all the surrounding abdominal structures, except on the posterior aspect due to adhesions to the kidney. The cyst was then
decompressed by draining 2 liters of foul-smelling hemorrhagic material. The posterior adhesions were excised to deliver the cyst. The
origin of the cyst was ascertained intraoperatively to be the right adrenal gland. Pathological analysis of the excised cyst and right
adrenal gland was performed. It was confirmed as an adrenal pseudocyst of 18-cm size with mural calcifications (Figures 5, 6). No epithelial
lining was found (Figure 7). There was acute inflammation and hemorrhage in the lumen. No scolices or hook-lets consistent with Echinococcus
spp. were identified on polarization microscopy. The cyst wall contained adrenal cortical tissue, confirmed by A103 (Melan-A)
immunohistochemistry, thereby making this an adrenal cyst. A post-surgical CT scan revealed a seroma in the retroperitoneum and fat
stranding in the right hypochondrium, with peritoneal thickening suggestive of post-surgical changes. The apparent “hepatomegaly” and the
mild abnormalities in the liver function tests resolved completely after the surgery. Adrenal cysts are often discovered incidentally, and
the reported incidence is increasing due to increased detection rates from more liberal use of imaging in the present era . The incidence is
reported as 0.064% in surgical series and 0.18% on autopsies . They account for 5% of incidentally detected adrenal lesions . Approximately
80% of these cystic lesions of the adrenal gland are pseudocysts . Adrenal pseudocysts are rare, benign, non-functional cystic masses
arising from the cortex or medulla and are usually asymptomatic. Symptoms can develop, particularly in the case of large cysts (>10 cm), due
to pressure exerted on adjacent organs, if the cyst is rapidly enlarging, or if complicated by hemorrhage, infection, or rupture with
leakage of the cyst contents . Unlike true cysts, pseudocysts have no definite endothelial or epithelial cellular lining. Adrenal
pseudocysts are microscopically composed of fibrous tissue, sometimes with calcification. The lumen contains blood, and attenuated adrenal
gland tissue is often present in the wall. The pathogenesis of an adrenal pseudocyst is unclear. Possible etiologies include vascular
origin, neoplastic growth, adrenal parenchymal malformation, or hemorrhage into the adrenal parenchyma . Evaluation of adrenal cysts can be
done using imaging with ultrasound (US), CT scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), but contrast-enhanced CT scan is the criterion
standard. On CT and MRI, a pseudocyst may have a homogenous cystic appearance (low attenuation on CT or hypo-intense on T1-weighted and
hyper-intense on T2-weighted images). Complex pseudocysts may appear more heterogeneous due to septations, blood products, and
calcifications. The adjacent tissue involvement and the mass effects can be well depicted on both CT and MRI. Careful hormonal,
morphological, functional, and instrumental evaluation is indicated in all adrenal cysts . Adrenal cysts may occasionally mimic hepatic
cysts, as in our case, particularly if the organ of origin cannot be clearly identified on imaging. In our case, the mass was extensive, and
appeared to originate from the liver. The high attenuation value on CT, with surrounding inflammatory changes and fluid in the
retroperitoneum, were indicative of a complicated cyst, warranting immediate surgical intervention. Differential diagnoses of adrenal
pseudocysts include true adrenal cysts, lymphangiomas, pseudocysts of pancreatic origin, dermoids, cystic adrenal carcinomas, and, rarely,
hydatid cysts of the adrenal glands. Nevertheless, there are some characteristics that may help differentiate these entities. A hydatid cyst
is a low-density fluid-attenuation mass with or without septations, most commonly found in the liver. The hydatid cyst wall and septae may
enhance. A pancreatic pseudocyst would be associated with other features of pancreatitis. Lymphangioma is suggested by a water- or fat-
containing cystic mass with septations and multiple locules. Other differentials of adrenal pseudocysts include splenic, hepatic, renal
cysts, mesenteric, or retroperitoneal cysts, urachal cysts, and even solid adrenal tumors. Surgical excision of adrenal pseudocysts,
preferably by laparoscopic approach when possible, is indicated if the lesion is large (>5 cm) or in the presence of symptoms or endocrine
abnormalities (even when subclinical), if there are clinical complications, or if there is a suspicion of malignancy . An adrenal pseudocyst
can present as a large cyst incidentally or with subacute symptoms like recurrent intermittent abdominal pain, or as an acute abdomen when
complications such as rupture and infection occur. Precise diagnosis of a giant cyst in the abdomen can be challenging. Surgery is both
diagnostic and curative in such situations. Disclosures of conflict of interest None. A large cystic mass seen in the RUQ on a prior CT
abdomen: coronal view of the cyst exerting mass effect on the liver and inferiorly displacing the right kidney. CT abdomen 3 months prior to
presentation: giant 21×18×15 cm, Rimmed, calcified cyst in the right hemi-abdomen. (A, B) CT abdomen obtained this admission in axial and
sagittal views showing cystic mass in RUQ. (A, B) Axial and coronal views. Fluid and stranding in the pararenal and retrocolic space
inferior to the cyst are apparent. Cyst wall with heavy mural calcifications. Cyst wall contiguous with adrenal tissue (2×). Pseudocyst wall
on 40× magnification. No epithelial lining is present.
