Although Plasmodium infections have never been clearly associated with symptoms in non-human primates, the question of the pathogenicity of
Plasmodium parasites in non-human primates still remains unanswered. A young chimpanzee, followed before and after release to a sanctuary,
in a semi-free ranging enclosure located in an equatorial forest, showed fever and strong anaemia associated with a high Plasmodium
reichenowi infection, shortly after release. The animal recovered from anaemia after several months despite recurrent infection with other
Plasmodium species. This may be the first description of malaria-like symptoms in a chimpanzee infected with Plasmodium. Non-human primates
and particularly great apes are natural hosts of various Plasmodium parasites [1, 2], including species very closely related to human
parasites, like Plasmodium falciparum (the most virulent agent of human malaria), Plasmodium malariae, Plasmodium ovale and Plasmodium vivax
(Fig. 1) [3, 4]. Among the species related to P. falciparum and classified into the subgenus Laverania, three species were shown to infect
only chimpanzees (Plasmodium gaboni, Plasmodium billcollinsi and Plasmodium reichenowi) and three only gorillas (Plasmodium adleri,
Plasmodium blacklocki and Plasmodium praefalciparum). For the species related to P. malariae, P. ovale and P. vivax and classified in the
subgenus Plasmodium, they were all shown to infect both chimpanzees and gorillas.Fig. 1Phylogenetic relationships among primate Plasmodium
based on cytochrome b sequences (680 bp). Sequences obtained for Wonga at the different checkups are included in red. The sequences reported
in this study were deposited in Genbank under the following accession numbers: KR350681 to KR350683 Phylogenetic relationships among primate
Plasmodium based on cytochrome b sequences (680 bp). Sequences obtained for Wonga at the different checkups are included in red. The
sequences reported in this study were deposited in Genbank under the following accession numbers: KR350681 to KR350683 Despite their genetic
proximity with human parasite species especially P. falciparum, it is still unclear whether ape Plasmodium are virulent, that is whether
great apes express disease or not when they are infected . A case of a fatal Plasmodium infection in a chimpanzee was previously described ,
as well as in a gorilla , but the exact nature of the parasite involved was never determined with molecular tools, thus leaving the
possibility of an infection with a human parasite (P. falciparum in particular). In addition, other pathogens could have caused these deaths
and no special efforts were made to reject these possibilities. In contrast, other authors showed that the presence of Plasmodium in African
great apes was not correlated with any increase of temperature or any other symptoms or that the haematologic and biochemical values, as
well as the majority of immunologic parameters, remained unaltered in chimpanzees infected with P. falciparum . Some researchers noticed
malaria-like symptoms responding to anti-malaria treatment in orangutans but without clear evidence of the presence of the pathogen . In
non-human primates other than great apes, studies showed that experimental infections of rhesus macaques with Plasmodium knowlesi,
Plasmodium coatneyi, and less often Plasmodium cynomolgi, may be characterized by jaundice, anorexia, listlessness, fever, anaemia, and
splenomegaly in spleen-intact animals . Moreover, P. knowlesi-infected baboons expressed either acute infection with multiple system organ
dysfunctions and cerebral involvement, or a chronic infection with spleen enlargement . Therefore, no evidence of symptoms was ever clearly
associated with natural Plasmodium infection in non-human primates, especially in great apes. This case present what could be the first
description of symptoms associated to a clearly identified natural Plasmodium infection in a chimpanzee. A 6-year-old female chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes troglodytes), named Wonga, was brought to the Centre International de Recherches Médicales de Franceville (CIRMF) after being
confiscated from illegal owners in Libreville, Gabon. She was captured by the owners after they killed her mother and was kept as a pet for
most of her life, living inside the owners’ house in an urban environment. She spent her quarantine at CIRMF and cleared out after 90 days.
She was then transferred to the sanctuary “Parc de la Lékédi”, Bakoumba (Haut-Ogooué, Gabon). The sanctuary “Parc de la Lékédi”, Bakoumba,
holds various primates species, including gorillas, chimpanzees and small monkeys, all bushmeat-poaching-issued orphans, which have been
confiscated by the Gabonese Government, gone through a quarantine period at the Centre International de Recherches Médicales de Franceville
(CIRMF) and finally released into semi-free ranging enclosures in the sanctuary. Wonga was released into a group of 10 chimpanzees, ranging
from 3 to 12 year-old, sharing a 7-ha-semi-free ranging enclosure in dense equatorial forest. The chimpanzees are left in the enclosure
nights and days, and sleep in the trees. Food supplementation is offered every day, around 10 am and 2 pm, and consists of fruits and
protein cakes. During feeding, keepers monitor animals’ global health on site. Contacts with humans are extremely limited, to annual medical
check-ups or health-care-needed anesthesia. Chimpanzees are not followed during the day and evolve freely into the enclosure. Three and a
half months after Wonga’s release into the group, routine medical annual check-up was performed on all the chimpanzees of the group. All
procedures in this study involving animals were approved by the Government of the Republic of Gabon. This study complied with the relevant
national guidelines and with the IUCN Policy Statement on Research Involving Species at Risk of Extinction. During her quarantine, three
clinical check-ups were performed on days 0, 22 and 51, following CIRMF quarantine protocol. For every medical check-up, the animal was
anaesthetized with ketamine (10 mg/kg) via intramuscular injection. Once asleep, blood was collected from femoral vena into EDTA and dry
tubes, on which pathogen screenings were performed. Wonga expressed no clinical symptoms of any disease or infection. Her temperature was
stable over these check-ups (mean = 37.1 °C; SD = 0.25166). She constantly gained weight over the three check-ups, which is expected from an
individual recently confiscated and poorly nourished upon arrival at CIRMF (Fig. 2f).Fig. 2Evolution of haematology parameters, temperature,
parasitaemia and weight between quarantine (days 0, 22 and 51) and first post-release check-up (day 192). a Haematocrit (%); (b) Haemoglobin
levels (g/dl); (c) Red blood cell count (×106/mm3); (d) Temperature (°C); (e) Parasitaemia (parasites/μl of blood); (f) Weight (kg). Ht:
Haematocrit; HB: Haemoglobin; RBC: Red blood cells Evolution of haematology parameters, temperature, parasitaemia and weight between
quarantine (days 0, 22 and 51) and first post-release check-up (day 192). a Haematocrit (%); (b) Haemoglobin levels (g/dl); (c) Red blood
cell count (×106/mm3); (d) Temperature (°C); (e) Parasitaemia (parasites/μl of blood); (f) Weight (kg). Ht: Haematocrit; HB: Haemoglobin;
RBC: Red blood cells Three and a half months after her transfer to the Parc de la Lékédi, on day 192, annual check-up of all chimpanzees of
the group was routinely performed. Four chimpanzees (including this animal) were sampled on the same day. They were anaesthetized with
ketamine (10 mg/kg) via intramuscular injection. The veterinarians noticed that Wonga was less active, calmer and sleepier than usual and
than the other chimpanzees. Her physical examination revealed no abnormalities, except that her rectal temperature was high (39 °C), unlike
her previous temperatures observed during quarantine (Fig. 2d) and unlike the three other chimpanzees examined the same day
(mean = 37.56 °C, SD = 0.28868) (Fig. 3e). Veterinarians also noticed that Wonga did not gain any weight since her quarantine (Fig. 2f).Fig.
3Blood results, temperature and parasitaemia comparison between Wonga and other chimpanzees on day 192. a Haemoglobin levels (g/dl); (b)
Haematocrit (%); (c) Red blood cell count (×106/mm3); (d) Parasitaemia (parasites/μl of blood); (e) Temperature (°C). Ht: Haematocrit; HB:
Haemoglobin; RBC: Red blood cells Blood results, temperature and parasitaemia comparison between Wonga and other chimpanzees on day 192. a
Haemoglobin levels (g/dl); (b) Haematocrit (%); (c) Red blood cell count (×106/mm3); (d) Parasitaemia (parasites/μl of blood); (e)
Temperature (°C). Ht: Haematocrit; HB: Haemoglobin; RBC: Red blood cells For each check-up during quarantine and after release, blood counts
(serum chemistry and haematology) were performed. Serum chemistry results showed no strong abnormalities all along check-ups (Table 1) .
During her quarantine at CIRMF, Wonga was sampled three times. Her haematologic results were within or slightly below normal ranges for
juvenile female chimpanzees (Table 2) .Table 1Wonga serum chemistry resultsParametersAlbTotCreatUreaGGTASTALTALP(g/dL)Prot
(g/dL)(mg/dL)(mg/dL)(U/L)(U/L)(U/L)(UI/L)(Normal
ranges)(3.1–4.8)(6.2–8.1)(0.4–1)(4.6–19.9)(7.3–36.4)(7.9–33.0)(18.6–61.1)(159.1–1080.1)QuarantineDay 0N/A 8.5 0.8711.5 4.92 16 18 1.5 Day
22N/A 8.8 0.785.88101921 40 Day 513.8 6.0 0.9 2.8 N/A13 15 538Post-releaseDay 192 3 7.60.785.614 40 23288Day 307 2.9 8.10.64 1.12
222419324Day 3443.4N/A0.62N/A2724 13 270Day 3933.4 8.4 0.6211.54161920374 Alb albumin, Tot Prot total protein, Creat creatinine, Urea urea
nitrogen, GGT γ-glutamyltransferase, AST aspartate transaminase, ALT alanine transaminase, ALP alkaline phosphataseBold values: values out
of normal rangesTable 2Wonga hematological resultsParametersRBCHBHtPltMCVMCHMCHC(×106/mm3)(g/dl)(%)(/mm3)(μm3)(pg/ml)(g/dl)(Normal
ranges)(4.0–5.9)(11.2–15)(34.5–45.9)(171,900–442,000)(74.0–87.9)(23.7–28.9)(30.6–34.5)QuarantineDay 04.791236371,000 70 2435Day
224.61236431,000 69 2536Day 514.761236365,000 69 2537Post-releaseDay 192 3.8 8 24 266,000 68 20 32 RBC red blood cells, HB hemoglobin, Ht
hematocrit, Plt platelets, MCV mean cell volume, MCH mean cell hemoglobin, MCHC mean cell hemoglobin concentrationBold values: values out of
normal ranges Wonga serum chemistry results Alb albumin, Tot Prot total protein, Creat creatinine, Urea urea nitrogen, GGT
γ-glutamyltransferase, AST aspartate transaminase, ALT alanine transaminase, ALP alkaline phosphatase Bold values: values out of normal
ranges Wonga hematological results RBC red blood cells, HB hemoglobin, Ht hematocrit, Plt platelets, MCV mean cell volume, MCH mean cell
hemoglobin, MCHC mean cell hemoglobin concentration Bold values: values out of normal ranges During her first post-release check-up (day
192), correlated with her fever, her haematological results showed anaemia, with low haematocrit, low haemoglobin level and low red blood
cell count (Table 2 and Fig. 2). Along with blood counts, Wonga was tested for Plasmodium infections during quarantine and after release
using two distinct diagnostic tests (thick blood smears and cytochrome b PCR/sequencing) . The three samples tested during quarantine showed
no Plasmodium infection (Fig. 2e). On day 192, correlated with her fever and anaemia, she was tested positive for P. reichenowi (Fig. 1),
with a high parasitaemia (32,472 parasites/μl of blood) (Fig. 2e). Parasitaemia was determined by counting the number of parasites infecting
red blood cells, over a population of 100 white blood cells. Then, knowing the white blood cell count at the same date, the density of
Plasmodium parasites per microlitre of blood was calculated. Several forms were observed including ring stages and mature forms like
schizonts (Fig. 4), indicating that the parasite was clearly developing and could be the origin of the hyperthermia and of the anaemia.Fig.
4Wonga’s Plasmodium sp. forms on day 192. a Ring form; (b) Mature schizonts. Giemsa stain, 100 × magnification. Arrows point towards the
different forms Wonga’s Plasmodium sp. forms on day 192. a Ring form; (b) Mature schizonts. Giemsa stain, 100 × magnification. Arrows point
towards the different forms During quarantine and for the three samples, the chimpanzee was screened for several pathogens. Simian
Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV, peptides set), Simian T-Cell Leukaemia Virus (STLV, peptides set), hepatitis B (HBV, serology), hepatitis C
(HCV, serology), filariosis (leucoconcentration), bacterial infections (bacterial cultures performed on nasal and anal swabs), tuberculosis
(intradermal palpebral test) and gastro-intestinal parasites (Bailenger and flotation techniques) were all tested negative. Nevertheless,
anti gastrointestinal parasites drugs were preventively administered. On day 192, filariosis (leucoconcentration), bacterial infections
(bacterial cultures performed on nasal and anal swabs), gastro-intestinal parasites (Bailenger and flotation techniques) and tuberculosis
(intradermal palpebral test) were checked negative. Because the other chimpanzees of the group are non-infected with SIV, STLV, HBV and HCV
and because animals do not have any contacts with wild chimpanzees, these pathogens were not checked on Wonga on day 192. Three other
chimpanzees, two juvenile females (5 and 6 years old) and one adolescent male (9 years old), were sampled on day 192. Their haemoglobin
levels (HB), haematocrit (Ht), and red blood cell counts (RBC) were within or slightly lower than chimpanzees’ normal haematological ranges
(for juvenile females: HB = 11.2–15 g/dl; Ht = 34.5–45.9 %; RBC = 4.0–5.9 × 106/mm3; for adolescent males: HB = 12.4–16.4 g/dl;
Ht = 37.9–49.7 %; RBC = 4.5–6.1 × 106/mm3) . They did not show either anaemia or hyperthermia, unlike Wonga (Fig. 3). All chimpanzees of the
group were infected with Plasmodium (two of them with P. reichenowi and one with P. malariae), but with a much lower parasitaemia than Wonga
(2720, 4048 and 5130 parasites/μl) (Fig. 3d). Wonga stopped showing any abnormal behaviour some days after day 192. On days 307, 344 and
393, she was anaesthetized again for vaccination purposes. The veterinarian took advantage of the anesthesia needed for vaccinations to
perform a full clinical examination and to sample the animal. Her temperatures had decreased back to normal (37.9, 37.4 and 37.7 °C)
(Fig. 5c).Fig. 5Evolution of Wonga’s haematological parameters, temperature, parasitaemia and weight during post release check-ups (days
192, 307, 344, and 393). a Haemoglobin levels (g/dl); (b) Haematocrit (%); (c) Temperature (°C); (d) Mean cell volume (μm3); (e) Mean cell
haemoglobin (pg/ml); (f) Parasitaemia (parasites/μl of blood); (g) Weight (kg). Ht: Haematocrit; HB: Haemoglobin; MCV: Mean cell volume;
MCH: Mean cell haemoglobin Evolution of Wonga’s haematological parameters, temperature, parasitaemia and weight during post release check-
ups (days 192, 307, 344, and 393). a Haemoglobin levels (g/dl); (b) Haematocrit (%); (c) Temperature (°C); (d) Mean cell volume (μm3); (e)
Mean cell haemoglobin (pg/ml); (f) Parasitaemia (parasites/μl of blood); (g) Weight (kg). Ht: Haematocrit; HB: Haemoglobin; MCV: Mean cell
volume; MCH: Mean cell haemoglobin Plasmodium sequencing showed that she was now infected with P. gaboni (Fig. 1). Her parasitaemia was
still high but strongly decreased compared to day 192 (Fig. 5f). On days 307 and 344, her haematological results still showed strong anaemia
(Fig. 5). RBC count was back within normal range, but Hb level, Ht, mean cell volume (MCV) and mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) were low, signing
a chronic microcytic and hypochromic anaemia. On day 393, Wonga’s laboratory results showed that she recovered from her anaemia, with much
higher Ht, Hb level, MCV and MCH (Fig. 5). Follow-up on Wonga’s weight was also performed (Fig. 5g); after her release to the sanctuary, she
was barely maintaining her weight until day 344. Then, between day 344 and day 393, as she recovered from her anaemia, she spectacularly
gained weight in a short period of time. On day 307, she was tested negative for gastrointestinal infections; however, anti gastrointestinal
parasite drug was preventively administered on that day. On days 344 and 393, she was again tested negative for gastrointestinal parasites
infections. Some weeks after her release in a dense tropical forest, Wonga, a 6-year-old female chimpanzee, presented a fever associated
with anaemia, characterized by a very low Ht, very low Hb level and a low RBC count, as well as no weight gain since her quarantine. These
clinical and laboratory findings were associated with a Plasmodium infection at high parasitaemia. All her symptoms (especially high
parasitaemia and strong anaemia) are characteristics of a strong malaria attack in a naïve individual. Indeed, Wonga was kept for most of
her life inside a house in an urban environment and may never have been confronted to a Plasmodium infection. Moreover, Wonga was not
infected during quarantine, which lasted 3 months. Plasmodium-acquired immunity is believed not to last for a long period of time , thus
Wonga may be considered naïve regarding Plasmodium infection. Given her history, the symptoms Wonga expressed may thus be due to the
reaction of a naïve animal experiencing its first Plasmodium infection. On the opposite, the other chimpanzees sampled, which have been
followed for the past 2 years and have constantly been tested positive for Plasmodium, are definitively not naïve regarding Plasmodium
infection. On day 192, Wonga expressed two features that are seen in humans experiencing their first Plasmodium infection: high parasitaemia
and severe disease, including severe anaemia. Malaria-naïve patients have significantly higher risk to develop a peak parasitaemia compared
to patients born and resident in malaria-endemic countries of Africa . Wonga, a malaria-naïve chimpanzee, did express a peak parasitaemia
compared to other chimpanzees resident in the malaria-endemic sanctuary. High levels of parasitaemia can result in substantial destruction
of red blood cells, causing a severe anaemia, particularly in non-immune individuals . However, even if Plasmodium-induced haemolysis
contributes to a reduction in haemoglobin levels, low haemoglobin levels in anaemic children may also be explained by ineffective
erythropoiesis . Studies demonstrated that patients experiencing acute falciparum malaria show bone marrow damage, ineffective
erythropoiesis and a reduced rate of erythropoietic proliferation . Therefore, high parasitaemia and ineffective erythropoiesis may explain
Wonga’s anaemia. Severe anaemia is also a feature more often expressed by non-immune individuals infected with Plasmodium; it has been shown
that non-immune tourists going to Plasmodium-endemic areas are at greater risk to develop severe disease than semi-immune residents, who
seem at lower risk for severe disease . This is also true for children experiencing their first malaria infection: severe disease with rapid
progression to death occurs in young children without acquired immunity . Most of the mortality associated with P. falciparum infection
occurs in immune-naïve African children under 5 years of age. Symptoms of severe P. falciparum malaria include hyperparasitaemia and severe
malarial anaemia . Therefore, Wonga’s non-acquired immunity to Plasmodium may explain the hyperthermia and anaemia she experienced, while
semi-immune chimpanzees, living in the area for years, did not show any symptoms. Unfortunately, no other Plasmodium-naïve chimpanzees
recently introduced in the area was anaesthetized soon after release, thus allowing the same study as Wonga’s. Anaesthesia and sampling are
necessary to detect anaemia and hyperthermia, which may explain why malaria-like symptoms were never detected on the other chimpanzees
previously released. Given the unique aspect of the case observed, further case studies will thus be necessary to assess whether treatment
should be administered. No difference on alimentation, stress or weather could have biased these results. All individuals compared in this
study were sampled the same day, with the same technique and conditions, and live in the same enclosure. None of them suffered malnutrition
and all presented a good body condition. No difference in capture, anaesthesia or amount of stress could have been the origin of such a
raise in temperature. Wonga was also tested for other diseases which could have been responsible for the fever (for example, bacterial
infections), and for the anaemia (for instance, gastrointestinal parasites such as Ancylostoma sp.). After several months (day 307), P.
reichenowi had disappeared from Wonga’s blood, but another malaria infection with P. gaboni was observed, associated to a lower
parasitaemia. On days 307 and 344, Wonga did not show any hyperthermia but still had microcytic and hypochromic anaemia. During the same
period, she did not gain any weight, confirming that her global health was still not optimum. Gastrointestinal parasites infections which
could be responsible for these symptoms were again ruled out. The clearance of P. reichenowi from Wonga could have been due to the
development of an immunity of the chimpanzee against this parasite species. The existence of such immunity against chimpanzee parasite was
recently indirectly evidenced in natural ape populations by showing that prevalence of infection was lower in older individuals . Regarding
P. gaboni, infection was acquired by Wonga any time between day 192 and day 307. Whether this infection induced similar symptoms cannot be
told. Further studies should be done to determine if all ape Plasmodium species induce similar symptoms or not. It is nevertheless likely
that this infection, even at a low parasitaemia, was partly responsible for the maintenance of the anaemia. Finally, between day 344 and day
393, after several months without any symptoms other than anaemia and no weight gain, the chimpanzee recovered from her haematological
condition, recovered usual haemoglobin levels, and resumed gaining weight. Such recovery could be explained by a progressive accommodation
of Wonga’s physiology to the recurrent Plasmodium infections , as observed in humans . Wonga expressed hyperthermia and strong anaemia
correlated with a high parasitaemia Plasmodium infection. Other possible causes of the symptoms observed were ruled out. Then, after several
months, and despite recurrent infection with other Plasmodium species, the animal gradually recovered from anaemia. Symptoms such as fever
and anaemia were consistent with a strong Plasmodium infection, and showed first evidence of malaria-like symptoms in a likely naïve-
chimpanzee infected with Plasmodium. Benjamin Ollomo and Franck Prugnolle contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors made substantial contributions to the investigations
presented in this manuscript. AH wrote the article, analysed and interpreted the data. LB and DNM performed the molecular diagnosis of the
blood samples and estimated parasitaemia. AM collected all samples and performed the clinical exams. LB, DNM, APO, CA, and PD processed the
samples and carried out the sequence analysis. JM, CTB, BN, EW, and VR participated in sanitary controls and helped in the acquisition of
data. AH drafted the manuscript with contributions of FP, AM, BO, and FR. All authors have critically revised and approved the final
manuscript. The authors thank the CIRMF, CNRS, IRD as well as Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (ANR JCJC SVSE 7-2012 ORIGIN) which
provided financial support to this study. The authors thank COMILOG and SODEPAL for their help in the study. Authors thank the two reviewers
for their very constructive comments.
