Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) arising in the pterygopalatine fossa was rare, only 3 cases have been reported. In previous literature, few
authors reported whether the visual deficit could be resolved following the resection of the tumor. One patient with visual dysfunction
induced by ACC arising in the pterygopalatine fossa was reported. Complete visual recovery was achieved following the operation. And the
patient was satisfied with the appearance and the functional results in the follow-up. Visual loss contributed by the tumor in the
pterygopalatine fossa could recover in selected patients. Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a malignant tumor characterized by perineural
invasion, slow growth, and insidious destruction of surrounding tissues. It usually arises in the major salivary gland, but also in minor
salivary gland occasionally.1 ACC arising in the pterygopalatine fossa is extremely rare, only 3 cases have been reported.2–4 In these
cases, 1 patient presented visual deficit because of neural invasion.2 Owing to its proximity to the superior orbital fissure and optic
canal, neoplasms arising in the pterygopalatine fossa may cause optic neuropathy by direct invasion or oncothlipsis. Current literature has
described possible visual recovery following excision of anterior clinoid mucocele,5 but few authors reported whether the visual deficit
could be resolved after the resection of the tumor arising in the pterygopalatine fossa. In current study, we described 1 patient with
visual dysfunction induced by ACC arising in the pterygopalatine fossa. The Zhengzhou University institutional research committee approved
our study, and the participant signed an informed consent agreement. A 44-year-old Chinese man presented a mass in the palate for 7 months,
there was no ulcer or pain. One month ago, the visual acuity of the right eye dropped gradually and then there was no vision at diagnosis.
Preoperative radiographs presented a huge mass in the pterygopalatine fossa and infratemporal fossa (Figure 1A), but we could not determine
whether the optic nerve was invaded (Figure 1B). After explaining the possible risks including total blindness to the patient, a surgical
plan was formulated. A classic Weber-Ferguson incision was performed. Osteotomies were made on the hard palate after the periosteum was
elevated. The optic nerve was noted to just be oppressed by the tumor. After carefully distraction, the tumor was resected completely.
Intraoperative frozen section and postoperative pathology both showed a diagnosis of ACC. And the patient reported the visual acuity had
returned to normal at 10 days after the operation. At 2 months after discharge from the hospital, there was no recurrence of the tumor
(Figure 1C), and the patient was satisfied with the appearance and the functional results. (A) Huge space-occupying lesion in the
pterygopalatine fossa and infratemporal fossa was noted. The surrounding orbital bone was damaged. A malignant tumor tended to be the
primary diagnosis. (B) The tumor involved the orbital apex, but the association between the optic nerve and the tumor could not be justified
clearly. (C) At 2 months after discharge from the hospital, there was no recurrence of the tumor. The most distinctive biological behavior
of ACC was perineural spread.1 In previous case reports, facial pain or visual deficit or hypoglossal nerve palsy were the main
complaint.2–4 All these findings supported the above-mentioned viewpoint. In current study, optic dysfunction was also noted, but it would
be contributed by external compression rather than direct tumor invasion. Various surgical approaches for the pterygopalatine fossa and
infratemporal fossa have been advocated. It could be divided into 3 groups inferior approach, lateral approach, and anterior approach.6,7
Inferior approach could not provide adequate exposure of the retromaxillary and the skull base, and it was usually suggested for the tumor
restricted in the parapharyngeal space.6,7 Lateral approach was limited for tumors extending medial to the pterygomaxillary fissure and
especially those stretching across the medline.6,7 The maxillary swing approach was first introduced by Wei et al8 for recurrent
nasopharyngeal carcinoma as a novel anterior approach. Nowadays, the route has been the preferable approach for tumors arising in the
pterygopalatine fossa and infratemporal fossa. Compared to the facial translocation approach, the maxillary swing approach did not require
neurorraphy and could avoid the development of a free facial graft by keeping the anterior maxilla and translocated hard palate attached to
the cheek flap. In current study, an adequate exposure of the lesion was achieved and the tumor was resected completely. Possible
postoperative complications such as palatal fistula, epiphora, and trismus have been reported. But in current study, no complication was
noted. The most interesting finding in such case was complete recovery of visual disorder following surgical resection of the disease.
Previous authors have studied the factors related to vision recovery after optic nerve decompression. Suri et al9 have studied the visual
outcome in patients with suprasellar tumors who experienced preoperative blindness, and the authors found male sex, shorter duration of
blindness, operative evidence of hemorrhage in tumor, and soft tumor consistency were significantly associated with the visual outcome;
another research conducted by Mathiesen et al10 presented early optic nerve decompression and primary tumors seemed to predict better visual
prognosis. Similarly, Kitano et al11 compared postoperative improvement of visual function among different approaches in treating
suprasellar meningiomas, and the authors found extended transsphenoidal approach might resulted in improvements in visual acuity. Other
associated factors, such as the size of mass, the pathology type, tumor consistency and, so on, have also been proven in the literature.12
The same principle might also be compliant to the present case. In summary, ACC arising in the pterygopalatine fossa is extremely rare.
Visual loss contributed by the tumor in the pterygopalatine fossa could recover in selected patients. None declared. Abbreviation: ACC =
adenoid cystic carcinoma. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
