Mammary-type myofibroblastoma of the soft tissue is a very rare, benign, mesenchymal neoplasm with myofibroblastic differentiation. To date,
20 cases of extra-mammary myofibroblastoma have been described in literature. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest extra-
mammary myofibroblastoma described in the literature, and the first case reported in this location. A 50-year-old Pakistani man presented
with a long history of a painless, huge lump on his right thigh. His clinical examination showed normal-looking skin and there was no
inguinal lymphadenopathy. The mass was excised with a clinical impression of soft tissue sarcoma. Gross examination showed a huge, well-
circumscribed soft tissue mass measuring 34cm in its largest dimension and weighing approximately 13kg. It was partially covered by fat
tissue. Histologically, the lesion was composed of a haphazard arrangement of bland spindle-shaped cell fascicles in a thick collagenous and
myxoid background. The neoplastic cells showed diffuse and patchy positivity for CD34 and desmin, respectively. No recurrence was seen
following surgical excision over a follow-up period of five months. Mammary-type myofibroblastoma of the soft tissue is a benign soft tissue
neoplasm, and no malignant behavior and/or recurrence after surgical resection has been described, regarding its size and location. As an
extremely rare tumor, the correct diagnosis and prompt management is important, and requires careful clinical and pathological workup to
rule out the possibility of a malignant neoplasm. Mammary-type myofibroblastoma is a rare, benign, soft tissue tumor which morphologically
resembles its mammary counterpart. The lesion was first described in 1987 by Wargotz et al. as a distinctive, benign, mesenchymal tumor of
the breast. The lesion is usually well-circumscribed, composed of haphazardly arranged fascicles of spindle-shaped cells admixed with
interrupted adipocytes in a collagenous and myxoid background. The presence of coffee-bean shaped nuclear grooves, which was first described
by Wargotz et al. , is a cytological clue for diagnosis in fine-needle aspiration cytology smears . The most common immunohistochemical
profile seen in these tumors is diffuse positivity for CD34 and desmin ; however, more variable positivity has also been reported . This
tumor is most often confused with spindle cell lipoma, as both are spindle cell neoplasms, both are positive for CD34, and in addition at
the molecular level, both reveal similar loss of genetic material from the 13q14 region . The standard management is surgical removal.
Malignant behavior or recurrence has not been described. A review of the literature revealed a total 20 cases of extra-mammary
myofibroblastoma described to date, with a slightly male predilection . The largest size reported in the literature was 13cm in diameter,
and the most common location was the inguinal area (Table 1) . Here we report a case of mammary-type myofibroblastoma, which we believe is
the largest case (34cm in largest diameter) described so far, in the right thigh of a 50-year-old man. The literature is also reviewed.Table
1 Summary of current and previous reported cases of mammary-type myofibroblastoma Report Sex/age Tumor size and weight Site Gross
description of mass Current caseM/5034×28×22cm, 13KgRight thighFirm, well-circumscribed with yellow cut surface and focal myxoid changeMillo
et al. F/465.3cmLiverSolid, non-encapsulated, fat-containing tumorKojima et al. M/793.5×3.5×2cmRight seminal vesicleSharply demarcated,
white whorled, solid massWei and Zhu F/804×3.5×1cmLeft vulvaFirm, tan, nodular, well-circumscribed, un-encapsulated.Arsenovic et al.
F/405.5×4×4cmRight buttockElastic, grayish white, well-circumscribed mass with solid, whorled cut surfaceZhang et al. F/405cm,
40gPerianalWell-circumscribed, encapsulated nodular mass with solid, yellow homogenous cut surfaceHox et al. F/456cmBehind mandibular
angleWell-circumscribed, mobile and soft massDiwadkar and Barber F/563cmLeft vulvaDensely adherent to surrounding tissueScotti et al.
M/369cmPopliteal fossaNodular, whitish, well-circumscribed, un-encapsulated mass.Mukonoweshuro et al. M/857cm, 149gLeft paratestisWell-
circumscribed, apparently encapsulated, nodular mass with solid, whorled pale-gray cut surfaceMaggiani et al. M/37NGroinFirm and well-
circumscribed mass.McMenamin and Fletcher (9 cases)M (7), F (2) (35–67)6cm (2–13)IA (3), AW (1), VW (1), MB (1), TA (1), BT(1), RG (1)Mostly
firm and well-circumscribed, yellow-white mass with whorled cut surfaceAW, Abdominal wall; BT, Buttock; IA, Inguinal area; MB, Mid back; RG,
Right groin; PA, Paratesticular area; VW, Vaginal wall. Summary of current and previous reported cases of mammary-type myofibroblastoma AW,
Abdominal wall; BT, Buttock; IA, Inguinal area; MB, Mid back; RG, Right groin; PA, Paratesticular area; VW, Vaginal wall. A 50-year-old
Pakistani man presented to a tertiary care hospital with a long-standing history of a mass in his right thigh. His physical examination
revealed a huge bulging mass on the medial side of his right thigh. No inguinal or any other local lymphadenopathy was present. A clinical
impression of the soft tissue sarcoma was made and surgical excision of the mass was planned. Peroperatively, the mass was circumscribed,
encapsulated and well-demarcated from underlying muscles, with no invasion of underlying tissues. Upon gross examination, the mass was well-
circumscribed, firm in consistency, and measured approximately 34×28×22cm and weighed approximately 13kg (Figure 1A). The cut surface showed
a pale yellow appearance, with focal myxoid change and few areas of cystic degeneration. Neither necrosis nor hemorrhage was noted
(Figure 1B).Figure 1Gross and low microscopic view of the mass. (A) Well-circumscribed, oval to round large mass, with smooth external
surface. (B) Sectioning reveals yellow-white, myxoid cut surface with a whorled pattern, no necrosis or hemorrhage seen. (C) Low microscopic
field shows a well-circumscribed, un-encapsulated mass. (D) Bland, short, spindle-shaped cell fascicles arranged haphazardly in a
collagenous stoma. Gross and low microscopic view of the mass. (A) Well-circumscribed, oval to round large mass, with smooth external
surface. (B) Sectioning reveals yellow-white, myxoid cut surface with a whorled pattern, no necrosis or hemorrhage seen. (C) Low microscopic
field shows a well-circumscribed, un-encapsulated mass. (D) Bland, short, spindle-shaped cell fascicles arranged haphazardly in a
collagenous stoma. The tumor was extensively sampled for microscopic examination. Histologically, the mass was composed of short spindle to
oval-shaped cells in a haphazard arrangement of fascicles and sheets (Figure 1C,D). The cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct
cell borders and elongated nuclei with fine chromatin. Focal interspersed adipocytes are seen (Figure 2A). Nuclear grooves were noted in
some cells (Figure 2B). Mitotic activity was scant and no atypical mitotic figures were found. No cytologic atypia or necrosis was noted.
The stroma was composed of thick bundles of collagen with focal myxoid change and was surrounded by fatty tissue. However, the surrounding
fatty tissue did not show lipoblasts or atypical adipocytes. It was revealed on immunohistochemistry that the neoplastic spindle-shaped
cells showed strong positive expression for CD34 (Figure 2C), and patchy expression for desmin (Figure 2D). An immunohistochemical stain for
the S-100 protein showed positive expression in the background adipocytes. However, the neoplastic cells were negative for CD10, alpha
smooth muscle actin, STAT6 B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl 2) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA).Figure 2High microscopic view and
immunohistochemical finding of the mass. (A) In this microscopic view, interrupted adipocytes are seen in a collagenous background. (B)
High-power view shows the cells with coffee-bean shaped intranuclear grooves. Immunohistochemical stains show diffuse positivity for (C)
CD34, and multifocal patchy positivity for (D) desmin. High microscopic view and immunohistochemical finding of the mass. (A) In this
microscopic view, interrupted adipocytes are seen in a collagenous background. (B) High-power view shows the cells with coffee-bean shaped
intranuclear grooves. Immunohistochemical stains show diffuse positivity for (C) CD34, and multifocal patchy positivity for (D) desmin.
Myofibroblastoma is a rare, benign, mesenchymal tumor of breast. An extra-mammary location is rare, and usually occurs along the embryonic
milk-line, which extends from the mid-axilla to medial groin . Accessory breast tissue can also be present along this embryonic line.
However, several cases outside of this embryonic line have been also reported , which is difficult to explain on the basis of the embryonic
milk-line concept. A review of the 20 previously reported cases showed that mammary-type myofibroblastoma occurs at a relatively old age,
with an average reported age of 52.5 years (range 35 to 85 years), and slight male predominance (M:F ratio = 1:0.7). Classically, these
tumors are mostly slow growing, and form painless masses. The average reported tumor size was 5.5cm (range 2 to 13cm), and most of the
reported tumors were small and discovered incidentally. Most cases were reported in the pelvic area: five cases in the inguinal area , three
cases in the vulva and vaginal wall , two in the paratesticular area , and two cases in the buttock , followed by single cases reported in a
seminal vesicle , the perianal region , and the suprapubic area . So far, five cases have been reported outside the pelvis, including cases
in the mandibular region , popliteal fossa , abdominal wall , liver , and back (Table 1) . Regardless of size or location, these lesions
behaved in a benign fashion, with no recurrences or metastases after surgical excision reported so far. The mammary-type myofibroblastomas
described in the literature are well-circumscribed, un-encapsulated masses, consisting of spindle-shaped cells haphazardly arranged in
fascicles of various sizes, along with bands of hyalinized thick collagen in the background. Intralesional fat lobules are also seen, and
intranuclear grooves have been described . It has been revealed on immunohistochemistry that these lesions have positive expression for CD34
and desmin. We describe what, to the best of our knowledge, is the largest case of mammary-type myofibroblastoma (34cm in maximum dimension)
reported so far, and is the first case reported in the medial side of the thigh. For the proper diagnosis of mammary-type myofibroblastoma
in soft tissue outside the milk-line, clinicopathologic correlation is needed. Clinically, these tumors present as slow growing, painless
masses, without evidence of local lymphadenopathy, in middle-aged patients. Pathologically, careful gross examination is essential to detect
the presence or absence of necrosis, a fibrotic component, hemorrhage, and so on. Extensive sectioning for microscopic examination is
essential in order to rule out the presence of cellular atypia or mitosis. Positive expression for immunostaining for CD34 and desmin is
helpful in reaching a correct diagnosis. The importance of mammary-type myofibroblastoma, regardless of size or location, primarily lies in
its definition as a distinctive benign neoplasm, which should not be confused with malignant soft tissue neoplasms, such as stromal sarcoma,
undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (malignant fibrous histiocytoma), spindle cell carcinoma, and so on . The differential diagnosis
includes both benign and malignant neoplasms. It is most often confused with spindle cell lipoma; however, other benign lesions such as
angiofibroma, angiomyofibroblastoma, soft tissue perineurioma, and nodular fasciitis should also be considered and excluded . Both spindle
cell lipoma and mammary-type myofibroblastoma are morphologically similar benign neoplasms, composed of CD34-positive spindle cells admixed
with mature adipose tissue, and both reveal loss of genetic material from the chromosome 13q14 region . In mammary-type myofibroblastoma,
the background stroma is more prominent and hyalinized, and the adipose tissue component is less prominent than in spindle cell lipoma .
Moreover, spindle cell lipoma does not stain for desmin, whereas mammary-type myofibroblastoma is always positive for this
immunohistochemical marker. Tumors with uncertain behavior, such as lipomatous hemangiopericytoma and solitary fibrous tumor, and malignant
tumors, such as low-grade spindle cell liposarcoma, low-grade peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, should
also be considered in the differential diagnosis. Most of these entities can be eliminated from consideration with careful attention to
histologic features. Of those listed, solitary fibrous tumor histologically is perhaps the closest mimic of mammary-type myofibroblastoma.
Solitary fibrous tumor has a more prominent hemangiopericytomatous vasculature, and is also immunohistochmically positive for signal
transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) protein . Mammary-type myofibroblastoma of the soft tissue is a benign, soft tissue
neoplasm, and no malignant behavior and/or recurrence after surgical resection has been described in the cases reported so far. As an
extremely rare tumor, the correct diagnosis and prompt management is important, and requires careful clinical and pathological workup and
extensive sectioning after surgical excision to demonstrate the presence or absence of necrosis, mitosis, or nuclear atypia, and thus rule
out a malignant neoplasm. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JAG and NUD conceived the idea. JAG was major contributor to the
writing of the manuscript. NUD and ZA diagnosed the case, and were major contributors for critically revising the manuscript for important
intellectual content. SDB has given expert opinion and final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
