Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune arthritis in which two inflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-1β, play a
critical role in the induction and progression of the disease. Several reports and data from registries have discussed the association
between chronic inflammatory diseases and disorders in intermediary metabolism, pointing out that prevalence of peripheral insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus is increased among patients with rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, several studies have shown that
type 2 diabetes mellitus may be considered an interleukin-1β inflammatory-mediated process, and both preclinical and clinical observations
have reported the usefulness of interleukin-1 antagonism therapy in this disease. We describe the case of a 58-year-old Caucasian woman and
a 74-year-old Caucasian man with rheumatoid arthritis associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus. In these patients, the inhibition of
interleukin-1β not only induced remission for rheumatoid arthritis, but successfully controlled their metabolic status. We report the
positive effects of the inhibition of interleukin-1 in two patients with rheumatoid arthritis associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus, with
both reaching the therapeutic targets of their diseases by using a single biological agent and tapering or discontinuing their antidiabetic
therapies. These findings suggest that targeting interleukin-1 might be considered a good therapeutic option for the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) play a critical role in the
induction and progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and the efficacy of therapies targeting these two inflammatory cytokines confirms
their prominent role in the disease . Both several reports and data from registries have suggested that the prevalence of type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) is increased in patients with RA . In addition, several studies have shown that T2DM may be considered an IL-1β
inflammatory-mediated process, and both preclinical and clinical observations have reported the usefulness of IL-1 antagonism therapy in
this disease . In this paper, we describe two patients with RA associated with T2DM, in which the inhibition of IL-1 induced remission for
RA and successfully controlled the metabolic status, suggesting that targeting IL-1 might be considered a good therapeutic option for the
treatment of RA associated with T2DM. A 58-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our clinic due to the insidious onset, in previous
months, of arthralgias and arthritis. Her symptoms involved wrists, hands, shoulders and knees. She also reported notable morning stiffness
and fatigue, limiting her daily activities. The results of her cardiological, pulmonary, dermatological, abdominal and neurological
examinations were unremarkable. In her medical history, both essential hypertension and osteoporosis were reported. Laboratory findings
showed an increase of inflammatory markers and were negative for rheumatoid factor (RF), antinuclear antibodies and anti-cyclic
citrullinated peptide (ACPA). A radiological examination of her wrists and hands showed multiple bone erosions and juxta-articular
osteoporosis. Her Disease Activity Score in 28 Joints (DAS28), Simple Disease Activity Index (SDAI) score and Patient Global Visual Analogue
Scale (PG-VAS) score were 4.5, 28 and 67mm, respectively, and active seronegative RA was diagnosed. Combination therapy with methotrexate
(15mg/weekly) (TEVA, Israel), hydroxychloroquine (400mg/daily) (Sanofi, Italy) and a low dose of prednisone (10mg/daily) (Bruno
Farmaceutici, Italy) was prescribed. She experienced a long clinical remission (her DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores were 2.2, 8.2 and 25mm,
respectively, after one year). She experienced a new disease flare-up after two years, characterized by multiple arthritis (wrists, hands
and knees) and an increase of morning stiffness and fatigue (her DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores were 5.2, 34.4 and 88mm, respectively).
Infliximab (400mg/bi-monthly) was introduced into her treatment regimen and a new clinical remission was reached (her DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS
scores were 2.4, 6.8 and 30mm, respectively) for seven years. At this time, after her diagnosis of T2DM (fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level
189mg/dL, glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level 62mmol/mol, 7.8% (4.8-5.9%)), she began taking a new oral hypoglycemic drug (metformin 500mg
trice/daily). One year later, following a new flare-up of her disease involving arthritis of her wrists, hands, elbows, shoulders and knees
(her DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores were 6.27, 34.6 and 80mm, respectively), her anti-TNF-α treatment with infliximab (MSD, USA) was
discontinued. Both her methotrexate and steroids dosage remained stable; the hydrossicloroquine was discontinued due to poor compliance.
Anakinra (Sobi, Sweden), a recombinant form of a human IL-1 receptor antagonist, was introduced into her therapy regimen (100mg/daily). With
regards to therapy for her T2DM, a stable dosage of metformin was continued (FPG level 127mg/dL, HbA1c level 60mmol/mol, 7.6%). In the six
subsequent months a new clinical remission was observed. After three months of therapy, her DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores were 3.88, 24.2
and 74mm, respectively. At the same time, her FPG and HbA1c levels were 108mg/dL and 46mmol/mol, 6.3%, respectively. After six months of
therapy, her DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores were 2.52, 9.2 and 30mm, respectively. Furthermore, repeated tests showed a stable further
reduction in her FPG and HbA1c levels at 103mg/dL and 46mmol/mol (6.3%) (4.8-5.9%), respectively. In Figure 1, the values of DAS28, SDAI,
PG-VAS, inflammatory markers, FPG and HbA1c are reported. A reduction of daily intake of metformin was observed (metformin 500mg
once/daily). Fasting insulin levels were increased following treatment with anakinra: 34pmoles/liter at baseline; 43 pmoles/liter at three
months and 69pmoles/liter at six months, respectively. Similarly, we observed that fasting C-peptide levels were increased: 0.4nmoles/liter
at baseline; 0.6nmoles/liter at three months and 0.8nmoles/liter at six months, respectively. During the follow-up period, her weight,
frequency of physical exercise and diet/caloric intake did not modify. No side effects were observed.Figure 1Clinical charateristics of
evaluated patients during six months of follow-up. Disease Activity Score in 28 Joints (DAS28) (a), Simple Disease Activity Index (SDAI)
(b), Patient Global Visual Analogue Scale (PG-VAS) (c), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (d), C-reactive protein values (CRP) (e), body
weight (f), fasting plasma glucose (g) and glycosylated hemoglobin (h) concentrations in our two patients at the beginning of anakinra
treatment and after three and six months of follow-up. Clinical charateristics of evaluated patients during six months of follow-up. Disease
Activity Score in 28 Joints (DAS28) (a), Simple Disease Activity Index (SDAI) (b), Patient Global Visual Analogue Scale (PG-VAS) (c),
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (d), C-reactive protein values (CRP) (e), body weight (f), fasting plasma glucose (g) and glycosylated
hemoglobin (h) concentrations in our two patients at the beginning of anakinra treatment and after three and six months of follow-up. A
74-year-old Caucasian man with an eight-year history of RA, treated by a combination therapy with methotrexate (15mg/weekly),
hydroxychloroquine (200mg/daily) and methylprednisolone (Pfizer, Italy) (16mg/daily at the beginning, progressively tapered to 3 to
4mg/daily), obtaining a stable and sustained good clinical response (DAS28 not available) was admitted to our unit with a new flare-up of
the disease consisting of multiple swelling joints, mainly involving his hands and feet, with a symmetrical pattern. He showed DAS28, SDAI
and PG-VAS scores of 3.78, 11.5 and 51mm, respectively. In addition, screening for autoimmunity highlighted positivity for RF (100UI/mL) and
ACPA (1326UI/mL). He also reported a history of uncontrolled T2DM in the last 12 months, treated with repaglinide 0.5mg twice daily (Novo
Nordisk Farmaceutici, Italy) (FPG level 310mg/dL, HbA1c level 73mmol/mol, 8.8% (4.8-5.9%)) despite the lower levels of methylprednisolone (3
to 4mg/daily) (Pfizer, Italy) employed. Anakinra (100mg/daily subcutaneously) (Sobi, Sweden) was started, in addition to methotrexate
(10mg/weekly) (TEVA, Israel) and methylprednisolone (3-4mg daily) (Pfizer, Italy), leading to clinical improvement within a few days. At his
three-month follow-up, his DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores had dropped to 1.53, 3.3 and 22mm, respectively. In addition, although oral anti-
diabetic therapy was tapered off eight days after anakinra introduction due to a poor compliance, an improvement in glycemic control was
noted (his FPG and HbA1c levels were 96mg/dL and 54mmol/mol, 7.1% (4.8-5.9%), respectively). At six months his DAS28, SDAI and PG-VAS scores
were 1.89, 6.7 and 20mm, respectively, and a further improvement of both his FPG and HbA1c levels was observed (92mg/dL and 45.36mmol/mol,
6.3% (4.8-5.9%), respectively). His fasting insulin level was increased following treatment with anakinra: 36pmoles/liter at baseline,
53pmoles/liter at three months and 77pmoles/liter at six months, respectively. Similarly, we observed that his fasting C-peptide levels were
increased: 0.6nmoles/liter at baseline, 1.1nmoles/liter at three months and 1.5nmoles/liter at six months, respectively. His weight,
frequency of physical exercise and diet/caloric intake did not modify during the follow-up. No side effects were observed. We show that
anakinra, prescribed for the treatment of relapsing RA in two rheumatic patients with associated T2DM, controls not only the clinical
pictures of RA, but also their metabolic status, confirming previous reports suggesting that IL-1 blockade may be helpful in patients with
T2DM and inflammatory rheumatic diseases . In both case studies, our patients reached a sustained DAS28 remission after introduction of
anakinra, without any side effects observed during the follow-up periods. IL-1β is highly expressed in RA, promoting activation of
leukocytes, endothelial cells, chondrocytes and osteoclasts , and targeting IL-1 reduces inflammation, joint damage and slows the
radiographic progression in patients with RA . Moreover, no opportunistic infections in treated patients have been reported . Diabetes
mellitus is a chronic disease due to a failure in both producing and using insulin. When compared with healthy people, patients with T2DM
display a two-four-fold increased risk of coronary artery disease . On the other hand, it is well known that RA is an independent risk for
cardiovascular disease (CVD), and at present, cardiovascular (CV) events are the leading cause of death in patients with RA . A prospective
longitudinal large cohort study showed that traditional CV risk factors and markers of RA severity might both contribute in predicting fatal
CV events . On this basis, our patients (with both RA and T2DM) displayed a much higher risk of CVD and related mortality. In our patients,
we observed that anakinra administered to treat RA controlled their metabolic disorder. A significant reduction of both FPG and HbA1c levels
was observed. It is well known that the pharmacologic interventions for T2DM are aimed at improving both FPG and HbA1c levels, as suggested
by the American Diabetes Association and the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists . Large clinical trials have shown that
intensive treatments are associated with a significant decrease of CV events . It must be pointed out that by treating our patients with an
anti-IL-1 agent, we were able to reach the optimal therapeutic targets for both RA and T2DM, thus decreasing their CVD risk according to the
European League Against Rheumatism recommendations . These results may suggest new therapeutic possibilities in patients with both RA and
T2DM. It must be pointed out that when diabetic patients are treated with oral antidiabetic drug monotherapy, after an initial improvement,
a progressive and inexorable decline in β-cell function may be observed. Many studies showed that after three years of treatment, the
disease may be controlled by monotherapy in only 50%, and in only 25% after nine years , confirming that T2DM is a progressive disease and
combined therapies are needed to achieve and maintain metabolic targets . In our study, one patient decreased her daily antidiabetic drug
intake, while the other patient discontinued the specific antidiabetic therapy. In this setting, anakinra was able to determine both a
stable DAS28 remission and a glycemic control after six months and that an anti-IL-1 therapy allowed our patients to control their rheumatic
disease without increasing steroid treatment, associated with an increased risk of CV events, in a dose-related manner . Taken together,
these results support that IL-1 antagonism may be a specific therapy in RA with associated T2DM. Although the role of IL-1β has been
extensively studied in RA, recently several studies have suggested this cytokine as a key cytokine in the pathogenesis of T2DM . In fact,
under the influence of higher glycemic levels, islets macrophages start to produce inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β and TNF-α, which
increase the β-cell apoptosis rate, thus contributing to the impairment in pancreatic secretory function . In this setting, Larsen et al.
performed a double blind, parallel-group trial, involving 70 T2DM patients randomly assigned to receive 100mg of anakinra or placebo. At 13
weeks, the anakinra group showed an improvement of HbA1c levels, the C-peptide secretion was enhanced and a reduction in the ratio of
proinsulin to insulin and in levels of IL-6 and C-reactive protein (CRP) was observed . Furthermore, the extension of this study showed that
this improvement lasted at least 39 weeks after treatment withdrawal . In our patients, we observed a reduction of HbA1c and CRP levels
associated with an increase of insulin levels and C-peptide, mirroring what was already observed in the study by Larsen et al., and
suggesting an improvement of β-cell function. In this context, it has been recently shown that anakinra is able to increase insulin
secretion , and this insulin availability may explain its metabolic effects. Recently, Moran et al. reported that anakinra therapy was not
effective in type 1 diabetes (T1DM) patients . It must be pointed out that the insulitis in T1DM is mainly driven by an autoimmune-mediated
process rather than an autoinflammatory process as observed in T2DM, and this different mechanism suggests that IL-1 blockade may not be
considered a good strategy to inhibit the pathogenesis of T1DM . In conclusion, we report the positive effects of anakinra for two patients
with RA associated with T2DM reaching the therapeutic targets of both the diseases, using a single biological agent, and allowing us to
taper or discontinue their antidiabetic therapies. In this setting, further specifically designed studies must be performed to evaluate the
safety and long-term efficacy of anakinra in patients with RA associated with T2DM, and the subsequent reduction of CV events in this
population. On these bases, an open, randomized, controlled, double-arm, multi-center study, whose primary endpoint is the efficacy of
anakinra in controlling the signs and symptoms of T2DM in patients with RA affected by this metabolic disorder, is actually ongoing in our
country (TRACK study, Clincaltrials.gov identifier: NCT02236481). Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of
this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Anti-cyclic citrullinated
peptide C-reactive protein Cardiovascular Cardiovascular disease Disease activity score in 28 joints Fasting plasma glucose Glycated
hemoglobin Interleukin-1β Patient global visual analogue scale Rheumatoid arthritis Rheumatoid factor Simple disease activity index Type 1
diabetes Type 2 diabetes mellitus Tumor necrosis factor-α. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions PR, PC, LC, AV, MG and RG designed the study and wrote the paper. PR, VL, AV, FC and OB enrolled and assessed
patients and collected data. PR, MV and RG analyzed data and critically reviewed the results. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors thank Mrs Federica Sensini for her technical assistance.
