An autoimmune disease is characterized by tissue damage, caused by self-reactivity of different effector mechanisms of the immune system,
namely antibodies and T cells. All autoimmune diseases, to some extent, have implications for fertility and obstetrics. Currently, due to
available treatments and specialised care for pregnant women with autoimmune disease, the prognosis for both mother and child has improved
significantly. However these pregnancies are always high risk. The purpose of this study is to analyse the fertility/pregnancy process of
women with systemic and organ-specific autoimmune diseases and assess pathological and treatment implications. The authors performed an
analysis of the clinical records and relevant obstetric history of five patients representing five distinct autoimmune pathological
scenarios, selected from Autoimmune Disease Consultation at the Hospital of Braga, and reviewed the literature. The five clinical cases are
the following: Case 1–28 years old with systemic lupus erythematosus, and clinical remission of the disease, under medication with
hydroxychloroquine, prednisolone and acetylsalicylic acid, with incomplete miscarriage at 7 weeks of gestation without signs of thrombosis.
Case 2–44 years old with history of two late miscarriages, a single preterm delivery (33 weeks) and multiple thrombotic events over the
years, was diagnosed with antiphospholipid syndrome after acute myocardial infarction. Case 3–31 years old with polymyositis, treated with
azathioprine for 3 years with complete remission of the disease, took the informed decision to get pregnant after medical consultation and
full weaning from azathioprine, and gave birth to a healthy term new-born. Case 4–38 years old pregnant woman developed Behcet’s syndrome
during the final 15 weeks of gestation and with disease exacerbation after delivery. Case 5–36 years old with autoimmune thyroiditis
diagnosed during her first pregnancy, with difficult control over the thyroid function over the years and first trimester miscarriage,
suffered a second miscarriage despite clinical stability and antibody regression. As described in literature, the authors found a strong
association between autoimmune disease and obstetric complications, especially with systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome
and autoimmune thyroiditis. An autoimmune disease (AID) is characterised by tissue damage, caused by self-reactivity of different effectors
mechanisms of the immune system, namely antibodies and T cells. Its occurrence may be associated with genetic and/or environmental
predisposition. There is an activation of the adaptive immune response with tissue damage and inflammation in the absence of any infection,
exposure to toxins or tumour growth . Although, individually, each AID affects a small number of individuals, as a whole, it is estimated
that its prevalence is between 7.6 and 9.4% . All AIDs, to some extent, have implications for fertility and obstetrics. In the general
population, about 80% of miscarriages occur in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy and the risk of miscarriage in those under the age of 35 is
about 10% while it is about 45% in those over the age of 40 . Most AIDs occur frequently in women and should they appear at childbearing
age, they pose a potential risk for almost all aspects of reproduction, from fertility to pregnancy itself (Table 1) . In the past, it was
suggested that women with certain AIDs [particularly systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)/antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)] should avoid
pregnancy. Currently, due to available treatments and specialised care for pregnant women with AID, the prognosis for both mother and child
has improved significantly [4, 7, 9]. However, these pregnancies are always high risk, often associated with foetal loss in the first
trimester, preeclampsia/eclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, premature rupture of membranes, placental insufficiency, pre-term birth,
caesarean delivery and low birth weight [4, 5, 9]. The overall principle, common to all AIDs, is planning the pregnancy for the remission
phase of the disease, in addition to all the care necessary for a successful pregnancy .Table 1Available information on fertility and
miscarriage rates in autoimmune diseases (adapted from Carp et al. )DiseaseFertilityMiscarriageAntiphospolipidic syndromeNew tudies suggest
a role played by aAP in infertility pathogenesisReported recurrent foetal loss with a 10–19% frequencyAutoimmune thyroiditisAntibodies
associated with increased risk of infertilityAntibodies associated with increased risk of miscarriages (recurrent)Systemic lupus
erythematosusNo increased risk of infertilityaAP are the main miscarriage risk factor and are present in 34% aAP antiphospholipid
antibodies. Available information on fertility and miscarriage rates in autoimmune diseases (adapted from Carp et al. ) aAP antiphospholipid
antibodies. The purpose of this study is to analyse the fertility/pregnancy process of women with AID and assess the pathological and
treatment implications. SLE is a complex AID with varied clinical manifestations and developments. It is characterised by the presence of
antinuclear autoantibodies (ANA), anti-DNA, anti-RNA, anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB autoantibodies (among others), immune complex deposition
and damages to target organs, especially kidneys, skin and joints. It is associated with a significant mortality rate . Immunological
mechanisms involved include defects in the removal of immune complexes, apoptosis and antigen presentation. The treatment may be topical
(sunscreen and corticosteroids) or systemic, with anti-inflammatory drugs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, salicylates) or
immunosuppressors (hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate, corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, biological
therapy) . APS is defined by the presence of at least one clinical manifestation (venous/arterial thrombosis or obstetric complications) and
antiphospholipid antibodies (aAP). aAPs are part of a set of antibodies that recognise negatively charged plasma proteins and include anti-
cardiolipin, anti-β-2 glycoprotein and lupus anticoagulant antibodies, among others . It also causes skin and cardiac valves lesions and
changes in neurological, renal and haematological functions . This syndrome can be primary or occur in association with other systemic
diseases, especially SLE . Many individuals are aAP positive without presenting any symptoms and may develop this syndrome. The prevention
of the morbidity associated with APS requires an assessment of the risk of thrombosis and the evaluation of the benefits of antithrombotic
therapy, which must be performed individually, taking into account the immunological profile and background . Polymyositis with/without
dermatomyositis is an inflammatory myopathy which begins by symmetrically affecting the proximal muscles, is characterised by an increase in
the levels of muscle enzymes (creatine kinase/aldolase), electrophysiological changes and characteristic histological findings. These
myopathies may involve the muscles that control breathing and swallowing, the heart (pericarditis, cardiomyopathy and heart failure) or the
lungs (complications arising from aspiration, interstitial lung disease and pulmonary hypertension). DM also includes skin changes. While PM
is mediated by T cells (CD8+), DM is a vascular disorder, mediated by autoantibodies. The first-line treatment of PM/DM is corticosteroid
therapy, and it may call for the administration of other immunosuppressive drugs (azathioprine or methotrexate), to which DM responds better
. Vasculitis, an immune-mediated disease, is potentially fatal, especially when it affects medium or large calibre vessels. On the one hand,
it can cause aneurysms, ruptures and haemorrhages and on the other, it may lead to luminal stenosis with obstruction, tissue ischemia or
infarction. There are three major categories of systemic vasculitis: large-, medium- and small-vessel vasculitis. Its accurate diagnosis is
difficult and requires clinical, pathological and laboratory data, crucial for an appropriate diagnosis and therapy . Behcet’s disease (BD)
is a multisystem vasculitis, characterised by orogenital ulcers, uveitis and skin lesions. It may also affect the gastrointestinal tract,
joints, the central nervous system or the cardiovascular system. Venous or arterial thrombosis may occur due to endothelial dysfunction and
hypercoagulability. Its diagnosis is primarily clinical, although a positive Pathergy test is a classic indicator of the disease. Its
treatment differs and may be topical (corticosteroids) or systemic (corticosteroids, anti-TNF-α) . 90% of non-iatrogenic hypothyroidism in
countries without iodine deficiency occurs due to autoimmunity and it is a prevalent condition in women of childbearing age [1, 5, 16].
There are several types of AITs, of which the most noteworthy is Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, characterised by the presence of high levels of
antithyroglobulin and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies in the presence of hypothyroidism. Available treatment consists of hormone
replacement with exogenous thyroxin. The authors performed a systematic literature review and an analysis of the clinical records and
relevant obstetric history of 5 patients with AID, representing five distinct AID pathological scenarios, selected from AID Consultation at
the Hospital of Braga. The following are the descriptions and analysis of a series of five clinical cases. A 28 years old Brazilian citizen
was diagnosed with SLE in 2010 after the appearance of osteoarticular, vascular, ocular and haematological signs/symptoms. aAP were all
negative and the liver was never affected. After stabilisation, she was subjected to a regular treatment with prednisolone (10 mg/day) and
hydroxychloroquine (400 mg/day)—with periods of intensification of the immunosuppressive dosage due to discoid lupus lesions. The last
exacerbation of skin lesions was on December 2012. She first planned pregnancy in March 2013, under medication with hydroxychloroquine
400 mg/day, prednisolone 2.5 mg/day and acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day but suffered incomplete miscarriage at 7 weeks gestation, requiring
uterine curettage. A histopathological analysis of the abortion material revealed no signs of thrombosis. There was no clinical or
laboratory exacerbation of SLE during or after pregnancy, apart from the skin lesions previously described. SLE associated with pregnancy
can lead to maternal, obstetric and foetal problems (related to the AID). It is agreed that the maternal and foetal prognosis is better when
the disease is in remission/quiescent for at least 6 months prior to conception (Table 2) . This patient was in clinical remission at least
since 2011. The presence of aAP, anti-SSA/Ro or anti-SSB/La antibodies, hypertension or renal impairment, situations that comprise a greater
risk of complications, were excluded. During the 7 weeks of gestation, there was no disease activity or lupus flares, although inavailable
literature, a greater incidence of acute exacerbations during pregnancy is described , nor were there any complications commonly present in
pregnant women with SLE (hypertension, preeclampsia/eclampsia, premature rupture of membranes and gestational diabetes, which usually appear
at later stages ). The patient eventually had a miscarriage in the first trimester, a common complication in SLE [4, 5, 9]. Histopathology
revealed no signs of thrombosis, which safely excludes vascular phenomena associated with APS and/or vasculitis, which could foretell a
bleaker prognosis for a new pregnancy. In terms of treatment (Table 3), corticosteroids, and hydroxychloroquine were properly maintained.
The abrupt discontinuation of hydroxychloroquine is one of the main causes of exacerbation of the disease during pregnancy
.Table 2Contraindications for pregnancy in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (adapted from Andreoli et al. )1. Severe pulmonary
hypertension (systolic BP >50 mmHg or symptomatic)2. Heart failure3. Severe restrictive lung disease4. Mild/severe chronic liver failure5.
Treatment with high dosages of corticosteroids6. Exacerbation in the last 6 months7. Previous severe preeclampsia or HELLP syndrome, despite
treatment with aspirin and heparin BP blood pressure, HELLP hemolysis elevated liver enzymes low platelet count.Table 3Drugs used in the
treatment of autoimmune diseases/compatibility with pregnancy (adapted from Andreoli et al. )DrugFDA categoryPermitted during
pregnancyNotesPrednisoloneBAllowedAssociated to medical/obstetric complications (maternal diabetes, preeclampsia, premature rupture of
membranes)NSAIDB/DAllowed; avoid from 3rd trimester onwardRisk of premature closure of the arterial duct in the 3rd
trimesterHydroxychloroquineCAllowedDiscontinuation during pregnancy is associated with SLE exacerbationsAzathioprineDAllowedIn the smallest
therapeutic dosage, if benefits outweigh risksCyclosporineCAllowedTacrolimusCAllowedSulfasalazineBAllowedMethotrexateXDiscontinue 3–6 months
before a planned pregnancyCyclophosphamideDDiscontinue at least 3 months before a planned pregnancyMycophenolatemofetilDDiscontinue at least
6 weeks before a planned pregnancyWarfarinDDiscontinue after positive pregnancy testCan be used while breastfeedingLMWHBAllowedUsed as
primary prevention of thrombotic events during the puerperal periodIVIGCAllowedRituximabCDiscontinue at least 6–12 months before a planned
pregnancyBelimumabCDiscontinue at least 4 months before a planned pregnancyFDA-assigned pregnancy categories (The United States Food and
Drug Administration): A controlled studies in humans have failed to demonstrate a risk to the foetus, B no evidence of risk for the human
species, C Teratogenic—risk to humans cannot be excluded, D clear evidence of risk to the human foetus—risk is acceptable in a situation of
very high risk for the pregnant woman, in lack of safer alternatives, X Drugs considered unsafe during pregnancy. NSAID nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, LMWH low-molecular-weight heparin, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, SLE systemic lupus erythematosus. Contraindications
for pregnancy in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (adapted from Andreoli et al. ) BP blood pressure, HELLP hemolysis elevated
liver enzymes low platelet count. Drugs used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases/compatibility with pregnancy (adapted from Andreoli et
al. ) FDA-assigned pregnancy categories (The United States Food and Drug Administration): A controlled studies in humans have failed to
demonstrate a risk to the foetus, B no evidence of risk for the human species, C Teratogenic—risk to humans cannot be excluded, D clear
evidence of risk to the human foetus—risk is acceptable in a situation of very high risk for the pregnant woman, in lack of safer
alternatives, X Drugs considered unsafe during pregnancy. NSAID nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, LMWH low-molecular-weight heparin,
IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, SLE systemic lupus erythematosus. A 44 years old, Portuguese citizen, had a first miscarriage at 6 months
gestation, in 1992, and a second miscarriage at 8 months gestation, in 1993. Her first and single delivery occurred in 1994 and was a
preterm of 33 weeks who required hospitalisation in Neonatology. She had also a history of deep venous thrombosis, with a first episode in
2004 and others in 2006 (including brachial region), having subsequently initiated treatment with oral anticoagulants, which was suspended
in late 2012 due to methorragias. In January 2013, she was admitted to the hospital due to acute myocardial infarction with extensive
thrombus in the middle right coronary artery. Tests were positive for anti-β-2-glycoprotein (IgG/IgM), anti-cardiolipin antibodies (IgG/IgM)
and ANAs, which led to an APS diagnosis and resumption of oral anticoagulant medication. APS is probably the AID with the most implications
for pregnancy. The reason for the referral and follow-up of this patient to an AID consultation was not related to the pregnancy, but her
obstetric history helps support the diagnosis. Generally, after the diagnosis of APS and during pregnancy, anti-thrombotic therapy is based
on low-molecular-weight heparin (Table 3) . In this patient’s case, it should be pointed out that, after the second miscarriage, APS could
have been diagnosed at the first thrombotic event. A 31 years old Portuguese citizen with a history of PM, diagnosed in 2008 based on a
clinical scenario of polyarthralgia and myalgia with myositis and a biopsy which confirmed the diagnosis. She had a normal caesarean
delivery in 2006 and a current pregnancy progressing uneventfully. PM was diagnosed after the first pregnancy. She was treated with high
doses of prednisolone for 1 year, and was then put on azathioprine. After 3 years of complete remission and due to her (informed) decision
to get pregnant, she began a full weaning from azathioprine, having stabilised with 10 mg/day prednisolone. An angiography was performed and
excluded pulmonary hypertension. She then became pregnant and delivered a full term healthy new-born in August 2013. Given the low incidence
(1–9 cases per million) of PM/DM, its implications for pregnancy are poorly known and existing literature consists of mere descriptions of
cases or series of cases . Fertility is still subject to speculation. The trend towards lower fertility may be more related to prior
treatment history . The severity of the autoimmune inflammatory activity affects the foetal prognosis. Complete remission of the disease
translates into a better outcome of pregnancy ; otherwise, abortion rates are almost always above 50% . This patient’s stability and
remission were evident, which contributed to the good obstetric development described. Pulmonary hypertension may be one of the
manifestations (although rare, ~5%) of PM/DM , constituting, besides an activity of the disease, a risk factor for pregnant women (10–40%
mortality). A decision was made to study the presence of this manifestation, despite the absence of any cardio- or respiratory symptoms.
After it was excluded, pregnancy was safely advised. Unlike SLE, pregnancy does not induce exacerbations of PM. In terms of treatment
(Table 3), although azathioprine is allowed during pregnancy, it is the team who decides on whether to maintain or exclude it ; in this
case, the decision was to replace it with an appropriate dosage of corticosteroids. Thirty-eight years old Portuguese citizen with an
obstetric history of 3G 2P 1A. She had a first delivery in 2004 that occurred uneventful. In 2011, she had a miscarriage at 7 weeks
gestation, with no pathological analysis of the abortion material. The third pregnancy was unplanned. During the final 15 weeks of
gestation, BD was diagnosed due to erythema nodosum on limbs and genital ulcers (minor criteria) and recurrent oral thrush (major criteria),
with a 2-year evolution, exacerbated during pregnancy. Throughout the entire pregnancy, she was only treated with topical betamethasone to
control oral thrush. The delivery was eutocic, preterm (36 weeks), due to premature rupture of membranes. The new-born infant required
hospitalisation in Neonatology and was discharged on day 7. Due to persistent oral thrush and postpartum genital ulcers, systemic
corticosteroid therapy was initiated (5 mg/day). The BD diagnosis is sometimes suggested by the gynaecologist due to the presence of genital
ulcers, being oral thrush usually underestimated [27, 28]. It is a widespread opinion that pregnancy does not affect the natural development
of BD and vice versa , except in rarer conditions associated with a worse prognosis for pregnancy (vasculopathy, thrombosis and pulmonary
hypertension), where it has been shown to affect the placenta at an early stage . We did not find in the literature a description of the
relationship between BD and preterm delivery as in this case, but we found other foetal problems . Immunosuppressive therapy, as in the
other cases studied, may also have implications. BD, and especially severe oral thrush, have an undetermined behaviour during pregnancy, so
the treatment must be adjusted to each individual using the risk/benefit principle. This patient’s symptoms were only oral thrush, and so
the treatment adopted was topical. No systemic therapy was administered postpartum, considering the absence of other manifestations
(vascular/uveitis). Thirty-six years old Portuguese citizen, with a history of AIT (Hashimoto’s disease) diagnosed in 2006 during her first
pregnancy. She was medicated with levothyroxine in widely variable doses to achieve clinical/laboratory goals. Her obstetric history up to
the first consultation was 2G 1P 1A. The first pregnancy had no complications but it was eutocic and preterm (34 weeks) and an miscarriage
occurred during the first trimester in 2012. She was then referred to the AID consultation for pathology review and due to very high levels
of antithyroglobulin and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies and difficult control over the thyroid function. After systemic AID was excluded
and 4 months of clinical stability with antibody regression, she became pregnant. A new miscarriage occurred at 7 weeks gestation. Upon the
diagnosis of organ-specific AID (Hashimoto thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, vitiligo), associated systemic diseases must be ruled out. Clinical
immunology studies have shown that, during pregnancy, initially high levels of antithyroid antibodies fall abruptly due to the immune
tolerance environment . However, AIT is associated with higher rates of infertility and early miscarriages, due to the associated hormonal
changes and instability and higher age (the average age of the study groups is above normal childbearing age, which is associated with
increased obstetric risk), as is the case with this patient. The presence of antithyroid antibodies may react against the structures of the
placenta or fertilized egg and cause problems in embryo implantation [32, 33]. This patient’s hormonal instability and age were possible
causes for the miscarriages. As described in literature, we found a strong association between AIDs and obstetric complications, especially
with SLE, APS and AIT—of the 12 pregnancies studied, 50% resulted in miscarriage and 25% in preterm birth. However, it is important to point
out that these cases were already particularly complicated, as they concern women who were being followed in specific AID consultations,
which excludes simpler cases that do not require such specialised care. Autoimmune disease Systemic lupus erythematosus Antiphospholipid
syndrome Antinuclear autoantibodies Antiphospholipid antibodies Polymyositis Dermatomyositis Behcet’s disease Autoimmune thyroiditis. VG and
CC treated the patients. AM and VG wrote the paper. CC supervised the writing. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
authors would like to thank Dr. Juan Garcia, the coordinator of the Autoimmune Disease Unit of Braga’s Hospital, for his scientific support
and also the five patients who kindly participated in this study. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. and there is no source of fundings to declare. Ethics The study was conducted according to the principles expressed in the
declaration of Helsinki. The authors received ethical approval for this study from the Braga Hospital Ethical Committee and all five
patients provided written informed consent for publication of this manuscript.
