A 9-year-old girl presented to us with complaints of binocular diplopia and pain RE for the past 2 days. On examination, she had a vision of
20/20 OU, left face turn with chin elevation, 30 PD of LE hypertropia (RE fixing). The RE elevation was restricted 4 – in adduction and 3 –
in abduction (on a scale of 1–4) [Fig. 1]. The elevation saccades of the right eye were normal with normal levator palpebral superior
function. The forced duction test for elevation in adduction (topical anesthesia) was positive. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the orbit
showed thickening of the right superior oblique muscle involving the tendon [Fig. 2]. No other orbital/sinus pathology was noted. There was
no history of systemic illness, polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, skin lesion or joint pains. A complete hemogram and erythrocyte
sedimentation rate were normal. She was started on oral prednisolone 20 mg OD (body weight 24 kg). After 1-week of therapy, there was an
improvement in primary position deviation to 16 PD left hypertropia (RE fixing) with pain relief, though the restriction of elevation in
adduction persisted [Fig. 3]. No further improvement was noted at 2 weeks. The patient was counseled for pulse steroids, but was noted to
have a high random blood sugar of 208 mg/dl and was referred to a pediatrician for systemic workup. Subsequently she was lost to follow-up
and could not be contacted. Cardinal gaze photograph at presentation showing left hypertropia with restriction of right eye elevation in
adduction. There is a ‘Y’ pattern divergence on attempted elevation Axial, coronal and sagittal computed tomography scan sections showing
enlargement of the right superior oblique muscle Significant improvement in left hypertropia after 1-week of oral steroids. The restriction
of right eye elevation in adduction persists Isolated superior oblique myositis is a very rare entity. This could be because of relative
lack of muscle fibers in strap muscles or because of under-reporting due to technical difficulties in imaging. Diagnosis is by CT/magnetic
resonance imaging. Interestingly tendon sparing may be noted. Tychsen et al. had reported 13 cases of trochleitis with superior oblique
myositis. They were all successfully treated by oral steroids or excision biopsy. None had ocular motility restriction at presentation.
Salam et al. reported superior oblique myositis as a presenting feature of Wegener's granulomatosis with inflammation involving adjacent
muscles. Fleischmann et al. reported successful treatment of isolated superior oblique myositis with oral prednisolone. Kau et al. suggested
that while oral steroids produce a prompt improvement, they are often associated with persistent restriction in ocular motility, though
pulse steroids produced an improvement even when started late. In our patient, elevation restriction was persistent after 2 weeks of oral
steroids, though steroids were commenced 2 days after presentation. Relief of pain and improvement in primary position deviation argue for a
therapeutic role. The high blood sugars were probably a side-effect of oral steroids. Steroids injected in the region of the trochlea were
not considered as an option in our case because it would have required general anesthesia. Furthermore, the entire length of the muscle was
inflamed. To conclude treatment with oral steroids, even when instituted promptly after diagnosis can leave behind a persistent motility
restriction. The role of pulse steroids in this rare condition merits further investigation both as first line and in patients with
persistent motility restriction. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
