Sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (SAHS) is one of the extracardiac reasons of atrial fibrillation (AF), and the prevalence of AF is high in
SAHS-diagnosed patients. Nocturnal hypoxemia is associated with AF, pulmonary hypertension, and nocturnal death. The rate of AF recurrence
is high in untreated SAHS-diagnosed patients after cardioversion (CV). In this study, we present a patient whose SAHS was diagnosed with an
apnea test performed in the intensive care unit (ICU) and who did not develop recurrent AF after the administration of standard AF treatment
and bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP). A 57-year-old male hypertensive Caucasian patient who was on medical treatment for 1.5 months
for non-organic AF was admitted to the ICU because of high-ventricular response AF (170 per minute), and sinus rhythm was maintained during
the CV that was performed two times every second day. The results of the apnea test performed in the ICU on the same night after the second
CV were as follows: apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 71 per hour, minimum peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 67%, and desaturation period
(SpO2 of less than 90%) of 28 minutes. The patient was discharged with medical treatment and nocturnal BiPAP treatment. The results of the
apnea test performed under BiPAP on the sixth month were as follows: AHI of 1 per hour, desaturation period of 1 minute, and minimum SpO2 of
87%. No recurrent AF developed in the patient, and his medical treatment was reduced within 6 months. After gastric bypass surgery on the
12th month, nocturnal hypoxia and AF did not re-occur. Thus, BiPAP and medical treatments were ended. SAHS can be diagnosed by performing an
apnea test in the ICU. SAHS should be investigated in patients developing recurrent AF after CV. Recovery of nocturnal hypoxia may increase
the success rate of standard AF treatment. Atrial fibrillation (AF) is treated with rhythm and speed control, thromboembolic protection,
direct current, and pharmacological cardioversion (CV). Sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (SAHS) is one of the extracardiac reasons for AF . AF
prevalence is known to be high in SAHS-diagnosed patients [2, 3]. Nocturnal hypoxemia is associated with AF, pulmonary hypertension, and
nocturnal death . AF recurrence has been reported to be high (82%) in untreated SAHS-diagnosed patients after CV . In our case, the patient
was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) because of high-ventricular response AF. After CV, SAHS was diagnosed and no recurrent AF was
detected after nocturnal bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) treatment administered together with medical treatment. A 57-year-old
male hypertensive Caucasian patient on medical treatment for 1.5 months for non-organic-related AF was hospitalized in the ICU because of
high-ventricular response AF (170 per minute). Biphasic CV with 100J was performed on the patient under medical treatment, and sinus rhythm
was maintained. The patient had high-ventricular response AF (160 per minute) again after 2 days, biphasic CV with 200J was conducted again,
and sinus rhythm was maintained. An apnea test (AT) was performed on the same night because frequent apneas were observed during sedation,
and his body mass index (BMI) was 40.9kg/m2. The results were as follows: apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 71 per hour, desaturation period of
28 minutes, and minimum peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 68 %. The patient was discharged with nocturnal BiPAP—expiratory positive
airway pressure of 8cm H2O and inspiratory positive airway pressure of 14cm H2O—and medical treatment. The patient was in sinus rhythm at
the 1-month follow-up; thus, medication doses were decreased, AT was performed under BiPAP at the 6-month follow-up, and the results were as
follows: AHI of 1 per hour, desaturation period of 1 minute, and minimum SpO2 of 87 %. The patient did not have AF within these 6 months. At
the 12th month, the patient decided to undergo gastric bypass surgery. Up to the time of surgery, nocturnal BiPAP and medical treatment were
continued. Within 6 months after the medical surgery, the patient lost 40kg and only medical treatment was continued. In the AT conducted in
the 18th month (via spontaneous breathing), results in the range of AHI of 5 per hour, apnea index of 1 per hour, and minimum SpO2 of 93 %
were observed; hence, bisoprolol fumarate was ended (Fig. 1).Fig. 1The effects of sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome treatment on atrial
fibrillation treatment. AH, apnea index; AHI, apnea-hypopnea index; AI, apnea index; BiPAP, bi-level positive airway pressure; BMI, body
mass index; CV, cardioversion; EPAP, expiratory positive airway pressure; ESS, Epworth sleepiness scale; HR, heart rate; IPAP, inspiratory
positive airway pressure; SpO2, peripheral oxygen saturation The effects of sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome treatment on atrial fibrillation
treatment. AH, apnea index; AHI, apnea-hypopnea index; AI, apnea index; BiPAP, bi-level positive airway pressure; BMI, body mass index; CV,
cardioversion; EPAP, expiratory positive airway pressure; ESS, Epworth sleepiness scale; HR, heart rate; IPAP, inspiratory positive airway
pressure; SpO2, peripheral oxygen saturation Age, obesity, male gender, hypertension, coronary disease, and congestive heart failure are the
common risk factors for both AF and SAHS . And nocturnal hypoxia is known to increase the rate of AF prevalence [2, 3, 6, 7]. Recurrent AF
developed despite the medical treatment and CV in the patient who had a risk of AF because of obesity and hypertension. Thus, the patient
underwent an AT in the ICU in order to investigate SAHS. An AT can easily be applied under ICU conditions and is an affordable method
through which AHI, less-than-90 % desaturation period, minimum SpO2, and minimum and maximum heart rate can be recorded . Severe SAHS and
nocturnal hypoxia were diagnosed in the patient, who underwent an AT on the same night after the second CV. Thus, the administration of
nocturnal BiPAP treatment was decided in addition to the standard AF treatment. Kanagala et al. showed that the rate of AF recurrence was 82
% 1 year after CV in the untreated SAHS-diagnosed patients but regressed to 42 % after the treatment of SAHS . Besides, in the present
study, AF recurrence was associated with the desaturation period that was below 90 %. In the present study, it is remarkable that no AF
recurrence developed during the 6 months through which nocturnal BiPAP treatment was administered and the medical treatment was reduced. In
the AT performed under nocturnal BiPAP treatment at the sixth month, an improvement was observed in AHI, minimum SpO2, and less-than-90 %
desaturation period. After the nocturnal BiPAP treatment, not only did the patient develop no recurrent AF but also medical treatment could
be reduced and the patient’s quality of life could be increased as the Epworth sleepiness scale regressed from 17 to 7. Besides, we can say
that decreased BMI could be the main reason for increased quality of life because BiPAP and medical treatment could be ended after the
gastric bypass surgery. Apnea is known to cause a sudden decline in the intrathoracic pressure, an increase in the left ventricular
transmural pressure, vasoconstriction, and sympathetic hyperactivity due to arousal . As a result, diastolic dysfunction, intrathoracic
pressure changes, severe hypoxemia, and increased adrenergic state cause fibrosis, distention, structural, and electrical atrial remodeling
formation . The treatment of sleep apnea prevents intrathoracic pressure fluctuations and autonomic dysfunction and helps to recover atrial
myocardium, diastolic ventricular functions, pro-inflammatory state, and oxidative stress [10, 11, 13-15]. We are of the opinion that the
relationship between the nocturnal hypoxia and AF should be evaluated through tissue oxygen delivery (DO2). The results acquired by Kanagala
et al. indicate the importance of DO2 in the nocturnal hypoxia-AF relationship. DO2 is calculated by multiplying the cardiac index (CI) by
arterial oxygen content (CaO2) . Myocardial tissue uses NADH for the production of mitochondrial energy . Hypoxia causes a decrease in DO2,
which enables oxidative phosphorylation to endure and results in blocking the electron transport chain and NADH production . Although a
recovery is obtained in CI with the standard treatment of AF, untreated nocturnal hypoxia indicates persistence in an insufficient DO2 state
in the myocardium cell. This might explain recurrent AF despite standard treatment. The recovery of nocturnal hypoxia together with standard
AF treatment may increase the efficiency of AF treatment by improving CaO2 and consequently DO2. It may even help to reduce the medical
treatment as in our case. Thus, the investigation of nocturnal hypoxia together with standard treatment of AF and simultaneous treatment may
increase the success rate of the treatment. AF is a clinical status that is life-threatening and hence its treatment is obligatory.
Administration of AF treatment without treating nocturnal hypoxia would reduce the success of the treatment. Nocturnal BiPAP treatment may
increase the success of AF treatment by reducing nocturnal hypoxia and DO2. Besides, increased BMI can be the main reason for SAHS,
nocturnal hypoxia, and AF. That is why, before gastric surgery, nocturnal BiPAP treatment can also be used for safe preoperative
preparation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. atrial fibrillation apnea-hypopnea index apnea test bi-level positive airway
pressure body mass index arterial oxygen content cardiac index cardioversion oxygen delivery intensive care unit sleep apnea-hypopnea
syndrome peripheral oxygen saturation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
BG was involved in the initial writing of the manuscript. HKA, HA, AK, and TA provided intellectual contributions to the content of the
manuscript as well as editorial assistance. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Henry Tyron from Aydın
University (School Of Foreign Languages at the English Preparatory School) in Istanbul and Idil Cakir for her editorial contribution.
