Histoid leprosy is rare type of lepromatous leprosy characterized by unique clinical, histopathological, and microbiological features. It is
characterized by cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules. Histoid leprosy cases represent probable resistant bacilli and a highly active
lepromatous process. These cases may act as reservoirs of the disease and lead to further spread of leprosy. Continual occurrence of these
cases does not bode well for eradication of leprosy. A 20-year-old young male, an agricultural laborer, complained of multiple asymptomatic
shiny nodules all over the body. The lesions were present for the last 1 year. He had two episodes of epistaxis in the last 6 months that
were treated symptomatically. The nodules were distributed predominantly over the trunk and thighs. Family history was non-contributory. He
did not take any form of treatment for his skin lesions. Clinical examination revealed multiple discrete, skin-colored, shiny cutaneous and
subcutaneous nodules over the trunk and limbs. The nodules varied in size from 0.5 to 1.0 cm (Figure 1 Figure 1.Multiple skin-colored
nodules on the trunk.); there was no impairment of pain, touch, or temperature sensation. There was no thickening of peripheral nerves. Slit
skin smear from the nodule revealed plenty of acid fast bacilli, with a bacteriological index of 6+. Histopathology of the nodule showed
atrophic epidermis with a subepidermal grenz zone. The dermis revealed sheets of spindle cells arranged in a whorled, crisscross/storiform
pattern (Figure 2 Figure 2.High-power (40×) view of the histopathology showing the spindle cells in a whorled pattern.). Fite's stain showed
numerous acid fast bacilli (Figure 3). The patient was diagnosed with the histoid variant of lepromatous leprosy. He was treated with
multibacillary–multidrug therapy (MB-MDT) comprising of monthly rifampicin and daily dapsone and clofazimine for a period of 1 year. The
patient responded well to the treatment. Multiple skin-colored nodules on the trunk. High-power (40×) view of the histopathology showing the
spindle cells in a whorled pattern. Oil immersion (100×) view of the Fite's stain showing the macrophages with acid fast bacilli. Histoid
leprosy is a distinct and rare variant of lepromatous leprosy, and it was described by Wade1 in 1963. It is characterized by unique
clinical, histopathological, and microbiological features. This form of leprosy is fairly common in patients on dapsone monotherapy and
irregular treatment.2 Sometimes, it can arise de novo as well. The clinical features include cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules and plaques.
The nodules are well-demarcated, and the skin surrounding the lesions is apparently normal. The histopathological features are distinct and
contribute to the nomenclature of the condition. The most prominent feature is the presence of numerous spindle-shaped histiocytes arranged
in interlacing bands, whorls, and tight curlicues.2 Histoid leprosy cases represent probable resistant bacilli and a highly active
lepromatous process. Continual occurrence of these cases does not bode well for a country like India, where leprosy was eliminated as a
public health problem in 2005.3 These cases may act as reservoirs of the disease and lead to further spread of leprosy. Early diagnosis and
management of these cases are important in this era of leprosy eradication. Author's address: Kaliaperumal Karthikeyan, Department of
Dermatology and STD, Sri Manakula Vinayagar Medical College and Hospital, Kalitheerthalkuppam, Puducherry, India, E-mail:
karthikderm@gmail.com.
