Colistin resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) is mediated by a complete loss of lipopolysaccharide production via mutations
in lpxA, lpxC, and lpxD gene or lipid A modifications via mutations in the pmrA and pmrB genes. However, the exact mechanism of therapy-
induced colistin resistance in A. baumannii is not well understood. We investigated the genotypic and phenotypic changes that underlie pan-
drug resistance mechanisms by determining differences between the alterations in extensively drug-resistant (XDR) A. baumannii (AB001 and
AB002) isolates and a pan-drug resistant (PDR) counterpart (AB003) recovered from one patient before and after antibiotic treatment,
respectively. All three clinical isolates shared an identical sequence type (ST138), belonging to the global epidemic clone, clonal complex
92, and all produced OXA-23 carbapenemase. The PDR AB003 showed two genetic differences, acquisition of armA gene and an amino acid
substitution (Glu229Asp) in pmrB gene, relative to XDR isolates. No mutations were detected in the pmrA, pmrC, lpxA, lpxC, or lpxD genes in
all three isolates. In matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight analysis, the three isolates commonly showed two major
peaks at 1728 m/z and 1912 m/z, but peaks at 2034 m/z, 2157 m/z, 2261 m/z, and 2384 m/z were detected only in the PDR A. baumannii AB003
isolate. Our results show that changes in lipid A structure via a mutation in the pmrB gene and acquisition of armA gene might confer
resistance to colistin and aminoglycosides to XDR A. baumannii strains, resulting in appearance of a PDR A. baumannii strain of ST138. The
extensive use of antimicrobial agents and the propensity of pathogenic bacteria that accumulate antimicrobial resistance have led to a
considerable increase in pathogenic bacteria acquiring resistance to multiple categories of antimicrobial agents. As this problem continues
to grow, the definition of terms such as multidrug resistant (MDR), extensively drug-resistant (XDR), and pan-drug resistant (PDR) strains
were standardized in order to more specifically define those microorganisms. MDR strains are defined as non-susceptible to at least one
agent in three or more antimicrobial categories, XDR strains are defined as non-susceptible to at least one agent in all but two or fewer
antimicrobial categories, and PDR strains are defined as non-susceptible to all agents in all antimicrobial categories.1 Acinetobacter
baumannii (A. baumannii) is associated with infections including bacteremia, pneumonia, meningitis, and urinary tract infections especially
in patients hospitalized in intensive care units (ICUs).23 The prevalence of XDR A. baumannii isolates with carbapenem resistance has
persistently increased, and most of XDR A. baumannii isolates in Asia belong to the globally-distributed clone, clonal complex 92.4567 After
the reintroduction of colistin in clinical practice to treat infections caused by XDR A. baumannii due to the lack of applicable
antibiotics, the emergence of PDR A. baumannii strains with colistin resistance has repeatedly been reported in many parts of the
world.891011 According to a few in vitro studies regarding colistin resistance mechanisms in A. baumannii, colistin resistance is mediated
by a complete loss of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) production via mutations in LPS producing genes (lpxA, lpxC, and lpxD) or by mutations in the
pmrA and pmrB genes that encode a two-component signal transduction system.1213 However, the exact mechanism of therapy-induced colistin
resistance in A. baumannii is not well understood. Here, we studied colistin resistance mechanisms by evaluating the genetic alterations
between two colistin-susceptible XDR A. baumannii clinical isolates and a colistin-resistant counterpart isolated from one patient before
and after colistin therapy, respectively. Furthermore, we investigated the genetic determinants of antimicrobial resistance to various
antibiotics and the molecular epidemiology of the clinical isolates. A 72-year-old man with a history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation,
and diabetes mellitus was admitted to the emergency department of a tertiary-care hospital in Seoul, Korea, on August 29th, 2011 due to
abdominal pain. Abdominal computed tomography revealed an impending thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm, and a graft replacement of the
abdominal aorta was performed. After emergency surgery, he was admitted to the ICU and was mechanically ventilated from day one. He was
treated with ciprofloxacin (400 mg/day) and piperacillin+tazobactam (6.75 g/day). An XDR A. baumannii isolate (AB001) was first recovered
from a respiratory tract specimen on day five, and it was then serially recovered from respiratory tract specimens. And an XDR A. baumannii
isolate (AB002) was recovered from a urinary specimen on day six. Intravenous administration of colistimethate sodium (150 mg/day) was
started on day six. After five days of colistin therapy, a colistin-resistant A. baumannii isolate (AB003) was recovered from a blood
specimen, which prompted the physicians to change antibiotics to tigecycline. However, urinary tract infection, acute renal failure,
atelectasis at both lungs, and sepsis were not controlled. On day 17, the patient was transferred to a local hospital near the patient's
home for continuation of treatment. In this study, we included the two colistin-susceptible XDR A. baumannii isolates (AB001 and AB002),
which were recovered from the respiratory tract and urinary specimens, respectively, and their colistin-resistant counterpart (AB003). The
isolates were identified as A. baumannii using the Vitek GNI system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France) and sequence analysis of the RNA
polymerase β-subunit (rpoB) gene.14 A. baumannii ATCC 19606 was used as the reference strain. Antimicrobial susceptibilities were determined
using antibiotic-containing disks (Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD, USA) on Mueller-Hinton agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA). The
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of meropenem and imipenem were determined using the agar dilution method, and the MIC of colistin
was determined by the E-test (bioMérieux) according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines.15 PCR and sequencing
experiments were performed on seven housekeeping genes encoding citrate synthase (gltA), DNA gyrase subunit B (gyrB), glucose dehydrogenase
B (gdhB), homologous recombination factor (recA), 60-kDa chaperonin (cpn60), glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (gpi), and RNA polymerase sigma
factor (rpoD), as described previously.616 Nucleotide sequences of both strands were determined. Allelic profiles of the seven housekeeping
genes and STs of the strains were analyzed using the Acinetobacter MLST database (http://www.pasteur.fr/recherche/genopole/PF8/mlst/).
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed with SmaI-digested genomic DNA extracted from the three isolates using a CHEF-DRII
device (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The conditions of PFGE were 6 V/cm for 20 h with pulse times of 3-10 seconds at a temperature of 11℃.
SmaI-digested band patterns were analyzed using Molecular Analyst Fingerprinting Software Ver. 3.2 (Bio-Rad). The PFGE patterns were
interpreted using the criteria of Tenover, et al.17 PCR and sequence analysis of antimicrobial resistance determinants including
blaOXA51-like, blaOXA-23, blaAmpC, gyrA, parC, and armA genes were performed according to methods described in previous studies.18192021 The
presence of IS Aba1 upstream of the blaOXA51-like, blaOXA-23, and blaAmpC genes was also evaluated.22 LPS-producing genes (lpxA, lpxC, and
lpxD) and pmrA and pmrB genes encoding a two-component signal transduction system were sought by PCR and sequencing.1323 Briefly, genomic
DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. After PCR, amplicons
were purified using a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) and sequenced using an ABI 3500dx system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA,
USA). Sequences for all antimicrobial resistance determinant loci in A. baumannii isolates were compared using the GenBank database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) with reference sequences of A. baumannii ATCC 17978 (GenBank accession number CP000 521). LPS and lipid A were
extracted from whole bacterial cells using Tri-Reagent extraction and mild acid hydrolysis methods, and were then subjected to negative-ion
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Leipzig, Germany) analysis
in the negative reflective mode.24 The antimicrobial resistance determinants of the two colistin-susceptible XDR A. baumannii isolates
(AB001 and AB002) and a PDR A. baumannii isolate (AB003) were evaluated. All three isolates showed resistance to ciprofloxacin, and they
contained the gyrA gene with an amino acid substitution (Ser83Leu). While isolates AB001 and AB002 showed susceptibility to amikacin and
gentamicin, the AB003 isolate showed resistance to these aminoglycosides and harbored the armA gene. All three isolates showed resistance to
ceftazidime and cefepime, and they carried and the ISAba1-blaAmpC structure. MICs of imipenem and meropenem for all three isolates were
greater than 32 mg/L, and they carried the blaOXA-23 gene with an insertion sequence ISAba1 upstream of the gene. The MIC of colistin for
both AB001 and AB002 isolates was 0.25 mg/L, while that for AB003 isolate was 16 mg/L (Table 1 and 2). All three isolates were identified as
an identical ST, ST 138 (1-3-3-2-2-50-3), and they showed identical SmaI-macrorestriction patterns by PFGE (Fig. 1). The sequences of the
pmrB gene in the two colistin-susceptible AB001 and AB002 isolates were identical to those of the reference A. baumannii ATCC 17978, whereas
the PDR A. baumannii AB003 isolate harbored a novel mutation (encoding a Glu229Asp change) in the pmrB gene (Table 2). No mutations were
detected in the pmrA, pmrC, lpxA, lpxC, and lpxD genes in all three isolates. The two colistin-susceptible AB001 and AB002 isolates and the
PDR A. baumannii AB003 isolate all showed two major peaks at 1729 m/z and 1911 m/z in negative-ion MALDI-TOF mass spectra. These two major
peaks most likely correspond to bis-phosphorylated hexa- and hepta-acylated lipid A, respectively. Spectra for the lipid A structure from
the PDR A. baumannii AB003 isolate were distinct from those of AB001 and AB002, as it showed additional peaks at 2034 m/z, 2157 m/z, 2261
m/z, and 2384 m/z (Fig. 2). The extensive use of antimicrobial agents has led to a considerable increase in MDR, XDR, and PDR pathogenic
bacteria. Colistin has resurfaced as effective last resort for treatment of infections caused by XDR A. baumannii. Many studies evaluated
the resistance mechanisms against polymyxins, and analysed effectiveness of colistin monotherapy as well as the combination therapy to
reduce the colistin resistance and toxicity of colistin.81025 Despite the efforts, colistin therapy-related colistin-resistant A. baumannii
strains have been isolated.102627 A complete loss of LPS production via mutations in LPS-producing genes (lpxA, lpxC, and lpxD) and the
modification of lipid A components via mutations in the pmrAB gene have been evaluated in various studies with in vitro manipulated
colisitn-resistant A. baumannii.1213 Between two colistin-resistance mechanisms, only mutations in the pmrA (Met12Ile; Met12Lys) or pmrB
gene (Gln270Pro; Gln277Lys) were found in clinical isolates from patient who has been treated with colistin. In our study, AB003 harbored
Glu229Asp mutation in the pmrB gene, while the isolate carried wild-type LPS-producing genes (lpxA, lpxC, and lpxD). The mutant pmrAB genes
are involved in LPS modification by adding 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose (Ara4N) and/or phosphoethanolamine (pEtN) to lipid A.232829 In MALDI-
TOF analysis, we observed the expected spectra ion peaks of 1728 m/z and 1912 m/z in all three isolates, AB001, AB002, and AB003. However,
the peaks of 2034 m/z, 2157 m/z, 2261 m/z, and 2384 m/z were detected only in the AB003 strain, which contained the pmrB mutation. Possibly,
these peaks were generated by the addition of one or two pEtN (123 m/z) residues to bis-phosphorylated hepta- and octa-acylated lipid A
molecules. These modifications should affect the electrostatic interaction of certain cationic antimicrobial-peptide resistance determinants
with the bacterial cell surface, and act as one of the colistin-resistant mechanisms.3031 In our study, the AB003 acquired a mutation in the
pmrB gene after five days of colistin therapy. It should be a short period of time to obtain a resistance, but colistin resistant A.
baumannii were collected from patients who received colistin therapy for 7-19 days.2632 The AB003 strain also harbored the armA gene and
showed resistance to amikacin (<9 mm of disk diffusion test). After admission, the patient did not received aminoglycoside agents, such as
tobramycin and amikacin. Therefore, it is highly likely that the armA is located on plasmids was incidentally transferred from another A.
baumannii clone.1833 In our study, all three isolates showed identical SmaI-macrorestriction patterns by PFGE and identified as an identical
ST, ST 138 (1-3-3-2-2-50-3), indicating that they are a clone. All three isolates shared the gyrA gene with a same mutation, and they
carried identical resistance genes IS Aba1-blaAmpC and ISAba1-blaOXA-23. However, AB003 carried only the pmrB gene with a mutation of
Glu229Asp and the armA gene. Therefore, AB003 might acquire resistance to colistin and aminoglycosides by in vivo selection during colistin
treatment from the XDR parental strains (AB001 and AB002). This work was supported by the Research Program funded by the Korea Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (2014E4700200#). The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. AN, amikacin; CAZ, ceftazidime; CIP,
ciprofloxacin; CL, colistin; CTX, cefotaxime; FEP, cefepime; GM, gentamicin; IPM, imipenem; MEM, meropenem; MLST, multi-locus sequence
typing; R, resistance; S, susceptible; ST, sequence type. *AB001 and AB002 are colistin-susceptible isolates and AB003 is the colistin-
resistant counterpart. ND, not detected; WT, wild type. *ISAba1 upstream of blaOXA-51-like was not detected in all isolates. †Genes detected
by PCR and sequencing.
