Academic Editor: Norbert Kovács Surface dyslexia designates a selective impairment in reading irregular words, with spared ability to read
regular and novel words, following a cerebral damage usually located in the left dominant hemisphere. In Italian language, which is regular
at the segmental level, surface dyslexia is characterized by stress assignment errors. Here we report on two cases of Italian surface
dyslexic patients who produced stress assignment errors, mainly in reading irregular words. In reading nonwords they usually applied the
regular stress pattern. Both patients were also impaired in lexical decision and in semantic discrimination tasks when the processing of
homophones was required. Our patients' performance relied almost exclusively on the phonological coding of the stimulus, revealing a deficit
in accessing the orthographical input lexicon. In addition, one patient showed a cerebral lesion limited to the right thalamus, providing
evidence of a possible role of the right hemisphere in the reading process. Surface dyslexia is an acquired reading disorder characterized
by a selective impairment in reading irregular familiar words, coupled with a preserved ability to read regular words, unknown words, and
nonwords . Typically, it results from a cerebral lesion located in the left, dominant hemisphere . According to the dual-route model ,
surface dyslexia is assumed to reflect the predominant use of the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion procedure due to a deficit of the lexical
route, that is, a deficit in accessing the stored lexical knowledge. Different subtypes depending on the loci of impairment through the
lexical route have been reported in both acquired and developmental surface dyslexia. All the subtypes of surface dyslexia show the typical
pattern of regularization errors in reading aloud. However, they are associated with different performance in tasks requiring lexical
decision with pseudohomophones and homophone comprehension . Surface dyslexia has been often described in languages with opaque orthography,
for example, English [7, 8] or French . In such languages, the phonological forms corresponding to the orthographic segments can be
ambiguous; for example, in English the letter sequence <EA> is pronounced differently in the words head, beat, heart, and great; similarly,
in French the letter sequence <EN> is read differently in the words chrétienté and impatiente . For a number of words, the correct
pronunciation cannot be derived using the grapheme-to-phoneme (GTP) conversion rules; therefore, to be read flawlessly, “exception” or
“irregular” words have to be learnt by heart and stored in the lexicon with their particular orthography to phonology mappings. Typically,
surface dyslexic patients produce regularization errors, with irregular words pronounced with the statistically typical GPT correspondences,
for instance, listen → liston or have → hayve . This kind of errors, which can be considered “legitimate alternative readings of components”
responses , has been reported also in nonalphabetic languages, for example, Chinese and Japanese . In languages with transparent
orthography, like Spanish , surface dyslexia is mainly characterized by homophone confusions and errors in lexical decision with
pseudohomophones. Overall, the pattern of impairment depends on the features of the language; for instance, in Hebrew most errors are
incorrect vowel pronunciations in reading unvoweled homographs , whereas in Italian most errors are stress assignment errors [13, 14]. In
Italian, the GTP mapping is regular. Almost all phonemes are represented by a grapheme constituted by a single letter (e.g., <B> → /b/; <F>
→ /f/). In a small set of cases, the selection of the correct phoneme depends on the following letter (e.g., the letter C is read as /k/
when followed by consonants or by the vowels A, O, and U or as /c/ when followed by the vowels E and I). At the segmental level, therefore,
Italian is a very transparent language, with all phonemes being derived from letters by means of general conversion rules. Nevertheless,
Italian written language is opaque at the suprasegmental level. Stress position is obligatorily marked only when stress falls on the last
syllable (e.g., umiltà ). In the other cases, stress position is not marked diacritically; even it is completely unpredictable . Therefore,
reading words having more than two syllables requires access to stored lexical information. Consider, for instance, the word pairs colline
(hills) and polline (pollen), legato (bound) and fegato (liver): they differ only in the first letter but have stress falling on different
syllables, the penultimate and the antepenultimate, respectively. About 80% of three-syllabic words are stressed on the penultimate
syllable, while about 18% are stressed on the initial (antepenultimate) syllable. Given the statistical distribution, stress on the
penultimate syllable is usually referred to as the “regular” pattern . Italian patients with surface dyslexia have been often reported.
Whereas in some cases stress errors appear to be due to a deficit not limited to reading or to a more general cognitive disorder [18, 19],
in two dyslexic patients showing a selective deficit of stress assignment it is possible to locate the functional impairment on the lexical
route. Patient CLB described by Miceli and Caramazza showed jargon aphasia and was impaired in all verbal tasks. In reading aloud he was
correct at the segmental level but made errors involving stress assignment ('macchina → ma'cchina ). Since he produced very few errors in
lexical decision and in comprehension tasks, his stress assignment errors appear to be reflecting a deficit at the level of the phonological
output lexicon. Patient CA was affected by slowly progressive aphasia with frequent anomia and circumlocutions in spontaneous speech. In
both naming and comprehension tasks he produced semantic errors, whereas in reading word aloud he made a number of stress assignment errors
('nevica [it snows] → ne'vica ). His overall pattern of performance is consistent with a deficit affecting both the semantic system and the
phonological output lexicon. To our knowledge there are no Italian dyslexic patients described in literature showing deficits due to a
selective impairment at the orthographic input lexicon. In the present paper, for the first time, we report on two Italian patients with
surface dyslexia who showed almost exclusively errors in assigning the correct stress pattern and in processing nonhomographic homophones
stimuli, which is the pattern of performance consistent with an impaired orthographic input lexicon. Moreover, noticeably, while one patient
presented with a cerebral lesion involving the left, dominant hemisphere, the other one had a lesion limited to the right thalamus. This
instance testifies an involvement of the right hemisphere in the reading process and suggests that lesions affecting different cerebral
areas may underlie similar patterns of impairment. Two brain-damaged patients with evidence of surface dyslexia participated in the study.
The first patient, BL, is a right-handed, 69-year-old man, with 13 years of formal education, who suffered a hemorrhagic damage to the right
hemisphere. A CT scan revealed a right thalamic intraparenchymal hemorrhage with an expansion to the third and the lateral ventricles (see
Figure 1). At the admission, the first neurological examination revealed confusional state, dysarthria, and left brachiofacial hemiplegia.
At the time of testing (53 days after the onset of the lesion), no signs of neglect were detected on screening tasks: line cancellation
(0/35 omissions) , bell cancellation (2/35 omissions) , and picture copying . Verbal production was normal as well as auditory comprehension
(Token Test: 34/36). However, rather surprisingly, when required to read words and nonwords, BL produced several stress assignment errors
that were absent in spontaneous speech (e.g., ta'lora → ‘talora ). No other cognitive disorders were present. The second patient, MA, is a
76-year-old male, with 5 years of formal education (a normal educational level for Italians of his age), who was referred to the hospital
following the sudden appearance of expressive disorders. A CT scan showed an ischemic lesion involving the frontal parasagittal area and the
temporooccipital area of the left hemisphere. When tested, two months after the onset of the lesion, he showed normal auditory comprehension
but defective verbal production. On a standardized battery for aphasic disorders (BADA) , he was impaired on picture naming (correct
responses 19/30, 63%) and direct repetition (34/45, 76%). Errors revealed impaired lexical access (anomia and circumlocutions) and
difficulties in producing the correct phonological sequence of individual words (phonemic paraphasias and neologisms). In most cases, the
frequent attempts of self-correction were successful. The processing of visual orthographic information appeared to be less impaired.
Lexical decision of written stimuli was mildly defective (68/80, 85%), while reading words (85/92, 93%) and nonwords (42/45, 93%) aloud was
quite normal. However, at variance with spontaneous speech where errors involved phonological segments, most reading errors involved only
stress assignment (e.g., os'sia [that is] → 'ossia ; 'mandorla → man'dorla ). Nonverbal abilities were normal. Both patients gave their
verbal informed consent to participate in the study, which was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the University of Turin and was
performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki 2013. To investigate reading abilities and
orthographic processing, the two patients underwent the battery proposed by Sartori [24, 25]. To evaluate lexical decision and reading words
and nonwords aloud, a list of 40 words and 40 pronounceable nonwords was used (subtest 4 of Sartori's battery). The words were controlled
for length (4 or 7 letters), frequency, and concreteness; the nonwords were derived from the word stimuli by substituting one letter. To
evaluate further the ability to read words, a second list was employed (subtest 7 of Sartori's battery). It comprises 80 words that were
controlled for length (from 4 to 7 letters) and grammatical class (nouns, adjectives, verbs, and functors). The battery comprises also
subtests for letter recognition, semantic categorization, and comprehension of nonhomographic homophonic stimuli. Letter recognition was
evaluated by asking the patients to name a list of 21 letters and, in a second task, to judge whether two letters, presented one in capital
and one in lower case, were the same or not (e.g., rR or Gd). Semantic processing was tested by means of categorization tasks; patients were
asked to classify written nouns as denoting animals or not (easy semantic decision) or as four-legged or not four-legged animals (hard
semantic decision). Finally, two different tasks were used to assess homophone comprehension. In Italian, nonhomographic homophonic word
pairs are very few (e.g., hanno [they have], anno ; cieco , ceco ). Therefore, the contrasting stimuli were obtained, in the first task, by
inserting an apostrophe within a word to generate a noun phrase (e.g., l'una [the one] from luna ) and, in the second task, by splitting the
noun into two unrelated words (e.g., di vino [of wine] from divino ). In the first subtest (word comprehension), the patients had to choose
out of four alternatives the correct meaning of nonhomographic homophones (e.g., l'ago [the needle], lago ). One of the three incorrect
choices would be appropriate if the target word was confused with its homophone. In a second subtest (sentence discrimination), the patients
were given short homophonic sentences, such as I monaci abitano nel convento [the monks live in a monastery] or I monaci abitano nel con
vento [the monks live in with wind], and asked to indicate whether the sentence was written correctly or not. To assess the ability to read
words with different stress position, three different lists were used (lists are reported at the end of the paper). In all lists, half the
stimuli had stress on the penultimate syllable (the most frequent stress position in Italian language) and half on the antepenultimate
syllable. The first list was included in the Sartori battery and comprised 60 three-syllable words matched for frequency and grammatical
class (subtest 8 of Sartori's battery). The second list was derived from Miceli and Caramazza and comprised 120 words, controlled for length
(three and four syllables), grammatical class (nouns, adjectives, and verbs), and frequency (high and low). To investigate further the
access to orthographic knowledge a third list was used; it comprised 10 noun pairs which share the same number of letters and the same two
ending vowels but have different stress position . For example, the nouns sedia and bugia end with the same sequence of letters <ia> but
have different stress pattern. In the former noun, which represents the most frequent pattern in Italian, stress is on the syllable
preceding the two final letters that constitute a diphthong (/ja/); in the latter noun, stress is on the vowel “i,” with the two ending
letters representing a hiatus and pronounced as two distinct syllabic nuclei (/ia/). These lists are provided in the appendix. Finally, a
list of nonwords was given to test the effect of stress neighborhood . In Italian language stress position reveals formal regularities
related to the noun ending letters. For example, most words ending with -olo have antepenultimate stress (e.g., 'tavolo ), whereas most
words ending with -ume have penultimate stress (e.g., vo'lume ). The ending letters appear to influence also stress assignment in nonword
reading: consistent with the stress neighborhood (words with the same final sequence and the same stress pattern), meaningless stimuli like
rocolo and aldume tend to be read as having stress on antepenultimate and penultimate syllable, respectively (e.g., [27, 28]). A list of 50
nonwords was derived from 50 words with many “stress neighbors” by substituting one of the first letters. The stimuli were classified as
expected to be read with stress position either on the antepenultimate or on the penultimate syllable, depending on the stress neighborhood
of the original words. The list of nonwords was presented twice to MA. As shown in Table 1, both patients were able to process orthographic
stimuli, to recognize single letters, and to categorize written words. Their performance on these tasks was flawless or just below normal
limits . However, both patients appear unable to process homophonic nonhomographic stimuli, that is, when the use of the phonology to
orthography conversion rules does not allow accomplishing tasks requiring the access to lexical knowledge. In word comprehension and
sentence discrimination, the performance of both patients was at chance level. As reported in Table 2, both patients produced very few
visual errors in reading words and nonwords. No lexical effect was present; nonwords were read as accurately as familiar words. Further, no
effects of lexical variables such as concreteness, frequency, and grammatical class were found in reading words. Overall, this pattern of
performance is consistent with a preserved ability in converting orthography to phonology when reading regular stimuli. However when the
correct phonology cannot be derived from applying the GTP conversion rules, as in reading the lists of polysyllabic words and nonwords
described above, both patients showed a clear effect of stress position (Table 3). Indeed, they read words with penultimate stress more
accurately than words with antepenultimate stress (BL: χ2 = 9.25; P < 0.005; MA: χ2 = 16.15; P < 0.001). Most errors were stress
displacement (Table 4), with the less frequent antepenultimate stress words read with stress on the penultimate syllable. Also in reading
nonwords, patients assigned stress following the distributional information, according to which the penultimate stress is dominant in
Italian. Almost all stimuli were read with stress on the penultimate position, either nonwords with a stress neighborhood mainly composed of
antepenultimate stress words or those with a majority of penultimate stress neighbors. The tendency to read words by assigning the most
frequent stress pattern is confirmed by the performance in reading words ending with “i” plus vowel (e.g., -ia). BL read correctly 7/10
(70%) words with diphthong and 5/10 (50%) words with hiatus; MA read 8/10 (80%) words with diphthong and 4/10 (40%) words with hiatus.
Again, most errors involved only stress position (e.g., funi'via → fu'nivia). In the present paper, we reported on two Italian brain-damaged
patients with surface dyslexia. Their pattern of performance was characterized by regularization errors at the suprasegmental level and
difficulties in tasks requiring the comprehension of homophones and the discrimination between words and pseudohomophones. Both patients
appeared to rely exclusively on the phonological coding of the stimuli. Within the framework of the dual-route model , their pattern of
performance is consistent with a deficit involving the lexical route and the privileged use of the sublexical procedure. The greater
accuracy in reading words with penultimate stress than in reading words with antepenultimate stress and the tendency to read nonwords by
assigning the most common stress pattern suggest that the sublexical procedure can assign stress using the relative distribution of
different stress patterns in the language . Further, since the two patients showed errors with homophones and pseudohomophones, their
reading performance can be accounted for by assuming a deficit at level of the orthographical input lexicon . The individual
neuropsychological picture confirms the functional locus of their impairment. BL showed neither aphasic disorders nor visual-perceptual
impairments. Semantic knowledge and phonological lexicon appeared to be preserved. It follows that his deficit should be located at the
level of orthographic input lexicon only. MA, on the contrary, was aphasic: the types of errors he produced in naming and repetition tasks
revealed a disorder at the level of the phonological lexicon. To verify whether also orthographic lexical lexicon was impaired or not, MA
underwent a spelling decision test where he was asked to discriminate between a word and a pseudohomophone distracter (e.g., igiene and
igene ; cuoco and quoco ). MA produced 16/44 (36.4%) errors, thus confirming an impaired orthographic knowledge. It is the first time that
Italian patients with surface dyslexia due to a disorder at the level of the orthographic input lexicon are reported. The present findings
are striking also because one of our patients, BL, showed a cerebral lesion limited to the right thalamus and sparing the other brain
structures (see Figure 1). We have no reason to assume that the patient's linguistic skills were located in the right hemisphere; he was
right-handed and the right lesion affected neither his oral expression and comprehension nor his writing ability. The pattern of performance
shown by this patient suggests a possible role of the right hemisphere in the reading process, which appears to be functionally similar to
that of the left hemisphere. This finding is consistent with neuroimaging evidence for a bilateral activation in the head of the caudate
nucleus and the anterior thalamus in reading low frequency words . Independently of the side of the cerebral lesion therefore, damage to
these areas can, at least in part, impair reading when lexical access is needed. The pattern of performance shown by BL fits perfectly this
prediction. One can assume that damage to the right hemisphere prevents orthographic information stored in the “visual word form area” of
the left hemisphere, particularly in the occipitotemporal sulcus , from being accessible anymore. The authors would like to thank the
patients who participated in the study and Vittoria Mamoli who referred to us the patient MA. This work was supported by a Compagnia di San
Paolo grant (2008–2010) to Alessia Folegatti and Lorenzo Pia and by a grant from Fondazione San Paolo, Neuroscience Programme, to Roberto
Cubelli. Lists of words with different stress patterns used to assess the ability to read words with different position are presented as
follows. List 1 Profilo Felice Replicare Ruvido Famiglia Prendere Cucciolo Costoso Italiano Includere Passivo Macchina Addetto Sillaba
Facile Fiutare Giovane Chiudere Milione Funebre Chirurgo Vicino Friggere Piantare Minimo Pollaio Cellula Esempio Soffocare Lacero Sbagliare
Lettera Giungere Libero Appetito Invadere Materno Lasciare Candido Sporgere Dottore Battere Possibile Sperare Monello Predire Ripido Rompere
Maggiore Fortuna Passero Nervoso Cucinare Ordine Diventare Camera Tingere Orfano Lucente Genere. Profilo Felice Replicare Ruvido Famiglia
Prendere Cucciolo Costoso Italiano Includere Passivo Macchina Addetto Sillaba Facile Fiutare Giovane Chiudere Milione Funebre Chirurgo
Vicino Friggere Piantare Minimo Pollaio Cellula Esempio Soffocare Lacero Sbagliare Lettera Giungere Libero Appetito Invadere Materno
Lasciare Candido Sporgere Dottore Battere Possibile Sperare Monello Predire Ripido Rompere Maggiore Fortuna Passero Nervoso Cucinare Ordine
Diventare Camera Tingere Orfano Lucente Genere. List 2 Nuvole Patate Medicina Camera Cortile Genitori Simboli Genere Polvere Numero Parole
Tesoro Denaro Secoli Favore Cinema Lettera Mattina Colore Pagina Tavolo Regina Natura Pericolo Cintura Carcere Pecore Costume Portici Favole
Manico Timore Nipoti Cenere Fegato Vetrina Radice Vagoni Vapore Miracoli Facile Felice Vicini Povera Celebre Nobili Sicura Simile Comodo
Alpina Rapidi Navali Ultime Antica Notevole Ridicolo Naturale Cattivo Rigido Geloso Divina Diversa Penosa Severi Gelida Timido Debole Veloce
Valido Solito Comunale Piccoli Esteri Feroce Capace Famosa Morbido Sincere Tragico Cretino Erano Vengono Aveva Vivere Bollire Sudava Passano
Capire Pareva Furono Caddero Tentare Toccare Ridere Salito Bevono Prestano Morire Volete Trovare Credere Perdere Tornare Succede Dicono
Cercano Contano Salvare Supera Devono Pagare Piantare Guardano Pensare Mettere Prendete Recitare Sapevano Appariva Accomodi. Nuvole Patate
Medicina Camera Cortile Genitori Simboli Genere Polvere Numero Parole Tesoro Denaro Secoli Favore Cinema Lettera Mattina Colore Pagina
Tavolo Regina Natura Pericolo Cintura Carcere Pecore Costume Portici Favole Manico Timore Nipoti Cenere Fegato Vetrina Radice Vagoni Vapore
Miracoli Facile Felice Vicini Povera Celebre Nobili Sicura Simile Comodo Alpina Rapidi Navali Ultime Antica Notevole Ridicolo Naturale
Cattivo Rigido Geloso Divina Diversa Penosa Severi Gelida Timido Debole Veloce Valido Solito Comunale Piccoli Esteri Feroce Capace Famosa
Morbido Sincere Tragico Cretino Erano Vengono Aveva Vivere Bollire Sudava Passano Capire Pareva Furono Caddero Tentare Toccare Ridere Salito
Bevono Prestano Morire Volete Trovare Credere Perdere Tornare Succede Dicono Cercano Contano Salvare Supera Devono Pagare Piantare Guardano
Pensare Mettere Prendete Recitare Sapevano Appariva Accomodi. List 3 Sedia/Bugia Ovvio/Addio Boria/Moria Paggio/Leggio Media/Mania
Madia/Malia Sabbia/Pazzia Begonia/Bigamia Malaria/Funivia Varia/Magia. Sedia/Bugia Ovvio/Addio Boria/Moria Paggio/Leggio Media/Mania
Madia/Malia Sabbia/Pazzia Begonia/Bigamia Malaria/Funivia Varia/Magia. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding
the publication of this paper. Performances of patients BL and MA on Sartori's battery : correct responses. ∗Chance level. Patients'
performance in reading words and nonwords (correct responses). Stimuli included 120 words and 40 nonwords taken from subtests 4 and 7 of
Sartori's battery . ∗MA was given also 92 words and 45 nonwords taken from BADA . Correct responses (%) in reading aloud stimuli with
different stress position (Lists 1 and 2 reported in the appendix). ∗Responses consistent with the predicted stress position (for normal
readers see [27, 28]). ∗∗For incidental reasons, BL was given only 40 nonwords. Type of errors produced by patients BL and MA in reading
words and nonwords.
