A 13-year-old spayed mixed-breed dog was diagnosed with a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) after histopathological examination of an
abdominal mass. Five months after surgical resection of the tumor, we detected the recurrence of GIST with multiple disseminated abdominal
lesions. A sequence analysis of cDNA obtained from a biopsy of the recurrent tumors revealed a mutation within exon 9 of the c-kit gene
(1523A>T, Asn508Ile), which has been shown to cause ligand-independent phosphorylation of the KIT protein in GISTs and canine mast cell
tumors (MCTs). Upon detection of the recurrent tumors, we initiated treatment with imatinib mesylate (10 mg/kg, q 24 hr). After 2 months,
the dog achieved complete remission. Our findings indicate that canine GIST, and possibly MCT, may be responsive to molecular-targeted
therapy. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) occur in humans, dogs and other species, and are among the most common mesenchymal tumors
that originate from the interstitial cells of Cajal in the walls of the gastrointestinal tract [14, 15]. The c-kit gene encodes the KIT
protein, which is a receptor tyrosine kinase that mediates the signaling of stem cell factor (SCF), a cytokine involved in hematopoiesis and
mast cell growth .Mutations of the c-kit gene have been identified in exons 9 (5–10%) and 11 (60–70%) in cases of human GISTs . Studies on
human GISTs and canine mast cell tumors (MCTs) have indicated that imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, may be effective in the
treatment of these tumors, depending on the presence and location of c-kit mutations [6, 9]. Furthermore, a previous case study has reported
imatinib mesylate to be effective against canine GISTs that contained a mutation in exon 11 of the c-kit gene . Cases of canine GISTs with
c-kit mutations may therefore be clinically responsive to imatinib mesylate treatment [5, 6]. Here, we describe a case of canine recurrent
GIST harboring a mutation in exon 9 of the c-kit gene that responded clinically to the administration of imatinib mesylate. A 13-year-old,
10-kg, spayed mixed-breed dog with a body condition score of 3/5 and a 1-week history of vomiting and anorexia was referred to the Shikoku
Veterinary Medical Center, located in Kagawa Prefecture, Japan. Upon physical examination, we detected a large mass in the abdominal cavity
through palpation. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed the mass to be approximately 10 cm in diameter with mixed echogenicity. A fine-needle
aspiration of the mass showed clusters of spindle-shaped cells. There were no apparent abnormalities observed in the complete blood cell
count, blood chemistry tests or blood coagulation profile. Abdominal radiography, however, revealed the presence of a single large lesion in
the abdominal cavity. Based on computed tomography (CT) findings (Fig. 1A and 1BFig. 1.Preoperative CT images: (A) Transverse image of the
5th lumbar vertebra and (B) sagittal image indicating a large mass with an irregular surface (12 × 8 × 6 cm in size) extending from the
cecum. (C) Photograph of the surgically resected area showing the main tumor and multiple disseminated masses (arrows) in the omentum. L5,
5th lumbar vertebra; m, main tumor; s, spleen; b, bladder.), we concluded that the mass originated from the cecum and could be surgically
resected. Laparotomy exposed a tumor that was approximately 12 × 8 × 6 cm in size, had an irregular surface and originated from the cecum
(Fig. 1C). In addition to the large mass, we observed 5 to 10 smaller masses (ranging from 1 mm to 20 mm in diameter) in the omentum. During
surgery, the cecum was partially removed, and the omentum with the disseminated tumors was excised. Preoperative CT images: (A) Transverse
image of the 5th lumbar vertebra and (B) sagittal image indicating a large mass with an irregular surface (12 × 8 × 6 cm in size) extending
from the cecum. (C) Photograph of the surgically resected area showing the main tumor and multiple disseminated masses (arrows) in the
omentum. L5, 5th lumbar vertebra; m, main tumor; s, spleen; b, bladder. Histopathological examination of the excised tumor revealed that the
mass had unclear boundaries and had originated from the muscle layer of the cecum. The tumor tissue was composed of spindle-form neoplastic
cells arranged in streams and interlacing bundles, and was supported by abundant basophilic myxoid stroma. The tumor cells had wispy
eosinophilic cytoplasm, as well as ovoid to cigar-shaped nuclei with a single small nucleolus (Fig. 2AFig. 2.(A) Histopathological features
of the resected abdominal mass using hematoxylin and eosin stain at 100 × magnification. Tumors were composed of spindle-form neoplastic
cells arranged in streams and interlacing bundles and were supported by abundant basophilic myxoid stroma. (B) Histopathological features of
the resected abdominal mass using hematoxylin and eosin stain at 400 × magnification. The tumor cells showed wispy eosinophilic cytoplasm,
ovoid to cigar-shaped nuclei with a small single nucleolus, and mild to moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. (C) Immunohistochemical
analysis of the resected abdominal mass using immunohistochemical staining with anti-KIT antibodies followed by hematoxylin counterstain at
100 × magnification. Most cells were positive for human KIT.). Mild to moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis were also observed in the
tumor cells. The mitotic index ranged from 0 to 1 mitotic figures per 5 high-power fields (Fig. 2B). (A) Histopathological features of the
resected abdominal mass using hematoxylin and eosin stain at 100 × magnification. Tumors were composed of spindle-form neoplastic cells
arranged in streams and interlacing bundles and were supported by abundant basophilic myxoid stroma. (B) Histopathological features of the
resected abdominal mass using hematoxylin and eosin stain at 400 × magnification. The tumor cells showed wispy eosinophilic cytoplasm, ovoid
to cigar-shaped nuclei with a small single nucleolus, and mild to moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. (C) Immunohistochemical analysis
of the resected abdominal mass using immunohistochemical staining with anti-KIT antibodies followed by hematoxylin counterstain at 100 ×
magnification. Most cells were positive for human KIT. Immunohistochemical analysis using an antibody against human KIT (Dako, Carpinteria,
CA, U.S.A.) demonstrated that most of the tumor cells were positive for KIT proteins (Fig. 2C), and the tumor was therefore identified as
GIST. A DNA sample obtained from paraffin-embedded sections of the tumor was subjected to sequence analysis of exon 11 of the c-kit gene;
however, no mutations were found in the target sequence. Because several residual tumors were detected in the omentum, 200 mg/m2 of
carboplatin (Paraplatin; Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY, U.S.A.) was administered to the dog 2 weeks after surgery; the drug was further
administered once every 3 weeks for a total of 6 doses. However, a scheduled follow-up examination conducted 160 days after the initial
surgery indicated the possible recurrence of GIST in the omentum. CT scans showed the presence of numerous masses with diameters ranging
from 2 cm to 5 cm. Exploratory laparotomy revealed multiple tumors up to 5 cm in diameter. As the complete and safe removal of all the
tumors was not feasible, only a limited number of masses were resected for biopsy. Histopathological examination of the resected masses
confirmed the recurrence of GIST. Total RNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tumor tissue resected during the second surgery using an
RNeasy FFPE kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, U.S.A.), and the corresponding cDNA was synthesized as previously described . The forward primer
5′-GCACAGACACAGAGTAATAGC-3′ and reverse primer 5′-GAAGGCACCAGCACCCAAAGT-3′ were then used to amplify c-kit cDNA from the single-strand cDNA
through PCR with KOD FX DNA polymerase (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). The PCR products were sub-cloned into a pCR-Blunt vector (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, U.S.A.), and the sequence of the full length c-kit cDNA was obtained using a previously described method . When compared with
the wild-type canine c-kit gene (GenBank accession no. AY313776), the GIST tissue showed a point mutation in exon 9 (1523A>T) (Fig. 3Fig.
3.Identification of the point mutation in the c-kit gene and assembly of wild-type and mutant c-kit nucleotide sequences. D1 to D5,
immunoglobulin-like domains; TM, transmembrane domain; JM, juxtamembrane domain; TK1, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding site; TK2,
activation loop.). Identification of the point mutation in the c-kit gene and assembly of wild-type and mutant c-kit nucleotide sequences.
D1 to D5, immunoglobulin-like domains; TM, transmembrane domain; JM, juxtamembrane domain; TK1, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding site;
TK2, activation loop. Based on the findings of the c-kit sequence analysis, we began administration of imatinib mesylate (10 mg/kg q 24 hr)
(Veenat; Natco Pharma, Hyderabad, India) 2 weeks after surgery. In an abdominal ultrasonography conducted 2 weeks after the initial imatinib
mesylate administration, the lengths of the residual masses in the abdominal cavity were found to have shrunk to less than half of their
original lengths. In accordance with the classification criteria for solid tumor response evaluation , the observed reduction in tumor size
indicated a partial remission (PR). Two months after the initiation of imatinib mesylate treatment, ultrasonography and CT imaging indicated
complete remission (CR) of GIST (Fig. 4Fig. 4.CT images taken after the recurrence of GIST: (A) Transverse image and (B) frontal image of
the abdomen taken 162 days after the initial surgery. The white arrowheads indicate the intraabdominal mass. (C) Transverse image and (D)
frontal image of the abdomen taken 1,700 days after the initial surgery. The mass was observed to have completely disappeared in this later
stage. s, spleen; rk, right kidney.). Treatment of imatinib mesylate with the same dosage was continued even after achievement of CR to
prevent further recurrence. The dog remained in CR with continuous daily administration of imatinib mesylate. Ultrasonography was conducted
during periodic health examinations once every 3–6 months. CT images taken after the recurrence of GIST: (A) Transverse image and (B)
frontal image of the abdomen taken 162 days after the initial surgery. The white arrowheads indicate the intraabdominal mass. (C) Transverse
image and (D) frontal image of the abdomen taken 1,700 days after the initial surgery. The mass was observed to have completely disappeared
in this later stage. s, spleen; rk, right kidney. Although the dog was periodically re-examined at our veterinary medical center, it
eventually died of pneumonia 4 years and 5 months after the second surgery. There was no indication of GIST recurrence at the time of the
dog’s death. This case did not present with any severe adverse events associated with imatinib mesylate treatment. All of the procedures
involved in the examination and treatment of this case were conducted in accordance with the guidelines for small animal practice issued by
the Japanese Veterinary Medical Association in 2007. A mutation within exon 9 of the c-kit gene (1523A>T) was found in the GIST tissue
extracted from our canine patient. Although the phosphorylation of the KIT protein was not evaluated in this study, this type of mutation
has been observed in 1.5% of canine MCTs and has been shown to cause constitutive phosphorylation of the KIT protein . The c-kit point
mutation (1523A>T) observed in this case has yet to be reported in canine GISTs. Kobayashi et al. have previously reported a case of canine
GIST harboring a c-kit mutation in exon 11 that responded to imatinib mesylate treatment ; although imatinib mesylate treatment was able to
generate a PR response, CR could not be achieved in their canine patient. In contrast, the canine patient described here achieved CR with
the same dose of imatinib mesylate (10 mg/kg q 24 hr) and survived for a long period after treatment without relapse. Although a further
study is needed to produce definitive results, our findings in conjunction with the report by Kobayashi et al. suggest the possible
effectiveness of imatinib mesylate for the treatment of GISTs in dogs. As human GIST patients with exon 9 or exon 11 mutations in the c-kit
gene have been shown to be responsive to imatinib mesylate treatment , this has become the first-choice drug in the treatment of metastatic
or recurrent GISTs. However, patients with exon 9 mutations have been reported to have decreased sensitivity to this treatment [1, 3].
Therefore, such patients require higher doses of imatinib mesylate, or even treatment with other tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
sunitinib malate. Despite having an exon 9 c-kit mutation, our canine patient demonstrated good response to imatinib mesylate treatment and
was able to achieve CR. This apparent discrepancy may be explained in part by the difference in the type of exon 9 mutation between canine
(point mutation) and human (duplication) GISTs. It has been documented that the responsiveness of human GISTs to anticancer drugs can be
affected by differences in the types of c-kit mutations . Although our canine patient remained in CR during the follow-up period, we decided
to provide long-term administration of imatinib mesylate to prevent further recurrence. Several studies have suggested that the long-term
administration of imatinib mesylate may lead to the emergence of drug-resistant clones in the treatment of advanced GISTs in humans [1, 8,
13]. On the other hand, Le Cesne et al. have advocated non-interrupted imatinib mesylate treatment for advanced human GISTs unless adverse
effects are evident . As our patient did not develop any severe adverse events during the treatment, we decided to continue the
administration of imatinib mesylate. In this case study, the administration of imatinib mesylate was found to be an effective treatment in a
canine patient with GISTs that contained an exon 9 mutation in the c-kit gene. Molecular-targeted therapy may therefore be a promising
therapeutic strategy for GISTs in dogs. We would like to thank Professor Hajime Tsujimoto from the Department of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, for his advice in the preparation of this manuscript.
None of the authors have any financial relationships with individuals or organizations that could inappropriately influence or bias the
content of the study.
