Noncardiac chest pain (NCCP) is one of the most common esophageal symptoms and lacks a clearly defined mechanism. The most common cause of
NCCP is gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). One of the accepted mechanisms of NCCP in a patient without GERD has been altered visceral
sensitivity. Mast cells may play a role in visceral hypersensitivity in irritable bowel syndrome. In this case, a patient with NCCP and
dysphagia who was unresponsive to proton pump inhibitor treatment had an increased esophageal mast cell infiltration and responded to 14
days of antihistamine and antileukotriene treatment. We suggest that there may be a relationship between esophageal symptoms such as NCCP
and esophageal mast cell infiltration. Noncardiac chest pain (NCCP) is defined by recurrent episodes of substernal chest pain without a
cardiac cause.1 Identified esophageal causes of NCCP include gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), esophageal dysmotility, and visceral
hypersensitivity.2 For GERD-related NCCP, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are the main treatment option. However, for non-GERD-related NCCP,
there is no clearly accepted mechanism or treatment strategy. One possible mechanism of pain in patients with non-GERD-related NCCP is an
increased nociceptive response and a decreased nociceptive threshold.3 Mucosal mast cells are important regulators of intestinal sensory and
motor function. Tryptase and histamine are released after degranulation from mast cells and activate enteric nerves, resulting in neuronal
hyperexcitability.4 Mast cells can also be associated with the pathophysiology of symptoms in some gastrointestinal disorders, such as
celiac sprue, inflammatory bowel disease, and nonulcer dyspepsia.5 In a case-control study, an increased number of mucosal mast cells was
demonstrated in colonic or duodenal biopsy specimens from patients with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).6 Furthermore,
symptoms in 67% of these patients improved with the administration of H1 and H2 receptor antagonists, with or without the concurrent
administration of mast cell mediator release inhibitors.6 However, there have been few studies describing an association between esophageal
mucosal mast cell infiltration and esophageal symptoms.7 Herein, we describe our experience with a 32-year-old woman who had NCCP that did
not respond to PPI treatment. This patient had an increased number of mast cells in the esophageal mucosa, and her symptoms were
successfully controlled with H1 and H2 receptor antagonists and antileukotrienes. A 32-year-old woman visited Samsung Medical Center (Seoul,
Korea) with an 8-month history of recurrent retrosternal chest pain. She described a burning sensation that was not related to meals.
Additionally, she often complained of regurgitation when in the supine position and intermittent dysphagia to both solids and liquids. She
had allergic rhinitis, but her symptoms were not associated with particular foods. She had been treated for 4 months with once-daily
esomeprazole (40 mg) and prokinetics (Motilitone® 30 mg three times a day), without any improvement in her symptoms. She underwent a
thorough workup, including esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), esophagography, high-resolution esophageal manometry, 24-hour esophageal
impedance-pH monitoring, and computed tomography (CT) of the chest. There were no specific findings on the EGD (Fig. 1). During EGD, we
performed random biopsies of the upper, middle, and lower esophagus to evaluate for eosinophilic or mast cell infiltration. Mast cells in
the epithelium and lamina propria were counted using CD117 immunostaining. The number of mast cells is presented as the largest cell number
per high-power field (HPF, ×400). Esophagography demonstrated suspicious mild luminal irregularity at the distal esophagus. High-resolution
esophageal manometry revealed normal peristalsis of the esophageal body and normal lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. The percentage of
total pH <4 time was 1.1%, according to 24-hour esophageal impedance-pH monitoring. There were no specific findings on the chest CT. An
esophageal biopsy showed an increased mucosal mast cell count of up to 66/HPF, without evidence of eosinophilic infiltration. Biopsies of
the stomach and duodenum showed a mucosal mast cell count of up to 16/HPF and up to 40/HPF, respectively. The patient underwent allergic
tests. The total serum IgE level was 30.2 U/mL, and the serum eosinophil count was 50/L. House dust mite (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and
Dermatophagoides farinae) and Mugwort exhibited 3+ positivity on skin prick testing. Based on these test results, we assumed that she had
symptomatic allergic mastocytic esophagitis and treated her with an H1 receptor antagonist (Chlorpheniramine®), an H2 receptor antagonist
(Ranitidine®), and an antileukotriene agent (Monteleukast®) for 14 days. After treatment, her symptoms improved by more than 50%. She did
not have any chest pain after continuing the medication for another month. Eight months after her symptoms had resolved, she returned to our
clinic with recurrent retrosternal chest pain. We prescribed the same medication for 1 month, after which her symptoms were again relieved.
Mucosal mast cells play an important role in visceral hypersensitivity in patients with IBS, who have increased mast cell infiltration in
the mucosa of the intestinal tract.8,9 In a retrospective study, Jakate et al.6 proposed the term mastocytic enterocolitis to describe the
presence of an increased number of gastrointestinal (GI) mucosal mast cells upon colonic or duodenal biopsy in patients with chronic
intractable diarrhea. Patients with mastocytic enterocolitis who were treated with antihistamines and/or cromolyn sodium showed a
significant reduction in diarrhea.6 In a recent retrospective study, Akhavein et al.10 described patients with the following
characteristics: (1) symptoms of GI dysmotility; (2) increased mast cells in the GI tract mucosa; (3) a history of food or environmental
allergies; (4) nocturnal awakening; and (5) elevated histamine levels. This study suggested the use of a new term, allergic mastocytic
gastroenteritis, for a new type of GI mast cell disorder. As mucosal mast cells are distributed throughout the GI tract, and their relation
with visceral hypersensitivity has been reported in previous studies, we can assume that increased esophageal mast infiltration may also
influence esophageal hypersensitivity. Recently, Lee et al.7 reported a higher mucosal mast cell count in NCCP patients with
hypersensitivity of the esophagus and functional chest pain than in controls. These authors also showed that mucosal mast cell infiltration
was associated with smooth muscle segmental changes during esophageal contraction.11 Given this background, we report a case of non-GERD-
related NCCP; the patient had increased esophageal mast cell infiltration, and her symptoms were successfully controlled with antihistamines
and antileukotrienes. NCCP is a common disease with a global prevalence of 13%; it is very costly and has a significant effect on health
care systems.12,13 NCCP can be divided into GERD-related NCCP and non-GERD-related NCCP. Non-GERD-related NCCP can be demonstrated in up to
58% of patients with NCCP.14 For non-GERD-related NCCP cases, esophageal motility disorder, visceral hypersensitivity, altered autonomic
activity, and psychological disorders have been suggested as the underlying mechanisms.2 However, patients with non-GERD-related NCCP
frequently do not receive a definitive diagnosis, even after a workup, which makes it difficult to determine the treatment strategy
clinically. In this case, we showed that symptoms in a patient with esophageal mast cell infiltration were successfully relieved with
antihistamines and an antileukotriene agent, suggesting that visceral hypersensitivity induced by mast cell infiltration is a treatable
cause of non-GERD-related NCCP. However, further large-scale prospective studies are required to better understand the relationship between
esophageal symptoms and mast cell infiltration affecting visceral sensitivity. In this case, we used chlorpheniramine (an H1 receptor
antagonist) to prevent symptoms because histamine is the main mast cell mediator, and of its four receptor subtypes, H1 is the main target
for visceral pain.15,16 Recently, the transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRPV) family has been identified as a common pathway for
several mediators of visceral hypersensitivity, including histamine, tryptase, and serotonin.17,18 Chlorpheniramine also is a TRPV receptor
antagonist.19 Therefore, chlorpheniramine might work in this case by antagonizing the H1 receptor and through the direct inhibition of TRPV.
In addition, chlorpheniramine can be thought of as a selective serotonin and noradrenalin reuptake inhibitor due to its actions on both
serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons.20 Accordingly, its visceral analgesic effect may also have partially contributed to the relief of
symptoms in this patient.21 Although data are limited, in previous studies by Lee et al.7 and Yu et al.,22 the esophageal mast cell count in
the healthy group was 7.6 cells/HPF and 3.79 cells/HPF, respectively. This patient had a markedly increased level of esophageal mast cell
infiltration (66 cells/HPF). The mucosal mast cell count was also increased in the stomach and duodenum (up to 16 cells/HPF and up to 40
cells/HPF, respectively). However, the patient did not have any corresponding enteric symptoms. In addition, considering the mast cell count
that has been reported in the stomach and duodenum of healthy persons,6,23 which are relatively higher than in the esophagus, the esophagus
seemed to be the main site of mast cell infiltration in the present case. Considering the refractory burning sensation and intermittent
dysphagia reported by this patient, eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) should also be considered. Furthermore, esophageal mastocytosis can occur
in patients with EoE.24,25 However, no typical endoscopic features of EoE were seen upon EGD. Biopsies of the upper, middle, and lower
esophagus showed neither eosinophilia nor other histologic features of EoE, including microabscess formation, superficial layering, and
extracellular eosinophil granules.26 In addition, the patient received PPI treatment for 4 months, but her symptoms were not improved, and
pathologic acid exposure was not observed in the 24-hour esophageal impedance-pH monitoring. Thus, we could exclude EoE, PPI-responsive
esophageal eosinophilia, and refractory GERD.26 Limitations of this case include the fact that we did not directly evaluate mast cell
activation by measuring histamine or tryptase released from mast cell degranulation and did not perform a follow-up biopsy to confirm a
reduction in the esophageal mast cell count after treatment. However, an association between mast cell activation and NCCP is indirectly
suggested by repeated responses to treatment with antihistamines and an antileukotriene agent. Nevertheless, further studies, including an
assessment of mast cell activation and the pathologic confirmation of the treatment response, are needed to draw a firm conclusion. In
conclusion, we consider that non-GERD-related NCCP can be attributed to visceral hypersensitivity, which can be associated with mast cell
infiltration of the esophageal mucosa. Therefore, an endoscopic esophageal mucosal biopsy to evaluate mast cell infiltration may help
physicians to determine the treatment for patients with non-GERD-related NCCP, which is particularly difficult to treat. CONFLICTS OF
INTEREST No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Microscopic findings. (A) A few mast cells without any
eosinophils, as visualized by H&E staining (×200); and (B) increased mast cell infiltration as visualized by immunohistochemical staining
for CD117 in the esophageal mucosa.
