Mesial protraction of mandibular posterior teeth requires increased anchorage to avoid undesired tooth movements. Orthodontic mini-implants
have become a popular and successful way to increase skeletal anchorage in such cases. However, mini-implants may cause injury to adjacent
teeth or anatomical structures and may lead to tissue inflammation. Induced ankylosed primary teeth have been used in the past as abutments
for the protraction of the maxilla in cases of maxillary retrognathism. However, this technique has not been described in the literature for
the protraction of mandibular molars. The aim of this paper is to present, through a case report, an alternative to mini-implant devices to
maximize anchorage in the mandible by inducing ankylosis on a primary molar. A 13-year-old female with class II right malocclusion, deep
bite, and congenitally missing right second premolars was referred for orthodontic treatment. Treatment plan involved removal of the primary
teeth and mesial protraction of the posterior. In the mandible, ankylosis was induced on the retained primary second molar by extraction,
bisection, replantation of the mesial part after endodontic treatment, and bonding of a rigid splint. Ankylosis was diagnosed after 10 weeks
and a closing T-loop sectional wire was inserted to move the permanent first molar mesially. At 6 months, the remaining space was closed
using elastic chain on a rectangular stainless steel wire with tip-back bends, supported by class II elastics. Induced ankylosis of primary
teeth can be an alternative to orthodontic mini-implants in selected cases, with minimal risks and maximum biocompatibility. A 13-year-old
Caucasian female was referred for orthodontic treatment. The patient’s medical history was noncontributory. Extraoral clinical examination
revealed a symmetric face, normal proportions of the upper and lower facial height, a slightly convex profile, and an acute nasolabial
angle. Intraoral clinical examination showed mild generalized gingivitis with fair oral hygiene and no caries. Evaluation of the occlusion
revealed a dental class II molar and canine relationship on the right side and class I molar and canine relationship on the left side, deep
bite, slight malalignment of the anterior teeth, and deviation of the mandibular midline to the right by 2 mm. Both maxillary and mandibular
right second primary molars were present while all other primary teeth had exfoliated (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Initial clinical examination of a
frontal view, b right lateral view, c left lateral view, d maxillary occlusal view, and e mandibular occlusal view Initial clinical
examination of a frontal view, b right lateral view, c left lateral view, d maxillary occlusal view, and e mandibular occlusal view
Radiographic examination revealed congenitally missing right second premolars and all third molars (Fig. 2a). Cephalometric analysis showed
a skeletal class I relationship and hyperdivergent skeletal pattern (Fig. 2b, Table 1).Fig. 2 a Panoramic radiograph showing congenitally
missing right 2nd premolars. b Cephalometric radiograph at the start of treatmentTable 1Initial and final cephalometric
measurementsInitialFinalSNA (°)76.476.8SNB (°)73.372.7ANB (°)3.14.1Wits (mm)0.2−0.4SN to GoGn (°)42.842.9Maxillary incisor to NA
(°)19.813.4Maxillary incisor to NA (mm)4.1−0.1Mandibular incisor to NB (°)25.527.6Mandibular incisor to NB (mm)4.43.9Interincisal angle
(°)131.6134.9Mandibular incisor to GoGn (°)89.592.0 a Panoramic radiograph showing congenitally missing right 2nd premolars. b Cephalometric
radiograph at the start of treatment Initial and final cephalometric measurements Correction of the canine relationship, overbite, and
midline discrepancy would be accomplished using fixed appliances. Regarding the agenesis of the second premolars, the patient was offered
two choices: maintain the primary molars and prosthetically replace them when they would eventually exfoliate, or extract them and close the
space by mesial movement of the first and second permanent molars [1, 2]. The patient decided to follow the second option in order to avoid
the need for implants or other prostheses in the future. Mesial movement of molars is taxing on anchorage, especially in the mandibular arch
. Considering that the mandibular midline was already shifted to the agenesis side, skeletal anchorage was deemed an efficient option.
However, instead of placing a mini-implant [3, 5, 6], we decided to use the primary molar as a biological alternative. We induced ankylosis
and used the mesial root as skeletal anchorage. Induced ankylosed primary teeth have been used in the past as abutments for the protraction
of the maxilla in cases of maxillary retrognathism . However, this technique has not been described in the literature for the protraction of
mandibular molars. The ankylosis technique included extraction of the primary molar under local anesthesia followed by root canal treatment
of the mesial root, performed ex vivo using a zinc oxide and eugenol sealer (Fig. 3a). The crown was then restored with composite resin and
a 2-mm apicoectomy and hemisectomy of the tooth was performed (Fig. 3b). To induce ankylosis, we followed the management protocol for
avulsed teeth with a closed apex and extraoral dry time exceeding 60 min . Periodontal ligament cells were removed from the root surface
with a scaler. Sixty minutes after the extraction of the tooth, the socket was irrigated with saline solution and the mesial root was
replanted with slight pressure. To stabilize the tooth and assure ankylosis, a rigid splint was applied, extending from the right canine to
the right first molar, using a 0.016″ × 0.022″ stainless steel (SS) rectangular wire (Fig. 3c).Fig. 3Induced ankylosis technique a extraoral
root canal treatment of the mesial root of the primary tooth, b hemisectomy of the primary tooth, and c replantation of the mesial part and
splinting Induced ankylosis technique a extraoral root canal treatment of the mesial root of the primary tooth, b hemisectomy of the primary
tooth, and c replantation of the mesial part and splinting Ankylosis of the mesial root of the primary mandibular right second molar was
diagnosed after 10 weeks through clinical and radiographic examination, and the splint was removed (Fig. 4). Next, a band was placed on the
permanent mandibular right first molar and brackets were bonded on the primary second molar and the mandibular first premolar. A closing
T-loop 0.017″ × 0.025″ TMA sectional wire was inserted between the permanent and primary molar, without any prior levelling, to move the
permanent first molar mesially (Fig. 5). The T-loop was activated 9 times. At 6 months, clinical and radiographic examination revealed
almost total replacement resorption of the root of the primary tooth and complete closure of the space (Fig. 6). Consequently, the bisected
primary tooth was extracted and full orthodontic treatment followed. Remaining space closure was performed, during the next year, using
elastic chain on a 0.017″ × 0.025″ SS wire with tip-back (Fig. 7) and support from class II elastics.Fig. 4Radiograph 10 weeks post
replantation showing the absence of periodontal ligament and root ankylosisFig. 5Initial orthodontic space closure using a T-loop to close
the space between the primary molar segment and the permanent first molarFig. 6Radiograph 6 months post replantation showing almost total
root resorption and complete space closure between the 1st permanent molar and 2nd primary molarFig. 7Orthodontic space closure using a
retraction elastic chain to close the space between the permanent first molar and the first premolar; a stop was added to the wire to
maximize anchorage Radiograph 10 weeks post replantation showing the absence of periodontal ligament and root ankylosis Initial orthodontic
space closure using a T-loop to close the space between the primary molar segment and the permanent first molar Radiograph 6 months post
replantation showing almost total root resorption and complete space closure between the 1st permanent molar and 2nd primary molar
Orthodontic space closure using a retraction elastic chain to close the space between the permanent first molar and the first premolar; a
stop was added to the wire to maximize anchorage Final records show class I canine and molar relationship on both sides; full space closure
of the agenesis sites, confirmed with the use of dental floss; and correction of overbite and overjet; however, a slight midline deviation
remained (Figs. 8 and 9a). Cephalometric analysis showed that the mandibular incisors did not experience lingual movement as a result of
molar protraction (Fig. 9b, Table 1).Fig. 8Clinical examination after the completion of orthodontic treatment showing the 1st permanent
molar in the position of the 2nd premolar a frontal view, b right lateral view, c left lateral view, d maxillary occlusal view, and e
mandibular occlusal viewFig. 9 a Panoramic radiograph at the end of orthodontic treatment showing the 1st permanent molar in the position of
the 2nd premolar. b Final cephalometric radiograph Clinical examination after the completion of orthodontic treatment showing the 1st
permanent molar in the position of the 2nd premolar a frontal view, b right lateral view, c left lateral view, d maxillary occlusal view,
and e mandibular occlusal view a Panoramic radiograph at the end of orthodontic treatment showing the 1st permanent molar in the position of
the 2nd premolar. b Final cephalometric radiograph Induced ankylosed primary teeth can be used in place of temporary anchorage devices to
maximize anchorage during orthodontic treatment. The technique used in the present case was based on the treatment protocol for avulsed
teeth exceeding 60 min extraoral dry time, as suggested by the International Association of Dental Traumatology . However, the tooth was not
placed in 2 % sodium fluoride for 20 min since the goal of this step is to postpone osseous replacement of the root , which was not a
desired outcome in this case. Also, a rigid splint was used to further assure tooth ankylosis . Previous studies that have reported induced
ankylosis for orthodontic protraction have used similar techniques . Several treatment alternatives have been proposed for the management of
congenital missing premolars. In cases of deep bite, spacing, and class I occlusion, the primary tooth can be kept in place until it
exfoliates [2, 13]. In cases of congenitally missing premolars, the primary predecessors usually exfoliate when the patient is an adult [13,
14] and an implant can be placed, as the alveolar bone has usually been preserved [2, 15]. However, it is difficult to restore the implant
since the mesiodistal dimension of the primary tooth is greater than the missing premolar and additional orthodontic treatment may be
required [2, 14, 16]. An option to avoid future restorative compromise, especially when orthodontic treatment is inevitably required, is to
modify the primary molar by trimming it mesially and distally and restoring it as a premolar . Orthodontic treatment follows and, when the
primary molar exfoliates, it is replaced by an implant . When the primary molar has extensive caries, restorations, or resorption,
extraction is an option [1, 14]. The space can then be preserved with a space maintainer or an implant placed if the patient is an adult [2,
3, 15]. In all implant cases mentioned above, a fixed prosthesis is also an alternative . It is crucial to note that when space is
maintained for a long time, alveolar bone can become atrophic and implant placement is challenging [2, 4]. Finally, autotrasplantation of
premolars or molars may also be an alternative . In cases of crowding, class II malocclusion, severely damaged primary molars, or when the
patient rejects the option of a prosthesis, space closure is the treatment of choice [1, 2]. When the patient is under the age of 8 years,
spontaneous space closure can be achieved [18, 19]. The key point is to detect the premolar agenesis prior to root completion of the first
permanent molar [18, 19]. However, even then, mild tipping of adjacent teeth can be observed [18, 19]. An alternative to space closure is
the use of conventional orthodontics. In our case, this was the choice of treatment for the space closure in the maxilla, where cortical
alveolar bone is less compact and thus orthodontic bodily movement is easier . However, in the mandible, due to the bone’s compact
architecture, bodily movement is compromised leading to loss of anchorage and undesired tooth movement [3, 5, 2021]. Lingual functional
appliances , intermaxillary elastics [4, 16], and mandibular protraction appliances have been proposed for space closure in the mandible to
avoid molar tipping and anchorage loss. Another option is controlled slicing and hemisectomy [14, 23]. Controlled slicing starts with
progressive trimming of the distal surface of the primary molar which leads to hemisectomy of the tooth . The hemisectomy technique is
similar to the one used for induced ankylosis; however, the primary molar is not ankylosed and cannot be used as an immovable abutment.
Hemisectomy diminishes the risk of bone atrophy in the extraction site and of extreme mesial inclination of the first permanent molar [14,
23]. However, undesired movement of the anterior teeth cannot be totally prevented . Recently, orthodontic mini-implants have been used
successfully for space closure in mandibular molar protraction [2, 3, 6, 24]. However, they have the risk of soft tissue inflammation,
damage of anatomical structures during implant placement, lack of stability, and implant fracture . On the contrary, an induced ankylosed
tooth has maximum biocompatibility leading to low inflammation risks when appropriate oral hygiene is performed. Furthermore, there is no
risk to damage anatomical structures during replantation since the tooth is put in the existing socket. Finally, the root of the ankylosed
tooth at the time of final extraction has almost totally been replaced by bone diminishing the risk of fracture. The proposed technique is
conservative and has advantages since (a) half of the tooth is retained, thereby retaining the alveolar process during the first phase of
protraction, and (b) even if ankylosis fails to develop, other options are still open, because the tooth can be extracted and treatment can
continue using other methods (e.g., mini-implant). However, this technique is indicated only for cooperative patients since procedures are
time-consuming and treatment requires several visits. In addition, treatment cost can be high compared to mini-implants. Also, the ankylosed
abutment cannot be placed wherever is required but where the primary tooth is located and is only partially exploited since the ankylosed
root has to be extracted after 4–5 mm of protraction. Titanium molybdenum alloy Stainless steel Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution MVA performed the treatment on the primary molar to induce its ankylosis and drafted
the initial manuscript. DK carried out the orthodontic treatment. GV supervised the treatment and edited the manuscript. DJH designed the
treatment plan for the patient, supervised the treatment and the follow-up of the patient, and edited the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr. Yiannis Lyros and Dr. Alina Cocos for the follow-up of the patient’s
orthodontic treatment. Informed consent for publication of the presented case was obtained by the parent and the child.
