We present herein several transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) images of a 60-year-old man referred to the cardiac surgeon for a triple
coronary artery bypass graft procedure, in which a normally-functioning double orifice mitral valve (DOMV) was an incidental finding during
routine intraoperative TEE. This is a very rare congenital malformation, even rarer as an isolated anomaly in an elderly patient. Three-
dimensional TEE (3D-TEE) confirmed the diagnosis and provided complete and fast assessment of the mitral valve and the surrounding
structures and all the information needed to reassess the surgical strategy in the very short pre‑bypass period. Author contributions
Conception and design of the research:Ciobanu AO, Bennett S, Vinereanu D. Acquisition of data:Ciobanu AO, Bennett S. Analysis and
interpretation of the data: Ciobanu AO, Bennett S, Lopes RD, Vinereanu D. Writing of the manuscript:Ciobanu AO. Critical revision of the
manuscript for intellectual content: Ciobanu AO, Bennett S, Lopes RD, Vinereanu D. Supervision / as the major investigador: Vinereanu D.
Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no
external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work. This paper is
partly supported by the Sectorial Operational Programme of Human Resources Development (SOPHRD), financed by the European Social Fund and
the Romanian Government under contract number POSDRU 141531. Real-time 3D-transesophageal echocardiogram „en face" view from the left atrium
(„surgeon's view", Panel A) and from the LV (Panel B) revealing two asymmetrical orifices, a smaller lateral (1) and a bigger medial (2)
mitral orifice, separated by fibrous tissue (arrow). Panel C- achieved after using a sagittal crosssectional plane to "split" the valve and
the LV in two for better view of the orifices and unrestricted opening of the mitral valve. Panel D. 2D (left) and 3D-zoom mode (right)
transgastric view of the two orifices. LV, left ventricle.
