Situs inversus totalis is a relatively rare condition and is an autosomal recessive congenital defect in which an abdominal and/or thoracic
organ is positioned as a “mirror image” of the normal position in the sagittal plane. We report our experience of laparoscopic-assisted
total gastrectomy with lymph node dissection performed for gastric cancer in a patient with situs inversus totalis. A 58-year-old male was
diagnosed with cT1bN0N0 gastric cancer. There were no vascular anomalies on abdominal angiographic computed tomography with three-
dimensional reconstruction. laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy was performed with D1+ lymph node dissection, in accordance with the
Japanese Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines. There were no intraoperative issues, and no postoperative complications. This was the first
report describing laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy with the standard typical lymph node dissection in the English literature. We
emphasize that the position of trocars and the standing side of the primary surgeon during the lymph node dissection are critical. Situs
inversus totalis (SIT) is a relatively rare condition found in only approximately 1 per 5,000 to 20,000 people . SIT is an autosomal
recessive congenital defect in which an abdominal and/or thoracic organ is positioned as a “mirror image” of the normal position in the
sagittal plane. Laparoscopic surgery for such patients has been reported upon, with most reports describing laparoscopic cholecystectomy .
Reports of advanced laparoscopic surgery in such patients are also increasing in accord with the overall progress of laparoscopic
procedures. In 2003, the first case of laparoscopic surgery for a SIT patient with gastric cancer was reported . Only a few cases of
laparoscopic assisted distal gastrectomy (LADG) for gastric cancer have been reported . However, there are no reports of laparoscopic
assisted total gastrectomy (LATG) for gastric cancer in patients with SIT in the English literature. We herein report a case of LATG with
lymph node dissection and esophagojejunostomy using the overlap method in a patient with early gastric cancer and SIT. A 58-year-old male
with SIT was diagnosed with early gastric cancer by an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) performed at an outside hospital, and was
subsequently referred to our hospital for further evaluation and surgical treatment. He was diagnosed with SIT 5 years previously. He had
been healthy until this diagnosis with no other underlying disease or any family history of SIT or gastric cancer. History and physical
examination revealed right orchidoptosis. Laboratory examination, including tumor markers, showed no abnormal findings. Electrocardiogram
(ECG) examination revealed right bundle branch block. Chest x-ray suggested dextrocardia (Fig. 1). Upper gastrointestinal imaging (UGI) and
repeat EGD identified a superficial lesion with slight depression (0-IIc) measuring 20 × 25 mm in size on the posterior side of the lesser
curvature of the upper gastric body (Fig. 2a, b). The lesion was 3 cm distal to the esophagogastric junction (EGJ). Biopsy revealed poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed that all intraabdominal organs were inversely positioned (Fig. 3a).
Prior to surgery, abdominal angiographic CT with 3D reconstruction was performed to reveal any other anatomic variations and to verify the
locations of the major vasculature. There were no arterial variations (Fig. 3b). Chest and abdominal CT did not reveal any metastases,
including none to the liver or lung. Based on findings of the biopsy, UGI, EGD and CT, a 0-IIc lesion of the upper gastric body, clinical
stage cT1b, cN0cH0cP0cM0, stage IB according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma was diagnosed . We decided to perform LATG
with standard lymph node dissection (D1 + No. 7, 8a, 9) in accordance with the Japanese Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines .Fig.
1Dextrocardia was evident on chest radiography from the frontal viewFig. 2 a, b Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and gastrointestinal
imaging study showed a superficial lesion with a slight depression of the upper gastric bodyFig. 3 a Enhanced abdominal CT showed
transposition of the abdominal organs and identified no metastasis to the lymph nodes or to the distant organs. b Three-dimensional
reconstruction image of CT angiography showed no vascular anomalies Dextrocardia was evident on chest radiography from the frontal view a, b
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and gastrointestinal imaging study showed a superficial lesion with a slight depression of the upper
gastric body a Enhanced abdominal CT showed transposition of the abdominal organs and identified no metastasis to the lymph nodes or to the
distant organs. b Three-dimensional reconstruction image of CT angiography showed no vascular anomalies After general anesthesia was
induced, the patient was placed in a supine position. The position of trocars is showed in Fig. 4. First, a 12-mm trocar was placed in the
umbilical site, and carbon dioxide was injected into the peritoneal cavity at 10 mmHg. A laparoscope was inserted into the abdomen through
the 12-mm trocar. An additional 4 ports were placed in the left and right subcostal positions and lateral abdominal regions. The surgeon was
positioned on the right side of the patient for dissection of lymph node basins 5, 6, 7, 8a, and 9 and was positioned on the left side for
the dissection of lymph node basins 1, 2, 3, 4sa, 4sb, 4d, and 11p. At the beginning of the operation, the surgeon was positioned on the
left side of the patient and the greater omentum was dissected. The location of the spleen was confirmed, and the 4sa node basin (along the
short gastric vessels) and 4sb node basin (along the left gastroepiploic vessels) were dissected. The left gastroepiploic vessels were
clipped and divided. Next, the surgeon was positioned on the right side of the patient, and the node basin 6 (infrapyloric lymph nodes) was
dissected (Fig. 5a) and the duodenum was transected with a linear stapling device intraperitoneally. Next, the node basins 5 (suprapyloric
lymph nodes), 8a [lymph node along the common hepatic artery (CHA)], 9 [lymph node around the celiac artery (CA)], and 7 [lymph node along
the left gastric artery (LGA)] were dissected safely (Fig. 5b). Next, the surgeon was positioned on the left side of the patient again, and
the node basins 11p [along the proximal splenic artery (SA)], 1 (right pericardial lymph node), 2 (left pericardial lymph node), and 3
(along the lesser curvature) were dissected completely in accord with Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines (Fig. 5c). We exposed the
abdominal esophagus and transected it at an appropriate resection line using an endoscopic linear stapler. The resected stomach and
surrounding fatty tissue including harvested lymph nodes were placed in a plastic specimen bag. The specimen in the bag was retrieved
through an extended umbilical port incision. At last, we performed an esophagojejunostomy using the overlap method intraperitoneally
(Fig. 5d). Operating time was 359 min, and blood loss was 90 mL. The final pathology showed a poorly differentiated 0-IIc lesion with
invasion limited to the mucosa. There was no metastasis in any of the retrieved lymph nodes. The final stage was pT1aN0M0, Stage 1A
according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma . There were no immediate postoperative complications, and the patient was
discharged 7 days after the operation. The patient is still alive without recurrence or symptoms 4 years after surgery.Fig. 4Placement of
portsFig. 5 a Dissection of lymph nodes in lymph node basin 6 (infrapyloric lymph nodes). b Dissection of lymph nodes in lymph node basins
8a, 9, and 7 (along the common hepatic artery, the celiac artery, and the left gastric artery). c Dissection of lymph node basin 11p (along
the splenic artery). d Reconstruction via esophagojejunostomy using the overlap method Placement of ports a Dissection of lymph nodes in
lymph node basin 6 (infrapyloric lymph nodes). b Dissection of lymph nodes in lymph node basins 8a, 9, and 7 (along the common hepatic
artery, the celiac artery, and the left gastric artery). c Dissection of lymph node basin 11p (along the splenic artery). d Reconstruction
via esophagojejunostomy using the overlap method In this case, we made two important clinical observations. First, 3D reconstruction of an
abdominal CT angiography image should be done to examine a blood stream in detail in SIT patients preoperatively. Second, the position of
trocars and the standing side of the primary surgeon during the dissection of basins 5, 7, 8a, and 9 are critical. SIT is a rare congenital
anomaly. SIT can be accompanied by cardiopulmonary malformations, familial long QT syndrome, total esophageal duplication, agnathia, and a
variety of urologic anomalies. Typically, the frequency of cardiovascular anomalies is 10 times greater than in a patient with normal
anatomy . In other report, SIT is associated with cardiovascular malformations in 8 % of cases . Therefore, preoperative identification of
any abnormal vasculature is important, because abnormal vasculature carries with it the risk of misidentifying anatomy and causing
unanticipated injury of important vessels. In our case, major vascular abnormalities were not found. However, it is required to examine a
blood stream in 3D reconstruction of an abdominal CT angiography image preoperatively. Second, the position of trocars and the standing side
of the primary surgeon during the dissection of basins 5, 7, 8a, and 9 are critical. Laparoscopic surgery has been performed for SIT
patients in numerous case reports, including laparoscopic cholecystectomy , laparoscopic colectomy , laparoscopic fundoplication , and
laparoscopic gastric band surgery . In 2003, LADG for gastric cancer in a patient with SIT was successfully performed in Japan, and was the
first reported case of its kind . Furthermore, in 2010, LADG with D1 + β lymph-node dissection for early gastric cancer was successfully
performed in Japan . It was the first case of laparoscopic gastrectomy with extended lymph node dissection. The reported cases of
laparoscopic gastrectomy for gastric cancer with SIT are listed in Table 1 . LATG is not performed as frequently as LADG even in patients
without SIT due to the technical difficulty of the laparoscopic approach, particularly the esophagojejunostomy and complete lymph node
dissection. The present patient was the first report describing LATG with the standard typical lymph node dissection (D1+) in the English
literature. It is a very important element where the surgeon inserts the trocar, and which direction the surgeon operates on from. However,
there is no consensus about it until now, because LATG has never been reported for the patients with SIT. Thus, based on our experience, we
describe the position of trocars and the standing side of the primary surgeon when the surgeon performs LATG for the patients with SIT.Table
1Previous reports of laparoscopic surgery for gastric cancer with SITNo.AuthorAgeSexAnomalies of blood vesselsOperationLymoh node
dissection* Position of surgeonOperating time (min)Blood loss (ml)Stage** Post operation1Yamaguchi (2003)76MNDLADGNDNDNDNDNDND2Futawatari
(2010)53Mno anomaliesLADGD1 + βleft side (opposite the usual side)300350IAno complications3Seo (2011)60Mno anomaliesLADGD1 + βright side
(same the usual side)20070IBno complications4Kim (2012)47Mno anomaliesRADGD1 + βsame the usual side300NDIIIBno complications5Fujikawa
(2013)60Fno anomaliesLADGNDopposite the usual side2345IBmechanical obstruction (re-operation)6Min (2013)52Mthe CHA from SMA 2 branches from
the LGALADGD1+same the usual side220100IBno complications768Mno anomaliesLADGD1+same the usual side11750IAno complications8Sumi (2014)42Mthe
LHA from the SMALADGD1 + No.7, 8a, 9opposite the usual side31390IBno complications9Our case58Mno anomaliesLATGD1+opposite the usual
side35990IAno complications(except for no.5, 7,8a, 9)IAno complications *According to Japanese gastric cancer treatment guidelines 2010
(ver. 3) **According to Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma: 3rd English edition Previous reports of laparoscopic surgery for
gastric cancer with SIT *According to Japanese gastric cancer treatment guidelines 2010 (ver. 3) **According to Japanese classification of
gastric carcinoma: 3rd English edition The surgeon should perform the dissection of basins 5, 7, 8a, 9 from right side of patient same as
normal operation. We did not perform the dissection of basins 5, 7, 8a, and 9 from the left side of patient as the surgeon’s right hand
(dominant hand) using the ultrasonic cut and coagulation instrument can contact the proper hepatic artery (PHA). This risk is not completely
avoided with the surgeon on the right side, however. The ultrasonic cut and coagulation instrument may hit the PHA perpendicularly, and
damage the vessels during dissection of basin 5. However, lymph node dissection from the right side of the patient is safer than that from
the left side of the patient if we pay attention to the cavitation of the ultrasonic cut and coagulation instrument so as not to damage the
vessels. Furthermore, in normal operation, if the surgeon is right-handed, he inserts the lower right trocar more vertically up and towards
the center. That is because he can dissect node basins 7, 8a and 9 precisely and more deeply, and he can reach the spleen using right hand
for dissecting lymph node around the splenic artery. In SIT, there is no need to insert the lower right trocar toward the center because
there is no spleen in the left side of abdomen. However, the trocar should be inserted in the higher position, because it is difficult to
perform the lymph node dissection around the CHA as the pancreas interferes with movement of the right hand. We describe the procedure after
the surgeon moves to the left side of the patient. The surgeon should insert the upper left trocar (which is used with the right hand) more
toward the center. As a result, the surgeon’s hand can reach the spleen and he can avoid the injury of PHA during the dissection of node
basins 11p. The diagram of the optimum positions of the trocars in LATG with SIT is shown in Fig. 6.Fig. 6Optimum positions of the trocars
for LATG with SIT Optimum positions of the trocars for LATG with SIT There are 4 cases in the literature describing the operation done with
the surgeon standing in the standard position [4, 5, 7]. One of these authors reported that the mirror image led to confusion during the
operation . Furthermore, another of these authors reported that even slight confusion of the anatomy can jeopardize the patient’s life, and
that only a surgeon experienced with laparoscopic gastrectomy should perform the operation . There is a report of the use of surgical
instruments in the non-dominant hand from the opposite side of patient when operating on patients with SIT . We advise against this
technique to prevent the damage of major vessels and to ensure adequate node dissection. However, robot-assisted distal gastrectomy (RADG)
is an exception to this as the surgeon does not need to change his positon during surgery because of the centered robotic view of the field
with easy changing of the instruments between hands . Our procedure of LATG with D1+ dissection and esophagojejunostomy using the overlap
method was completed in 359 min with 90 mL blood loss. In other reports of LADG, the median operating time and blood loss were 267 min and
90 mL, respectively. It is logical that total gastrectomy has a longer operative time given the more extensive dissection necessary compared
to distal gastrectomy. Also, the esophagojejunostomy using overlap method was carried out from the left side of the patient, we could
perform it safely. As in our procedure, lymph node dissection and esophagojejunostomy can be performed safely and efficiently by
coordinating the position of trocars, and alternating the standing side of the primary surgeon over the course of the case. In conclusion,
there has been marked improvement of the surgical technique and instruments used in laparoscopic surgery recently. Since the LATG was
performed at our hospital more than 200 times, the operating team has become very comfortable with performing it. While performing LATG with
SIT, we have encountered some problems present. Thus, we have described the important technical aspects of LATG with lymph node dissection
for patients with gastric cancer and SIT, namely recognition of the anatomy, with particular attention to the vasculature as determined by
preoperative 3D reconstruction of an abdominal CT angiography image. Furthermore, it was important to simulate the position of the trocar
insertion, and the change of the position of the primary surgeon preoperatively. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Situs inversus totalis Laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy Three-dimensional Laparoscopic-assisted distal gastrectomy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Electrocardiogram Upper gastrointestinal imaging Esophagogastric junction Computed tomography Common hepatic
artery Celiac artery Left gastric artery Splenic artery Proper hepatic artery Robot-assisted distal gastrectomy Superior mesenteric artery
Left hepatic artery Distal gastrectomy Total gastrectomy Proximal gastrectomy Not described Competing interest The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All six authors were involved in planning, data collection, analysis of case and writing
the manuscript. MM, TH, and HK performed surgical procedures. MM and MT managed the patients. MM collected data and wrote the paper. YM and
HT reviewed it. All authors approved the final manuscript. The authors acknowledge all the ward staff who took care of the patient.
