Freshwater stingrays cause many serious human injuries, but identification of the offending species is uncommon. The present case involved a
large freshwater stingray, Potamotrygon motoro (Chondrichthyes: Potamotrygonidae), in the Araguaia River in Tocantins, Brazil. Appropriate
first aid was administered within ~15 min, except that an ice pack was applied. Analgesics provided no pain relief, although hot compresses
did. Ciprofloxacin therapy commenced after ~18 h and continued seven days. Then antibiotic was suspended; however, after two more days and
additional tests, cephalosporin therapy was initiated, and proved successful. Pain worsened despite increasingly powerful analgesics, until
debridement of the wound was performed after one month. The wound finally closed ~70 days after the accident, but the patient continued to
have problems wearing shoes even eight months later. Chemistry and pharmacology of Potamotrygon venom and mucus, and clinical management of
freshwater stingray envenomations are reviewed in light of the present case. Bacterial infections of stingray puncture wounds may account
for more long-term morbidity than stingray venom. Simultaneous prophylactic use of multiple antibiotics is recommended for all but the most
superficial stingray wounds. Distinguishing relative contributions of venom, mucus, and bacteria will require careful genomic and
transcriptomic investigations of stingray tissues and contaminating bacteria. Freshwater stingrays are elasmobranchs belonging to the
monophyletic Family Potamotrygonidae, Garman, 1877. Descendants of Pacific and Caribbean marine stingrays , potamotrygonids exhibit
considerable diversity in South America . They are currently classified into four genera: Paratrygon (Duméril, 1865), Potamotrygon (Garman,
1877), Plesiotrygon (Rosa, Castello and Thorson, 1987), and Heliotrygon . The Genus Potamotrygon is the most diverse, with more than 25
species identified to date . Potamotrygonid stingrays occur in most river basins that drain into the Atlantic Ocean, including the Amazon-
Orinoco, the Paraguay-Paraná, the Uruguay, and the Parnaíba River basin in northeastern Brazil . Diurnally, stingrays partially bury
themselves in sand or mud in shallow portions of rivers and lakes, where they feed mainly on small invertebrates and fish . Stingrays
possess one to three barbed stingers in the mid-distal region of the tail. These are covered with secretory cells that produce various
proteins having nociceptive, inflammatory, and necrotic actions . In addition, stingrays, like other fish, are covered with mucus. Even
though the mucus contains elements of the non-specific immune system, it also harbors bacteria of many types. The stingers, with their
associated secretory cells and mucus, constitute the only physical defensive weapon of these fishes . They have no offensive or prey-capture
function. South American freshwater stingrays cause a large number of serious human injuries. These are common on the feet, ankles, and
distal parts of the leg when people accidentally step on them, but because captured rays tend to thrash violently, fishermen also commonly
suffer injuries to the hands and arms . In central Brazil, the Tocantins and Araguaia River basins (subsystems of the Amazon-Orinoco basin)
are heavily used for recreational activities, especially from June to August. Being the dry season, low water levels leave exposed beaches
that attract tourists, and during this season stingray accidents are most common. In stingray envenomations, the mechanical injury itself is
excruciatingly painful and usually causes considerable damage, owing to the retrorse serrations of the stingers, which sometimes cause
trauma to major nerves and blood vessels . The physical damage is exacerbated by the action of substances present in the mucus and the
secretory epithelium covering the stingers. Secondary bacterial infections involving gram-negative species are common . Serious morbidity
and mortality are especially common in rural areas where medical attention is not readily available and patients do not seek treatment until
symptoms become severe. Prompt and intensive cleansing of the wound, tetanus prophylaxis, and appropriate antibiotics are crucially
important . Domingos et al. reported that antibiotic resistance of bacteria associated with stingray mucus is common, especially to
ampicillin, amoxycillin/clavulanic acid, and cephalotin; 23% of their bacterial isolates were resistant to all but one of the sixteen
antibiotics they tested. In addition to extreme nociception, stingray envenomations often involve edema, inflammation, and myotoxicity,
while hemorrhagic and hemolytic activities are absent . Severe envenomations involving delayed medical treatment or clinical mismanagement
can result in amputation or death . Potamotrygon motoro (Müller and Henle, 1841 ), the ocellate river stingray, is one of the most common
stingray species in the Tocantins-Araguaia river basin, and has one of the broadest geographic distributions of any species in the genus.
Despite the number of epidemiological studies of stingray envenomations, positive identification of the stingray species involved is quite
rare . In this paper, we report a severe human accident involving an ocellate river stingray in central Brazil and we discuss implications
for public health strategies related to freshwater stingray envenomations. What makes this case unusual is that the victim, one of the co-
authors of this report, was raised in the region where the accident occurred. He is an ardent fisherman familiar with fish of the local
rivers. When shown photographs of various rays, marine and freshwater, Brazilian and foreign, he unhesitatingly identified the offending
species. Moreover, he is also a physician. Accordingly, the resulting case report is the most detailed of which we are aware. On 20 July
2014, at approximately 12:30 pm, a 41-year-old Caucasian male was stung by a freshwater stingray along a beach of the Araguaia River, known
as Praia do Pontão (municipality of Santa Fé do Araguaia) in the northwestern region of the state of Tocantins, Brazil (Figure 1). While
bathing in shallow water at the beach, the subject felt something under the sand, but before he could react, he was stung on the medial face
of the left foot. The victim, despite the stress of the situation, was able to spot and carefully observe the stingray. It was an adult
ocellate river stingray (Potamotrygon motoro) approximately 60 cm in width (across the body disk) (Figure 2). Map showing the location of
the stingray accident in northwestern Tocantins state with landmarks mentioned in the text. Drawing: Sérgio Henrique de Moura Nogueira
(2015). An adult ocellate river stingray (Potamotrygon motoro) from the Araguaia-Tocantins basin. Photo: Itamar Júnior Tonial (2013). The
accident resulted in a deep puncture wound with copious bleeding and excruciating pain that quickly spread to the distal part of the thigh.
Reaching a local first aid station 10 min after the accident, the wound was cleaned with Povidone iodine and the patient received 3 mL of 2%
Xylocaine subcutaneously, and 1.5 g Paracetamol (acetaminophen), a non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory (Diclofenac Potassium, 75 mg), and an
ampyrone sulfonate analgesic, antispasmodic, and antipyretic Dipyrone (1 g) orally. At that time, an ice compress was applied and the victim
was transported by boat to the nearest village (40 min) and then by car (2 h) to the town of Santa Fé do Araguaia (Figure 1). Admitted to a
local hospital, the victim received an ampoule of analgesic (Tramadol Hydrochloride, 100 mg) and a synthetic opioid analgesic (Meperidine,
100 mg) i.v.; however, these did not reduce the pain. By this time, edema and erythema were strongly evident. The site of the wound was
extremely sensitive to touch, and the pain had radiated to the upper left thigh. Inguinal lymph nodes on the left side were visible enlarged
with the first signs of peripheral vasculitis (Figure 3A). Only at this point was the patient informed that the ice compress was
inappropriate. It was replaced with hot compresses, which caused the local pain to subside within a 3 h period. On 21 July, the patient was
transported by car to Palmas, the capital city of Tocantins, an 11 h trip (Figure 1). During this journey, clinical symptoms worsened
considerably, with increased edema and pain (Figure 3B). In a hospital environment, the wound was again cleaned with Povidone and the
patient received another 3-mL dose of 2% Xylocaine subcutaneously. Antibiotic therapy was initiated approximately 18 h after the injury and
analgesic and anti-inflammatory medications were changed. The patient received the antibiotic (Ciprofloxacin, 500 mg) plus a non-steroidal,
anti-inflammatory (Ketoprofen, 50 mg), and Tramadol Hydrochloride (50 mg), each three times a day. He remained at Palmas 48 h before being
transferred to São Paulo, where he resides. During this period the edema began to subside, while the intense local and radiating pain
persisted (Figure 3C). On 24 July, the patient was transferred to São Paulo by air. Once again in a hospital environment, the patient was
attended to by a vascular surgeon, who requested a blood count and imaging exams (x-ray, tomography and echo-doppler). The results revealed
a peripheral vascular lesion and evident leukocytosis (12,500 leukocytes/mL; 92% neutrophils; elevated Protein C). Medication started on 21
July was continued. However, the pain was not alleviated. The patient started to walk using crutches. On 27 July, with no fever or signs of
local infection, antibiotics were suspended, (Figure 3D). However, on 29 July, after repeating all laboratory tests, antibiotic therapy was
reinitiated, this time with a beta-lactam antibiotic (Cephalosporin, 2 g, i.v.) once a day, for seven days (until 4 August) with the
persistence of pain and worsening of the local lesion (Figure 3E). The period from 5–20 August comprised the most serious phase of the local
lesion with vasculitis and tissue necrosis. On 5 August, the patient received Tramadol Hydrochloride (3 × 50 mg/day), 200 mg of a medication
for neuropathic pain (Carbamazepine, 3 × 200 mg/day), and thiamine (1 × 300 mg/ day) on suspicion of peripheral neuropathy. With still
worsening pain, this protocol was changed to include Ketoprofen (1 × 150 mg/ day), Oxycodone (2 × 10 mg/day), and Clexane (low MW heparin)
(1 injection s.c. × 60 µg) every 24 h. The latter was given in consequence of the patient’s vasculitis. This regimen was maintained until 17
August (Figure 3F). The patient was also given Zolpidem (10 mg/day) for two months to treat insomnia. Interestingly, during this period the
patient began to experience significant symptoms of anxiety. He was given escytalopram (10 mg/day) and cognitive behavioral therapy was
initiated. Therapy continued until the end of November, but escytalopram was continued until March, 2015. Evolution of the accident caused
by an ocellate river stingray (Potamotrygon motoro) from the first day to complete healing of the wound: A. Evident edema with vasculitis
and hyperemia caused by the trauma of sting penetration with laceration of tissues, and by the action of proteolytic enzymes that damage
cells and liberate fluid and cellular debris into the interstices; B. Worsening of edema 24 h after the accident; C. Evident ecchymosis and
prevailing edema; D. Worsening of ecchymosis; E. Ecchymosis with evident initial local necrosis; F. Dry necrosis of the affected area with
evident dead tissue; G. Replacement of necrotic tissues with granulation tissue, although with areas of dead tissue; H. Total replacement of
necrotic area with granulation tissue and evident recovery; I. Accelerated granulation of the affected area with only the focal trauma
remaining open; J. to L. Total recovery of tissues and regeneration of the traumatized area. On 19 August, debridement of the wound was
performed, which subsequently decreased the pressure and pain (by 21 August). Pain medications were changed accordingly. At this point the
patient received only Ibuprofen (600 mg) and Paracetamol (750 mg) as needed (Figure 3G,H). On 21 August, the wound started to granulate
along the margin. Bandages with SAF-Gel and Kollagenase topical cream (0.6 U/g) were applied every other day. After five days, the
peripheral vasculitis persisted without any advance in granulation. Significant local pain and functional incapacitation of the left leg
required the continued use of crutches. The left foot became increasingly painful when touched (Figure 3I). Beginning on 9 September,
bandages with topical Phenytoin cream (4%) were changed once a day. The healing process (cicatrization) accelerated significantly and the
wound closed completely between 20 and 30 September, when the patient started to move without the aid of crutches (Figure 3J,K). The region
around the wound was still sensitive to touch as of 1 March 2015, and the patient continued to have problems wearing closed shoes (Figure
3L). There have been relatively few biochemical characterizations of freshwater stingray venoms. Regarding potamotrygonid venoms, Rodrigues
(p. 683) declared that, “The chemical nature of the active principle is unknown, and our knowledge gathered from previous research is of
dubious significance”. More than 40 years later, it is probably still safe to say that we know more about what these venoms are not, than
what they are. Marine stingray venoms have been somewhat better characterized than those of their freshwater cousins , but until very
recently that was not saying much . Understandably, stingray venoms share more attributes with fish venoms generally than with those of
other vertebrates or invertebrates. However, they are difficult to characterize because they are not produced in a gland with a central
lumen, but rather as a layer of secretory cells on external spines. Additionally, stingray venoms are mucus-rich, chemically unstable, and
are adversely affected by heat and pH. They lose activity with increasing storage time, freezing and thawing, and even lyophilization . How
similar potamotrygonid venoms are to those of marine rays is also unclear. The most thorough characterization of any ray venom to date is a
transcriptomic and proteomic study of Neotrygon kuhlii venom by Baumann et al. . Venom proteins with identified functions that are probably
pertinent to envenomation include galectin, two cystatins, and peroxiredoxin-6. They did not find orpotrin or porflan (Potamotrygon
orbignyi) , although they did manage to isolate a hyaluronidase gene; however, it was not present in the venom proteome, so they concluded
that it was not actually a venom protein. They did not indicate whether it was of vertebrate or bacterial origin. Accidents caused by
freshwater stingrays also tend to be more serious than those caused by marine rays . Taken together, these reports suggest that
characterizations of marine ray venoms may offer limited insights into the chemistry and pharmacology of freshwater ray venoms. Rodrigues
isolated a compound from Potamotrygon motoro stings that contracted guinea pig ileum and produced a lethal vasodilation in rats. He
concluded that the active constituent is non-proteinaceous, non-lipidic, water-insoluble, thermostable, and parasympathomimetic.
Centrifuging the solution caused a significant reduction in activity of the supernatant, suggesting that the active principle was suspended,
rather than dissolved. Specialized cells of the Potamotrygon stinger epithelium stain well with bromophenol blue, indicating a high-protein
content , but it is not clear that this material comprises active constituents of the venom. Given that the “venom” collected actually
consists of cellular contents, much of the protein demonstrated in protein assays may be irrelevant to biological activity assays performed.
While Halstead opined that venom-producing cells would be of a holocrine type, Pedroso et al. found no evidence that these cells are capable
of releasing material to the environment. They postulated instead that when the stinger enters the victim’s tissues, mechanical abrasion
probably shears and ruptures the venom-producing cells into the victim’s tissues. Magalhães detected 5’-nucleotidase, phospholipase, acid
phosphatase, hyaluronidase, caseinolytic, gelatinolytic and elastinolytic activities in P. motoro venom from animals collected in the
Crixás-Açú River (Goiás, Brasil) . Haddad et al. similarly reported hyaluronidase, caseinolytic, gelatinolytic and elastinolytic activities
in P. falkneri venom. The latter authors noted that P. falkneri venom has a major component with a mass of ~12 kDa. SDS PAGE showed seven
components between 80–200 kDa. Components with masses of 80+ and 100 kDa displayed gelatinolytic and caseinolytic activities, respectively.
Hyaluronidase activity was also present and was attributed to a protein of ~84 kDa . Magalhães et al. characterized the hyaluronidase
isolated from the venom of P. motoro, with an estimated molecular weight of 79 kDa. Interestingly, they reported that 97% of the
hyaluronidase activity was lost during gel filtration. If bacteria account for much of the hyaluronidase activity, they probably would have
been filtered out by the gel. The enzyme was thermolabile, losing 70% of its activity when incubated for 30 min at its thermal optimum of 40
°C . Potamotrygon venoms are well known to be nociceptive , but the compounds responsible are unknown. Heating of P. orbignyi and P. scobina
venoms to 56 °C reduced nociceptive activity by only 32%–34% and edematogenic activity by 16%–25% of their respective levels at 37 °C .
Conceição et al. reported the presence of a vasoconstrictive nonapeptide (orpotrin) from the venom of Potamotrygon orbignyi. It transiently
reduced the diameter of mouse cremaster muscle arterioles by about 65%, with peak activity being seen approximately 20 min after injection.
Later, Conceição et al. sequenced and characterized an 18-residue pro-inflammatory peptide from venom of P. orbignyi. Named Porflan, it
showed no similarity to any known peptide. Porflan and synthetic analogs did not affect arteriolar diameter or vascular permeability, but
promoted leucocyte recruitment and adhesion in mouse microcirculation. More recently, Conceição et al. also reported the presence of an
antimicrobial protein (~16 kDa) with strong homology to the β-chain of hemoglobin. It had broad-spectrum activity against gram-negative and
gram-positive bacteria and yeast, and it also exhibited minor pro-inflammatory activity. Kirchhoff et al. found that adult P. leopoldi
venoms have ~5-fold lower protein concentrations than juvenile venoms and that the adult venoms exhibited 10-fold lower cytotoxicity. Since
stingray venoms are employed solely for self-defense, they attributed this to reduced predation pressure on adults. Mucus from external
surfaces of bony fishes contains a number of immune components such as lysozyme, immunoglobulin, complement, carbonic anhydrase, lectins,
crinotoxins, calmodulin, C-reactive protein, proteolytic enzymes, and antimicrobial peptides (Alexander & Ingram, 1992). These probably
function primarily in immune defense against bacteria and fungi. Mucus that covers the external surfaces of stingrays may be similar in
composition and function. If so, any functions that the mucus serves in envenomation may be fortuitous. There have been few attempts to
characterize the pharmacology of stingray mucus. The most thorough study to date is that of Monteiro-dos-Santos et al. , who reported that
both venom and mucus from the sting, and mucus from the skin of P. henlei, augmented vascular permeability and promoted nociception in mice,
in essentially the same way as venoms and mucus of P. orbignyi and P. scobina. In both assays, the venom-mucus mixture from the sting was
slightly more potent than mucus alone from the body of the ray. However, stingray mucus is well populated with bacteria and probably with
some fungi as well . Monteiro-dos-Santos et al. do not appear to have filtered their solutions so as to remove bacteria, but we are unaware
of any studies that have. This raises some interesting and clinically important questions, since many activities ascribed to stingray venom
are extracellular enzymatic activities associated with bacterial species present in South American rivers and/or in stingray mucus . What
biochemical components are produced by stingrays specifically to serve as toxins?To what extent do cytoplasmic components of stingray venom-
producing cells contribute, if at all, to early symptoms of stingray envenomation?Does stingray mucus itself possess pharmacological
activity relevant to envenomation?Why is the pain caused by freshwater stingray envenomations so intractable and persistent?What non-mucoid
components of mucus, if any, are produced by bacteria in the mucus, rather than by the stingrays themselves?To what degree do bacteria in
the mucus and in the water contribute to the sequelae of stingray envenomation? What biochemical components are produced by stingrays
specifically to serve as toxins? To what extent do cytoplasmic components of stingray venom-producing cells contribute, if at all, to early
symptoms of stingray envenomation? Does stingray mucus itself possess pharmacological activity relevant to envenomation? Why is the pain
caused by freshwater stingray envenomations so intractable and persistent? What non-mucoid components of mucus, if any, are produced by
bacteria in the mucus, rather than by the stingrays themselves? To what degree do bacteria in the mucus and in the water contribute to the
sequelae of stingray envenomation? It will not be possible to answer these questions conclusively without careful transcriptomic and genomic
studies of both stingray venom-producing cells and bacteria present in stingray mucus. Clinically, the last question may be the most
important, as the current case report suggests. Proper treatment for stingray envenomations remains poorly understood and somewhat
controversial within the Brazilian medical community. There are even anecdotal reports of anti-Bothrops antivenin being administered in some
cases due to the pain and inflammation presented by stingray victims. This is unquestionably ineffective. The recommended therapeutic
approach employs analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs, immersion of the injured body part in hot water for pain relief, and antibiotics to
prevent bacterial septicemia, gangrene, and tetanus . In the present case, different treatment regimens were employed at different stages of
the case, some more effective than others. Ice compresses were applied for approximately the first 3 h. This treatment has been employed in
some other cases , but as early as 1956, Russell and Lewis concluded that heating the wound helped to control pain. Russell et al. reported
that packing the wound in ice actually intensified it. They concluded that venom components were thermolabile and that heating the injured
appendage was beneficial therapeutically, a finding supported by others, with the caveat that it be done as soon as possible . In this case
also, upon arrival at the hospital in Santa Fé do Araguaia, hot compresses caused the pain to gradually subside. Magalhães et al. reported
partial inactivation of nociceptive and edematogenic activity of two Potamotrygon venoms at 56 °C, and Haddad Jr. et al. recommended
immersion in 60 °C water! This is too hot, a concern also expressed by Meyer , who recommended that the bath be only as hot as the patient
can stand. However, the reduction in activity of venom components at physiologically tolerable temperatures would be significantly less than
that reported by Magalhães et al. . Meyer acknowledged the prompt relief from pain afforded by immersion in hot water but suggested that
inhibition of venom components may be less significant than the direct anti-nociceptive effects of heat. This could be true; however, since
Magalhães et al. heated the venom itself, rather than affected tissue, there is some direct effect as well. The prompt onset and the extreme
persistence of intractable pain induced by stingray venoms are difficult to explain. While these venoms are well known to be nociceptive,
the nociceptive compounds have not been identified, nor have possible pharmacological mechanisms been proposed. While peptidyl toxins or
chemical mediators of inflammation, such as histamine, could induce pain almost immediately, they would probably be cleared in due course
and the pain they induced would likely not persist for extended periods. Chemistry and pharmacology of the stingray mucus itself are
unknown, but again, it seems likely that the mucus would soon be degraded by various hydrolases. While purely hypothetical at this point,
perhaps the most reasonable explanation would be some form of physically or chemically induced nerve damage. Within two hours of the
envenomation, the patient manifested edema, erythema, and the first signs of vasculitis. It would not be surprising if P. motoro venom
contains a homolog to the pro-inflammatory peptide reported from P. orbignyi venom by Conceição et al. , but the mechanical damage and the
introduced stingray mucus, toxins, cellular debris, and bacteria would also have provoked the release of chemical mediators of inflammation.
It is therefore difficult to assess how much of a contribution such a venom peptide might make to the overall picture. We are unaware of any
other reports of insomnia or anxiety associated with stingray envenomation. If purely psychological in origin, such symptoms would logically
be expected immediately after the event. However, in this case, onset was almost a full month after envenomation. This suggests a possible
biochemical basis for such effects, but there are no clues in the envenomation literature regarding possible causes. Significantly, in the
present case, no antibiotics were administered for approximately 18 h after the injury, despite the well-documented occurrence of pathogenic
bacteria and fungi in stingray venom and mucus, and in aquatic environments generally . Given that secondary bacterial infections involving
gram-negative species are common, this may have been a serious oversight. Such infections have been attributed to Aeromonas hydrophila,
Aeromonas sobria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, P. putida, Citrobacter freundii, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae, Photobacterium damsela,
and Vibrio alginolyticus . Clostridium perfringens, C. tetani, Pasteurella sp., Group A Streptococcus and Staphylococcus sp. have also been
reported . These infections often involve tissue necrosis, gangrene, tetanus, and septic shock, with extreme cases leading to death. Most of
the gram-negative species are found in both river water and mucus of the barb epithelium; however, some bacteria have been detected only in
mucus (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter sp., Klebsiella pneumoniae, and some gram-positives) . The first antibiotic employed was
ciprofloxacin. Aeromonas hydrophila, one of the primary species responsible for bacterial infections of freshwater stingray wounds, is
normally susceptible to ciprofloxacin; however, resistant strains have been documented in leeches and in wastewater . Resistance has also
been reported in other bacteria common to stingray mucus, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Staphylococcus aureus , Klebsiella pneumoniae
and Escherichia coli , Acinetobacter sp. , and Clostridium perfringens . Ciprofloxacin and other medications commenced in Palmas were
continued in São Paulo for a total of seven days. At that time, the patient manifested no fever and showed no signs of infection, so
ciprofloxacin was discontinued. However, two days later, despite the lack of fever, additional lab tests showed elevated C-reactive protein
(an indicator of inflammation that activates the complement system) and white blood cell counts. Accordingly, antibiotic therapy was resumed
for another seven days, this time with cephalosporin. The failure of ciprofloxacin therapy is not surprising, given the variety of bacterial
species likely to be injected in a typical envenomation, and given the finding of Domingos et al. that 23% of all bacterial isolates from
stingray mucus and river water were resistant to all but one of 16 antibiotics tested. As an added caution, ciprofloxacin and other
fluoroquinolones can cause peripheral neuropathy that may be irreversible, such as weakness, burning pain, tingling, or numbness . In rare
cases, such symptoms, should they occur, might be overlooked or misattributed to the envenomation itself. While cephalosporin therapy
ultimately proved successful, resistance to this antibiotic is also well known in various bacterial species pertinent to Potamotrygon
envenomations: Citrobacter freundii , Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Aeromonas hydrophila, Enterobacter, Acinetobacter sp., Klebsiella pneumoniae .
Given the practice of using the same antibiotic classes for both human and veterinary applications and indiscriminate uses of antibiotics,
it is virtually certain that antibiotic resistance will become increasingly problematic . When the patient in the present case arrived in
São Paulo, skin was starting to slough near the margins of the wound, a condition that has also been reported in Potamotrygon falkneri
envenomations . Schechter reported that the basement membrane of the dermal-epidermal junction is highly susceptible to degradation by
neutral proteases released by inflammatory cells. Elastase and Type IV collagenase were the most efficient at destroying the basement
membrane, but trypsin- and chymotrypsin-like proteases were also capable of doing this. Gelatinases (metalloproteases) as well as
collagenase have been implicated in epidermal detachment . Neither of these activities has been directly linked to stingray venom; however,
if not produced by mast cells or other inflammatory cells in the wound, such activity certainly could have been bacterial in origin.
Collagenase activity has been reported in Streptococcus pyogenes and S. mutans , various Clostridium species , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and
Vibrio alginolyticus , being especially prominent in the latter two species. Gelatinase activity has also been reported in bacterial species
present in stingray envenomations: Aeromonas hydrophila, Aeromonas sobria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and Vibrio alginolyticus , and also in
Streptococcus pyogenes . Given that stingray envenomations usually involve puncture wounds in aquatic environments, except in cases
involving only superficial lacerations, we think it advisable to use prophylactic antibiotic treatment. Moreover, in view of the diversity
of bacteria likely to be involved in a single accident and the frequency of antibiotic resistance among bacterial species present in
stingray mucus and in tropical aquatic habitats, it would be wise to administer combinations of broad-spectrum antibiotics, including those
effective against species of Clostridium. Future studies undertaken to better characterize stingray venoms need to control for bacterial
contamination of venom and mucus samples. In particular, pharmacological activity of the mucus itself needs to be carefully investigated.
Even proteins isolated from mucus and venom cannot simply be assumed to originate with the stingrays themselves. Because they may be
secreted bacterial proteins, the biological origins of proteins in stingray mucus need to be identified. This will necessitate genomic and
transcriptomic studies of both stingray tissues and bacteria. NJSJr is supported by a grant from the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) - Process 309443/2013-0. K.R.C. made the most significant contribution by obligingly stepping on the
stingray, without which there would have been no study. He also recorded the case history and took the photographs of his foot during
treatment and recovery. N.J.S. and S.D.A. reviewed the literature, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. R.N.L.P. reviewed the case
history, assessed the development and healing of the wound, and wrote the descriptions for Figure 3. All authors edited the manuscript. The
authors declare no conflict of interest.
