Intrahepatic heterotopic pancreas is rarely reported in the literature. Here, we report a case of a 39-year-old male with intrahepatic
heterotopic pancreas associated with primary cholesterol hepatolithiasis. Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed multiple cholesterol
stones in intrahepatic bile ducts of the left lobe concomitant with intrahepatic cholangiectases. These observations were confirmed by
magnetic resonance cholangiopaneretography (MRCP). The patient underwent transabdominal left hepatic lobectomy. Postoperative histological
examination of the resected specimen showed pancreatic tissues distributed along the wall of the bile duct and composed of acinar cells and
duct elements without islets of Langerhans, therefore strongly suggesting that the heterotopic pancreas occurred in response to chronic
injury due to the primary cholesterol hepatolithiasis and was derived from the biliary epithelial cells. The virtual slide(s) for this
article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1461819267158980. Pancreatic heterotopia, which is defined as
pancreatic tissues at aberrant sites and having no anatomical, neural or vascular connections with the normal pancreas , was first described
in 1727 by Jean Schultz . It is found in approximately 0.2 % surgical operations involving the upper digestive tract and in 0.55 % to 13.7 %
of necropsies . The ectopic tissues can be located anywhere in the digestive tract and the most likely sites are the stomach (26 %–38 %),
duodenum (28 %–36 %), jejunum (16 %), Meckel diverticulum, and ileum , while it is relatively rare in the colon, esophagus, gallbladder,
bile ducts, liver, spleen, umbilicus, mesentery, mesocolon, and omentum . Heterotopic pancreas is generally asymptomatic but occasionally
develops into a clinical incident associated with potential complications such as inflammation, ulceration, bleeding, and obstruction [1,
6]. The location, size and pathological changes are crucial to the prediction of clinical outcomes. Here, we present a case of intrahepatic
heterotopic pancreas associated with primary cholesterol hepatolithiasis in an adult male. A 39-year-old male who was diagnosed with primary
cholesterol hepatolithiasis attended our out-patient department for a routine medical check-up. Further inquiry revealed a history of
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) due to left ureteral calculus one year ago; no other aberrations were noted and physical
examinations were normal. Liver function tests demonstrated a normal level of liver transaminases, including aspartate aminotransferase,
alanine aminotransferase and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase. No clear elevation of tumor markers including α-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA), CA125 and CA-19-9 was observed. Hepatitis virus markers were all negative. Ultrasound examination showed multiple cholesterol
stones in the intrahepatic bile ducts of the left lobe and hepatic steatosis. Further examinations were performed after admission of the
patient to hospital. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans revealed several round high-density shadows within the intrahepatic biliary
tract of the left lobe, which was noticeably dilated (Fig. 1a and b). A low-density mass with an estimated magnitude of 2.0 × 1.8 cm and a
vague margin was also observed in the CT scan. The mass was located in the right hepatic lobe and showed signal enhancement around the wall
in arterial phase, gradual enhancement toward the central area of the lesion in the portal venous and delayed phases (Fig. 1c and d). No
other abnormalities were noted. Magnetic resonance cholangiopaneretography (MRCP) demonstrated multiple T2 low signal intensity foci in the
left intrahepatic bile duct concomitant with cholangiectases. At the request of the patient and to rule out the possibility of cancer, a
transabdominal radical excision was performed based on the clinical diagnosis of hepatolithiasis and the left hepatic lobe was successfully
removed. Postoperative recovery was uneventful.Fig. 1Abdominal computed tomography scan before surgery. a–b: Abdominal computed tomography
scan (plain and arterial phase) revealed multiple cholesterol stones in intrahepatic bile ducts of the left hepatic lobe concomitant with
intrahepatic cholangiectases; c–d: A low-density mass (arrow) with an estimated magnitude of 2.0 × 1.8 cm and a vague margin was also
observed Abdominal computed tomography scan before surgery. a–b: Abdominal computed tomography scan (plain and arterial phase) revealed
multiple cholesterol stones in intrahepatic bile ducts of the left hepatic lobe concomitant with intrahepatic cholangiectases; c–d: A low-
density mass (arrow) with an estimated magnitude of 2.0 × 1.8 cm and a vague margin was also observed Gross examination showed a few
yellowish-white biliary calculi within the left hepatic lobe and distinct strictures of several biliary tracts. The dilated bile ducts had a
maximum circumference of 1.2 cm. Histological examination of the resected specimen showed pancreatic tissues distributed along the wall of
the bile duct and composed of acinar cells and duct elements without islets of Langerhans (Fig. 2a). The acinar cells contained eosinophilic
granules (Fig. 2b). The pathological diagnosis was intrahepatic cholangiectases with hepatolithiasis concomitant with pancreatic
heterotopia.Fig. 2Histological examination showed pancreatic tissues distributed along the wall of the bile duct. a: The pancreatic tissues
consisted of acinar cells and duct elements [hematoxylin and eosin (HE), ×4]; b: The acinar cells contained eosinophilic granules (HE, ×20)
Histological examination showed pancreatic tissues distributed along the wall of the bile duct. a: The pancreatic tissues consisted of
acinar cells and duct elements [hematoxylin and eosin (HE), ×4]; b: The acinar cells contained eosinophilic granules (HE, ×20) The
presentation of heterotopic pancreas is generally clinically silent and lacks specific preoperative diagnostic methods . The possible
symptoms are commonly nonspecific including abdominal pain (45.5 %), epigastric discomfort (12.0 %), nausea and vomiting (9.6 %), bleeding
(8.0 %), and others signs (24.5 %) . The diagnosis of the heterotopic pancreas is almost completely dependent on postoperative histological
examinations, which leads to uncertainty in the clinical treatment strategy. Despite controversy, radical excision is universally considered
to be the most valid treatment for the purpose of avoiding potential complications including inflammation, ulceration, bleeding, and
obstruction [1, 6]. While heterotopic pancreas can be found anywhere inside the alimentary canal, the stomach, duodenum and jejunum are the
most commonly reported sites , while other sites such as the Meckel diverticulum, ileum, are rare, and the colon, esophagus, gallbladder,
bile ducts, liver, spleen, umbilicus, mesentery, mesocolon, and omentum are almost completely unknown. Confirmed cases of intrahepatic
heterotopic pancreas are relatively rare and, to the best of our knowledge, only eleven incidents have been reported to date in association
with cirrhosis , adenocarcinoma arising from intrahepatic heterotopic pancreas, hepatic and extrahepatic choledochal cysts, necropsy,
Caroli’s disease, hepatic mass, insular carcinoma probably arising from intrahepatic heterotopic pancreas (1 case each), and two cases of
primary cholesterol hepatolithiasis . The pathogenesis of heterotopic pancreas remains to be fully clarified although three promising
hypotheses had been presented to date. The first hypothesis suggests that the heterotopic pancreas arises from the separation and migration
of heterotopic pancreatic tissue from the primitive pancreas during embryonic rotation . The second hypothesis suggests that pancreatic
metaplasia of endodermal tissues is the cause of the heterotopic pancreas . Finally, it has been suggested the heterotopia is caused by
abnormalities in the Notch signaling system [12, 13]. On the basis of the these three hypotheses and the currently available literature, we
speculated that, due to the histological and functional features of the heterotopic pancreatic tissues, the active pancreatic enzymes
secreted into the bile ducts cause recurrent inflammation, hyperplasia and dysplasia of the mucosa [14, 15]. The reconstruction of original
anatomical structure and focal strictures facilitate lithogenesis which may, ultimately lead to cholelithiasis or hepatolithiasis [14, 15].
However, in the case presented here, we noticed that the heterotopic pancreatic tissues were distributed along the wall of the biliary tract
and were composed of acinar cells and duct elements without islets of Langerhans. These features are distinctly different from those
presenting as solitary nodules or masses. Thus, this unique histological distribution was quite difficult to interpret solely as a
developmental disorder. We also noted chronic inflammation of the mucosa and mild-to-moderate epithelial dysplasia in same location in
biliary tract. Previous reports indicate that intrahepatic biliary epithelial cells are able to serve as progenitors in response to certain
stimuli . Combined with the fact that intrahepatic bile ducts and the pancreas shared a common embryologic derivation from the caudal
portion of the foregut, these findings indicate the possibility that the heterotopic tissues is derived from metaplasia of the biliary
epithelium. The primary hepatolithiasis constantly irritated the biliary epithelium, eliciting recurrent local inflammation. This chronic
mechanical and chemical injury induces the hyperplasia and dysplasia of the epithelium, eventually leading to transdifferentiation of the
epithelial cell and pancreatic metaplasia. The exocrine pancreatic metaplasia releases secretory products, which exacerbate the inflammation
and metaplasia, causing a “vicious circle” of pathological changes, finally resulting in the exacerbation of primary hepatolithiasis. We
propose that the intrahepatic heterotopic pancreas found in the case presented here occurred in response to chronic injury due to the
primary hepatolithiasis. Similar instances have been described both in clinical cases and experimental reports. Wolf et al. presented a case
of liver cirrhosis, in which the heterotopic pancreatic tissues had a close relationship with proliferation of bile dutucles, therefore,
strongly suggesting that the pancreatic tissues were formed by metaplasia of the biliary epithelium. Fang-Ying et al. described 16 cases of
liver explants containing pancreatic acini-like tissue, which were almost always accompanied by or intermixed with bile ductular conditions.
This suggested that the pancreatic acini-like tissue was the metaplastic product of bile ductular regeneration. The experimental conversion
of liver to pancreas has been widely reported . More specifically, Masaki et al. transfected intrahepatic biliary epithelial cells with
adenoviral-pancreas duodenum homeobox 1 (Ad-Pdx-1), NeuroD or Pdx-1/VP16 in vitro, showing a subpopulation of these cells successfully
acquired the ability to differentiate into β-cell. Although the heterotopic cells found in our study were not identical to β-cells,
considering the common embryologic derivation of these cells, we suggest that it is completely feasible for intrahepatic biliary epithelial
cells to be induced to differentiate into pancreatic cells. Intrahepatic heterotopic pancreas associated with primary cholesterol
hepatolithiasis is rarely seen in clinical practice, not only due to the limitation of specific markers and detection methods, but also
because of lack of information and vigilance. Based on the case reported here, except for the known hypotheses, our hypothesis may add to
the currently proposed hypotheses and provide a new perspective for understanding the genesis of heterotopic pancreas. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Computed tomography Magnetic resonance cholangiopaneretography Extracorporeal
shock wave lithotripsy α-fetoprotein Carcinoembryonic antigen Adenoviral-pancreas duodenum homeobox 1 Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Author Contributions Yu ZY and Sun ZQ contributed equally to this work; Yu ZY, Sun ZQ, Zhang
M, Wang Bei and Zheng SS performed the surgery and provided the patient care; Sun ZQ and Lu W wrote and revised the manuscript; Yu ZY, Lu W
and Sun ZQ organized the data and figures; all authors have read and approved the manuscript.
