Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the cervix is a rare and aggressive tumor with fatal outcome. In this paper we report two cases of primary
adenoid cystic carcinoma and a review of literature. A 80 years old woman, admitted to our hospital with postmenopausal bleeding and
hydrorrhea. Gynealogical examination showed a cervical stenotic with the presence of a tumor processus. Biopsy of cervical growth was done.
80-year-old woman presented with vaginal bleeding with pelvic pain. Physical examination revealed a friable mass in the cervix. Incisional
biopsy was performed. In the both cases the diagnosis of adenoid cystic carcinoma of the cercix was confirmed. Adenoid cystic carcinoma of
the cervix is clinically and radiologically similar to other tumors of the cervix but the diagnosis can only be made by histological
examination. Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) (also called adenocystic carcinoma, cylindroma or cylindromatous adenocarcinoma) is a malignant
epithelial neoplasm derived from the salivary glands and can occur in variety of other sites, such as minor and major glands, lacrymal
glands, mucous glands of the aero-digestive tract, skin, breast and lung [1, 2]. In the female reproductive tract, adenoid cystic carcinoma
occurs most commonly in the Bartholin gland and rarely in the cervix . It accounts less than 1% of all cervical carcinoma. A very wide
spectrum of pathologic entities has been presented as ACC of the cervix. Billroth in 1859 originally defined this lesion as ‘‘tumor composed
of small basal cells with slight eosinophilic cytoplasm, hyperchromatic nuclei in central amorphous eosinophilic mass of varying amounts’’.
This definition has been extended today to include tumors where spindle or basal cells predominate. Most of the patients are over 60 years
of age, and there is a high proportion of black women . It is characterized by slow grouth and high rate of local recurrence. Metastatic
spread is usually a long-term complication [4, 5]. Because of the rarety of the disease, no standard treatment has yet been proposed. We
report two cases of primary ACC of the cervix and we discuss the clinical, pathological and therapeutic features of disease. A80 years old
postmenopausal moroccan woman (para6, gravida6) admitted to our hospital with postmenopausal bleeding and hydrorrhea. Gynealogical
examination showed a cervical stenotic with the presence of a tumor processus whose size is diffuclt to assess. On bimanual recto-vaginal
examination we showed that the tumor had invaded both sides of the parametrium. Biopsy of cervical growth was done and sent for
histopathological examination. 80-year-old woman presented to Department of gynaecology with vaginal bleeding with pelvic pain. Physical
examination revealed a friable mass in the cervix. Bimanual pelvic examination showed that vagina, uterus and bilateral adnexal structures
are normal. Speculum examination showed an ulcerative and exophytic mass, 4cm in diameter on the anterior lip of the cervix. The lymph nodes
are free. Transabdominal pelvic ultrasound reported that the uterus was with homogenous myometrium, indistinct endometrial echo pattern and
bilateral adnexal areas were normal. Incisional biopsy was performed. Microscopic examination showed fragmented biopsy with tumor cells
disposed in cribriform nests and cords. The tumor cells were small, uniform, composed of dense basophilic nuclei with inconspious nucleoli.
Mitotic figures were rarely found (Figure 1). Immunohistochemical study was performed. Tumor cells express receptors ant-CD117, hormone
receptors and focally anti-CK5/6, anti-S-100 protein and anti-CD56. A diagnosis of adenoid cystic carcinoma was made (Figure 2).
Proliferation composed of small basaloid cells with trabecular structures. Cylindromatous structures are present CD117 immunohistochemestry
highlighting tumor cells in the adenoid cystic carcinoma Adenoid cystic carcinoma pattern is best knowen as neoplasm of the major and minor
salivary glands. The first case of adenoid cystic carcinoma of the cervix was reported as cylindroma in 1949 by Paalman and Counseller [2,
6]. There are no studies that have systematically investigated the incidence of ACC. However, it accounts less than 1% of all cervical
carcinoma. The most accepted view regarding its origin in the cervix is from ‘‘reserve cells’’ of endocervix . The origin of this disease is
still unknown. Although, Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is belived to be a necessary cause of cervical cancer, its role in the
pathogenesis of ACC is not well defined [4, 7]. These tumors usually occurs in postmenopausal women. Though, it has been reported from 24 to
99 years of age, majority of the cases have been reported during 7th to 9th decades of life [2, 8-11]. But, some recent data reported some
cases in young woman [4, 12, 13]. Our patient was postmenopausal and multiparous woman. Although, some authors suggested the association
between ACC, highparity and black race [4, 14, 15]. Clinical and radiological characteristics of primary ACC of the cervix were similar to
those of a squamous cell cancer. The main symptom of disease was the vaginal bleeding [4, 12]. In addition, vaginal discharge and uterine
enlargement can be seen. Clinically, it presents as a nonfriable mass on speculum examination, in contrast to the friable growth usually
seen in squamous cell carcinoma of cervix. The details of the gross examination of the surgical specimens were not clearly specified.
Seemingly, the gross features of these lesions did not differ from those usually seen in ordinary squamous-cell carcinoma of the cervix.
Their size varied from small tumors involing portions of the cervix and invading the parametria. The histologic types of the primary
carcinoma of the cervix cannot be classified simply as either a squamous or a gland cell lesion (adenocarcinoma). Despite the fact that
there were co-existing components of squamous cell metaplasia or carcinoma of the cerix has been found, by means of election microscopic
study, to prossess structures of glandular epithelium [16, 17]. This finding suggests that adenoid cystic carcinoma shares the origin from
endocervical glands with ordinary cervical adenocarcinoma. The characteristics pathologic features of ACC have been amply documented in
several reports. The histologic appearance is varied and includes cribriform, corde-like, glandular and basaloïd patterns, as well as the
classical cylindromatous appearance. Cribriform is the most characteristic pattern in ACC and is composed of polygonal to spindled cells
forming numerous duct-like structures that contain extracellular matrices filled with homogenous eosinophilic periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
positive material or granular basophilic material [18, 19]. The pseudocystic spaces stained positively with antibodies to type IV collagen,
laminin, heparan sulfate proteoglycan and entractin. In the tubular type, small ductal structures formed by one or two layers of cuboïdal or
polygonal tumor cells were intermingled with solid strands of tumor cells. The lamina of these tubules contained an eosinophilic amorphous
material. The solid type is characterized by solid sheets with prominent mitotic activity and frequently with central necrosis. Small
clusters of slightly larger polygonal cells are occasionally present. This pattern is morphologically least differentiated and is not
diagnostic by itself. Perzin et al. [20, 21]described a grading system for ACC based on distinctive histologic patterns: tubular, cribriform
and solid. They believed that the three patterns reflect a progression of cellular proliferation and aggressiveness of biologic behavior.
The tumor is a assigned to three histologic grades: gradeI,a well-differentiated tumor composed of tubular and cribriform patterns without
solid components; grade II: a tumor with a pure cribriform pattern or mixedwith less than 30% of solid aeras and grade III, a tumor with
marked predominance of the solid pattern. This tumor has a remarkable tendency for invasion perineural spaces, to the degree that the
diagnosis of ACC should be questionned if an adequate sample taken from the periphery of the tumor does not exhibit the feature. This is
thought to be caused or promoted by the production of brain- derived neurotopic factor . ACC can also occur in association with other tumor
types as an example of squamous or adenocarcinoma tumor components. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells located in recognizable duct
structures express a phenotype similar to that of the the intercalated duct (positive for keratin, S-100 protein and CD117 (C-kit)) and
those around pseudocysts have a phenotype suggestive of myoepithelial cell differentiation (positive for S-100 protein and actin and
variable for keratin). The patter of c-kit expression in ACC differs with the histologic subtype. Tubular and cribriform variants primarily
show C-kit expression in the luminal cell layers. This suggests that myoepithelial cells do not express C-kit as the abluminal cells do not
stain [23, 24]. Paradoxically, solid variants show expression in all cells, most of which are considered modified myoepithelial cells [23,
24]. This suggests the role of C-kit overexpression in the aggressive clinical behavior. There is also strong reactivity for basement
membrane components, particularly along the inner luminal surface of the pseudocysts . These components include type IV collagen, laminin,
their intergin ligands, heparain sulfate proteoglycan (perlecan) and entactin [19, 26, 27]. The basement membrane material also stains for
alph-1-antitrypsin . Adenoid cystic carcinomas have also been found to express hormone receptors and about a half of them stain for CD34.
The differential diagnosis includes small cell carcinoma, adenoid basal carcinoma and no-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. Furthemore,
as already stated, ACC is usually strongly immunoreactive for CD117. Important points to remember are that ACC is usually invasive and often
associated with perineurial invasion and that mesenchyme-like areas and foci of squamous metaplasia are consistently absent. ACC of the
cervix seems to be more aggressive than squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix with higher tendency to local and metastatic recurrence even
if diagnosed in their earliest stages [4, 5]. Five years and ten years survival were 37% and 40% respectively [4, 31]. In some series, the
recurrence rate was 59% for the tubular tumors, 89% for the classic cribriform lesions and 100% for the solid variety. In another series in
which a somewhat similar grading system was used, the cumulative survival rates at 5 years were 39%, 26% and 5%, respectively . The solid or
anaplasic type of ACC is associated with a higher incidences in which a conventional ACC undergoes dedifferentiation or high-grade
transformation , an event that is accompanied by TP53 gene mutation . The solid subtype carries a worse prognosis in terms of the
development of distant metastases and overall survival. For the solid subtype, control of local disease is not as important a variable for
ultimate survival, due to the rapidity of death from distant metastases. The cribriform subtype demonstrated greater local aggressiveness
and a poorer salvage rate as compared with the tubular subtype . Other factor that influences the prognosis of ACC is the anatomic site. The
lower survival rate is probably explained by the fact that ACC arising in some difficult region impossible to excise completely [35, 36].
The presence of tumor at the surgical magin appears to be an important factor in predicting prognosis and the size of the tumor appears also
to be one of the most important factor in prognosis. Cure is obtained with much frequency in patients with smaller primary lesions . Factors
other than histologic grade and location that appear to inflence survival are the invasion of adjacent anatomic structures, deep stromal
invasion and the presence of tumor cells within a lymphatic space or capillary . Abnormalities of E-cadhrin expression have been detected,
and the claim has been made that reduced expression of this adhesion molecule correlates with an unfavorable prognosis . Because of the
rarity of the disease and the absence of prospective studies, no standard treatment has yet been proposed. Most patients were treated as
squamous cell carcinoma. Surgery and radiation therapy has been used in the treatment of ACC of the cervix. The best treatment is surgery,
principally when the surgical lines of resection could be histologically determined. Radiotherapy proved to be a useful method of treament
for surgically treated patients whose surgical borders were indaquate, those who experienced recurrent disease and those considered
inoperable . Chemotherapy has very little role in the management of these tumors but has been used for advanced/recurrent/metastatic disease
without much success [2, 9, 13]. Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the cervix is a rare and aggressive tumor with fatal outcome. We must think of
this tumor in elderly woman and the presence of perineurial invasion. It has a clinical course influenced principally by the clinical
staging and the histologic pattern of growth presented by the tumor. The prognosis is also modified by the size and the presence or absence
the tumor at the margins. Surgery is the best treatment of this disease and radiotherapy is an important palliative procedure that prolongs
the life of the patients who are not cured by surgery. The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest. All authors have read and
agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have equally contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
