It was supposed that troponins in cardiac myxoma patients might be in a same fashion as in the conditions without myocardial injury. In
order to verify this hypothesis, troponins in cardiac myxoma patients were discussed by presenting a comprehensive retrieval of the
literature with incorporating the information of a recent patient. Postoperative detections of troponin I, creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (CK-
MB) and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide revealed elevated troponin I and CK-MB and normal N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
peptide. Postoperative troponin I and CK-MB shared a same trend, reaching a peak value at postoperative hour 2, gradually decreased on
postoperative day 1, and reached a plateau on postoperative days 7 and 13. A significant correlation could be noted between the
postoperative values of the two indicators (Y=0.0714X + 0.6425, r2=0.9111, r=0.9545, P=0.0116). No significant linear correlation between
troponin I and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide were found. Literature review of troponins in cardiac myxoma patients revealed the
uncomplicated patients had a normal or only slightly elevated troponin before open heart surgery. However, the complicated patients (with
cerebral or cardiac events) showed a normal preoperative troponin in 3 (23.1%) and an elevated troponin in 10 (76.9%) patients (χ2=7.54,
P=0.0169, Fisher's exact test). The overall quantitative result of troponin I was 2.45±2.53 µg/L, and that of troponin T was 3.10±4.29 mg/L,
respectively. Troponins are not necessarily elevated in patients with a cardiac myxoma without coronary syndrome. By contrast, patients with
a cardiac myxoma with an elevated troponin may herald the presence of an associated coronary event. An old cerebral infarct does not
necessarily cause an elevation of troponin or B-type natriuretic peptide, or new neurological events, but might lead to a delayed awakening.
Supunha-se que troponinas em pacientes com mixoma cardíaco poderiam estar em uma mesma forma que naqueles sem lesão miocárdica. Para
verificar essa hipótese, as troponinas em pacientes com mixoma cardíaco foram discutidas, em uma revisão abrangente da literatura com a
incorporação das informações de um paciente recente. Detecções pós-operatórias de troponina I, creatina quinase isoenzima MB (CK-MB) e
peptídeo natriurético tipo B N-terminal revelaram troponina I e CK-MB elevadas e pró-peptídeo natriurético tipo B N-terminal normais.
Troponina I e CK-MB no pós-operatório tiveram a mesma tendência, chegando a um valor de pico na 2ª hora de pós-operatório, diminuindo
gradualmente no primeiro dia pós-operatório, chegando a um patamar nos dias 7 e 13 do pós-operatório. Correlação significativa pode ser
observada entre os valores pós-operatórios de dois indicadores (Y=0,6425 + 0.0714X, r2=0,9111, r=0,9545, P=0,0116). Nenhuma correlação
linear significativa entre troponina I e pró-peptídeo natriurético tipo B N-terminal foi encontrada. A revisão da literatura de troponina em
pacientes com mixoma cardíaco revelou que os pacientes sem complicações tiveram troponina normal ou apenas ligeiramente elevada antes da
cirurgia de coração aberto. No entanto, nos pacientes com complicações (com eventos cerebrais ou cardíacos) três (23,1%) estavam com
troponina normal e 10 (76,9%) com troponina elevada no pré-operatório (χ2=7,54, P=0,0169, teste exato de Fisher). O resultado quantitativo
global de troponina I foi 2,45±2,53 µg/L, e o de troponina T foi 3,10±4,29 mg/L, respectivamente. As troponinas não são necessariamente
elevadas em pacientes com mixoma cardíaco sem síndrome coronariana. Por outro lado, em pacientes com mixoma cardíaco a troponina elevada
pode ser preditora de um evento coronariano associado. Um infarto cerebral antigo não necessariamente causa elevação de troponina, do
peptídeo natriurético tipo B, ou novos eventos neurológicos, mas pode levar a um atraso no despertar. Troponins are a type of contractile
protein produced in cardiac and skeletal muscles. They are composed of troponin subunits I, C and T, with the former two subunits being
highly sensitive and specific for myocardial damage, especially implicated in the diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. Dynamics of
troponins have been sufficiently described as to start to increase a few hours after myocardial ischemic damage, reach a plateau after 10-15
hours, and recover gradually to the baseline level. Elevations of troponins T and I were also found in patients without myocardial injury.
These situations included severe renal dysfunction, acute neurological events (with a peak troponin I value of 3.43±3.22 µg/L), hepatic
cirrhosis and portal hypertension, stroke, pulmonary embolism and sepsis. Troponins were sporadically reported in cardiac myxoma patients.
However, these results were actually anecdotal without being taken into a through investigation. It was supposed that troponins in cardiac
myxoma patients might be in a same fashion as in the conditions without myocardial injury. In order to verify this hypothesis, a patient
with cardiac myxoma, whose clinical and histopathological aspects have been reported elsewhere, is to be presented in terms of her serum
troponin studies along with creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (CK-MB) and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) by incorporating
the results based on a comprehensive retrieval of the literature. Six months prior to current admission, a 51-year-old female had abrupt
loss of vision and consciousness. She was in a state of cardiogenic shock, which was revealed to be a result of multiple cerebral infarcts
with a diagnosis of "top of the basilar" syndrome due to a left atrial myxoma. Later, she also developed multiple segmental embolism of her
lower extremities involving the bilateral anterior tibial, bilateral posterior tibial, right popliteal and bilateral dorsal arteries. Left
atrial myxoma resection was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass. During the operation, the myxoma was found to be originated from the
free wall of the left atrium. The myxoma was resected en bloc, and the iatrogenic atrial free wall defect was repaired with an autologous
pericardial patch. She had a delayed awakening until postoperative hour (POH) 13.5 without any new neurological sequelea. She had an
uneventful postoperative course and was discharged home on postoperative day (POD) 19. Histopathology of the resected myxoma showed a
glandular cardiac myxoma. On admission, her C-reaction protein was 41.66 (normal range, 0-10) mg/L, hypersensitive C-reaction protein was >5
(normal range, 0-1) mg/L, and CK-MB 7.6 (normal range, 0-40) U/L. Her condition was gradually stable after prolonged treatment. She was
recently referred to this hospital for surgical treatment of left atrial myxoma. After admission, the diagnosis of left atrial myxoma was
confirmed by echocardiography and chest computed tomography. Her preoperative troponin I and NT-proBNP values were normal. Postoperative
detections revealed elevated troponin I and CK-MB and normal NT-proBNP (Table 1). Troponin I values were moderately elevated at POH 2 and
POD 1. Postoperative CK-MB showed a same trend with cardiac troponin I, which reached a peak value at POH 2 (POD 0.08), gradually decreased
on POH 24 (POD 1), and reached a plateau on PODs 7 and 13. The only difference between the two indicators was CK-MB recovered to normal
values since POD 7, whereas troponin I did not, but were 0.43 µg/L and 0.32 µg/L at PODs 7 and 13 (Figure 1). A significant correlation
could be noted between the postoperative values of the two indicators (Y=0.0714X + 0.6425, r2=0.9111, r=0.9545, P=0.0116) (Figure 2). Random
NT-proBNP values were 243 and 448 pg/mL at POH 2 and on POD 7. No significant linear correlation between troponin I and NT-proBNP were found
(Y=-0.0251X + 11.2760, r2=0.2846, r=-0.5335, P=0.6418) (Figure 3). Determinations of serum cardiac biomarkers. A similar changing trend of
troponin I and creatine kinase isoenzyme MB. CK-MB=creatine kinase isoenzyme MB. Linear correlation between troponin I and creatine kinase
isoenzyme MB. CK-MB=creatine kinase isoenzyme MB Linear correlation between troponin I and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-
proBNP). NT-proBNP=Nterminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide Troponin I is a popularly recognized sensitive biomarker in the diagnosis of
postoperative myocardial damage and perioperative myocardial infarction. Clinical observations revealed that troponin I, CK and CK-MB values
peaked between POHs 6 and 18, troponin T between POHs 18 and 42, and myoglobin at the surgical closure. The values of all markers were
higher in patients undergoing coronary surgery compared to those undergoing valve surgery. Yuan et al. discovered significant elevated serum
troponin I during the early days after the onset or surgical repair of myocardial rupture, and they advocated the troponin I was valuable in
judging the prognosis of the patients with myocardial injury. Troponin I (as well as NT-BNP) can be helpful in the evaluation of the
functions of the vital organs including heart subjected to perioperative drug use, such as oral prophylactic metoprolol and high-dose
aprotinin. Troponin levels in cardiac myxoma were reported in 18 sporadic patients, totally 19 patients including the present one (Table 2).
Of them, 12 (63.2%) were troponin I and 7 (36.8%) were troponin T. Six (31.6%) patients were uncomplicated, and 13 (68.4%) were complicated
(χ2=5.16, P=0.0502, Fisher's exact test). Of the complicated patients, acute myocardial infarction developed in 10 (76.9%) patients, and
ventricular fibrillation arrest, pulmonary embolism, and ischemic stroke developed in 1 (7.7%) patient, each (χ2=21.17, P=0.0001, Fisher's
exact test). The uncomplicated patients had a normal or only slightly elevated troponin before open heart surgery. However, the complicated
patients showed a normal preoperative troponin in 3 (23.1%) and an elevated troponin in 10 (76.9%) patients (χ2=7.54, P=0.0169, Fisher's
exact test). The overall quantitative result of preoperative troponin I was 2.45±2.53 (range, 0.0189-5.91; median, 1.47) µg/L (n=7), and
that of troponin T was 3.10±4.29 (range, 0.31-9.37; median, 1.36) mg/L (n=4), respectively. The troponin I was somewhat higher than the
baseline value of coronary artery disease patients (1.0±6 µg/L) or the baseline value of the patients with coronary and/or valvular
disorders (0.16±0.05 µg/L) reported in the literature. The functional atrioventricular valve obstruction and embolic phenomena predisposing
to myocardial infarction in the presence of a cardiac myxoma might be the explanations of the remarkable rise of the baseline troponin
values. Preoperative troponin levels in the patients with a cardiac myxoma. It was proposed that troponin I levels measured on POD 1 may
predict short-, medium- and long-term mortality. Troponin I levels of alive patients was 2.01 (range, 1.01-3.65) and 4.26 (range, 2.18-8.37)
µg/L at POH 2 and on POD 1, while those of the deceased were 3.63 (range, 1.62-8.26) and 11.85 (range, 5.59-23.96) µg/L, respectively. In a
patient with a cardiac myxoma and associated coronary artery stenosis, his troponin I was 3.56 µg/L on POD 13. The present patient with old
cerebral infarct had an uneventful recovery after the resection of cardiac myxoma. She had compatible troponin I values during the early
postoperative period to the maximal value of the survived surgical patients as reported by Croal et al.. In addition, this patient had
significantly decreased troponin I values on PODs 7 and 13, much lower than those of the patient reported by Stępień's et al.. This could be
interpreted by the associated coronary artery disease in the latter patient. Comparative studies between troponins and CK-MB have already
been stated some decades ago. There were little differences among troponins I and T, and CK-MB after cardiac operation to diagnose
myocardial damage. However, troponins have a more prolonged release than CK-MB when the patient is subjected to myocardial damage; it is
therefore more sensitive than CK-MB in indicating myocardial necrosis. A troponin I concentration <15 µg/L within PODs 1-2 was highly
suggestive of the absence of perioperative myocardial necrosis. The dynamic changes of troponin I and CK-MB in the present patient were
quite identical. The incidental finding was a peak value at POH 2 and a gradual decrease on POD 1, contrary to a delayed peak appearing on
POD 1 as reported by Croal et al.. The disconformity warranted further investigations. NT-proBNP is a pre-propetptide synthetized in the
cardiomyocytes. When it is secreted, it splits into two parts: physiologically active brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and biologically
inactive NT-proBNP. Both can be significantly elevated when the patient is with an acute or congestive heart failure. The normal range of
BNP was <200 pg/mL. Increased BNP values were discovered to be related to acute cerebrovascular events. BNP >140 pg/mL could be helpful in
distinguishing cardiogenic from non-cardiogenic embolism. Clinical observations revealed BNP levels were loosely correlated with New York
Heart Association (NYHA) functional class. In the patients undergoing cardiac surgery including one patient with atrial myxoma, BNP was
62.8±68.1 pg/mL. Patients with congestive heart failure had a mean BNP concentration of 1076±138 pg/mL, while the non-congestive heart
failure patients had a mean BNP concentration of 38±4 pg/mL. Links between BNP and cardiac myxoma have rarely been discussed. Factors
associated with high BNP levels other than congestive heart failure were age, gender, renal failure, lung disease and myocardial infarction;
meanwhile, atrial myxoma was determined as a factor accounting for low BNP levels with congestive heart failure. Plasma BNP level in 17
consecutive adult patients (including one patient with a left atrial myxoma) during the perioperative period were detected. Plasma BNP
remained unchanged until 12, 24 and 48 hours after the termination of cardiopulmonary bypass, which were 149.5±43.0 pg/mL, 175.2±93.6 pg/mL
and 146.2±59.4 pg/mL, respectively. In a patient with right heart enlargement and severe pulmonary hypertension free of congestive heart
failure, her BNP was 5,613.4 pg/mL. A 53-year-old man with a large left atrial myxoma presented with biventricular heart failure. His BNP
was as high as 4,800 pg/mL. Lack of elevations of BNP has been reported in the event of acute congestive heart failure or with ventricular
inflow obstruction (hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, mitral stenosis, or atrial myxoma). Top of the basilar artery refers to a 2-cm
territory surrounding the five-forked junction at the top of the basilar artery formed by 2 posterior cerebral arteries, 2 superior
cerebellar arteries and the top of basilar artery. Cerebral infarction involving the rostral brainstem and cerebral hemisphere that are
supplied by the distal basilar artery causes a clinical syndrome, known as rostral brainstem infarction or "top of the basilar" syndrome,
characterized by visual, oculomotor, and behavioral abnormalities, often with insignificant motor dysfunction. "Top of the basilar" syndrome
occurs when the top of the basilar artery is subjected to thromboembolic occlusions, and results in bilateral thalamic ischemia due to
occlusion of perforator vessels. Transient ischemic attack and stroke can present in 80% of patients with a cardiac myxoma. Unexplained
transient ischemic attack, cerebral infarction and syncope are common neurologic manifestations. Clinical observations demonstrated that the
patients with preoperative cerebral infarct took longer time to awaken than those without (6.5±5.0 hours vs. 4.6±2.9 hours, P<0.05). The
incidence of confusion and cerebral infarction after operation in the preoperative infarct patients was higher than those without. The
anesthetic awareness in the present patient was 13.5 hours, even longer than reported. This phenomenon implicated that an old cerebral
infarct may interfere anesthetic awareness, but not necessarily complicated with new postoperative sequelae. The normal postoperative BNP
values of the present patient offered a strong support to this argument. Troponins are not necessarily elevated in patients with a cardiac
myxoma without coronary syndrome. By contrast, cardiac myxoma patients with an elevated troponin may herald the presence of an associated
coronary event. An old cerebral infarct does not necessarily cause an elevation of troponin or BNP, or new neurological events, but might
lead to a delayed awakening. This study was carried out at First Hospital of Putian, Teaching Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Putian,
Fujian Province, People’s Republic of China. No financial support.
