A 66-year-old white female s/p mitral and tricuspid valve replacement was seen in cardiac consultation and diagnosed with atrial
fibrillation and high-degree atrioventricular (AV) block with symptomatic bradycardia, thus pacemaker placement was recommended. For this
particular patient, a standard, single-lead implantable pacemaker, while not contraindicated, was not a preferable solution due to the
patient’s newly implanted bioprosthetic tricuspid valve and the potential complications transvalvular lead placement may bring . No FDA-
approved leadless pacemaker is available in the USA at this time; however, initial safety and feasibility trials have shown comparable
results to traditional transvenous leads . The Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation (MHIF) at Abbott Northwestern Hospital is part of
Medtronic’s Micra Transcatheter Pacing FDA IDE trial. The Micra system departs from the traditional design. The pacing capsule is quite
small (2.0 g, 0.8 cc) compared with a traditional implantable generator with the added benefit of being leadless. The contact point for
sensing and energy delivery is positioned on one end of the housing and held against the endocardium via flexible nitinol tines. The implant
procedure is also unique in that it is deployed via catheter through the femoral vein rather than the standard pocket formation and access
through the axillary veins. At the start of the procedure, the right femoral vein was entered using the micropuncture technique. Sequential
dilatation was performed using an 8 French, 16 French, and then ultimately the large bore 23 French Micra introducer. Once the large bore
sheath had been placed and advanced over a stiff guidewire to the right atrium, the Micra pacemaker was advanced through this sheath, and
using catheter manipulation, directed through the bioprosthetic tricuspid valve toward the apex of the right ventricle. The initial
attachment point in the apex while anatomically stable was ultimately unsuccessful due to insufficient electrical measurements. The pacing
capsule was retrieved and redeployed in a second spot closely adjacent, which demonstrated excellent sensing and pacing characteristics.
Stability was confirmed using the pull and hold test to assure at least two tines were engaged. After confirming stability, and assessing
electrical parameters again, the tether was cut and slowly removed, the delivery catheter and sheath were removed, and the insertion site
was closed with a figure 8 stitch. This was the first implant of its kind at this institution. The implant procedure lasted approximately
45 min from initial puncture through closure. The elapsed time was 31 min from the point at which the TPS was inserted into the sheath until
the delivery tool was removed. Six months post-implant, the patient has had no complications from the procedure or any other cardiovascular-
related adverse events. Device data comparing the day of discharge to the 6-month follow-up show acceptable performance and battery
longevity:Discharge measurements6-Month measurementsVsense11.5 mVVsense>20.0 mVVcapture0.38 V @ 0.24 msCapture0.38 V @
0.24 msImpedance650 ΩImpedance900 ΩV-paced %46.5 %V-paced %17.4 %Battery voltage3.14 VBattery voltage3.10 VLongevity est.>13 YearsLongevity
est.>13 Years Echocardiographic follow-up indicates no significant changes in tricuspid valve
performance:TTE—05/2014TTE—03/2015TRTRACETRACETV mean gradient4.1 mmHg3.0 mmHgTR Vmax2.5 m/s2.3 m/s For our patient, a pacing lead
permanently placed through the newly implanted bioprosthetic tricuspid valve is less than ideal as valvular insufficiency could be a
concern. Thus, the transcatheter system seemed to have a significant advantage.
