Cystic pancreatic lesions are increasingly more frequent detected clinical entities. Mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN) is a hormone-related
pancreatic tumor (HRTP) with a strong predominance in young and middle-aged females. Here, we present the case of a 31-year-old surgically
transgendered female-to-male patient with a history of alcoholic pancreatitis, on chronic testosterone therapy. He was found to have a
pancreatic MCN and underwent distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a transgender
patient with a history of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and pancreatic MCN. We consider possible mechanisms for the pathogenesis to
explain this patient’s neoplasm. Mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN) is a hormone-related pancreatic tumor (HRTP) with a strong predominance in
young and middle-aged females . In 1996, the World Health Organization and Armed Forces Institute of Pathology provided a formal distinction
between intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) and MCN, stressing the importance of the presence of ovarian stroma to diagnose MCN.
The validity of this distinction has been confirmed in subsequent studies . However, the criteria for distinguishing MCN from other mucinous
tumors remain debated . These neoplasms have risk for malignancy and require either close radiological follow-up or resection depending on
their size and morphological characteristics [3, 4]. The exact mechanism of how sex hormones affect the development of pancreatic tumors is
not entirely understood. Pancreatic tissue expresses estrogen receptors , and there are contributory reports of MCN development during
pregnancy and in post-menopausal women on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) . There is also evidence that pancreatic tissue expresses
testosterone receptors . However, reports of pancreatic MCNs in males are limited and of the reports of men with MCN, most have a history of
pancreatitis and/or aberrant hormone levels and sexual phenotypic characteristics [1, 12, 13]. The expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors in MCN among some male patients is perplexing . There are also rare reports of pancreatic MCNs in men or post-menopausal women,
which do not show the characteristic ovarian-like stroma. Some suggest that such tumors be called “indeterminate mucin-producing cystic
neoplasms” so as to maintain the requirement that MCNs are defined by ovarian-like stroma . Here, we present the case of a 31-year-old
surgically transgendered female-to-male patient with a history of alcoholic pancreatitis, on chronic testosterone therapy. He was found to
have a pancreatic MCN and underwent distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a
transgender patient on HRT with pancreatic MCN. We provide a case presentation and propose possible mechanisms, based upon our review of the
literature, for the pathogenesis of this patient’s neoplasm. The patient is a 31-year-old surgically transgendered, female-to-male patient
with a history of multiple prior admissions for alcoholic pancreatitis. He was on chronic, long-term testosterone therapy. He presented
complaining of pain in the mid-epigastrium, which had worsened over the prior months, with occasional radiation to the back and shoulders
and post-prandial worsening of pain. He denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, weight change, or constipation. Additional past medical history
was significant for anxiety and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. His surgical history included laparoscopic cholecystectomy,
tonsillectomy, bilateral mastectomy, total bilateral hysterectomy, and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. His family history included
leukemia, diabetes mellitus, and cholecystitis. His medications included testosterone cypionate, bupropion, escitalopram, hyoscyamine
sulfate, omeprazole, and pancrelipase. He was a former smoker with history of polysubstance abuse including chronic alcoholism. His physical
examination was otherwise non-contributory. Serum CA19-9 level was moderately elevated at 72 u/ml [reference range <34], lipase was elevated
at 128 u/l [ref 7–60], and amylase was within the normal range at 51 u/l [ref: 20–101]. Serum IgG4 was negative. Computed tomography (CT)
scan of the abdomen and pelvis with pancreatic protocol demonstrated a pancreatic body cystic mass (Fig. 1a, b). Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)
confirmed a 30 × 33 mm round multi-septated mass in the pancreatic body suggestive of an MCN (Fig. 2). Aspirated cyst fluid analysis
revealed an elevated CEA level of 745 ng/mL.Fig. 1Abdominal CT with pancreatic protocol showing cystic pancreatic mass. a Arterial phase CT
axial slice through the pancreatic body shows a cystic mass within the body region. b Coronal reconstruction portal venous phase shows a
cystic mass confined to the pancreatic parenchymaFig. 2FNA-EUS showing hypo-echoic pancreatic mass, arrow Abdominal CT with pancreatic
protocol showing cystic pancreatic mass. a Arterial phase CT axial slice through the pancreatic body shows a cystic mass within the body
region. b Coronal reconstruction portal venous phase shows a cystic mass confined to the pancreatic parenchyma FNA-EUS showing hypo-echoic
pancreatic mass, arrow Of note, 6 years prior to presentation at our institution, the patient was being followed with serial cross-sectional
imaging, demonstrating a pancreatic body cystic lesion. Importantly, during this interval period of time, the lesion was noted to
alternately increase and decrease in size. Surgical management included distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. Specimens were sent for
pathologic examination. Serial sectioning of the formalin-fixed specimen revealed a 2 × 1.8 × 1.2 cm septated cyst with a tan-pink, smooth,
and glistening inner lining, filled with clear, thin fluid. The cyst was located 0.9 cm from the proximal pancreatic resection margin,
6.7 cm from the splenic hilum, and 0.1 cm from the nearest posterior aspect. It abutted but did not involve the main pancreatic duct
(Fig. 3a, b). Microscopic examination showed that the cyst was lined by cuboidal or mucin-producing epithelium and surrounded by the
ovarian-like stroma, which was immunohistochemically positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors (Fig. 4a–d). These characteristics are
consistent with the diagnosis of MCN. The patient’s post-operative course was complicated by a peri-pancreatic abscess and fistula, which
resolved following endoscopic placement of a pancreatic ductal stent. On yearly follow-up, the patient had no evidence of recurrent
disease.Fig. 3Gross pathology of the tumor. a A distal portion of pancreas with an attached intact spleen, white arrow delineates pancreatic
MCN. b A gross section of pancreatic cyst, white arrow delineates pancreatic cyst wallFig. 4Microscopic pathology of the tumor. a Pancreatic
MCN lined by cuboidal epithelium surrounded by the ovarian-like stroma (H&E stain; c × 1.25). b High-power of pancreatic MCN lined by
cuboidal epithelium surrounded by the ovarian-like stroma (H&E stain; d × 10). c Immunohistochemical staining for estrogen receptor within
the MCN stroma (4×). d Immunohistochemical staining for progesterone receptor within the MCN stroma (4×) Gross pathology of the tumor. a A
distal portion of pancreas with an attached intact spleen, white arrow delineates pancreatic MCN. b A gross section of pancreatic cyst,
white arrow delineates pancreatic cyst wall Microscopic pathology of the tumor. a Pancreatic MCN lined by cuboidal epithelium surrounded by
the ovarian-like stroma (H&E stain; c × 1.25). b High-power of pancreatic MCN lined by cuboidal epithelium surrounded by the ovarian-like
stroma (H&E stain; d × 10). c Immunohistochemical staining for estrogen receptor within the MCN stroma (4×). d Immunohistochemical staining
for progesterone receptor within the MCN stroma (4×) Pancreatic MCN is a HRTP with predominance in females , characterized by ovarian-like
stroma . Figure 5 outlines the possible mechanisms for the pathogenesis of pancreatic MCN in our patient, which is likely multifactorial.
Investigators have speculated about the interaction between HRT and the development of hormone-related cancers for many years. Among
transgendered females, there are several case reports describing the occurrence of prostate cancer after many decades of estrogen therapy
[14, 15]. The exact role that estrogen plays in the development of pancreatic MCN is not entirely understood . However, the pancreas is
known to express estrogen receptors and binding proteins . Normal pancreatic tissue can convert estrone and estrone sulfate into active
17-beta-estradiol, and estrogen is believed to be necessary for pancreatic enzyme synthesis . There are contributory reports of MCN
development during pregnancy and in post-menopausal women on HRT .Fig. 5Proposed multifactorial mechanisms for pathogenesis of pancreatic
MCN in a transgender male Proposed multifactorial mechanisms for pathogenesis of pancreatic MCN in a transgender male One explanation for
the pathogenesis of pancreatic MCN expressing ovarian-like stroma is that genital gland and dorsal pancreatic buds are adjacent during the
course of development such that primary yolk cells may be implanted in the pancreas . This mechanism is plausible in the patient presented
here. Another explanation is that immature pancreatic stroma, which expresses sex hormone receptors, responds to female hormones resulting
in cystic change and progression . In either case, estrogen is required to stimulate tissue proliferation. The patient discussed here is
female-to-male transgendered on chronic testosterone therapy. It is plausible that exogenous testosterone could have been aromatized to
estradiol. This would be particularly true if the testosterone dosing was relatively high. Aromatase and 5-alpha-reductase have both been
identified in human pancreatic cancer tissue . The former enzyme converts testosterone to 5-dihydrotestosterone, which is a strong androgen,
and the latter enzyme converts testosterone to estradiol as well as delta-4-androstenedione to estrone. Importantly, notable variations in
size of our patient’s pancreatic MCN may reflect variation in the hormonal environment from estrogen to testosterone, which lends credence
to the hypothesis of hormonal influences on MCN development and natural history. The aforementioned embryological mechanism, however, does
not fully account for the albeit rare occurrence of pancreatic MCN in men [1, 12]. The literature concerning pancreatic MCN in males is
limited, and it is possible that the development of MCN in men may not necessarily follow the same pathogenesis as occurs in women .
However, of the reports of men with MCN, most have a history of pancreatitis and/or aberrant hormone levels and sexual phenotype
characteristics [1, 12, 13]. Moreover, in a recent study that included five cases of pancreatic MCN along with four cases of pancreatic
solid pseudopapillary neoplasm (SPN) in men, hormonal and/or sexual dysfunction was identified in four of the nine patients . In one case
report of a young Japanese man who was found to have a pancreatic MCN with ovarian-type stroma and antiestrogen and antiprogesterone
staining positivity, the authors question whether or not the presence of female hormone receptors is adequate to term the tissue of origin
to be ovarian. Pancreatic tissue is also known to express testosterone receptors as well as estrogen receptors . It has been established
that there are androgen receptors in pancreatic cancer, and testosterone has been experimentally shown to promote growth of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma . Chronic pancreatitis is another proposed risk factor for the development of pancreatic MCN. Wouters et al. published a case
report discussing a 43-year-old man who had a 10-year history of moderate to high alcohol intake and chronic pancreatitis that developed a
pancreatic MCN . Accordingly, a possible mechanism for the development of pancreatic MCN in chronic alcohol abusers, male or female, is
chronic excess alcohol consumption that results in increased estrogen levels either via increased peripheral fat conversion of androgen
precursors to estrogen and/or via transient or permanent liver damage resulting in hormonal imbalance secondary to disrupted sex steroid
metabolic pathways with elevated estrogen levels . The patient presented in this case had a long history of alcohol abuse. In terms of
management, surgical resection remains the cornerstone for the treatment of high risk pancreatic cystic lesions. Clinicopathologic factors
identified as higher risk for malignancy among pancreatic cystic neoplasms includes size greater than 3 cm, presence of septations, a solid
component, and related symptomatology [3, 4]. Here, we present the first reported case of a pancreatic MCN in a surgically transgendered
female-to-male patient. This patient had a history of alcoholic pancreatitis and was on chronic, long-term testosterone therapy. We provide
a case presentation and propose possible mechanisms, based upon our review of the literature that could explain the pathogenesis of his
neoplasm. Transgendered patients generally tolerate HRT well. However, this case suggests that pancreatic neoplasms, in part, may be
susceptible to HRT. This case also illustrates the importance of being aware of special medical and surgical issues in the transgender
population. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. computed
tomography endoscopic ultrasound hormone replacement therapy hormone-related pancreatic tumor intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms
mucinous cystic neoplasm solid pseudopapillary neoplasm Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions DF, MS, EG, BB, JL, RO, MH, DR, and WBB all have made substantial contributions to the conception and design of this
study. DF, MS, EG, BB, JL, RO, MH, DR, and WBB all have made substantial contributions to the acquisition of data, as well as analysis and
interpretation of data; DF, MS, EG, BB, JL, RO, MH, DR, and WBB have been involved in drafting the manuscript or revising it critically for
important intellectual content; DF, MS, EG, BB, JL, RO, MH, DR, and WBB have given final approval of the version to be published and agree
to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are
appropriately investigated and resolved. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We acknowledge and appreciate the willingness
of the patient to be featured in this publication. This article did not receive any specific funding. No additional writers participated in
the preparation of this article aside from the aforementioned authors.
