Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are common lysosomal storage disorders causing typically progressive skeletal and ocular abnormalities. To
describe the clinic features, metabolic profile and a unique mutation in a domestic shorthair (DSH) kitten with MPS VII. Affected kitten and
80 healthy cats. Serum lysosomal enzyme activities and urinary glycosaminoglycan (GAG) accumulation were assessed. Exons of the
β‐glucuronidase gene (GUSB) were sequenced from genomic DNA and genotyping was conducted. A 3‐month‐old DSH cat was presented for stunted
growth, paresis, facial dysmorphia, multiple skeletal deformities, and corneal opacities. Evaluation of blood smears disclosed metachromatic
granules in leukocytes and a urinary mucopolysaccharide spot test was positive. The proband had no GUSB activity but normal or increased
activities for other lysosomal enzymes. Sequencing of the GUSB gene from the proband and comparison to the sequence of 2 healthy cats and
the published feline genome sequence demonstrated 2 unique single base transitions (c.1421T>G and c.1424C>T) in exon 9, altering 2 adjacent
codons (p.Ser475Ala and p.Arg476Trp). These amino acid changes are in a highly conserved domain of the GUSB protein and nontolerable to
maintain function. Moreover, the p.Arg476Trp mutation previously has been identified in human patients. None of the other clinically healthy
cats had these mutations. The diagnostic approach to MPS disorders is delineated. This is only the second mutation known to cause MPS VII in
cats. Similarly, 2 different mutations have been described in MPS VII dogs, thereby showing the molecular heterogeneity of MPS VII in
companion animals. 4‐methylumbelliferyl alanine arginine base pair deionized water deoxyribonucleic acid deoxynucleotide domestic shorthair
ethylenediamine tetra‐acetic acid glycosaminoglycans genomic DNA β‐glucuronidase hot‐start kodakaraenis mucopolysaccharidosis online
Mendelian inheritance in animals polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism serine sorting intolerant from tolerant
single nucleotide polymorphism triosephosphate isomerase tryptophan A variety of lysosomal storage disorders including mucopolysaccharidoses
(MPS), sphingolipidoses, and glycoproteinoses have been discovered and are well characterized in several animal species, and dogs, cats, and
mice serve as excellent disease models of these rare inborn errors of metabolism in humans. Although most lysosomal storage diseases are
associated with neurologic signs, MPS (except type III) disorders mostly cause progressive skeletal and ocular abnormalities with secondary
neurologic signs. In MPS, degradation of the glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) chondroitin, dermatan, or heparan sulfate is hampered because of
deficient activity of a single lysosomal acid hydrolase. Isolated cases of domestic shorthair (DSH) cats with MPS I, VI, and VII have been
reported, and MPS VI seems to be somewhat common in Siamese cats.1 Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII), also known as Sly syndrome in
humans (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 253220), is a rare autosomal recessive trait caused by more than 50 different mutations in the
β‐glucuronidase gene (GUSB).2, 3, 4 In addition to the well‐known human disorder, MPS VII also has been identified in several animal species
including mice5, 6, 7 and dogs (Online Mendelian inheritance in animals 000667‐9615).8, 9, 10, 11 In dogs, the same missense mutation in
GUSB (p.Arg166His) was found in mixed breed9 and German shepherd dogs,10 whereas another mutation (p.Pro281Leu) was discovered recently in
Brazilian Terriers.11 Mucopolysaccharidosis VII also was reported in 3 domestic shorthair (DSH) cats (OMIA 000667‐9685). The first case was
reported from Switzerland,12 and another 2 cases were identified in the United States (Michigan and California).13, 14 However, only the cat
from Michigan has been studied at the molecular genetic level.13 Here, we describe the clinicopathologic features of MPS VII caused by a new
GUSB mutation in a DSH kitten. Aside from the samples from the proband and related cats, EDTA‐preserved blood, serum, buccal swabs, and
urine samples from other domestic shorthair (DSH) cats were available for these studies at the Metabolic Genetics Screening Laboratory at
the School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania. Diagnostic studies are offered as part of a diagnostic evaluation for
suspected inborn errors of metabolism in animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of
Pennsylvania. Samples were shipped on ice overnight after collection and urine and serum samples were stored frozen until further analysis.
Urinary GAG concentrations were analyzed semiquantitatively (toluidine blue mucopolysaccharide spot test)15 and quantitatively (normalized
by the sample's creatinine concentration using a GAG Isolation & Concentration Kit and Blyscan GAG Assay Kit).1 Five lysosomal enzyme
activities were determined in serum by fluorescence assay using 4‐methylumbelliferyl (4MU) substrates following previously established
protocols in our laboratory.13 The storage diseases and corresponding enzymes were investigated based upon prior reports in cats and
included (1) Mucopolysaccharidoses: α‐L‐iduronidase (IDUA, EC 3.2.1.76 for MPS I), N‐acetylgalactosamine‐4‐sulphatase (4S, EC 3.1.6.12 for
MPS VI), β‐D‐glucuronidase (GUSB, EC 3.2.1.31 for MPS VII), and (2) Glycoproteinoses: α‐mannosidase (MANB, EC 3.2.1.24 for α‐mannosidosis)
and α‐L‐fucosidase (FUCA, E 3.2.1.51 for α‐fucosidosis). Genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes and buccal swabs
using DNA extraction kits,2 and concentrations were measured.3 A total of 12 exons including the 5′untranslated region (UTR), exon‐intron
junctions and the 3′UTR of the feline GUSB gene were examined using the Hot‐start (HS) Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Kit4 and Sanger
sequencing techniques. A total of 11 PCR primer pairs were designed5 and synthesized6 (Table 1). The PCR reaction mixture contained 100 ng
(2 μl) of gDNA as a template, 25 μL of 2X PCR buffer, 10 μL of 10 mM deoxynucleotides (dNTPs, 2.5 mM each), 0.75 μL of each forward and
reverse primers (20 μM), 1 μL of Kodakaraenis (KOD) HS DNA polymerase (1 U/μL), and sterile deionized water (diH2O) up to a total volume of
50 μL. The PCR protocol included an initial HS at 94°C for 2 minutes, 35 cycles of denaturing at 94°C for 10 seconds, annealing at 60–62°C
for 30 seconds, and extending at 68°C for 30–45 seconds (times varied based on the length of the amplicons). A negative control, comprised
of diH2O instead of gDNA, was used to detect possible contamination. The PCR products were separated by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis,
extracted using a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit,7 sequenced at the Gene Sequencing Core Facility of the School of Medicine at the University
of Pennsylvania and analyzed using Lasergene software.8 PCR primers and conditions used in sequencing feline GUSB gene Sources: NCBI‐Genbank
(Gene ID: 493879, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, Ensembl (Felis_catus_6.2, ENSFCAG00000006928), http://www.ensembl.org and UCSC Genome
Bioinformatics (ICGSC Felis_catus_6.2/felCat5), http://genome.ucsc.edu. Genotyping methods for mutant and normal (wild‐type) alleles were
developed9 and performed with 80 gDNA samples from EDTA blood or buccal swabs of clinically healthy DSH cats including a littermate of the
proband. A gDNA mixture of the affected proband and a clinically healthy cat at a 1 : 1 ratio (both genotypes were confirmed by GUSB gene
sequencing) was used as a control to detect the heterozygous state. The DNA fragment around the putative mutations was amplified by
real‐time PCR using a 15 μL reaction mixture containing 7.5 μL of 2X TaqMan® Universal PCR master mix (no AmpErase® Uracil N‐Glycosylase),
0.375 μL of 40X assay mix consisting of unlabeled PCR primers (forward: ACGCTGATTGCTCACACCAA; reverse: TCATAGTTGGAGTTGGTCACAAAGG), and
fluorescently labeled TaqMan® 3′‐Minor groove binder probes (for c. 1421T>G transition, VIC® dye‐labeled AGCCTTGGATCCCTCC for normal, and
FAM™ dye‐labeled AGCCTTGGATCCCGCC for mutant; for c.1424C>T substitution, VIC® dye‐labeled CTTGGATCCCTCCCGG for normal, and FAM™ dye‐labeled
CTTGGATCCCTCCTGG for the mutation), 6.125 μL of diH2O and 1 μL of template gDNA. The cycling conditions utilized universal thermal cycling
parameters: initial heating step at 95°C for 10 minutes, 40 cycles of 15 seconds at 92°C for denaturing and 60 seconds at 60°C for
annealing/extending, and 10 minutes at 72°C for final extension. To further determine the impact of the amino acid substitutions on the GUSB
protein structure and function, the Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant (SIFT) algorithm software was applied to predict the effect of the
amino acid change.10 The scores range from 0.00 (unacceptable) to 1 (normal); a score of <0.05 is deleterious. A 3‐month old, female kitten
from a farm in Trenton, Ontario, Canada was noted to have weakness in the rear legs. No prior and family history was available but an
apparently healthy littermate was adopted by the same owner at the same time. On physic examination, the diseased kitten appeared stunted
for its age, had a rounded head and pectus excavatum, and had hind limb paralysis. The kitten was able to pull itself forward with its
forelimbs. No obvious pain was identified on palpation, and motor functions appeared to be delayed. The clinical signs progressed over the
next 3 months to tetraparesis and ocular opacities developed (Fig 1A–C). The proband's skeletal radiographs disclosed pectus excavatum,
kyphosis, shortened and fused vertebral bodies, dysostosis multiplex, hypoplastic epiphyses, thickened diaphyses, irregularly fragmented
endplates, and increased intervertebral distances (Fig 1D). Based on the progressive clinical features, a systemic congenital orthopedic or
metabolic disorder was suspected. A blood smear stained with Wright–Giemsa disclosed many metachromatic granules (also referred to as
Alder‐Reilly bodies) within lysosomes of neutrophils and lymphocytes, representing GAGs. This finding was suggestive of MPS rather than
other lysosomal storage disorders (Fig 1E). Clinical features of a 6‐month‐old DSH cat with MPS VII. (A) Facial dysmorphia and corneal
opacities. (B) Flattened nose, large rounded head, and short neck. (C) Tetraparesis, and short stature compared with the healthy littermate
(back). (D) Skeletal radiograph showed pectus excavatum, kyphosis, fused and shortened vertebral bodies, increased intervertebral distances,
dysostosis multiplex, hypoplastic epiphyses, and thickened diaphysis. (E) Blood smear stained with Wright–Giemsa solution showing a
neutrophil with many coarse metachromatic granules, which represent cellular GAGs accumulation. The proband's urinary excretion of GAGs was
evaluated by 2 methods. The semiquantitative toluidine blue mucopolysaccharide spot test was strongly positive, and quantitative analysis
identified a large amount of urinary GAGs (Fig 2). These results of urinary GAGs analysis further indicated that MPS was likely. Urinary
GAGs analysis from the proband with MPS VII and clinically healthy DSH cats. (A) Mucopolysaccharide spot test. Proband: strongly positive
result; a clinically healthy cat: negative result. (B) Quantitative assay. The proband's urinary GAGs concentration (95.2 μg/mg creatinine)
compared with the clinically healthy, age‐matched controls (mean ± SD: 7.0 ± 3.3 μg/mg creatinine, n = 10); a 13.6X increase is shown.
Assessment of lysosomal enzymes (Table 2) identified a severe deficiency of serum GUSB activity, whereas the other 2 enzymes (IDUA and 4S)
involved in GAG catabolism were increased when compared with healthy controls. The other 2 enzyme activities tested were normal. The
lysosomal enzyme activity profile led to a final diagnosis of MPS VII. Serum lysosomal enzyme activities in a cat with MPS VII and normal
controls Disease corresponds to the specific abnormal function of the enzyme tested. Specific activity: nM 4 MU/h/mL serum. Percentage
activity of healthy controls (based on the mean of 10 healthy cats). In cats, the GUSB gene is located on chromosome E3, and has 12 exons
coding for 651 amino acids. Comparison of the proband's GUSB sequence to the published genome sequence of cats (NCBI‐Genbank, Gene ID:
493879 and Ensembl: ENSFCAG00000006928) and results from 2 clinically healthy cats sequenced simultaneously identified homozygosity for 2
single nucleotide substitutions in exon 9: a thymine (T) base located at cDNA position 1421 was changed to guanine (G) (c.1421T>G), and just
3 bases away, a cytosine (C) base was changed to thymine (T) (c.1424C>T). These 2 base changes resulted in 2 adjacent amino acid
substitutions with a serine changed to alanine (p.Ser475Ala) and an arginine replaced by a tryptophan (p.Arg476Trp; Fig 3). Moreover, this
cat did not have the missense mutation previously reported in another DSH cat (c.1074G>A, p.Glu351Lys in exon 7).13 In addition, 6 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were observed in the 3′UTR region of the proband's GUSB gene: c.2046C>T, c.2645T>C, c.2880A>C, c.2934C>T,
c.3261A>C and c.3307A>C. These variants also were observed in 2 healthy cats and therefore were not considered responsible for the GUSB
deficiency. The results of sequencing analysis on GUSB gene of a cat with MPS VII. The results reveal two missense point mutations in exon 9
of the GUSB gene, (c.1421T>G, c.1424C>T), which cause two adjacent and detrimental amino acid substitutions (p.Ser475Ala and p.Arg476Trp).
Multiple alignments of the GUSB amino acid sequence performed across multiple eukaryotic species indicated that the p.Ser475Ala and
p.Arg476Trp substitutions reside in a highly conserved region of the third domain of the GUSB enzyme (Table 3). The SIFT analysis indicated
that neither the p.Ser475Ala (SIFT score = 0.03) nor the p.Arg476Trp (SIFT score = 0.00) were tolerable. Thus, both amino acid changes were
considered highly deleterious to the structure and function of the GUSB protein. Comparison of multiple eukaryotic species' GUSB amino acid
sequence alignments around the substitution sites. The two amino acid substitutions, p.S475A (p.Ser475Ala) and p.R476W (p.Arg476Trp)
occurred in a highly conserved region of the GUSB protein, and were predicted to be pathogenic, and likely disrupt the structure of the GUSB
enzyme. (Source: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein) Genotyping the c.1421T>G and c.1424C>T mutations with 2 real‐time PCR assays readily
discriminated the mutant and normal alleles and also detected the heterozygotes made by an admixture of a sample from a healthy cat and the
affected cat (Fig 4). Screening of an additional 80 DSH cats, including a littermate, 2 nearby cats and 77 cats from various parts of the
United States showed only the normal haplotype. Parents were not available for study. Allelic discrimination genotyping results of
fluorescence real‐time PCR for detecting 2 GUSB mutations utilizing gDNA from the proband, clinically healthy DSH cats, and a mixture of
both. End point fluorescence intensities (Rn values) for the normal allele are expressed on the X‐ axis and for the mutant allele on the
Y‐axis. (A) c.1421T>G mutation fluorogenic probe. (B) c.1424C>T mutation fluorogenic probe. Both allelic discrimination plots clearly show
the 3 genotypes for the 2 mutations. The proband has mutant (duplicate assay) genotypes (blue dots). The 10 clinically normal DSH cats,
including a littermate of the proband, have normal alleles (red dots). The mixed gDNA sample from the proband and a healthy cat reflects the
heterozygote states (duplicate assay, green dots). dH 2O indicates a negative template DNA control. This study describes the diagnostic
evaluation of a kitten with multisystemic skeletal malformations, ocular opacities, positive urinary mucopolysaccharide spot test and
metachromatic leukocyte inclusions suggestive of MPS. Serum enzyme and molecular genetic studies identified a complete deficiency of GUSB
enzyme activity caused by 2 adjacent amino acid changes in the GUSB gene. Although 1 of the mutations (p.Arg476Trp) has been reported in
human patients with MPS VII, our study represents the second report of a disease‐causing mutation in GUSB in cats. Although clinical
features can be suggestive of a storage disorder, other congenital skeletal malformations and congenital hypothyroidism16 also should be
considered as differential diagnoses. The accumulation of GAGs in tissues, leukocytes and urine are among the most important and simple
biochemical markers to suggest MPS. Urinary GAG concentration can readily be quantified by simple kit methods and chondroitin, dermatan, and
heparan sulfates can be identified by electrophoresis.17 Although urinary GAG concentration can be moderately increased in growing animals,
the 13.6‐fold increase in the proband's urine over that of age‐matched normal cats was indicative of MPS. Additional evaluation of GAGs may
have further suggested a specific type of MPS (chondroitin and dermatan sulfates with MPS VII), but was not done in this cat. Because the 11
known MPS disorders share many clinical features such as early age of onset, dwarfism, facial dysmorphia, bone and joint abnormalities,
organomegaly and neurological signs with variable degree of severity, it was necessary to determine which specific lysosomal enzyme was
deficient.18 Enzyme activities measured in serum, as done in this kitten, and leukocytes are standard methods, but recently we also showed
that because of the extraordinary stability of most lysosomal enzymes, dried blood spot samples can be used to measure these enzyme
activities and document a GUSB deficiency.19 The undetectable activity of GUSB in the proband's serum led to the final diagnosis of MPS VII.
As previously reported for MPS VII and other MPS disorders, the other enzyme activities in the same pathway are increased likely because of
the compensated transcription factor EB regulation mechanism.20 Indeed, in the proband's serum, activities of other MPS enzymes that degrade
GAGs (IDUA and 4S) were markedly increased, whereas enzymes involved in glycoprotein catabolism (MANB and FUCA) had activities in the
reference range. It was not surprising that the kitten from Canada in this report did not have the point missense mutation causing
substitution of a highly conserved amino acid (p.Glu351Lys) reported previously in a DSH cat from Michigan despite showing very similar
clinical signs and biochemical features of MPS VII.13 Both likely represent independent new mutation events because of subsequent breeding
of related cats heterozygous for the mutant alleles to produce affected animals (homozygous for the mutation). The structure of the GUSB
monomeric enzyme is well conserved among species (80% similarity to human GUSB at the amino acid level [UCSC Genome Bioinformatics, ICGSC
Felis_catus_6.2/felCat5, http://genome.ucsc.edu]) and is composed of 3 functional domains, including a jelly roll barrel (amino acid
residues 22–223, exons 1–4), an immunoglobulin constant region (amino acid residues 224–342, exons 5–6), and a triosephosphate isomerase
(TIM) barrel domain with its catalytic site (amino acid residues 343–632, exons 7–12).21 In the affected cat, the identified single base
changes (c.1421T>G and c.1424C>T) in exon 9 of GUSB result in p.Ser475Ala and p.Arg476Trp substitutions of the GUSB protein; this area
resides in the middle of the TIM barrel domain which is highly conserved among mammals. To further determine the effect of the p.Ser475Ala
and p.Arg476Trp amino acid substitutions (in which polar amino acids were replaced by nonpolar amino acids) on the GUSB protein structure, a
SIFT analysis was performed. Based upon the SIFT analysis results, it was predicted that either amino acid substitution would be highly
deleterious to the GUSB protein's structure and function. Furthermore, the p.Arg476Trp missense mutation previously was reported in human
patients and caused a severe MPS VII disorder.22 It is unknown how much the adjacent p.Ser475Ala missense mutation worsened the deleterious
effect of the p.Arg476Trp substitution. We established species‐specific allelic discrimination based real‐time PCR methods for both the
c.1421T>G and c.1424C>T variants which readily differentiated the mutant alleles exclusively found in the proband from the normal alleles in
all other cats and identified the heterozygote state (Fig 4). The proband was from Trenton Ontario, Canada and no other cats except 1
littermate and 2 healthy cats from that farm were available for study and were found to have the normal haplotype. Although this is a simple
screening test, the mutant haplotype will likely only be found in the region from which the cat originated, except when cats travel with
people to other areas. Such a situation occurred with this kitten, when the family moved to Iowa. Thus, as in the case of MPS VII in
Michigan, general screening for these 2 mutations is not recommended. Rather, animals with clinical signs suspicious of MPS should be tested
utilizing blood smear examination, the urine mucopolysaccharide spot test, and enzyme activity testing of serum or dried blood spot
screening tests. Currently, MPS VII and other MPS disorders lack an efficient clinical treatment despite intense experimental investigations
offering promising results with novel gene transfers, such as bone marrow transplantation for MPS VII in mice23 and dogs,24 enzyme
replacement treatment for MPS VII in mice,25 and gene treatment for MPS VII in dogs.26, 27, 28 These treatments have demonstrated a great
capacity to prevent many of the clinical features but once clinical signs occur, MPS VII is not reversible. Symptomatic treatment, pain
alleviation, and physiotherapy can be offered before euthanasia is elected. In conclusion, we describe the clinical, biochemical and
molecular findings in a DSH cat with MPS VII. We identified a pair of adjacent GUSB mutations that reflects only the second molecular
characterization of MPS VII in cats. Grant support: This study was supported in part by NIH OD 010939. Conflict of Interest Declararion: Urs
Giger and Shurnevia Strickland are affiliated with the not‐for‐profit PennGen Laboratories at the University of Pennsylvania which offers
MPS testing. Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials. GAGs Isolation & Concentration Kit and
the Blyscan GAGs Assay Kit, Biocolor Ltd., Carrickfergus, Antrim, UK. QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit, QIAGEN, Valencia, CA NanoDrop 2000, UV‐Vis
Spectrophotometer, Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE Novagen‐EMD Company, Gibbstown, NJ DNAStar, Inc., Madison, WI Integrated DNA
Technologies, Inc., Coralville, IA QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit, QIAGEN, Valencia, CA Lasergene software, DNAStar, Inc., Madison, WI ABI 7500
instrument and “Custom TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assay”, Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY J. Craig Venter Institute,
Rockville, MD, http://sift.jcvi.org
