A 52 years old lady was diagnosed to have Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) on the basis of 2 major and one minor criterion. She had family
history of similar complaints in her sister and two sons. There was involvement of kidney in the form of angiomyolipoma, skin in the form of
facial angiofibroma and teeth with a dental pit. She had an unusual lung involvement in the form of multiple small choristomas. Choristoma
was diagnosed on transbronchial lung biopsy and was present in the form of disorganised striated muscles. The reported pulmonary
manifestations of TCS i.e. lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) and multifocal micronodular pneumocyte hyperplasia (MMPH) are types of hamartomas.
Hamartomas and choristomas are both types of disorganized tissue. ‘Choristoma’of lung in TSC however is not reported. Clinopathological
correlation of pulmonary hamartoma and choristoma, and treatment in TSC has been discussed. A 52 year old lady, normotensive, non-diabetic
and non-smoker was referred to pulmonary medicine department of our institute for the evaluation of pulmonary nodules. She did not have
significant respiratory complaints. She did however have a history of multiple admissions in the Medicine department during the past year
for year for anaemia, anasarca and hydronephrosis. She also had history of non-progressive facial lesions since early childhood and similar
lesions in one of her sons. Her sister died at the age of 40 of a seizure disorder. On examination, her vital parameters were normal. There
were non tender, non- progressive, pale brown, papular lesions of about 2 to 8 mm over the cheeks. There was poor orodental hygiene with one
dental pit found on oral examination. Systemic examination did not reveal any significant abnormality. Dermatological consultation diagnosed
the skin lesions as facial angiofibromas (adenoma sebaceum). She was also detected to have mild mental retardation on psychiatric
evaluation. Ophthalmological examination was normal. The routine biochemical and hematological investigations were normal except for iron
deficiency anaemia (hemoglobin-9.8gms/dl). The computed tomography of kidney, ureter and bladder showed multiple variable sized focal masses
containing macroscopic fats almost completely replacing bilateral renal parenchyma suggestive of bilateral renal angiomyolipoma [Figure 1].
The magnetic resolution imaging (MRI) of brain was normal as was the ECG and 2D ECHO. Endocrine evaluation showed hypothyroidism with
thyroid stimulating hormone of 8.3IU/ml. An ultrasonography of the neck showed a 11 mm cystic lesion with thin septation in left lobe of
thyroid. Thyroid scan showed mildly increased uptake with cold area in inferior pole of left thyroid. Fine needle aspiration cytology was
consistent with a benign follicular nodule. The chest radiograph showed a few calcific lesions in both upper lobes with a few nodular
lesions in lower lobes. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest showed multiple randomly distributed nodules of about 4 to 13 mm in
size in bilateral lung fields. Some of them showed calcification in the periphery and some of them were calcified completely. In addition
there were cystic change in lingular region suggestive of localized lymphangioleomyoma [Figure 4a–d]. Spirometry showed restrictive pattern
with forced vital capacity (FVC) 1.56 litre (55% predicted), forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 1.28 litre (53%) and
FEV1/FVC-82%. CT of the kidney, ureter, and bladder showing multiple, variable-sized, focal masses containing fats replacing the bilateral
renal parenchyma, suggestive of bilateral angiomyolipoma One of the sons’ MRI of the brain showing cortical tuber Another son's facial
angiofibroma HRCT of the chest showing multiple, randomly distributed nodules in the bilateral lung fields with calcification; calcified
nodules marked with black arrows and noncalcified nodules marked with red arrows in (a-d) and cystic changes in the lingular lobe marked
with an arrow in (b) Lung tissue from the transbronchial biopsy showed largely normal lung tissue with one small bit showing a microcyst
lined by cuboidal epithelium containing abnormally formed skeletal muscle with striations in the background of normal alveolar tissue
suggestive of choristoma of lung [Figure 5a & b]. Transbronchial lung biopsy with (a) Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain 100× magnification
and (b) H&E stain 400× magnification showing abnormally formed skeletal muscle with striations (marked with an arrow) in the background of
normal alveolar tissue She was diagnosed to have tuberous sclerosis on the basis of two major criteria i.e. facial angiofibroma and
angiomyolipoma of kidney. On family screening, one of her sons had mild mental retardation with multiple signal alteration seen in bilateral
cerebral parenchyma in a nodular pattern, predominently located in the cortical region of bilateral high frontoparietal region on MRI of
brain [Figure 2]. The other son had facial angiofibromas [Figure 3], renal angiomyolipoma and mild mental retardation. The Choristoma of
lung and localized lymphangiomyoma did not require treatment. The patient refused surgical removal of angiomyolipoma. She was treated with
sirolimus 2 mg per day for angiomyolipoma. The patient discontinued it after 2 months due to stomatitis and vomiting. She was also given
levothyroxine and iron supplements for hypothyroidism and iron deficiency anaemia respectively. Patient is now on regular follow up for the
last two years without disease progression. A comparative HRCT is given in Figure 6a & b. (a and b) Comparative HRCT done 1.5 years apart
showing no disease progression TSC is diagnosed on the basis of diagnostic criterion consisting of 11 major and 9 minor features [Table 1].
A definitive diagnosis of TCS either needs two major or one major plus 2 minor features. Our patient had two major and one minor features as
highlighted in bold text in Table 1 confirming the diagnosis of TSC. The family history further supported the diagnosis. Diagnostic criteria
for tuberous sclerosis Bold texts are the lesions seen in our patient and italic texts are hamartomas seen in TCS The reported lung
manifestation of TCS are lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), multifocal micronodular pneumocyte hyperplasia (MMPH), and clear cell tumour, of
which LAM and MMPH are hamartomas. Radiologically, MMPH presents as small, multiple randomly distributed nodules, LAM has cysts and clear
cell tumour is a small solitary pulmonary nodule. Our case on HRCT had multiple, randomly scattered nodules suggestive of MMPH. The nodules
of MMPH are however less than 10 mm. These nodules do not have calcification and usually there is ground glass opacification. The nodules in
our patient were >10 mm. There was calcification and absence of ground glass opacity. The unusual features suggested either these lesions
were precursor of LAM similar to histeocytosis X which is known to evolve from nodules, or variant of MMPH with calcification or a new
manifestation of TSC. Transbronchial lung biopsy showed disorganised skeletal muscle suggesting the diagnosis of choristoma. The commonly
seen lesions in TSC are hamartomas. Pathologically, pulmonary hamartoma is a benign neoplasm composed of cartilage, connective tissue,
smooth muscle, fat, and bone. All these are native to lung. ‘Choristoma’ is an entity similar to hamartoma but having non-native heterotopic
tissue. Choristomahas not been reported in TSC. The other lesions seen in our patient on HRCT were cysts in lingular lobe. Characteristic
features of pulmonary LAM are round, thin-walled cysts of variable size and contour distributed uniformly throughout the lungs with normal
intervening parenchyma. They can involve the juxtaphrenic recesses and medial tips of the middle lobe and lingual but spare the extreme
apices. Thus, the cystic lesions involving lingular lobe suggested the diagnosis of localized LAM. Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TCS) is an
autosomal dominant multisystem disorder characterised by the development of multiple hamartomas in numerous organs including central nervous
system, skin, heart, kidney, eye and the lungs affecting 1 in 6000 people. The classical combination of seizures, mental retardation, and
adenoma sebaceum also known as Vogt's triad is seen in only one-third of patients. Many of the TSC manifestations are hamartomasas shown in
Table 1 in italics. Of these, the skin, kidneys, brain, and heart hamartomas are very common. Hamartomas involving the retina, gingiva,
bones, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs are rare. The pulmonary manifestations of TSC are primarily hamartomas. Hamartomas consists of
tumorous native tissue whereas choristomas consists of of non-native abbarant rest. Hamartoma and choristoma, both are types of
heteroplasias. Heteroplasia is defined as the development of cytological and histological elements that are not normal for the organ or
part, in which they occur, or malposition of tissue/part that is otherwise normal. The former is choristoma, while the latter is hamartoma.
Both are disorganized normal tissues of the body. Choristoma (aberrant rest, heterotopic tissue) is histologically non-neoplastic tissue
proliferationor nodule formation seldom reaching size greater than 1.5 cm. It may be single or multiple and may calcify. Some of the
choristomas had calcified in our case. The biopsy had picked up a non-calcified lesion hence calcification was not seen on biopsy but
calcification was seen on HRCT. Skeletal muscle choristomas have been reported as an incidental finding associated with congenital anomalies
of lung but not with TCS. Renal angiomyolipoma in our patient was diagnosed on the basis of macroscopic fat on CT scan, which is a
characteristic feature of angiomyolipoma. Angiomyolipoma usually presents with Wunderlich syndrome, retroperitoneal hemorrhage, shock, or
hyodronephrosis. Wunderlich syndrome is a rare condition, where spontaneous renal haemorrhage occurs into the subcapsular and perirenal
spaces. Retroperitoneal hemorrhage is the commonest manifestation whereas hydronephrosis, the manifestation observed in our patient is seen
rarely. Follicular thyroid lesion seen in our patient could be incidental or a manifestation of TSC. It is difficult to prove or disprove
one or the other. This is because small series and case reports have documented that tuberous sclerosis patients may have endocrine system
alterations leading to dysfunction of the pituitary, parathyroid and other neuroendocrine tissue. Pituitary adenomas, parathyroid adenomas
and gastroenteropancreatic and adrenomedullary neuroendocrine tumours have been suggested as a feature of TSC. Benign thyroid nodules have
not yet been reported in patients with TSC. Hence it is either a possible association or an incidental finding. There is no definite
treatment for TSC. Surgical treatment is indicated for subependymal giant cell astrocytomas and symptomatic angiomyolipoma of more than 4
cm. Embolization of angiomyolipoma may also be performed if the size is more than 5cm. Sirolimus is the only drug approved for the treatment
of TSC. The indication for sirolimus in TSC is subependymal giant cell astrocytomas that cannot be removed surgically. Sirolimus has been
also been studied in multiple randomized controlled trials for the management of kidney angiomyolipomas. Studies have shown that renal
angiomyolipoma shrink during sirolimus therapy but tend to regrow after the therapy is stopped. The most commonly reported sirolimus related
adverse reactions are stomatitis, respiratory infection, skin lesions and hyperlipidemia. Our patient denied surgical management hence
medical management was given, but it had to be stopped due to intolerable side effects. In conclusion, Tuberous sclerosis complex is a
multisystem disorder with formation of hamartoma in various organs. In addition to hamartoma of lung, choristoma, which is also a
disorganized tissue, may be seen in TSC. Endocrine involvement may also be a feature of TSC. Medical treatment of TCS primarily consists of
use of sirolimus. The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms. In the form the patient(s) has/have
given his/her/their consent for his/her/their images and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patients understand
that their names and initials will not be published and due efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be
guaranteed. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest
