Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 58 Final Diagnosis: Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with widespread
metastases Symptoms: — Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Left below knee amputation Specialty: Oncology Rare disease Extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma is a unique and distinct clinicopathological entity in terms of its origin, morphology, and biologic behavior. Despite being
a slow-growing tumor, it has a high rate of local recurrences and history of metastases to uncommon sites like the mandible, liver,
retroperitoneum, right ventricle, pancreas, and central nervous system. Here, we report a very unique case of extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma that metastasized to the breast, which itself is a very rare site for metastases. A 58-year-old woman presented with a large,
firm, and tender soft-tissue mass (6.0×7.0 cm) underneath the sole of the left foot. A computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a
heterogeneous lobulated mass in the plantar aspect of the forefoot, measuring 8.6×8.0×7.1 cm. Punch biopsies revealed histology consistent
with extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Metastatic work-up was negative. The mass was fully resected with left below-knee amputation. The
histology of the resected mass was consistent with extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. A follow-up CT showed a new right breast nodule
along with metastases to lung and bones. The results of the core needle biopsies of the right breast masses seen on mammogram were
morphologically identical to extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Although rare, metastases to the breast should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of a breast mass. A close long-term follow-up is needed due to the unpredictable behavior of extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma and the high frequency of local recurrences, metastases, and death due to disease. Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC)
is a soft-tissue chondrosarcoma, initially described by Stout and Verner in 1953 as an extraosseous chondrosarcoma that develops in soft
tissues, but with histology similar to that of chondrosarcoma of the bones . Enzinger and Shiraki (1972) delineated EMC as a distinct
sarcoma of chondroblastic origin that arises from extraskeletal soft tissues . EMC is currently classified as a tumor of uncertain
differentiation in the revised version (2002) of the World Health Organization classification of tumors of soft tissue and bone . EMC
accounts for 2.5% of all soft-tissue sarcomas. The median age at diagnosis is around 50 years and the median tumor size ranges from 1 to 25
cm in diameter. It occurs more commonly in men than in women (2:1). Despite the prolonged clinical course, it is locally aggressive and has
metastasizing potential. Metastasis is an adverse prognostic factor in EMC and about 50% of the cases will develop metastases . Here, we
report the case of a 58-year-old woman with metastases from EMC to the breast – a rare tumor with metastases to a rare site. A 58-year-old
Jamaican woman presented at our hospital with complaints of a growth underneath the sole of her left foot for 1 year, with worsening pain.
Physical examination showed a large 6.0×7.0 cm soft-tissue mass with areas of maceration (Figure 1). The mass was firm and tender on
palpation. There was no active bleeding or discharge. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the left lower extremity showed a lobulated
low-attenuation soft-tissue mass on the plantar aspect of the forefoot, measuring 8.6×8.0×7.1 cm (Figure 2). Multiple punch biopsies of the
mass revealed monomorphic round tumor cells with minimal cytoplasm in the loose myxoid background, consistent with extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma (EMC) (Figure 3 [A – 100×, B – 400×]). The immunohistochemical stain was positive for synaptophysin (Figure 4A) and weakly
positive for S 100 (Figure 4B). To confirm the diagnosis, a specimen was sent to the Mayo Clinic Medical Laboratories for molecular testing.
Metastatic work-up was negative and the patient underwent left below knee amputation while awaiting the results of molecular testing. The
amputation was planned because the location of the mass would have precluded skin closure. The mass was fully resected with negative
margins. The resected tumor was tan-gray and bulging, measuring 9.0×7.0×5.5 cm. The cut surface of the tumor was tan-red and mucinous in
appearance, with areas of hemorrhages. The tumor extended to the inter-digital area of the second and third toe and involved the articular
surfaces of the distal metatarsal heads of the second and third toes. The skin, bone, and soft-tissue margins were grossly viable. The
resected margins were negative. As per World Health Organization classification of the soft-tissue tumors, the tumor was identified as EMC
(Figure 5). Mitotic rate was 5/10 high-power fields (HPF) and necrosis was present (extent 50%). Histologic grade as per French Federation
of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group (FNCLCC) was Grade 2. Pathologic staging was pT2bNX. The results of molecular testing were positive for
rearrangement of EWSR1 gene at 22q12, thus confirming the diagnosis of EMC. A CT scan of the chest 2 months after the surgery showed a
0.8-cm nodule in the subcutaneous tissues posterior to the right scapula suspicious for metastases (Figure 6A). The patient went back to
Jamaica and returned after 6 months. A follow-up CT scan showed a new pulmonary nodule in the right lower lobe measuring 0.4 cm and new
lucencies involving T7 and T12 vertebral bodies suspicious for metastases (Figure 7A, 7B). A new nodule in the right breast measuring
1.3×1.4 cm was also reported (Figure 8A, 8B). There was an interval increase in the size of the soft-tissue nodule in the subcutaneous fat
posterior to the right scapula, measuring 1.6×1.1 cm (Figure 6B). A mammogram showed an irregular nodular mass in the upper outer quadrant
of the right breast and a smaller well-defined round mass in the lower aspect of the right breast (Figure 9A, 9B). There were no suspicious
microcalcifications, skin thickening, or nipple retraction in either breast. Bilateral breast ultrasound findings corresponded to that of
the mammography (Figure 10A, 10B). A bone scan showed skeletal metastatic disease in the shoulder, thoracolumbar spine vertebra, and single
mid-thoracic left rib (Figure 11A, 11B). The results of the core needle biopsies of masses in the right breast showed an infiltrating,
poorly differentiated, mammary carcinoma with mucinous and myxochondroid features, which were morphologically identical to EMC (Figure 12A,
12B). CA 27.29 was normal at 24.4 Units/ml (0.0–37.7 Units/ml). The case was presented to the tumor board. Due to the poor prognosis,
treatment options were to seek a second opinion for clinical trial at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center versus palliative chemotherapy
with Ifosfamide/Adriamycin. The patient refused chemotherapy and is currently awaiting a second opinion. Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
(EMC) is a rare, low-grade, soft-tissue sarcoma characterized by chondroid and neurogenic differentiation. Tumor cells typically resemble
the developing chondroblasts; thus, it is suggested that EMC originates from the primitive cartilage-forming mesenchymal cells . EMC
typically presents as a slow-growing mass in the deep soft tissues of the lower extremities. It usually involves proximal extremities and
limb girdle (60%), distal extremities (20%), and trunk (20%), but can have several unusual sites of origin like the scrotum, finger , nasal
cavity, central nervous system, and vulva . Recent studies have found that EMC has high propensity for metastases along with a high rate of
local recurrences. Metastases have been reported to occur at anywhere between 6 to 15 years after the initial diagnosis and were discovered
in 1 case after 20 years . The most frequent site for metastasis is the lung, followed by soft tissues, lymph nodes, and bones. In Miess-
Kindblom’s study of 76 patients, the lung was the most common metastatic site (32%), followed by soft tissue (18%) and bones (5%) . Saleh et
al. found that all 10 patients in his study developed lung metastases . Other rare sites of metastases are the mandible, liver,
retroperitoneum, right ventricle, pancreases , and intracranium . Here, we report the first case of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
metastatic to the breast. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in females. However, secondary malignancy metastatic to the breast is
rare, accounting for only 0.5–2% of all breast malignancies . Metastases to the breast (in order of decreasing frequency) are: contralateral
breast, malignant melanoma, lymphoma, lung cancer, ovarian cancer, soft-tissue sarcoma, and gastrointestinal and genitourinary tumors .
Metastases to breast occur via hematogenous route. Since the upper outer quadrant has the highest blood supply, metastatic lesions are
frequently found in this area. Mammography may be helpful in distinguishing between primary and metastatic breast malignancy . It is
important to differentiate between metastases to the breast and primary breast carcinoma, due to the marked difference in the prognosis.
Metastases to the breast are predictive of poor prognosis. In a study of metastatic neoplasms in the breast by Sneig et al., 11 out of 20
patients died soon after the breast metastases were diagnosed . Typically, a metastatic lesion appears as a round, dense mass on mammogram
and is generally not associated with microcalcifications or spiculations. The metastatic mass does not cause breast distortion or involve
the skin. Moreover, metastatic lesions are likely to be multiple and bilateral. However, sometimes it is difficult to differentiate
metastatic lesion from benign lesions like fibroadenoma and certain malignant neoplasms. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) plays an
important role in differentiating metastases from the primary breast malignancy. Accurate diagnosis of breast metastasis is crucial to avoid
unnecessary mastectomy and to implement an appropriate systemic therapy . EMC is characterized by multinodular architecture and well-
circumscribed masses with internal fibrous septa. They are composed of round or elongated cells of uniform shape and size separated by
variable amounts of mucoid material, and are interconnected to form cords, strands, or clusters. Neoplastic cells have uniform round-to-oval
hyperchromatic nuclei with a modest amount of eosinophilic (occasionally vacuolated) cytoplasm. EMC, unlike chondrosarcoma of the bone,
rarely have differentiated cartilage cells with distinct lacunae and ossification . A unique feature of EMC is nonrandom reciprocal
chromosomal translocation . The most common reciprocal translocation in 75% of the cases of EMC is t(9; 22) (q22; q12), which leads to
juxtaposition of the gene EWSR1 (also termed as EWS) on chromosome 22 and NR4A3 (also known as TEC, NOR1 or CHN) on chromosome 9 . It is
reported that TAF2N can replace the EWS gene, forming TAF2N-TEC gene fusion, which may account for other cases of EMC . The translocation
t(9; 22) (q22; q12) has never been reported in other mesenchymal tumors , other translocations being t(9; 17) (q22; q11) and t(9; 15) (q22;
q21) . A recently discovered translocation, t(9; 22) (q22; q11), is associated with EMC-producing neuroendocrine secretions . Currently the
only curative option for EMC is aggressive control of the localized disease, with early wide local resection with or without radiation
therapy. In the published data no chemotherapeutic agent or combination agents have demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of EMC . Only a
partial response has been observed with the use of interferon alpha 2b . Complete response in 1 patient and partial response in 1 out of 6
patients was seen with the use of multi-agent chemotherapy by McGory et al. ; however, data regarding the agents used was unavailable. Due
to the ineffectiveness of chemotherapy, few alternative agents have been studied. In a study by Stacchiotti et al., Sunitinib has been
confirmed to have anti-tumor activity in EMC. A correlation was observed between response and EWSR1-NR4A3 fusion. Pazopanib, another
antitumor agent, is under clinical trial for use in patients with EMC . EMC is a resilient tumor with an unpredictable behavior. It can
behave aggressively with a high rate of metastases and local recurrences, leading to early mortality. McGrory et al. suggested that EMC
should be graded as an intermediate- and not a low-grade tumor . It is important to know and recognize the adverse prognostic factors in EMC
for early management. Cellularity is one of the most important prognostic factors. High cellularity, Ki-67 activity (≥10%) and high mitotic
activity (>2 mitotic figures/10 HPF) are poor prognostic factors. Studies have also shown that tumor size (≥10 cm) is also an important
prognostic factor in terms of survival rate as well as metastases . However, a study by Kapoor et al. showed no correlation between the
tumor size and metastases-free interval . Rhabdoid phenotype and anaplasia may be associated with poor prognosis . Kapoor et al. proposed
the hypothesis that higher tumor density on contrast-enhanced CT may be associated with poor prognosis. However, contrary to the above
hypothesis, the tumor density in our patient was not high (32 Hounsfield units). Local recurrences occur in about 45–50% of the cases but do
not affect the overall survival, in contrast to metastases, which is an adverse prognostic factor . Female sex and higher mitotic rate are
adverse prognostic factors for local recurrences . Survival has been reported to range from few months up to 18 years from the time of
initial diagnosis . Meis-Kindblom et al. estimated that the survival rate at 5-, 10-, and 15-years was 90%, 70%, and 60%, respectively .
This case demonstrates that even low-grade tumors can metastasize to rare sites – in our case, the breast. Although rare, metastases to the
breast should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a breast mass to avoid unnecessary mastectomy and to implement appropriate
systemic therapy. EMC, despite being a slow-growing tumor, has a very poor long-term prognosis due to the high propensity for metastases
resulting in tumor-associated death. Thus, in accordance with previously published data, we recommend that EMC should be classified as
intermediate as opposed to low grade. Wide excision helps control the local recurrences, but does not necessarily prevent distant
metastases, as in our case. Close long-term follow-up is needed due to the unpredictable behavior of EMC. Since the lung is the most
frequent site for metastases, imaging of the chest at regular intervals is crucial. Dr. Shaojun Lin (Assistant Attending, Pathology, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai/Elmhurst Hospital Center) provided the pathology images. Deborah Goss, MLS (Director, Health Sciences
Library, Queens Hospital Center) reviewed and edited the manuscript. Statement There are no financial grants or funding sources to declare.
There is no conflict of interest for the authors of this manuscript. Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma presenting as a large soft-tissue
tan-gray lobulated mass underneath the sole of the left foot. An approximately 8-cm heterogeneously enhancing, hypodense, mass in the
plantar aspect of the forefoot. Flexor digitorum tendon (purple arrow) is encased in the mass. (A – 100×, B – 400×): Histopathology of
multiple punch biopsy of mass revealing monomorphic round tumor cells with minimal cytoplasm in loose myxoid background, consistent with
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. (A) Immunohistochemical staining was positive for synaptophysin. (B) Weakly positive for S 100.
Histopathology of surgical specimen revealing. (A) A multinodular architecture and well circumscribed masses with internal fibrous septa.
(B) An abundant myxoid matrix containing round or slightly elongated cells with small hyperchromatic nuclei. Chest CT (A) demonstrates a
small subcutaneous nodule overlying the right scapula that on follow up (B) has increased in size. Follow-up surveillance CT (A)
demonstrates a new lytic lesion in the thoracic spine, not seen on initial study (B). New right breast nodules on follow-up surveillance CT.
Craniocaudal (A) and mediolateral (B) views of right breast demonstrates two nodular masses. The larger is in the upper outer quadrant and
the smaller is in the lower outer quadrant. Ultrasound images of the right breast reveal the 2 corresponding heterogeneous masses with
internal vascular flow that were subsequently biopsied. A bone scan showed skeletal metastatic disease in the shoulder, thoracolumbar spine
vertebra, and single mid-thoracic left rib. (A) Anterior, (B) Posterior. (A – 100×, B – 400×): Histology of the breast metastatic lesion
showing an infiltrating poorly differentiated mammary carcinoma with mucinous and myxochondroid features.
