Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterised by abnormal ciliary motion and impaired mucociliary
clearance, leading to recurrent respiratory infections, sinusitis, otitis media and male infertility. Some patients also have laterality
defects. We recently reported the identification of three disease-causing PCD genes in the Irish Traveller population; RSPH4A, DYX1C1 and
CCNO. We have since assessed an additional Irish Traveller family with a complex phenotype involving PCD who did not have any of the
previously identified PCD mutations. In this study we report on a family with three children with PCD and various laterality defects. In
addition, one child (V:1) has mild-to-moderate developmental delay and one child has speech delay (V:2). Developmental delay is not usually
associated with PCD and is likely to be caused by an additional genetic abnormality. Transmission electron microscopy showed variable inner
and outer dynein arm defects. Exome sequencing identified a homozygous missense variant in CCDC103 (c.461A > C; p.His154Pro) as the most
likely cause of the PCD and laterality defects in this family. However, as mutation in CCDC103 would not account for the developmental
delay, array comparative genomic hybridisation was undertaken and identified a maternally inherited gain of ~1.6 Mb
(chr17:34,611,352-36,248,918). Gains at this locus are associated with 17q12 duplication syndrome which includes speech and language delay.
We report on a variable and complex phenotype caused by the co-inheritance of a single gene mutation in CCDC103 and a microduplication at
17q12, both on chromosome 17. The co-existence of a single gene and chromosome disorder is unusual but accounts for the spectrum of clinical
features in this family. In addition, our study brings the total number of PCD genes in the Irish Traveller population to four and we
suspect additional PCD genes are yet to be identified. Although, on a global scale, PCD is associated with extensive genetic heterogeneity,
finding such a high number of causative PCD genes within the relatively small Irish Traveller population was unexpected. The online version
of this article (doi:10.1186/s12881-015-0192-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Primary ciliary
dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare, genetically heterogeneous respiratory disorder primarily characterised by chronic sinopulmonary infections.
Approximately 50 % of patients with PCD also have an organ laterality defect. The disorder occurs due to a defect in ciliary structure
and/or function. To date, 29 PCD genes have been identified (accounting for ~60 % of cases), 20 of which can cause PCD with a laterality
defect . We recently reported the identification of pathogenic variants in three different disease genes causing PCD in the Irish Traveller
population; RSPH4A (c.166dup; p.Arg56Profs*11), DYX1C1 (~3.5 kb deletion) and CCNO (c.258_262dup; p.Gln88Argfs*8) . Each family had a
different type of ultrastructural ciliary defect, depending on which gene was mutated. All patients had normal situs. However, the DYX1C1
deletion has been observed to cause PCD with laterality defects in an Irish Traveller family (personal communication, Dr. Jane S Lucas). The
identification of three PCD genes within a population of ~30,000-40,000 people was surprising and suggests that there may be a selective
advantage towards variation in ciliary genes. We have since assessed another Irish Traveller family who have three children with PCD and
variable laterality defects (Fig. 1a). One child has situs inversus (V:1), one has situs inversus totalis (V:2) and one child (V:3) has left
atrial isomerism and an atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD). Sanger sequence analysis excluded the three previously identified PCD
mutations in the Irish Traveller population, suggesting that the family harboured a novel mutation. We proposed to identify the underlying
genetic cause of PCD with laterality in this family using whole exome sequencing.Fig. 1Irish Traveller family with PCD and laterality
defects. a The family has three children with PCD and various laterality defects. Child V:3 was born prematurely and died post-delivery. DNA
was available from all family members. b Transmission electron microscopy of bronchial epithelium samples from patient V:2 (1–4) and patient
V:1 (5–8) showed a reduced number of dynein arms in some but not all cilia. The phenotype varied from normal ultrastructure (7) through
shortened dynein arms (5, arrow) to complete absence of dynein arms. c The CCDC103 NM_001258395.1:c.461A > C was validated by Sanger
sequence analysis. The inverted triangle indicates the position of the mutated A > C base on the forward strand which results in the
substitution of His (H) with Pro (P) at residue 154 Irish Traveller family with PCD and laterality defects. a The family has three children
with PCD and various laterality defects. Child V:3 was born prematurely and died post-delivery. DNA was available from all family members. b
Transmission electron microscopy of bronchial epithelium samples from patient V:2 (1–4) and patient V:1 (5–8) showed a reduced number of
dynein arms in some but not all cilia. The phenotype varied from normal ultrastructure (7) through shortened dynein arms (5, arrow) to
complete absence of dynein arms. c The CCDC103 NM_001258395.1:c.461A > C was validated by Sanger sequence analysis. The inverted triangle
indicates the position of the mutated A > C base on the forward strand which results in the substitution of His (H) with Pro (P) at residue
154 Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of the 3 affected children and unaffected parents. The study protocol was
approved by the ethics committee of Temple Street Children’s University Hospital (Dublin, Ireland). Patient V:1 was well at birth (no
neonatal respiratory distress) but has a history of multi-trigger persistent wheeze, recurrent respiratory tract and ear infections,
persistent nasal congestion and possible obstructive sleep apnoea. He also had congenital cytomegalovirus infection which may or may not be
linked to moderate bianural hearing loss. He had otitis media with effusion on the left side and Eustachian tube dysfunction on the right
side. He has had grommets inserted twice and has had his tonsils and adenoids removed. Sweat test and immunoglobin profiles were normal. A
diagnosis of PCD with situs inversus was made. In addition, patient V:1 has mild-to-moderate developmental delay and a pectus excavatum
chest deformity. Cardiovascular exam was normal. Chest x-ray was normal with no evidence of dextrocardia. He had brain stem evoked responses
which were normal after grommet insertion. Despite normal hearing, his speech is still limited to single words at age 5 years. His gross and
fine motor skills are within normal limits. He has mild behavioural issues including bruxism and hyperactivity. Patient V:2 is the only
surviving child from a triplet pregnancy. The other two triplets miscarried at 16 weeks gestation. This child was well at birth (no
respiratory distress) but she presented with recurrent chest infections as a child and she currently has a wet productive cough and
rhinitis. She does not have sinusitis. She has had grommets inserted for otitis media and is awaiting removal of her tonsils and adenoids.
Situs inversus totalis was incidentally detected on chest X-ray. She has a structurally normal heart. She has some speech delay. A fetal
echocardiogram of patient V:3 showed that she had left atrial isomerism. Antenatal scans did not identify any other internal malformations.
She was born prematurely at 26 + 3 weeks gestation following placental abruption and weighed 1.48 kg at birth. Apgar scores were one at
1 min and zero at 5 and 10 min. Full resuscitation, including cardiopulmonary resuscitation, was unsuccessful and she died. There was an
antenatal diagnosis of a significant AVSD with hypoplastic right sided tissue. This lesion would not have been treatable unless the baby was
born after 32 weeks gestation. She was also dysmorphic with low set ears and broad spaced nipples. Chromosome analysis showed a normal 46XX
karyotype. Post mortem was not performed. Nasal brushings from patients V:1 and V:2 were analysed at a PCD Diagnostic Service (University
Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust) following a standard transmission electron microscopy (TEM) protocol . DNA from two affected
children (V:1 and V:2) was selected for whole exome sequencing. The exonic DNA was enriched with the SureSelect v5 Human All Exon Kit
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara), and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Aros Applied Biotechnology, Denmark, now part of the Eurofins
Genomics Organisation). The 100 bp paired-end reads were aligned to the hg19 human reference genome. Quality control and variant and indel
identification were performed as previously described . Assuming an autosomal recessive model, we prioritised variants that were (i)
autosomal, (ii) absent or present with a frequency <1 % in dbSNP130, NHLBI Exome Variant Server database and 1000 Genomes, (iii) homozygous,
(iv) absent in our 60 Irish control exomes and (v) shared by the affected siblings. Array CGH was performed using the Agilent design 028469
(~60,000 oligonucleotide probes), with a median resolution of 120 kb. Genomic copy number variants were analysed with Cytogenomics v2.7.22
software (Agilent). Validation and segregation analysis of the CCDC103 NM_001258395.1 c.461A>C variant was undertaken by polymerase chain
reaction and Sanger sequencing (Additional file 1: Table S1). TEM in patients V:1 and V:2 showed a high percentage of outer and inner dynein
arm defects (Fig. 1b). The proportion of cilia with dynein arm defects was not within the range usually seen in patients with PCD but
considerably higher than normal (Additional file 1: Table S2). Further investigation was therefore recommended following this inconclusive
result. Whole exome sequencing was pursued. Analysis of the exome data identified 4 rare homozygous variants shared by both siblings, only
one of which is in a gene related to ciliary function; CCDC103 (Additional file 1: Table S3 and S4). CCDC103 is an essential gene for dynein
arm assembly, cilia motility and determination of left-right asymmetry. The CCDC103 c.461A > C p.His154Pro variant (rs145457535) identified
in this family has previously been associated with PCD, varying degrees of situs abnormalities (in some cases) and dextrocardia [3, 4].
Sanger sequencing confirmed that all three affected children are homozygous for CCDC103 c.461A > C and the parents are obligate carriers
(Fig. 1c). Array CGH was performed on account of the developmental and speech delay in patients V:1 and V:2 and identified a gain of ~1.6 Mb
at chr17:34,611,352-36,248,918 (Fig. 2). Gains at this locus are associated with 17q12 duplication syndrome (#614526) which includes speech
and language delay. Analysis of parental DNA showed that the micro-duplication was maternally inherited. The mother (IV:2) has significant
hearing loss due to mastoiditis secondary to chronic ear infection. In her early history, she did not talk until 5 years of age. She was
also diagnosed with a goitre and hyperthyroidism as an adult.Fig. 2Array comparative genomic hybridisation. Array CGH was undertaken for
patient V:1 on account of his developmental delay. a Image from Cytogenomics v2.7.22 software (Agilent) showing a ~1.6 Mb gain on 17q12
(hg19; chr17:34,611,352-36,248,918). b Screenshot from UCSC hg19 showing the 17 genes (UCSC) located within the duplicated region Array
comparative genomic hybridisation. Array CGH was undertaken for patient V:1 on account of his developmental delay. a Image from Cytogenomics
v2.7.22 software (Agilent) showing a ~1.6 Mb gain on 17q12 (hg19; chr17:34,611,352-36,248,918). b Screenshot from UCSC hg19 showing the 17
genes (UCSC) located within the duplicated region The present study involves three siblings from an Irish Traveller family with PCD,
laterality defects, dextrocardia (one child) and developmental delay (two children). Analysis of ciliary ultrastructure and beat has only
been reported for four patients with CCDC103 mutations; two previously reported and two in the current study (Table 1). The patients
reported in this study showed reduced numbers of dynein arms on TEM in comparison to healthy controls, but not as low as typically found in
PCD. Whole exome sequencing identified CCDC103 c.461A > C p.His154Pro as the most likely cause of the PCD and laterality phenotype in this
family. This finding brings the number of PCD genes in the relatively small Irish Traveller population to four, highlighting locus
heterogeneity even in a small endogamous population. Given the rarity of PCD (1:15,000-30,000), finding such a high number of causative
genes in a genetically homogenous endogamous population was unexpected.Table 1Clinical and histological characterisation of patients
homozygous for CCDC103
p.His154ProPatientODAIDAMotilityPCDLateralityOtherOriginConsRefUCL-143CompleteCompleten.a.+NormalPakistaniyes3II1lossloss-
OP-1194n.an.an.a.+DextrocardiaPakistaniyes3II1-OP-32Reduction of ODAsNo defect reportedReduced cilia beat amplitude+SI
totalisGermanno3II1-OP-32n.a.n.aLoss of beat coordination, and cilia paralysis+SI abdominalisGermanno3II2+-Italianno4D’Andrea et al.
II-2n.an.an.a.+SI totalisAVSDPFOItalianno4D’Andrea et al. II-3n.an.an.a.+SI totalisAVSDOSIrish Travelleryesc.s.Casey et al. V:1Reduction in
ODAsReduction in IDAsn.d.+SI-Irish Travelleryesc.s.Casey et al. V:2Reduction in ODAsReduction in IDAsn.d.+SI totalis-Casey et al.
V:3n.d.n.d.n.d.Left atrial isomerismAVSDIrish Travelleryesc.s.Features that are present and absent are denoted by + and – respectively.
Abbreviations: AVSD atrioventricular septal defect, Cons consanguinity, c.s. current study, IDA inner dynein arm defects, n.a not available,
n.d. not done, ODA outer dynein arm defects, OS ostium secundum, PCD primary ciliary dyskinesia, PFO patent foramen ovale, Ref reference, SI
situs inversus, SI totalis situs inversus including dextrocardia Clinical and histological characterisation of patients homozygous for
CCDC103 p.His154Pro Features that are present and absent are denoted by + and – respectively. Abbreviations: AVSD atrioventricular septal
defect, Cons consanguinity, c.s. current study, IDA inner dynein arm defects, n.a not available, n.d. not done, ODA outer dynein arm
defects, OS ostium secundum, PCD primary ciliary dyskinesia, PFO patent foramen ovale, Ref reference, SI situs inversus, SI totalis situs
inversus including dextrocardia The CCDC103 p.His154Pro variant has previously been associated with PCD and laterality defects in families
from three other populations; two Pakistani families, one German family and one Italian family [3, 4]. We now report the presence of this
particular variant in the Irish Traveller population. Identification of the same variant across multiple populations supports the causative
nature of the p.His154Pro variant and suggests either a founder mutation or a mutation hotspot. Given the absence of any known shared
ancestry between the three populations, this observation is more likely due to a spontaneous mutation hotspot at cDNA position 461. Almost
50 % of PCD patients have situs inversus totalis, while at least 12 % have incomplete situs inversus or heterotaxy . A total of nine PCD
patients from five families (including current study) have been reported to be homozygous for the CCDC103 p.His154Pro variant (Table 1).
Laterality status ranges from situs solitus (normal) to situs inversus totalis. This variation in laterality may be due to a combination of
timing and the suggested hypomorphic nature of the p.His154Pro variant. The timing of alterations during the patterning process has a
profound effect on the final laterality phenotype . It is possible that the p.His154Pro variant may result in varying levels of protein of
reduced functionality; patients with the least amount of functional protein during the earliest steps in the establishment of left-right
asymmetry may develop situs inversus totalis, whereas those retaining greater amounts of functional protein may develop situs inversus
abdominalis or have normal situs. Panizzi and colleagues also observed considerable phenotypic variation in a zebrafish p.His154Pro model,
suggesting the influence of modifier genes . Of the three affected siblings with the CCDC103 p.His154Pro variant reported in the current
study, only one child (V:3) (with left isomerism) has an AVSD. Two of the six previously reported patients with the p.His154Pro variant also
had an AVSD (Table 1). Congenital heart defects are not uncommon in patients with lateralisation disorders as laterality disturbance can
affect heart development. AVSD associated with laterality defects occurs in approximately 91.2 % of right isomerism compared to 56.8 % of
left isomerism cases . Genes causative of AVSD have demonstrated incomplete penetrance and variable expression which correlates with the
presence of AVSD in 3/9 CCDC103 p.His154Pro patients to date. While the CCDC103 variant explains the PCD, laterality defects and AVSD in
this family, it is unlikely to account for the developmental delay. Array CGH analysis showed that in addition to the CCDC103 gene mutation,
at least two of the children have a maternally inherited 17q12 microduplication of approximately 1.6 Mb. This 17q12 microdupliation overlaps
with duplications previously reported in other patients (Fig. 3a). There is one known disease gene, HNF1B (TCF2), located within the
critical region (Fig. 3b). Deletion of HNF1B is associated with renal cysts and maturity-onset diabetes type 5 while there is one report of
a HNF1B duplication causing various renal abnormalities [8, 9]. As the 17q12 duplication identified in the current study includes this gene,
it is possible that the patients may be at risk of developing renal cysts later in life, though this is an ultrarare feature of the
duplication syndrome. Furthermore, 17q12 duplications are associated with a wide phenotypic spectrum, even in patients with the exact same
breakpoints which complicates genotype-phenotype correlation .Fig. 317q12 microduplications. a UCSC Genome Browser (hg19) view of previously
reported 17q12 microduplications and one large 12.4 Mb duplication. The chromosomal region 17q11.2-q12 is shown together with UCSC genes.
The coloured bars show the location and extent of the duplicated region of the patients described here (red), and of other cases reported in
the literature (blue). b Zoomed in view of genes within the microduplication reported in this study (red) and previously reported 17q12
microduplications (blue). Duplications range in size from 300 kb to 2.4 Mb 17q12 microduplications. a UCSC Genome Browser (hg19) view of
previously reported 17q12 microduplications and one large 12.4 Mb duplication. The chromosomal region 17q11.2-q12 is shown together with
UCSC genes. The coloured bars show the location and extent of the duplicated region of the patients described here (red), and of other cases
reported in the literature (blue). b Zoomed in view of genes within the microduplication reported in this study (red) and previously
reported 17q12 microduplications (blue). Duplications range in size from 300 kb to 2.4 Mb Patients carrying a 17q12 duplication present with
a variable phenotype characterised by intellectual disability or developmental delay of various degree. Additional features may include
behavioural problems, brain abnormalities, epilepsy, esophageal atresia, renal abnormalities, atrial septal defects, sex reversal and ocular
anomalies . A 17q12 microduplication has also been identified in patients with autism spectrum disorder . The patients in the present study
presented with mild-to-moderate developmental delay only. The mother (IV:2), who is the carrier of the microduplication, did not talk until
age 5, consistent with previously reported features of 17q12 microduplcation. Array CGH was not performed on DNA from the deceased child
(V:3). However, it is plausible to suggest that she too had the 17q12 microduplication as she had facial dysmorphism and widely spaced
nipples, which have been reported in patients with 17q12 anomalies. Of note, there is one previous report of a child with PCD, dextrocardia,
AVSD, mild facial dysmorphism and wide spaced nipples . However, the molecular basis of the child’s disorder was not reported. In terms of
genetic counselling, it is important to try and establish which clinical features are attributable to each of the CCDC103 mutation and the
17q12 microduplication. It is clear that the PCD, recurrent infections and laterality defects are a direct result of the CCDC103 mutation.
Although it is not uncommon for PCD patients to have associated speech and language delay due to conductive hearing loss caused by recurrent
chronic otitis media and effusions , we do not think this is the case in the reported family. Brain stem evoked responses were normal after
grommet insertion in patient V:1. Despite normal hearing, his speech is still limited to single words (no sentences) by age 5 years.
Therefore, the speech and language delay together with his behavioural issues are most likely attributable to the 17q12 microduplication.
While his sister (V:2) has only mild speech delay, this variability is frequently found in patients with 17q12 microduplications whereby
development can range from normal to severely delayed. It is interesting to note that the CCDC103 variant and the microduplication are both
located on chromosome 17. We do not believe that one genetic alteration “caused” the other but it suggests co-inheritance. The mother (IV:2)
carries both the 17q12 microduplication and the CCDC103 variant. At least two of her children have inherited both the microduplication and
the CCDC103 variant, indicating that these two alterations are in cis. The father (IV:1) carries the CCDC103 variant only. Therefore, any
child in this family who inherits the CCDC103 variant from their mother, will also inherit the microduplication provided there is no
recombination (Fig. 4). This suggests that any future children in this family who present with PCD and/or laterality should also be tested
for the microduplication which is likely to be co-inherited. Given that the parents are first cousins (mothers are sisters), the CCDC103
variant carried by each parent (IV:1 and IV:2) is likely the same mutation inherited from a common ancestor. The DNA surrounding the CCDC103
variant should therefore be the same on both the mother’s and father’s chromosome 17. However, the fact that the father does not carry the
microduplication suggests that this copy number alteration arose recently as a de novo evolutionary event in either the carrier mother
(IV:2) or in her mother (III:4) (who is the maternal aunt of her husband). These observations suggest that there are two CCDC103 “alleles”
in the Traveller population; one which contains only the CCDC103 variant and another which contains both the CCDC103 variant and the 17q12
microduplication. Hence, it is possible for some Traveller patients to have isolated PCD/laterality due to the CCDC103 alteration while
others will be at risk of the microduplication syndrome depending on which “allele” they inherit.Fig. 4Co-inheritance of two genetic
alterations. The CCDC103 variant (blue) and the 17q12 microduplication (red) are both located on chromosome 17, approximately 6 Mb apart.
Given the co-inheritance of PCD/laterality with the 17q12 microduplication syndrome, the mother (IV:2) most likely carries the two genetic
alterations in cis. The father (IV:1) carries only the CCDC103 variant. Therefore, all offspring within this family who have PCD and
laterality defects will also have 17q12 microduplication syndrome, provided there is no recombination on the maternal chromosome Co-
inheritance of two genetic alterations. The CCDC103 variant (blue) and the 17q12 microduplication (red) are both located on chromosome 17,
approximately 6 Mb apart. Given the co-inheritance of PCD/laterality with the 17q12 microduplication syndrome, the mother (IV:2) most likely
carries the two genetic alterations in cis. The father (IV:1) carries only the CCDC103 variant. Therefore, all offspring within this family
who have PCD and laterality defects will also have 17q12 microduplication syndrome, provided there is no recombination on the maternal
chromosome In conclusion, we report a rare finding of patients with both a single gene disorder (CCDC103) and a chromosome disorder (17q12
microduplication) giving rise to a complex and variable phenotype. Together, the two genetic alterations account for the spectrum of
clinical features observed in the family. Our findings highlight the importance of considering the possibility of more than one genetic
mutation in patients with a complex phenotype, which cannot be explained by abnormalities in one gene alone. We have obtained written
informed consent from the parents of the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review from the Editor of this journal. Additional file 1: Table S1. Primer sequences for PCR amplification. Table
S2. Transmission electron microscopy. Table S3. Variant prioritisation strategy. Table S4. Rare homozygous variants shared by siblings.
Primer sequences for PCR amplification. Table S2. Transmission electron microscopy. Table S3. Variant prioritisation strategy. Table S4.
Rare homozygous variants shared by siblings. Primary ciliary dyskinesia Atrioventricular septal defect Transmission electron microscopy
Comparative genomic hybridisation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions The
work presented here was carried out in collaboration between all authors. MW, BE and SAL performed clinical assessment, diagnostic testing
and patient management. JPC and SAL defined the study design. PG and JSL analysed ciliary ultrastructure and interpreted the ciliary
results. JPC analysed and interpreted the exome data. SE contributed to interpretation of the genetic findings. JM and DB performed and
interpreted the array CGH analysis. JC and SAL drafted the manuscript and all authors contributed to revisions. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We sincerely thank the family involved for their contribution to research, and the use of genetic samples and
clinical information. This work was co-funded by a Medical Research Charities Group grant (MRCG/2013/02) from the Children’s Fund for
Health, The Fundraising Office for Temple Street Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland (R-PAC-2013-06) and the Health Research
Board (Ireland). Jillian Casey is supported by a Medical Research Charities Group grant (MRCG/2013/02).
