The "racket" lesion is a rare presentation of tuberculoid leprosy, which consists of a thickened nerve branch emerging from a tuberculoid
plaque. It results from centripetal damage to cutaneous nerves caused by granuloma formation. We describe a typical case of tuberculoid
leprosy presenting as a "racket" lesion. The lesion persisted after treatment with paucibacillary multidrug therapy. A 38-year-old man had a
2-year history of well-defined annular plaque in the medial dorsal region of his left hand. The plaque had erythematous borders consisting
of grouped papules and its infiltration gradually decreased towards the normochronic, atrophic center. There was pronounced sensory loss at
the site. We also observed a significant thickening of the dorsal branch of the radial nerve emerging from the plaque, which characterizes
the "racket" lesion (Figures 1 and 2). The patient had undergone treatment with multidrug therapy paucibacillary in the past 6 months.
Complementary tests revealed negative sputum smear microscopy and 11.5 mm Mitsuda reaction. Skin biopsy showed the formation of tuberculous
granuloma and associated type 1 reaction (Figures 3 and 4). “Racket” lesion: Circular plaque with papulous well-defi ned borders in the
medial dorsal region of the left hand. Signifi cant thickening of the dorsal branch of the radial nerve (arrow) “Racket” lesion, typical of
tuberculoid leprosy Pathological examination of a fragment of the border of the skin lesion: Superfi cial and deep tuberculoid granulomas
along the neural pathway (HE, 40X) Pathological examination of a fragment of the border of the skin lesion: A) Tuberculoid granuloma with
epithelioid macrophages in the center and a large number of lymphocytes and monocytes in the periphery; B) Tuberculoid granuloma with
central necrosis (HE, 400X) The "tennis racket" lesion is a typical presentation of tuberculoid leprosy. It consists of a thickened nerve
branch emerging from a tuberculoid plaque and results from centripetal damage to cutaneous nerves caused by granuloma formation.1,2,3 In
paucibacillary patients, the evolution of neural lesions is not always related to multidrug therapy, as in the case presented here, in which
the lesion persisted after the treatment had been discontinued. Its persistence is justified because the amount of bacilli in tuberculoid
forms of leprosy is minimal, and antimicrobial drugs only act on metabolically active bacilli. Thus, bacterial destruction is independent
from the therapy used in the treatment of this group of patients. This explains the spontaneous healing observed in patients in the "pre-
dapsone" era.4,5,6 However, the authors emphasize that, despite the possibility of spontaneous regression of tuberculoid leprosy, all
patients should be treated and have their contacts examined in order to identify new cases of leprosy. Financial Support: None. Conflict of
Interest: None. How to cite this article: Brandão LSG, Marques GF, Barreto JA, Coelho APCP, Serrano APP. Tuberculoid leprosy presenting as a
“racket” lesion. An Bras Dermatol. 2015; 90(3):420-2. Study conducted at the Lauro de Souza Lima Institute (ILSL) – Bauru (SP), Brazil.
