The Iso-Kikuchi Syndrome is a rare condition characterized by nail dysplasia involving the index fingers, including micronychia,
polyonychia, anonychia, irregular lunula, malalignment and hemionychogryphosis. On the antero-posterior image, radiologic examination
reveals a narrowing of the distal phalanx. The lateral image shows a Y-shaped bifurcation of the distal phalanx. We report a case of a
patient with typical clinical and radiologic signs of Iso-Kikuchi Syndrome. A 13-year-old patient born and living in Sao Paulo sought the
dermatology clinic of the Hospital do Servidor Público Municipal de São Paulo with a complaint of birth-onset nail changes on the index
fingers. The patient denied a history of consanguinity or consumption of drugs or teratogenic molecules during pregnancy. Dermatological
examination revealed micronychia and changes in the lunula of the second right finger, and micronychia, malalignment of the nail, and
changes in the lunula of the second left finger (Figure 1). Parents denied any associated malformations or cutaneous and systemic diseases.
On the antero-posterior image, radiologic examination revealed a narrowing of the distal phalanx. (Figure 2). The lateral image shows
erosion and Y-shaped deformity of the dorsal side of the free margin of the distal phalanx of the second finger and enlargement of the ulnar
side (Figure 3). Onychodysplasia of the index fi ngers. Right index fi nger: micronychia and changes in the lunula. Left index fi nger:
micronychia, malalignment of the nail and changes in the lunula Radiography of the right hand. Narrowing of the distal phalanx of the index
fi nger Lateral radiological image of the index finger. Y-shaped image of the distal phalanx Congenital onychodysplasia of the index fingers
(COIF), also known as Iso-Kikuchi syndrome, was first described by these researchers in 1969 and 1974, respectively. 1,2 COIF is a rare
condition characterized by nail dysplasia involving the index fingers (IF). It affects both sexes, and shows no known predilection for race
or ethnicity. The clinical characteristics are, in order of frequency, micronychia (located on the ulnar side), polyonychia (central
anonychia and two small incomplete nails on the radial side), anonychia, irregular lunula, malalignment and hemi-onychogryphosis. 3-5 We
have found some case reports in countries like Brazil, Argentina, France, England, Italy, Belgium and India. 5,6 Some studies have described
theories on the pathogenesis of COIF, attributing it to the use of drugs during pregnancy or to ischemic events located on the radial side
of the IF due to direct pressure of the thumbs on the IF of the fetus, which would cause reduction in the diameter of the radial artery of
the IF and its consequent abnormal adhesion. However, these theories are controversial.6 Some studies have also reported associations with
several mesodermal malformations and with the autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expression.7 As the distal phalanx of the IF is a
derivative of the mesoderm, it can be understood that a dysplasia of the processus angularis and changes in the membranous ossification at
the phalanx would explain associated changes such as brachydactyly, brachymesophalangia, syndactyly, joint malformations, ear abnormalities
and inguinal hernia. 6,7 The antero-posterior radiological image shows hypoplasia and narrowing of the distal phalanx, whereas the lateral
radiological image reveals a "Y"-shaped bone projection to the dorsal side. 2,8 Baran and Stroud suggested the following criteria for the
diagnosis of the syndrome:9 -.Congenital occurrence. -. Unilateral or bilateral index finger involvement. -. Variability in nail appearance.
-. Possible hereditary involvement. -.Frequently associated bony abnormalities. Treatment is limited. Parents should be informed of the need
for genetic counseling and possible screening for other potential abnormalities. The hemi-onychogryphosis can be totally or partially
corrected with the use of nail orthoses or with surgery. It is necessary to recognize this disease, perform differential diagnosis with
ectodermal dysplasias and promote future research lines. Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interest: None. How to cite this article: Di
Chiacchio N, Jasso-Olivares JC, Di Chiacchio NG, Jacinto JA, Restrepo MVS. Syndrome in question. An Bras Dermatol. 2015; 90(3):423-5. Study
conducted at the Dermatology Clinic of the Hospital do Servidor Público Estadual de São Paulo (HSPE) – São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
