Brachioradial pruritus is a chronic sensory neuropathy of unknown etiology which affects the skin of the shoulders, arms and forearms on the
insertion of the brachioradialis muscle. We describe the case of a 60-yearold woman recently diagnosed with multiple myeloma who refers
paresis, severe pruritus and itching lesions on the right arm with 6 months of evolution. Investigation led to a diagnosis of Brachioradial
pruritus consequent to the presence of cervical disc herniation and Parsonage-Turner syndrome. The patient started gabapentin 900mg/day with
good control of itching. Corticosteroids and antihistamines are often ineffective in the treatment of BP. Gabapentin has been used with
encouraging results. All patients with Brachioradial pruritus should be evaluated for cervical spine injuries. Brachioradial pruritus (BP)
is a chronic sensory neuropathy which affects the skin of the shoulders, arms and forearms on the insertion of the brachioradialis muscle.
The etiology is unknown, although some authors emphasize an association with sun exposure and/or cervical spine injuries.1,2 In 1968,
Waisman first described cases of patients with very intense and persistent itch of the skin over the insertion of the brachioradialis
muscle, having this pathology related to intense sun exposure. 3 The skin in the affected region was normal and the pruritus was resistant
to treatment with systemic or topical corticosteroids, oral antihistamines, or anxiolytics. Additionally, in 1983, Heyl associated BP with
cervical spine disorders such as osteoarthritis, trauma or disc herniations.4 Some authors have suggested that cutaneous nerves can be
simultaneously damaged by solar radiation and cervical spine injuries. This case report describes an example of BP not associated with sun
exposure. A 60-year-old woman with multiple myeloma was referred to dermatology consultation for an intense pruritus on her right arm with
six months evolution and no worsening after sun exposure. On physical examination we observed excoriations on the lateral side of the right
arm (Figure 1). The patient also complained of right brachial paresis. Computed tomography of the cervical spine, magnetic resonance imaging
and electromyography of the brachial plexus showed right cervical disc herniation with nerve root compression of C6-C7 and right brachial
plexus inflamation (Parsonage-Turner syndrome) attributed to neoplastic infiltration of multiple myeloma. A skin biopsy on the right arm
demonstrated a nonspecific superficial dermatitis (Figure 2). Ulcerated erythematous papules on the lateral aspect of the right arm
suggestive of scratching Superficial lymphocytic non-specific dermatitis (H&E, 10x) In this context, we assumed the diagnosis of BP
consequent to the described nerve lesions (cervical disc herniation and Parsonage-Turner syndrome). The patient was treated with
methylprednisolone aceponate cream 0.1% and oral hydroxyzine 25mg every 8 hours, which resulted in little improvement of the pruritus.
Consequently, gabapentin was introduced at 900 mg/day, achieving optimal control after 3 months of follow-up. The patient was also referred
to neurosurgery and oncology consultation for additional therapeutic orientation. BP has multifactorial etiology and its pathophysiological
mechanism remains unknown. A decrease of intraepithelial nerve fibers was observed in patients with intense brachioradial pruritus in the
context of prolonged exposure to sunlight and / or disorders of the cervical innervation.5.6 Corticosteroids and antihistamines are often
ineffective. Capsaicin cream 0.025% can be effective, but with frequent relapses. Oral gabapentin (900 mg to 3600mg) has been used with
encouraging results.7.8 Other treatments include mirtazapine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and thalidomide with variable degrees
of response.9 In the presented case, the investigation of BP led to a diagnosis of two different entities with specific therapeutic
orientation (cervical disc herniation with nerve root compression requiring neurosurgical intervention and Parsonage-Turner syndrome with
neoplastic infiltration of multiple myeloma for oncological treatment). The authors suggest cervical spine lesion be ruled out in all
patients with BP. Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interest: None. How to cite this article: Carvalho S, Sanches M, Alves R, Selores M.
Brachioradial pruritus in a patient with cervical disc herniation and Parsonage-Turner syndrome. An Bras Dermatol. 2015; 90(3):401-2. Work
performed at the Dermatology and Venereology Service, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Portugal
