Spontaneous splenic rupture is a rare but known complication of dengue fever. Previously reported cases have occurred early during the
course of the disease and most cases have led to a fatal outcome. Here we report a case of spontaneous splenic rupture in a patient with
dengue fever, which occurred during the recovery phase of the illness. A 28-year-old Sinhalese, Sri Lankan man presented with a history of
fever, myalgia and vomiting of 4 days duration. Investigations revealed a diagnosis of dengue fever with no signs of plasma leakage. He was
managed in the ward as per local protocol. During the recovery phase the patient developed severe abdominal distention with circulatory
failure. Radiology revealed splenic rupture with massive amounts of abdominal free fluid. The patient was resuscitated and Emergency
laparotomy with splenectomy was performed. The outcome was excellent with the patient making a complete recovery. Although splenic rupture
is a known complication of dengue fever it may be manifested late in the disease process. A high degree of suspicion should be maintained
and patients must be monitored even during the recovery phase of dengue fever. Early diagnosis and intervention can prevent mortality. The
online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13104-015-1234-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Dengue fever is the commonest arboviral illness in the world . In Sri Lanka it has reached epidemic proportions with over 25,000 reported
cases annually . Apart from its well-known manifestation of plasma leakage leading to circulatory failure, dengue is known to lead to
multiple other complications, such as myocarditis, hepatitis and neurological manifestations . Spontaneous splenic rupture is a rare but
known complication of dengue fever, which has been well reported in world literature . However almost all of the reported cases have
described spontaneous splenic rupture to occur early during the course of the illness. Late splenic rupture, during the recovery phase of
the illness has hitherto not been reported in world literature. A 28-year-old previously healthy Sinhalese, Sri Lankan man with no known co-
morbidities was admitted to Government General Hospital Kaluthara, in the Western Province of Sri Lanka with a history of fever for 4 days
associated with myalgia, vomiting and anorexia. He had no haemorrhagic manifestations on admission. On examination his oral temperature was
40°C. Blood pressure was 115/86 mmHg with no significant postural hypotension. Pulse rate was 88 beats per minute. Abdomen was soft, not
distended and non-tender. Lungs were clear. Investigations on admission—hemoglobin (Hb) 14.2 g/dl, packed cell volume (PCV) 41.2%, white
blood cells (WBC) 1,500/mm3, Platelet count 68,000/mm3. He was managed in the medical ward as dengue fever according to Sri Lankan
guidelines . His platelet count continued to drop by day 5 and 6 of fever where it reached a low of 53,000/mm3. However he remained stable
haemodynamically with no evidence of plasma leakage. His PCV remained at around 40% with adequate hydration. Dengue IgM and IgG antibodies
were positive, confirming the diagnosis. By day 7, his fever settled and his platelet count started to rise and reached a level of
68,000/mm3 with stable PCV and haemodyanamics. On day 8, despite being afebrile, he complained of severe generalized abdominal pain.
Examination revealed a distended, severely tender abdomen. He was clinically pale. His blood pressure dropped to 80/60. Pulse rate 140 bpm.
Investigations—Hb 8.8 g/dl, PCV 26%, WBC 4,000/mm3, platelets 90,000/mm3. His coagulation profile was normal. A concealed bleed was
suspected and the patient was transfused with two pints of packed red cells. An ultrasound scan of the abdomen at that time revealed a large
amount of free fluid in the pelvis and Morrison’s pouch. A contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was performed
(Figure 1) which revealed free fluid in the peritoneal cavity with a per-splenic haematoma. The patient was taken over to the surgical ward
and an emergency laparotomy was performed. There was approximately 4 l of blood in the peritoneal cavity and a 4 cm splenic laceration close
to the upper pole (Figure 2). Splenectomy was done. Four pints of packed rec cells were transfused during the surgery. Post Op day 1 the
patient was haemodynamically stable. Hb 11.5 g/dl, PCV 35, WBC 14,000/mm3, platelets 183,000/mm3. The splenic histology was normal. The
patient was discharged home 5 days following surgery.Figure 1Contrast enhanced computed tomography scan of the abdomen—free fluid in
peritoneal cavity with splenic laceration.Figure 2Post-splenectomy—splenic laceration close to upper pole. Contrast enhanced computed
tomography scan of the abdomen—free fluid in peritoneal cavity with splenic laceration. Post-splenectomy—splenic laceration close to upper
pole. Splenic rupture could be either post-traumatic or non-traumatic. Non-traumatic, spontaneous splenic rupture refers to one which occurs
in a histologically normal spleen . Many infections are known to lead to spontaneous splenic rupture, including infectious mononucleosis,
malaria, typhoid, varicella, infective endocarditis, Q-fever, influenza, aspergillosis and dengue. In Sri Lanka there has been one
previously published case of spontaneous splenic rupture following dengue fever . When reading through all the published articles, it was
evident that all previously reported cases of post-dengue spontaneous splenic rupture occurred during the acute stage of the illness, either
during the viraemic stage or the critical phase (Table 1). There have been no previously documented cases of this manifestation occurring in
the recovery phase of the illness. It is hypothesized that a combination of coagulation factors and severe thrombocytopenia lead to this
phenomenon, however the exact mechanism of splenic rupture in dengue is not clear. The fact that this occurred in our patient during the
recovery phase, where the platelet count was rising and normal coagulation profile, contradicts both theories. The splenic histology of our
patient was also unremarkable rejecting any structural damage to the spleen leading to rupture. A possible mechanism which could be
postulated is severe splenic congestion leading to laceration and subcapsular hematoma formation. Timely diagnosis and intervention lead to
complete recovery of our patient, which is fortunate compared to most other reported cases which had a fatal outcome .Table 1Published case
reports of spontaneous splenic rupture complicating dengue fever with timing of eventCase reportTiming of splenic ruptureImbert et al. Day
4Pungjitprapai and Tantawichien Day 5Redondo et al. Day 5Miranda et al. Day 2Bhaskar and Moorthy Day 4 Published case reports of spontaneous
splenic rupture complicating dengue fever with timing of event Spontaneous splenic rupture although being a known complication of dengue
fever, should be suspected at any phase during the disease process. Monitoring dengue patients should continue beyond the recovery phase and
a high degree of suspicion should be made if signs and symptoms suggest splenic rupture. Early diagnosis and intervention will be lifesaving
(Additional file 1). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: CARE checklist. CARE
checklist. hemoglobin packed cell volume haematocrit white blood cells immunoglobulin M immunoglobulin G computed tomography WTT carried out
the literature search and drafted the manuscript; MG did the critical revision for important intellectual content in the manuscript and
given the final approval of the version to be published. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the
departments of surgery, radiology, microbiology and medicine at General Hospital, Kalutara, Sri Lanka for providing help in diagnosing and
managing the patient mentioned in the case report. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
