We describe an incident of development of acute pulmonary edema after the device closure of a secundum atrial septal defect in a 52-year-old
lady, which was treated with inotropes, diuretics and artificial ventilation. Possibility of acute left ventricular dysfunction should be
considered after the defect closure in the middle-aged patients as the left ventricular compliance may be reduced due to increased elastic
stiffness and diastolic dysfunction. Baseline left atrial pressure may be > 10 mmHg in these patients. Associated risk factors for the left
ventricular dysfunction are a large Qp:Qs ratio, systemic hypertension, severe pulmonary hypertension and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
Atrial septal defect (ASD) is routinely closed using occluder device in a cardiac catheterization laboratory. The device closure of ASD may
be complicated with perforation of cardiac chambers and embolization of the device. We describe an incident of the development of acute
pulmonary edema after the device closure of a secundum ASD. A 52-year-old lady presented with a history of dyspnea on exertion (grade 2) and
self-limiting paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) since 1-year and hypertension since 3 years on T.Amlodipine 5 mg OD. Features on
preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) were a 26 mm × 16 mm ostium secundum ASD shunting left-to-right, normal systolic function
of the ventricles and right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 42 mmHg. The left ventricular (LV) internal diastolic diameter and
systolic diameter were 42 mm/27 mm, and right ventricular (RV) diameter was 36 mm. Chest X-ray findings were the cardiothoracic ratio of 55%
and bilateral pulmonary plethora [Figure 1a]. She was scheduled for transcatheter closure of the ASD in the cardiac catheterization
laboratory. On the day of the procedure in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, standard monitors were connected. After anesthesia
induction with Inj.Midazolam 1 mg, Inj.Fentanyl 100 mcg, and Inj.Propofol 100 mg, Inj.Vecuronium 8 mg was used as a relaxant and patient was
intubated with 7.5 mm cuffed endotracheal tube. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) probe was inserted (I/E 33, Philips Medical Systems,
Bothell, WA, USA). Cardiac examination confirmed the findings on TTE. Cardiac catheterization studies revealed a normal coronary angiogram,
a Qp: Qs shunt >2:1 and the LV end-diastolic pressure and left atrial pressure (LAP) of 10 mmHg. Pulmonary venous Doppler profile showed
continuous antegrade wave during systole and diastole. The ASD was closed with the deployment of a size 28 Cocoon device. The patient was in
sinus rhythm with stable hemodynamics. After confirming ASD device in place and stable, TEE probe was removed. At the end of the procedure,
the neuromuscular blockade was reversed, and trachea extubated after the recovery of adequate respiratory efforts and muscle power. There
was no evidence of stridor, secretions or laryngospasm immediately after tracheal extubation. (a) Preoperative chest X-ray shows
cardiomegaly and bilateral pulmonary plethora (b) chest X-ray after atrial septal defect device closure shows bilateral lung congestion in
basal and hilar region About 10 min after extubation, patient had tachycardia, hypotension, and fall in the saturation to 85%. The TTE
revealed moderate LV global hypokinesia, severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR), and RVSP of 40 mmHg. The trachea was reintubated and infusion
of epinephrine 0.1 mcg−1 × kg−1 × min−1 and Dobutamine 10 mcg−1 × kg−1 × min−1 were commenced. In addition, 40 mg furosemide and morphine 10
mg were injected. The patient was transferred to ICU and ventilated artificially. As the rhythm changed to paroxysmal AF (rate >140),
infusion of Amiodarone was started. The LV contractility improved within 10 min, although the TR persisted. The troponin-T levels done 3 h
after the procedure showed normal values. The chest X-ray showed features of pulmonary edema [Figure 1b], which were resolved after 14 h of
ventilation. The LV systolic function as evidenced by the ejection fraction had improved as seen on repeat TTE after tracheal extubation.
The patient had an uneventful recovery afterwards and was discharged on 3rd day after the procedure. Left ventricular failure is a rare
complication following device closure of ASD especially in elderly patients. Fundamental pathophysiology of ASD in young adults can be
described as RV volume overload, paradoxical movement of the interventricular septum (IVS), severe restriction in diastolic filling and
chronic LV underloading. Prolonged RV contraction results in dyssynchronization of relaxation between the ventricular septum and the LV free
wall. ASD closure ceases the RV volume overload and removes the LV diastolic restraint by restoring the IVS movements. The baseline left
ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) remains comparable with normal subjects and increases marginally after the ASD closure. The LV
volume increases along with an increase in the LAP and LVEDP after the ASD closure. The transmitral Doppler E/A ratio remain normal unless
the LAP remains grossly elevated due to reduced LV compliance. The E/E’ increases in all patients after ASD closure. The LV pressure-volume
relationship in young adults with ASD is governed by ventricular interdependence rather than a high LV passive stiffness that explains the
absence of pulmonary edema after the ASD closure. Increasing elastic stiffness and impaired intrinsic diastolic compliance of LV influence
the LV pressure-volume relationship in elderly patients with ASD. Studies focused on LV compliance and stiffness in ASD patients reveals
that the slope k of the elastic stiffness-stress relation is significantly greater in patients with ASD than in the normal patients,
suggestive of increased chamber stiffness. It predicts higher LV filling pressures with respect to volume after ASD closure. In middle-aged
patients, the LV compliance may also be reduced due to LV diastolic dysfunction in as many as 19% of patients, which gets unmasked after ASD
occlusion causing acute increase in LAP and transmitral E/A ratio. Apart from stiffness and diastolic dysfunction, some other factors may
contribute toward LV dysfunction after the ASD closure. LV diastolic dysfunction may be associated with advanced age, severe pulmonary
hypertension, systemic hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and aggravated by paroxysmal AF. Transcatheter closure of ASD should
always be deferred in ischemic heart disease patients who need percutaneous myocardial revascularization. Coronary air embolism during the
deployment of ASD device has been reported to cause cardiac dysfunction, although delayed hemodynamic deterioration and absence of increase
in troponin-T levels indicate that it was not the cause of LV failure in our patient. Although, the LV dimensions in our patient were within
normal limits, the baseline LAP was raised to 10 mmHg, suggesting reduced LV compliance [Table 1]. The reduced LV compliance could have
precipitated pulmonary edema due to increased LAP that was compounded by the coexistence of other conditions like middle-age, large Qp: Qs
ratio, systemic hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, and paroxysmal AF. Comparing presentation between patients with and without LV
dysfunction immediately after ASD closure LV: Left ventricular, ASD: Atrial septal defect, LVEDP: Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure,
LAP: Left atrial pressure The temporary balloon occlusion of the ASD along with LAP monitoring is considered the best method to predict the
risk of postclosure heart failure. If the LV compliance is reduced due to high elastic stiffness or diastolic dysfunction, the baseline mean
LAP is usually >10–12 mmHg. Balloon occlusion in such patients markedly increases the transmitral E/A ratio and LAP, particularly in the
peak pressure of V-wave. Current management options in potential high-risk patients for heart failure after ASD closure include
pharmacological preconditioning before ASD closure and the use of the fenestrated device, which markedly reduce the mean LAP and help
preventing postclosure heart failure. The pharmacological preconditioning may be performed before ASD closure for 48 h using intravenous
inotropes and furosemide or for 2 months with diuretics and afterload reducing agents like enalapril. In addition, a small ASD may be left
unclosed as a decompression route for both the ventricles. In summary, the possibility of acute LV dysfunction should be considered after
ASD closure in a middle-aged patient, whose baseline LAP is elevated to 10 mmHg and above. The risk of pulmonary edema is compounded in the
presence of other risk factors such as a large Qp: Qs ratio, systemic hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, and paroxysmal AF. Treatment
with inotropes and diuretics, maintaining sinus rhythm, and instituting artificial ventilation may be needed to stabilize the vital
parameters. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
