This report describes an emergent balloon aortic valvuloplasty (BAV) procedure performed under cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a 79-year-
old man with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis (mean gradient 78 mm Hg, valve area 0.71 cm2, and left ventricular ejection fraction 40%)
awaiting surgery and who was admitted for heart failure rapidly evolving to cardiogenic shock and multiorgan failure. Decision was made to
perform emergent BAV. After crossing the valve with a 6 French catheter, the patient developed an electromechanical dissociation confirmed
at transesophageal echocardiography and cardiac arrest. Manual chest compressions were initiated along with the application of high doses of
intravenous adrenaline, and BAV was performed under ongoing resuscitation. Despite BAV, transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated no
cardiac activity. At this point, it was decided to advance a pigtail catheter over the wire already in place in the left ventricle and to
inject intracardiac adrenaline (1 mg, followed by 5 mg). Left ventricular contraction progressively resumed and, in the absence of aortic
regurgitation, an intraaortic balloon pump was inserted. The patient could be weaned from intraaortic balloon pump and vasopressors on day
1, extubated on day 6, and recovered from multiorgan failure. In the absence of neurologic deficits, he underwent uneventful transcatheter
aortic valve implantation on day 12 and was discharged to a cardiac rehabilitation program on day 30. At 3-month follow-up, he reported
dyspnea NYHA class II as the only symptom. This case shows that severe aortic stenosis leading to electromechanical dissociation may be
treated by emergent BAV and intracardiac administration of high-dose adrenaline. Intracardiac adrenaline may be considered in case of
refractory electromechanical dissociation occurring in the cardiac catheterization laboratory. Percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty
(BAV) was first performed in 19861 as an alternative for surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) in high-risk patients. First observational
studies demonstrated hemodynamic improvement following BAV, but high rate of early restenosis and a considerable rate of complications.2–5
Nowadays, several studies6,7 have described the feasibility of BAV as a bridge to SAVR or transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) in
patients with cardiogenic shock8 or major comorbities,9 and current guidelines of the European Society of Cardiology recommend this
procedure as a class IIb, level of evidence C for this indication. The first TAVI procedure was performed in 2002 by Cribier et al10 and
since then it has become a widely used technique for patients with severe aortic stenosis not suitable for surgery or at high surgical risk.
Accordingly, the PARTNER Trials11,12 demonstrated the superiority of TAVI over BAV, and standard therapies in inoperable patients and the US
CoreValve pivotal trial13 showed for the first time superiority of TAVI to SAVR in patients at increased surgical risk. A 79-year-old
patient known for severe symptomatic aortic stenosis (transaortic peak velocity 5.7 m/s, mean gradient 78 mm Hg, and valve area 0.71 cm2)
awaiting TAVI presented with acute onset of shortness of breath because of heart failure. Prior investigation reported a moderately reduced
left ventricular ejection fraction (40%) without significant coronary artery disease documented on coronary angiography. His comorbidities
consisted of hypertension, diabetes, chronic alcohol consumption, atrial fibrillation, and chronic renal failure. The logistic EurosSCORE
was calculated at 25% for perioperative mortality, while Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) risk score was 5%. Upon presentation, the
condition of the patient rapidly deteriorated requiring endotracheal intubation and high doses of cathecholamines, and he developed
multiorgan failure. Decision was made to perform percutaneous BAV as a bridge to aortic valve replacement. Arterial vascular access was
obtained through transradial and transfemoral approaches for simultaneous pressure measurements and cardiac imaging consisted of both
fluoroscopy/angiography and transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Following valve crossing, a 6 French pigtail catheter was advanced in
the left ventricle, while the second pigtail catheter was positioned in the aortic root and the hemodynamics of the patient further
deteriorated. Simultaneous pressure measurement documented systolic aortic pressure of 40 mm Hg and systolic pressure in the left ventricle
of 100 mm Hg despite high dose of cathecholamines (Figure 1). TEE excluded cardiac tamponade, but revealed a progressive decrease in
contractility and finally electromechanical dissociation, as confirmed by the transesophageal echocardiography probe already in place. Under
manual cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), BAV was performed with a 20 mm × 4 cm Nucleus balloon (NuMED, NY), but this led to no
contraction of the left ventricle despite high doses of adrenaline administered IV. Over the wire present in the left ventricle, a pigtail
was advanced and intracardiac adrenaline (1 mg followed by additional 5 mg) was administered. Cardiac function and blood pressure gradually
recovered (Figure 2). In the absence of significant aortic regurgitation, an intraaortic balloon pump was inserted, leading to a further
improvement of the hemodynamics. The next day, the inotropes could be weaned off and the intraaortic balloon pump was removed. The patient
was extubated on day 6 and organ functions recovered. Invasive hemodynamic waves of simultaneous left ventricle–aortic pressures before
balloon aortic valvuloplasty showing severe aortic stenosis and cardiogenic shock. Patient conditions degradated following the catheter
insertion in the left ventricle. Note the systolic blood pressure of approximately 50 mm Hg (yellow arrow), the left ventricular systolic
pressure of approximately 90 mm Hg, and the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure of approximately 35 mm Hg. Recovery of hemodynamic
parameters after balloon aortic valvuloplasty and intracardiac adrenaline. Twelve days later, in the absence of neurologic deficits and
after a heart team agreement, decision of percutaneous approach was made because of the comorbidities and high intraoperative surgical risk
of the patient. The patient underwent a successful transfemoral TAVI via a left femoral approach with a 31 mm CoreValve (Medtronic Inc, MN).
Owing to a complete atrioventricular block, this patient with preexisting right bundle branch block required a definitive pacemaker
implantation. The patient could be discharged to rehabilitation on day 30 in dyspnea NYHA class II. At 3-month follow-up, he reported
dyspnea NYHA class II as the only symptom. This case report describes the performance of BAV under CPR condition in a patient with severe
aortic stenosis as a bridge to TAVI. Despite the lack of left ventricular contraction documented after BAV on TEE, the administration of
intracardiac adrenaline followed by intraaortic balloon pump insertion allowed for restoration of cardiac function, stabilization of
hemodynamics, and ultimately a staged TAVI procedure. In patients not immediately suitable for TAVI/SAVR because of hemodynamic instability
or multiorgan failure, BAV as a bridge to TAVI/SAVR is a well-described procedure, which demonstrated its feasibility and safety with good
midterm outcomes. Indeed, in a large trial6 of BAV including 538 BAV procedures, BAV as a bridge was performed in 7% of patients who were in
cardiogenic shock, all with good hemodynamic outcomes and without major complications. In addition, literature reported a study that
randomized 86 patients at high risk with severe aortic stenosis to undergo BAV as a bridge to TAVI versus no previous BAV, suggesting that
performing BAV to relieve symptoms before14 TAVI is a safe procedure. Although no reports on BAV under CPR conditions were identified, 1
previous report describes an emergent TAVI under CPR. Accordingly, Jensen et al15 described a CoreValve implantation under Automatic-CPR
using the Lucas® Chest Compression System for a severe aortic regurgitation developed during balloon aortic dilatation before TAVI procedure
with no major complications at 30-day follow-up. Adrenaline is a sympathomimetic drug, which helps to improve cardiac output through its
action in cardiac B-adrenergic receptors, and its use in intravenous administration is well known in cardiac arrest. However, intracardiac
injection was only described in immediate cardiac resuscitation in the 90 seconds by direct injection into right ventricle through a
transthoracic parasternal approach. No recent literature has been found on intracardiac injection of adrenaline via a percutaneous catheter
in patients with cardiac arrest. This case shows that electromechanical dissociation in a patient with severe aortic stenosis and
cardiogenic shock was reversed by BAV and intracardiac adrenaline and allowed for a bridge to TAVI. Intracardiac adrenaline may be
considered in case of refractory electromechanical dissociation occurring in the cardiac catheterization laboratory. Abbreviations: BAV =
balloon aortic valvuloplasty, CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation, SAVR = surgical aortic valve replacement, STS = Society of Thoracic
Surgeons, TAVI = transcatheter aortic valve implantation, TEE = transoesophageal echocardiography. Ethical approval: Not necessary because
it is a case report. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
