In immunocompetent persons, primary cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is self-limited infection. Lymphoma-like syndromes have been sometimes
described in adults but have not been described for children. Lymphoma-like syndromes (protracted fever, alteration of the general status,
and clinical lymphoproliferative syndrome) were retrospectively recorded in children attending our hospital from 1999 to 2008 for primary
CMV infection. Patients with immunodeficiency, coinfection (Epstein–Barr virus, toxoplasmosis, or mycobacterial), or biological criteria of
mononucleosis-like syndrome were excluded. We report 4 cases of lymphoma-like syndrome. The median duration of fever was 21.5 days (range
15–27). Tonsillitis and hepatitis are most of the time missing. A probable malignant diagnosis was raised in 3 cases. Clinical outcome was
protracted (15–35 days) but favorable. To our knowledge, our study is the first pediatric case series of lymphoma-like syndrome. This
clinical presentation is a source of delayed diagnosis due to diagnosis pitfall. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a DNA virus belonging to the
Herpesviridae family (Human herpesvirus 5), transmitted in blood, tissue transplantation, and also through saliva, genital secretions,
urine, and breast feeding. After primary infection, latency is established, and reactivations can occur particularly in immunodeficient
individuals. Primary CMV infection is common during early childhood: the prevalence rate, in industrialized countries, for children from 1
to 4 years old is estimated to be 43%.1 CMV infection and reactivation have been extensively explored in immunocompromised subjects because
they can induce frequent and severe clinical manifestations. In immunocompetent persons, primary CMV infection is self-limited infection,
more often asymptomatic, and sometimes mononucleosis-like syndrome, meeting the Hoagland criteria of mononucleosis: fever, tonsillitis,
lymphadenopathies, and lymphocytosis with ≥10% of atypical lymphocytes.2 However, atypical presentations have also been described in
immunocompetent patients such as hepatitis, Guillain–Barré syndrome, colitis, myocarditis, pericarditis, thrombocytopenia, and autoimmune
hemolytic anemia.3 Lymphoma-like syndromes associated with primary CMV infection have also been reported in adults.4 Prolonged febrile
syndromes, alteration of the general status, large adenopathies, and hepatosplenomegaly are the hallmarks of this form of infection. To our
knowledge, lymphoma-like syndrome revealing primary CMV infection has never been described in pediatric patients. We report here 4 atypical
primary CMV infections in immunocompetent children with lymphoma-like syndromes resulting in diagnostic difficulties necessitating multiple
explorations. Lymphoma-like syndromes were retrospectively reviewed in children attending the Montpellier University Hospital from January
1, 1999 to December 31, 2008 for primary CMV infection. Immunocompetent children ages 1 month to 18 years with lymphoma-like syndrome during
CMV primary infection and without biological mononucleosis-like syndrome were included. Definition of lymphoma-like syndrome was a
protracted fever (≥15 days), an alteration of the general status (asthenia, anorexia, and weight loss), and a clinical lymphoproliferative
syndrome defined by lymphadenopathies with malignancy criteria (firm, fixed, or supracentimetric) or hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Diagnosis
of primary CMV infection was based on serological testing with the detection of CMV-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) M associated with the
presence of low-avidity CMV-specific IgG or evidence of IgG seroconversion. Immunodeficient patients, patients with primary Epstein–Barr
virus coinfection, toxoplasmosis, or mycobacterial infection and patients with biological criteria of mononucleosis-like syndrome defined as
a strong increase of circulating mononuclear cells and >10% of activated lymphocytes were excluded. The ethics committee was consulted
(Comité de Protection des Personnes Sud Méditerranée IV, Dr Dubois), and as per their response, in our country, a retrospective study did
not need an ethical approval. In our hospital laboratory, between January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2008, CMV serological testing was
performed in 2151 children. Of these, 101 patients (4.70%) had CMV-specific IgM. Of the CMV IgM-positive group, 33 (1.53%) were excluded
because of immunodeficiency and 37 (1.72%) because of unconfirmed primary CMV infection diagnosis. Primary CMV infection was confirmed in 31
immunocompetent patients (1.44%). Out of them, 4 (2 girls and 2 boys) patients met the criteria for lymphoma-like syndrome. Median age was
59 months (range 33-82). All of the patients were hospitalized. The main reason for consultation was protracted fever. The median duration
of fever was 21.5 days (range 15–27). It was associated with chills and sweats in 2 cases. Patients were referred to the hospital after an
average of 18 days with fever (range 13–27). Digestive symptoms were associated in 2 cases (Table 1). Characteristics of Patients With
Lymphoma-Like Syndrome During Primary CMV Infection Clinical examination showed hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly in 3 cases and
lymphadenopathies in all cases. Lymphadenopathies were cervical, suggesting a malignancy in 3 cases. Tonsillitis and cutaneous rash were
rare (1 case each). One patient had lymphocytosis (14,500 lymphocytes/mm3). Atypical lymphocytes in the leukocytic count were inconstant (2
cases), delayed, and in small proportion (1%–3% of lymphocytes). Cytopenia was not observed. One patient had a moderate thrombocytosis
(518,000 platelets/mm3). C-reactive protein was moderately increased (mean 25 mg/L, range 10–37), and laboratory liver function tests
(aspartate transaminase , alanine transaminase , and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase) were within normal ranges. Abdominal ultrasonography was
performed in all cases and confirmed clinical hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly. Two patients had abdominal lymphoid hyperplasia: the first
one had many lymphadenopathies in the mesenteric and the hepatic hilum areas. The second one had ileal lymphoid hyperplasia associated with
many lymphadenopathies and renal infiltration with nephromegaly. Chest radiography was normal in all cases. Diagnosis of primary CMV
infection was initially not suspected, and CMV serology was only performed between the 13th and the 29th day (mean, day 18) after the
beginning of the fever. A probable malignant diagnosis was raised in 3 cases. Bone marrow aspiration was performed and was normal. One
patient had a lymph node needle aspiration, showing nonspecific adenitis. Neither adenopathy nor bone marrow biopsies were performed. Two
patients had only antipyretic treatment. The 2 other children were treated with antibiotics, macrolides, as a therapeutic test.
Acetylsalicylic acid was prescribed for 1 patient with a suspicion of Still disease. Liver cytolysis without liver failure (AST 720 UI/L,
ALT 2000 UI/L) occurred because of drug overdosage. Clinical outcome was good after stopping treatment. Corticotherapy was prescribed to
this patient. No patient received specific antiviral treatment. Clinical outcome was protracted (15–35 days) but favorable for all patients.
In the long term, no patient presented any sequel, and, to our knowledge, there was no diagnosis of malignant lymphoproliferative disorder
or immune deficiency thereafter. We describe 4 pediatric cases of lymphoma-like syndrome during primary CMV infection. Clinical presentation
was protracted fever, alteration of the general status, and cervical lymphadenopathies associated in some of them with hepatomegaly and/or
splenomegaly and/or abdominal lymphadenopathies. These clinical presentations induce diagnostic wavering due to the absence of tonsillitis
and of biological mononucleosis syndrome. To our knowledge, our study is the first pediatric case series of lymphoma-like syndrome during
primary CMV infection. Only few adult cases have been described. Bonnet et al4 reported that among 115 hospitalized immunocompetent patients
with primary CMV infection, 7% had pseudotumoral presentation (splenomegaly or lymphadenopathies with malignancy criteria) and 4% had
lymphoma-like syndrome (alteration of the general status, protracted fever, lymphadenopathies with malignancy criteria, and
hepatosplenomegaly). Complications described in that study were a subscapular splenic hematoma and a splenic rupture.4 In children,
lymphadenopathies and hepatomegaly are more frequent during primary CMV infection,5 but lymphoma-like syndrome has never been described so
far. The first reason is that there is no other large retrospective study about CMV primoinfection in immunocompetent children. The second
reason is that lymphoma-like syndrome is very uncommon (only 4 children in 10 years in our hospital). However, among our 31 cases of primary
CMV infection in immunocompetent children, lymphoma-like syndrome is one of the most frequent clinical presentation, and all the
immunocompetent children with protracted fever (≥15 days) have a lymphoma-like syndrome (data not shown). However, the retrospective feature
of our study and potential selection bias related to the recruitment in a reference hospital may limit the generalizability of our
observations. Pseudolymphoma syndromes during primary CMV infection have been poorly described, especially in children, and is probably
underestimated. Protracted fever, alteration of the general status, and clinical lymphoproliferative syndrome are the key features of this
syndrome that should justify a diagnostic CMV serology. Lymphoma-like syndrome is a source of delayed diagnosis because many differential
diagnoses exist and need to be eliminated. Although tonsillitis, hepatitis, and biological mononucleosis-like syndrome are missing, primary
CMV infection must be raised as a surrogate diagnosis of malignant pathology. Abbreviations: ALT = alanine transaminase, AST = aspartate
transaminase, CMV = cytomegalovirus. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
