Patients with the homozygous sickle cell disease have increased perioperative mortality. Some indications like heart valve surgery, may
justify an exchange blood transfusion to reduce the proportion of hemoglobin S (HbS) and complications. We report two female cases aged 20
and 27, of African origin with homozygous sickle cell anemia who underwent heart valve surgery to treat mitral valve regurgitation. This
presentation describes the perioperative considerations including anesthesia and postoperative care. A partial exchange blood transfusion
decreased HbS levels from respectively, 90% and 84%, 9% to 27% and 34%, and simultaneously treated the anemia. Neither sickling crisis nor
acidosis occurred in any patient, and no special postoperative complication occurred. Average hospital stay was 10 days. Currently, the two
patients remain alive and free of cardiac symptoms. Although the presence of sickle cell disorders is associated with increased risk of
sickling and thus vaso-occlusive complications, they should not be taken as a contraindication for heart valve surgery. Nevertheless,
monitoring of certain parameters such as venous, arterial oxygen content, pH, and body temperature is mandatory for a better outcome.
Furthermore, preoperative exchange transfusion has a positive influence on the outcome of surgery and on the survival of patients undergoing
heart valves surgery. Avoiding intraoperative hypoxia, hypothermia, and vaso-constrictive agents, minimizing HbS levels with preoperative
exchange transfusion, and ensuring a stress-free environment with the judicious use of sedatives made surgery relatively safe in these
cases. Hemoglobinopathies mainly sickle cell anemia and thalassemia, are autosomal-recessive inherited disorders. Approximately 5% of the
whole world population carries a potentially pathological gene. Sickle cell disease (SCD) is frequently seen among Africans but is also
found in Southern Europe, the Middle East, and India. Patients with SCD who require cardiac surgery, especially homozygous forms are at risk
of a potentially fatal sickling crisis, which may be induced by hypothermia, hypoxia, acidosis, or low-flow states. Modification of the
routine perioperative management strategies with special considerations is required for a successful outcome in patients with SCD, who
undergo heart valve surgery. Because it is a rare clinical entity, the aim of our present study was to report a simplified management
strategy that can be used by cardiac surgery teams in patients undergoing heart valves surgery in the presence of SCD to reduce
perioperative complications in this population of patients. We evaluate two female adult patients of African origin aged 20 and 27 with
homozygous sickle cell hemoglobinopathy who underwent open heart surgery for the heart valve disease at our institution. The two patients
received exchange transfusion before surgery, to decrease hemoglobin S (HbS) concentration to about 30%. We do not perform any exchange
transfusion during cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Analyzed parameters were exchange transfusion, length of surgery, CPB time, and cross-clamp
time, duration of Intensive Care Unit, hospital stays, and complications. Perioperative changes in temperature, hemodynamics, respiratory,
and metabolic parameters were recorded [Table 1]. Demographic characteristics of the two patients CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass, MV: Mitral
valve, TV: Tricuspid valve Standard Hb electrophoresis was performed to detect the concentrations of HbS, HbC, and HbA [Figure 1a and b]. (a
and b) Standard hemoglobin electrophoresis before and after exchange transfusion on patient two (MINCAP SEPIA capillary method) Alterations
in Hb and hematocrit, blood loss, and transfusion requirement were documented [Table 2]. Preoperative biological data of the two patients
Hb: Hemoglobin, Hct: Hematocrit The two patients were followed up in the postoperative period for 10 and 2 years. Exchange transfusion was
performed preoperatively in the two patients to decrease HbS concentration and to increase hematocrit. One-third to one-fourth of the
calculated blood volume was drained from a central vein (internal jugular vein) using a blood component collector of red blood cells and
plasma (Haemonetics® MCS® +8150 – Haemonetics Corporation, 400 Xood Road, Braintree, MA 02184, USA) [Figure 2] in order to separate
different blood cells by a centrifugation procedure. Red blood cells are recuperated into a blood bag then plasma and other cells are
restituted to the patient. Haemonetics® MCS®+ 8150 Multicomponent Collection System During this procedure, and to avoid blood coagulation
into the extracorporeal circuit, an anticoagulant like: Anticoagulant citrate dextrose solution, solution A is used. Concomitant transfusion
is performed into a peripheral vein. Red blood cells were replenished with packed red blood cells from healthy individuals obtained from the
hospital blood bank. Five to six blood bags were sufficient on each patient to decrease HbS concentration and to increase hematocrit. The
two patients received their cardiac medications until the morning of surgery. Contraindicated drugs were avoided. Oral intake was stopped 6
h before surgery. In a hated operating room (25°C), after oxygenation, anesthesia was induced with midazolam, fentanyl, and pancuronium was
used for muscle relaxation. After intubation, the two patients were ventilated with 100% oxygen. All invasive procedures were performed
while the patients were under deep anesthesia: After tracheal intubation, arterial, and central venous lines were inserted. Further
incremental doses of fentanyl were administered during the operation. Tranexamic acid was used routinely to prevent bleeding complications.
Arterial blood pressure, central venous pressure, electrocardiogram, saturation with pulse oximetry, and rectal temperature were routinely
monitored during and after surgery. Anesthesia was maintained with an infusion of propofol. Fast-track anesthetic management was not
performed, and the two patients were transferred to the intensive care unit while still under sedation with propofol. Tracheal extubation
was performed once optimal cognitive, hemodynamic, and respiratory functions were achieved. For postoperative pain management, morphine, and
paracetamol were administered. CPB was performed in a routine manner. The bypass circuit volume was adjusted according to the age, weight,
and body surface area of each individual patient to reach a hematocrit value of average 30% during CPB. Additional crystalloid, colloid, or
red blood cells were added to the CPB circuit as needed according to the desired hematocrit levels. Throughout the bypass, venous oxygen
saturation was kept at >80%. To avoid the risk of sickling, rectal temperature was maintained >36, 5°C. pH of the serum during CBP was
maintained between 7.35 and 7.45 by correction of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate. The flow was adjusted as a body surface area times
cardiac index (2.2–2.4). We avoided using of exchange transfusion during CPB. Myocardial protection was performed using a 20 ml/kg of
anterograde cold crystalloid cardioplegia. A second or a third shot of crystalloid cardioplegia was given every 20 min with half of initial
dose (10 ml/kg). Operations were performed to treat valvular pathologies [Table 1]. Baseline Hb and hematocrit values were 9.5 g/dL to 30%
for the first patient and 8.5 g/dL to 26% for the second one. The preoperative HbS concentration before therapeutic exchange transfusion was
about 90% and 84.9%. After exchange transfusion in the preoperative period, hematocrit was increased to 38% and 45%. Preoperative HbS
concentration decreased to 27% and 34% after preoperative exchange transfusion [Table 2]. Mean CPB and cross-clamp times were 123 and 95
min, respectively. None of the patients underwent active systemic cooling and all operations were performed at >36°C. The mean flow rate
during CPB was 3.5 L/min. On-pump perfusion pressure ranged from 65 to 80 mmHg. Neither sickling crisis nor acidosis occurred in any
patient, and no major postoperative complication occurred. Postoperative biological data of the two patients is reported on Table 3.
Postoperative biological data of the two patients Hb: Hemoglobin, Hct: Hematocrit Average hospital stay was 10 days. Currently, the two
patients remain alive and free of cardiac symptoms. Sickle cell hemoglobinopathy is a recessively inherited genetic disorder seen world-
wide. It results from the mutation of the substitution of adenine for thymidine, which further ends up matching with valine rather than
glutamine at the sixth codon of chromosome 11 that is, the β-globin gene. The condition may present as SCD (homozygous genotype ), the
severe form in which, the fractional concentration of HbS ranges between 70% and 98%, or it can be manifested as sickle cell trait, which is
rather benign and more common among populations as the heterozygous genotype (HbAS), in which the fractional concentration of HbS is <50%.
The solubility characteristics of HbS are severely impaired, and after the dispersal of oxygen to tissues, the molecule adopts its
characteristic sickle shape. Erythrocytes containing high amounts of HbS undergo multiple sickling and desickling events, deforming their
conformation and eventually resulting in autolysis and anemia. Furthermore, these deformed cells have an increased tendency to adhere to the
vascular endothelium, frequently leading to occlusion of small-caliber vessels, and causing organ damage. The classic precipitating factors
for sickling include stress, exposure to cold, dehydration, infections, hypoxemia, inflammatory cascades, and acidosis. Such conditions lead
to potassium efflux, causing the formation of insoluble globin polymers. These molecules increase the viscosity of blood and lead to vaso-
occlusive phenomena, which include cell sickling, adherence of sickle cells to the endothelium, and vaso-occlusion. Although the risks are
accompanying sickle cell pathology before high-risk surgery including orthopedic and cholecystectomy, have been well stated, the literature
contains only small series or case reports on sickle cell patients having cardiac surgery. It should be noted that predisposing conditions
are more common in patients undergoing cardiac surgery especially during the anesthesia, CPB itself, as well as aortic cross-clamping, low-
flow states, topical or whole-body hypothermia, cold cardioplegia, and use of vaso-constrictive agents, may predispose to the crisis state.
Hence, special care should be taken in sickle cell patients who require cardiac surgery to avoid or at least to minimize those risk factors.
These maneuvers may start with decreasing the amount of HbS concentration in the blood with exchange transfusion. Exchange transfusion
decreases the amount of circulating sickle cells without increasing hematocrit levels or blood viscosity. On the other hand, in patients
with deep anemia, therapeutic exchange transfusion not only is advantageous for decreasing HbS, but also increases the preoperative
hematocrit and hence oxygen delivery to the organs, which further facilitates surgery. Exchange transfusion can be done preoperatively as
performed in our experience, peroperatively, or both. Although there is no consensus on absolute safe values of HbS in patients undergoing
surgery, it is proposed that the level of HbS should be reduced to average 30% for major surgical procedures or even 5% for cardiac surgery
before or at the time of surgery. Although some authors advocate against blood transfusion for Hb levels >7 g/dL the benefits of a reduction
in HbS and an increase in HbA concentrations are obvious for preventing sickling phenomena and providing adequate delivery of oxygen to the
tissues. The advantages of preoperative transfusion include increased hematocrit levels and suppressed production of HbS in this particular
group of anemic patients. The literature contains reports indicating that the majority of patients with sickle cell hemoglobinopathy
scheduled for cardiac surgery receive preoperative transfusion. It should be kept in mind that the amount of circulating HbS is only one
factor among many (e.g. disorganized endothelial function, cytokine expression, increased number of inflammatory cells) for sickling and
vascular occlusion complications. Stress is another major factor that may lead to sickling. Cardiac surgery itself constitutes a major
stress for the patient, but the preparatory phase for operation including intubation and the insertion of catheters, contributes
considerably toward this stress, particularly in pediatric patients, and it is strongly recommended that patients must be kept fully sedated
during this phase. Prevention of hypothermia in the operating theater is an easy preventive measure that helps avoiding sickling phenomena.
Warm-air blankets before and after surgery may be helpful to stabilize the patient's body temperature. On the other hand, systemic cooling
via the CPB circuit is commonly applied in cardiac operations to reduce the metabolic rate. Hypothermia carries the risk of sickling, and
vascular occlusion in the presence of sickle cell hemoglobinopathy. This can be avoided by applying “topical-only” cooling or achieving
moderate hypothermia, but totally warm CPB is another valid option frequently mentioned in the literature. Avoidance of hypoxia is crucial
for preventing a sickling crisis. Thus, oxygen delivery to the CPB circuit should be ensured at all times during surgery. In some series,
the CPB pump prime was hyperoxygenated to a PO2 >50 kPa to mediate increased oxygen levels in the patient's own blood after mixing in CPB
circuits. The patient's venous oxygen saturation monitoring is a reliable marker for blood oxygenation. Levels >80% during the surgical
procedure were advocated as safe. Although the presence of sickle cell disorders increases the risk of sickling and thus vaso-occlusive
complications in patients, they should not be taken as a contraindication for heart valve surgery. Nevertheless, monitoring of certain
parameters such as venous and arterial oxygen content, pH, and body temperature is mandatory for a better outcome. Furthermore, preoperative
exchange transfusion has a positive influence on the outcome of surgery and on the survival of patients undergoing heart valves surgery. Our
clinical experience is consistent with the acceptance of patients with sickle cell hemoglobinopathies for cardiac surgical operations
requiring CPB. Avoiding intraoperative hypoxia, hypothermia, and vaso-constrictive agents; minimizing HbS levels with preoperative exchange
transfusion, and ensuring a stress-free environment with the judicious use of sedatives made surgery relatively safe in these two patients.
Heart valve surgery can be performed safely in patients with SCD with the good outcome by modifying the routine perioperative management
strategies and by using special considerations. Nevertheless, literature on the evaluation and specific management of these patients remains
limited, and further studies are strongly recommended. Nil. There are no conflict of interest.
