Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 22 Final Diagnosis: Purulent pericardial effusion with tamponade Symptoms:
Chest pain • short of breath Medication: None Clinical Procedure: Pericardial drainage Specialty: Cardiology Rare disease Purulent
pericarditis is a rare but life-threatening illness. Often, it may be masked by the primary infectious etiology like pneumonia,
endocarditis, or CNS infection, leading to a delay in diagnosis and treatment. Echocardiography is the modality of choice for estimating the
presence and size of pericardial effusion and detecting presence of tamponade. We present a case of a young man with acute respiratory
illness in whom clinical exam, electrocardiography, and classic echocardiographic findings played a key role in diagnosis. An echo-dense
effusion (rather than echo-free space) appearing like “bubbles” within the pericardial space was seen and a purulent nature of the fluid was
strongly suspected. Prompt institution of antimicrobial therapy and timely pericardial drainage resulted in complete clinical recovery of
the patient. In this case, timely diagnosis and prompt treatment of effusion with pericardial drainage and antibiotics resulted in complete
recovery from this otherwise devastating infection. Purulent Pericarditis is an uncommon disease which can be a devastating illness. Timely
diagnosis requires strong clinical suspicion and prompt cardiac workup with electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiography followed by
confirmation of diagnosis with pericardial fluid cultures. Treatment involves timely pericardial drainage and antibiotics. We present a case
of a young man in whom timely diagnosis and management of this life threatening condition allowed for complete recovery. Several novel
echocardiographic findings of this disease are also described and demonstrated. A 22-year-old man presented to the emergency department (ED)
with a 2-week history of generalized malaise, nausea, vomiting, and cough productive of yellow phlegm. He was diagnosed with a viral
syndrome with superimposed community-acquired pneumonia and discharged with a prescription of oral antibiotics. He presented to the ED 5
days later with severe central chest pain getting worse in a lying down position and slightly better with sitting. On physical examination,
temperature was 101.6ºF, respiratory rate 30 breaths per minute, pulse regular at 130 beats per minute, blood pressure 104/64 mm Hg, and
oxygen saturation 92% while he was on 4 liters/minute oxygen via nasal cannula. Pericardial rub was noted at the left lower sternal border.
Neck veins were distended, heart sounds were soft, and pulsus paradoxus was present. Examination of the lung revealed bronchial breath
sounds and rhonchi in the right lower lobe. The white-cell count was 30,000 per cubic millimeter with 21% bands. Chest X-ray showed right
middle and lower zone infiltrates consistent with pneumonia, and interval enlargement in cardiac silhouette. A 12-lead electrocardiogram
(Figure 1) showed sinus tachycardia at 115 beats per minute, diffuse concave up ST-segment elevation, diffuse PR-segment depression, and PR-
segment elevation in lead aVR. Two sets of blood cultures were drawn, sputum culture was obtained, and empiric broad spectrum intravenous
(IV) antibiotics were started. Community-acquired pneumonia complicated by acute pericarditis was diagnosed and an urgent transthoracic
echocardiogram (TTE) was obtained due to strong clinical suspicion of cardiac tamponade. TTE showed a large circumferential pericardial
effusion with right ventricular free wall collapse during early diastole (Figures 2, 3, Video 1) and septal bounce (Video 2). Unlike usual
pericardial effusion which appears as an echo-free space, this one had an appearance of mobile echo-dense granules or “bubbles” within the
pericardial space (Video 3). Diagnosis of purulent pericarditis with cardiac tamponade was made. Pericardial window was performed and
approximately 200 cc of purulent pericardial fluid was removed. Sputum and pericardial fluid cultures grew Gram-positive cocci identified as
Beta-hemolytic Group G streptococci. Blood cultures as well as HIV and influenza workup were negative. Over the next few days, improvement
in hemodynamic and respiratory status was noted with resolution of fever. IV antibiotic regime was de-escalated and transitioned to oral
therapy at the time of discharge. Purulent pericarditis is an uncommon disease. Often, it may be masked by the primary infectious etiology,
like pneumonia, endocarditis, or CNS infection, leading to a delay in diagnosis and treatment. Worsening septic shock and cardiac tamponade
are dreaded complications if diagnosis is delayed. In the pre-antibiotic era, most cases had a primary identifiable infectious disease, such
as pneumonia, endocarditis, CNS, or bone infections . In the antibiotic era, many patients with purulent pericarditis have a preexisting
pericardial disease due to conditions such as uremia, tumor, or collagen vascular disease. Alcohol abuse, pre-existing immunosuppression,
and chest trauma are other risk factors . Staphylococcus aureus is the most commonly identified pathogen. Rare cases of purulent
pericarditis caused by Group G streptococcus have been reported. TTE is the modality of choice in evaluating the presence and size of
pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. Occasionally, in cases of purulent pericarditis, loculation or compartmentalization of effusion
may be noted as opposed to free-flowing circumferential fluid collections. The diagnosis of purulent pericarditis is established by
pericardial fluid culture and microscopy. The treatment involves pericardial drainage and antibiotics . Most patients with purulent
pericarditis are critically ill and broad-spectrum empiric antibiotic coverage should be started . The rapid clinical deterioration with
development of sepsis, and classic clinical and ECG findings of pericarditis helped suggest purulent pericarditis in our case. Subsequent
work-up with TTE and pericardial window confirmed the diagnosis. In this case, timely diagnosis and prompt treatment of effusion with
pericardial drainage and antibiotics resulted in complete recovery from this otherwise devastating infection. Statement No disclosures or
conflicts of interest. Initial 12-lead electrocardiogram showing sinus tachycardia at 115 beats per minute, diffuse concave up ST-segment
elevation, diffuse PR-segment depression, and PR-segment elevation in lead aVR, changes consistent with pericarditis. Transthoracic
echocardiogram (TTE) image of the parasternal short axis view at level of mitral valve showing pericardial effusion with right ventricular
free-wall buckling during diastole (arrow). TTE image of M-mode across the short axis view at the level of mitral valve showing collapse of
RV free-wall during early diastole (arrow), a finding consistent with tamponade physiology. TTE Video of Parasternal short axis view at
level of mitral valve showing pericardial effusion with right ventricular free-wall collapse during diastole, consistent with tamponade. TTE
Video of 4 chamber apical view showing “septal bounce” which is a brisk, early diastolic septal motion toward the LV during inspiration,
followed by a rebound in the opposite direction during expiration, and reflects exaggerated interventricular dependence. TTE video of
subcostal view showing mobile echo-dense granular effusion in pericardial space as opposed to usual echo-free space noted with most
pericardial effusion.
