Pancreatic islet transplantation is a physiologically advantageous and minimally invasive procedure for the treatment of type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Here, we describe the first reported case of successful allogeneic islet transplantation alone, using single-donor, marginal-dose
islets in a Korean patient. A 59-yr-old patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus, who suffered from recurrent severe hypoglycemia, received
4,163 islet equivalents/kg from a single brain-death donor. Isolated islets were infused intraportally without any complications. The
immunosuppressive regimen was based on the Edmonton protocol, but the maintenance dosage was reduced because of mucositis and leukopenia.
Although insulin independence was not achieved, the patient showed stabilized blood glucose concentration, reduced insulin dosage and
reversal of hypoglycemic unawareness, even with marginal dose of islets and reduced immunosuppressant. Islet transplantation may
successfully improve endogenous insulin production and glycemic stability in subjects with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pancreatic islet
transplantation is a physiologically advantageous and minimally invasive procedure for the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus (1). The
success rate of islet transplantation has been improved by transplanting a higher mean islet mass prepared from two to four donor pancreases
and using glucocorticoid-free immunosuppressants (1, 2). However, a shortage of donors and the use of potentially islet-toxic
immunosuppressants are the main hurdles to successful islet transplantation. Few data are available on islet isolation from the pancreas of
Asian people, and most of the guidelines on islet isolation techniques are based on the procedures used on Western subjects. Reports on
allogeneic islet transplantation alone in the Korean population are lacking. According to data from the Korean Network for Organ Sharing, 10
cases of allogeneic islet transplantation have been performed, and most were islet-after-kidney transplantations (3). Several autologous
islet transplantations have been reported (4), but islet isolation was performed using a living-donor pancreas and an inadequate quantity of
isolated islets was not a limitation to performing the transplantation. Here, we report on a case of allogeneic islet transplantation alone,
using a marginal dose from a single-donor pancreas in a Korean patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus. A 59-yr-old woman who had been
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus for 25 yr, suffered from recurrent severe hypoglycemia and hypoglycemic unawareness since October
2011. Her body weight was 52 kg and her body mass index (BMI) was 20.31 kg/m2. Fasting and postprandial serum C-peptide concentrations were
0.07 ng/mL and 0.23 ng/mL, respectively. She had visited the emergency room twice complaining of decreased consciousness related to severe
hypoglycemia (<50 mg/dL) in the previous year. She did not experience hypoglycemic symptoms until her blood glucose level decreased to 50
mg/dL. Her total insulin requirement was 34 U/day, and her glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level ranged from 7.8% to 9.6% with a mean value of
8.54% in the preceding 2 yr. The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 91.67 mL/min/1.73 m2 and albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR)
was 16.45 mg/g. An ophthalmological evaluation showed mild nonproliferative retinopathy of both eyes. There was no evidence of macrovascular
complication. The pancreas was procured from a 49-yr-old brain-death donor with a BMI of 23.13 kg/m2. The organ was transported in chilled
histidine-tryptophan-ketoglutarate solution and transferred to the Good Manufacturing Practice facility. The pancreas was distended by
controlled ductal perfusion with Liberase human islet enzyme (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, USA) and digested mechanically in a Ricordi
chamber. Pancreatic tissue density was tested before purification using a COBE 2991 cell processor (Gambro BCT Inc., Lakewood, CO, USA) to
predict the pancreatic tissue density. Prepurification gradient tests were performed using a Ficoll (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany)-based
standard gradient (1.100-1.077 g/cm3), OptiPrep (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)-based gradient-1 (1.100-1.085-1.060 g/cm3) and OptiPrep-
based gradient-2 (1.090-1.075-1.050 g/cm3). The tests showed little differences in the density and produced a single layer of islet-acinar
cell mixture. By contrast, a gradient test using OptiPrep-based gradient-3 (1.080-1.065-1.040 g/cm3) produced two distinct layers of the
different cell types. Islet purification using the COBE was performed using the gradient-3 combination with OptiPrep solution. The total
amount of purified islets was 216,500 islet equivalents (IEQ) (4,163 IEQ/recipient body weight in kg), which is the minimally adequate
quantity for transplantation (5). The purity of the isolated islets was 79.6%, and the islet viability was >90%. Glucose stimulated insulin
secretion of isolated islet was tested in vitro and showed an insulin concentration of 10.1 µU/mL at low (2.8 mM) glucose media and 17.1
µU/mL at high (16.8 mM) glucose media during 1 hr each. Gram staining of the media was negative, and the endotoxin concentration was
<1EU/kg. The islet transplantation was performed in November 2013. The patient was sedated and a percutaneous transhepatic approach was used
to access to the portal vein under fluoroscopic guidance. The portal venous pressure was measured at baseline and after islet infusion.
Doppler ultrasonography of the portal vein was performed within 24 hr after transplantation, and no definite evidence of flow disturbance
was observed. The immunosuppressive regimen was based on that previously described in the Edmonton protocol (5). Instead of daclizumab,
basiliximab was given intravenously at a dose of 20 mg 2 hr before islet transplantation and 4 days after transplantation. Sirolimus was
administered administered once daily to achieve a target trough therapeutic range of 12-15 ng/mL for the first 3 months, after which the
target trough range was planned to be lowered to 7-12 ng/mL. Tacrolimus was administered twice daily and adjusted to achieve a target trough
level of 3-6 ng/mL. One month after transplantation, the dosage of sirolimus was reduced because of systemic mucositis and leukopenia, and
this dosage was maintained at the trough level of 5-9 ng/mL. The islet transplantation protocol was approved by the institutional review
board of The Catholic University of Korea (No. KC10CISI0438) and written informed consent was obtained from the patient. This study was
conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. After islet transplantation, the patient's insulin
requirement decreased to 22 U/day, which was about 65% of the previous requirement (Fig. 1). Fasting and postprandial C-peptide
concentrations improved to 0.25 ng/mL and 0.44 ng/mL, respectively, at 2 months after transplantation. The HbA1c level improved to 7.3% at 3
months after transplantation. Self-monitored blood glucose concentration was measured four times a day (before each meal and at bedtime),
and the results showed marked improvement in the frequencies of both hypoglycemia and extreme hyperglycemia after transplantation (Fig. 2).
Before transplantation, she experienced severe hypoglycemia (<50 mg/dL) on average twice a month. However, she did not experience further
severe hypoglycemia and became aware of hypoglycemia at a glucose concentration of 70 mg/dL. We calculated the Glycemic Risk Assessment
Diabetes Equation (GRADE) score to assess the glycemic variability and the percentage contribution of hypoglycemia events, before and at 3
and 9 months after the transplantation (6). Also the Average Daily Risk Range (ADRR) index was calculated; the values are stratified into
three categories: low risk <20; moderate risk, 20-≤40; and high risk >40 (7, 8). Before the transplantation, the GRADE score was 10.31 with
28.5% of hypoglycemia (<70 mg/dL) events, and improved to GRADE score of 7.94 with 2.4% of hypoglycemia events and 5.99 with 2.1% of
hypoglycemia events at 3 and 9 months after the transplantation, respectively. Similarly, the ADRR index was 26.88 before the
transplantation and improved to 17.56 and 14.60 at 3 and 9 months after transplantation, respectively. Currently (about 9 months after the
transplantation), her HbA1c is 7.8%, and fasting and postprandial C-peptide concentrations are 0.20 and 0.43 ng/mL, respectively. There is
no evidence of leukopenia and her renal function is in normal range with an eGFR of 106.04 mL/min/1.73 m2. To our knowledge, this is the
first reported case on allogeneic islet transplantation alone in Korea. Although insulin independence was not achieved, the patient showed
stabilized blood glucose concentration, reduced insulin dosage and reversal of hypoglycemic unawareness, even with a marginal dose of islets
and reduced immunosuppressant. There are only a few reports on islet transplantation in Asian subjects. According to the Collaborative Islet
Transplantation Registry, centers from North America, Europe and Australia are registered, but none from Asian countries (9). When islets
are purified with a COBE, the purification gradient used is often fixed. However, this method does not appropriately adjust for
interpancreatic variations in exocrine and islet tissue density, which is influenced by donor characteristics, the secretory status of
exocrine cells, and the islet isolation procedure (10). It is not known whether the density of pancreatic tissue differs between ethnic
groups. Predicting pancreatic tissue density using prepurification density tests may improve the islet isolation yield, as we performed in
this case. Hering et al. (11) reported on allogeneic islet transplantation using marginal dose islets (average of 7,271 IEQ/kg) from a
single donor pancreas along with potent induction immunotherapy (antithymocyte globulin, daclizumab and etanercept). However, our patient
underwent islet transplantation with only a marginal quantity of islets (4,163 IEQ/kg) with reduced immunosuppressant. In conclusion, this
is the first reported case on successful islet transplantation alone in a Korean patient with type 1 diabetes. Although insulin independence
was not achieved, the patient showed stabilized blood glucose concentration, reduced insulin dosage and reversal of hypoglycemic
unawareness, even with a marginal dose of islets and reduced immunosuppressant. This work was supported by a grant from the Korean Health
Technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (HI09C1555). This work was also supported by the Mystery of Life
Fund of the Catholic Institute of Cell Therapy. DISCLOSURE: The authors declare that no competing financial interests exist. Also, the
funder played no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. AUTHOR
CONTRIBUTION: Study design: Yang HK, Kim JW, Yoon KH. Pancreas procurement: Ham DS, Park HS, Hong TH. Islet isolation: Ham DS, Park HS, Rhee
M, You YH, Kim MJ. Islet infusion: Yang HK, Ham DS, Choi BG. Writing: Yang HK. Review and revision: Yoon KH, Lee SH, Cho JH.
