Rhinosporidiosis is a rare infection caused by Rhinosporidium seeberi, an organism classified in its own class, mesomycetozoea. It commonly
affects mucus membranes namely the nasal mucosa, pharynx and the conjunctiva. We present the case of an 8-year-old female who presented with
a flat, red, vascular, fleshy, pedunculated mass arising from the tarsal conjunctiva of the right upper eyelid. The mass was completely
excised. On histopathological examination, multiple sporangia were seen in various stages of degeneration, consistent with rhinosporidiosis.
The diagnosis of rhinosporidiosis is based solely on its microscopic features, and the treatment is surgical excision. This condition is
endemic in the temperate regions of the Indian subcontinent, but it has been known to occur even in the colder regions of North America and
Eastern Europe. Although a rare clinical entity, the possibility of rhinosporidiosis must be borne in mind when evaluating any polypoidal
conjunctival mass. Rhinosporidiosis is a chronic granulomatous disease caused by Rhinosporidium seeberi, an endosporulating microorganism,
which has recently been placed in a taxonomical group, mesomycetozoea, which is a heterogeneous group of microorganisms which are at the
boundary between animals and fungi. The disease is endemic in India and Sri Lanka. Its most common presentation is like a soft polypoidal
pedunculated mass. While the nose and nasopharynx are the most common sites, other sites of infection include the conjunctiva, maxillary
sinuses, penis, urethra. In addition to the conjunctiva, ocular rhinosporidiosis can affect the eyelids, limbus, caruncle, canthi, lacrimal
sac and nasolacrimal duct. Rarely scleral ectasia, staphyloma formation, and the scleral melt have also been reported. In this
communication, we report an unusual location of the focus of rhinosporidiosis: The tarsal conjunctiva in a child and also highlight the
typical microscopic findings seen. An 8-year-old female presented to our clinic with a history of foreign body sensation, irritation and
occasional epiphora in the right eye of 8 months duration. Visual acuity in both eyes was 20/20 N6. On examination, the lids, bulbar
conjunctiva, cornea, and sclera were normal. Ocular motility was normal, as were intraocular pressures and dilated fundus examination. On
eversion of the right upper eyelid, a flat, red, vascular, fleshy pedunculated mass was seen arising from the tarsal conjunctiva. Large
feeder vessels were seen at the base of the mass, which had multiple small, pale yellow nodules on the surface [Fig. 1a and b]. The patient
had no prior history of any ophthalmic surgery or ocular trauma. A clinical diagnosis of a pyogenic granuloma was made, and the mass was
completely excised with application of electro-cautery to the base of the lesion. Clinical photograph of the right eye: The red vascular,
fleshy pedunculated mass is seen arising from the tarsal conjunctiva (a). On higher magnification, feeder vessels at the base can be easily
identified. The coarse pale yellow nodules on the surface of the mass represent the mature sporangia (b). Postoperatively, at 6 months no
residual lesion was noted (c) Histopathological examination of the mass showed squamous mucosa with subjacent moderate lymphocyte and plasma
cell infiltration. Epithelial hyperplasia was noted, and multiple sporangia were seen in various stages of degeneration including the early
trophic stage, which is characterized by a large single centrally situated nucleus surrounded by a finely granular cytoplasm. The
degenerating sporangia were surrounded by degenerating cells admixed with a few dilated blood vessels. The picture was consistent with
rhinosporidiosis [Fig. 2a and b]. Postoperatively, topical Tobramycin 0.3% eye drop was prescribed for 1-week. At 6 monthly follow-up, there
was no recurrence, and the conjunctiva had healed well with no residual lesion [Fig. 1c]. A rhinology consultation was also sought to rule
out additional lesions, which was normal. Epithelial hyperplasia of the conjunctiva is noted here. Multiple round sporangia were seen in
various stages of degeneration. The degenerating sporangia were surrounded by inflammatory cells admixed with a few dilated blood vessels
(black arrows) (H and E, ×10) (a). Stage I or the early trophic stage in the life cycle of rhinosporidosis: A large single centrally
situated nucleus is surrounded by a finely granular cytoplasm. The three surrounding layers can be distinctly identified (black arrow): The
outer chitinous layer, the middle cellulose-like layer and the thin mucoid layer. (Gomori's Methanamine silver stain, 40×) (b) The typical
conjunctival lesion in oculosporidiosis is a red, fleshy, pedunculated, polypoid mass arising from the palpebral conjunctiva with multiple
pale yellow dots representing the mature sporangia on the surface. It has been hypothesized that when the infection arises from the bulbar
conjunctiva, there is no space for the oculosporidium to grow out as a polypoid mass as the lids over the conjunctiva exert a flattening
force. Therefore, the lesions in the bulbar conjunctiva are usually sessile and flatter in appearance. Oculosporidiosis presenting as a
conjunctival mass is extremely rare. Suh et al. reported a case where rhinosporidiosis presented as chronic follicular conjunctivitis in a
15 years old contact lens wearer. The mass was seen arising from the tarsal conjunctiva, but owing to the lack of space to grow outward, it
assumed a flat configuration [Fig. 1b]. The presumed mode of human infection is due to contact of traumatized epithelium with contaminated
water. Highest incidence of cases is reported among river-sand workers in India and in Sri Lanka; this is particularly relevant to such a
mode of infection, through abrasions caused by sand particles with the pathogen in the putative habitat such as ground water. Another mode
of infection is inhalation of field dust contaminated by the spore bearing feces of infected animals. Clinically, on examination of the
mass, the presence of yellowish pin head-sized spots on the surface, which represent underlying mature sporangia, may help in pointing
toward a possible diagnosis of rhinosporidiosis. The definitive diagnosis of rhinosporidiosis, however, is by histopathological examination
of biopsied or resected tissues, with the identification of the pathogen in its diverse stages, rather than the stromal and cellular
responses of the host. Final diagnosis is achieved by demonstration of thick-walled sporangia containing numerous endospores in a background
of fibrovascular stroma. Although cases of spontaneous regression have been recorded, they are rare, and the most effective mode of
treatment remains surgical. Rhinosporidial lesions may recur years after primary excision. Total excision of the mass preferably by electro-
cautery is recommended to reduce the chance of recurrence. Postoperatively, oral Dapsone is recommended by some authors as a measure to
prevent recurrence. Differential diagnosis in such cases must include conjunctival papilloma, hemangioma, arteriovenous malformation and
pyogenic granuloma. Close examination will reveal the small pale yellow spherules typical of rhinosporidiosis. Although endemic in tropical
regions, rhinosporidiosis requires a high degree of clinical suspicion to clinically diagnose it. While the Indian subcontinent accounts for
the majority of the cases in literature; sporadic cases from Europe and North America also have been reported. Therefore, regardless of the
geographic location, rhinospiridiosis must be considered as a differential when encountered with a polypoidal conjunctival mass. Source of
Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
