Dear Sir, Accessory nipples are solitary or multiple rudimentary nipples developing along the two vertical 'milk-lines'. Most cases are
sporadic and asymptomatic. Accessory nipple occurs in 1-6% of the population and affects both genders equally.1 It is often mistaken as
dermatofibroma in clinical or dermatoscopic examination. Blum et al. have reported a case of accessory nipple indistinguishable from
dermatofibroma, with dermatoscopic features such as peripheral pigment network and central scar-like white-colored area.2 Oztas and Gurer
detected a cleft-like appearance in the dermatoscopic evaluation of four of their five patients.3 Herein, we would like to point out the
potential of portable digital microscopy for the diagnosis of accessory nipple in clinical practice. In our clinic, we use a Celestron
handheld digital Microscope model #44301, at 30-fold magnification, provided with a focus ring and six LED ring illuminators. It has a
resolution of 1280 x 1024 pixels and provides JPEG-format digital images, which are downloaded via USB connection to a personal computer. A
30-year-old man presented with a congenital 4x5 mm brownish-pink nodule in his right subcostal region (Figure 1). We could not detect a
cleft-like appearance in dermatoscopic evaluation. Dermatoscopic examination disclosed a dermatofibroma-like appearance with peripheral
pigment network and a central scar-like area (Figure 2). However, the cleft-like appearance was observed in digital microscopy (Figure 3). A
5x5 mm brownish-pinknodule along the right milkline Dermatoscopy of accessory nipple with peripheral pigment network and a central scar-like
patch Digital microscopy of accessory nipple (Arrow shows cleft-like appearance responding to nipple tip) A portable digital microscope with
30- to 100-fold magnification is a more affordable imaging device than a dermatoscope and it can be helpful in the diagnosis of accessory
nipple in clinical practice. Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interest: None. How to cite this article: Senel E. Cleft-like appearance
of accessory nipple in digital microscopy. An Bras Dermatol. 2015; 90(3):434-5. Study conducted at the Hitit University, Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Dermatology – Çorum, Turkey.
