Ocular metastases from breast carcinoma are rare. The reported incidence of ocular metastasis varies from 0.07% to 12%; most frequently to
the uveal tract. Metastases limited to optic nerve occur far less frequently; more so bilaterally. We describe a case of bilateral optic
disk metastasis secondary to breast carcinoma causing complete visual loss. A 46-year-old lady presented with decreased vision in both eyes
since 3 months. She was diagnosed of the infiltrative ductal type of breast adenocarcinoma and had a right mastectomy and 6 cycles of
chemotherapy 5 years back. She was in remission for 4 years till she had lymph node and bone metastasis, 13 months back. She was retreated
with 12 cycles of radiotherapy and 6 cycles of chemotherapy. Ocular examination revealed nil light perception in both eyes. Anterior segment
examination revealed sluggish pupillary reaction to light in both eyes. Dilated fundus examination revealed infiltrative mass over the optic
disk with intrinsic calcification and sub-retinal fluid in both eyes [Figs. 1-3a and b]. Optical coherence tomography [Fig. 3c and d] and
ultrasound [Fig. 4] revealed high reflectivity and posterior shadowing. Visual evoked potential (VEP) revealed extinguished response,
bilaterally [Fig. 5]. Right eye color fundus montage reveals infiltrative mass over the optic disk with intrinsic calcification, sub-retinal
fluid, and retinal pigment alterations Left eye color fundus montage reveals infiltrative mass over the optic disk with intrinsic
calcification, choroidal infiltration, sub-retinal fluid, and retinal pigment alterations Color photographs of the optic disk of right (a)
and left (b) eye reveal intrinsic calcification and vasculature. Optical coherence tomography scan reveals high reflectivity, strong
shadowing (c) and subfoveal fluid (d) but lacking the “moth-eaten appearance” from intratumoral cysts typical of retinal astrocytoma
Ultrasound reveals sub-retinal fluid (left) and shadowing (right) from the mass lesion over the disk Visual evoked potential plot reveals
extinguished response, bilaterally Review of the literature reveals low rates of isolated metastases to the optic nerve (1.3–4%). The
interval between initial diagnoses of breast carcinoma to the detection of uveal metastasis is longer (range: 8–240 months) than from lung
carcinoma (range: 2–15 months). Our patient was diagnosed of metastasis nearly 60 months after detection of breast carcinoma. VEP revealed
extinguished response, bilaterally. The patient was advised palliative therapy. In conclusion, impairment of vision in a patient with known
breast carcinoma could be an alarming symptom of ocular metastasis. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
