Giant arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is a complex and relatively rare congenital lesion with high morbidity and mortality. Its optimal
treatment, however, remains controversial. Normal perfusion pressure breakthrough (NPPB) is a potentially devastating complication following
surgical resection. Generally, strict blood pressure control is particularly recommended for preventing this phenomenon. Here we present a
case of a 21-year-old patient with a progressive giant AVM who developed frequent seizures and subsequently underwent microsurgical total
resection after 13-year follow-up, complicated by NPPB. Hypertensive hypervolemic treatment rather than strict blood pressure control was
administrated postoperatively; however thalamic infarction occurred. During the 1 year of follow-up, the patient remained seizure-free with
only mild right-sided hemiparesis. This case highlights that, in view of potential growth of the lesion, early intervention is necessary
when possible. Microsurgical resection is challenging but remains to be an effective option for eliminating such giant AVM, and it is vital
to keep risks associated with surgery in mind, such as NPPB. Moreover, whether blood pressure control is needed or not should be
individualized. Arteriovenous malformation (AVM), a lesion thought to be congenital in origin, is a major cause of hemorrhagic stroke in
children with 2% to 4% annual bleeding risk and a 17% to 90% lifetime risk of rebleeding.1–3 The risk of disability after bleeding is 30% to
35%, whereas the risk of mortality after bleeding is 5% to 10%.1 The most common presentation is hemorrhage, followed by seizure, headaches,
and focal symptoms.4 The indications for surgical treatment of AVMs remain controversial. Giant AVMs (ie, those >6 cm in maximum diameter)
are a small group of AVMs but pose an especially difficult challenge, carrying a higher risk of morbidity and mortality than do smaller
AVMs. Normal perfusion pressure breakthrough (NPPB), referred to the occurrence of brain edema and/or hemorrhage following removal of an
AVM, is a main limiting factor for giant AVMs resection.5 Given this phenomenon, strict blood pressure control is particularly recommended.
We herein present a case of a 21-year-old patient with a growing giant AVM who developed frequent seizures and subsequently received
surgical resection complicated by NBBP and thalamic infarction after 13-year follow-up. The patient signed informed consent for the
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A 21-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of tonic-clonic seizures. At
the age of 8, he was admitted with a sudden onset of headache, nausea, and vomiting. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans showed
hemorrhage in the left temporal lobe associated with a Spetzler–Martin grade V AVM (Figure 1A). Conservative management was instituted, and
the above symptoms gradually improved. However, he developed frequent generalized tonic-clonic seizures 2 years ago, which remained poorly
controlled despite treatment with sodium valproate (500 mg three times a day). He was readmitted and neurological examination was
unremarkable. Repeat MRI demonstrated a significant increase in size of the lesion (110 mm × 75 mm × 75 mm) involving the temporoccipital
lobe (Figure 1B). Angiography confirmed the enlarged AVM, and it was mainly fed by branches of the left external carotid, internal carotid
(ICA), middle cerebral (MCA), and posterior cerebral arteries (PCA), draining into the transverse, sigmoid and sagittal sinus (Figure 1C–E).
. A and B, Axial magnetic resonance imaging scans show the arteriovenous malformation (AVM) increases in size during a 13-year period (2001
and 2014, respectively). C, Computed tomography angiography reconstruction reveals a giant Spetzler–Martin Grade V AVM involving the left
hemisphere. D, Left common carotid angiogram shows the nidus fed by branches of the external carotid, internal carotid, and middle cerebral
arteries. E, Left vertebral angiogram demonstrates the nidus also fed by branches of the dilated posterior cerebral artery. F, Left internal
carotid angiogram shows that coil embolization fails to decrease the flow and the volume of the nidus. Pre-operative embolization failed to
reduce flow to the nidus (Figure 1F). After 2 weeks, the lesion was circumferentially exposed along the fending arteries, and thereafter was
resected uneventfully. Several minutes later, however, multifocal bleeding in the surgical bed occurred, with massive parenchymal swelling.
The phenomenon was considered to be the NPPB. The ICA adjacent to the origin of the posterior communicating artery was clipped proximally,
and the bleeding was somewhat weakened but still uncontrollable. Ultimately, this condition was effectively held by clipping the left P1
segment. As such, collateral blood flowed to the territories of left MCA and PCA via the anterior communicating artery and left A1 segment
(Figure 2A). It is of note that the A1 segment was relatively thin in diameter (Figure 2B). Instead of controlling blood pressure,
hypertensive hypervolemic therapy was instituted during the initial 48 hours postoperatively in consideration of the narrow collateral
vessel. Dopamine was intravenously administered to induce a mild hypertension (systemic blood pressure, 140–150 mmHg); meanwhile,
crystalloid and colloid solutions (1:3) were intravenously administered to maintain a central venous pressure of 5 to 12 cm H2O. On
postoperative day 1, however, he presented with right hemiparesis (1/5) related to a left thalamic infarct (Figure 2C). Antiplatelet therapy
was instituted, and his neurologic status remained stable. He remained seizure-free with mild right-sided hemiparesis (4/5) at the 1-year
follow-up, and angiography showed complete obliteration of the AVM and collateral flow to the left MCA (Figure 2D). . A, Schematic
illustration shows cerebral blood flow changes before and after clipping the proximal internal carotid artery and P1 segment. B,
Intraoperative micrograph demonstrates a left thin A1 segment (white arrow). C, Diffusion-weighted image on postoperative day 1 reveals a
left thalamic infarct. D, Follow-up right internal carotid angiogram shows complete resection of the lesion, and collateral circulation
filling to the left middle cerebral artery territory via the narrow A1 segment (black arrow). Giant AVM poses a significant treatment
challenge, carrying a high risk of morbidity and even mortality. In terms of treatment decision making, multimodality treatments including
embolization, microsurgery, and stereotactic radiosurgery were available; however, it should be individualized.6 In our patient, the staged
embolization failed to reduce the blood flow to the AVM. Although surgical resection remains one of the most effective ways for eliminating
giant AVMs, controversy exists regarding the indication.7 Klopfenstein and Spetzler have advanced that high-grade AVMs contributing to
multiple hemorrhages or progressive symptoms should be surgically excised.8 Therapeutic goals include reducing the risk for bleeding, mass
effect, and seizures.9 Our patient suffered from 2-year history of uncontrollable frequent seizures, which subsequently halted by total
resection of the lesion. Besides, in consideration of potential growth of the lesion, early intervention is essential when possible. The
NPPB theory was initially described by Spetzler et al10 in 1978 to explain the malignant edema or hemorrhage that sometimes occurred
following resection of high-flow AVMs. The brain parenchyma surrounding the nidus is chronically hypoperfused; as a result, the local
vessels chronically dilate and loss auto-regulatory capacity. Thus, following removal of an AVM, these chronically dilated low-resistance
vessels cannot compensate for increased perfusion, and ultimately lead to hyperemia, edema, or hemorrhage.10,11 Currently, the occurrence of
NPPB is the main limiting factor for high-flow AVMs resection.5 As usual, strict blood pressure control under normal values, especially
systolic blood pressure (<140 mmHg), is recommended on the postoperative period to avoid NPPB occurrence.5 Moreover, mannitol, steroids,
barbiturate coma, and hyperventilation have also been used in treatment of NPPB.11 In our patient, the NPPB occurred during the surgical
resection, and the proximal segments of left ICA and PCA had to be sacrificed via clipping. In that case, the blood flows into ipsilateral
MCA and PCA through the narrow A1 segment. Consequently, the “2H” treatment (hypertension and hypervolemia) rather than accurate control of
systemic blood pressure was administrated, aiming at increasing regional cerebral blood flow, and brain tissue oxygenation. It is noteworthy
that there are potential dangers in using this therapy such as aggravation of brain edema and increase of intracranial pressure.
Unfortunately, the left thalamic infarct occurred due to the inadequate collateral circulation from the narrow A1 segment to the PCA deep
branches. Such an ischemic event might be prevented if the blood flow from the left P1 segment was preserved partially. In conclusion, early
intervention of the lesion is necessary when possible in view of its potential growth. Although challenging, microsurgical treatment is an
effective way to approach such giant AVMs, and the related risks, such as NPPB, should be kept in mind. Moreover, blood pressure control
should be undertaken on a case-by-case basis. Abbreviations: AVM = arteriovenous malformation, ICA = internal carotid artery, MCA = middle
cerebral artery, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, NPPB = normal perfusion pressure breakthrough, PCA = posterior cerebral artery. CF and WY
contributed equally to the work. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
