Splenoma or splenic hamartoma is a rare primary splenic tumor most often discovered radiologically and incidentally. Splenic hamartomas have
a strong association with solid and hematological malignancies and, in rare cases, with tuberous sclerosis, but to the best of our knowledge
no reports of splenic hamartomas associated with familial adenomatous polyposis have been documented, although it is recognized that
familial adenomatous polyposis presents a variety of extracolonic manifestations. We report on a very rare case of multiple splenic
hamartomas in a 46-year-old white woman who had previously undergone surgery for restorative proctocolectomy for familial adenomatous
polyposis. A computed tomography scan of her spleen revealed multiple small lesions which measured less than 1cm in diameter. A splenectomy
was performed and a histologic examination of the splenectomy specimen revealed the presence of multiple hamartomas. Incidence, differential
diagnosis, diagnostic procedures, pathologic findings and treatment of splenic hamartomas are discussed here and hamartomas are considered
in a differential diagnosis of splenic tumors. A splenectomy is indicated in cases where malignancy cannot be excluded and in cases of
associated hematologic disorders. To the best of our knowledge our patient is the first reported case to have splenic hamartomas identified
in a familial adenomatous polyposis-affected patient with mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene. At this time it is not possible to correlate
with certainty our multiple splenic hamartomas and familial adenomatous polyposis case as a clinical manifestation of the mutation of APC
gene; however, we believe that this case report could be important for further observation of similar cases in the future. The online
version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13256-015-0627-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Splenic
hamartomas (SHs), also known as splenomas, accessory spleens in the spleen, congenital malformation and hyperplastic nodules, are rare
benign vascular proliferative tumors with an anomalous mixture of normal splenic elements such as red and white pulp, and are characterized
by cluster of differentiation (CD) 8 immunopositivity of the vascular endothelial lining cells . Their diagnosis is often incidental at
autopsy or when evaluating images for other reasons . Although benign, it is imperative that a differential diagnosis be made between
splenic primary and secondary malignancies [1, 4]. Here we report on a rare case of multiple SHs incidentally found in a woman who had
previously been operated on for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) coli. A 46-year-old white woman was admitted for the presence of small
multiple splenic lesions which were incidentally found by a routine abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. At the scan she was found to
have an incisional hernia at the midline incision of the previous colectomy. She was asymptomatic with unremarkable laboratory findings. On
physical examination, no palpable mass in her abdomen was found. Upper and lower endoscopy and abdominal ultrasonography (US) did not show
primary malignancies, while the CT scan (Fig. 1) revealed a dysmorphic and inhomogeneous spleen with nodular millimeter hypodense areas
which were found to be almost isodense to the remaining splenic parenchyma in basic and later contrastographic scans (Additional file
1).Fig. 1Dysmorphic and inhomogeneous spleen, with nodular millimeter areas – indicated with the arrows - which appeared hypodense during
arterial and portal phases of the contrastographic study (transverse diameter max 11mm at abdominal CT scan) Dysmorphic and inhomogeneous
spleen, with nodular millimeter areas – indicated with the arrows - which appeared hypodense during arterial and portal phases of the
contrastographic study (transverse diameter max 11mm at abdominal CT scan) She had a 20-year history of FAP of a classic phenotype with
profuse colorectal polyposis. She had successively undergone a restorative proctocolectomy (1995), exeresis of cranial osteomas (2003),
hysteroannessectomy for a benign ovarian cyst and uterine myomatosis (2007), and has been regularly followed up. She also presented
congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) and dental abnormalities. On mutational analysis, a mutation of the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene in fragment C of exon 15, deletion of an A nucleotide (c.2638delA) was found which created a premature stop codon
105 nucleotides downstream and caused a truncated protein (p.Ile880SerfsX36). A few days following the scan, she underwent a laparotomy with
splenectomy and incisional hernia repair. Her postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on the seventh postsurgical day.
Histological examination of the specimen (Figs. 2 and 3) revealed SHs.Fig. 2 a Haphazardly arranged slit-like vascular process without
intervening white pulp. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×200. b Vascular spaces lined by plump endothelial cells without atypia and
containing red blood cells. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×400Fig. 3 c The nodule was composed of disorganized red pulp elements and was
separated from the normal spleen by a compressed rim of tissue and not by a true capsule or fibrosis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×100.
The endothelial cells lining the vascular spaces are positive for: a CD8, b vimentin, and d CD31. Immunohistochemical staining, ×100 a
Haphazardly arranged slit-like vascular process without intervening white pulp. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×200. b Vascular spaces
lined by plump endothelial cells without atypia and containing red blood cells. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×400 c The nodule was
composed of disorganized red pulp elements and was separated from the normal spleen by a compressed rim of tissue and not by a true capsule
or fibrosis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×100. The endothelial cells lining the vascular spaces are positive for: a CD8, b vimentin, and
d CD31. Immunohistochemical staining, ×100 The resected spleen measured 10×8×2cm and, on the cut section, showed multiple well-circumscribed
bulging nodules ranging in size from 0.5cm to 1cm. These were red-tan, quite homogeneous and compressing the surrounding splenic parenchyma.
On microscopic examination, the lesions were composed of disorganized cords and sinuses of red pulp with slit-like vascular spaces lined by
plump endothelial cells containing erythrocytes and, occasionally, an amorphous material largely composed of trapped platelets. White pulp
follicles were absent and only a scant trabecular structure was observed. No cytological atypia was observed. Although grossly well
demarcated, the nodules were not capsulated, but surrounded by a rim of compressed red pulp separating them from the normal spleen without
associated fibrosis. The residual spleen was histologically unremarkable. On immunohistochemical examination, the endothelial cells lining
the vascular channel were positive for CD8, CD31, CD34 and vimentin. The definitive diagnosis was multiple hamartomas of the spleen. After
the operation at a six-month follow-up, she was in good general health. Subsequent to further analysis, we have confirmed the presence of
the heterozygous mutation c2638delA in exon 15 of the APC gene, also on the DNA extracted from a paraffin-embedded specimen of the SHs
(Fig. 4).Fig. 4c.2638delA APC mutation detection on DNA extracted from a paraffin-embedded specimen of the splenic hamartoma. a Denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography and b sequencing analysis of amplified product corresponding to DNA region including the mutation
c.2638delA of APC gene. a is carrier patient; b is normal control; c is the position of mutation, c.2638delA (the forward sequence is shown)
c.2638delA APC mutation detection on DNA extracted from a paraffin-embedded specimen of the splenic hamartoma. a Denaturing high-performance
liquid chromatography and b sequencing analysis of amplified product corresponding to DNA region including the mutation c.2638delA of APC
gene. a is carrier patient; b is normal control; c is the position of mutation, c.2638delA (the forward sequence is shown) This rare case of
multiple SHs with FAP led us to review the literature and to considerations on incidence, diagnosis, pathologic findings and treatment of
SHs, in order to try to understand their likely association with FAP. While splenic tumors are uncommon, benign ones are extraordinarily
rare (7/100,000 autopsy specimens) . Rokitansky first described a SH under the appellation of splenomas; since then, more than 150 cases
have been reported with a prevalence of 0.024 to 0.13 % given in a review of autopsies and three in 200,000 splenectomies . The origin of SH
is not clear with some hypotheses including congenital malformations of the splenic red pulp, neoplasms of the splenic red pulp, post-
traumatic reactive lesions [3, 8] or acquired proliferative processes as documented in cases associated with hematological malignancies .
SHs may be associated with solid and hematological malignancies (that is, thymomas, squamous cell carcinomas and renal cell carcinomas) and
in rare cases with tuberous sclerosis, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the development of benign tumors (hamartomas) in
multiple organs (that is, brain, skin, lungs and kidneys) [1, 2]. Our case concerns a woman who received a molecular diagnosis of FAP. FAP
is a dominant inherited autosomal disorder associated with mutations in the APC gene. In addition, bi-allelic mutations in the MYH gene may
account for up to 30 % of families with multiple adenomas (15–100) which do not exhibit an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance nor a
germline mutation in the APC gene . A variety of extracolonic manifestations (ECM) occur in patients with FAP and many of them could
correlate to a specific mutation of the APC gene (Table 1).Table 1Genotype/Phenotype correlations of extracolonic manifestations in patients
with familial adenomatous polyposis and attenuated familial adenomatous polyposisPhenotypeExon of APC gene Codon positionPapillary thyroid
carcinoma3–15 exons Codons 140–1309Hepatoblastoma3–15 exons Codons 141–1578Congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE)10–15
exons Codons 463–1445Osteomas15 exon Codons 767–1578Desmoids15 exon Codons 1309–1580 Genotype/Phenotype correlations of extracolonic
manifestations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis and attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis In a review of the medical
literature, no reported association between FAP and SHs has yet been made. In addition, in hamartomatous polyposis syndromes, such as
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome (PJS) an autosomal dominant syndrome arising from germline mutations in the serine threonine kinase gene (STK11) ,
SHs have not been identified although an exceptionally high rate of extracolonic cancers in patients with PJS including gastric (29 %),
small bowel (13 %), pancreatic (36 %), breast (54 %), ovarian (21 %), lung (15 %), cervical (10 %), and uterine/testicular (9 %) and many
other benign lesions were reported. Nor was SH reported among numerous clinical manifestations of hamartoma tumor syndrome, an autosomal
disorder associated with germline mutation or a differential expression of phosphatase and tensin homolog gene (PTEN) on chromosome ten [15,
16]. In our patient a profuse FAP was diagnosed back in 1995 and a restorative proctocolectomy was performed. She presented several ECM:
osteoma, dental anomalies, CHRPE, ovarian cysts and uterine myomatosis. At molecular analysis a mutation of the APC gene was found in
fragment C of exon 15, the deletion of an A nucleotide (c.2638delA) which determined a frameshift and therefore a premature stop codon, 105
nucleotides downstream causing the truncated protein (p.Ile880SerfsX36). This mutation was also identified in heterozygous on DNA extracted
from the paraffin-embedded specimen of the SH. As expected, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the APC gene was not present and was consistent
with the benign nature of the hamartomatous tumor . Moreover, all carriers in her family presented a classic FAP phenotype with profuse
polyposis of the colorectum and had undergone restorative proctocolectomies in the third decade of their lives. Mutations in exon 15 are
common in affected patients with FAP and are associated with profuse polyposis and some ECM. A correlation between the mutation site and
clinical phenotype encompassing both colonic and repeatedly extracolonic features has been reported [19, 20]. Mutations at codon 1309 lead
to the most severe intestinal phenotype characterized by a high number and early development of colorectal adenomas. Therefore it is likely
that SHs are included among extracolonic manifestations. SHs vary in size and sometimes can reach 20cm in diameter. Two histological types
exist according to the tumor components : a white pulp type and a red pulp type. The white pulp type is composed entirely of lymphoid
tissue, while the red pulp type is composed of an aberrant complex of sinuses. Most tumors are a mixture of the two subtypes. Their
characteristic histological features are disorganized vascular channels lined with plump endothelial cells. The lining cells of the vascular
channels are typically positive for CD8, CD31, CD34, factor-related antigen and vimentin [1, 2, 21]. Immunohistochemical staining may
distinguish a SH from a capillary hemangioma according to their respective staining characteristics. Endothelial cells which are positive
for CD8 are a key feature that distinguishes a hamartoma from other vascular lesions of the spleen [1, 21, 22]. The endothelial cells of SHs
are CD8-positive in contrast with the CD8-negative of hemangiomas . As in our case, the majority of patients (80 %) with hamartomas do not
have any symptoms and an incidental diagnosis is made during autopsy or an image evaluation . In the other cases splenomegaly, palpable
mass, spontaneous rupture of the spleen, anemia, thrombocytopenia and digestive symptoms may allow for identification [1, 23]. The diagnosis
of hamartomas can be a challenge as it is difficult to distinguish them from splenic primary malignancies with imaging modalities . CT scans
and US features have been highly variable and nonspecific. Recently, the radiological features on US, color Doppler imaging, CT and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) have been able to clearly identify hamartomas . Such tumors may appear hyperechoic on US, or as isodense or
hypodense solid masses relative to the adjacent normal splenic parenchyma on CT. On color Doppler the blood flow results are increased due
to hypervascularity. The main differential diagnosis includes other vascular tumors and solid mass-forming lesions (hemangioma, littoral
cell angioma, lymphangioma, hemangioendothelioma, sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation, angiosarcoma inflammatory myofibroblastic
tumor, lymphoma and metastatic tumors) [1, 23]. Once identified, a pathological examination is strongly needed. The risk of bleeding or
tumor dissemination makes a fine needle aspiration biopsy of the spleen problematic and therefore surgery is necessary for diagnostic and
therapeutic purposes. Once a splenic lesion is discovered, a malignant tumor cannot be ruled out without performing a splenectomy. A
splenectomy may be curative even for hematological disorders associated with hamartomas. Although recently laparoscopic surgery has become
the standard technique for splenic disorders, due to our patient’s previous colectomy, we adopted a laparotomic approach due to the presence
of several tenacious intraperitoneal adherences. SHs are benign vascular proliferative lesions with a characteristic CD8-positive
immunophenotype of the lining endothelial cells. A splenectomy is mandatory to exclude primary or secondary malignancies. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first reported SH case identified in a FAP-affected patient with mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene. We therefore
feel that the topic of this report could be relevant for further observation of similar cases in the future. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: 46 years old FAP affected patient with splenic hamartomas: main steps of
her clinical history. 46 years old FAP affected patient with splenic hamartomas: main steps of her clinical history. Adenomatous polyposis
coli Cluster of differentiation Congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium Computed tomography Extracolonic manifestations
Familial adenomatous polyposis Peutz–Jeghers syndrome Splenic hamartoma Ultrasonography Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions NC, MLC, MC, and AC treated the patient, collected the data, reviewed the literature and
wrote the paper. FD and MDR performed the molecular analysis. VV and GC performed the pathology analysis. NC and MLS carried out critical
interpretations. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Ms Juliet Ippolito BA, Vassar College, MPhil University of Dundee, for
English language editing. Prof. Guido Pettinato, Ordinary Professor of Pathology gave us a substantial contribution in performing histologic
studies and immunohistochemistry and critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. Prof. Paola Izzo, Ordinary
Professor of Biochemistry, Chief of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology Dept. and CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate – University
Federico II of Naples, gave us a substantial contribution in performing molecular analysis and critically revised the manuscript for
important intellectual content. Prof. Andrea Renda, Ordinary Professor of Surgery of University Federico II of Naples critically revised the
manuscript for important intellectual content.
