Background and purpose — Osseointegrated implants are an alternative for prosthetic attachment in individuals with amputation who are unable
to wear a socket. However, the load transmitted through the osseointegrated fixation to the residual tibia and knee joint can be unbearable
for those with transtibial amputation and knee arthritis. We report on the feasibility of combining total knee replacement (TKR) with an
osseointegrated implant for prosthetic attachment. Patients and methods — We retrospectively reviewed all 4 cases (aged 38–77 years) of
transtibial amputations managed with osseointegration and TKR in 2012–2014. The below-the-knee prosthesis was connected to the tibial base
plate of a TKR, enabling the tibial residuum and knee joint to act as weight-sharing structures. A 2-stage procedure involved connecting a
standard hinged TKR to custom-made implants and creation of a skin-implant interface. Clinical outcomes were assessed at baseline and after
1–3 years of follow-up using standard measures of health-related quality of life, ambulation, and activity level including the questionnaire
for transfemoral amputees (Q-TFA) and the 6-minute walk test. Results — There were no major complications, and there was 1 case of
superficial infection. All patients showed improved clinical outcomes, with a Q-TFA improvement range of 29–52 and a 6-minute walk test
improvement range of 37–84 meters. Interpretation — It is possible to combine TKR with osseointegrated implants. Socket-related discomfort
leads to a significant reduction in the quality of life of individuals with lower limb amputation (Dillingham et al. 2001, Gholizadeh et al.
2014). Socket-skin interface problems lead to poor fit, diminished proprioception in the amputated limb, lack of rotational control, and
reduction of ipsilateral proximal joint movement (Legro et al. 1999, Lyon et al. 2000, Meulenbelt et al. 2006). A direct connection of the
prosthetic limb to the bone using osseointegrated implants can address these socket-related problems (Van de Meent et al. 2013,
Tsikandylakis et al. 2014). Brånemark introduced this surgical procedure in 1995. He adapted osseointegration principles established in
dental surgery to the rehabilitation of individuals with transfemoral amputation using a percutaneous bone anchoring implant screwed into
the femur (Brånemark et al. 2001). Hip replacement spongiosa surface coating technology has been used to make a chrome cobalt intramedullary
press-fit implant (Endo-Exo Prosthesis) allowing larger surface area for osseointegration and faster rehabilitation (Staubach and Grundei
2001). Al Muderis et al. (2015) adapted highly porous plasma-sprayed titanium implants to provide optimum initial press-fit and solid bone
ingrowth. Studies of transfemoral implants have found improved quality of life, prosthetic use, body image, hip range of motion, sitting
comfort, and walking ability (Van de Meent et al. 2013, Hagberg et al. 2014). For example, substantial improvements in health-related
quality of life using the Global component of the questionnaire for transfemoral amputees (Q-TFA)—of 38 points (Hagberg et al. 2014) and 24
points (Van de Meent et al. 2013)—have been reported in 2 case series of 51 and 22 patients, respectively. Similar benefits could be
expected for transtibial amputees using osseointegrated implants, as the knee joint could possibly enhance their gait. A study of 39 cases
involving upper and lower limb prostheses (Tillander et al. 2010) found infections in 7 patients at an average follow-up period of 54
(3–132) months, with no infections reported for 1 tibial implant. At our own center, preliminary evidence of the safety and effectiveness of
the tibial impants in 22 transtibial amputees with a minimum of 6 months of follow-up gave results consistent with the published results for
transfemoral amputations (Khemka et al. 2015). Few authors have reported on the safety of this procedure (Brånemark et al. 2014,
Tsikandylakis et al. 2014). One of the largest studies included 51 patients and reported superficial infections in approximately half of
these patients at 2-year follow-up. In that study, the implant was removed in 1 patient due to deep infection and in 3 patients due to
aseptic loosening (Brånemark et al. 2014). Osseointegrated implants are not currently recommended for transtibial amputees with ultra-short
residuum. In addition to the practical technical challenges, biomechanical studies have suggested that small bone-implant contact is more
likely to increase the risk of loosening (Lohr et al. 2000, Henriksen et al. 2003, Carvalho et al. 2012). Osseointegration is also not
currently recommended for those suffering from ipsilateral knee osteoarthritis because it is hypothesized that an osseointegrated tibial
implant will aggravate arthritic symptoms due to mechanical forces (Frossard et al. 2008). We describe the surgical procedure and early
results of combining a total knee replacement (TKR) with an osseointegrated implant for prosthetic attachment for the first time. We
retrospectively reviewed all 4 individuals with transtibial amputations who underwent TKR combined with an osseointegrated implant at our
center. Eligibility criteria included transtibial amputees presenting with socket-related problems and having arthritis and/or a short
residuum (< 40 mm). All 4 patients were treated at a specialized orthopedic osseointegration clinic run by the investigators. A 2-stage
surgical procedure was performed 4–6 weeks apart, to connect an osseointegrated tibial prosthesis to the cemented tibial base plate of a
standard hinged TKR prosthesis, transferring the load directly to the femur and enabling the tibial residuum and the knee joint to act as
weight-sharing structures. The implant consisted of 4 components. The knee prosthesis used was a standard cemented stemmed rotating hinged-
knee system (Genia R-Pol Endoprosthetic Knee System; Orthodynamics GmbH, Lübeck, Germany). The tibial osseointegrated implant component was
made of titanium, plasma-sprayed with a rough surface. The dual conus was made from a cobalt-chrome alloy coated with titanium niobium. The
fourth component was a cobalt-chrome taper sleeve. The tibial platform and the dual conus were secured to the osseointegrated implant via a
locking screw. The implant for each individual patient was designed and customized by the principal investigator based on CT scans and plain
radiographs (Figures 1 and 2; for Figure 2, see Supplementary data) Computed tomography scans and key measurements of the residual bones for
each case. We used spinal anesthesia blockade and 2 g of Cephazolin for infection prophylaxis. The knee was opened in layers using a midline
skin incision and a medial peripatellar arthrotomy (Crawford and Coleman 2003). Free-hand tibial plateau resection was done using a sagittal
saw. The tibial medullary canal was sequentially broached. The femoral cuts were made using a size-specific block and the medullary canal
was reamed for the stem. The trial components were placed in situ and the knee was then taken through a range of motion. An image
intensifier was used to check the component position (Figure 4B). Then the definitive components were implanted. A guide-wire was used to
localize the center of the cannulated end-cap using an image intensifier. Passing a coring device over the guide-wire, perforating the skin,
subcutaneous tissue, and the sealed end of the bony residuum, a skin-implant interface was created. The skin was then stitched to the bone
using intraosseous sutures (2 Nylon). A dual conus was then inserted into the tibial component of the implant followed by a screw locking
the 2 components together. This was in turn followed by placing the taper sleeve. Wound care involved daily dressing changes with dry ribbon
gauze, and sutures were removed after 14 days. This was until the wound granulated over the titanium niobium oxide-polished surface of the
dual conus. Thereafter, the patients were instructed to wash the implant-skin interface with warm tap water and soap, and to pat dry. All
the patients followed a modified version of the Osseointegration Group of Australia Accelerated Protocol (OGAAP) for postoperative care and
rehabilitation, which integrated guidelines for TKR and osseointegration fixations (Khemka et al. 2015). Patients mobilized without weight
bearing using a forearm support frame and assisted by physiotherapists. Knee motion and core strengthening also commenced on day 1.
Following the second stage of rehabilitation involved axial loading of 20 kg twice a day for 20 min, with an increment of 5 kg per day until
reaching 50 kg or half of their body weight. Balance and gait training was commenced once the patients were fitted with a prosthesis. They
were allowed to mobilize with full weight bearing using 2 crutches for 6 weeks, followed by another 6-week period with a single crutch and
unaided thereafter. Clinical and functional outcomes were measured at baseline and at a minimum of 1 year of follow-up. Plain radiographs
were taken at baseline, at 3, 6, and 12 months, and then on an annual basis. Skin-implant interface was monitored, looking at discharge and
granulation. Adverse events were monitored. Functional outcomes were assessed using the physical and mental components of the Short Form 36
(SF-36) health survey as well as the questionnaire for transfemoral amputees (Q-TFA) (Ware 1999, Hagberg et al. 2004). The Q-TFA was
initially developed and validated for use by transfemoral amputees. However, it assesses aspects that are also relevant and meaningful for
transtibial amputees: a prosthetic use score (amount of prosthetic wear per week), prosthetic mobility score (prosthetic capability, aids,
and habits), problem score (problems related to amputation and prosthesis affecting quality of life), and global score (overall amputation
situation). Ambulation ability was assessed at baseline and at 6 and 12 months using the standard “Timed Up and Go” (TUG) and the 6-minute
walk test (6MWT). The Amputee Mobility Predictor assessment tool was used to classify mobility, measured as “K-levels”, graded from K-0
(does not have the ability to ambulate) to K-4 (active adult) (Gailey et al. 2002). Actual activity level was recorded at baseline and 4
months using a SenseWear (BodyMedia Inc., Pittsburg, PA), which provided the daily average number of steps and also indicators of total and
active energy expenditure, and duration of physical activity over a 7-day period of activity (St-Onge et al. 2007). The differences between
follow-up values and baseline values were calculated in measurement units and as a percentage of the baseline value. A Wilcoxon test was
used to test for a statistical difference between baseline and follow-up measures. Any p-value of < 0.05 was considered significant.
Analyses were conducted using SPSS statistical software. The Human Research Ethics Committee of University of Notre Dame Australia approved
the study (ref. no.: 014153S). All the subjects signed an informed consent document. The 4 patients were 3 men and 1 woman aged between 38
and 77 years (Table 1). 1 patient was wheelchair-bound and presented with a short residuum (3.8cm). The other 3 patients presented with
difficulty walking with their customized socket, even for short distances, and they also had radiographic knee arthritis. These 3 patients
suffered from socket interface problems that reduced their personal, recreational, and professional activity level. At the preoperative
assessment, the 3 prosthetic users presented with normal posture, walked with an antalgic gait, and had skin breakdown at the distal end of
their residuum. All patients complained of phantom limb sensation and pain. Stage 1 of the procedure for all 4 cases occurred between August
2012 and April 2014. Patient follow-up ranged from 12 to 32 months (and 10–30 months after completion of stage 2). Individual and group
demographics, amputation information, and rehabilitation timeline a Percent sound limb All patients had a pain-free knee and no phantom limb
sensation at the follow-up assessment. Case 1 reached maximum range of motion of 0–90 degrees, while the others had 0–110 degrees. The
implants were stable and well aligned (Figure 4C). All patients had complete healing with no discharge at the 3-month follow-up, and none of
the cases presented with granulation tissue (Figure 3). Only case 3 had 1 episode of superficial infection and a broken bushing (external
abutment). Skin-implant interface for case 2. Case 1 at baseline (A), intraoperatively (B), and at follow-up (C). All patients improved at
follow-up for the physical component of SF-36 (score improvement ranged from 1 to 54 points) and the Q-TFA (score improvement range 29–52).
Case 1 also showed a marked improvement in the mental function component of SF-36 (Table 2, see Supplementary data). All cases improved in
ambulation and activity levels, although no statistically significant difference was apparent (Table 2). The improvement in daily number of
steps ranged from 18% to 730%, and the improvement in duration of physical activity ranged from 18% to 550%. Case 3 remained at level K-3
for mobility (community ambulatory) while cases 1, 2, and 4 improved their ranking by 4, 2, and 2 levels after the procedure to reach the
highest K-level (K-4 (active adult)). We report on the feasibility of the first 4 attempts to combine total knee replacement with the tibial
osseointegrated implant for prosthetic attachment in transtibial amputees. A short residuum was defined as < 40 mm, based on the minimum
surface area required for osseointegration, which is consistent with other published reports on tibial implants (O’Donnell 2009). Our
experience suggests a minority of transtibial amputees are eligible for this procedure. Nevertheless, they are a challenging group to manage
and innovative techniques are needed. A more proximal amputation would be a more straightforward surgical option, but the knee provides much
of the power needed for a standard gait cycle (Jefferson et al. 1990). Thus, we developed this procedure to offer an important biomechanical
advantage over the alternative of a higher-level amputation, such as a knee disarticulation or transfemoral amputation. In theory, the
procedure breaches the conventional principles of joint replacement by exposing the joint to the environment, so careful soft tissue
management techniques to reduce the risk of infection are essential. Initial press-fit implantation of the osseointegrated implant is
required to provide a proper seal of the implant bone interface. Skin healing at the bone is essential to prevent ascending infection. There
have been too few reports of outcomes of osseointegrated implants for transtibial amputees to compare them with outcomes of conventional
socket prostheses. However, observational data indicate that the success of the implantation is related to the length of the residuum, with
long residuum giving better results than short residuum in case series (Brånemark et al. 2001). Additionally, osseointegrated implants have
not been used in presence of knee joint arthritis. We observed improvement in functional outcomes in our patients. Participants reported
being able to use their prosthesis all through the day if needed, which put them at the highest classification level using the Amputee
Mobility Predictor tool. We did not observe any serious adverse events. A superficial infection was treated with a single 7-day course of
oral antibiotics (cephalexin 500 mg). The few authors who have reported on the safety of osseointegrated implants have described an
acceptable rate of superficial infection and rare occurrence of other adverse events, including deep infection (Brånemark et al. 2014).
Altogether, one could hypothesize that the absence of stoma revision and explantation surgeries might be due to techniques adopted to close
pathways from the external environment, such as press-fit implantation and soft tissue handling, consequently sealing the knee to ascending
infections. We are concerned about the risk of deep infection associated with this procedure. Given the small sample size, limited follow-up
time, and single-clinic setting, larger prospective studies with long-term follow-up will be needed to estimate the risks of infection and
benefits of this procedure. Figure 2 and Table 2 are available available at Acta’s website (www.actaorthop.org), identification number 8662.
Click here for additional data file. AK: data collection, data analysis, and led the writing of the manuscript. LF: figure preparation,
table design, and manuscript review. SL: statistical analysis and manuscript review. BB: data collection. MAM: principal surgeon, conception
of study, and writing of the manuscript. MAM currently has financial consultant agreements with Orthodynamics, Endo-Exo Pty Ltd., and
Permedica.
