Libman-Sacks endocarditis (LSE), characterized by verrucous vegetations formation, is a typical cardiac manifestation of autoimmune diseases
such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). It primarily leads to lesions of cardiac valves and mostly
involved valves are mitral and aortic, but isolated tricuspid valve involvement is exceptional. Here we reported a 20-years-old female with
past SLE history suffered from acute right heart failure caused by multiple tricuspid vegetations and valve regurgitation. The patient
recovered following tricuspid valve replacement with a bioprosthesis. Transesophageal echocardiography(TEE), especially real time
3-dimensional (RT3D) TEE provide a better imaging modality for assessing cardiac valvular involvement of LSE. For patients with active
SLE/APS course, uncontrolled systemic inflammation may made it difficult for surgical exposure and suture. The durability of bioprosthesis
for this patient and the prosthesis selection for tricuspid LSE both need further follow-up and more clinical investigation. In 1924, Libman
and Sacks originally reported 4 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) cases with verrucose vegetative endocarditis , and that was the first
introduction of Libman-Sacks endocarditis(LSE). Nowadays, LSE have been seen as a typical cardiac manifestation of autoimmune diseases such
as SLE and antiphospholipid syndrome(APS). The pathologic changes of LSE involve the formation of fibrin-platelet thrombi on the altered
valve, the organization of which leads to valve fibrosis, edema, diffuse thickening, mild inflammatory changes, valve distortion, scarring,
and subsequent valvular dysfunction such like stenosis or regurgitation [2, 3]. LSE often involve left heart valves, tricuspid lesions were
very rare. And most LSE can be treated with medicine therapy while very few need surgical treatment. Here we reported a rare tricuspid LSE
patient with SLE history which underwent open-heart surgery with bioprosthesis replacement. A 20-year-old young Asian female presented to
our department for continuous weakness and short of breath for more than 2 months on June 2014. The girl’s past history was significant for
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) more than 3 years but she denied regular oral hormone therapy for nearly 2 years. Symptoms of paroxysmal
knee joint ache, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and orthopnea are manifested. She had experienced increased dyspnea on exertion with
activities of daily living and increasing lower extremity edema. After admission the patient had transitional mild fever with the highest
temperature of 37.9 °C. Heart auscultation showed systolic murmur at the 4th intercostal space by the left border of sternum. The
transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography (TTE and TEE) showed severe tricuspid regurgitation and a large single vegetation on the
atrial surface of anterior leaflet, which was swinged by blood flow. Real time3-dimensional (RT3D)TEE further detected numerous verrucose
nodular thickening on the leaflet’s atrial surface (Fig. 1). The computed tomography scan excluded existence of arteritis. Her laboratory
test yielded the following: normal regular blood tests, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and normal C-reactive protein level,
positive antinuclear antibody (tite 1:1000), decreased complement C3 and C4 levels(C3, 0.50 g/l; C4, 0.11 g/l), and negative anti-double-
stranded DNA antibody, negative anticardiolipin antibody and negative lupus anticoagulant. Hepatic and renal functions were all normal just
after admission. Blood culture was taken for 3 times consecutively, but no existence of bacteria was shown. History of unhygienic
intravenous injection was denied. Prednisone and hydroxychloroquine were given after admission for 2 weeks but the valve vegetations didn’t
disappear according to TEE follow-ups, and the patient did show aggravated clinical symptoms of right heart failure such as loss of
appetite, edema of lower extremities, polyserositis, hepatolienomegaly and continuous increasing hepatic function indexes.Fig.
1Transesophgeal echocardiography images of the patient before surgery. a Tricuspid regurgitation, Yellow arrowhead: wide and reversed blood
flow signals at TV site. b A large vegetation formation. Yellow arrowhead: A large vegetation adhere to anterior leaflet of TV. c Suspicious
multiple vegetations on 3D echo image. Yellow arrowheads: multiple verrucous abnormal nodular projections on the leaflet surface. RA right
atrium, RV right ventricle, LA left atrium, LV left ventricle, TV tricuspid valve Transesophgeal echocardiography images of the patient
before surgery. a Tricuspid regurgitation, Yellow arrowhead: wide and reversed blood flow signals at TV site. b A large vegetation
formation. Yellow arrowhead: A large vegetation adhere to anterior leaflet of TV. c Suspicious multiple vegetations on 3D echo image. Yellow
arrowheads: multiple verrucous abnormal nodular projections on the leaflet surface. RA right atrium, RV right ventricle, LA left atrium, LV
left ventricle, TV tricuspid valve Due to the uncontrolled and evolved right heart failure, the patient received emergent surgery
intervention. Considering her uncontrolled SLE and time-limited steroids treatment, the patient was in status of uncontrolled systemic
inflammatory response, which leaded to acute pericarditis and pericardial adhesion, also with edema of heart tissue. We had spent more time
to expose the heart and establish cardiopulmonary bypass. Intraoperative macroscopy showed a 5 mm*5 mm*5 mm vegetation attached to the apex
of tricuspid anterior leaflet, multiple verrucose nodular vegetations tightly adhered to the leaflet and subvavular apparatus. The main
chordae tendinae of the leaflet was also ruptured due to vegetation erosion (Fig. 2a–c). Due to the massive vegetations and inflammation-
induced tissue weakness, a final decision of valve replacement was made and a 31 mm Medtronic Hancock bioprosthesis was implanted. The
surgery and post-operation procedure were both uneventful. The girl presented no symptom of heart failure and discharged 1 weeks later but
with continuous follow-ups for heart surgery and further prednisone treatment of SLE. Histopathological examination of the excised
vegetation showed inflammation with neutrophil infiltration combined with fibrin-platelet thrombi formation (Fig. 2d–e). The patient was
alive 3 months after surgery and echocardiogram follow-up showed normal tricuspid bioprosthesis function without regurgitation.Fig.
2Macroscopy and microscopy of the involved tricuspid valve and vegetation. a Yellow arrowhead: The large vegetation, Blue arrowhead: rupture
mainchordae tendinae. b Blue arrowheads: Multiple verrucous nodular vegetation on the atrial surface of leaflet. c Resected tricuspid valve.
Blue arrowheads: multiple small vegeatations, Yellow arrowhead: rupture main chordae tendinae. d microscopy of the vegetation adhered to the
leaflet, Magnification 4×, Hematoxylin and Eosin stain. e enlarged square area in (e) showing inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrin-
platelet thrombi, Magnification 20×, Hematoxylin and Eosin stain Macroscopy and microscopy of the involved tricuspid valve and vegetation. a
Yellow arrowhead: The large vegetation, Blue arrowhead: rupture mainchordae tendinae. b Blue arrowheads: Multiple verrucous nodular
vegetation on the atrial surface of leaflet. c Resected tricuspid valve. Blue arrowheads: multiple small vegeatations, Yellow arrowhead:
rupture main chordae tendinae. d microscopy of the vegetation adhered to the leaflet, Magnification 4×, Hematoxylin and Eosin stain. e
enlarged square area in (e) showing inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrin-platelet thrombi, Magnification 20×, Hematoxylin and Eosin
stain The verrucous vegetations formation of LSE are seen as a cardiac manifestation of SLE and/or APS. Mitral and aortic valve is the
mostly involved valve, while tricuspid valve involvement was rarely reported. Moyssakis reported 38 LSE in 342 SLE patient which were
diagnosed by echocardiography, among which there were 24 mitral and 13 aortic involvement. only one tricuspid involvement . Doppler
echocardiography can be considered as the diagnostic technique of choice. But sometimes it is very difficult to identify LSE and true
infectious endocarditis (IE), for the former may also have fever due to the original immunology diseases and the latter may also have
vegetation. Echocardiographically, LSE vegetations appear as masses of varying size and shape with irregular borders and heterogeneous echo-
density, which are firmly attached to the leaflet surface and exhibit no independent motion . While the vegetation of IE may typically
exhibit independent motion . The role of transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), especially RT3D TEE, had been emphasized in assessing
vegetation size in a patient with LSE . And in our case the diagnostic role of RT3D TEE had been also highlighted, which might be more
sensitive to the very special verrucous vegetations. Treatment for LSE consists of drug treatment and surgical intervention. Corticosteroid
and anticoagulation drugs are used for LSE drug treatment. Corticosteroids cannot prevent LSE, but they can help healing LSE lesions by
lessening inflammation [3, 7, 8]. However they can also increase tissue fibrosis and scarring, finally worsening valvular damage and
dysfunction. Nonetheless, appropriate and sufficient steroid therapy to control autoimmune disease activity is important. Anticoagulation
therapy is required due to the increased risk of thrombo-embolic events in LSE and current therapeutic guidelines for APS did suggest long-
term anticoagulation to prevent thrombo-embolic events [2, 3]. So if the patient with LSE is hemodynamically stable, conservative treatments
above should be firstly recommended. Moaref had reported a successfully recovered case of LSE with treatment of prednisolone and
hydroxychloroquine, but the patient denied worsening symptoms of heart failure and received drug treatments by months . If with severe
intractable symptomatic valvular dysfunction, surgical intervention for LSE may be required [10, 11]. Since our patient got symptoms of
acute uncontrolled right heart failure, early surgical intervention even without adequate steroid treatment should be considered. In the
past decade, large studies on the surgical treatment for LSE were mostly focused on patients with mitral LSE. Bouma et al. reviewed the
English literatures of surgical treatment for mitral regurgitation caused by LSE and from 1974 to 2010 there were 41 patients with LSE
undergoing mitral valve surgery reported in 30 literatures, 13 patients underwent mitral valve repair while 28 underwent replacement . He
suggested that for only localized abnormalities with otherwise relatively normal leaflets, repair and rather than replacement was considered
as a good surgical opinion. We think the suggestion for mitral site also partly works for tricuspid-involved patient. And we had also
reviewed the very few published cases of isolated tricuspid LSE which underwent surgery, and collected types of etiology and surgical
procedure of reported cases (Table 1). Cases which exhibited vegetations to obstruct valve orifice have the possibility of being treated by
vegetation removal and may not need valve replacement. While cases with subvavular apparatus involvement were mainly undergone valve
replacement. Wang had recently reported a 40-year-old Asian female with SLE which had similarly multiple vegetations on the subvalvular
apparatus and the atrial side of the leaflets of tricuspid valve and a small perforation on a septal leaflet . The patient received
sufficient steroid treatment but vegetations still existed and finally underwent mechanical valve replacement due to the difficulty of
vegetation removal. We think if subvalvular apparatus were involved, the repair work may be hard and choice of replacement should be
considered since the difficulty to reconstruct the subvalvular apparatus (either vegetation removal or repair of chordae tendinae,
especially for active SLE/APS patients which suffered total systemic inflammation and tissue edema). In our case we also judged the
difficulty of repair due to multiple vegetations formation on the subvalvular apparatus and inflammation-induced tissue weakness which
leaded to chordae rupture, finally implanted a Medtronic Hancock porcine bioprosthesis at the tricuspid site.Table 1Reviews of literature on
isolated tricuspid valve surgery for TS/TR caused by Libman-Sacks endocarditisReferencePublished yearsGender/Age(y)SLE and/or APSAdequate
steroids usage before surgeryHeart failure before surgeryTS/TRMorphological changesSurgical procedureFollow-upLaufer et al.
1982F/9SLEYesYesTRDilated annulus and elongated chordae, no vegetationsMechanical prosthesis replacementNot mentionedLedingham et al.
a1988F/19SLENoTSa large calcified mass invading the right side of the heartBioprosthesis replacementTSSubsequent tricuspid stenosisafter
initial surgeryRemoval but no re-implantation of tricuspid prothesisAlive 5 years post-2ndopChan-Lam et al. a2001F/29APSTStwo masses that
were adherent to the tricuspid valve and intermittently prolapsed through the pulmonary valve.Surgical removal of the massesFalode et al.
2006F/35APSNot mentionedYesTSmassive vegetations involving the tricuspid valve, filling the right atriumVegetation removal and valve
replacement (type of prothesis not mentioned)Alive 3 months post-opGur et al. 2014F/20SLEYesYesTSmultiple verrucous vegetations as if being
a mass on the anterior and posterior leafletsTricuspid valve commisurotomy and Kay annuloplastyAlive 6 months post-opWang et al.
2014F/40SLEYesNoTRseveral large nodules on the subvalvular apparatus and the atrial side of the leaflets of tricuspid valve; small
perforation on a septal leafletMechanical valve replacementAlive 5 weeks post-opBai et al.2014F/20SLENoYesTRA large and mutiple tiny
vegetations on the atrial side of anterior leaflet with ruptured main chordae tendinae of the leafletBioprothesis replacementAlive 2 months
post-opTS Tricuspid stenosis, TR Tricuspid Regurgitationathe full texts of the articles from Ledingham and Chan-Lam (15,16)cannot be
acquired through any online database or official websites of the original journals, the author might only get informations from online
abstracts Reviews of literature on isolated tricuspid valve surgery for TS/TR caused by Libman-Sacks endocarditis TS Tricuspid stenosis, TR
Tricuspid Regurgitation athe full texts of the articles from Ledingham and Chan-Lam (15,16)cannot be acquired through any online database or
official websites of the original journals, the author might only get informations from online abstracts Usually for LSE, it was not very
recommended to implant a bioprosthesis since there was reported cases that underwent re-operation in the future, due to rapid calcification,
valvulitis and subsequent perforation or massive bioprosthetic thrombosis . So a mechanical prosthesis might provide a comprehensive better
result for LSE. But there were no expert suggestion on prosthesis selection for tricuspid site for LSE. For normal consideration, mechanical
tricuspid valve replacement (TVR) leads to increased early mortality and occurrence of valve-related events, especially the composite of
thrombosis, embolism, and bleeding . Compared to the possibility of mid-to-long-term degeneration and failure of bioprosthesis, we could not
tell which kind of prosthesis on tricuspid site should have better outcomes. Considering the prosthesis site and the gender/age of our
patient, a mechanical valve may be not very recommended since it might need more intense anticoagulation at tricuspid site which may lead to
unexpected embolism-bleeding events and bring harassments for female menstruation and pregnancy. But the durability of bioprosthesis for
this patient and the prosthesis selection for tricuspid LSE both need further follow-up and more clinical investigation. LSE should be
strongly suspected when significant valve vegeation unveiled during the course of SLE and/or APS. Mitral involvement is common but tricuspid
LSE is rarely reported. TEE, especially RT3D-TEE, is useful for diagnosis between LSE and IE. Conservative treatment with steroids should be
firstly recommended, but patients with untreated and severe intractable symptomatic valvular dysfunction still need surgical intervention.
For patients with active SLE/APS course, uncontrolled systemic inflammation may made it difficult for surgical exposure and suture. The
prosthesis selection for tricuspid LSE when valve repair is impossible, mechanical or bioprothesis, need further follow-ups and more
clinical cases investigation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Bai, Hou and Rencollected the data, Bai wrote the manuscript.
Guo participated in the design of the manuscript and revised and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This study was financially supported by Department of Cardiovasular Surgery, West China Hospital of Sichuan University.
