Sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation (SANT) is a relatively new entity in the spleen, which usually presents in the form of single
nodule. Only 5 multifocal SANT cases have been reported in English literature. The present case is the first report of a 38-years-old male
patient with SANT in the form of multiple nodules, who has been cured via laparoscope. In comparison to solitary SANT, multifocal SANT
occurs more likely in males than females and association with malignant neoplasm has not been described yet. Multifocal SANT as well as
solitary SANT show some relationships with IgG4-related sclerosing disease. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s13000-015-0312-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Sclerosing angiomatoid nodular
transformation (SANT) is one kind of very rare benign lesion in the spleen, which may present as ., Solitary type or Multifocal type SANT.
To date, a total of 127 cases of SANT have been reported in the English literature, of which only 5were multifocal . In this report, we
present a new case of multifocal SANT that had been treated with laparoscopic splenectomy successfully. We hope this report will help to
accumulate more experience for an accurate diagnosis and proper therapy of multifocal SANT. A 38-years-old man suffered from dull pain in
left upper quadrant of abdomen in December 2011. The pain became sharp when the body turns right lateral flexion, without other symptoms
such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal distention, diarrhea. The patient denied referring to the physician for any consultant and treatment
further. On August 2012, abdominal CT scan was performed for the patient, which showed an enlarged spleen, with multifocal lobulated or
irregular nodules in the spleen parenchyma. These nodules were isodense or hypodense, well-defined boundary, which were 3.5 cm, 5.5 cm and
7.6 cm in diameter respectively (Fig. 1a). The arterial phase and portal venous phase imaging both showed marked nodular enhancement with a
few faintly visible stellate change penetrating the center of the lesion from the periphery. The delayed enhanced imaging showed that the
lesion was progressively enhanced toward its center, becoming nearly isodense to the normal spleen. According to these imaging
manifestations, the patient was initially diagnosed as multiple angioma, while metastatic neoplasm could not be completely excluded. Then,
the patient was admitted to the department of hepatobiliary surgery in Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University for further
therapy at August 22, 2012. The decision was made to proceed with an operation by laparoscopic splenectomy after the necessary laboratory
investigations.Fig. 1 a Arterial phase scan showed marked multiple irregular nodular enhancement (arrows) with a few faintly visible stellar
change (arrowheads) penetrating the center of the lesion from the periphery. b Three well- circumscribed round tumors were found on the cut
surface measuring 6.5 cm (a), 5.0 cm (b) and 3.5 cm (c) in diameter respectively, the masses were non-encapsulated and grey brown and focal
calcification with a grey white scar in the center of the lesion a Arterial phase scan showed marked multiple irregular nodular enhancement
(arrows) with a few faintly visible stellar change (arrowheads) penetrating the center of the lesion from the periphery. b Three well-
circumscribed round tumors were found on the cut surface measuring 6.5 cm (a), 5.0 cm (b) and 3.5 cm (c) in diameter respectively, the
masses were non-encapsulated and grey brown and focal calcification with a grey white scar in the center of the lesion The patient change
given laparoscopic splenectomy, and a new upper midline abdominal incision was made for removing the large spleen. The spleen was sectioned
into pieces and placed in a specimen bag and were sent to Department of Pathology. The patient did well during the post-surgical period and
discharged 14 days after the surgery without any complications. Macroscopically, the spleen was 18 cm × 11 cm × 8 cm in bulk volume, with
three well-circumscribed round tumors on the cut surface which measured 6.5 cm, 5.0 cm and 3.5 cm in diameter, respectively, which was
consistent with the impression of multifocal lesions on CT findings. Every mass was non-encapsulated and grey brown, focal calcification
with a grey white stellate scar in the center of the lesion (Fig. 1b). Microscopically, at low-power, SANT was composed of multiple,
variably sized, circumscribed and confluent angiomatoid nodules with a central vascular core and a fibrosclerotic stroma on periphery
(Fig. 2a). On high power examination, three types of vascular structure were found in the tumor. One was capillary-like vessels, which were
characterized by the presence of erythrocytes within the lumin, another was larger vessels, which resembled the sinusoids in the red pulp,
and the third was ectatic veins, which usually had a well-defined vascular wall. Nuclear atypia was minimal, mitotic figures were extremely
rare, and necrosis was not present. A variable number of plasma cells were present in the internodular sclerotic stroma and in the
peripheral portion of the masses. Immunohistochemistry revealed that three different vessels in the nodules showed distinct
immunophenotypes. The capillaries showed CD34+/CD8−/CD31+ and the ectatic small veins were CD34−/CD8−/CD31+, the dilated sinusoids like
vessels presented CD34−/CD8+/CD31+. In other words, three kinds of vessels were all positive for CD31 (Fig. 2b), the capillaries were
positive for CD34 (Fig. 2c), the dilated sinusoid like vessels were positive for CD8 (Fig. 2d). In the sclerotic stroma we can found some
plasma cells which revealed IgG+ (Fig. 2e) and some of which showed IgG4+ (Fig. 2f) (<50/HP).Fig. 2 a Microscopically at low-power (×10),
the lesion was composed of multiple, variably sized, circumscribed and confluent angiomatoid nodules with a central vascular core and a
fibrosclerotic stroma on periphery. Different vessels in the nodules had distinct immunophenotypes, three kinds of vessels were positive for
CD31 (b, × 40), the capillaries were positive for CD34 (c, ×40), and the dilated sinusoid like vessels were positive for CD8 (d, ×10).
Plasma cells in the stroma revealed IgG+ (Fig. 2 e) and some few of which showed IgG4+ (Fig. 2 f) (<50/HP) a Microscopically at low-power
(×10), the lesion was composed of multiple, variably sized, circumscribed and confluent angiomatoid nodules with a central vascular core and
a fibrosclerotic stroma on periphery. Different vessels in the nodules had distinct immunophenotypes, three kinds of vessels were positive
for CD31 (b, × 40), the capillaries were positive for CD34 (c, ×40), and the dilated sinusoid like vessels were positive for CD8 (d, ×10).
Plasma cells in the stroma revealed IgG+ (Fig. 2 e) and some few of which showed IgG4+ (Fig. 2 f) (<50/HP) SANT of the spleen, as a new
entity, was first described in detail in a series of 25 patients by Martel et al. in 2004. Clinically, SANT is only a kind of described
pathological diagnostic conception, the exact nature of this disease, however, is not fully understood. In this paper, we reported a case of
multifocal SANT managed at our hospital and retrospectively reviewed medical records of 127 patients with SANT reported in English
literature, including 97 cases reported by Falk et al. in March 2012 and the additional 30 cases reported by other investigators dated from
March 2012 to present(shows this in more detail in the Additional file 1: Table S1). In the present investigation, we retrieved a total of
128 cases (including this case) that comprised 57 males (44.5 %) and 71 females (55.5 %). The age ranged from 11–82 years old, with a mean
age of 46 years, which was identical with the data reported by Falk and his colleagues . Analysis showed that the ratio of male to female
was 1:1.25, with a slight female predominance, which was basically consistent with the previous report (1:2) . The present data, together
with the other findings , suggested that the gender predilection may be prone to be neutralized as more cases were described, even though
SANT had initially been considered to be a female predominant disease. Of all 128 cases, 122 were solitary SANT, of which 53 were males and
69 were females; whereas, only 6 cases(include this case) were multifocal SANT, of which 4 were males and 2 were females, as shown in
Table 1. Analysis showed that age of the 6 patients ranged from 31 to 57 years, with a mean age of 41 years and that the male–female ratio
was 2:1, indicating a male predominance in comparison to the ratio of patients with solitary SANT (1:1.3). Evidently, as multifocal SANT is
sparingly reported, the gender difference in these patients needs to be confirmed further with larger sample sizes.Table 1Clinical Features
of 6 Cases of Multiple SANT of the SpleenAuthorAge (year)GenderSpleen weight (g)Gross features (size: cm)OperationConcurrent diseaseFollow
up1Diebole1 N = 156Female24003 nodules, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 in diametersplenectomyIdiopathic myelofibrosisNR2Kuo2 N = 339Male2783 nodules,
1.2 × 0.9 × 0.8 to 0.9 × 0.8 × 0.7splenectomyPancreatic mucinous cystadenomaNED, 14 months331Male6548 nodules, 3.5 × 3 × 2.5 to
6.5 × 6.5 × 5NRRight inguinal massNED, 6 months457Male142.53 nodules, 2 × 2 × 1.3, 2.4 × 1.9 × 1.5, and 4.8 × 4.5 × 4.4NRLeft upper
abdominal pain for 2 yearsLost follow up5J-C.Lee3 N = 143Female1802 nodules, 3.5, 3.0 in diametersplenectomyMultiple calcifying fibrous
pseudotumorsNR6Present case38Male5603 nodules, 3.5, 5.0, 6.5 in diameterlaparoscopichepatic cystNED, 26 monthsAbbreviations: NED, No
Evidence of Disease; NR, No Record Clinical Features of 6 Cases of Multiple SANT of the Spleen Abbreviations: NED, No Evidence of Disease;
NR, No Record In this work, review of available documents in English literature, 30 of these 127 cases (23.6 %) coexisted with other
diseases, such as idiopathic myelofibrosis, bile duct cancer, pancreatic cancer, acute pyelonephritis, and so on, most of which were cases
of malignancy. Those results were matched up with Martel’s report further confirming that patients with SANT, indeed, have a relatively high
prevalence of coexistence with diseases at other organs. Such a situation reminds clinicians and radiologists that, once a splenic lesion is
discovered and, particularly, coexists synchronously with malignant tumors at other sizes (for which metastatic tumors can not be ruled out,
the possibility of patient with SANT should be considered integrating with imaging findings. We deem it advisable to do the necessary
examination before or during operation to determine the explicit nature of the lesion. This can lead to avoid losing the best treatment
opportunity due to the thinking of a tumor that has been widely metastasized. Feasibly, the needle aspiration or biopsy [16, 17] should be
applied to clarify the nature of the space-occupying lesions in the spleen so as to select the optimal therapeutic regimen for
achieving maximum efficiency. Of 6 cases of multifocal SANT, 4 cases coexisted with other diseases, such as idiopathic myelofibrosis,
multifocal calcifying fibrous pseudotumors, pancreatic mucinous cystadenoma and hepatic cyst, as shown in Table 1. Interestingly, none of
these 6 cases coexisted with malignant tumors. Whereas, of 122 cases of solitary SANT, 26 cases (21.3 %) coexisted with other diseases, of
which 15 cases (12.3 %) coexisted with malignant tumors. The prevalence of coexistence of multifocal SANT with diseases at other organs was
higher than that of the solitary ones (0.01 < p < 0.05), in contrast, the tendency of coexistence of multifocal SANT with malignant tumors
was likely lower than that of solitary ones. This phenomenon may be associated with that the cases of multifocal SANT are less, or that
single and multifocal SANT, indeed, exist differences in terms of pathogenesis. This is necessary to accumulate more cases for the further
textual research. Macroscopically, the 5 reported patients with multifocal SANT presented multiple nodules (2–8 nodules), ranging in
diameter from 1 to 6.5 cm. The characteristics of the present case were similar to those 5 patients. In addition to the differences in
typical characteristic of multiple nodules and the clinical features mentioned above, the traits in terms of imaging , pathology and
immunophenotype had no other differences from the solitary SANT . As primary or metastatic tumors in the spleen are rare, and multiple
space-occupying lesions in the spleen are extremely rare, thus, we should realize that SANT of the spleen can present in the form of
multiple nodules. Meanwhile, we found that a variable number of plasma cells were present in the internodular sclerotic stroma and a few of
which showed IgG4 positive with immunohistochemistry. On average, the number of IgG4+ and IgG+ cells were 22/HPF and 95/HPF, respectively.
The IgG4/IgG ratio was 23.1 %. Kuo et al. reported three cases of multiple nodulars SANT and of which the mean IgG4 + cells/HPF and IgG4/IgG
ratio were 7.7, 30.7, 52 and 9.5 %, 14.4 %, 19.7 % respectively. Analysis of the data of this case those reported by Kuo et al. in 2009
revealed that the differences in the number of IgG4+ plasma cells between multifocal SANT and solitary SANT was not statistically
significant (P = 0.705), but they were statistically significant (P = 0.009) with the differences between multifocal SANT and control
spleens. Compared with normal spleens, the data showed some relationships between multiple SANT and IgG4-related sclerosing disease as well
as solitary SANT, which presented evidence to support the hypothesis that this disease entity was associated with IgG4-related sclerosing
disease as previous study reported by other literature [2, 8, 13]. SANT is a benign lesion, for which the curative treatment is splenectomy.
Review of the existing literature revealed that only 8 cases of solitary SANT were treated with laparoscopic splenectomy. The treatment
effect was similar to that by open operation according to the experience of follow up [5, 7, 10, 13, 14]. To the best of our knowledge, no
laparoscopic splenectomy had previously been performed in patients with multifocal SANT. In summary, we reported a unique patient with
multiple nodules of SANT of the spleen who underwent laparoscopic splenectomy successfully. In comparison to solitary SANT, multifocal SANT
occurs more likely in males than females and incorporates with other diseases, in which malignant neoplasm has not been described yet.
Multifocal SANT as well as solitary SANT show some relationships with IgG4-related sclerosing disease. When multiple lesions are found in
spleen in the imaging examination, the clinicians and radiologists should be conscious of the possibility of multifocal SANT. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Additional file 1: Clinical Feature of 31 Cases of SANT By Other
Investigators Dated from March 2012 to Present. Clinical Feature of 31 Cases of SANT By Other Investigators Dated from March 2012 to
Present. Sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation IgG4-related disease Contrast-enhanced computed tomography High-power fields
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Zhixin cao drafted the report,
contributed to concept, and cared for the patient. Jiawen Xu and Jiamei Li cared for the patient. Jianfeng Li and Qiangxiu Wang contributed
to concept and design, and approved the final version of the manuscript. Jiamei Li made relevant corrections. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81072200).
