A 43-year-old female born in Cape Verde presented with a nodular lesion of 2 cm on her right foot. She was admitted because of a recurrence
within 1 year after surgery. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed two elongated nodules in subcutaneous fat (Figure 1). Excision with
wide margins was planned and the surgical defect was corrected by a skin graft. (A) Nodular lesion located on the right foot. (B) Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) showed two elongated nodules in subcutaneous fat without bone or tendon involvement. Macroscopically, we observed
black grains with hard consistency measuring 1–2 mm (Figure 2). The fungi grew in Brain Heart Infusion Agar and Sabouraud Agar, with the
best growth at 37°C. Colonies were grayish brown, folded leathery with dark brown pigment diffusing in the culture medium. The
histopathologic examination showed a chronic granulomatous inflammation with fibrosis and rounded or trilobed grains composed of compact
filaments with chlamydospores (Figure 3). (A) Excision with wide margins and the surgical defect was corrected by a skin graft. (B)
Macroscopically, we could observe black grains with hard consistency measuring 1–2 mm. (A) (H&E 100×), (B) (May-Grünwald-Giemsa 400×) The
histopathologic examination showed a chronic granulomatous inflammation with fibrosis and rounded or trilobed grains composed of compact
filaments with chlamydospores. Molecular diagnosis was made by the analyses of the internal transcribed spacer region of ribosomal gene
sequences. A posterior Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis and alignment with reference sequences at GenBank–National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) allowed us to identify the fungi as Madurella mycetomatis. After surgery, the patient was treated with
itraconazole 400 mg/day for 16 months without any signs of recurrence or drug toxicity. Eumycetomas are rare in Europe. A multidisciplinary
team and long follow-up is needed to ensure the effectiveness of treatment.1 We thank A. Maduro, M. Martins (Unit of Medical Microbiology,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal), and J. Inácio (Instituto Nacional de Recursos
Biológicos, IP—Laboratório Nacional de Investigação Veterinária, Lisbon, Portugal) for providing internal transcribed spacer sequences and
microbiological data for Madurella mycetomati. We also thank G. Catorze G., I. Viana, and E. Vale for patient follow-up. Authors' addresses:
Tiago Mestre and Raquel Vieira,, Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Hospital Curry Cabral—Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon,
Portugal, E-mails: tiago.g.mestre@gmail.com and rviera@minsaude.pt. José Coutinho, Department of General Surgery, Hospital Curry
Cabral—Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal, E-mail: jcoutinho@minsaude.pt.
