Pancreas divisum, the most common congenital anomaly of the pancreas, is caused by failure of the fusion of the ventral and dorsal
pancreatic duct systems during embryological development. Although various pancreatic tumors can occur in patients with pancreas divisum,
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm is rare. A 77-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because she was incidentally found to have
a cystic tumor in her pancreas at a regular health checkup. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography images demonstrated a cystic
tumor in the head of the pancreas measuring 40 mm in diameter with slightly enhancing mural nodules within the cyst. Endoscopic retrograde
pancreatography via the major duodenal papilla revealed a cystic tumor and a slightly dilated main pancreatic duct with an abrupt
interruption at the head of the pancreas. The orifice of the major duodenal papilla was remarkably dilated and filled with an abundant
extrusion of mucin, and the diagnosis based on pancreatic juice cytology was “highly suspicious for adenocarcinoma”. Magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography depicted a normal, non-dilated dorsal pancreatic duct throughout the pancreas. The patient underwent a pylorus-
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy under the diagnosis of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm with suspicion of malignancy arising in
the ventral part of the pancreas divisum. A pancreatography via the major and minor duodenal papillae on the surgical specimen revealed that
the ventral and dorsal pancreatic ducts were not connected, and the tumor originated in the ventral duct, i.e., the Wirsung’s duct.
Microscopically, the tumor was diagnosed as intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma with microinvasion. In addition, marked fibrosis with
acinar cell depletion was evident in the ventral pancreas, whereas no fibrotic change was noted in the dorsal pancreas. Invasive ductal
carcinomas of the pancreas associated with pancreas divisum usually arise from the dorsal pancreas, in which the occurrence of pancreatic
cancer may link to underlying longstanding chronic pancreatitis in the dorsal pancreas; however, the histopathogenesis of intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm in this anomaly is a critical issue that warrants further investigation in future. Pancreas divisum, the most
common congenital anomaly of the pancreas, is the result of non-fusion of the ventral and dorsal pancreatic duct systems. The incidence of
pancreas divisum is reported to range from 5 to 10 % in Western countries , but only from 1 to 2 % in Asia . About 20–45 % of patients with
pancreas divisum develop clinical symptoms [2, 4], and most of these symptoms are associated with pancreatitis of the dorsal pancreas due to
stenosis or a small orifice of the minor duodenal papilla that can block the outflow of pancreatic juice in the dorsal duct into the
duodenum [6, 7]. Pancreatic tumors sometimes develop in patients with pancreas divisum, with an incidence of 11.1–12.5 % [8, 9]. The
majority of these pancreatic tumors are ductal carcinomas, and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is rare [8, 9]. We herein
report a case of intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma (IPMC) arising in the ventral part of pancreas divisum and review the relevant
literature. A 77-year-old woman underwent an annual medical checkup and was diagnosed with a cystic tumor in the pancreas by computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen. The patient was referred to our hospital for further examination. Her medical history included a radical
parotidectomy for a parotid gland tumor and a total knee replacement for the right leg. In addition, she was receiving treatment for
hypertension and osteoporosis. On admission, she had no clinical symptoms. Her height was 154 cm and her body weight was 61 kg. There was no
superficial lymphadenopathy or palpable mass in the abdomen. Her serum amylase level was 211 U/L (normal range; 30–120 U/L), and other
biochemical data, including tumor marker levels, fasting plasma glucose, and hemoglobin A1c, were within normal ranges. An upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy showed esophageal hiatal hernia and short-segment Barrett’s esophagus. Colonoscopy showed diverticula in the
sigmoid colon. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scanning demonstrated a cystic tumor in the head of the pancreas measuring 40 mm in diameter
with slightly enhancing mural nodules within the cyst (Fig. 1). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed a cystic tumor
in the head of the pancreas along with a normal, non-dilated dorsal pancreatic duct throughout the pancreas (Fig. 2). The presence of a
connection between the cystic lesion and the main pancreatic duct was unclear. Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) via the major
duodenal papilla showed a cystic tumor and a slightly dilated main pancreatic duct, but the main pancreatic duct was abruptly interrupted at
the head of the pancreas (Fig. 3). The major duodenal papilla was enlarged and the orifice was filled with abundant mucin (Fig. 4). The
minor duodenal papilla was normal in size and ERP via the minor papilla was not possible. The diagnosis based on pancreatic juice cytology
was “highly suspicious for adenocarcinoma,” suggestive of an intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma (IPMC) arising in the ventral pancreas
of pancreas divisum. The patient underwent a pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) with regional lymphadenectomy. The
postoperative course was uneventful, except for a Grade A pancreatic fistula (staged according to the International Study Group on
Pancreatic Fistula clinical criteria ), and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 29.Fig. 1Coronal image of contrast-enhanced
computed tomography of the abdomen. A cystic tumor is seen in the head of the pancreas with slightly enhancing mural nodules (arrows)Fig.
2Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. A cystic tumor is seen in the head of the pancreas (arrows). The dorsal pancreatic duct is
normal in size and clearly depicted throughout the pancreas (arrow heads)Fig. 3Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography via the major duodenal
papilla. A cystic tumor (arrow heads) and a slightly dilated main pancreatic duct, which is abruptly interrupted at the head of the pancreas
(arrow), are seenFig. 4Endoscopic findings of the major duodenal papilla. The major duodenal papilla is enlarged and the orifice is filled
with abundant mucin Coronal image of contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen. A cystic tumor is seen in the head of the
pancreas with slightly enhancing mural nodules (arrows) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. A cystic tumor is seen in the head of
the pancreas (arrows). The dorsal pancreatic duct is normal in size and clearly depicted throughout the pancreas (arrow heads) Endoscopic
retrograde pancreatography via the major duodenal papilla. A cystic tumor (arrow heads) and a slightly dilated main pancreatic duct, which
is abruptly interrupted at the head of the pancreas (arrow), are seen Endoscopic findings of the major duodenal papilla. The major duodenal
papilla is enlarged and the orifice is filled with abundant mucin A pancreatography via the major and minor duodenal papillae on the
surgical specimen revealed no connection between the ventral and dorsal pancreatic duct systems (Fig. 5). Macroscopically, a multilocular
cystic tumor, 40 × 35 × 25 mm in size, with abundant accumulation of mucin was identified in the ventral pancreas. Microscopically, the
tumor was composed of atypical epithelial cells showing nuclear enlargement, clear nucleoli, and disordered polarity (Fig. 6). They formed
prominent papillary structures. The Mib-1 index was up to 80 %. The tumor cells slightly progressed into the main pancreatic duct. Finally,
the tumor was determined to be a mixed type IPMC (well-differentiated adenocarcinoma) with partial microinvasion. The pancreas bearing the
tumor was drained by the pancreatic duct, which opened into the major papilla, suggesting that it was the ventral pancreas. The region
surrounding the IPMC was mainly composed of fibrous tissue, which was clearly distinguished from the normal pancreas (Fig. 7). The normal
pancreas was relatively rich in adipose tissue and the islets of Langerhans were typically oval in shape, features consistent with the
dorsal pancreas. Furthermore, the pancreatic duct in the region of the normal pancreas was linked to the minor papilla, also suggesting a
dorsal pancreas origin.Fig. 5Pancreatography via the major duodenal papilla (MaDP) and minor duodenal papilla (MiDP) on the surgical
specimen. There is no connection between the dorsal pancreatic duct (arrows) and the ventral pancreatic duct (arrow heads). A cystic tumor
is connected to the ventral pancreatic ductFig. 6Microscopic findings of the cystic tumor. The tumor is composed of atypical epithelial
cells showing nuclear enlargement, clear nucleoli, and disordered polarity (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 400×)Fig. 7Microscopic
findings of the head of the pancreas. The pancreas bearing the tumor shows marked fibrosis, which is clearly distinguished from the
neighboring pancreas. The normal pancreas i.e., the dorsal pancreas, is rich in adipose tissue (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 200×)
Pancreatography via the major duodenal papilla (MaDP) and minor duodenal papilla (MiDP) on the surgical specimen. There is no connection
between the dorsal pancreatic duct (arrows) and the ventral pancreatic duct (arrow heads). A cystic tumor is connected to the ventral
pancreatic duct Microscopic findings of the cystic tumor. The tumor is composed of atypical epithelial cells showing nuclear enlargement,
clear nucleoli, and disordered polarity (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 400×) Microscopic findings of the head of the pancreas. The
pancreas bearing the tumor shows marked fibrosis, which is clearly distinguished from the neighboring pancreas. The normal pancreas i.e.,
the dorsal pancreas, is rich in adipose tissue (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 200×) The pancreas is formed from the dorsal and
ventral buds of the foregut. Between the 6th and 8th week of embryological life, the ventral bud rotates behind the duodenum to reach below
and behind the head of the dorsal pancreas. The ventral bud forms the remainder of the head and uncinate process of the pancreas, while the
dorsal bud develops into the remainder of the head and the whole of the body and tail of the pancreatic gland . The two ductal systems fuse
so that the pancreatic gland drains almost entirely through Wirsung’s duct into the major duodenal papilla, and the distal dorsal duct
regresses and drains as Santorini’s duct through the minor duodenal papilla . When the dorsal and ventral pancreatic duct systems fail to
join during embryogenesis, the condition is called “pancreas divisum,” and it results in inadequate pancreatic drainage because the bulk of
the pancreatic gland drains through Santorini’s duct via the minor duodenal papilla . Warshaw et al. have classified pancreas divisum into
three types: type 1: the ventral pancreatic duct (Wirsung’s duct) and dorsal pancreatic duct (Santorini’s duct) are completely divided,
which is the most common type, accounting for up to 70 % of cases; type 2: an absent ventral pancreatic duct, accounting for up to 20–25 %
of cases; and type 3: a filamentous connection between the two duct systems. In our case, pancreas divisum was classified as type 1 based on
ERP, MRCP, and pathological findings. However, there was a slight chance that it was an incomplete divisum and the connection between the
ventral and dorsal pancreatic duct systems was obscured by the coexisting IPMC. IPMN associated with pancreas divisum is rare. Recently,
Zippi et al. summarized 13 cases of IPMN associated with pancreas divisum. To identify potentially relevant articles related to IPMN
associated with pancreas divisum, we performed a literature review by querying PubMed and MEDLINE with the search term “pancreas divisum”
and “intraductal papillary mucinous tumor” or “intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm”. In addition, references from these articles were
also assessed for additional relevant materials. As a result, 15 cases of IPMN associated with pancreas divisum, including our case, were
identified in the English literature [8, 14–26] (Table 1). Based on these reports, the following clinical characteristics were identified:
1) female predominance (80 %), 2) predominance of type 1 (complete pancreatic divisum) (80 %), 3) tumor location in the dorsal pancreas
(80 %) rather than in the ventral pancreas, and 4) a predominance of the branch-duct type (60 %) over the main-duct type. More than half of
the patients presented with clinical symptoms, such as back pain or epigastric pain, and two patients’ symptoms were associated with
pancreatitis. In general, most cases of pancreas divisum are asymptomatic and some may present with clinical symptoms related to
pancreatitis . In patients with IPMN, mucin-producing tumors may cause an accumulation of mucin in the pancreatic ducts and subsequent
obstructive pancreatitis. Although our patient had no symptoms, pancreatic IPMNs arising in patients with pancreas divisum may modify the
clinical symptoms of the patients, because dorsal pancreatitis associated with relative stenosis of the minor papilla and pancreatitis due
to IPMN may interact with each other. In our case, fibrosis of the pancreas associated with acinar cell degeneration was remarkable in the
ventral pancreas, but the bulk of the pancreatic gland, i.e., the dorsal pancreas, was normal without any findings of pancreatitis. This may
be the reason why our patient showed no clinical symptoms.Table 1IPMNs of the pancreas associated with pancreas divisumAuthors YearPatient
age (years)SexType of pancreas divisumaType of IPMNTumor locationTumor location based on embryologyTumor histologyOperationClinical
symptomsOriguchi 199682F1BranchHeadDorsalAdenoma(Autopsy)Icterus (due to other disease)Thayer 200271F1MDHead-
tailDorsalCarcinomaDorPNoneYarze 200333F1BranchHeadDorsalAdenomaPDEpigastralgia, nauseaSakurai 200474M2BranchHeadDorsalAdenomaPPPDNoneSakate
200434M1BranchHeadVentralAdenomaPPPDBack pain, epigastralgiaKamisawa 200563F1BranchHeadDorsalUnknownUnknownUnknownTalbot
200551F1BranchHeadDorsalCarcinomaDorPNoneAkizuki c200675F1BranchBody, TailDorsal, DorsalAdenomaCP & PRBack painScatton 200645M1MDHead-
tailDorsalAdenomaDorPEpisode of pancreatitisSterling 200770F3MDHead-tailDorsalCarcinomabNoneEpigastralgia, body weight lossSanti
c201074F1BranchHead, TailDorsal, VentralUnknownNoneNoneRingold 201065F1MDHead-tailDorsalAdenomabNoneNoneNakagawa d201370F2BranchHead-
tailDorsalUnknownNoneRelapsing acute pancreatitisGurram 201439F1MDHeadVentralAdenomaPDEpigastralgiaPresent
case74F1MixedHeadVentralCarcinomaPPPDNoneIPMN: intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, atype of pancreas divisum according to Warshaw’s
classification, bcytological diagnosis, ctwo tumors existed in the pancreas, dmultiple tumors existed in the pancreas, Branch: branch-duct
type, MD: main-duct type, Mixed: mixed type, DorP: dorsal pancreatectomy, PD: pancreaticoduodenectomy, PPPD: pylorus-preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy, CP: central pancreatectomy, PR: partial resection IPMNs of the pancreas associated with pancreas divisum IPMN:
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, atype of pancreas divisum according to Warshaw’s classification, bcytological diagnosis, ctwo
tumors existed in the pancreas, dmultiple tumors existed in the pancreas, Branch: branch-duct type, MD: main-duct type, Mixed: mixed type,
DorP: dorsal pancreatectomy, PD: pancreaticoduodenectomy, PPPD: pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, CP: central pancreatectomy, PR:
partial resection The treatment for IPMN with pancreas divisum depends both on the malignant potential of the IPMN and the symptoms related
to pancreas divisum. Our patient showed enhancing mural nodules within the cystic tumor of the pancreas on contrast-enhanced CT examination,
and pancreatic juice cytology results were highly suspicious for adenocarcinoma. A surgical resection was thus indicated for the patient
according to the international consensus guidelines for IPMN proposed by International Association of Pancreatology . Among reported cases
of IPMN with pancreas divisum, operative procedures vary, with some patients undergoing minimally invasive surgery, such as a dorsal
pancreatectomy (Table 1). With regard to the surgical management of IPMNs, the extent of pancreatic resection and lymph node dissection has
not been standardized because the malignant potential of pancreatic IPMNs varies. Therefore, it is important to plan an adequate operation
on an individual patient basis. Although organ-preserving pancreatectomy, such as duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection, pancreatic
head resection with segmental duodenectomy, or ventral pancreatectomy, could be the treatment of choice for benign or low-grade malignant
lesions of the pancreas, PPPD was performed in our patient because the cystic tumor of the pancreas was strongly considered to be IPMC based
on preoperative investigations and because a curative pancreatectomy provides a favorable prognosis for patients with IPMC [28, 29]. The
etiologic relationship between pancreas divisum and IPMN is an extremely interesting issue. Most pancreatic ductal carcinomas arising in
patients with pancreas divisum develop in the dorsal pancreas, and longstanding pancreatitis in the dorsal pancreas caused by relative
stenosis of the minor duodenal papilla has been considered to be a predisposing factor for ordinal pancreatic cancer [8, 30]. In our
patient, IPMC developed in the ventral pancreas. Because the ventral pancreas drains through the major papilla, ventral pancreatitis is very
rare in patients with pancreas divisum [31, 32]. Although marked fibrosis with acinar cell degeneration was evident in the ventral pancreas
in our patient, it might be due to chronic obstructive pancreatitis related to the accumulation of mucin in the pancreatic ducts. Talamini
et al. have suggested that IPMN is the cause of chronic pancreatitis and not vice versa. Although it is difficult to elucidate the etiologic
relationship between pancreas divisum and IPMN, the co-existence of these two unique disorders may have no strong relevance, and the
histopathogenesis of IPMNs in patients with this anomaly is a critical issue that warrants further investigation in future. Longstanding
obstructive pancreatitis in the dorsal pancreas due to obstruction of pancreatic juice outflow into the duodenum through the minor duodenal
papilla might be a risk factor for ordinal pancreatic cancer arising in the dorsal pancreas in patients with pancreas divisum, but the
relationship between pancreas divisum and IPMN is currently unclear. A large case series study would be needed to clarify the etiology of
IPMN arising in patients with pancreas divisum. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor in Chief of this journal. Intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm Computed tomography Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography Intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma
Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography Pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions TN carried out the surgical procedure, designed the report, analyzed all of the reports, and
drafted the manuscript. YK and SY carried out the surgical procedure and participated in designing the report. AA, NI, and RM performed the
histological analysis of the surgical specimens. YT participated in designing the report and revised the manuscript for submission. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Editage for providing editorial assistance. This research
received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
