A 46-year-old woman presented with a slowly enlarging skin lesion on the back, jugular lymphadenopathy for 1 month, but no fever. She was
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); CD4+ T lymphocyte count was 22 cells/mm3. She had always lived in Hubei province
(central China) and denied a history of traveling to southern China. The skin lesion was 3 × 3 cm flesh-colored, well-demarcated, and
ulcerated (Figure 1). Lymph node biopsy showed granulomatous inflammation. Bone marrow smear did not show specific pathological changes.
Blood and bone marrow cultures were negative, but skin biopsy stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Figure 2) and periodic acid–Schiff
revealed yeast-like microorganisms. Mycological culture of skin biopsy showed Penicillium marneffei. Intravenous amphotericin B led to full
recovery. P. marneffei causes penicilliosis, an opportunistic infection geographically restricted to Southeast Asia and southern China. In a
study of penicilliosis patients in mainland China from 1984 to 2009, nearly 100% of the patients had a history of traveling or residing in
the south.1 The classic skin lesion—papules with central necrotic umbilication—had always served as an important clue for the diagnosis of
P. marneffei infection.2 In this case, the residence of the patient outside southern China and the unusual appearance of the skin lesion
made diagnosis difficult. This patient's history suggests that endemic areas of P. marneffei may extend beyond Southeast Asia and southern
China. The negative blood and bone marrow cultures and non-specific lymph node biopsy indicate that this patient did not have a disseminated
infection typical of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients with penicilliosis. Biopsy and fungal cultures of skin lesions are
useful for diagnosing penicilliosis. The skin lesion on the patient's left back. Skin biopsy showing numerous intracellular round to oval
yeast-form cells (hematoxylin and eosin, ×400). Financial support: Training Programme for Young and Middle-Aged Medical Talents of Wuhan.
Authors' addresses: Yanni Xiang, Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, E-mail:
diligentx2014@gmail.com. Wei Guo, Pathology Department, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, China, E-mail:
graceg121@gmail.com. Ke Liang, Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, E-mail:
harry.liang2008@gmail.com.
