Critically ill patients often have focuses of infection that are difficult to detect. When conventional imaging techniques fail to
demonstrate the focus of infection, FDG-PET-CT (fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography) can be of
value . In this case, we present a 62-year-old male patient with a history of aplastic anemia. Two weeks following allogenic stem cell
transplantation, he was admitted to the ICU and intubated because of respiratory failure by severe Aspergillus pneumonia. His recovery was
complicated by persistent positive blood cultures with Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus epidermidis (CNS), and Escherichia coli. No
focus could be found despite extensive investigations, including echography of great vessels and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE).
After 2 weeks, we performed a PET-CT and found increased activity of fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation at the right atrial appendage (RAA)
(Fig. 1). Retrospectively, there was an oscillating structure in the right atrium visible on the stored TEE images that was initially not
recognized. We had the working diagnosis of infected thrombus. Intensive antibiotic therapy (meropenem and vancomycin) was continued for
6 weeks combined with therapeutic dosages of unfractionated heparin (UFH), after which blood cultures became negative. During repeat TEE
after 12 weeks the RAA thrombus had considerably reduced. After weaning from ventilation, the patient was discharged from ICU after 15 weeks
in a reasonable condition. In conclusion, the use of the FDG-PET-CT should be considered in ICU patients for detection of a focus during
unexplained positive blood cultures. The PET scan should be organized in ICU ensuring discontinuation of glucose or insulin-containing
intravenous infusions (for at least 6 h) and injection of intravenous radiolabeled FDG in the scan room 1 h before starting the
examinations, thereby allowing the patient to return to the ICU within 3 h.Fig. 1 a PET/CT images of positive uptake in the right atrial
appendage (arrow) of an immunocompromised patient with persisting blood cultures for E. faecium, S. epidermidis (CNS) and E. coli. b
Corresponding TEE picture (aortic valve, short axis, right ventricular inflow/outflow) a PET/CT images of positive uptake in the right
atrial appendage (arrow) of an immunocompromised patient with persisting blood cultures for E. faecium, S. epidermidis (CNS) and E. coli. b
Corresponding TEE picture (aortic valve, short axis, right ventricular inflow/outflow) On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author
states that there is no conflict of interest.
