We report a rare case involving a patient with C3 vertebral body metastasis secondary to adenoid cystic carcinoma of the tongue. Five years
after local resection of the primary tumor, magnetic resonance imaging showed a metastasis located in the left posterior border of the C3
vertebral body. Additionally, multiple pulmonary metastases were identified by computed tomography. Based on these findings, the patient
underwent C2–3, C3–4 discectomy; C3 corpectomy; and titanium mesh fusion with a Zephir plate. The diagnosis was confirmed by the pathology
findings. During 6 months of follow-up, the patient showed improvement and return of function of the cervical vertebrae, with no serious
complications. Because of the scarcity of cases of vertebral metastases from tumors of the tongue in the literature, we have reported this
case to add to the available evidence regarding this rarely encountered condition. Authors’ contributions: H.F. conceived of the case report
and drafted the manuscript; J.W. helped to draft the manuscript; P.G. and J.X. obtained the images; and J.F. edited the manuscript. Tongue
cancer is the most common type of oral cancer1; however, most malignant tongue tumors are squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).2 Other common
locations of oral SCCs include the salivary glands,3 followed by the hard palate and the base of the tongue.4 On the other hand, tongue
adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is rarely seen in the clinic.5 Further, while this rare malignancy has been reported to frequently
metastasize to the lung and bones,6 we here describe a very rare case involving a patient who presented with a left posterior tongue lesion
with metastatic spread to the C3 vertebrae. The patient was successfully treated with surgery and radiotherapy. In 2009, a 52-year-old woman
was referred to our hospital with an asymptomatic volume growth on her left posterior tongue. Examination of a biopsy specimen showed cancer
cells. Accordingly, she was diagnosed with tongue cancer and underwent local resection. The tumor was diagnosed as tongue ACC based on the
pathology findings (Figure 1). The patient received interstitial iodine-125 implantation postoperatively. Five years later, in June 2014,
she started to experience paralysis in both hands and reported pain in her neck. X-ray imaging showed that the C3 posterior edge density was
slightly decreased (Figure 2A and B). Further, T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a subtle decrease in signal in the
C3 vertebral body (Figure 2C and D). The findings of each imaging modality showed that the left posterior border of the C3 vertebral body
was invaded, and that multiple pulmonary metastases were present (Figure 3). Thus, we performed anterior C2–3, C3–4 discectomy; C3 vertebral
resection; and titanium mesh fusion with a Zephir plate. The operation was successful, and the intraoperative blood loss was approximately
200 mL. Histopathological analysis demonstrated a neoplasm that was formed of microcystic spaces surrounded by atypical hyperchromatic
epithelial cells invading the adjacent muscular tissue. The pathology findings of the C3 vertebral body lesion revealed ACC (Figure 4).
After 2 weeks of adjuvant chemoradiation therapy, the patient remained in good health. Two months later, magnetic resonance images and
computed tomography showed no recurrence (Figure 5). At the 6-month follow-up, the patient was alive and the function of the cervical
vertebrae was improved. The patient provided written informed consent for the publication of these case details and the consent procedure
was approved by the Human Ethics and Research Ethics committees of the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University. Pathology findings
resulted in a diagnosis of the tumor as tongue adenoid cystic carcinoma. X-ray imaging (A and B) showed that the C3 posterior edge density
was slightly decreased (arrow). T1-weighted magnetic resonance images without contrast enhancement (C, sagittal; D, axial) demonstrated a
subtle decrease in signal in the C3 vertebral body (arrow). Chest radiographs revealed multiple pulmonary metastases (arrow).
Microphotograph, showing the formation of microcystic spaces surrounded by hyperchromatic cells (hematoxylin and eosin stain). The patient
was followed-up with magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography scans, which did not show any detectable recurrence at 2 months. In
1859, Billroth first coined the term “cylindroma” to describe the histological standard of 4 salivary gland tumors. This term was widely
used until 1953, when Foote and Frazell redesignated these lesions as “adenoid cystic carcinomas.”7–9 ACC can originate from both the minor
and major salivary glands,10 and a recent study suggested that 4.4% of minor salivary gland tumors are located on the tongue.3 These tumors
generally progress slowly and tend to show wide perineural invasion into the adjacent nerves and distant metastasis. The primary tumor
generally metastasizes via the lymphatics11 and rarely metastasizes via the blood. Carlson and Ord12 reported the cases of 4 patients with
13 involved vertebrae, all of whom presented with symptoms such as severe pain, hypercalcemic somnolence, and flaccid paralysis of the lower
extremities as part of cauda equina syndrome. Accordingly, the authors advocated that such patients, especially those with bone pain, should
undergo radiographic examinations to identify distant metastases. Mendes et al13 described 3 patients who presented with symptoms and signs
of nerve root compression affecting the upper limbs secondary to tongue cancer metastasis. Further, in 2007, Lee et al14 reported 2 cases in
which signs of spinal cord compression developed due to tongue tumor metastasis to the lumbar vertebrae, and the authors suggested that oral
cancer may cause vertebral metastasis. In a more recent report, Tornwall et al15 described a case of spinal cord metastases from oral SCC
that started with pain in the lower limbs and spine. However, the present case differed from previously reported cases in several respects
aspects: including the facts that it was involved tongue ACC rather than SCC, showed metastasis to the C3 vertebrae, and that the patient
achieved significant improvements in quality of life using the management strategies that have been described above. In resemblance with the
previously reported cases, our case indicated that tongue cancer has a tendency toward distant metastasis, and clinicians should hence be
aware of the possibility of spine metastasis in any patient presenting with tongue cancer. Abbreviations: ACC = adenoid cystic carcinoma,
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, SCC = squamous cell carcinoma. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
