The present study aimed to examine and analyze cardiac involvement in two Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) pedigrees caused by the
c.1583 C→G mutation of the lamin A/C gene (LMNA). The clinical and genetic characteristics of members of two families with EDMD were
evaluated by performing neurological examinations, skeletal muscle biopsies, cardiac evaluations, including electrocardiography, 24 h
Holter, ultrasound cardiography and 99TcM-MIBI-gated myocardiac perfusion imaging, and genomic DNA sequencing. Family history investigations
revealed an autosomal dominant transmission pattern of the disease in Family 1 and a sporadic case in Family 2. The three affected patients
exhibited typical clinical features of EDMD, including joint contractures, muscle weakness and cardiac involvement. Muscle histopathological
investigation revealed dystrophic features. In addition, each affected individual exhibited either cardiac arrhythmia, which was evident as
sinus tachycardia, atrial flutter or complete atrioventricular inhibition. Cardiac imaging revealed dilated cardiomyopathy in two of the
individuals, one of whom was presented with heart failure. The second patient presented with no significant abnormalities in cardiac
structure or function. The three affected individuals exhibited a heterozygous missense mutation in the LMNA gene (c.1583 C→G), which caused
a T528R amino acid change in the LMNA protein. In conclusion, the present study identified three patients with EDMD, exhibiting the same
dominant LMNA mutation and presenting with a spectrum of severe cardiac abnormalities, including cardiac conduction system defects,
cardiomyopathy and heart failure. As LMNA mutations have been associated with at least six clinical disorders, including EDMD, the results
of the present study provide additional mutational and functional data, which may assist in further establishing LMNA mutational variation
and disease pathogenesis. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) refers to a group of inherited muscular dystrophies, characterized by
slow, progressive muscular weakness and atrophy of the humeral and peroneal distributions, with early contractures, which affect the
Achilles tendon, spine and elbows (1). EDMD is also associated with cardiomyopathy and abnormalities of the cardiac conduction system (2,3).
Cardiac problems are the leading cause of sudden mortality in patients with EDMD, therefore, it is important that cardiac symptoms are
diagnosed and treated early to improve outcomes and prolong life expectancy in patients with EDMD (2,4). EDMD can arise from mutations in
five different genes, EMD, LMNA, SYNE1, SYNE2 and FHL1, and can be inherited as an X-linked, autosomal dominant (AD) or autosomal recessive
disorder (5). The autosomal forms of the disease are predominantly caused by gene mutations in the lamin A/C gene (LMNA) (6), and patients
with EDMD exhibiting LMNA mutations typically present with more severe cardiac involvement, compared with patients with other EDMD gene
mutations. However, there are currently few case reports detailing the various genetic mutations according to phenotype (7–9). The
structural/functional correlations are further complicated by LMNA mutations, which have been associated with several distinct clinical
disorders, including Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, limb girdle muscular dystrophy, familial partial
lipodystrophy and dilated cardiomyopathy, in addition to EDMD (7). To further improve knowledge regarding specific LMNA mutations and
disease phenotypes, the present case study assessed the cardiac phenotypes in two families with EDMD, caused by the same c.1583 C→G (T528R)
LMNA mutation. The present case study investigated two Chinese families, which included three EDMD-affected and 12 unaffected members,
ascertained by neurological examination. Clinical data and detailed family surveys were collected. The patients and family members included
in the present study provided written informed consent and the study was approved by the ethics committee of the Third Hospital of Hebei
Medical University (Hebei, China). Skeletal muscle biopsies were performed for diagnostic purposes on the three affected patients. Briefly,
muscle biopsy specimens (0.5 cm diameter, 1.0 cm length) were collected from the biceps brachii, under local lidocaine anesthesia (Xiamen
Kang Source Biotechnology Limited, Xiamen, China). The muscle biopsy specimens were frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen, and 7 µm
cryostat sections were made using an EM UC ultrathin section machine (Leica Microsystems, Mannheim, Germany), and were used for the
subsequent histochemistry and immunofluorescence staining experiments. Morphological analysis of the muscle was performed using the
following routine histological stains: Hematoxylin and eosin, modified Gomori trichrome, NADH-tetrazoliumreductase, succinate dehydrogenase,
adenosine monophosphate deaminase and cytochrome c oxidase to assess enzymatic activity, adenosine triphosphatase at pH 9.8, 4.3 and 4.6 to
assess muscle fiber distribution, acid phosphatase, and oil red O staining to assess fatty deposition (all Shanghai Bioleaf Biotech Co.,
Ltd., Shanghai, China). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed using antibodies targeting procoagulant and anticoagulant membrane
components. The following antibodies were used in 1:50 dilutions overnight at 4°C: Anti-emerin (NCL-EMERIN) and anti-lamin A/C (NCL-LAM-A/C)
(Novocastra, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Biotinylated anti-mouse immunoglobulin G secondary antibodies (Novocastra) were then used for 1 h at
37°C. The avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (ABC) method was used for signal detection (ABC kit; Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA,
USA). After staining the muscle specimens were visualized, and the images were captured, using a BX51 confocal scanning laser microscope
(Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Electrocardiography (ECG) (FX-740; Fukuda Denshi Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), 24 h Holter (FM 800; Fukuda
Denshi Co., Ltd.), ultrasound cardiography (UCG) (iE33; Philips, Amsterdam, Netherlands) and 99TcM-MIBI-gated myocardiac perfusion imaging
(GPI) (Infinia Hawkeye 4; GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA) investigations were performed on the three patients with EDMD
(patients 1, 2 and 3). Genomic DNA from nine family members from Family 1, and six family members from Family 2 were extracted from
peripheral blood (500 µl) using the Genomic DNA Extraction kit 5.0 (Takara Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Dalian, China), according to the
manufacturer's instructions. Control genomic DNA samples were obtained from 50 healthy Chinese unrelated individuals. DNA concentration was
determined using a Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Wilmington, DE, USA). Each reaction required 50 ng
genomic DNA, 10 pmol primer sets (sequences in Table I; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), dNTP and Qiagen Multiplex PCR Master Mix
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The following conditions were used for multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR): 15 min at 95°C; 40 cycles of
amplification at 95°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 1 min; 35 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 45 sec 63.5°C for 30 sec and
72°C for 45 sec; 10 min at 72°C. Briefly, 50 ng genomic DNA from the patients was amplified using the hot-start PCR method. The DNA was
subjeceted to PCR using the Qiagen Multiplex PCR Master Mix. Each PCR reac-tion consisted of 50 ng genomic DNA, 16.8 µl SYBR Green PCR
Master Mix, and 250 nm specific primer pairs, in a total 25 µl volume. Using a pre-sequencing kit (USB Corporation, Cleveland, OH, USA), the
PCR products were purified and sequenced by dye terminator chemistry using an ABI Prism 377 DNA Sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA, USA). The resulting sequences were subsequently aligned and mutations were determined using Sequencher version 4.9 sequence alignment
software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). The clinical data of the three patients with EDMD are presented and summarized in
Fig. 1 and Table II. The patients from Family 1 exhibited an AD mode of inheritance, whereas the patient from Family 2 was a sporadic case
(Fig. 2A and B). The levels of serum creatine kinase were marginally increased in Patient 2, and were normal in Patients 1 and 3. The
electromyogram revealed myogenic damage in each of the three patients. Routine histological analysis revealed dystrophic features in the
muscle tissues, with degeneration, polyfocal necrosis, fiber splitting and moderate to marked fibrosis. Adipose tissue infiltration was also
observed. In addition, atrophic and scattered regenerating fibers were noted. The ATP enzyme staining revealed a predominance of type I
fibers. Immunofluorescence staining for emerin and lamin A/C revealed normal labeling along the membrane in all three cases (Fig. 3).
Patient 1 (33 years old) presented with panicky, shortened breathing and dyspnea. The heart border expended to the left and a heart rate of
42 beats per min (bpm) was recorded. Patient 2 (12 years old), the daughter of Patient 1, presented with no clear cardiac abnormalities upon
initial clinical examination. Patient 3 (24 years old) presented with panicky and transient amaurosis with a heart rate of 52 bpm. Further
cardiac assessments revealed a variety of abnormalities in each patient (Figs. 4 and 5). The ECG and Holter of Patient 1 demonstrated
complete atrioventricular inhibition and premature ventricular contractions of 26 beats/24 h. The UCG revealed that this individual had
generalized cardiac enlargement, mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation and decreased function of the left ventricle (Table II). The
99TcM-MIBI GPI assessment indicated left ventricular hypertrophy and variegated changes in the left ventricular myocardium. Patient 2
suffered from sinus tachycardia, as determined by ECG and Holter. The UCG and 99TcM-MIBI GPI scan was normal. The ECG and Holter of Patient
3 revealed atrial flutter and the UCG demonstrated mild left ventricular enlargement and decreased diastolic function of the left ventricle
(Table II). The 99TcM-MIBI GPI assessment revealed that myocardial perfusion was moderately decreased in the apex of the left ventricle. The
genetic analysis in the present study identified one missense mutation, c.1583C→G, in exon 9 of LMNA. This change caused a T528R mutation in
the LMNA protein. The mutation was heterozygous in the three affected individuals examined in the present study, and none of the 12
unaffected family members (seven from Family 1 and five from Family 2) exhibited this base change on either allele (Fig. 6). In addition,
the mutation was not identified in 50 Chinese control chromosomes. The LMNA gene is located on chromosome 1q21 and encodes the A-type
lamins, lamin A and C, and two minor isoforms, C2 and AΔ10, which arise through alternative splicing. The first 566 amino acids are
identical in lamins A and C (10). Structurally, the protein is composed of a central α-helical dimerization domain flanked by a short amino-
terminal head and a larger carboxy-terminal tail (11). Lamins A and C are located in the inner nuclear lamina and are widely expressed in
skeletal and cardiac muscle, fat, blood vessels, skin and nerve tissue (12). Lamins A and C are considered to be important in maintaining
the size and shape of the nucleus, and contribute to DNA replication, chromatin formation, RNA splicing, cell differentiation and signal
transduction (10,11,13). The three patients with EDMD identified in the present study were members of two families. The first family
presented with an AD inheritance pattern, while the single patient with EDMD in Family 2 was the only known affected member, suggesting a
sporadic mutation. Patients 1, 2 and 3 all presented with the typical clinical features of EDMD, including joint contractures, muscle
weakness and cardiac involvement. The contractures initially affected the shoulders, elbows or ankles and impacted the posterior cervical
muscles, thereby limiting neck flexion and forward spine flexion. Muscle weakness was slowly progressive and typically targeted to the
peroneal and humeral distribution. With time, a limb-girdle distribution of muscle weakness developed. Immunostaining for emerin and lamin
A/C revealed normal labeling along the nuclear membrane in all three cases. Although routine histological analyses revealed dystrophic
features, these phenotypes lacked specificity for EDMD and, therefore, gene analysis was required. It was revealed that each patient
possessed the same heterozygous missense mutation, c.1583C→G, in exon 9 of LMNA, which caused a T528R amino acid change in the LMNA protein.
A previous study suggested that the majority (76%) of AD-EDMD cases arise from sporadic mutations (14). The mutation identified in the
present study was previously described in reports of Italian and German individuals, suggesting that this change exhibits an increased
incidence despite ethnic differences (15,16). In the present study, Patient 3 was the only known individual from Family 2 to exhibit the
T528R LMNA mutation, which supported the suggestion that it was a sporadic mutation. Cardiac involvement is a frequent and serious
complication in EDMD, with a high risk of sudden mortality (4). The degree of cardiac involvement negatively correlates with the severity of
skeletal muscle weakness, however, it demonstrates a positive correlation with age and disease course (17). The predominant cardiac
manifestations are progressive conduction system defects and/or sinus node dysfunction. The incidence of atrial fibrillation and atrial
flutter is the highest, followed by atrioventricular inhibition (18). A number of patients present with ventricular tachycardia, ventricular
fibrillation and other malignant arrhythmias, which are the leading causes of sudden mortality in patients with EDMD (15,17). Consistent
with previous reports, the present study revealed various ECG findings, which were positively correlated with age and disease course in all
three patients. The ECG demonstrated only sinus tachycardia in the youngest patient (Patient 2; 12-years old). By contrast, atrial flutter
was observed in Patient 3 (24-years old), supporting sinus node dysfunction and complete atrioventricular inhibition in the oldest patient
(Patient 1; 33-years old). This latter finding suggested severe conduction system defects. It has been previously reported that cardiac
involvement in AD-EDMD caused by LMNA mutations may be more severe, compared with other forms of EDMD (17,19,20) and are often accompanied
by dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), left ventricular dysfunction and heart failure (15,20). Pathologically, the normal myocardium is
progressively replaced by fibro-adipose tissue, resulting in atrial and ventricular enlargement with progression towards clinical heart
failure (15,21). The cardiac imaging of the three patients reported in the present study revealed that myocardial damage was progressive
with increasing age and course of disease. The oldest patient (Patient 1) presented with left ventricular dysfunction, enlarged heart
chambers and severe myocardial perfusion defects, which suggested dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Patient 3 also developed
decreased myocardial perfusion in the left ventricular apex. By contrast, the youngest patient (Patient 2) revealed no abnormal findings on
cardiac imaging examination, therefore, follow-up observations are required as this patient ages. Amino acid 528 is located on the highly
conserved carboxy terminal tail of lamin A/C, suggesting that the T528R mutation may negatively impact the structure of the carboxy terminal
tail and decrease protein stability (22,23). It has been reported that patients with AD-EDMD caused by the R541H LMNA mutation develop
severe DCM, requiring heart transplant during childhood (9,24). Analysis of protein function has revealed that the lamin A/C p.R541H
mutation causes the highly conserved sequence of the carboxy terminal tail to mis-fold, leading to severe cardiac damage, which is
consistent with the observations of the present study (25,26). In conclusion, the present study identified three patients with EDMD
exhibiting the same dominant LMNA mutation. These patients presented with a spectrum of severe cardiac abnormalities, including cardiac
conduction system defects, cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Since LMNA mutations have been associated with at least six clinical disorders,
including EDMD, the present case study provides additional mutational and functional data, which may assist in further establishing LMNA
mutational variation and disease pathogenesis. Images of the three patients with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy in the present study. (A
and B) Patients 1 and 3 exhibited shoulder, elbow and ankle contractures, standing on toes, generalized muscle atrophy and limited neck
mobility. (C) Patient 2, the daughter of Patient 1, exhibited a positive Gower's sign. (D) Patient 3 also exhibited Achilles tendon
contracture. Pedigree of the two families examined in the present study. (A) Family 1 pedigree. The arrow indicates the proband. Individuals
diagnosed with EDMD are represented by solid black symbols and healthy individuals are indicated with open symbols. (B) Family 2 pedigree.
The arrow indicates the proband. Open symbols represent healthy individuals. Circles indicate females, squares indicate males.
Representative histopathological analysis of muscle biopsies from Patient 1 with Emery Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. (A) Hematoxylin and
eosin staining revealed scattered muscle fiber degeneration, necrosis, regeneration and connective tissue proliferation. (B) Cytochrome c
staining revealed decreased enzyme activity. (C) Staining of the ATP enzyme revealed type I fiber predominance. (D) Immunofluorescence
staining using a monoclonal antibody against emerin demonstrated a normal muscle fiber nuclear membrane. (E) Immunofluorescence staining
using a monoclonal antibody against lamin A/C revealed a normal muscle fiber nuclear membrane. (F) Merged immunofluorescence staining using
monoclonal antibodies against emerin and lamin A/C demonstrated normal labeling along the muscle fiber nuclear membrane. Magnification, ×40.
Electrocardiogram traces of patients 1, 2 and 3. (A) Patient 1 exhibited a complete atrioventricular block. (B) Patient 2 exhibited sinus
tachycardia. (C) Patient 3 exhibited atrial flutter. 99TcM-MIBI-gated myocardiac perfusion imaging of patients 1, 2 and 3. Patient 1
exhibited variegated changes in the left ventricular myocardium. Myocardial perfusion imaging was normal for Patient 2. Patient 3 exhibited
decreased myocardial perfusion in the left ventricular apex. LMNA gene sequences of patients 1, 2 and 3. Chromatograms of the heterozygous
c.1583 C→G (p.T528R) mutation in exon 9 of LMNA. Primer sequences. Clinical data of patients 1, 2 and 3 in the two pedigrees. Patient 1,
proband of family 1; patient 2, daughter of patient 1; Patient 3, proband of family 2; Prox, proximal; Dist; distal; CK, serum creatine
kinase; EMG, electromyography; EDV, left ventricular end-diastolic volume; ESV, left ventricular end-systolic volume; LVEF, left ventricular
ejection fraction; UCG, ultrasound cardiography.
