Bilateral gigantomastia is a rare condition, often associated with pregnancy that is characterized by a diffuse enlargement of both breasts.
Here we present a case of a late 20s woman in her seven months pregnancy with a bilateral gestational gigantomastia associated with multiple
breast lumps. Histological analysis revealed a fibroadenoma. Her prolactin level after caesarean delivery was found particularly high. A
significant decrease in breast size was achieved with bromocriptine treatment in conjunction with a bilateral lumpectomy. This case report
highlights the diversity of gigantomastia and emphasizes the importance of a tailored, multidisciplinary approach to the diagnosis and
treatment of this condition. Gigantomastia is an excessive, diffuse increase in breast volume. It is a very rare mammary gland condition
with a prevalence of 1 case per 100 000 pregnancies . The hormonal aetiology of gigantomastia remains controversial. The clinical signs of
the condition, including inflammation and breast pain, can be similar to those of inflammatory breast cancer . To the best of our knowledge,
a case of gestational gigantomastia occurring in association with breast lumps has never been described. This case report discusses the
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches taken with an unusual case of gestational gigantomastia with breast lumps, and emphasizes the
importance of a tailored, multidisciplinary approach to the management of this diverse condition. A seven months pregnant woman in her late
20s from a small town in northern Guinea was hospitalized at a clinic in Conakry for bilateral gigantomastia associated with multiple breast
lumps. The patient reported that the condition had been present for about 3 months, i.e. approximately at four months of gestational
amenorrhea. The patient was in her third pregnancy and she never experienced before any size abnormality of the breasts. In addition to the
gigantomastia, the patient complained of breast itch and a severe pain in the breasts and back. At the physical examination, the patient was
found pale with a pregnancy of 31 weeks and had a bilateral gigantomastia, predominantly in the right breast. The axillary tail of breast
tissue was curved. Both breasts had hyperpigmentation and were sensitive to palpation. The nipple skin was thickened. There was a firm
straight axillary lymphadenopathy (hard, with certain mobility of lymph nodes) but no supraclavicular node. Breast ultrasonography showed
multiple hypoechogenic masses with posterior enhancement in the axillary tail of both breasts and in the inner lower quadrant of the right
breast. There was an evolutive singleton pregnancy of 31 weeks. Fine-needle aspiration and core biopsy analysis of the breast lumps revealed
atypical epithelial hyperplasia. The patient was also suffering of severe anemia with an haemoglobin concentration of 7.5 g/dL. HIV serology
was negative. Blood tests performed after delivery showed the following hormone levels: prolactin 111.1 ng/mL, oestradiol 15.8 pg/mL,
progesterone 2.4 mg/mL, luteinizing hormone 0.13 mIU/mL, and follicle-stimulating hormone 0.10 mIU/mL. These values are consistent with
hyperprolactinemia and hyperoestradiolémia. To manage the patient's breast and back pain, which would have been exacerbated by vaginal
delivery, a prophylactic caesarean section was performed at 34 weeks gestation, after steroid administration to accelerate fetal lung
maturation. A live male infant weighing 2.3 kg was delivered. Bromocriptine treatment was then initiated (at a dosage of half a 2.5-mg per
tablet on day 1, one tablet on day 2, two tablets on day 3, and then increasing by one tablet per day to a maximum of 10 mg per day for 15
days). A significant reduction in breast volume was achieved with bromocriptine treatment (Figure 1), revealing easily palpable breast
lumps. Bromocriptine treatment during fifteen days also resulted in a fall in prolactin levels to 19ng/mL. Side effects of bromocriptine
were headache relieved by tramadol. Bilateral lumpectomy was performed two months after bromocriptine treatment. The excised lumps were well
circumscribed and varied in size (Figure 2). The patient's postsurgical follow-up was marked by delayed healing due to a haematoma.
Histological examination of the surgical specimens confirmed fibroadenoma (Figure 2). Both breasts returned to a normal size compared to the
initial size at the time of diagnosis (Figure 3). After 6 months of breast lumpectomy, there was no relapse. In addition, breast and back
pain were relieved after delivery. (A) appearance of bilateral gigantomastia associated with lumps (arrows) in the right; (B) left breasts
(A) surgical specimens from the lumps in the boths breasts; (B) histology of the resected lumpectomy specimen (H&E), magnified view × 4,
showed fibroadenoma with galactophorous duct and fibrous tissue proliferation (A) appearance of the breasts at the time of the diagnosis;
(B) after bromocriptine and surgical treatment The association of breast lumps with bilateral gestational gigantomastia is exceptional. Only
one other case of gigantomastia with breast lumps has been reported, and that case occurred after kidney transplantation . Rare cases of
gigantomastia associated with breast tumours have been reported, but only in the context of unilateral gigantomastia . This case report
describes a case of bilateral gestational gigantomastia predominantly in the right breast and with lumps in both breasts. Asymmetry in
breast size in bilateral gestational gigantomastia has also been reported by Ezem et al . Cesarean was justified by the unbearable back and
breast pain. It can also prevent in some case complications of the breast infection . The primary treatment indicated was medical, involving
the administration of bromocriptine . The use of this drug was very efficient, as a significant decrease in the size of the breasts occurred
during treatment. However, in some cases of gestational gigantomastia, breast size decreases spontaneously . Mastectomy with breast
reconstruction is indicated in the absence of gigantomastia resolution after delivery and also in the case of relapse or complications
during pregnancy [8, 9]. In this case, in which favourable results were achieved with bromocriptine treatment, lumpectomy was indicated due
to the persistence of nodules in both breasts. A limitation of this case report is the lack of information about the patient´s hormone
levels before delivery. In addition, there was no histological examination of the breast tissue surrounding the lumps. The availability of
these data in future cases could help clinicians make the decision to start treatment with bromocriptine before delivery, and could also
facilitate the differential diagnosis of this condition from other breast diseases. Indeed, the presence of skin inflammatory signs,
axillary lymphadenopathy, and atypia (found on fine-needle aspiration) may have suggested a case of inflammatory breast carcinoma, with a
possibility of phyllodes tumours. However, the clinical outcome after delivery, i.e. the decrease in the size of both breasts with
bromocriptine treatment, the clinical characteristics of the breast lumps, and particularly the histology of the lumps led to a confirmed
diagnosis of fibroadenoma. This report describes the first known case of gestational gigantomastia associated with multiple fibroadenomas;
however, the role of such fibroadenomas in the genesis or exacerbation of gigantomastia remains to be determined. We thank the patient and
her family for their kind cooperation. We are also grateful to Dr Bakary S. Sylla for his comments and critical review of the manuscript,
and to Dr Karen Müller and Ms Jessica Cox for editing the manuscript. The authors declare no conflict of interest. All authors have read and
agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have equally contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
