Conflicts of interest: none Signet-ring cell (SRC) carcinomas are poorly-differentiated malignant tumors that may affect the stomach and the
colon, but very rarely occur in other digestive organs1, 3. Although SCR distal bile duct cholangiocarcinomas have been very rarely
reported2, 4, 7 we herein first report the occurrence of a SRC hilar cholangiocarcinoma. A 66-year-old caucasian woman was admitted with a
40-day history of fatigue, anorexia, jaundice, itching and pale stools. She had undergone external percutaneous transhepatic drainage and
had been treated for cholangitis with antibiotics. The patient had no palpable masses and her past medical history was unremarkable. Total
bilirubin and liver enzymes were mildly elevated, and CBC was normal. Abdominal computed tomography showed a 4.0 x 0.5 cm tumor on the
confluence of the right and left hepatic bile ducts with moderately dilated intrahepatic ducts. It also revealed a 2 cm tumor in the left
kidney. Additional workup was negative for metastases. Laparotomy was performed and revealed a hardened mass involving the common bile duct
from above the implantation of the cystic duct to the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts. Resection of the biliary tree was then
carried out from the supraduodenal portion of the common bile duct to the first 2 cm of the right and left hepatic ducts, with en-bloc
regional lymphadenectomy. A Roux-en-Y jejunal loop was taken to the hepatic hilum and right, left and caudate bile ducts were sewn to a
single jejunal loop. Macroscopic exam of the bile duct tumor revealed a 5.5x0.8cm surgical specimen that was firm and scirrhous tumor
located on the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts (Klatskin tumor). Bile duct confluence had a narrow lumen but no stones or
mucin. Gallbladder had no stones or wall thickening. Pathology report revealed a poorly differentiated SRC hilar cholangiocarcinoma (UICC
T4N0M0) with free proximal and distal margins and microscopically focally positive circumferential margins (Figure 1). Resected lymph nodes
had no metastases. Histological analysis: bile duct tumor with signetring cells (hematoxylin-eosin, x200); histological examination of the
tumor revealed solid and infiltrative growth by pleomorphic round undifferentiated tumor cells with signet-ring morphology The
immunohistochemical profile confirmed the biliary origin of the SRC cancer (Figure 2A, 2B and 2C). Signet-ring cells stained for (A) CK19,
(x 200); (B) CK07, (x 200); (C) CAM5.2, (x 200) As frozen section of the intraoperative incisional biopsy of the left kidney tumor was
suggestive of angiomyolipoma, nephrectomy was not performed at that time. Postoperative course was complicated by a biliary leak, and
patient was discharged home on 27th postoperative day. As the definitive pathology report for the kidney tumor revealed a clear cell renal
carcinoma; the patient underwent a left radical nephrectomy after completely recovered from the first operation. Pathology report confirmed
the diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma with free margins. Postoperative course was uneventful. Nevertheless, the patient died of local
recurrence of SRC carcinoma 15 months after the first operation. Three previous cases of primary biliary SRCC that have been reported in the
English-language literature, all consisting of distal bile duct SRCCs occurring in Asian patients2, 4, 7. Two of those patients underwent
surgical resection of the primary tumor (pancreaticoduodenectomy). None of the previous bile duct SRC carcinomas consisted of a hilar
cholangiocarcinoma (Klatskin tumor). Thus, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a SRC of a signet-ring hilar
cholangiocarcinoma. This is a relevant fact, since hilar cholangiocarcinomas carry a worse prognosis than distal bile duct cancers, being
usually more aggressive and less amenable to surgical resection. Additionally, surgical treatment employed for hilar cholangiocarcinoma
(bile duct resection with bilioenteric anastomoses) is different to the one used for lower bile duct cancers (pancreaticoduodenectomy).
Although risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma include primary sclerosing cholangitis, congenital biliary malformations, and parasitic liver
disease, and hepatolithiasis, none of those was present in the case herein reported. This is the first report the occurrence of a SRC bile
duct cancer in a Western patient, and this might be relevant since cholangiocarcinomas in the East possess epidemiology and etiology that
are diverse to those bile duct cancers occurring in Western countries. A higher incidence of cholangiocarcinoma in the East has been largely
credited to colonization by liver Opisthorchis viverrini and Clonorchis sinensis, liver flukes that may induce inflammatory changes in the
biliary tree and are endemic in Asian countries. Although one could hypothesize that SCR hilar cholangiocarcinomas would arise from gastric
ectopic or metaplastic mucosa4, no evidence of gastric mucosa was found in the surgical specimen of the case reported herein. It has also
been demonstrated that bile duct epithelium may undergo a sequence hyperplasia-metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma similarly to the one of
intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinomas. Nevertheless, no evidence for such sequence was found in this case. In fact, biliary SRC carcinomas
are poorly-differentiated aggressive tumors that may arise de novo as it is thought to occur in SRC gastric carcinomas. As happened in this
case, most cholangiocarcinomas share expression of markers of progenitor cells such as CK7 and CK19. Thus, it is suggested that
cholangiocarcinomas are monoclonal tumors that may arise from hepatobiliary pluripotent stem cells9. Another uncommon finding in the case
presented here is the association between cholangiocarcinoma and clear cell renal cancer6, 8. Although bile duct obstruction could have been
attributed to the occurrence of a biliary metastasis from renal cell carcinoma10, immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the biliary
epithelial origin in this case (positivity for CK19, CK07, CAM 5.2 and AE1+AE3)5. Renal cell clear carcinomas do not usually stain for all
these markers. Although Levy et al. 6 described the occurrence of simultaneous intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and a left kidney cancer in a
patient on long-term use of methotrexate, there was no previous chronic use of any medications in this case8. Thus, the association of a
renal cell carcinoma with a SRC Klatskin tumor is likely to be fortuitous in this case. Cholangiocarcinoma is an aggressive malignant tumor
and it is possible that the presence of signet-ring cells could confer additional aggressiveness to this tumor. Further studies will be
necessary to confirm or refute this hypothesis. Financial source: none
