Spinal fusion surgery techniques develop together with technologic advancements. New complications are seen as the result of new techniques
and these may be very severe due to spinal cord and vascular structures in the lumbar region. The posterior lumbar interbody fusion cage
(PLIFC) was shown to enhance spinal fusion and to prevent pseudoarthrosis due to its basic dynamic characteristics. PLIFC migrations are
usually observed during the postoperative period, just after the mobilization of the patient and usually toward spinal canal. Migration to
the retroperitoneal region is a extremely rare condition in the literature. In this article we discussed three cases of PLIFC antepulsion
into the retroperitoneal region during the intraoperative period. Spinal fusion surgery techniques develop together with technologic
advancements. New complications are seen as the result of new techniques and these may be very severe due to spinal cord and vascular
structures in the lumbar region. Consequently, related mortality and morbidity may increase [1, 2]. The posterior lumbar interbody fusion
cage (PLIFC) was shown to enhance spinal fusion and to prevent pseudoarthrosis due to its basic dynamic characteristics . In addition, the
PLIFC enables the restoration of disc height and decompression of neural structures by providing anterior support to the vertebral column in
degenerative lumbar spinal diseases [4, 5]. In this paper, we discuss the one-year outcomes of PLIFCs that showed antepulsion into the
abdominal cavity during the intraoperative period. Case 1: A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to our clinic with complaints of low
back pain and leg pain that increased with walking, as well as neurogenic claudication. She underwent an operation for spinal stenosis and
degenerative disc disease between L3-S1. A bilateral transpedicular screw system (BTSS) was placed at the L3-L4-L5-S1 levels. Total
laminectomy and bilateral foraminotomy were performed on the L3-L4-L5 spine. A PLIFC was placed without problems through fluoroscopy control
after the dura and roots were eliminated and L5-S1 discectomy had been performed; fluoroscopy showed the cage to be located in
retroperitoneal region as anterior resistance was not felt during placement of the left PLIFC. The CT images obtained in the early
postoperative period confirmed that the cage was in the retroperitoneal region at L5-S1 level (Figure 1). Axial (A) and sagittal (C) images
of PLIFC(**) with antepulsion from the L5-S1 intervertebral disc space replaced nearby to the left iliac artery (B) is realized on the
control CT performed postoperative first day. No movement change of the cage is seen in the postoperative 1 year control CT (D) Case 2: A
55-year-old female patient was admitted to our clinic with complaints of neurologic claudication that negatively affected her daily life, as
well as numbness and tingling in her both legs. The patient had spinal stenosis and degenerative disc disease between L3-S1 levels and
underwent an operation. A BTSS was placed at L3-L4-L5-S1 levels. L4-L5 total laminectomy, superior facetectomy, and bilateral foraminotomy
were performed. The right PLIFC was placed without problems through fluoroscopy control after L5-S1 discectomy had been performed by
eliminating dura and roots; fluoroscopy control was performed as the cage easily moved to the depth without resistance during the left PLIF
cage insertion. The cage was observed to be in the retroperitoneal region at the L5-S1 level. A lumbar CT obtained in the early
postoperative period revealed that PLIFC was at the L5-S1 disc space in the left retroperitoneal region (Figure 1). Case 3: A 53-year-old
female patient was admitted to our clinic with complaints of neurogenic claudication and pain that increased with walking in the lower
extremities and decreased when leaning forward. She underwent an operation due to spinal stenosis and degenerative disc disease between
L3-S1. A BTSS was placed at L3-L4-L5-S1 levels. L3-L4-L5 total laminectomy, superior facetectomy, and bilateral foraminotomy were performed.
Fluoroscopy control was performed as the cage easily progressed to the correct depth without resistance during the right PLIFC placement
after L4-L5 discectomy had been performed by eliminating dura and the roots. PLIFC was observed to be located in the retroperitoneal region.
The operation was terminated without a cage on the left. PLIFC was observed to be in the right retroperitoneal region at the L4-L5 level on
lumbar CT obtained in the early postoperative period (Figure 2). Axial (A) and sagittal (C) images of PLIFC(**) with antepulsion from the
L5-S1 intervertebral disc space replaced nearby to the left iliac artery (B) is realized on the control CT performed postoperative first
day. No movement change of the cage is seen in the postoperative 1 year control CT (D) Postoperative follow up of the patients: The patients
were closely followed up hemodynamically by the anesthesia team in the perioperative period and general surgery and cardiovascular surgery
clinics were consulted for assessment of intra-abdominal organ and/or vascular injuries. Abdominal USG, lumbar spinal CT, abdominopelvic CT,
and abdominopelvic CT angiography were performed for elimination of vascular and internal organ injuries in the early postoperative period.
No pathologies were detected as the result of these tests (Figure 1 (B), Figure 2, (B)). The hemogram, arterial blood pressure, and pulse
were monitored closely in the intensive care unit during the postoperative 24 hours. The patients were mobilized with lumbosacral corsets,
and invited for control follow-up at months 1, 3, 6, 9. No injuries were detected in the internal organs and vascular structures. No
movement was observed on control CT in the cages that migrated to anterior position in case1 and case 2, but in case 3 minimal movement
change with a cranial angulation is seen on the control CT (Figure 1 (D), Figure 2, (D)). Very severe complications may be seen in spinal
surgery due to the proximity of the spinal cord and vascular structures to the operative field. The use of posterior transpedicular screw
systems (PTSS) and PLIFC has gradually increased for treatment of spinal instability and/or spinal stenosis and related complications have
also increased [1, 2, 5–7]. Classical complications of PLIFC include spinal root injury, dura injury, epidural fibrosis and/or
arachnoiditis, infection, and cage migration. PLIFC migrations are usually observed during the postoperative period, just after the
mobilization of the patient and usually toward spinal canal . The main cause of posterior migration of PLIFCs is total facetectomy and
insufficiency of posterior stabilization [4, 5]. Migration to the retroperitoneal region is a rare condition in the literature. While
Ignacio et al. claimed that late abdominal exploration could lead to more severe outcomes in case of antepulsion of PLIFCs, they recommend
early exploration and removal of the cage and repair of organ and vascular injuries, if present. We closely monitored hemodynamics in the
early postoperative period and verified the absence of intra-abdominal and great vessel injuries through abdominal USG, abdominopelvic CT,
and abdominopelvic CT angiography performed in the early period. No complications were observed in the early and late follow-ups. PLIFCs
were not removed, thereby preventing complications. Passage of the cage to the retroperitoneal region was in a relatively safer field
surrounded by the anterior surface of the spine and outer membrane of the peritoneum. In addition, limitation of low back movements due to
long segment posterior stabilization could have contributed to the displacement of the cage. Lumbar disc prosthesis (LDP) cases dislocated
to anterior have been reported in literature and some of these cases were dislocated in the early period and some in the late period. In all
these cases, removal is recommended in the early period prior to adhesion development in the operative field. Disc prosthesis developing in
the late period may lead to injuries of the small intestine, colon, and ureter, in addition to the complications related to great vessel
compression or rupture . Surgical removal is recommended in these cases although it is difficult and may lead to complications . The size of
the lumbar disc prosthesis is larger than the PLIFC and its borders are sharper, which means it is more prone to future complications even
though asymptomatic. Tight retroperitoneal adhesions may increase the risk of vascular and internal organ injury, together with dislocation
of the prosthesis as LDP is performed with a retroperitoneal approach, while the PLIFC is smaller and round. Complication risks may be less
as it migrates into the retroperitoneal region without adhesions. Ignacio et al. reported that the impaction of the cage by means of a bone
packing instrument helped the anterior displacement of the implant to the abdominal cavity. We consider that uncontrolled hammering of the
cage or applying excessive power when tightening the screw that provides expansion could lead to antepulsion. A wide range exists for
possible anatomic variants of vessels [11, 12]. Common iliac vessels originate at this level in anterior of the L4-L5 . Gstöttner et al.
found aortic bifurcation at the level of the L5 vertebral body at a ratio of 61%. The iliac vein confluence occurred mainly at the L5
vertebral body (67%). The left common iliac artery is the most commonly injured vessel in lumbar disc hernia due to its proximity with the
L4-L5 intervertebral disc and it proceeds in a medial direction . One of our cases antepulsed at the L4-L5 space and it was on the right.
Less vascular injury occurs at L5-S1 as it is directed toward the lateral of both corpus body in lumbar disc surgery . Two of our cases had
antepulsed from the L5-S1 space and this was on the left. Parasympathetic nerves originate from the second and fourth segments of the sacral
spinal cord (S2-S4). The parasympathetic system is confluent with the sympathetic nerves coming from the hypogastric plexus in the pelvic
plexus. Injury of this plexus results in impotence in males. However, our three patients were female and plexus injury was not considered.
Excessive curettage could lead to tearing of the anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL) and annulus fibrosus when applying PLIFC. The cage
should be hammered carefully under scope control. Excessive power should be avoided during tightening of the screw. The L5-S1 region should
be closely monitored for acute injury of organs and vascular structures in case of anterior migration of PLIFC although it is a less risky
region for injury. We consider that early retroperitoneal explorative surgery is not required unless intra-abdominal organ and vascular
injury develop. The authors declare no competing interests. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and
have equally contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
