Intravascular large cell lymphoma is a rare subtype of extranodal large cell lymphoma characterized by the presence of neoplastic cells
within the lumina of small vessels. Most cases of intravascular large cell lymphoma have a B-cell phenotype. To date, 12 cases of
intravascular natural killer (NK/)/T–cell lymphoma (IVNKL) have been reported. Our case is A 47-year-old female presented with erythematous
patches and plaques on the lower extremities mimicking panniculitis clinically. A skin biopsy revealed intravascular lymphoma (IVL) with a
NK/T cell phenotype (positive for CD3, and granzyme B and negative for CD20, CD4, CD8, CD5). The lymphoma cells were also positive for
Epstein-Barr virus by Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA in situ hybridization test. Because this type of lymphoma is extremely rare, our case
is documented and compared with the previously reported cases. Intravascular lymphoma (IVL) is a rare form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
characterized by massive proliferation of large, neoplastic cells in small- and medium-sized blood vessels with a predilection for the skin
and the central nervous system. This disorder was first described as angioendotheliomatosis proliferans systemisata by Pfleger and Tappeiner
in 1959. Most cases of IVL are of B-cell immunophenotype; rare cases of NK/T-cell IVL have been reported. To date, 12 cases of intravascular
natural killer (NK)/T–cell lymphoma (IVNTKL) have been reported, our case is the 13th. Because this variant is extremely rare, our case is
documented and compared with the previously reported cases A 48-year-old woman visited a dermatology clinic complaining erythematous patches
and nodules on her lower extremities noted for 3 months. The lesions were not painful or pruritic. The results of all laboratory studies,
including CBC count, liver function tests were unremarkable. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable. Under the impression of
panniculitis, a skin biopsy was taken from a lesion on her leg. The histological study revealed many distended vessels filled with atypical
large lymphoid cells in the subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 1). The tumor cells were all confined to the vessels and had large, irregular
hyperchromatic nuclei with an ample eosinophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 2). Many mitotic figures and necrosis were observed. Immunohistochemical
studies showed that tumor cells were CD45+ CD3+ (Fig. 3-a), Granzyme B+ (Fig. 3-b), CD56−, CD4−, CD5−, CD8−, CD20− (Fig. 3c), CD30−. In situ
hybridization for EBER was positive (Fig. 4). The immunophenotype suggested that the intravasacular cells were NK/T-cell–like lymphoid
cells. Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate revealed no evidence of tumor involvement. The patient did not have nasal lymphoma. The absence of
peripheral leukemia and the lack of bone marrow involvement excluded the possibility of an aggressive NK-cell leukemia. The
immunohistochemical tests and EBER in situ hybridization as well as the clinical finding suggested IVNKTL. After this diagnosis, Computed
tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, chest and abdomen were done and were unremarkable. Following combination
chemotherapy the patient was alive with no evidence of disease at 18 months.Fig. 1Scanning view of the cutaneous lesion revealing
subcutaneous abnormal obstructed vessels (H/E, ×20)Fig. 2Higher magnification showing distended vessels containing atypical lymphoid cells
with focal fibrin thrombi (H/E, ×400)Fig. 3The intravascular lymphoma cells were CD3+ (a), granzyme B b. and negative for CD20 (c)
(immunoperoxidase hematoxylin counterstain; ×200)Fig. 4The lymphoma cells were positive for EBV by EBV-encoded RNA in situ hybridization
study (in situ hybridization ×200) Scanning view of the cutaneous lesion revealing subcutaneous abnormal obstructed vessels (H/E, ×20)
Higher magnification showing distended vessels containing atypical lymphoid cells with focal fibrin thrombi (H/E, ×400) The intravascular
lymphoma cells were CD3+ (a), granzyme B b. and negative for CD20 (c) (immunoperoxidase hematoxylin counterstain; ×200) The lymphoma cells
were positive for EBV by EBV-encoded RNA in situ hybridization study (in situ hybridization ×200) IVL is a very rare neoplasm characterized
by proliferation of lymphoma cells almost exclusively within the blood vessels. Originally described in 1959 as “angioendotheliomatosis
proliferans systemisata” and considered an endothelial neoplasm, IVL has subsequently been shown to be a lymphoid malignancy based on
immunohistochemical techniques . The majority of reported cases were large B-cell lymphomas, only a few cases were reported to be of the T
and NK-cell lineage. Since 2003, 12 cases of IVNKL have been reported worldwide. The current case is the 13th. Recognized variants of NK
cell lymphomas include a clinicopathologic spectrum of predominantly extranodal disease, including nasal and extranasal types, and
aggressive NK cell leukemia/lymphoma [3, 4]. IVNKL should be distinguished from the extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (ENKTCL).
Although ENKTCL can also occur in the skin but presents with multiple nodules with ulceration and the tumor cells are distributed in tissues
and show vascular invasion. Patients with IVNKTL have no nasal abnormalities and tumor cells are confined to the endovascular system. IVNKTL
should also be distinguished from aggressive NK-cell leukemia. A rash is typically prominent in IVNKTL without obvious abnormalities in the
peripheral blood, although bone marrow abnormalities might be present in some patients. In aggressive NK-cell leukemia, tumor cells are
diffusely scattered in the extravascular tissue rather than deposited in blood vessels. Why are all tumor cells distributed intravascularly
in IVNKTL? The lack of adhesion molecule (CD29 and CD54) expression by tumor cells in intravascular large B-cell lymphoma is thought to
explain why these tumor cells do not infiltrate extravascular sites . Whether similar mechanisms exist in IVNKTL is not yet known. The high
prevalence of EBER positivity in IVNKTL suggests that EBV infection is somehow involved in the pathogenesis of this rare lymphoma. Because
these are rare cases, the origin of intravascular NK/T-cell lymphoma has not been studied in depth. Only two of the 12 cases had T-cell
receptor gene rearrangement analysis performed, which confirmed NK/T-cell origin . The age range of the reported IVNKL cases was between
4–71 years. The clinical course lasted from 2 months to 3 years. Multisystem involvement (brain, bone marrow, spleen, and kidney) occurred
in eight of 13 patients (61.5 %). The other five patients including our case developed only a skin rash. Among the 13 cases, four (30.7 %)
were reported in China, two (15.3 %) in Taiwan, two (15.3 %) in the United States, one (7.6 %) in Austria, one 7.6 %) in Japan, one in
Korea, one (7.6 %) in Italy and one in Saudi Arabia (7.6 %). Nine (69.2 %) of 13 of the reported cases were encountered in Asian countries.
Nine out of 13 patients were female (69.2 %) and four were male (30.8 %) . The prognosis for IVL in general might vary depending on the
extent of disease. Patients with limited disease such as skin lesions, as noted in our case, or single organ involvement might respond well
to chemotherapy. Patients with disseminated disease, particularly those with CNS involvement, have done poorly . In conclusion, Although the
majority of IVL cases are B cell in lineage, rare cases of T or NK-cell lymphoma can occur as IVL. Because this variant is extremely rare,
our case is documented and pathologists should be aware that NK-cell lymphoma can also occur intravascularly as cutaneous lymphoma with or
without affecting other internal organs. The diagnosis can be established by combined histopathologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular
studies. The role of EBV in the oncogenesis of IVNKL requires further investigation. More cases should be documented for further
understanding of this peculiar rare type of lymphoma. Consent was obtained from the patient for publication. Competing interest The author
declare that they have no competing interest
