Conflicts of interest: none Meckel's diverticulum is the most common malformation of the gastrointestinal tract with an incidence of 2% of
the population. This congenital anomaly results from incomplete yolk duct development1. Meckel's diverticulum has a complication rate of
4-6%. Most common complications are haemorrhage, perforation, obstruction and inflammation4. It is mostly asymptomatic and most often
diagnosed when complications occur. Also it may be diagnosed incidentally during laparoscopy or laparatomy for unrelated conditions1.
Fistula formation (between abdominal organs), herniation (of abdominal wall), and Littre hernia (protrusion of a Meckel's diverticulum
through an abdominal wall defect) are well-described complication. However, umbilical herniation of Meckel's diverticulum is rare3. Herein
is presented a case with enterocutaneous fistula between Meckel's diverticulum and umbilicus associated with umbilical hernia. A 40-year-old
man was admitted to the department of General Surgery with a 24 h history of abdominal pain focused on the umbilical region, as well as
fever, anorexia and vomiting. He had a history of previous umbilical abscess drainage five years ago. He reported no other medical history.
Examination of the abdomen showed tenderness over the umbilical region without abdominal guarding and rigidity. A leakage of intestinal
fluid through an opening (an external fistula orifice) was determined inside the umbilicus. There was no increase in local heat, swelling or
edema. The laboratory findings, including complete blood count and electrolytes, and abdominal X-ray showed no abnormality. Abdominal
ultrasound showed a well-limited liquid collection of 1.5x1.5 cm subcutaneously under the umbilicus. The contrast-enhanced abdominal
computerized tomography scan revealed a small intestine segment lying subcutaneously throughout the fascia defect on the umbilicus The
intestine was fistulized throughout the umbilical hernia into the external layer of the skin (Figure 1). With the clinical and radiological
findings, the patient was initially diagnosed as enterocutaneous fistula with a Meckel's diverticulum. In the surgery, abdomen was opened
and the exploration revealed Meckel's diverticulum (lying subcutaneously throughout the fascia defect on the umbilicus) and a fistula
between this and the umbilicus. There was no fluid contamination in the abdomen. A diverticulectomy and an excision including the fistula
tract and umbilicus were performed (Figure 2). The patient was discharged at fifth postoperative day safely. Histopathologic examination
approved Meckel's diverticulum. Contrast enhanced CT shows an intestine fistulized throughout the umbilical hernia into the external layer
of the umbilical skin Intraoperative image showing the Meckel's diverticulum forming enterocutaneous fistulization of Littre's umbilical
hernia Various complications of Meckel's diverticulum include ulcerations, gastrointestinal bleeding, intestinal obstructions due to bands,
intussusceptions, diverticulitis, perforations and neoplasms2, 3. In patients under 18, the most common presentation is haemorrhage, while
in adults it is intestinal obstruction. Beyond all, development of fistula is a rare complication. In literature, enterocolonic fistula,
vesicodiverticular fistula and ileorectal fistula have been reported as case reports and recently a fistula between Meckel's diverticulum
and the appendix has been published5. However, the search of Pubmed literature failed to find any previous study regarding a fistula between
a Meckel's diverticulum and the umbilicus. A possible explanation for this situation is that Meckel's diverticulum may congenitally be
localized in the umbilical hernia sac. An inflammatory attack of Meckel's diverticulum in the hernia sac leads to an abscess formation and
sinus. When missed, or undiagnosed, an enterocutaneous fistula may occur. Based on the experience in this case, complications of Meckel's
diverticulum should be considered during differantial diagnosis of enterocutaneous fistula. Financial source: none
