A 65 year old man, with no past history of epilepsy or seizures and of weight 80kg, is admitted with sepsis. After a 5 minute generalized
tonic-clonic seizure (GTCS) he is given 2mg of intravenous lorazepam. After multiple brief GTCS he is given a further 2 mg of intravenous
lorazepam. He becomes obtunded. After a further 10 minutes when he has developed subtle left facial twitching, 1 g of phenytoin is infused
over 30 minutes. After a further 15 minutes, by which time his GCS is 8/15, colleagues in anaesthetics are contacted with a view to transfer
to the intensive care unit. Status epilepticus (SE) is the term used to describe an abnormally prolonged state of self-perpetuating and
evolving seizure activity, specifically defined by time, as a 5 minute seizure or an episode of briefer seizures with reduced recovery of
awareness in between seizures1. SE can be convulsive or non-convulsive in type. Non-convulsive seizures represent states of various levels
of altered awareness, associated with electroencephalographic (EEG) seizure activity, but without outwardly observable convulsive activity2.
An important feature of convulsive seizures is their potential for evolution into non-convulsive seizures, where the patient can appear
“post ictal” but is having electrical seizures, without obvious convulsive activity3. Other types of status epilepticus include simple
partial status (with preserved awareness), complex partial status (with impaired consciousness) and myoclonic status (often associated with
coma)4. Records from antiquity describe SE, but it has only been in the last century that there have been major advances in its
understanding and treatment5. Many significant questions remain about the pathophysiology and management of this medical emergency which
carries a substantial morbidity and mortality. This paper will present the current understanding of SE, identifying gaps in our knowledge.
The evidence base for the pharmacological management of SE will be reviewed. With an incidence of 6 to 41 per 100,0006–12 for convulsive SE,
between 108 and 738 cases would be expected to occur in Northern Ireland each year. Incidence is bimodal, with peaks in infancy and in the
elderly (>60). The overall case fatality rate is between 7.6 and 39%13. The mortality rate is higher in the elderly at 38% compared to 14%
for younger adults14. Over half of SE patients present with de novo seizures7 and approximately 10% will have recurrent episodes of SE14.
Patients presenting with SE also have a higher likelihood of developing chronic epilepsy when compared to those who present with a first
seizure, that does not fulfill the criteria for SE15. In 50% of cases of SE no cause is identified. The common causes of SE are presented in
Figure 1 6–12. Most episodes of SE are secondary to old structural lesions (e.g. a past stroke), with acute cerebral insults including acute
stroke, anoxia, toxic and metabolic causes and alcohol and drug withdrawal, accounting for a significant proportion of the remaining cases.
Patients with epilepsy can develop SE for various reasons including reduced serum drug levels from poor adherence with treatment regimens,
or the effects of intercurrent illnesses and fever. Table 1 summarises the more uncommon causes of SE identified in a recent systematic
review16 . Identified aetiology of status epilepticus across major studies (6-12) The uncommon causes of status epilepticus.16 The outcome
from SE is associated with the underlying aetiology. Anoxia is associated with a substantial mortality (72%). The lowest mortality is in
patients with epilepsy who have provoked seizures, for example with low serum antiepileptic drug levels (mortality rate 4 - 8.6%)6 Age,
duration of SE, whether there have been any prior episodes, depth of coma at presentation, and response to treatment have also been shown to
be important6, 14, 17, 18. The main modifiable factor is the duration of SE, highlighting the importance of urgent treatment. Duration of
seizure activity has been shown to be an important predictor for mortality19, with seizures lasting less than 30 minutes having a mortality
of 2.6%, compared with 19% for those lasting more than 30 minutes. SE is an evolving state with changes in neuronal and synaptic chemistry
and systemic physiology resulting in progressive pharmacological refractoriness. For the first 30 minutes physiological compensation occurs
to meet the increased metabolic demands. Heart rate, blood pressure and serum glucose level are all elevated to minimize the risk of
cerebral damage. After 30 minutes, decompensation occurs with hypotension, hypoxia, metabolic acidosis, cardiac arrhythmias and cerebral
auto-regulatory failure ensuing, all of which can lead to neuronal damage. Later complications include rhabdomyolysis, renal failure,
pulmonary edema, increased intracranial pressure, and electrolyte disturbance20. Within seconds of the development of SE alterations occur
in protein phosphorylation at various synapses, ion channel function and neurotransmitter release. Within minutes, receptor expression
changes in favour of excitation as a result of progressive reduction in GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) receptors and an increase in AMPA
(α-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) and NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartic acid) receptors. (Figure 2). By one hour there is an
increase in excitatory neuropeptides. The excess in excitotoxic transmission is a suggested mechanism for neuronal cell death21. The
pathophysiology of status epilepticus21. In evaluating the patient in SE, the ABC (Airway, Breathing, Circulation) approach to the
management of any medical emergency should be employed. After airway and cardio-respiratory stability have been attained, hypoglycaemia must
be excluded in all cases. Pabrinex may also be required at this stage, if the patient is at high risk of Wernicke's
encephalopathy.Pseudostatus epilepticus (prolonged non-epileptic attacks) should be considered in all patients presenting with apparent SE.
Differentiating between the two on clinical grounds alone can be difficult, even for experienced practitioners. Given the limited access to
EEG, when the clinical diagnosis is not established beyond reasonable doubt, it is best to err on the side of caution and treat as SE.
Clinical features that can help distinguish non-epileptic and epileptic seizures are detailed in Table 2.22, 23, 24, 25 The importance of
making an accurate diagnosis is all too obvious, to prevent medicalising a psychological condition, to prevent iatrogenic morbidity from
anticonvulsant medications, and to reduce morbidity and mortality associated with intubation and ICU stay26, 27. Distinguishing seizure from
psychogenic non epileptic attacks22, 23, 24, 25 Laboratory testing to include a full blood count, biochemistry, liver function tests,
electrolytes, glucose, relevant serum antiepileptic drugs levels (to check compliance) and a toxicology screen are recommended as a minimum.
Investigations should not delay treatment. In appropriate circumstances, where an infectious cause is suspected, lumbar puncture is
necessary. SE can lead to a slightly raised cerebrospinal fluid white cell count28. All first presentations of SE should have emergent
neuroimaging once the patient is stabilized, utilizing whatever modality is available locally. EEG is invaluable not only for confirming the
diagnosis and planning treatment but in the patient who remains obtunded after a seizure, to distinguish a prolonged post ictal state from
non-convulsive SE and other causes of reduced consciousness. Delays occur at various points in the management of SE, including time to
presentation and initiation of first line treatment29. In order to minimise these and to reduce variability in practice, SE should be
managed with a protocol which provides details on appropriate doses of medications to be given in a timely manner30. A simple protocol for
the management of SE is given in Figure 3. More detailed guidelines have been published by various groups such as NICE31, EFNS32, and the
American Society of Neurocritical Care33 as well as groups of international experts34. A suggested protocol for management of first and
second stage of SE. Several clinical trials guide the early management of SE35, 36, 37, 38. They show that early use of benzodiazepines is
important for controlling SE. They work by enhancing the inhibitory GABAergic system, and at higher concentrations limit sustained
repetitive neuronal firing39. Lorazepam, diazepam and midazolam are the most frequently used. Diazepam achieves early high brain
concentrations and therefore has a very fast onset of action. Unfortunately, it quickly redistributes to fatty tissues, limiting clinical
effectiveness to 20-30 minutes and often necessitating repeated dosing which has the potential to lead to accumulation due to its long
elimination half-life. While diazepam and lorazepam are equivalent at achieving seizure control35, lorazepam is the drug of choice in early
status due to its favorable pharmacokinetic profile, with a half-life of 12-24 hours. A recent prehospital study38 compared intramuscular
(IM) midazolam and intravenous (IV) lorazepam. It demonstrated that patients received treatment quicker utilizing the IM approach, and that
this lead to greater cessation of SE on arrival to the emergency department. Intravenous benzodiazepines have significant side effects
including respiratory depression (3-10%), hypotension (<2%), and impaired consciousness (20-60%)39. Second line therapies include
phenytoin/fos-phenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, levetiracetam and lacosamide. The best drug to use has not been conclusively demonstrated
by a randomized controlled clinical trial.40 Phenytoin is the most commonly used second line drug in the United Kingdom. It should be given
at a dose of 20mg/kg infused at a rate of 50mg/kg. Slower infusion rates are used if cardiac arrhythmia or hypotension occurs. A loading
dose can also be given if the patient is taking phenytoin. If the patient presents in SE it is likely that they have a subtherapeutic serum
level of phenytoin. Maximum cerebral concentrations are achieved towards the end of the infusion. Side effects include hypotension in
28-50%, bradyarrhythmias and ectopics in <2%. It is important to monitor drug levels after loading with phenytoin, to guide further dosing.
Typically maintenance dose will be started the following day at 4-5mg/kg once daily 39, 40. Other agents used in SE (off license indication)
have certain advantages over phenytoin such as faster administration rates, fewer interactions, less side effects and better
pharmacokinetics40. The second line agents are listed in Table 3 along with their doses, mean efficacy from the results of meta-analyses,
side effects and mechanisms of action. Second line management of status epilepticus40. It is presently unclear if some patients should be
given one second line drug, or should be rapidly escalated to an initial polytherapy approach, given the fact that treatment of SE becomes
more difficult the longer it has occurred41. A multicenter blinded comparative randomized control trial using an adaptive design is in the
process of being set up which seeks to guide the optimal second line drug choice42. For those with epilepsy making sure that they get their
regular AEDs in their usual doses at all times, given by whatever means possible (given by nasogastric tube or intravenously) is also
crucial. Maintaining therapeutic doses of any AEDs that have been commenced should also not be overlooked. Both are common reasons for
failure to maintain control in those presenting with SE, where seizures have initially been successfully terminated. Treating the underlying
cause whenever possible is also important if the best outcomes are to be achieved. Refractory SE is the state when first and second line
therapies have failed, usually 30 minutes into the SE episode. In hospital based series it occurs in 31 - 44% of cases, and has a mortality
rate between 16 - 23%43. It has been reviewed in several excellent recent articles44, 45. Anaesthetic agents used are propofol, midazolam,
thiopental or phenobarbital.46, 47, 48, 49. These are outlined in Table 4 in detail. Often an antiepileptic drug is also given in a loading
dose and uptitrated so that once weaning from anaesthetic agents is started there is a background effective antiepileptic agent. The choice
of anaesthetic agents is based on small open trials, with no adequately powered prospective randomised controlled trial ever having been
completed in this area. Decisions such as treatment duration and target of treatment (either clinical seizure suppression or EEG guided,
such as suppression-burst suppression) are thus on an individual patient basis. Usually the patient will be anesthetized for 12-24 hours and
then the agents weaned slowly over a period of hours. If after the first wean there are further clinical or electrographic seizures they
will require further anesthesia. This situation is then termed super refractory SE50 Third line agents for status epilepticus.46, 47, 48
With regards the anaesthetic agents used in SE a number of safety points are worth highlighting. The main clinical concern with propofol is
the risk of propofol infusion syndrome (PRIS)51. It is characterized by metabolic acidosis, cardiac disturbances, hypertriglyceridaemia, and
rhabdomyolysis. The main risk factors appear to be dosage (>83/mcg/kg/minute) and duration of therapy (>48hrs), and simultaneous vasopressor
support. It carries a high mortality rate, at least in the early series, and calls for vigilance. The major limiting factors in barbiturate
therapy are the risk of haemodynamic instability, immunosuppression, risk of gastrointestinal motility disturbance and nosocomial infection,
particularly intestinal infection. Oher general medical problems can befall the patient in ICU with SE. The main concerns include airway
protection, aspiration related to the low GCS, cerebral hypoperfusion, and cardiac dysrhythmia. Hypertension can complicate the first 60
minutes of SE and it is worth bearing in mind that all parenteral anti-epileptic drugs will lower blood pressure, as will sedatives used for
intubation. Positive pressure ventilation reduces preload and can also result in the patient ending up becoming hypotensive. Various
parenteral preparations of anticonvulsants are available for use in intensive care units, namely phenytoin, fosphenytoin, valproate,
levetiracetem, and lacosamide. Care should be taken in the critically ill patient to ensure that phenytoin and valproate levels are
interpreted correctly as often the albumin level is low. Simple conversion tools are available online to help with administration of these
drugs (http://www.mdcalc.com/phenytoin-dilantin-correction-for-albumin-or-renal-failure/). Multiple anti-epileptic drugs will often be tried
if patients enter a super refractory state. The duration of anesthesia, using combinations of anaesthetic agents is often prolonged and at
times periods of 1 week of anesthesia are used prior to attempting weaning. At this stage attention needs to be directed towards rarer
causes of SE (Table 1)16. One potentially very treatable group of disorders is the immune encephalopathies. If there is any concern that the
cause of SE is one of these disorders a trial of immunotherapy is warranted whilst waiting for corroborative evidence such as the results of
autoantibody testing or patterns of abnormalities seen on detailed neuroimaging50. Other novel treatments include electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT), surgical lesionectomy for example in patients with complex partial status presumed to originate from an acute structural abnormality
e.g. subdural haematoma, hypothermia, and other drugs such as ketamine, lidocaine, and isoflurane. The evidence base for these treatments is
currently very limited51. The outcome from refractory and super refractory SE is poor, with death in 35% and recovery to baseline in 35%52.
For those surviving, neurological disability can vary considerably. In one retrospective analysis it was shown that a prolonged duration of
SE did not preclude a meaningful functional and cognitive recovery53. It is not clear if progressive cognitive decline that can follow SE is
due predominantly mainly to the underlying epileptic condition or the underlying aetiology of SE54. The management of the patient in the
illustrative case would have been improved by the use of an agreed protocol. After having been diagnosed as having early SE he should have
been given 4 mg of lorazepam intravenously, Weighing 80 kg, he should then have been given an infusion of 1600mg of phenytoin, to be given
over 32 minutes. If ten minutes after receiving the first dose of intravenous lorazepam he was still showing any signs of seizure activity
he should have had a further 4mg of lorazepam, given intravenously. Having completed the infusion of phenytoin any further seizure activity
should have prompted immediate referral to ICU.
