Pulmonary tumor embolism is commonly discovered at autopsy, but is rarely suspected ante-mortem. Microangiopathy is an uncommon and distinct
form of simple tumor pulmonary embolism. Here, we present a 52-year-old male with tumor thrombotic microangiopathy and pulmonary infarction,
which might have originated from intraductal papillary mucinous tumor of the pancreas. Multiple wedge-shaped consolidations were found
initially and aggravated with cavitation. These CT features of pulmonary infarction were pathologically confirmed to result from pulmonary
tumor thrombotic microangiopathy. Pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy (PTTM) of a metastatic tumor is a rare and completely different
form of simple tumor pulmonary embolism. The most important pathological feature of PTTM is extensive pulmonary vascular fibrocellular
intimal hyperplasia concomitant with tumor emboli (1). According to previous reports, the tree-in-bud pattern and multiple small nodular
opacities on thin-section CT are characteristic radiological findings of PTTM (12). Here, we report a case of pulmonary tumor thrombotic
microangiopathy in which no small nodules or tree-in-bud pattern were apparent on CT. However, progressive wedge-shaped consolidations with
cavitation developed, which were pathologically identified as pulmonary infarction by means of a video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of pulmonary cavitary infarction caused by PTTM. The origin of metastasis in our case
may have been intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas, which is also a very rare extrathoracic malignancy resulting
in PTTM. This case report was approved by the Institutional Review Board of our institution, and the need for informed consent was waived. A
52-year-old man presented with diffuse abdominal and back pain and respiratory symptoms (mild cough and whitish sputum) for several days. He
had a history of surgical treatment for IPMN associated with recurrent pancreatitis 10 years previously, for which further pathological
details were not available. Physical examination revealed abdominal rigidity and fine crackles in both lungs. The patient had anemia,
diabetes, and hypoxemia. His oxygen saturation level was below 90% (room air). Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cells,
6940/µL; Hb, 7.0 g/dL; platelet count, 22.9 × 104/µL; amylase, 9 IU/L; lipase, 18 IU/L; glucose, 149 mg/dL; and CRP, 14.5 mg/dL.
Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 4332 U/mL. Echocardiography revealed mild resting pulmonary arterial hypertension. Chest radiographs showed
bilateral multifocal consolidations, which were predominantly in both upper lung fields and particularly prevalent close to the pleura (Fig.
1A). Chest computed tomography (CT) images (lung window setting: window width, 1500 Hounsfield unit ; window level, -700 HU) revealed ill-
defined wedge-shaped consolidations and ground glass opacities predominantly in the peripheral portions of the lungs. There was cavitation
in some of the consolidations (Fig. 1B, C). Enhanced abdominal CT scans showed multiple cystic lesions suggesting IPMN in the remnant
pancreas and peripancreatic lymphadenopathy (Fig. 1D, E). However, pathological evaluation of the pancreatic lesion and complete oncological
evaluation were not performed at that time. We started empirical antibiotics and antifungal agents under the working diagnosis of septic
emboli or fungal infection. However, chest CT images 3 weeks later demonstrated that the wedge-shaped consolidations had rapidly become
aggravated, and cavitation had progressively developed in the consolidations, despite antibiotic and antifungal therapy (Fig. 1F, G).
Furthermore, subjective symptoms of dyspnea and chest radiograph findings had deteriorated. Therefore, we obtained specimens from the
cavitary consolidations by percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy. However, the biopsy specimens only showed numerous neutrophils and
necrosis without any organisms such as bacteria or fungus. The patient then underwent a video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy for an
accurate pathological diagnosis. Two weeks after the operative biopsy, the patient died despite intensive supportive care. The pathological
features of the specimen explained the cause of the unexplained lung lesions and the patient's condition. Tumor emboli were found involving
multiple levels of the microscopic pulmonary vasculature, from medium-sized arteries down to small arteries or arterioles. The areas
surrounding these tumor emboli-containing vessels consisted of necrotic tissue that appeared to have been caused by pulmonary infarction
(Fig. 1H). Pulmonary arteries and arterioles were stenosed and occluded by fibrocellular intimal proliferation induced by intraluminal tumor
emboli composed of compact nests of columnar mucin-producing glands and papillae with a fibrovascular core. However, contrary to previously
reported cases of thrombotic microangiopathy, there was little fibrinous thrombosis within the involved pulmonary microvasculature (Fig.
1I). Histologically, pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma shows extremely well differentiated and tumor cells float within the pool of mucin,
but tumor cells of this case looked like intestinal columnar cells, gastric foveolar cells and pancreatobiliary cells with papillae.
Additional immunohistochemical findings demonstrated that tumor cells are positive reaction for mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), but negative for thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) (Fig. 1J). Intravascular tumor embolization leading to the occlusion of pulmonary vessels by neoplastic cells
is reported in 2.4-26% of autopsies on patients with extrathoracic malignancy (1). These tumor emboli originate from various malignancies
and are usually located in small- or medium-sized pulmonary arteries, which makes radiological diagnosis difficult (3). Patients may present
with respiratory symptoms such as unexplained progressive dyspnea, chest pain, cough, hypoxia, and respiratory alkalosis (4). Oxygen
saturation is decreased, and right-sided heart failure and pulmonary hypertension are occasionally reported (4). Adenocarcinoma is the tumor
type most frequently associated with pulmonary tumor embolism, and common primary organs are the breast, stomach, lung, colon, and liver
(5). However, pancreatic origin is extremely rare (5). Mostly pulmonary tumor emboli occur at an advanced stage in a known cancer, although
embolism can develop at any time from an extrathoracic malignancy. Rarely, pulmonary tumor embolism can be the initial manifestation of a
latent cancer, which can make diagnosis difficult (5). To our knowledge, this is the first case of pulmonary tumor embolism possibly caused
by pancreatic IPMN to be reported in the literature, although complete pathological proof was lacking. Two cases of pulmonary tumor embolism
from other types of pancreatic cancer have been described (5). The CT findings in pulmonary tumor embolism include multifocal dilatations
and a beaded appearance of the peripheral subsegmental arteries (3). Episodes of infarction induced by pulmonary embolism were estimated to
occur in only 10% of all pulmonary embolisms (6). When pulmonary infarction is caused by emboli, it classically appears as pleural-based
consolidations or ground glass opacities with their apexes directed towards the thoracic hilum (6). These imaging findings are correlated
with histological changes including intra-alveolar hemorrhage and interstitial edema without destruction of lung parenchyma (7). Pulmonary
tumor thrombotic microangiopathy is a rare entity, and a separate disease distinct from tumor embolism. While pulmonary tumor embolism
indicates the occlusion of pulmonary vascular spaces by tumor cells themselves, with or without accompanying local thrombosis, the most
important finding in PTTM is intimal proliferation resulting in increased vascular resistance (8). This entity is characterized
histopathologically by extensive pulmonary arterial or arteriolar fibrocellular intimal hyperplasia that is concomitant with tumor
microemboli (1). This microangiopathy has been reported at autopsy in only 0.9-3.3% of cadavers with extrathoracic malignancies (1).
Widespread pulmonary tumor vascular occlusion in patients with thrombotic microangiopathy leads to increased vascular resistance.
Consequently, progressive dyspnea, cough, hypoxia, and pulmonary hypertension develop in patients with pulmonary tumor thrombotic
microangiopathy (1). Franquet et al. (1) described CT findings of thrombotic microangiopathy in pulmonary tumors. The tree-in-bud pattern on
thin-section CT is a characteristic finding similar to infectious bronchiolitis. Pathologically, it indicates that fibrocellular intimal
hyperplasia in small arteries and arterioles has caused obliteration of the vascular lumen rather than the tumor emboli themselves. Small
groups of tumor cells in PTTM metastasize at a microscopic level to the pulmonary vasculature and adhere to the vascular endothelium (9).
These tumor cells do not cause simple mechanical obstruction of involved vessels as a true tumor embolus, but rather are thought to activate
the coagulation cascade and release of inflammatory mediators, which might result in deposition of platelets and fibrin microthrombi,
fibrocellular subintimal proliferation, and smooth muscle colonization of the lesional complexes. These proliferations lead to diffuse
affected pulmonary arterial luminal narrowing and increased vascular resistance. However, the precise mechanisms of PTTM are unclear (10).
The pathological features of our case were extensive tumor emboli and marked fibrocellular intimal hyperplasia in the small arteries and
arterioles. However, there were few thrombi in the affected vascular lumen. It remains unclear why minor thrombosis occurred,
disproportionate to the extensive metastatic tumor emboli in the pulmonary vessels. Pulmonary embolism causes infarction in fewer than 15%
of cases, and only about 5% of infarctions develop cavitation (11). The previously reported prevalence of cavity formation was 3.4% (12). In
our case, extensive tumor emboli were present in medium-sized and small arteries, and arterioles were accompanied by widespread vascular
intimal hyperplasia (microangiopathy). These massive tumor emboli not only mechanically obstruct the pulmonary vessels but also result in
fibrocellular intimal hyperplasia that then leads to intimal proliferation, luminal stenosis, and ultimately total occlusion. They are
presumed to cause massive pulmonary infarction with necrosis, which presented as cavitary consolidation on CT. We believe that this finding
is an extremely rare complication of pulmonary tumor emboli and may be correlated with poor prognosis. In a previous report, over 75% of the
developed cavities were located in the middle and upper zones (apical and posterior segments of the upper lobes and superior segments of the
lower lobes), and they were more predominant in the right lung (12). Conversely, non-cavitary infarcts occurred more frequently in the lower
zone. On CT of our case, the lesions involving pulmonary infarction with cavitation were also predominantly located in the upper lobes. In
conclusion, this case illustrates that extensive tumor emboli and pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy can lead to consequent
progressive necrotic pulmonary infarction presenting as cavitary consolidation or ground glass opacity on CT. A. Chest radiograph
demonstrates bilateral multifocal consolidations in peripheral portions of both upper lungs. Axial computed tomography images (lung window
setting; window width, 1500 Hounsfield unit ; window level, -700 HU) show ill-defined wedge-shaped consolidations and ground glass opacities
in peripheral portion of both upper lobes (B, C). Cavitation was present in some consolidations (B, arrows). D. Contiguous contrast-enhanced
axial CT images show multiple cystic lesions (black arrows with white border) with minimal disproportional pancreatic duct dilatation
(branch ducts, white arrowheads) in body and tail of pancreas. Ill-defined soft tissue lesion is present in one cyst (white arrow), which is
presumed to be mural nodule of malignant intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. E. Lymphadenopathy in peripancreatic space (arrow) and
ascites are also seen. F, G. Follow-up axial CT images (lung window setting: window width, 1500 Hounsfield unit ; window level, -700 HU) 3
weeks after initial CT scan demonstrate that wedge-shape consolidations are extended or newly developed. Additionally, cavities in
consolidations are newly developed or changed, predominantly in peripheral portion of lungs. H. Photomicrograph of histopathological
specimen shows tumor emboli (black arrowheads) and intimal hyperplasia (white asterisks) in vasculature. These tumor emboli and intimal
hyperplasia may obstruct vascular lumen and cause irregular vascular shape. Distal lung parenchyma of obstructed vascular lumen is necrotic
(black asterisk) (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification, × 40). I. Photomicrograph of histopathological specimen shows tumor cells,
columnar mucin-producing glands (black arrowheads) in pulmonary vasculature, and marked fibrocellular intimal hyperplasia (white asterisk)
(hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification, × 100). There is little fibrin thrombosis in vascular lumen. J. Immunohistochemical stain for
MUC5ac (× 100), to which metastatic adenocarcinomas demonstrate positive reaction (brown color) but bronchial epithelium and alveolar
pneumocytes are negative. In contrast to MUC5ac, basal cells of bronchial epithelium and alveolar pneumocytes demonstrate positive reaction
(brown color) to immunohistochemical stain for TTF-1 (× 100), but metastatic adenocarcinomas are negative.
