Ovarian fibroma is the most common benign solid tumors of the ovary, commonly misdiagnosed as uterine fibromaor as malignant ovarian tumors.
It occurs generally in older perimenopausal and postmenopausal women. Occasionally large fibromas may undergo torsion causing acute
abdominal pain. Doppler Ultrasonographyimaging is the choice study. CT and MRI are often needed for further characterization and
differentiation from other solid ovarian masses. The choice treatment is surgical removal with intraoperative frozensection.
Immunohistochemicalanalysis is recommended to rule out the differential diagnosis. Here we present a case of a postmenopausal woman with a
large twisted ovarian fibroma reflecting diagnostic and management difficulties including potential misdiagnosis of the tumor as a malignant
ovarian neoplasm that may influence the surgical approach. Ovarian fibromas are the most common benign solid tumors of the ovary (1-4%),
typically detected in middle aged women , often difficult to diagnose preoperatively and commonly misdiagnosed as uterine fibromas, because
of their same pathology, complications, clinical and ultrasonic features [2, 3], or sometimes as malignant ovarian tumors because of
accompanying ascites and increased serum CA-125 level . Extra uterine fibromas present greater diagnostic challenge. Here we present a case
of a 62 year-old postmenopausal with a large twisted ovarian fibroma presented as acute pelvic pain. This case highlights the diagnostic
difficulties that may be encountered in the management of twisted ovarian fibroma including potential misdiagnosis of the tumor as a
malignant ovarian neoplasm that may influence the surgical approach. A 62-year-old post-menopausal, multiparous woman waspresented in
emergency with nausea; vomiting and a 6-day history of worsening abdominal pain started in the right lower quadrant and subsequently spread
to the whole abdomen. In her past medical history wereintermittent episodes of abdominal discomfort and a sensation of abdominal heaviness
during the preceding months. Her vital signs were all within normal limits. Physical examination revealed a palpable abdominal mass in the
lower abdomen with sensibility and involuntary guarding. Vaginal examination revealed a normal sized uterus and a large painful irregular
mass of 10 cm size, firm in consistency. Pelvic ultrasonography showed a non-homogeneous mass (120 × 10 mm) in the upper and right latero
uterinewithout any flow on color Doppler. Pelvic computed tomography revealed a right enlarged ovary with heterogeneous iso-dense mass in
the midline, rotated toward the contralateral side of the pelvis measuring 122× 86cm with deviation of the uterus without lymphadenopathy or
pelvic effusion (Figure 1, Figure 2). Anexploratory laparotomy had showed a black bluish encapsulated mass arising from the twisted right
adnexa, measuring 140x100x60 mm with irregular surface and hemorrhagicreshuffle, attached to the right ovary with a thrice twisted pedicle
(Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5). Both the uterus and left adnexa appeared normal. A total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-ooferectomy
were performed. According to pathological and immunohistochimical findings, the diagnosis of ovarian fibroma with extensive ischemic
necrosis was confirmed (Figure 6, Figure 7). Pelvic computed tomography revealing an enlarged ovary with iso-dense mass in the midline,
measuring 122× 86cm with deviation of the uterus Pelvic computed tomography showing rotated mass toward the contralateral side of the
pelviswithout lymphadenopathy or pelvic effusion Intraoperative picture showing a black bluish encapsulated mass arising from the twisted
right adnexa, measuring 140x 100x 60 mm Intraoperative picture showing an ovarian mass with irregular surface, hemorrhagicreshuffle and
thrice twisted pedicle Macroscopic appearance of the resected ovarian fibroma. Histopathology of ovarian fibroma showing benignspindle
cellproliferation (X4) Histopathology of ovarian fibroma showing ischemic necrosis (X4) Mesenchymal neoplasms of the ovary are uncommon, not
specific and determine difficult problems in diagnosis, histogenesis, behavior, and therapy . Ovarian fibroma is seen between 20 and 65
years oldwith mean ages in the fifth and sixth decades . Ovarian fibroma can be bilateral in 4-8% of patients and multiple in 10% of cases ,
especially in Gorlin syndrome [9, 10], or associated with pleural effusion and ascites in Meigs’ syndrome . It is often seen concomitantly
with uterine leiomyoma suggesting an identical hormonal stimulation and rarely associated with hirsutism or infertility . These tumors are
often asymptomatic despite their large size and are mostly discovered on routine examination . Sometimes, they manifest with abdominal
enlargement, urinary symptoms, abdominal pain , and occasionally withtorsion which is rare in the postmenopausal patient such us our case
[14, 15]. Also, ovarian fibromacan mimic ovarian cancer because of his solid nature, his association with ascites, pleural effusions and
elevated CA-125 levels which is more pronounced in torsion due to necrosis and inflammation . Ultrasound features are usually nonspecific .
Doppler imaging is the study ofchoice when ovarian torsion is suspected. Classically, the ovary appears enlarged, amorphous, and hypoechoic
with heterogeneous stroma because of hemorrhage and edema and coexistent mass, free pelvic fluid, lack of arterial or venous flow, and a
twisted vascular pedicle . On CT, ovarian fibroma usually appears as homogeneous solid tumors with delayed enhancement [8, 17]. While,
diagnostic criteria for torsion include an adnexal mass in the midline, rotated toward the contralateral side of the pelvis; deviation of
the uterus to the side of the affected ovary and ascites . MRI is often needed for further characterization and differentiation of ovarian
fibromas from other solid ovarian masses . The tumor appeared as well-circumscribed low signal intensity mass on T1, with mixed signal
intensity on T2 due to degeneration of the leiomyoma : hemorrhage, necrosis, cyst formation, calcareous and sarcomatous degeneration [2, 5].
In fact, suggestive signs of malignancy include: solid mass, size greater than 10 cm, internal hypervascularity, advanced age, extension of
the tumor into the pelvis or surrounding viscera and metastases . While, suggestive signs of torsion include: tube thickening, ascites,
deviation to the twisted side, hemorrhage in the thickened tube, and torsion knot . Because of its rarity, the immunohistochemical analysis
with desmin, inhibin α-smooth muscle actin or histochemical staining with Masson′s trichrome is recommended to rule out the differential
diagnosis especially leiomyosarcoma and sex-cord stromal tumors (thecoma and sclerosing stromal tumor) . Early recognition of ovarian
torsion and restoration of blood flow are important to avoid irreversible ovarian damage. Adnexectomy has been the standard treatment,
rather than untwisting the affected ovary due to fear of thromboembolism into the systemic circulation after untwisting the ovarian
vasculature . In fact, treatment for ovarian fibroma need surgical removal with intraoperative frozen whether laparoscopic or open. However,
surgeons are reluctant to use laparoscopic approach because of extraction difficulty. Moreover, the benign nature cannot be definitely
diagnosed preoperatively and safe removal must be achieved without peritoneal contamination [3, 13]. Cystectomy only can be performed in
young women [3, 7]. While, a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy is be the treatment of choice in the elderly patient .
Ovarian fibromas are uncommon but are the most common benign solid tumor of the ovary. Despite its rarity, it should be preoperatively
considered in the differential diagnosis. Its treatment requires surgical removal with intraoperative frozen section and immunohistochemical
analysis for definitive diagnosis. The authors declare no competing interest. All authors had participated in the management of this case
and the realization of this work. All authors read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript.
