Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 6 Final Diagnosis: Cerebral palsy secundary perinatal hypoxia Symptoms:
Cognitive impairment • epilectic seizure Medication: Platelet rich plasma Clinical Procedure: Cognitive improvement with neuroestimulator
and neuroregenerator power of platelet rich plasma injection Specialty: Hematology Unusual clinical course The use of platelet-rich plasma
is a now a common medical technique known as regenerative medicine, through power cell activation and differentiation, which produces growth
factors called platelets derived both locally and systematically. Here, we report the case of a cerebral palsy patient who received
intravenous platelet-rich plasma. We administered an intravenous injection of concentrated platelet-rich plasma (25 cc) in a 6-year-old boy
with perinatal cerebral palsy, cognitive impairment, and marked and severe generalized spasticity. We performed follow-up at 3 and 6 months
after the injection. All serum samples for determination were obtained by ELISA technique. Cognitive scales (Bayley, Battelle, M.S.C.A,
Kaufman ABC, and Stanford-Binet Intelligence scale) were used before and after treatment. The determination protocol that was applied before
the analysis was performed manually and the autotransfusion was considered suitable for treatment. We determined the plasma levels of factor
similar to insulin-1 (IGF-1), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), vasculo-endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and transforming growth
factor B (TGF-B) before and during treatment monitoring. No adverse effects were observed in the patient except for a small hematoma in the
area channeling venous access. We observed a clear improvement in the cognitive sphere (memory, ability to perform more complex tasks, and
acquisition of new skills) and in language, maintaining stable levels of growth factor in plasma 3–5 times higher than average for his age
group at both 3- and 6-month follow-up. Positron emission tomography (PET) images showed an evident increased demarcation in the cerebral
cortex. We propose that this therapy is useful in these patients to harness the neurostimulative and neuroregenerative power of endogenous
growth factors derived from platelets. The use of platelet-rich plasma in various fields of medicine and traumatology, dentistry, and
general surgery is experiencing an extraordinary development given the larger generation capacity, chemotaxis, modulating angiogenesis, and
cellular plasticity of injured tissues that produce growth factors such as insulin growth factor type I (IGF-1), transforming growth factor
B (TGF-B), vasculo-endothelial-derived growth factor (VEGF), and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which are the plasma growth and
platelet factors that are most reported in the literature due to their power of neurostimulation and neuroregeneration. Regenerative
medicine relies on the power of the cell to perform activation and differentiation, producing growth factors derived from platelets both
locally and systematically. However, there are other fields of application in medicine that are opening new roads, such as
neuroendocrinology and neurorehabilitation, which are now used either locally or systemically in autologous transplantation, given the
intrinsic activating antiapoptotic pathways controlling the biochemical level of neuronal cells, which have specific receptors on their
membranes for these growth factors derived from platelets. In addition, it has been demonstrated that in patients with neuronal degenerative
diseases (e.g., Alzheimer disease, vascular encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis, ALS, and hypoxic or anoxic encephalopathy), proteins were
detected at low levels in serum, as well as being modulated by mechanisms of cerebral hypoxia. Furthermore, a neuroprotective function has
also been shown in neuronal tissue. We report the case of a 6-year-old boy diagnosed with cerebral palsy at age 2 months, secondary to
perinatal hypoxia, with spastic tetraparesis and moderate cognitive impairment, who received a 25-cc intravenous infusion of PRP with
clinical, laboratory, and radiological monitoring prior to infusion and at 3 and 6 months later, without a clinical trial. Authorization for
the treatment was provided by the patient’s legal representatives. We obtained 60 cc of the patient’s whole blood. After titration, we
performed analytical biochemistry, determination of plasma growth factors, and complete blood count serology to ensure the suitability of
the treatment. The technique for obtaining PRP used only 1 centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 30 min at 18°C. Table 1 shows the cellular and
protein values in peripheral blood of the patient and the final product obtained. While the laboratory sample was processed, a 20-G venous
access was created in the elbow flexure and we infused the RPP within 30 min of obtaining it, at the rate of 1 mL per s. Before the
injection and at 24 hours and 3 and 6 months after the injection, we determined plasma levels of serum growth factors by ELISA technique and
leucocyte count. Values are shown in Figures 1 and 2. Similarly, rigorous monitoring was performed for neurorehabilitative skills acquired
by the patient by 3 and 6 months after treatment by applying cognitive scales (Bayley, Battelle, M.S.C.A, Kaufman ABC, and Stanford-Binet
intelligence scale) and comparing the results with those obtained before treatment. We did PET brain imaging immediately before and at 6
months after the injection. Images and report results are shown in Figure 3. Clinical monitoring and analytical values of the obtained
platelet growth factors and imaging were satisfactory, obtaining a high peak in levels of plasmatic growth factors at 24 hours after the
treatment, which remained stable at above-normal levels at 3 and 6 months after the injection. This resulted in a clearly progressive
improvement of the patient’s symptoms, especially in the cognitive sphere (e.g., capacity to eat solid food, remarkable improvement in
coordinated movements, speaking 2- and 3-syllable words, and fixing his gaze on moving objects, evident at 3- month follow-up and
maintaining progress at 6-month follow-up. Neuroradiological evaluation revealed a clear increase in glucose metabolism level in the entire
cortex, suggestive of neuronal plasticity phenomena, and we did not observe any changes in deep brain structures (hippocampus and amygdala).
Progress in regenerative medicine in several clinical areas is revolutionizing the field of tissue repair, providing a treatment tool that
is economical, easy to use, without adverse effects, and less invasive . However, scientific and social requirements make it necessary to
design appropriate clinical trials to establish treatment protocols in each particular medical application . Today, the medical areas with
the most scientific evidence about the use of RPP are dentistry (for repairing dental alveolar bed) and traumatology (arthropathy,
tendinopathy, ligament injuries, and meniscopathy), with the design of randomized trials in phase I–II . But the empirical use in many
diseases and medical specialties is based on weak scientific evidence . Some of the most promising medical fields for application are
neurology, neuroendocrinology, and neurorehabilitation. Neuroregenerative, antiapoptotic, immunomodulatory, and neurotropic effects
differentiating platelet-derived growth factors in neuronal tissue makes this a totally feasible therapy treatment from the medical point of
view, to be applied in neurodegenerative or anoxic and hypoxic pathologies like Alzheimer disease, cerebral vascular accidents, spinal cord
injury, and cerebral palsy of hypoxic or anoxic origin . Spontaneous remission of cerebral palsy signs is rare due to degenerative neuronal
and glial mass secondary to hypoxic effects in the evolution of the disease . Neuroprotective and neuroregeneration stimulator effects were
observed in these patients managed with synthetic growth hormone (HGF), which results in functional improvement, especially in the cognitive
field (e.g., memory, language, ability to perform complex tasks, and acquisition of new skills). In these patients, the neuronal
degenerative effect has been accompanied by a marked qualitative and quantitative decrease in plasmatic growth factors like HGFIGF-1-VEGD,
PDGF, and TGF-B , regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary axis that produces a neuroprotective effect, and by the neurotropic effect of
chemotaxis, cell differentiation, and neuroplasticity on neuronal tissue. However, treatment with synthetic growth hormone is costly, not
only from the economic standpoint, but also from the clinician’s viewpoint. The possibility of RPP as a final product, rich in these growth
factors, for local or systemic administration in a single dose, and maintenance of plasma levels stable enough for achieving a long-term
therapeutic effect similar to clinical hormone synthetic growth, without the oncological secondary effects , make it attractive for these
patients by significantly reducing the economic and clinical cost of treatment. We report the case of a patient with cerebral palsy, in whom
the application of systemic PPR in a single dose increased the level of platelet-derived growth factors to above-normal levels and that
remained stable over time (at 6-month clinical follow-up), resulting in clinical improvement, especially in the cognitive sphere, coinciding
with the results obtained by other authors who used isolated growth factors in patients with perinatal hypoxia. This is the first case
report published in the literature of use of autologous growth factors in this clinical application with successful results. Well-designed,
randomized, clinical trials are needed to further develop the utility of this treatment in these patients. We thank the patient, his family,
and the professionals who trusted in us. Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Levels of growth
factors before injection and at 24 hours and 3 and 6 months after the treatment. Count of blood cells before and at 24 hours and 3 and after
6 months after treatment. Cerebral PET images taken immediately before treatment and at 6-month follow-up. Growth factor values and cell
count in peripheral blood and final product obtained.
