Glomus tumors typically occur in the subcutaneous tissue of distal extremities, but rarely in visceral organs. Most glomus tumors are
benign, while others have been reported to have malignant potential. Herein, a unique case of a liver glomus tumor with atypical
histological features is reported. A 39-year-old man felt fullness in the epigastrium, and an enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the
abdomen and pelvis revealed a 21-cm solid and cystic mass in the left liver lobe. The patient underwent a left hepatic lobectomy, and the
tumor was pathologically identified as a glomus tumor with atypical histological features in the liver. This case is unique for three
reasons. First, cases of glomus tumors in the liver are extremely rare. Second, this is the first report of a hepatic glomus tumor with
histologically atypical features. Third, immunohistochemical staining showed focal positivity for synaptophysin. A literature review
revealed that glomus tumors in visceral organs positive for synaptophysin show histological atypical features in most cases. This is the
first case of a glomus tumor with atypical histological features arising in the liver. This unique case and literature review yielded
interesting findings and enabled us to postulate that synaptophysin positivity may be indicative of atypical histological features in glomus
tumors arising in visceral organs. A glomus tumor is an uncommon mesenchymal perivascular tumor considered a vascular hamartomatous
derivative of glomus bodies responsible for the thermoregulation of distal extremities. Most glomus tumors are diagnosed in patients in
their fourth to sixth decades of life, although symptoms are often present for several years prior to diagnosis. Radiographic features of
glomus tumors are not characteristic, and the supplementation of clinical impressions with radiographic studies is uncommon . Glomus tumors
typically occur in the skin of extremities but rarely in visceral organs. Glomus tumors in visceral organs are discovered incidentally or
due to vague symptoms . Most glomus tumors are benign, but some with malignant potential have been reported. Herein, we report a case of
glomus tumor with atypical features arising in the liver. A 39-year-old Japanese male felt fullness in the epigastrium four months prior to
admission. An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a 21-cm solid and cystic mass in the left liver
lobe. The patient then visited the Department of Gastroenterological Surgery in our hospital for medical evaluation. Enhanced CT (Fig. 1a)
revealed numerous tumor vessels in a bulky mass and cystic lesions filled with blood. Enhancement was observed in solid lesions and became
stronger in the delayed phase. The left branch of the portal vein was closed due to compression or tumor invasion. The main portal and
hepatic veins were also narrowed. No lesion was observed in the right lobe. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (PET) revealed
no other lesions or lymph node swelling. From these findings, a diagnosis of primitive undifferentiated sarcoma was considered, but a
mesenchymal hamartoma or a sarcoma derived from hamartoma could not be excluded. According to serological tests, the levels of biliary tract
enzymes were elevated, but those of hepatic transaminase and bilirubin were normal. After examination, the patient underwent left hepatic
lobectomy.Fig. 1Enhanced CT, gross appearance, and tumor histology. Enhanced CT revealed a 21-cm solid and cystic mass in the left liver
lobe (a). Cystic lesions filled with blood and solid lesions were observed (b). Very low-power field of the tumor histology (c, x5) Enhanced
CT, gross appearance, and tumor histology. Enhanced CT revealed a 21-cm solid and cystic mass in the left liver lobe (a). Cystic lesions
filled with blood and solid lesions were observed (b). Very low-power field of the tumor histology (c, x5) Two components were
macroscopically observed in the hepatic mass with a 20-cm diameter: a cystic lesion filled with blood and a white solid lesion (Fig. 1b).
The background liver was normal. Low-power microscopic examination revealed that the tumor in the cystic lesions consisted of numerous blood
vessels of varying size (Fig. 1c). The tumor was composed of monomorphic cells with round-to-oval nuclei and a pale cytoplasm, and basement
membrane lacework material was detected around the cells (Fig. 2a). Cell membranes were well-defined, and few mitoses were observed
(Fig. 2b). In contrast, the tumor in the solid lesions was composed of cells with mild-to-moderate nuclear atypia and the eosinophilic
cytoplasm was surrounded by vessels with a hemangiopericytomatous growth pattern (Figs. 2c and d). High cellularity and frequent mitotic
figures (35 mitotic figures per 50 high-power fields ) were also observed (Fig. 3). Tumor margins showed an infiltrative growth pattern
(Fig. 4), but no vascular invasion, perineural invasion, necrosis, or atypical mitosis was detected.Fig. 2Histology of tumors in cystic (a
and b) and solid (c and d) lesions. Monomorphic cells with round-to-oval nuclei and a pale cytoplasm and lacework of the basement membrane
material were detected (a, x50; b, x150). In contrast, the tumor in the solid lesion was composed of cells with mild-to-moderate nuclear
atypia and eosinophilic cytoplasm surrounded by vessels with a hemangiopericytomatous growth pattern (c, x50; d, x150)Fig. 3Histology of
tumors in the solid lesion. High cellularity and frequent mitotic figures were observed (x400)Fig. 4Histology of tumor margins showing an
infiltrative growth pattern (x50) Histology of tumors in cystic (a and b) and solid (c and d) lesions. Monomorphic cells with round-to-oval
nuclei and a pale cytoplasm and lacework of the basement membrane material were detected (a, x50; b, x150). In contrast, the tumor in the
solid lesion was composed of cells with mild-to-moderate nuclear atypia and eosinophilic cytoplasm surrounded by vessels with a
hemangiopericytomatous growth pattern (c, x50; d, x150) Histology of tumors in the solid lesion. High cellularity and frequent mitotic
figures were observed (x400) Histology of tumor margins showing an infiltrative growth pattern (x50) Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of
the tumor was positive for both vimentin and smooth muscle actin (SMA) (Fig. 5a). The collagen IV signal was distributed among tumor cells
in a chicken-wire pattern (Fig. 5b). Tumor cells were focally positive for calponin and synaptophysin (Fig. 5c). CD31 showed faint
positivity (Fig. 5d), but CD34 staining was negative. Ets-related gene (ERG), Desmin, S100, low-molecular-weight cytokeratin (CAM5.2), pan-
cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 19, CD117, chromogranin A, discovered on GIST (DOG-1), melanosome (HMB-45), CD56, alpha-
fetoprotein (AFP), and hepatocyte paraffin 1 (HepPar-1) were completely negative. Both monomorphic cells in the cystic lesions and atypical
cells in the solid lesions showed similar immunohistochemical results. The Ki-67 proliferative index was less than 3 % in cystic lesions and
15 % in solid lesions. From these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a glomus tumor with atypical histological features.Fig.
5Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor. Sections were stained with anti-SMA (clone 1A-4, 1:100, Dako, Carpinteria, CA), anti-collagen IV
(clone CIV22, 1:50, Dako), anti-synaptophysin (clone 27G12, 1:200, Leica, Buffalo Grove, IL), and anti-CD31 (clone JC70A, 1:40, Dako)
antibodies. Tumor cells were positive for SMA (a, x200), and collagen IV signal was distributed among tumor cells in a chicken-wire pattern
(b, x200). Tumor cells were focally positive for synaptophysin (c, x200). CD31 staining showed faint positivity (d, x200)
Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor. Sections were stained with anti-SMA (clone 1A-4, 1:100, Dako, Carpinteria, CA), anti-collagen IV
(clone CIV22, 1:50, Dako), anti-synaptophysin (clone 27G12, 1:200, Leica, Buffalo Grove, IL), and anti-CD31 (clone JC70A, 1:40, Dako)
antibodies. Tumor cells were positive for SMA (a, x200), and collagen IV signal was distributed among tumor cells in a chicken-wire pattern
(b, x200). Tumor cells were focally positive for synaptophysin (c, x200). CD31 staining showed faint positivity (d, x200) Glomus tumors
usually occur in the skin of extremities and are rarely present in visceral organs, such as the gastrointestinal tract , mediastinum ,
bladder , kidney , or corpus cavernosum . Glomus tumors arising in the liver are extremely rare. To our knowledge, only six cases have been
reported in the English literature, including the case presented herein . The liver is the main target organ of metastasis. However,
inspection of the present case prior to operation revealed no tumors in organs other than the liver, suggesting the tumor was not a
metastatic lesion, but rather a primary tumor. It is necessary to distinguish glomus tumors from other tumor types, such as
hemangioendotheliomas, gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), paragangliomas, PEComas, and neuroendocrine tumors (NET). The lack of CD34
and ERG immunopositivity in conjunction with the histological appearance ruled out hemangioendothelioma. GIST and paraganglioma appeared to
be ruled out because the tumor was CD117-, DOG-1-, S100-, and chromogranin A-negative. Concomitant positivity for synaptophysin and lack of
melanosome positivity ruled out PEComa. NET is typically synaptophysin-, chromogranin A-, CD56-, and cytokeratin-positive. The present case
was focally positive for synaptophysin, but negative for chromogranin A, CD56, CAM5.2, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 7, and cytokeratin
19. The lesion was unlikely a hepatocellular carcinoma or hepatoblastoma, since both AFP and HepPar-1 were negative. Taken together, the
findings suggest that the current tumor was a glomus tumor. Glomus tumors are usually benign, but unusual histological features, including
an infiltrative growth pattern, mitotic activity, and nuclear pleomorphism, have been reported in several cases. Folpe et al. analyzed 52
cases of glomus tumors with atypical histological features and defined a ‘malignant glomus tumor’ as that fulfilling at least one of the
following criteria: (i) deep location and a size of more than 2 cm, (ii) atypical mitotic figures, or (iii) moderate-to-high nuclear grade
and mitotic activity (more than 5 mitotic figures per 50 HPFs) . They defined the criteria based on the fact that metastatic lesion was
observed in 38 % of tumors fulfilling the criteria, while metastasis was not seen in tumors not classified as ‘malignant glomus tumors’ .
The problem with these criteria is that all glomus tumors arising in the liver meet the first criteria, since they are located in a deep
space regardless of histological grade. Moreover, the glomus tumors reported in the liver to date are much larger than ordinary cutaneous
glomus tumors (usually less than 1 cm). Kihara et al. stated that glomus tumors arising in visceral organs may be diagnosed belatedly
because they have less intense symptoms and are less palpable . Folpe et al. analyzed only three cases of visceral organ tumors (two in the
lungs and one in the stomach), but did not analyze those without histological atypia . Therefore, in agreement with Kihara et al. , we
believe that liver glomus tumors cannot be classified as malignant on the basis of their location and size alone, and that histological
evaluation described in the other two criteria (ii) and (iii) should be of value. None of the five hepatic glomus tumor cases reported thus
far have displayed histological abnormalities ; this is the first case arising in the liver with histological atypical features. In the
atypical-looking lesion, mitotic figures were frequently seen (35/50 HPFs), but nuclear atypia was not higher than a typical malignant
glomus tumor . Atypical mitotic figures were not evident in the present case. Taken together, while the present case showed an invasive
growth pattern and high mitotic figures, the tumor cells did not entirely meet the second the third (ii and iii) histological criteria
listed above, and we therefore concluded that the current tumor was not a malignant glomus tumor. One of the most interesting features of
the present case was that the tumor cells were focally positive for synaptophysin. In general, glomus tumors in peripheral soft tissues are
synaptophysin-negative, but reports of glomus tumors focally positive for synaptophysin have been documented [5, 14]. Interestingly, glomus
tumors positive for synaptophysin occur not in peripheral soft tissues, but in visceral organs . More importantly, most of the reported
glomus tumors positive for synaptophysin have atypical histological features. Song et al. reported a case of a malignant glomus tumor in the
stomach that showed focal positivity for synaptophysin with prominent nuclear atypia and a fulminant course with multiorgan metastases .
Zhang et al. also reported a malignant glomus tumor of the esophagus with mediastinal lymph node metastases that tested positive for
synaptophysin and exhibited increased high mitotic activity . Moreover, other studies have reported cases of glomus tumors with atypical
histological features and synaptophysin positivity in the kidney [5, 16], esophagus and bronchus . Although there is one report of a case of
glomus tumor without atypia that stained positive for synaptophysin , most cases of glomus tumors positive for synaptophysin exhibit either
histological atypia or clinically malignant behavior, such as metastasis. These previous reports and the present case suggest that
synaptophysin positivity may correlate with atypical histological features in glomus tumors arising in visceral organs. In conclusion, we
report an extremely rare case of a glomus tumor in the liver. Glomus tumors arising in visceral organs are very rare, as are those with
atypical histological features, and little is known about the clinical course or prognosis of an uncommon glomus tumor. The types of glomus
tumors in visceral organs with malignant courses, including metastasis, are also unknown. An accumulation of evidence regarding uncommon
glomus tumors is indispensable to provide appropriate treatment and precisely estimate prognoses. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of written consent is available for review with the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Author contributions KH and
TM participated in the concept of this case report, interpreted the H&E slides and immunochemical studies, and wrote the manuscript. These
two authors contributed equally to this work. TM and EM were responsible for the concept of the case report and critically revised the
manuscript for intellectual content. HN, HE, SM, and HW cared for the patient. All authors have given approval for the final version to be
published.
