We describe and analyze the clinical course and imaging findings of a case of a renal inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) that is
similar to cystic renal cell carcinoma. “Solitary cysts” on the left kidney were found during a health examination of a 60-year-old female.
The patient also had hypertension. She had undergone surgeries twice for limb trauma fracture and had no definite record of hepatitis. There
was no tenderness with percussion of the kidney area or edema in the lower extremity. The renal function results, including serum
creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and blood urea, were within the normal range. No gross hematuria or microscopic hematuria was found. An
8.7 cm × 9.2 cm mixed echogenic mass at the upper pole of the left kidney was observed with ultrasound, the majority of which was an
anechoic mass that was slightly protruding from the renal capsule and had well-circumscribed borders. After a bolus injection of an
ultrasound contrast agent, the mass had rapid enhancement with fast fading. An approximately 9.4 cm × 10.1 cm round-like cyst lesion at the
upper pole of the left kidney was revealed by computed tomography (CT) examination of the abdomen; it had edge finishing with well-
circumscribed borders. The upper inner wall of the lesion was thick with crescentic soft tissue. The solid content had gradual enhancement
on enhanced CT scans. A kidney tumor was considered based on the CT findings. Based on the preoperative examination, the left renal cystic
masses were resected. Intraoperative frozen sections were used to further clarify the nature of the lesion, and no significant malignant
cells were observed; therefore, the kidney was not removed. The pathological diagnosis was renal IMT. After surgery, the patient recovered
and did not have recurrence or metastasis over the course of long-term follow-up. CT images of our patient with renal cystic disease are
categorized as Fuhrman grade IV and typically indicate the presence of malignant lesions. However, gradual enhancement of the solid content
in our case is different from typical cystic renal cell carcinoma. The nature of the lesion was further identified using intraoperative
frozen sections, which helped avoid unnecessary nephrectomy. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is a rare, benign lesion that can
affect nearly all parts of the body.1 IMT is common in the lungs, which is followed by the abdomen, retroperitoneum, and pelvis, but it
rarely occurs in the kidney.1–3 Fisch and Brodey4 reported the first case of IMT in the kidney, which was followed by other case reports.
IMT in the kidney has low clinical specificity because of its diverse imaging findings; therefore, the lesions must be surgically removed to
determine the diagnosis. Finally, the prognosis of IMT in the kidney is good.2,5 Therefore, clinicians need to be familiar with the imaging
findings so that they can develop an appropriate treatment strategy before surgery. We report 1 case of renal IMT that was found during a
health examination, and its imaging findings were similar to cystic renal cell carcinoma. However, observation of intraoperative frozen
sections allowed us to rule out kidney cancer, preventing unnecessary nephrectomy. The patient signed informed consent forms, allowing for
publication of the relevant clinical and imaging data from her case. In our case, the patient signed related informed consent for the
publication of clinical data and images. Solitary cysts were found in the left kidney of a 60-year-old female farmer during a health
examination 2 weeks ago. She did not have a backache, soreness in the waist, urinary urgency, dysuria, chills, fever, or other discomfort
when she visited our clinic. The kidneys, ureter, and bladder (KUB), and intravenous pyelogram (IVP) examination showed left renal pelvis
pressure signs. The patient was hospitalized with a left renal cystic lesion. She was in good mental health and had a normal appetite with
no significant changes in body weight. The patient was diagnosed with hypertension and prescribed oral Captopril. She underwent right-hand
trauma fracture surgery 6 years before and left leg fracture surgery 5 years before. Her postoperative recovery was good. The patient had no
history of hepatitis, diabetes, tuberculosis, or blood transfusion. She was not in the habit of smoking or drinking heavily. She had no
history of drug or food allergies. On admission, she had a body temperature of 36.6°C, heart rate of 70 beats/min, respiratory rate of
20 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 117/97 mm Hg. The patient had a ruddy complexion with no eyelid edema or swollen lymph nodes in the
neck. The patient did not have tenderness on percussion of the kidney area. The abdomen was soft and flat with no tenderness or rebound
tenderness. The liver and spleen were not enlarged. No abdominal masses were felt on palpation. There was no lower extremity edema.
Laboratory tests revealed renal function results as follows: serum creatinine of 59 μmol/L (reference range, 44–133 μmol/L), blood urea
nitrogen of 3.16 mmol/L (reference range, 2.86–8.20 mmol/L), and blood urea of 274 μmol/L (reference range, 90–420 μmol/L). Liver function
tests showed a white globulin ratio of 1.4 (reference range, 1.5–2.5), alanine aminotransferase of 69 U/L (reference range, 3–50 U/L),
aspartate aminotransferase of 62 U/L (reference range, 3–40 U/L), and total calcium of 2.02 mmol/L (reference range, 2.08–2.60 mmol/L). The
remaining biochemical indicators were in the normal range. Urine occult blood, urine protein, and urine bilirubin were normal with
ureteroscopic white blood cell of 0–3/hp. The quantitative examination of hepatitis B showed hepatitis B surface antigen-negative 0.6 S/N
(S/N ≥ 2.0 positive), hepatitis B e antigen-negative 0.2 S/CO (S/CO ≥ 1.0 positive), hepatitis B core antibody inhibition rate-positive
96.7% (inhibition rate ≥50% positive), hepatitis B e antibody inhibition rate-positive 98.6% (inhibition rate ≥60% positive), hepatitis B
surface antibody-positive 24.2 IU/L (concentration ≥10.0 IU/L positive), and hepatitis B core antibody IgM-negative 0.2 S/CO (S/CO ≥ 1.0
positive). In addition, the patient was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen, negative for hepatitis C antibody, negative for human
immunodeficiency virus antibody, and negative for Treponema pallidum antibody. There were no abnormalities in routine blood and stool
examinations or in the blood coagulate functions. Chest x-ray showed no abnormalities. Ultrasonography (US) showed an 8.7 cm × 9.2 cm mixed
echogenic mass at the upper pole of the left kidney; the majority of the mass was echoless, and it was slightly protruding from the renal
capsule with well-circumscribed borders. After a bolus injection of US contrast agent, the mass was rapidly enhanced, while there was a
“developing defect” within the tumor, and the contrast agent in the mass quickly washed out. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) imaging
indicated a left renal cell carcinoma with necrosis. Kidney CT examination revealed an approximately 9.4 cm × 10.1 cm round-like cyst lesion
at the upper pole of the left kidney with edge finishing and well-circumscribed borders. The upper inner wall of the lesion was thick with
crescentic soft tissue density. With enhanced CT scanning, the solid content had mild enhancement in the early stage and obvious enhancement
in the later stage. The left renal calices were under slight partial pressure without hydronephrosis of the renal pelvis. Based on CT
imaging, a kidney tumor was considered (Figure 1). Abdominal CT scans of the patient. (A) Abdominal plain CT scans showing a round-like
cystic mass with edge finishing, clear boundaries, and upper inner wall with significant soft tissue on the left kidney pole. (B, C)
Enhanced CT scans showing solid content with gradual enhancement and cystic content with no enhancement. CT = computed tomography. Based on
the preoperative examination, the left renal cystic masses were resected. During surgery, local thickness was found at the cystic wall,
which was approximately 2 cm × 5 cm and had a hard texture. To further evaluate the lesion, it was sent for frozen sections. The frozen
analysis suggested that there were no obvious malignant cells. As a result, the affected kidney was not resected. Finally, the pathological
diagnosis was left renal IMT (Figure 2). The following were the immunohistochemistry findings: smooth muscle actin (SMA) (++), CD68 (+),
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) (−), CD34 (−), CD10 (+), and Ki67 interspersed +. The patient recovered and was discharged 9 days after the
surgery. One month after operation, the patient was reexamined by US in our institution, which showed that the left kidney had no evidence
of recurrence, and no obvious abnormal occurred in right kidney. The subsequent ultrasound or CT examinations were accomplished in local
hospital. With a follow-up of 5 years and 3 months, the patient remained asymptomatic. Pathology of the patient, including myofibroblastic
proliferation, fusiform, rare mitotic count, and a high number of plasma cells. IMT was previously referred to as “inflammatory
pseudotumor.” Because of its varied pathological manifestations, different names have been used for IMT, including plasma cell granuloma,
inflammatory myofibroblastic proliferation, and xanthomatous pseudo tumor.6 With an improved understanding of its pathological and
immunohistochemical features, the name IMT has become widely accepted.7 The etiology and pathogenesis of IMT remains unclear. Microbial
infections and their immune suppression status may play important roles in IMT occurrences; for example, viral DNA sequences are found in
the spindle cells of IMT, and there is a higher incidence in individuals with immunosuppression conditions or who are taking corticosteroid
treatment.8–11 Trauma and chronic hepatitis B infection are also thought to play a role in tumorigenesis.12 ALK gene rearrangement has been
confirmed in some IMTs, suggesting that ALK rearrangement is correlated with tumor progression.13 Interestingly, the patient in our report
had hepatitis B infection without persistent chronic infection; also, she had a history of trauma to 2 limbs without trauma at her left
waist. Our case did not have systemic disease or immunosuppression. The distribution of renal IMT varies for different age groups, and it is
rare in children.3,14 The incidence of IMT is more common in men. Although there are no specific clinical symptoms of IMT, patients commonly
report pain and hematuria.3,14 There are usually no obvious abnormalities in laboratory tests, except for the presence of microscopic
hematuria.3 No clinical symptoms were found in the physical examination in our case, which is different from previous reports. Lesions are
generally solitary, though there can occasionally be multiple lesions, and they are usually 1.0 to 10.0 cm in size.14,15 US is usually
nonspecific and hyperechoic or hypoechoic. CT shows ill-defined borders and slight homogeneous enhancement; there is occasionally
significant enhancement with a clear edge.14,15 For some cases, a renal IMT may also have a thick-walled cystic mass and ill-defined
borders, which is occasionally accompanied by calcification.14,15,16 The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings for renal IMT vary, but
they commonly include hypointensity on T1-weighted image and T2-weighted image sequences.14 On enhanced MRI, the tumor has a poor blood
supply.14,15 Unlike previous reports, our case was primarily anechoic due to its cystic content. Ours is the first report with CEUS findings
for a renal IMT in which the outflow type of enhancement was similar to the enhancement type for cystic renal cell carcinoma. On CT, unlike
in reported thick-walled cystic lesions, such as renal cell carcinoma tumor with necrosis, our case had a clear edge and mural nodules,
which is similar to cystic renal cell carcinoma. For cystic renal cell carcinoma, a conservative surgical plan is optional.17 In our case,
the significant solid content and Fuhrman grade IV status are typically indicative of malignant lesions. However, unlike the typical early
significant enhancement of a cystic renal cell carcinoma, our case had gradual enhancement on enhanced CT. Therefore, a neoplastic lesion
was considered based on the CT findings. CEUS technology can dynamically indicate blood perfusion state in tumor tissue by ultrasound
contrast agent. In our case, ultrasound contrast agent rapidly entered into the solid component of renal IMT in arterial phase, which
presented on focal hyperenhancement. When the contrast agent quickly washed out in delayed phase, echo intensity within tumor was
significantly lower than renal parenchyma, which showed low echo. Although the solid component in our case also had significant enhancement
in early phase, but less than CEUS, it might be caused by 2 different contrast methods. Ultrasound contrast is more real time and sensitive
for microvascular perfusion state. In our case, the enhanced degree in the late stage of enhanced CT was lower than renal parenchymal
strengthen degree. The solid component showed relatively low density, which was similar with that in CEUS. Its enhancement value gradually
increased by measuring the value, which showed delayed enhancement. We presume that it might indicate that CT contrast agent was accumulated
in nonvascular tissues. In positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), renal IMTs have high fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG)
uptake, and transitional cell carcinoma is considered because it is different from the typical renal cell carcinoma FDG uptake.18 Therefore,
when kidney tumor imaging reveals atypical kidney cancer, the differential diagnosis needs to include renal IMT. Some have thought that
biopsy does not contribute to preoperative diagnosis of renal IMT.19 However, in a recent report, core needle biopsy was applied to confirm
the diagnosis, and the case underwent spontaneous resolution.20 Therefore, the value of the kidney biopsy for IMT merits further evaluation.
Most renal IMT cases have undergone surgical resection, and nephrectomy is usually performed due to the mimicry of malignancy on imaging
findings, such as renal carcinoma or Wilms tumor.5,15,21,22 In some cases that were not treated by resection, corticosteroid therapy was
somewhat beneficial.9,10 In our case, because the preoperative imaging was similar to cystic renal cell carcinoma, surgical resection was
implemented, and no recurrence was observed during follow-up. Therefore, renal IMT may occasionally present as a cystic lesion with gradual
enhancement on enhanced CT, and surgical removal of renal IMT is an optional treatment. The preoperative imaging and biopsy should be
evaluated. If necessary, intraoperative frozen section can be performed to help avoid unnecessary nephrectomy in renal IMT patients.
Abbreviations: ALK = anaplastic lymphoma kinase, CEUS = contrast-enhanced ultrasound, CT = computed tomography, IMT = inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET/CT = positron emission tomography/computed tomography, US = ultrasonography.
The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
