Device-related infections in recipients of left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have been recognized as a major source of morbidity and
mortality. They require a high level of diagnostic effort as part of the overall burden resulting from infectious complications in LVAD
recipients. We present a multi-allergic patient who was treated for persistent sterile intrathoracic abscess formation and pericardial
empyema following minimally invasive LVAD implantation including use of a sheet of e-polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) membrane to restore
pericardial integrity. Sterile abscess formation and pericardial empyema recurred after surgical removal until the ePTFE membrane was
removed, suggesting that in disposed patients, ePTFE may be related to sterile abscess formation or sterile empyema. Device-related
infections in LVAD recipients remain major complications associated with relevant morbidity and mortality. In the Mechanical Assistance for
the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) trial, sepsis was the most common cause of death, accounting for 41 % of the fatal
outcomes in the patient group who received LVADs . Evaluation of infection in the framework of the ADVANCE Bridge to Transplant trial showed
that driveline exit site infections occurred in 16.9 % and sepsis in 17.2 % of the study population, with fatal outcome in 17.5 % of those
who developed sepsis . The HVAD (HeartWare Inc., Massachusetts, USA) is a new generation continuous-flow LVAD that is small enough to fit
entirely within the pericardium without need for creation of a pump pocket. When the device is implanted by a minimally invasive approach
through a left anterolateral minithoracotomy, lateral closure of the pericardium to cover the device is usually not possible, and
e-polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) membrane or bovine pericardium may be used to prevent contact between the device protruding from the
opening in the pericardial sac and the lung or the thoracic wall. We present a case where a sterile intrathoracic abscess and
intrapericardial empyema developed following closure of the pericardium using ePTFE membrane in a multi-allergic patient. A 43 year old male
with a history of multiple allergies including severe lactose intolerance presented with dilated cardiomyopathy (Intermacs level IV)
secondary to the cardiotoxicity of polychemotherapy with doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide and vincristine for childhood laryngeal
rhabdomyosarcoma. Implantation of an HVAD as a bridge to transplant was performed as an elective minimally invasive off-pump procedure
through an L-shaped partial upper sternotomy through the third intercostal space and a left anterolateral minithoracotomy. An ePTFE membrane
(Gore® Preclude® Pericardial Membrane, W. L. Gore & Associates, Inc. Flagstaff, USA) was used to restore pericardial integrity. The surgical
procedure and the postoperative course were uneventful. Perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis consisted of cefuroxime and vancomycin for
48 h. After a hospital stay of 20 days, he was discharged. 3 weeks later, he was readmitted for suspected driveline infection with driveline
exit swabs positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis. Computed tomography (CT) was performed but showed no signs of deep driveline infection.
He was treated with intravenous linezolid (2 × 600 mg/d) and discharged on oral linezolid 10 days later. After 13 days, i.e. on post-implant
day 65, he was readmitted for VAD-associated infection with significant quantities of spontaneous putrid discharge from the anterolateral
thoracotomy wound. At the time of readmission, his clinical condition was not relevantly compromised apart from discomfort and tenderness at
the thoracotomy site. LVAD parameters were within normal ranges. Anti-infective therapy was altered to intravenous rifampicin (3 × 300 mg
i.v./d) and daptomycin (1 × 500 mg i.v./d), and he was immediately scheduled for surgical exploration. After opening of the left
anterolateral minithoracotomy wound, an accumulation of pus was found in the space between the pericardial sac containing the LVAD and the
thoracic wall. The ePTFE membrane loosely covered the HVAD without adhering to the surrounding lung and/or thoracic wall. After removal of
the pus and rinsing of the wound, vacuum therapy (VAC®, KCI, Texas, USA) was initiated. One day later, surgical revision was performed for
ongoing bleeding from the wound. This time, an accumulation of liquid was palpable under the ePTFE membrane, and after incision of the
membrane, a considerable quantity of viscous, putrid discharge drained from within the pericardial sac. An extensive series of swabs
obtained during these surgical procedures all returned negative, as did several subsequent swabs taken from the driveline exit and the depth
of the wound and a number of blood cultures. The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU), and his heart transplant
(HTX) listing status was upgraded to high urgency for mediastinitis and device infection. He remained hemodynamically stable without
requiring inotropic or vasopressor support. After 8 days of vacuum therapy, the wound was therefore rinsed and closed. When purulent
discharge reoccurred 6 days after wound closure, CT showed an intrathoracic abscess extending up to the HVAD (Fig. 1a). CT-guided drainage
of the abscess (Fig. 1b) and of a pleural effusion were performed, and antimicrobial therapy was extended to include piperacillin/tazobactam
(3 × 4.5 g/d). 6 days later, repeat CT showed that the abscess had regained its previous size. The patient once again underwent surgery,
this time comprising removal not only of the abscess and the intrapericardial empyema, but also of the ePTFE membrane, which had come to be
suspected to be implicated in the complication. The foam dressing was changed 4 days later, and the wound was finally closed after 3 further
days of vacuum therapy (VAC®, KCI, Texas, USA).Fig. 1a CT showing abscess reaching up to and adjoining the HVAD. b CT showing CT-guided
abscess drainage a CT showing abscess reaching up to and adjoining the HVAD. b CT showing CT-guided abscess drainage Examination of a
multitude of swabs and cultures obtained during all interventional and surgical procedures as well as PCR testing for bacteria and fungi of
the ePTFE membrane failed to yield a causative organism. A swab that was taken from the chest drain several days after the initial surgical
procedure returned positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa grown on enriched medium. However, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was not cultured from any
other site, leaving the diagnostic value of this particular swab doubtful. Nevertheless, antimicrobial therapy was altered to include
levofloxacin (2 × 500 mg/d) one day after the first wound closure. From two swabs taken from the chest drains two days after the final wound
closure, one remained negative while the other yielded Candida spp. sensitive to fluconazole. Contamination was suspected, however, as
Candida albicans had not been grown from any of the intrathoracic swabs but was present in a large patch of axillary intertrigo that reached
down to within a few centimeters from the thoracotomy wound and the chest drain exit site. The anti-infective regimen, which had previously
been altered to an empirical combination of rifampicin, cotrimoxazol and ciprofloxacin, was supplemented by fluconazole (1x200 mg/d) when
Candida albicans was also cultured from the tip of a central venous catheter one week later, accompanied by a final spike in CRP on the same
day, even though a blood culture obtained from the same catheter on the same day was negative and wound swabs and driveline exit swabs also
kept returning negative. From then on, CRP kept dropping, and the WBC remained within normal ranges (Fig. 2)Fig. 2Infection markers (CRP and
WBC count) during the 53 day hospital stay. Day 1: surgical exploration and initiation of underpressure therapy; day 8: wound closure; day
22: extensive surgical re-exploration; day 29: wound closure Infection markers (CRP and WBC count) during the 53 day hospital stay. Day 1:
surgical exploration and initiation of underpressure therapy; day 8: wound closure; day 22: extensive surgical re-exploration; day 29: wound
closure A final CT scan showed that abscess formation had not recurred. As the patient’s clinical condition, his surgical wounds, the
driveline exit site as well as his infection markers continued to be inconspicuous, his HTX urgency status was downgraded, and he was
transferred to the general ward and discharged to self-care on post-implant day 118 after a total hospital stay of 53 days including 46 days
in the medical ICU/IMC. His antibiotic regimen at discharge consisted of fluconazole (1 × 200 mg/d), ciprofloxacin (2 × 500 mg/d),
sulfomethaxozole/trimethoprim(2 × 960 mg/d) and rifampicin (2 × 450 mg) to be continued for a total of 14 days. Follow-up CT on post-implant
day 135 showed no recurrence of abscess formation. His driveline exit site and thoracotomy wound were inconspicuous. Blood and urine
cultures, as well as routine screening swabs and a swab from the driveline exit site returned negative for bacteria and fungi. During his
most recent outpatient clinic visit on post-implant day 359, i.e. 265 days after final closure of the anterolateral thoracotomy wound, his
clinical condition and infection markers were still inconspicuous. Management of infections in VAD recipients remains a challenging task,
with the infections specific to or requiring particular considerations in VAD recipients ranging from superficial driveline exit site
infection to devastating entities such as pump and/or cannula infection, endocarditis and sepsis. The range of treatment options
correspondingly covers the entire spectrum from local treatment to major cardiac surgery including device removal with or without temporary
mechanical circulatory support, VAD-to-VAD exchange or urgent heart transplantation . LVAD exchange for infection was found to be associated
with relevant morbidity and mortality, as well as a considerable risk of recurring infection . The cases of VAD exchange for infection
reported to date, however, mostly concerned the HeartMate II. Our patient, in contrast, received an HVAD, which renders the situation
somewhat different in that the pump housing is attached directly to the heart and the entire system is completely contained within the
pericardial sac. Regardless of the implantation characteristics, however, the risks of retaining the VAD and those of timely VAD exchange
under controlled conditions before development of frank mediastinitis and sepsis need to be carefully weighed against each other. At the
same time, the likelihood of availability of a donor organ for any given patient must be considered before proceeding with one or the other
approach. Studies of the microbiology of VAD-associated infection showed the majority of infections to be caused by staphylococcal organisms
. The share of culture-negative infections reported is low, with inability to identify the causative organism, like in other non-valvular
cardiovascular device related infections, being frequently attributed to previous exposure to antibiotics diminishing the sensitivity of
subsequent microbiological studies [15, 17]. Upon admission for suspected purulent device infection, antimicrobial treatment in our patient
was escalated to a combination of daptomycin and rifampicin in the absence of recent microbiological findings guiding anti-infective
therapy. Staphylococcus epidermidis, after all, was not cultured from any site after driveline exit site swabs had briefly been positive
during the previous hospital stay, and the infectious complication had developed while the patient was on anti-infective treatment with
linezolid. Daptomycin was chosen as it had previously proven effective in the treatment of patients presenting with multi-drug resistant
organisms after VAD implantation and for its unique ability to penetrate into biofilms on cardiovascular devices such as LVADS . Rifampicin
was added for its synergistic effect with daptomycin . Subsequently, anti-infective therapy was altered to different broad combinations of
antibiotics that did not, however, comprise antifungals until the last few days of the hospital stay. In retrospect, a considerable
diagnostic effort (Table 1) was dedicated to identifying a causative organism. This is reflected by a total of 18 superficial, deep,
intrathoracic and intrapericardial wound swabs including swabs from the LVAD surface subjected to microbiological examination during a
hospital stay of 53 days. PCR testing for bacteria and fungi was additionally performed on fluid obtained by CT guided aspiration from the
intrathoracic abscess and on a specimen from the ePTFE membrane removed during surgical exploration. Results of PCR testing, all
intrathoracic and intrapericardial swabs including swabs from HVAD surface, as well as all swabs taken from the driveline exit site were
negative. The only swabs that returned positive were taken by undefined methods and under non-standardized conditions from closed chest
drainage systems and must be considered of doubtful diagnostic value.Table 1Microbiological testing including routine screening for multi-
resistant organisms performed during hospital stay of 53 daysSummary of microbiological testingTestNo.ResultSuperficial, deep, intrathoracic
and intrapericardial wound swabs18NegativeDriveline exit site swabs6NegativeSwabs from chest drains31 positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosaa1
positive for Candida spp.aCulture from abscess fluid1NegativeCulture from pleural effusion1NegativeBlood culture3NegativeMicrobiological
examination of ePTFE membrane1NegativePCR for bacteria and fungi of ePTFE membrane1NegativePCR for bacteria and fungi of fluid aspirated
from abscess1NegativePCR for bacteria and fungi of pleural effusion1NegativeNose swabs6NegativeRectal swabs61 positive for Enterobacter
cloacae1 positive for E. coliAnal swab1Positive for E. coli, Klebsiella pneumonia, Candida albicans and Candida utilisStool culture1Positive
for Candida albicans and Candida non-albicansUrine culture7NegativeTip of central venous catheter31 positive for Candida albicansAxillary
skin swab1Positive for Candida albicansaSuspected contamination Microbiological testing including routine screening for multi-resistant
organisms performed during hospital stay of 53 days aSuspected contamination When microbiological studies failed to identify a causative
organism, the presence of the ePTFE membrane, in combination with the patient’s severe allergic disposition, came to be suspected of being
involved in the complication. ePTFE is a material widely used in cardiac surgery and appreciated for its chemical inertness and
biocompatibility. Whether or not it is superior to a number of alternatives available in preventing adhesions and providing a clear plane of
dissection at redo-surgery or, in the case of patients receiving LVADs as bridge to recovery or transplant, at LVAD explantation or heart
transplantation is a subject of ongoing debate . Permanent presence in the mediastinum of non-resorbable foreign material additionally poses
questions with regard to its implications in terms of infection. However, over the past two decades, different studies concluded that ePTFE
membrane can safely be used in cardiac surgery to limit adhesions without increasing the risk of infection . As infection is a particular
issue with VAD recipients, questions were also raised with regard to the material to be chosen for covering the components of the various
devices during the implantation procedure. A number of studies were dedicated to the use of ePTFE membrane in the context of VAD
implantation and found that it significantly facilitated explantation . Leprince et al. , studying 23 patients in whom ePTFE membranes had
been used to cover LVADs or total artificial hearts, found that infection had occurred in only one case. They concluded that ePTFE membranes
can be used to limit adhesion between tissues and device surfaces without increasing the risk of infection. Safety of ePTFE membrane was
similarly emphasized by Vitali et al. , who used ePTFE pericardial membrane in 20 patients implanted with a Novacor assist device. In
contrast, Holman et al. reported membranes in two of seven patients to have become infected with Staphylococcus aureus but nevertheless
advocated the use of ePTFE membrane. In our patients, who routinely undergo minimally invasive HVAD implantation, ePTFE membrane or, more
recently, bovine pericardium are used to close the lateral gap in the pericardial sac to prevent direct contact between device and lung or
thoracic wall rather than to achieve pericardial closure and facilitate re-sternotomy after full median sternotomy. When the anterolateral
thoracotomy wound in our patient was reopened on post-implant days 65 and 87, neither adhesion to surrounding structures nor any changes to
the membrane itself were observed, but an accumulation of viscous purulent fluid beneath the membrane, in addition to intrathoracic abscess
formation, represented a highly alarming finding. Finally, however, we succeeded neither in identifying a causative organism nor in proving
involvement of the ePTFE membrane in the development of the complication with absolute certainty. But given the patient’s severe allergic
disposition, the fact that neither pericardial empyema nor intrathoracic abscess formation recurred after removal of the ePTFE membrane may
be interpreted as suggestive of involvement of the membrane in the complication. The level of diagnostic effort undertaken in this
particular patient was motivated by a high degree of awareness of the potentially detrimental consequences of VAD infection. Even though the
complication resolved without major cardiac surgery being required, the patient had a hospital stay of 53 days most of which he spent at the
medical ICU/IMC, thus illustrating that infection in a growing population of VAD recipients represents a veritable burden and relevant
economic factor the impact of which grows with the severity of infection and extent of diagnostics and therapeutic interventions required.
In disposed patients, ePTFE may be related to sterile abscess formation or sterile empyema. This case, together with another case where
infection developed in a patient in whom ePTFE membrane was used to cover an HVAD, motivated us to abandon the use of ePTFE membrane. We now
use bovine pericardium for restitution of pericardial integrity after minimal invasive HVAD implantation through an anterolateral
minithoracotomy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. C-reactive protein computed tomography extruded
polytetrafluoroethylene heart transplantation ventricular assist device of HeartWare Inc. intensive care unit intermediate care unit left
ventricular assist device polymerase chain reaction ventricular assist device white blood cells Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AK conceived the design of the project, collected and interpreted the data and
drafted the manuscript. WV has contributed to collecting and interpreting the data and drafting the manuscript. KM has been involved in the
surgical treatment of the patient, has critically revised the manuscript and contributed to interpreting the data. TP has been involved in
the surgical treatment of the patient, has critically revised the manuscript and contributed to interpreting the data. AB has critically
revised the manuscript and contributed to interpreting the data. MA has critically revised the manuscript, contributed to interpreting the
data and given final approval of the version to be published. BFA has contributed to design and coordination of the project, interpreted the
data and critically revised the manuscript, and given final approval of the version to be published. SUA has supervised design and
coordination of the project, interpreted the data, critically revised the manuscript and given final approval of the version to be
published. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the physicians of the intensive care unit for the care they
provided for the patient. Funding None of the authors have received any funding for the preparation of this paper.
