The prevalence of Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis infection was determined in 102 persons bitten by ticks in Sweden. Two infected women
had erythematous rashes; 1 was co-infected with a Borrelia sp., and the other showed seroconversion for Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Both
patients had increased levels of Neoehrlichia DNA and serum cytokines for several months. Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis is a tick-borne
pathogen found in Europe and Asia (1). It causes an infectious disease in immunocompromised persons that is characterized by fever and
thromboembolic events (2). In contrast, Candidatus N. mikurensis infection in immunocompetent hosts has been linked to asymptomatic
infection (3), systemic inflammation with various symptoms (4,5), and possibly lethal infection (6). Knowledge regarding the capacity of
Candidatus N. mikurensis to cause disease in immunocompetent persons is still limited. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
prevalence, rate of co-infections, clinical picture, and cytokine response to Candidatus N. mikurensis infection in immunocompetent patients
participating in the Tick-Borne Diseases Study (Technical Appendix). The study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Linköping University
(M132-06), and Åland Health Care (2008-05-23). DNA was robot-extracted (MagNA Pure Compact Extraction Robot; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) from
400 µL of EDTA-plasma (Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit I; Roche) and analyzed by using a real-time PCR specific for a 169-bp segment of the groEL
gene of Candidatus N. mikurensis. Amplifications were performed in a 20-µL reaction mixture containing 1× FastStart Taqman Probe Master
(Roche), 1 µmol/L of each primer (5′-CGG AAA TAA CAA AAG ATG GA-3′; 5′- ACC TCC TCG ATT ACT TTA G-3′), 100 nmol/L of probe (5′-6FAM-TTG GTG
ATG GAA CTA CA-MGB-3′), and 4 µL of DNA template. Real-time PCR was performed by using Rotorgene 6000 (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Reaction
conditions were 95°C for 10 min, followed by 45 cycles at 95°C for 15 s, and a final cycle at 54°C for 1 min. A synthetic plasmid containing
the 169-bp sequence cloned into a pUC57 vector (Genscript, Piscataway, NJ, USA) was used to estimate bacterial gene copy numbers. Positive
samples were verified by using a pan-bacterial PCR specific for the 16S rRNA gene (Technical Appendix). All PCR products were sequenced
after electrophoresis on 2% agarose gels and analyzed by using an ABI PRISM 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Life Technologies Europe BV, Bleiswijk,
the Netherlands). Obtained DNA sequences were edited and further analyzed by using the GenBank BLAST program
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and Ripseq mixed software (Isentio, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Patient serum samples were analyzed for
antibodies against Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato by using the RecomBead Borrelia IgM and IgG Kit (Mikrogen Diagnostik, Neuried, Germany).
Samples were analyzed for IgG against Anaplasma phagocytophilum by using the A. phagocytophilum IFA IgG Kit (Focus Diagnostics, Cypress, CA,
USA) and for 20 cytokines by using the Bio-Plex 200 System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). A total of 102/3,248 study participants sought
medical care during the 3-month study period and were further investigated. Their median age was 63 years (range 28–79 years) and 73 (72%)
were women. All but 3 participants were immunocompetent (2 had cancer; 1 of them used methotrexate). Candidatus N. mikurensis DNA was
detected in 2 (2.0%) of 102 patients, which is consistent with prevalences of 1.1% in China (5) and 1.6% in Poland (3). Patient 1 was a
healthy 68-year-old woman who lived on the island of Tjurkö, southeast of Sweden. She sought medical care on day 77 of the study because of
a rash on her right breast. She reported being bitten by a tick in the same location 2 months earlier. The patient was given a diagnosis of
erythema migrans, received phenoxymethylpenicillin (1 g, 3×/d for 10 days), and the rash disappeared. Patient 2 was a 57-year-old woman who
lived in Kalmar, Sweden. She had a history of allergy and was regularly taking aspirin. She had received treatment for Lyme borreliosis 8
years earlier. On day 65 of the study, she sought medical care because of a rash on her left breast. She reported being bitten by a tick in
the same location 1.5 months earlier. The patient was also given a diagnosis of erythema migrans and received phenoxymethylpenicillin (1 g,
3×/d for 10 days). Patient 1 had IgM against Borrelia outer surface protein C and pre-existing Borrelia-specific IgG titers that increased
during the study (Table 1). Patient 2 was seronegative for Borrelia antigens throughout the study (Table 2). The rash of patient 1 may have
been caused by co-infection with a Borrelia spp. Although there was no evidence of a Borrelia infection in patient 2, only 50% of Borrelia
culture-positive patients with erythema migrans show development of specific antibodies (7). Moreover, early treatment for erythema migrans
might abrogate the IgG response (8), although not always (9). Nevertheless, 20% of patients with erythema migrans show negative results for
Borrelia DNA in the skin, which indicates that these rashes might be caused by other infectious agents (10). Our study indicates that an
erythematous rash in persons bitten by ticks might not be caused by Borrelia spp. and might require treatment with doxycycline instead of
penicillin. *Reactivity to either outer surface protein C (OspC) alone or to 2 antigens was required for a positive IgM
response. †Reactivity to >2 antigens was required for a positive IgG response. Full reactivity to an antigen is indicated by 4
points. ‡Every serum sample was tested at a dilution of 1/64. ++, strongly positive; +, positive. §Samples that showed a positive (+) result
were further tested at dilutions of 1:128 and 1:256. *Reactivity to either outer surface protein C alone or to 2 antigens was required for a
positive IgM response. †Reactivity to >2 antigens was required for a positive IgG response. ‡Every serum sample was tested at a dilution of
1/64. ±, weakly positive; +, positive; ++, strongly positive. Patient 1 had pre-existing IgG against A. phagocytophilum that remained
unchanged (Table 1). Patient 2 had borderline levels of IgG against A. phagocytophilum on day 0, which increased successively on days 65 and
98 (Table 2). This seroconversion may have resulted from cross-reactivity with Candidatus N. mikurensis, which was previously reported for
an immunocompetent patient from Switzerland (4). Relatively high rates of seropositivity to A. phagocytophilum in Sweden (11,12) might be
caused by cross-reactive antibodies because Candidatus N. mikurensis is common in ticks in Sweden, in contrast to A. phagocytophilum (13).
Both patients showed increased serum levels of cytokines, which appeared to mirror the numbers of Candidatus N. mikurensis gene copies
(Figures 1, 2; Technical Appendix Figure). Cytokine levels for patient 1 were maximum on day 77 and returned to reference levels on day 167.
All cytokines, except for interferon-γ−induced protein 10, reached maximum levels on day 98 for patient 2. The cytokines were selected
because systemic inflammation (Figure 1) with neutrophilia (Technical Appendix) is typical of neoehrlichiosis in immunocompromised patients
(2). In addition, a Th1-like immune response (Figure 2) is presumably required to eliminate an intracellular pathogen, such as Candidatus N.
mikurensis. However, the cytokine response of patient 1 may in part have been caused by Borrelia spp. (14). Proinflammatory cytokines in 2
patients infected with Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis, Sweden. Concentrations of cytokines A) interleukin-1β (IL-1β), B) tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α), C) interleukin-6 (IL-6), and D) macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β) were measured in serum of patient 1 on days 0,
77, and 169 and in serum of patient 2 on days 0, 65, and 98. A rash developed in patient 1 on day 77 and in patient 2 on day 65. Dashed
lines indicate levels of Neoehrlichia DNA in plasma for both patients. Dotted lines indicate detection limit for each cytokine. Th1
cytokines in 2 patients infected with Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis, Sweden. Concentrations of cytokines A) interleukin-12p70
(IL-12p70), B) interferon-γ (IFN-γ), C) monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) (C), and D) IFN-γ−induced protein 10 (IP-10) were
measured in serum of patient 1 on days 0, 77, and 169 and in serum of patient 2 on days 0, 65, and 98. Dashed lines indicate levels of
Neoehrlichia DNA in plasma for both patients. Dotted lines indicate detection limit for each cytokine. Candidatus N. mikurensis DNA was
detected in the blood of both patients for >1 and 3 months, respectively. Similarly, a healthy person in Poland showed a positive result for
Candidatus N. mikurensis twice in a 4-month period (3). This finding suggests that Candidatus N. mikurensis infections persist for a long
time or that frequent reinfections occur. Prolonged carriage seems more probable in view of the common occurrence of neoehrlichiosis during
winter among immunocompromised patients (2); immunosuppressive therapy might reactivate such infections. An analogous finding was reported
in a dog, which was believed to have been a chronic carrier of Candidatus N. mikurensis; infection became symptomatic when immune defenses
were compromised by surgery (15). In conclusion, an erythematous rash in a person bitten by a tick can be caused by Candidatus N.
mikurensis, rather than by Borrelia spp. Moreover, immunocompetent persons may be infected by Candidatus N. mikurensis for unexpectedly long
periods, even after symptoms have disappeared. Patients scheduled to receive immunosuppressive treatment, and who live in Candidatus N.
mikurensis–endemic areas should be screened for this pathogen before beginning therapy. Technical Appendix. Tick-borne disease study design
and pan-bacterial PCR. Suggested citation for this article: Grankvist A, Sandelin LL, Andersson J, Fryland L, Wilhelmsson P, Lindgren P-E,
et al. Infections with Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis and cytokine responses in 2 persons bitten by ticks, Sweden. Emerg Infect Dis.
2015 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2108.150060 These authors contributed equally to this article. This study was supported
by ALF-Göteborg (71580); the Cancer and Allergy Foundation (149781); Västra Götaland Region Research and Development (94510); Laboratory
Medicine at Sahlgrenska University Hospital (6333); the Medical Research Council of South-East Sweden (FORSS-297311, -307591, and -87231);
The Swedish Research Council/Medicine (2011-345); and ALF-Östergötland. Dr. Grankvist is a molecular biologist in the Department of Clinical
Microbiology at Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden. Her research interests are noncultivatable infectious agents, with a
focus on Candidatus N. mikurensis.
