Traumatic carotid artery dissections are very rare, often overlooked and life-threatening injuries. Diagnosis and treatment are difficult
especially in multiple injured patients. We report on a 28-year-old female major trauma patient (injury severity score, ISS 50) who was
involved in a motor vehicle accident. She was primarily transferred to a level II trauma center. After initial assessment and operative
management, an anisocoria was diagnosed on the intensive care unit. Subsequent CT angiography and extracranial duplex sonography revealed a
bilateral internal carotid artery dissection. The patient was transferred to our level I trauma center where conservative treatment with
high-dose heparin therapy was started at day two after trauma. Outcome after 6 months was very good. Besides presenting the case and outcome
of this patient, the article discusses the diagnostic and therapeutic management of this extremely rare and often overlooked dangerous
injury. To avoid overlooking carotid artery dissections, CT angiography of the neck region should be generously included into the initial
multislice CT whole-body scan, when the injury results from an according trauma. For the best outcome, sites of hemorrhage should be
abolished quickly and the anticoagulative therapy should be initiated as soon as possible. Interdisciplinary treatment of trauma surgeons
and neurologists is crucial. Traumatic carotid artery dissections are often overlooked life-threatening injuries . Even though most of the
carotid artery dissections occur spontaneously, about 4% of the dissections are related to severe trauma . While spontaneous dissections are
usually seen in older patients, traumatic dissections mostly affect young patients . The diagnosis of traumatic dissections is often
difficult, because of missing initial symptoms or distracting injuries. The treatment itself also provides many difficulties, especially
when combined with other injuries after severe trauma . Therefore, improvements in diagnosis and treatment of traumatic artery dissections
are of relevance for emergency medicine. A 28-year-old woman was involved in a motor vehicle accident (MVA) and suffered major trauma. The
trauma mechanism was a high speed MVA with head-on collision on a motorway. When the paramedics arrived, the patient was found lying on the
street next to the car involved in the accident, she was soporific with an initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 8. Furthermore, she
complained about severe pain in her head, chest and right leg. She was intubated, immobilized and transferred by ground emergency to a Level
II trauma center nearby. After initial trauma management following the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS)-scheme, a whole-body CT scan was
performed. As direct sequelae of trauma, multiple injuries were found (see Table 1), but no traumatic brain injury (ISS = 50 points).
Following the damage control concept, the II° open tibial fracture was stabilized with an external fixator, followed by surgery of the open
mandibular fracture. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after the operation. The postoperative checkup on the ICU
4 h after hospital admission showed an anisocoria (right > left). Therefore, additional diagnostics were initiated. A CT angiography
revealed the suspicion of a bilateral internal carotid artery (ICA) dissection (Figure 1). The suspected diagnosis was confirmed by
subsequent extracranial duplex sonography.Table 1Pattern of injuries of the patient presentedPattern of injuries resulting in an ISS of 50
pointsAIS scoreBilateral carotid artery dissection with bilateral stroke5Open mandibular fracture4Le Fort I fracture2Undislocated fracture
of the left clavicula1Rib fracture of the first rib1Bilateral lung contusion2Pneumothorax3Pelvic ring fracture type A2II° open tibial head
fracture2Figure 1Second CT scan after ICU admission with coronal reconstructions of the bilateral ICA dissection. “String sign” indicated
with an arrow. Pattern of injuries of the patient presented Second CT scan after ICU admission with coronal reconstructions of the bilateral
ICA dissection. “String sign” indicated with an arrow. 48 h after the accident, the patient was transferred via helicopter non-intubated to
the emergency department of our level I trauma center. It was decided not to intubate the patient prior helicopter transport to make
continuous neurological assessment possible. The patient presented with a GCS of 8 under sufentanil analgesia, in soporific condition, not
focusing with her eyes, spontaneous movements of the right arm, her left leg moved upon stimulation and the left arm and right leg were not
moved spontaneously but after stimulation, no speech production, with persisting anisocoria (right > left) in terms of an incomplete horner
syndrome. The additional CT angiography showed no changes in the vascular findings but a cerebral infarction in the left central region. The
patient was transferred to the ICU. A transcranial Doppler sonography showed a sufficient collateral circulation of the middle cerebral
artery via the posterior communicating arteries, so that an interventional stent angioplasty (with subsequent need of double platelet
aggregation inhibition) was not performed. High-dose intravenous heparinization was started immediately (PTT 60–80 s). Magnet Resonance
Imaging (MRI) on the next day (3 days after trauma) (Figure 2) revealed bihemispheric, mainly left-sided, ischemic lesions near the border
zone. The high-dose heparinization was continued.Figure 2Axial T-2 sequences of a brain MRI scan of the 28-year-old patient. Left
posttraumatic bihemispheric, mainly left-sided, ischemic lesions near the border zone, 3 days after trauma (indicated with arrows). Right
6 months follow-up MRI scan with good recovery. Axial T-2 sequences of a brain MRI scan of the 28-year-old patient. Left posttraumatic
bihemispheric, mainly left-sided, ischemic lesions near the border zone, 3 days after trauma (indicated with arrows). Right 6 months follow-
up MRI scan with good recovery. Eight days after the accident and ICU treatment the patient was referred to the stroke unit with a score of
8 on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS, min. 0 points = no neurological deficit, max. 42 points = worst outcome). Over
the course of time the proximal tibial fracture was treated with osteosynthesis and the intravenous heparinization was converted to oral
anticoagulation with Dabigatran (Pradaxa®) 150 mg 1–0–1 (off-label use because of needle-phobia). The clinical situation improved, but
regarding focal neurological deficiencies, a global motoric aphasia remained. The patient was discharged to rehabilitation 22 days after the
trauma with a NIHSS of four points. Six months later, the patient presented at our clinic for follow-up examinations and showed great
recovery. Besides slight concentration difficulties and fine motor dysfunctions, no neurological deficiencies remained (NIHSS = 0). The MRI
scan 6 months after trauma showed good recovery with a good perfusion of both internal carotid arteries (Figures 1, 2, 3).Figure 3Axial T-2
sequences of a brain MRI Angio scan of the 28-year-old patient. Left posttraumatic intracranial dissection with intramural hematomas of both
internal carotid arteries 3 days after trauma (indicated with arrows). Right 6 months follow-up MRI scan with good perfusion of both
internal carotid arteries. Axial T-2 sequences of a brain MRI Angio scan of the 28-year-old patient. Left posttraumatic intracranial
dissection with intramural hematomas of both internal carotid arteries 3 days after trauma (indicated with arrows). Right 6 months follow-up
MRI scan with good perfusion of both internal carotid arteries. Most of the carotid artery dissections (CADs) occur spontaneously . Only
about 4% of all CADs result from a (poly-) trauma such as a motor vehicle accident (MVA) . Bilateral ICA dissection following blunt trauma,
as described in our case, have a special role in the current literature, because they are only very rarely described. Exact data on the
incidence of traumatic CAD do not exist. Bilateral traumatic carotid artery dissection is extremely rare. Different injury mechanisms for
traumatic CADs are described in the current literature. Distraction/extension, distraction/flexion or lateral flexion forces of the C-spine
may result in traumatic ICA dissections [2, 5]. Even a vasocompression between C-Spine and mandibula during a hyperinclination trauma can
lead to a dissection of the internal carotid artery (ICA) [1, 2]. These mechanisms are frequently seen in MVAs, where the car occupants
remain fixed in their seats by the security belt during a sudden loss of speed (i.e. crash, full braking, etc.). The mentioned forces may
cause small lesions of the vessel wall, which can result in intimal tears, intramural hematomas or complete lumen displacement [2, 4]. It is
reasonable for cerebral ischemic insults to activate the coagulation cascade, which results in thrombus formation and, concomitantly, in an
increased risk of thromboembolic cerebral insults [1, 2, 6]. Traumatic dissections of the arteries in the head and neck region are most
frequently located in the mobile segments of the vessels. Concerning the ICA most of the traumatic dissection occur below the scull base .
There are several options to diagnose vessel dissections used in the clinical routine. Duplex ultrasound is one of the non-invasive methods
with a high disposability even in smaller hospitals. It is a common method to detect cerebrovascular injuries , although it has certain
limits when it comes to acute traumatic dissections in major injuries: it is an operator-dependent method with poor vision of the
intracranial aspects of a dissection and it also gives limited information about small intimal tears . When it comes to dissections of the
ICA as described in our case, the sensitivity of diagnostic ultrasound is even lower [9, 10]. According to the given limits, diagnostic
ultrasound is rather recommended as an additional method especially to evaluate the progress of a dissection [2, 6, 11]. The MRI scan
combined with the MR angiography is considered to be the gold standard for detection of carotid artery dissections [2, 12]. It determines
dissections in up to 99% and provides additional information about concomitant injuries (i.e. brain injuries, fractures, etc.) [1, 6, 13,
14]. But it also has certain limits, especially during the diagnostic of critically injured patients in the trauma room. Besides the long
duration of the scan, there are on the one hand restrictions in the use of potentially life supporting devices (i.e. pacemakers/iron-based
metal implants, etc.) and on the other hand there is the lack of availability of MRI scanners especially in the smaller trauma centers . The
CT scan combined with CT angiography are prominently used as diagnostic features for the detection of cerebrovascular injuries, especially
when thinking of the acute situation in the emergency room of severely injured patients. “String signs”, constrictions of the lumen, are
reckoned to be indirect signs of artery dissection (Figure 1) . Although it is not recommended by the AWMF (“Arbeitsgemeinschaft der
Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften”) guidelines as standard method yet [1, 9], the further development of the CT scanners
(>64 slices) shows comparable results in sensitivity to the MRI/MRA scans [2, 15]. The use of whole-body CT scans in severely injured
patients was described by Huber-Wagner et al. . However, to get additional information about a possible cerebrovascular injury, it can be
necessary to include CT angiography into the protocol of the whole-body CT. Wick et al. showed how to avoid the under diagnosis of blunt
cervical vascular injuries with the use of CT angiography included in the multislice CT (MS-CT) in their “Innsbruck Emergency Algorithm” .
To rule out the patients that need an additional CT angiography the modified “Denver Screening Criteria” (Table 2) can be helpful . CT
angiography should be performed generously in severely injured patients following the above-mentioned criteria .Table 2Modified Denver
screening criteria for blunt cerebrovascular injuries Signs of blunt cerebrovasuclar injuryRisk factors for blunt cerebrovascular
injuryArterial bleedingHigh-energy trauma mechanism combined with: Le Fort II/III fracture Cervical spine fractures (subluxations, CI-CIII
fractures, fractures extending to the transverse foramen) Basilar skull fracture with carotid canal involvement Diffuse axonal injury with
GCS ≤6 Near hanging with anoxic brain injury Combination of traumatic brain injury and thorax traumaCervical hematomaFocal neurological
deficiencyNeurological findings not matching with CT findingsIschemic insult seen on a secondary CT scanCervical heart murmur Modified
Denver screening criteria for blunt cerebrovascular injuries To treat cerebrovascular dissections, there are several therapeutical options
including open surgery (microsurgical vessel sutures, extracranial/intracranial bypass, thromboendarterectomy), endovascular management
(stenting, stent-assisted endovascular thrombolysis, stent-assisted thrombectomy), thrombolysis and antithrombotic [2, 6]. The German
Society of Neurology (DGN) gives the following advice for the treatment of spontaneous cerebrovascular dissections in the acute phase,
guidelines for traumatic dissections do not exist so far [1, 9, 15]:thrombolysis is possible in patients with cerebral ischemia following
dissection within 4.5 h after initial symptomsendovascular treatment, including intraarterial thrombolysis, in the acute phase is only
justified in rare caseshypertension and intensive care monitoring can be useful if severe cerebral perfusion disorders without any embolic
occlusions occur. thrombolysis is possible in patients with cerebral ischemia following dissection within 4.5 h after initial symptoms
endovascular treatment, including intraarterial thrombolysis, in the acute phase is only justified in rare cases hypertension and intensive
care monitoring can be useful if severe cerebral perfusion disorders without any embolic occlusions occur. Surgical options as mentioned
above are difficult and risky in the acute phase of the dissection [2, 19]. This is why they usually do not belong to the first line therapy
in the acute phase. However, there are certain cases where operative treatment is needed (i.e. to restore the blood flow in a case of
distinct tear of the vessels or complete occlusions without ischemic intracranial lesions) [1, 8]. Endovascular treatment of traumatic
cervical ICA injuries is becoming more and more popular and is meant to be an attractive minimally invasive alternative to surgery . In the
current literature, endovascular treatment is described to be a good therapeutic option even for traumatic dissections [1, 20, 21]. But
there are still certain risk factors including stroke, perforation of the thin dissected arteries, etc., that have to be considered .
Further randomized trials with a high level of incidence are still needed [1, 6]. Systemic and local lysis are thought to be useful
especially to prevent from thromboembolic cerebral insults, but still present high risks in the setting of a severely injured patient with
multiple fractures (as presented in our case) [2, 6, 9]. In our case of a severely injured patient with bilateral ICA dissections, treatment
has to be determined interdisciplinary. To prevent the patient from further thromboembolic events, a therapeutic anticoagulation is
considered to be the treatment of choice [1, 2, 9, 19, 22]. In general, the earliest possible time to start with the anticoagulation is
best. If there are other injuries with high risk of severe bleeding (i.e. pelvic fractures), the time to start with the anticoagulation
should be considered in an interdisciplinary approach (trauma surgeons, orthopedic surgeons, neurologists, neurosurgeons and radiologists).
The ATLS principle “treat first what kills first” should be supplied at any time of the treatment. According to the guidelines, the
therapeutic intravenous heparinization with a PTT of 50–70 s followed by oral anticoagulation with warfarin or phenprocoumon (INR 2–3) for
at least 3 months should be warranted [2, 6]. Approximately 4% of the CADs result from trauma, such as MVAs. Bilateral traumatic carotid
artery dissections as presented in the case at hand are extremely rare. There are several therapeutical options to treat patients with
traumatic dissections of the ICA. But when it comes to a severely injured patient as described in our case, no specific guidelines for
diagnosis and treatment exist. To avoid overlooking a carotid artery dissection, we recommend to include a CT angiography of the neck region
into the MS-CT whole-body scan generously, when a certain trauma mechanism shows the possible coexistence of an artery dissection. Regarding
the therapeutical options, the bleeding risk is one of the most challenging aspects. Therefore, a close cooperation between the different
medical disciplines is essential. Following the ATLS principle “treat first what kills first”, the patient should be stabilized initially,
sites of hemorrhage should be abolished quickly (i.e. fracture stabilization with external fixator, etc.) and the anticoagulative therapy
should be initiated as soon as possible. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Abbreviated Injury Scale Advanced
Trauma Life Support carotid artery dissection Glasgow Coma Scale internal carotid artery Injury Severity Scale middle cerebral artery motor
vehicle accident National Institute of Health Stroke Scale MC participated in the case reports design, conducted the literature search and
drafted the manuscript. GS and MB assisted in the literature search and critical revisions of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. SW/SHW/PB conceived the case report and provided critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Fritz Seidl, M.A. Interpreting and Translating, for professional language editing.
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
