Late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease of metabolic dysfunction clinically
characterized by fluctuating proximal muscle weakness, excise intolerance, and dramatic riboflavin responsiveness. Dropped head syndrome can
occasionally be observed in some severe patients with late-onset MADD; however, bent spine syndrome as an initial symptom had not been
reported in patients with late-onset MADD. A 46-year-old man lost the ability to hold his trunk upright, and had difficulty in raising his
head, but he had no obvious symptoms of limb weakness. Meanwhile, he developed persistent numbness of limbs and lips around. Myopathological
features and combined elevation of multiple acylcarnitines indicated that the axial myopathy might be caused by lipid storage myopathy.
Cervical and lumbosacral MRI revealed a lot of abnormal signals diffusing along paravertebral muscles, while the abnormal signals almost
disappeared after riboflavin treatment. Nerve conduction study indicated the patient suffering from predominantly sensory neuropathy and
mildly motor neuropathy. Muscle pathology also demonstrated no typical neurogenic change, which was consistent with the electrophysiological
findings. Causative mutations were found in the ETFDH gene. We report the first case of late-onset MADD with sensory neuropathy initially
manifesting as bent spine syndrome and dropped head syndrome. Bent spine syndrome (BSS) is defined as an unusual condition characterized by
progressive forward flexion of the trunk [1, 2]. Selective involvement of paravertebral muscles is the most common etiology of BBS,
including axial myopathy , motor neuron disease , myasthenia gravis , and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy . Multiple acyl-
CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease of fatty acid metabolism caused by deficiency of either
electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF) or ETF-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (ETF:QO) . Most patients with late-onset MADD can be dramatically
resolved on treatment with riboflavin, so this clinical phenotype is called as riboflavin responsive MADD . Besides the prominent muscular
symptoms of proximal limbs, extramuscular symptoms of cardiac or gastrointestinal digestive system occasionally can be observed in some
patients with late-onset MADD . However, the involvement of peripheral neuropathy is seldom described in patients with late-onset MADD .
Some patients with late-onset MADD have weakness of the neck extensor during the disease course, even dropped head syndrome is observed in
some severe cases . The coexisting of bent spine syndrome and dropped head syndrome has been rarely reported in the literature . Late-onset
MADD was not previously described as a common cause of these two clinical features. Herein, we presented the clinical and laboratory
features of a 46-year-old man, who was diagnosed as late-onset MADD with sensory neuropathy initially manifesting as bent spine syndrome and
dropped head syndrome. A 46-year-old man was admitted to our clinical center with symptoms of bent spine. He initially complained of back
and neck pain 3 months ago, and gradually had trouble in standing upright 2 months ago, while the symptoms would mildly alleviate when he
had a rest. At the same time, he felt numbness in limbs and around lips. All of the symptoms gradually became more severe. Two weeks ago, he
completely lost the ability to hold his trunk upright, and had difficulty in raising his head. The patient had no obvious symptoms of limb
weakness, tremor, ataxia, and muscle cramp. He denied any family history. Neurological examination revealed a posture of bent spine and
dropped head when standing up. Neck extensor strength was 2/5 (MRCS, grades 0–5); Iliopsoas muscle strength was 5-/5; proximal muscle
strength of lower limb was 5/5; and distal muscle strength was 5/5. Deep tendon reflexes can not be elicited. Impairment of light touch and
pain sensation were found in hands, feet, and lips around, while deep sensation was intact. Serum creatine kinase (CK) was 568 IU/L (normal
25-175 IU/L). Urinary organic acid analysis showed elevation of glutarate, 2-hydroxyglutaric acid, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, glyceric acid,
and 2-hydroxyadipic acid. Blood acylcarnitine analysis revealed a combined elevation of short- (C6), medium- (C8, C10), and long- (C14)
chain acylcarnitines, which was consistent with the metabolic disturbance of MADD. Other routine blood tests were normal. Electrophysiology
showed that no sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) were elicited in any nerves except the left ulnar nerve, which had decreased sensory
conduction segmental velocities of 33 m/s across the left forearm (normal >60 m/s), and a decreased amplitude of 2.8 millivolt (mV) in the
left ulnar nerves (normal >7 mV). In contrast, the results of motor nerve conduction studies were almost normal, except that compound muscle
action potential (CMAP) slightly decreased in some nerves, as follows: 1.6 mV and 1.2 mV (normal >2.5 mV) in bilateral peroneal motor
nerves, respectively. The electromyogram parameters of proximal and distal limb muscles were within normal limits. Cervical magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a few abnormal high signals infiltrating into cervical paravertebral mucles in T1 and T2 weighted images
(Fig. 1a). Lumbosacral MRI showed a lot of high signals diffusing around musculi multifidus, musculi longissimus, and iliopsoas in T1 and T2
weighted images (Fig. 1c). Lower limb MRI showed normal patterns of musculi biceps femoris, musculi quadriceps femoris (Fig. 1e), and
gluteus maximus (Fig. 1f). After a written consent was signed by patient in compliance with the bioethics laws of China, open left
quadriceps femoris and lumbar paravertebral muscle biopsies were performed. Hematoxylin & eosin (HE) staining revealed a lot of small
vacuoles in paravertebral muscle fibers, but a few small vacuoles in quadriceps femoris. The oil red O (ORO) staining showed a significant
increase of lipid droplets in paravertebral muscle fibers (Fig. 2a), but a mild increase in quadriceps femoris (Fig. 2b). No neurogenic
features were observed in acid and alkaline ATPases staining.Fig. 1Dynamic changes of muscular MRI. Cervical MRI revealed a few abnormal
signals infiltrating into cervical paravertebral muscles in T2 weighted image (a, circle), while the abnormal signals almost disappeared
after riboflavin treatment (b). Lumbosacral MRI showed a lot of abnormal signals diffusing around musculi multifidus, musculi longissimus,
and iliopsoas in T2 weighted images (c, ellipse), while the abnormal signals almost disappeared after riboflavin treatment (d). Lower limb
MRI showed normal pattern of musculi biceps femoris, musculi quadriceps femoris (e), and gluteus maximus (f)Fig. 2Muscular pathological
features. ORO staining showed a significant increase of lipid droplets in myofibers of paravertebral muscles (a), but a mild increase in
myofibers of quadriceps femoris (b) Dynamic changes of muscular MRI. Cervical MRI revealed a few abnormal signals infiltrating into cervical
paravertebral muscles in T2 weighted image (a, circle), while the abnormal signals almost disappeared after riboflavin treatment (b).
Lumbosacral MRI showed a lot of abnormal signals diffusing around musculi multifidus, musculi longissimus, and iliopsoas in T2 weighted
images (c, ellipse), while the abnormal signals almost disappeared after riboflavin treatment (d). Lower limb MRI showed normal pattern of
musculi biceps femoris, musculi quadriceps femoris (e), and gluteus maximus (f) Muscular pathological features. ORO staining showed a
significant increase of lipid droplets in myofibers of paravertebral muscles (a), but a mild increase in myofibers of quadriceps femoris (b)
Genetic screening was performed in the alpha ETF (ETFA), beta ETF (ETFB), and ETF dehydrogenase (ETFDH) genes. A common mutation C.770A>G
(p.T257C) in Chinese population was identified in exon 7 of the ETFDH gene (Fig. 3a). A novel mutation 920C>G (p.S307C) was found in exon 8
of the ETFDH gene (Fig. 3b). Substitution p.S307C is predicted to affect protein function with a score of 0.01 in Sorting Intolerant From
Tolerant (SIFT) software and a score of 1.0 in Polyphen2 software . Blast software revealed that the mutant residue had highly evolutional
conservation . The novel mutation was not found in 100 health Chinese.Fig. 3Genetic chromatogram of the ETFDH gene. A mutation C.770A > G
(p.257Tyr > Cys) in exon 7 of the ETFDH gene (a); another mutation 920C > G (p.307Ser > Cys) in exon 8 of the ETFDH gene (b) Genetic
chromatogram of the ETFDH gene. A mutation C.770A > G (p.257Tyr > Cys) in exon 7 of the ETFDH gene (a); another mutation 920C > G
(p.307Ser > Cys) in exon 8 of the ETFDH gene (b) After administration of riboflavin (60 mg/d, for 3 weeks), the symptoms of bent spine and
dropped head were completely resolved; the abnormal signals almost disappeared in musculus semispinalis cervicis (Fig. 1b),
transversospinales and erector spinae (Fig. 1d); the muscle strength of neck and limbs reached 5/5. The numbness in distal limbs and around
lips showed no any signs of improvement, when the patient was interviewed after 3 weeks. However, he reported a mild alleviation of numbness
after persistent administration of riboflavin (30 mg/d), CoQ10 (100 mg/d), and Vitamin B12 (500 ug/d) for 6 months. In this report, we
described a 46-year-old patient initially presenting with bent spine syndrome and dropped head syndrome. Acylcarnitine profile showed an
elevation of short-, medium- and long-chain acylcarnitines. Muscle biopsy indicated lipid storage myopathy. Because of the good response of
muscle symptoms to riboflavin treatment and genetic findings, the diagnosis of multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency can be established
. Bent spine and dropped head syndromes are characterized by an abnormal flexion of the trunk and neck appearing in standing or walking
position, both of which can also be called as axial myopathy . Axial myopathy is mainly caused by weakness of the paravertebral muscles
related to degradation of the muscular tissues, independently of the increasing age . Weakness of the spinal extensor muscles can be
secondary to various diseases generating pathologic changes in the anti-gravity muscles involved in trunk and neck extension. Some patients
with late-onset MADD had weakness of neck extensor muscles, even presented as dropped head syndrome in some severe cases . However, the
severe weakness of paravertebral muscles had not been reported in patients with late-onset MADD. Our patient initially presented with bent
spine syndrome, and then gradually showed dropped head syndrome. However, the patient had no obvious symptoms of limb weakness during the
disease course. To our knowledge, it is the first case report of late-onset MADD presenting with bent spine syndrome as the initial symptom.
Owing to the difficulty of obtaining biopsies from paravertebral muscles, muscular radiology is becoming a helpful diagnostic tool to
various axial myopathies. Computed tomography (CT) shows the commonest abnormality of axial myopathy is significant low muscle density and
fatty infiltration that extends along the entire length of the paravertebral muscles . MRI features of axial myopathy also have similar
muscular pattern with CT changes, but the muscular MRI has a clearer contour profile than muscular CT . The limb muscle MRI doesn’t show any
obvious abnormalities in most patients with late-onset MADD. Occasionally, some slightly high signals in T1 and T2 weighted images were
observed around musculi biceps femoris in some severe patients . There is no description about the MRI pattern of paravertebral muscles in
late-onset MADD. Our patient showed scattered fatty infiltration along the entire length of the paravertebral muscles, while no significant
fatty signals can be observed in limb muscles. The phenomenon is consistent with the degree of myofibers with lipid droplet deposition in
our patient. After administration of riboflavin, the patient had not only a complete recovery of axial muscle weakness, but also an obvious
recovery of the muscular pattern in MRI. Dynamic changes of muscular MRI are a useful indicator for the diagnosis of late-onset MADD. Nerve
conduction study indicated the patient suffering from a predominantly sensory neuropathy and mildly motor neuropathy. Muscle pathology of
the patient demonstrated no typical neurogenic change, which was consistent with the electrophysiological findings including prominent
abnormalities of sensory nerves and slightly axonal damage of motor nerves. It demonstrated that sensory neuropathy can be one of the main
manifestations in this patient with late-onset MADD . Recent studies showed that zebrafish model of MADD displayed increased neural cell
proliferation, abnormal glial patterning, reduced motor axon branching, as well as disorganized sensory axonal tract with hypomyelination,
and decreased response to touch stimulation [22, 23]. Although the neural phenotype in MADD zebrafish model is associated with aberrant
activation of the PPARG-ERK pathway and mTORC1 signaling resulting from mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress, the detailed
pathomechanism how mutant ETF-QO plays some roles in neurogenesis or maintenance is still unclear . Treatment with riboflavin and coenzyme
Q10 was quickly effective to resolve the muscle weakness, as reported by others , but did not resolve the sensory neuropathy in the same
way. According to the fellow-up result, long-term administration of riboflavin, coenzyme Q10 and vitamin B12 may be helpful to reverse the
damage of sensory nerves. Defects of ETF:QO can cause dysfunction of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases, which leads to defects in electron
transfer generated by dehydrogenation reactions and accumulation of multiple acyl-CoAs and metabolic substrates in tissues . The mutation
p.257Tyr>Cys locates in flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) domain, and p.307Ser>Cys locates in ubiquinone (UQ) binding region. The two
mutations clustered in FAD/UQ binding domain were similar to those in patients with classic late-onset MADD, but the clinical phenotype of
our patient presented with great differences with classic late-onset MADD. The mutations added two cysteine residues in the junctional
region between FAD domain and UQ binding domain . The additional Cys residues might crosslink with the inherent Cys residue at 248 and 266
positions, which can destroy the 3D structure of ETF:QO. However, the muscular symptoms were effectively responsive to riboflavin treatment,
but the peripheral sensory neuropathy was difficult to be reversible, which indicated the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of neuropathy
might be different from those of muscle weakness. The genotype–phenotype correlation in this patient is needed to elucidate further. In
summary, paravertebral muscles weakness can be predominant in some patients with late-onset MADD, even can present with bent spine syndrome
as the initial symptom. Our case raises the awareness that bent spine syndrome and dropped head syndrome as early symptoms is advised to
consider the possibility of late-onset MADD. Except for abnormalities of cardiac or gastrointestinal digestive systems, severe sensory
neuropathy can be one of the extramuscular manifestations in some patients with late-onset MADD. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
editor of this journal. Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency Bent spine syndrome Electron transfer flavoprotein ETF-ubiquinone
oxidoreductase Creatine kinase Sensory nerve action potential Compound muscle action potential Computed tomography Susceptibility weighted
imaging Oil red O ETF dehydrogenase Flavin adenine dinucleotide Ubiquinone Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests Authors’ contributions PY: neurological evaluation of the patient and manuscript composition; ZM and ZJ: Muscular
radiology and suggestions regarding manuscript composition; ZY, LX, and CX: conduction of biospies and genetic analysis; HD, neurological
evaluation of the patient, manuscript composition, corresponding author. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the
patient and his family for cooperation. This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81260194 and 81460199),
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi province (No. 20151BAB205025), and the bureau of public health of Jiangxi province (No.20151055 and
20155167).
