Dear Editor Coryneform bacteria are gram-positive, catalase-positive, usually non-motile, glucose fermentative or non-fermentative, aerobic
or facultatively anaerobic rods . Several pathogenic Corynebacterium spp. have been identified, and nosocomial Corynebacterium infection has
garnered substantial attention . For example, 281 cases of Corynebacterium infections associated with prosthetic devices, including central
venous catheters (CVCs), have been reported . Here, we present the first case in Korea of CVC-related bloodstream infection by C. striatum
identified by 16S rRNA and rpoB gene sequencing. A 51-yr-old man was admitted to our hospital with altered mental status. He had a history
of cerebral infarction resulting from hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Initial complete blood count revealed: WBC count, 10.3×109/L;
hemoglobin level, 11.6 g/dL; and platelet count, 692×109/L. C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 4.15 mg/dL. He became confused and developed
recurrent seizures. Under the diagnosis of status epilepticus, he was treated with infusions of carbamazepine, levetiracetam, and
quetiapine. A CVC was inserted into his jugular vein to ensure venous access. Since rashes were observed around the CVC and the patient
developed a fever (37.5℃) at day 17, the CVC was changed. Cultures from blood and CVC tip (collected simultaneously) yielded no isolates.
The patient's white blood cell count decreased to 0.8×109/L, and absolute neutrophil count was <0.1×109/L. Owing to potential drug-induced
neutropenia, he was placed in reverse isolation and all drugs were stopped. Three days later, his temperature and CRP level increased to
39.0℃ and 14.74 mg/dL, respectively. Three sets of blood cultures, including one from the CVC, yielded gram-positive bacilli identified as
Corynebacterium spp. on days 36 and 38 (Fig. 1). Cultures repeated two days later yielded coryneforms, identified as C. striatum by API
Coryne (bioMérieux, Durham, NC, USA). The isolates were positive for nitrate/nitrite reduction, pyrazinamidase, catalase, and glucose and
sucrose fermentation at 42℃, and were negative for the Christie, Atkins, and Munch-Peterson test and urease, maltose and galactose
fermentation. They were non-motile and exhibited growth at 20℃. Similar results were obtained at day 40 as well. Although empirical
treatment for neutropenic fever, ceftriaxone and meropenem, was administered, patient showed no change in temperature and CRP levels. The
CVC via left subclavian approach was exchanged for one via right subclavian approach at day 42. Blood and catheter tip cultures (sampled at
the time of exchange) yielded Corynebacterium spp. (>15 colony forming unit ). Susceptibility of the isolates to ciprofloxacin, clindamycin,
erythromycin, linezolid, cefoxitin, penicillin, rifampin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, teicoplanin, and vancomycin was tested by the disk
diffusion method on 5% sheep blood agar plates. Results were interpreted by using the criteria for staphylococci. As C. striatum lacks
approved breakpoints for ciprofloxacin, penicillin, and vancomycin, these results were interpreted using the British Society for
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (BSAC) guidelines . The strains were susceptible to linezolid, rifampin, teicoplanin, and vancomycin and
resistant to ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, erythromycin, cefoxitin, penicillin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. For more robust phenotypic
data and species identification, the 16S rRNA gene of the first isolates was sequenced by capillary sequencing (Macrogen Inc., Seoul, Korea)
using the primers 518F (5'-CCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACG-3') and 800R (5'-TACCAGGGTATCTAATCC-3'). The sequence showed 99.86% similarity to that of C.
striatum (strain: BRRJ 1954, GenBank: JF342700.1). Since a prior study reported that 16S rRNA sequences are not polymorphic enough for
phylogenetic studies among all Corynebacterium species, rpoB was further sequenced by using the primers C2700F (5'-CGWATGAACATYGGBCAGGT-3')
and C3130R (5'-TCCATYTCRCCRAARCGCTG-3') ; it showed 99.49% similarity with C. striatum sequence, thereby confirming the identification. The
antibiotic regimen was changed to vancomycin, which decreased the fever. Bacterial growth was not observed in subsequent cultures. The
patient had fever and elevated CRP levels with no apparent source of bloodstream infection except for the catheter. The same species was
isolated from peripheral venous blood and CVC tip. Blood cultures subsequent to the CVC removal did not show bacterial growth. Additionally,
all isolates were susceptible to vancomycin, which effectively managed the symptoms. Our finding is consistent with the previous report on
coryneform bacteria being susceptible to vancomycin . Vancomycin should therefore be considered the first line of treatment for CVC-related
bloodstream infections. C. striatum can cause bloodstream infections in immunocompromised patients, especially in those implanted with
medical devices such as intravenous catheters. Catheters are a major route by which natural skin flora, such as Corynebacterium, enter the
bloodstream. Appropriate guidelines are needed for management of corynebacterial catheter-related bloodstream infection. This is the first
report of catheter-related bloodstream infection with C. striatum in Korea identified by repeated blood culture and confirmed by 16S rRNA
and rpoB gene sequencing. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea Government
(MEST) No. 2014M3A9B8022854. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this
article were reported.
