CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared. Testicular calculus is an extremely rare case with unknown etiology and pathogenesis. To our knowledge,
here we report the third case of testicular calculus. A 31-year-old man was admitted to our clinic with painful solid mass in left testis.
After diagnostic work-up for a possible testicular tumour, he underwent inguinal orchiectomy and histopathologic examination showed a
testicular calculus. Solid testicular lesions in young adults generally correspond to testicular cancer. Differential diagnosis should be
done carefully. In young adults with painful and solid testicular mass with hyperechogenic appearance on scrotal ultrasonography, testicular
calculus must be kept in mind in differential diagnosis. Further reports on this topic may let us do more clear recommendations about the
etiology and treatment of this rare disease. A 31-year-old man was admitted to our clinic with left testicular pain for a month. He did not
report testicular trauma and/or tuberculosis in his past medical history and no accompanying urinary tract symptoms were present in his
query. Scrotal examination showed a 2 cm painful and solid mass in left testis, whereas right testis was normal. Vital signs were in normal
ranges and no other pathology was seen in systemic physical examination. Urinalysis and urine culture results were normal. Tumour markers
were within normal limits (β-HCG: 1 mIU/mL, AFP:1.14 ng/ mL, LDH:314 U/L). Scrotal doppler ultrasonograpy was performed and an eggshell
shaped hyperechogenic 16x12 mm solid mass was determined in the middle of left testis. He underwent left radical inguinal orchiectomy with a
suspicion of testicular cancer. He was discharged the day after the operation. In gross examination, the testis was unremarkable. On the cut
section there was a well demarcated mass in white and yellow colour (Figure-1). Microscopically, this mass was composed of ossified tissue
and there was minimal mononuclear inflammatory cells focally next to the ossification (Figure-2). Intratubular germ cell neoplasia or
dysgenetic changes were not seen near or far away from the mass. These histopathological features revealed the diagnosis of testicular
calculus. To rule out tuberculosis, three early morning urine samples and polymerase chain reaction assays for mycobacterium tuberculosis
were done for possible etiologic clarification, however results were negative. The patient is on follow-up for 42 months and did not face
any other pathologic finding during this period. Testicular calculus is an extremely rare case with unknown etiology and pathogenesis.
Testicular calcification/ossification may evolve due to tuberculosis, haematoma resorption or after trauma; however none of these conditions
were present in our patient. To our knowledge there were only two case reports for testicular calculus in the existing literature presenting
with similar symptoms and age interval for testicular cancer (1, 2). Our case also mimics a testicular cancer considering the presenting
symptoms and age, so work-up consisted of a testicular mass approach. Definition of the calculus is “a concretion formed in any part of the
body, most commonly in the passages of the biliary and urinary tracts; usually composed of salts of inorganic or organic acids, or of other
material such as cholesterol.” Localized bone formation in extraskeletal sites is a known disease and many of these are called as osteoma
cutis but they are not true neoplasias. They are accepted to be products of metaplasia. There is only one case report of testicular osteoma
(3), but we believe this case is not a true osteoma. The two cases described in English literature are similar cases to any etiological
factors as in our case (1, 2). We believe all these three cases to have developed under metaplastic processes, and either calculus or stone
terminology is appropriate according to the nature of the lesion. Testicular calcification/ossification may evolve due to tuberculosis,
haematoma resorption, or after trauma. Tuberculosis tests were negative in our patient. No hemosiderin pigment was seen and no trauma
history was present excluding the other possible etiologies. Ellis and Hutton (1) reported that their patient was diagnosed on routine
medical examination with no testicular pain or discomfort in his past medical history, whereas Dayanc et al. (2) described a 35-year-old man
presenting with testicular painful mass. They also mentioned that this lesion was highly echogenic on scrotal ultrasonography. These two
features are in close proximity with our patient. Scrotal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a useful tool for differentiating between
benign and malignant intratesticular masses, but high costs limit its use in daily clinical practice (4). Organ sparing surgery with frozen-
section examination could be an option for this patient (5–7). However; central location of the mass, suspicion of a testicular tumour and
healthy contralateral testis kept us from this option. We can conclude that in young adults with painful and solid testicular mass with
hyperechogenic appearance on scrotal ultrasonography, testicular calculus may be kept in mind in differential diagnosis. Further imaging
with MRI and testicular sparing surgery with the availability of frozen-section examination may be opted in proper cases. Further reports on
this topic may let us do more clear recommendations about the etiology and treatment of this rare disease.
