Nutcracker syndrome is an entity resulting from left renal vein compression by the aorta and the superior mesenteric artery, which leads to
symptoms of hematuria or left flank pain. The alternative option of endovascular or extravascular stenting is very appealing because of the
minimal invasive procedures. Stents in the renal vein can cause fibromuscular hyperplasia, proximal migration or embolization. A 30-year-old
female was diagnosed with nutcracker syndrome for severe left flank pain. After failed conservative approach, she underwent endovascular
stenting and subsequently developed recurrent symptom for stent migration one month postoperatively. She underwent successful extravascular
stenting with complete symptom resolution. The extravascular stenting is an alternative option after migration of left renal vein
endovascular stenting. The computed tomographic imaging was closely correlated to therapeutic interventions and stent migration. Left renal
vein (LRV) compression by the aorta and the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) leading to symptoms of hematuria or left flank pain has been
classically described as nutcracker syndrome (NCS) [1, 2]. Minimal invasive management includes both endovascular stenting and extravascular
stenting [1, 2]. We reported a teaching case with NCS who underwent endovascular stenting and subsequently developed recurrent symptom for
stent migration one month postoperatively. She underwent successful extravascular stenting with complete symptom resolution. A 30-year-old
female was presented with severe left flank pain for one year. Laboratory data was within normal limits. Her physical examination was
unremarkable, with a body mass index of 19 Kg/m2. On April 8th, 2011, the computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance
angiography showed narrowing of the LRV in the aortomesenteric portion. On May 25th, 2011, a duplex ultrasound demonstrated the compressed
LRV between the aorta and the SMA, varices of left gonadal vein arising from the LRV, and a peak velocity (PV) of 17 cm/s in the renal hilum
and 106 cm/s in the aortomesenteric portion of the LRV (the PV ratio of 6.2) (Fig. 1a, b). On June 2th, 2011, left renal venography revealed
obstruction of LRV outflow, perihilar varices, and an 8 mm Hg pressure gradient across the suspected narrowing in the LRV (Fig. 1c).Fig.
1The images of the duplex ultrasound and the left renal venography. a, Right transverse image: Duplex ultrasound demonstrated the compressed
left renal vein between the aorta (white arrow) and the superior mesenteric artery (blue arrow), and the left renal vein was pressed like a
beak. b, Left transverse image: Duplex ultrasound demonstrated a narrowing of the left renal vein at the aortomesenteric portion and varices
of left gonadal vein (green arrow) arising from the left renal vein on the left of aorta (white arrow). c, Before extravascular stenting,
left renal venography demonstrated there was obstruction of left renal venous outflow and perihilar varices (red arrow). d, After
endovascular stenting (red arrow), left renal venography showed unobstructed blood outflow and full stent expansion without obvious
protrusion of the stent in the inferior vena cava The images of the duplex ultrasound and the left renal venography. a, Right transverse
image: Duplex ultrasound demonstrated the compressed left renal vein between the aorta (white arrow) and the superior mesenteric artery
(blue arrow), and the left renal vein was pressed like a beak. b, Left transverse image: Duplex ultrasound demonstrated a narrowing of the
left renal vein at the aortomesenteric portion and varices of left gonadal vein (green arrow) arising from the left renal vein on the left
of aorta (white arrow). c, Before extravascular stenting, left renal venography demonstrated there was obstruction of left renal venous
outflow and perihilar varices (red arrow). d, After endovascular stenting (red arrow), left renal venography showed unobstructed blood
outflow and full stent expansion without obvious protrusion of the stent in the inferior vena cava After failed conservative approach, the
left renal venography was performed under local anesthesia to confirm and manage the narrowing of the LRV. A 10 mm × 40 mm SmartControl
stent (Cordis, Johnson & Johnson, USA http://www.jnj.com) was deployed. The left renal venography showed unobstructed blood outflow, and
full stent expansion without obvious protrusion of the stent in the inferior vena cava (Fig. 1d). The patient had nearly immediate
resolution of her symptom and was discharged on postoperative day 5. After one month of endovascular stenting, the patient began to
experience recurrent left flank pain. On July 5th, 2011, the second CTA demonstrated an endovascular stent migration on the left of SMA
(Fig. 2). On July 15th, 2011, the third CTA demonstrated further migration of the endovascular stent on the left of SMA (Fig. 2). Since
there was a continuing migration of the stent on computed tomographic imaging within 10 days, the extravascular stent was proposed on July
26th, 2011. The endovascular stent was found migrated to the left of SMA and adhered to the vessel wall tightly, and the stent could not be
moved. The varicose gonadal vein was seen arising from the LRV. Excessive fibrous tissue was found at the origin of the SMA, and excised for
adequate decompression of the LRV (Fig. 3a). We estimated and cut the graft to an appropriate length to fit between the inferior vena cava
and the gonadal vein or longer. After the left gonadal vein and adrenal central vein were ligated and transected (Fig. 3a), an externally
reinforced polytetrafluoroethylene graft (REF F4008, Bard Peripheral Vascular, Inc. http://www.bardpv.com/) of 8 mm diameter was selected to
form an extravascular stent around the LRV (Fig. 3b). The graft was wrapped around the LRV and fixed together at each ring (Fig. 3c). The
graft was sewn to the adventitia of the abdominal aorta and the endovascular stent was sewn to the wall of the LRV to prevent from the
further migration. The patient had nearly immediate resolution of her symptom and was discharged on postoperative day 7.Fig. 2The images of
the computed tomographic angiography (CTA). a, The second CTA evaluation was suggestive of an endovascular stent migration (red arrow) on
the left of the superior mesenteric artery. b, The third CTA demonstrated further migration of the endovascular stent on the left of SMA. c,
The follow-up CTA demonstrated the extravascular stent (red arrow) was patent and well positioned, and the endovascular stent (blue arrow)
remained on the left of the superior mesenteric arteryFig. 3The images of the extravascular stent placement. a, The migrated endovascular
stent was inside the left renal vein (green arrow), and the left adrenal central vein (black arrow) was ligated and transected. The aorta
(blue arrow); the inferior vena cava (white arrow). b, Intraoperative photograph demonstrated the graft (black arrow) was wrapped around the
renal vein. c, The graft was fixed together at each ring and sewn to the adventitia of the abdominal aorta The images of the computed
tomographic angiography (CTA). a, The second CTA evaluation was suggestive of an endovascular stent migration (red arrow) on the left of the
superior mesenteric artery. b, The third CTA demonstrated further migration of the endovascular stent on the left of SMA. c, The follow-up
CTA demonstrated the extravascular stent (red arrow) was patent and well positioned, and the endovascular stent (blue arrow) remained on the
left of the superior mesenteric artery The images of the extravascular stent placement. a, The migrated endovascular stent was inside the
left renal vein (green arrow), and the left adrenal central vein (black arrow) was ligated and transected. The aorta (blue arrow); the
inferior vena cava (white arrow). b, Intraoperative photograph demonstrated the graft (black arrow) was wrapped around the renal vein. c,
The graft was fixed together at each ring and sewn to the adventitia of the abdominal aorta At 36 months’ follow-up, the patient was
asymptomatic. The fourth, fifth and sixth CTA demonstrated the extravascular stent was patent and well positioned, and the endovascular
stent remained to be on the left of the superior mesenteric artery at the first week, third month, and ninth month after extravascular stent
placement respectively (Fig. 2). Endovascular stenting has been used for seventeen years for the treatment of NCS due to its minimally
invasive nature. A survey of the published English literature revealed 124 cases treated in this manner including our largest stenting
experiences to date . Although, the current literature suggests that stenting is a safe and effective procedure, stent migration notes in
7.3 % of all cases . The reason of endovascular stent migration may be the effect of cardiac motion, early activity, mismatch between renal
vein diameter or stent diameter, or inaccurate positioning of the stent within the lesion. The clinical implications of migration are
significant and can lead to thrombosis, vessel trauma, embolization, and its most disastrous consequence (rupture). It requires prompt and
effective diagnosis and management to prevent potentially implications. Sequence of image for diagnosis or follow-up has more or less been
rationalized to duplex ultrasound, computerized tomography or magnetic resonance angiography, and finally left renal venography . Duplex
ultrasound is the easiest and the least expensive method. Zhelan Zheng et al. pointed out standards for ultrasonic diagnosis of the disease
as follows: (1)the low velocity of stenosis of the LRV at supine position accelerates remarkably, and the acceleration is more obvious after
standing for 15 min,which is more than 100 cm/s; (2) the inner diameter ratio between renal hilum and stenosis of the LRV at supine position
is more than 3, while it is more than 5 after standing for 15 min. When two index are coincident with the standards, NCS may be primary
diagnosed. The CTA (including non-invasive 3-D) may be a useful tool in the diagnosis of the NCS and follow-up testing. CTA provided fine
outlines that gave a precise depiction of both endovascular stent migration on the left of the SMA and a compression of the LRV between the
aorta and the SMA. Furthermore, the stent migrating distance can be measured, and many distorting collateral veins were seen arising from
the LRV in the CTA. The CTA imaging was closely correlated to therapeutic interventions and stent migration. The typical treatment is
percutaneous removal of the migrated stent. However, under certain circumstances, such as stent migration to the heart, special stent, or
endothelialization of stent, percutaneous removal may be difficult or even impossible, thus surgery may be required. Hartung et al.
described a LRV stent that migrated into the retro hepatic inferior vena cava; an attempt to retrieve it with a Goose Neck failed when the
stent took a transversal orientation after 5 cm, and further attempts also failed . A patient with a nitinol stent is difficult to manage
percutaneously because of its inherent characteristics and probable endothelialization of the stent in 1 year, which makes the procedure
more challenging . In our previous case, one stent migrated into the right atrium and the patient required surgery after unsuccessful
percutaneous removal . In such cases, surgical removal is a safer and more feasible option. However, surgical removal is associated with
high morbidity: Long period of renal congestion and additional anastomoses. Compared with surgical removal, extravascular stenting is a
minimally invasive treatment modality. Compared with vascular displacement, extravascular stenting for NCS is a minimally invasive treatment
modality. Especially for children and adolescents, intravascular stenting should be cautiously recommended because the lumen of the LRV may
become wider and the stents cannot match any longer during physical development. One may postulate that externally suturing stent could be a
way to keep it in place; therefore, Barnes firstly reported extravascular stenting and externally suturing the stent performed by open
surgery in 1988 . Currently, sporadic cases of extravascular stenting for the NCS have been reported with excellent outcome at short-term
follow up . The stent has good conformability to adapt to the vessel wall and adhere to the vessel wall tightly . In our opinion, the
extravascular approach to treat endovascular stent migration is favored to avoid the potential complications. Consideration must also be
given to the original stent placement. If removal is not possible or failed, the original stent should be fixed to prevent repeated
movements of the stent. Both the new and old stents should be sewn to the vessel wall to ensure that the extravascular and endovascular
stents did not migrate, as shown in our case. The extravascular stenting is an alternative option after migration of left renal Vein
endovascular stenting. The computed tomographic imaging was closely correlated to therapeutic interventions and stent migration. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this manuscript and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Left renal vein Superior mesenteric artery Nutcracker syndrome Computed
tomographic angiography Peak velocity Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
LT cared for the patients and drafted the report. GZ, HZ,WJand ML cared for the patient. SC revised and approved the final version of the
manuscript. All authors reviewed the report and approved the final version of the manuscript. Language editor Keer Chen edited our
manuscript.
