Non-healing wounds can pose a medical challenge as in the case of vasculopathic venostasis resulting in a surgical ulcer. When traditional
approaches to wound care fail, an amniotic patch (a dehydrated tissue allograft derived from human amnion) can function as a biologic
scaffold to facilitate and enhance tissue regeneration and rehabilitation. Amniotic AlphaPatches contain concentrated molecules of PGE2,
WNT4, and GDF-11 which have angiogenic, trophic, and anti-inflammatory effects on tissues that may be useful in enhancing wound healing. We
present a case of a severe non-healing surgical wound in a 78-year-old male 17 days post right total knee arthroplasty. The full-thickness
wound exhibited a mobile flap, measured 4 cm long × 3 cm wide, and showed undermining down to patellar tissue. We treated the wound
conservatively for 6 weeks with no evidence of wound healing. Upon failure of the conservative treatment, two amniotic AlphaPatch (Amniotic
Therapies, Dallas, TX, USA) were applied to the wound, and the wound healed completely in 10 weeks. In the OR, the wound was irrigated with
three liters of double antibiotic solution under pulse lavage. Two dry amniotic AlphaPatch (4 cm × 4 cm) were placed over the wound with
Acticoat applied on top. At the two-week follow-up visit (following the incision and drainage of the wound dehiscence and application of the
amniotic AlphaPatch), a central scab had formed centrally in the wound dehiscence area. At the four-week follow-up visit, the wound
dehiscence area had completely scabbed over with no open areas left. At the eight-week follow-up visit, the scab had just fallen off, and
the wound was healing well with immature skin representing the size of a penny. At the ten-week follow-up visit, the wound was completely
healed. Sterile, dehydrated amniotic tissue AlphaPatches (containing trophic factors known to enhance wound healing) have proven effective
in completely healing an otherwise non-healing wound in a 78-year-old male who failed six weeks of conservative wound care treatment. Wound
healing is a complex process whereby multiple cell types, growth factors, and extra-cellular proteins interact to repair a disruption in the
dermal and epidermal layers of the skin. In some cases, the mechanism behind said repair fails to restore the integrity of the injured
tissue in a timely manner, delaying the progression of inflammatory, proliferative, and remodeling phases of healing . The resulting
chronic, non-healing wound is vulnerable to infection, may cause pain, reduce quality of life, and become a burden on the healthcare system
. Non-healing wounds, frequently seen in older patients , are associated with certain conditions such as diabetes, obesity, and rheumatoid
arthritis, but may also occur following acute trauma or surgical intervention [4, 5]. It is estimated that 1–2% of patients in developed
countries will experience non-healing wounds in their lifetime , and certain types of chronic wounds are estimated to account for billions
of dollars of treatment costs in the United States . An adequate progression of wound healing [1, 7, 8] begins with the secretion of growth
factors such as Transforming Growth Factor beta (TGF-β) , as well as Fibroblast (FGF), Endothelial (EGF), Platelet Derived (PDGF) and
Vascular Endothelial (VEGF) Growth Factors . Neutrophils attracted by PDGF signals clear excess bacteria at the site with the aid of
monocytes—later transformed to macrophages. Macrophages regulate the production of TGF-β, which in turn stimulates migration and
proliferation of fibroblasts as well as epithelialization . Extracellular matrix and granulation tissue begin forming as fibroblasts secrete
fibronectin and collagen precursors concurrently with VEGF-stimulated angiogenesis which carries oxygen and nutrients to the injured site .
Finally, the collagen structure in the wound area matures and reassembles into a tighter structure with greater tensile strength. An
interruption or delay at any stage of this complex process results in a non-healing wound [2, 13, 14]. Treatments for non-healing wounds
include compression therapy, negative pressure wound devices , skin grafts [16, 17] and tissue bioengineering , as well as cell therapy
particularly using mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). These cells, known to enhance wound healing, have been broadly studied in clinical trials.
Contrary to the early paradigm of cell replacement and differentiation as a therapeutic mechanism of action, evidence is mounting that the
secretions of the MSC are responsible for their therapeutic effects . These secretions include molecules and extracellular vesicles that
yield both local and distant effects. The most important factors present in a conditioned medium of MSC can also be considered protagonists
of MSC physiological effects including HGF, TGF-b, VEGF, TSG-6, PGE2 and galectins 1, and 9 . It is important to note that fresh amniotic
membranes contain live MSCs while dehydrated amniotic membranes do not. Rather, dehydrated amniotic membranes (as in the case of the
AlphaPatch) function as a biologic scaffold to facilitate and enhance tissue regeneration and rehabilitation by way of the said molecules in
addition to PGE2, WNT4, and GDF-11 . A 78-year-old male with history of prostate cancer and COPD, with a 40-pack-year history of smoking
presented for a follow-up visit in the clinic 17 days status post right total knee arthroplasty. During this visit, dermal staples were
removed from the surgical incision. The mid portion of the patient’s incision showed some wound dehiscence, representing the same location
in which the patient reported a previous sebaceous cyst. Cleocin 300 mg qid was prescribed as antibiotic prophylaxis while Talwin 1-q4prn
was prescribed for pain control. The dehisced area was thoroughly cleaned with alcohol and triple antibiotic while the remainder of the
wound was Steri-Stripped. One week later, the patient presented to the clinic for follow-up of the wound dehiscence. Upon physical
examination, the wound appeared macerated and white with initial signs of necrosis. The wound was cleaned with alcohol and compressed with
Ace bandage. The patient continued to take Cleocin antibiotic regimen. Eleven days later (35 days post surgery), the patient returned to the
clinic to recheck the wound. The wound showed slow healing with no significant drainage. To expedite the healing process, three Monocryl
sutures were used to close the wound. One week later (or 42 days post surgery), the patient returned to the clinic reporting that the three
sutures expelled while he flexed his knee during physical therapy. The non-healing wound displayed a sympathetic effusion consistent with
vasculopathic venostasis resulting in a surgical ulcer. The wound, however, was not erythematous, hot, or tender to palpation. The patient
was scheduled the following day in the OR for drainage of joint effusion with gram stain, knee wound irrigation with pulse lavage, and
application of amniotic dry patch to wound. The right lower extremity was sterilely prepped and draped in the usual fashion, roughly
2 months status post total knee arthroplasty. The joint effusion was drained, and 65 cc of bloody synovial fluid was removed from the
patient’s right knee. STAT gram stain of the aspirate revealed negative results. The wound was then irrigated with three liters of double
antibiotic solution under pulse lavage. Two (4 cm × 4 cm) dry amniotic AlphaPatches (Amniotic Therapies, Dallas, TX, USA) were placed over
the wound with Acticoat applied on top. Then 4 × 4’s, Webril, and Ace wrap were applied to the knee. The patient tolerated the procedure
well and was transferred to the recovery room in stable condition (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Pre-lavage. Pre-lavage. At the two-week follow-up visit
(following the incision and drainage of the wound dehiscence and application of the amniotic AlphaPatch), a central scab had formed in the
middle of the wound dehiscence area (Fig. 2). At the four-week follow-up visit, the wound dehiscence area had completely scabbed over with
no open areas left (Fig. 3). At the eight-week follow-up visit, the scab had just fallen off, and the wound was healing well with immature
skin representing the size of a penny (Fig. 4). At the ten-week follow-up visit, the wound had completely healed (Fig. 5), patient
demonstrated full knee ROM (120° of flexion and 180° of extension), and patient was released from orthopaedic care.Fig. 2Two weeks post-
lavage and amniotic Alpha Patch application.Fig. 3Four weeks post-lavage and amniotic Alpha Patch application.Fig. 4Eight weeks post-lavage
and amniotic Alpha Patch application.Fig. 5Ten weeks post-lavage and amniotic Alpha Patch application. Two weeks post-lavage and amniotic
Alpha Patch application. Four weeks post-lavage and amniotic Alpha Patch application. Eight weeks post-lavage and amniotic Alpha Patch
application. Ten weeks post-lavage and amniotic Alpha Patch application. Although the 78-year-old patient demonstrated excellent results in
ROM and overall decreased pain levels following right total knee arthroplasty, the non-healing status of the surgical wound at even 42 days
status post surgery posed great concern. The vasculopathic venostasis resulting in a surgical ulcer left very little option than to perform
dehiscence wound irrigation with pulse lavage and to apply dry amniotic AlphaPatch to the wound. The amniotic AlphaPatch, a dehydrated
amniotic tissue allograft, contains the molecules PGE2, WNT4, and GDF-11. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) secrete PGE2, or Prostaglandin E2,
in response to injury. This molecule inhibits fibrosis by way of limiting fibroblast proliferation, migration, collagen secretion, and
transforming growth factor (TGF)-induced myofibroblast that can spur fibroblast proliferation . PGE2 also enhances the wound healing process
and angiogenesis . WNT4, a protein, drives wound healing by way of wound re-epithelialization and cell proliferation . The creation of new
tissue materializes by multiple methods including new blood vessel formation, a critical element for normal wound healing . GDF-11, or
growth/differentiation factor 11, has been identified as one of the key molecules propelling the regeneration of skeletal muscle, cardiac
muscle, and nervous tissue in aged mice . The two dry amniotic patches applied on the patient’s wound substantially accelerated the wound
healing process. The dehisced surgical wound that showed no sign of healing even after 42 days post total knee replacement surgery,
demonstrated a central scab formation in the middle of the wound dehiscence area only after 2 weeks of amniotic patch application. After
eight more weeks, the wound was completely healed and the patient was released from orthopaedic care to assume high levels of physical
activity and activities of daily living. Although more studies are warranted to further substantiate the therapeutic benefits of this
treatment, we suggest unreservedly that dehydrated tissue allograft patches derived from human amnion embody a viable and more effective
alternative to current traditional means of wound care management. NHR, BAG, and RWM contributed to the development of the medical
procedure, concept, literature review, discussions, and writing of the manuscript. TBC participated in discussions, literature review,
followed the subject of the case report, and provided photographs and procedural notes. All authors have read the manuscript and agree to
its submission. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank Ms. Dorita Avila for her help with
preparing this manuscript. Competing interests R. Wade McKenna and Neil H. Riordan are shareholders in Amniotic Therapies, LLC.
