To make a preoperative determination of the degree of adhesion of the lymph node (LN) to the pulmonary artery (PA) in patients with lung
cancer. We investigated clinical parameters, including sex, age, smoking, stage, histology and surgical procedure, and performed an image
analysis using CT scanning. The data for sex, age, smoking, stage, histology and the surgical procedure were identical between the
“adhesion” and “no adhesion” groups. However, three of the five analyzable cases in the adhesion group clearly showed the disappearance of
the fat plane on minimum intensity projection (minIP) computed tomography (CT). In particular, sites on more than three slices demonstrated
the disappearance of the fat plane. On the other hand, five of the eight analyzable cases in the no adhesion group showed no disappearance
of the fat plane. Therefore, one central slice adequately reflected the fat plane in the cases in the no adhesion group. These findings
suggest that it is necessary to obtain a careful diagnosis of the extent of attachment of the LN to the PA using modern diagnostic imaging
in order to preoperatively assess the degree of adhesion of the LN to adjacent structures. Lung surgery was first developed to treat
inflammatory lung tumors, such as those associated with tuberculosis. Therefore, the surgical terminology regarding inflammatory,
infiltrating and calcified LN arose from such procedures. Recently, the number of operations for lung cancer has been increasing due to the
rise in the incidence of disease as a result of the aging of the population and new developments in diagnostic imaging . However,
calcification of the LN, even in cases without extra capsular extension of lymph node swelling, usually occurs as a sequel to old
granulomatous disease and is a possible cause of adhesion . On the other hand, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) lobectomy has
come into widespread use for the treatment of early lung cancer, with the advantages of minimal invasiveness , thus allowing the surgeon to
treat cases in which the LN cannot be removed intraoperatively. Furthermore, safety and quality are required for proper medical care.
Troublingly, most LNs are located in the vicinity of the left PA , especially in cases of reverse A3, which is a hazardous location
(Fig. 1a). To complicate matters, physicians sometimes have difficulty in estimating the potential for peeling from the PA after cutting the
superior pulmonary vein. Hence, this decision to exfoliate the LN from the PA is made intraoperatively. When combining the resection of the
PA, the surgeon must save the main trunk of the PA and perform a PA plasty (Fig. 1b). As a consequence, the operation is time-consuming .
Furthermore, histopathological analyses sometimes show the absence of cancer cells in the LN . Therefore, it is critical to determine the
degree of adhesion of the LN preoperatively. However, few available reports on this issue exist. The purpose of the current study was to
describe the clinical factors and chest CT findings and evaluate the possibility of determining the degree of adhesion of the LN to the PA
preoperatively in patients with lung cancer.Fig. 1a Operative findings showing adhesion between the LN and PA, which is hazardous (Case 3 in
Table 1). b Findings of anthracosis on the PA surface after PA reconstruction following clamping of the main PA and peripheral PA for LND a
Operative findings showing adhesion between the LN and PA, which is hazardous (Case 3 in Table 1). b Findings of anthracosis on the PA
surface after PA reconstruction following clamping of the main PA and peripheral PA for LND The preoperative investigations included chest
radiographs and high-resolution CT scans of the thorax. The preoperative clinical stage was determined based on the findings of CT, positron
emission tomography (PET) and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). One hundred and seventy patients underwent surgical resection between
June 2014 and December 2014 at the Saitama Cancer Center, Japan. Among these subjects, 108 patients with primary lung cancer underwent
surgery. There were four N1 disease patients with adhesion of the LN to the PA, and eight N1 disease patients without adhesion (three
patients who underwent surgery after induction chemoradiotherapy were excluded). The patients’ records, including their clinical data,
preoperative examination results, details of the surgeries and histopathological findings, were also reviewed. Former smokers were defined
as those who had quit smoking at least three years before the time of surgery. Clinical factors, including CT findings, were compared
directly between the patients. The protocol for postoperative management and follow-up has been described in a previous report . Whole-lung
CT scans were obtained with a 128-detector row CT scanner (SOMATOM definition flash, Siemens) using the following technique: 0.6 mm
collimation, 0.5 s rotation time, 5 mm thick reconstructions, pitch ratio of table travel per rotation to total beam width) of 120 kVp in
the radiation dose generated by the CARE Dose4D software. All images were reviewed with 3 mega-pixel monochrome LCD monitors (Eizo Nanao
Corporation) with standard lung (window width, 1500 HU; window level, −500 HU) and mediastinal (window width, 300 HU; window level, 40 HU)
window settings. Composite images of sites of the LN bordering with the PA were made for made for direction of tangent 1 mm by SYNAPSE
VINCENT® (Fujifilm Medical Co., Tokyo, Japan). MinIP images, not maximum intensity projection (MIP) images, were used to improve
visualization of the fat plane at a distance of 3 mm. The resultant images were transferred to a picture archiving and communication system
(PACS) (SYNAPSE-Fujifilm) for the image analysis. One board-certified thoracic radiologist, who was blinded to the operative findings and
perioperative outcomes, retrospectively evaluated 1-mm-thick axial and sagittal images in consensus in a direction perpendicular to the PA.
All patients underwent general anesthesia using a double lumen endotracheal tube for single-lung ventilation. The operation was performed in
the lateral decubitus position using a utility incision and two 12-mm ports. Open thoracotomy was selected in preference to VATS in patients
in potentially life-threatening situations depending on the assessment of the operating surgeon. The definition of adhesion of the LN was a
degree of adhesion to the adjacent structures beyond the realm of possibility of being hidden (Fig. 1a). When the adhesion of the LN was
recognized, the clamping of the main PA and peripheral PA was performed for lymph node dissection (LND). All patients were Japanese. A
summary of the details of all of the cases is given in Tables 1 and 2. The data for sex, age, smoking, stage, histology and surgical
procedure were identical between the adhesion and no adhesion groups. However, three of the four analyzable cases judged to have adhesion of
the LN to the PA clearly showed the disappearance of the fat plane on minIP CT. In particular, sites on more than three slices demonstrated
disappearance of the fat plane (Fig. 2). On the other hand, five of the eight analyzable cases in the no adhesion group showed no
disappearance of the fat plane. Therefore, one central slice adequately reflected the fat plane in the cases without adhesion of the LN
(Fig. 3). There were no cases of postoperative mortality (30-day mortality and hospital mortality after chest surgery), and all patients
were alive at the time of the analysis.Table 1Characteristics of the cases with adhesion of the LN to the PACaseSexAgeSmokingc-Stageas-
Stagebp-StagecHistologydSurgical procedureeCT finding1M63FormerIAIAIAADLLL + LNDdisappearance of fat
plane2F71neverIAIBIAADRML + LNDdisappearance of fat plane3M69currentIBIBIBSQLUL + LND with PA reconstructiondisappearance of fat
plane4M69currentIIAIBIASQLUL + LNDndfaclinical stage, bsurgical stage, cpathological stage, dSQ squamous cell carcinoma, AD adenocarcinoma,
eLLL left lower lobectomy, LND lymph node dissection, RML right middle lobectomy, LUL left upper lobectomy, fnot investigated due to plain
CTTable 2Characteristics of the cases without adhesion of the LN to the PACaseSexAgeSmokingc-Stages-Stagep-StageHistologySurgical
procedureaCT finding1M79FormerIIIAIVIVSQRLL + LNDExistence of fat plane2M79FormerIIAIIBIIASQRUL + LNDExistence of fat
plane3M69FormerIBIIAIBADLUL + LNDExistence of fat plane4M63currentIBIIAIIASQLUL + LNDExistence of fat
plane5M76currentIIAIIAIIASQRLL + LNDExistence of fat
plane6M65currentIIBIIIAIIIAADRUL + LNDndb7M55currentIIBIIIAIIASQRUL + LNDndb8M77currentIIBIIAIIBADRLL + LNDndbaRLL right lower lobectomy,
RUL right upper lobectomy, bnot investigated due to a lack of analyzable dataFig. 2a Sagittal view (left periphery) and sections for the LN
direction tangent to the PA (case 1), b Case 2, c Coronal section views (left periphery) and sections for the LN direction tangent to the PA
(case 3)Fig. 3One central slice shows the fat plane in series. a case 1, b 2, c 3, d 4, and e 5 in Table 2 Characteristics of the cases with
adhesion of the LN to the PA aclinical stage, bsurgical stage, cpathological stage, dSQ squamous cell carcinoma, AD adenocarcinoma, eLLL
left lower lobectomy, LND lymph node dissection, RML right middle lobectomy, LUL left upper lobectomy, fnot investigated due to plain CT
Characteristics of the cases without adhesion of the LN to the PA aRLL right lower lobectomy, RUL right upper lobectomy, bnot investigated
due to a lack of analyzable data a Sagittal view (left periphery) and sections for the LN direction tangent to the PA (case 1), b Case 2, c
Coronal section views (left periphery) and sections for the LN direction tangent to the PA (case 3) One central slice shows the fat plane in
series. a case 1, b 2, c 3, d 4, and e 5 in Table 2 To the best of our knowledge, there have been no previous reports concerning the methods
for determining the degree of adhesion of the LN to the PA preoperatively in patients with primary lung cancer. This study included one
expected and one novel finding. First, the data for sex, age, smoking, stage, histology and surgical procedure were identical between the no
adhesion and adhesion groups. Initially, we predicted that a male sex, smoking habit and histology of squamous cell carcinoma may affect the
degree of adhesion of the LN. However, our findings did not support this hypothesis. Nevertheless, the number of patients in our series was
very small. Therefore, future studies must be designed to confirm our outcomes in analyses of larger numbers of cases. Second, among the
cases with adhesion of the LN, sites on more than three slices showed the disappearance of the fat plane on minIP CT. However, one central
slice adequately demonstrated the fat plane in the cases without adhesion of the LN. We constructed the data from minIP CT, not MIP, images
in order to emphasize the fat layer to the extent possible . However, the comparison showed no significant differences between the minIP CT
and MIP findings. Importantly, our series did not include calcified LNs. Furthermore, routine systematic lymph node dissection (LND) is
widely performed, as calcification of the LNs does not preclude the presence of malignancy , and such dissection may affect the
perioperative outcomes . Hence, further detailed examinations are required, and it is necessary to accurately determine the degree of
adhesion of the LN in order to improve the safety and quality of the operation. There are several limitations that must be taken into
account when considering the present findings. These limitations include the retrospective nature of the study and the fact that it was
carried out at a single institution. There were also imbalances in the patient characteristics that could be excluded due to the small
number of patients without using statistical procedures, and the presence of selection bias must be acknowledged. Moreover, the
interpretations of the radiograms may have been subjective. Nevertheless, the current results highlight an important issue, as surgery
should be performed safely, and the development of diagnostic imaging may provide useful information for improving surgical quality. This
strategy is feasible and may thus contribute to improving the results of surgical treatment. The informed consent was obtained from the
patients for the use of their data in the analyses described herein. Lymph node Pulmonary artery Minimum intensity projection Computed
tomography Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery Positron emission tomography Brain magnetic resonance imaging Maximum intensity projection
Lymph node dissection Competing interest There were no conflicts of interest or financial interests for any of the authors. Authors’
contributions This report reflects the opinion of the authors and does not represent the official position of any institution or sponsor.
The contributions of each of the authors were as follows: HU were responsible for reviewing previous research, journal hand searching, and
drafting report. SN, YK, and HK were also responsible for reviewing previous research, journal hand searching. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
