Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 59 Final Diagnosis: Thymic carcinoma Symptoms: Dyspnea Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Bronchoscopy Specialty: Oncology Unusual clinical course Endobronchial metastases derived from nonpulmonary tumors are
uncommon, although a variety of malignant tumors have been reported to be associated with endobronchial metastasis. We herein report a case
of repeated bronchoscopic resection of endobronchial metastasis of a thymic carcinoma. A 59-year-old woman was diagnosed with primary thymic
carcinoma, Masaoka stage IVA, in May 2009. In June 2013, she developed dyspnea. A chest CT scan revealed left upper lobe atelectasis, and a
polypoid lesion was noted in the left upper bronchus on bronchoscopy. A pathological examination of the lesion revealed metastatic thymic
carcinoma, and bronchoscopic resection was performed for symptom relief. However, the lesion was partially resected, based on the operative
findings, which showed the peripheral part of B3 to be the origin of the polypoid lesion and bronchoscopy could not be used to reach this
site. Although the patient underwent repeated partial bronchoscopic resection of the polypoid lesion due to the symptoms of dyspnea caused
by regrowth of the polypoid metastatic thymic cancer in the left upper bronchus, she remains alive with an excellent performance status and
no evidence of widespread or other metastases for more than 5 years after the initial diagnosis. We speculate that this case was
successfully managed with repeated partial bronchoscopic resection because thymic cancer tends to be a slow-growing tumor. Therefore, it is
worth resecting endobronchial metastatic thymic carcinoma repeatedly in such cases, even if the resection is partial. Endobronchial
metastases derived from nonpulmonary tumors are uncommon, although a variety of malignant tumors have been reported to be associated with
endobronchial metastasis, of which breast and colon lesions predominate . However, few reports are available with respect to endobronchial
metastatic thymic carcinoma . Therefore, there remains no consensus regarding the best management strategy for endobronchial metastatic
thymic carcinoma. We herein report a case of repeated bronchoscopic resection of endobronchial metastasis of a thymic carcinoma. A 59-year-
old woman was initially evaluated for a mediastinal mass detected on chest computed tomography (CT) in May 2009. Contrast-enhanced CT showed
an anterior mediastinal mass with a poorly defined margin. We planned to perform surgery, as there were no other signs of distant
metastasis. The intraoperative findings showed that the mass had invaded the bilateral lungs, sternal bone, and pericardium (Masaoka stage
IVA. The patient underwent the tumor biopsy only, and the pathological results of the biopsy specimen were consistent with a diagnosis of
primary thymic epidermoid keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma [World Health Organization (WHO) type C]. The patient underwent
chemoradiotherapy with a total delivered external beam dose of 60 Gy and the combination of cisplatin, vincristine, doxorubicin, and
etoposide, with a good objective clinicoradiographic response. In September 2011, lung metastasis of the thymic cancer was noted in the
right upper lobe on follow-up CT imaging, and the patient underwent chemotherapy consisting of a combination of Adriamycin, cisplatin,
vincristine, and cyclophosphamide. However, it was difficult to continue the chemotherapy regimen due to the onset of various life-
threatening adverse effects of the treatment. In June 2013, the patient developed dyspnea. A chest CT scan revealed left upper lobe
atelectasis, and a polypoid lesion was noted in the left upper bronchus on bronchoscopy (Figure 1). The pathological examinations of the
biopsied specimen of the polypoid tumor revealed the lesion to be metastatic thymic carcinoma. Bronchoscopic resection using snare
electrocautery was performed for symptom relief. However, based on the operative findings, the lesion was partially resected (Figure 2), as
the peripheral part of the segmental bronchus (B3) was found to be the origin of the polypoid tumor and bronchoscopy could not be used to
reach this site. The patient’s dyspnea resolved in association with the disappearance of the left lingular segmental lobe atelectasis on CT
images after resection, although the atelectasis in the superior segmental bronchus of the left upper lobe remained unchanged. In March
2014, 9 months after the operation, she developed dyspnea caused by regrowth of the polypoid metastatic thymic cancer in the left upper
bronchus. The only treatment choice was to partially resect the lesion again via bronchoscopy because surgical treatment, such as lobectomy
or segmentectomy, would have been intolerable due to her worsening pulmonary function. Furthermore, in June and September 2014, we performed
partial bronchoscopic resection for the polypoid lesion as a result of the onset of further symptoms of dyspnea caused by regrowth of the
polypoid metastatic thymic cancer in the left upper bronchus. In summary, the patient remains alive with an excellent performance status and
no evidence of widespread or other metastases for more than 5 years after the initial diagnosis, although every few months she undergoes
bronchoscopic resection of the polypoid metastatic thymic cancer in the left upper bronchus. Endobronchial metastatic carcinoma can cause
massive hemoptysis and/or airway obstruction as the lesions increase in size. Therefore, it may be necessary to treat the tumor topically
via bronchoscopic resections in addition to the administration of systemic therapies such as chemotherapy. The treatment for endobronchial
metastasis may be determined based on the anatomic location of the lesions, evidence of other metastatic sites, and patient performance
status . In the current case, the endobronchial metastasis was removed via endoscopic resection, although we had no choice but to resect the
lesion partially, as bronchoscopy could not be used to reach the origin. Therefore, it was necessary to repeat the resection procedure each
time the patient developed symptoms of dyspnea. In general, the efficacy of partial resection does not last long if treatments, such as
radiotherapy or chemotherapy, are not performed after the surgery due to the potential for regrowth of the residual endobronchial metastatic
carcinoma. However, in the present case, the use of repeated partial resection provided life-saving improvements in the patient’s
performance status. Based on previous reports , endobronchial metastasis can be managed successfully with complete bronchoscopic complete
resection. However, to the best of our knowledge, the current report is the first to show that endobronchial metastatic thymic carcinoma may
be treated successfully with repeated partial bronchoscopic resection of the tumor. In general, the 5-year survival rates of patients with
thymic carcinoma are higher than those of patients with many other cancers. Thymic carcinoma is commonly staged according to the clinical
staging system by Masaoka et al. and the World Health Organization (WHO) histologic classification. According to Kondo et al., the 5-year
survival rate of stage I plus II, III, and IV thymic carcinoma is 88.2%, 51.7%, and 37.6%, respectively . We speculate that our patient was
successfully managed with repeated partial bronchoscopic resection of the tumor because thymic cancer tends to be a slow-growing tumor . It
is worth resecting endobronchial metastatic thymic carcinoma repeatedly, even if the resection is incomplete. Naohiro Taira and the other
co-authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Bronchoscopic image obtained at the level of the left upper lobe showed a pink polypoid
endobronchial lesion that arose from the B3 segment of the left upper lobe and completely obstructed the left upper bronchus. The polypoid
endobronchial lesion was partially removed via bronchoscopic resection using snare electrocautery.
