We present a 46-year-old white male with a retroperitoneal hygroma protruding from the right flank. This 46-year-old white male presented at
the emergency room with a history of right flank pain and a protruding mass at the right posterior flank. The flank mass became apparent two
months after trauma to the back by a beam and progressively enlarged. Immediately following the traumatic episode the patient noted gross
hematuria, which subsided without treatment within 10 days. At the time of admission the patient presented with a 10×8 cm postero-lateral
right flank mass, which appeared soft and compressible. The mass was only minimally tender to palpation. Laboratory values included: Hb
13.8, HCT 36, RBC 4.5 Mil, WBC 9400, BUN 28, Creatinin 2,1; urine cloudy with 5-10 WBC/hpf, 10 RBC/hpf, abundant bacteria and debris, spec
gravity 1024 and temp 37.1°C. Lungs were negative to auscultation, cardiac exam was negative with vitals BP 138/82, PR 78. Urine cultures
were positive for E. coli, and appropriate antibiotic therapy was instituted. A coronal reconstruction of a computed tomogram (CT) post
intravenous and oral contrast administration revealed cephalad displacement of the right kidney. The kidney showed normal enhancement but
also moderate hydronephrosis. The uretero-pelvic junction was elevated and the right ureter was displaced medially and splayed around non-
enhancing cystic retroperitoneal masses (Figure-1). Three cystic masses of variable wall-thickness (2-8 mm) were identified, measuring 7×6
cm, 7×5 cm, and 12×8 cm in the sagittal plane (Figure-2). They appeared to arise from the retroperitoneal space, but not from kidney or
ureter. The wall thickness of these cysts was 2-8 mm, suggesting an inflammatory component (1, 2). The delayed CTs showed no evidence of
enhancement of any of the cystic masses. The CT showed herniation of the most lower cyst through the abdominal transversalis fascia as well
as posterior strap muscles. The diagnosis of retroperitoneal hygroma was made. Lack of enhancement on the delayed CTs eliminated the
diagnosis of urinomas (1, 2). A retroperitoneal hygroma is a rare benign neoplasm that occurs as a result of an abnormal connection between
the lymphatic and venous systems. This lesion is classically found in the neck and axillary regions. Although usually asymptomatic they may
present as low back pain in adults. Complete resection is the treatment of choice if symptomatic or causing compression of adjacent organs.
In the reported case, the hygroma was resected via a posterior approach and the posterior abdominal transversalis fascia was closed.
Following completion of the antibiotic therapy for the urinary tract infection the patent made a full recovery.
