Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: JMG JV BM CM AM.
Performed the experiments: MD KP AM. Analyzed the data: MD KP AG. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: RWM TVM EMC. Wrote the
paper: MD KP RWM TVM JV BM CM. While next generation sequencing (NGS) is a useful tool for the identification of genetic variants to aid
diagnosis and support therapy decision, high sequencing costs have limited its application within routine clinical care, especially in
economically depressed areas. To investigate the utility of a multi-disease NGS based genetic test, we designed a custom sequencing assay
targeting over thirty disease-associated areas including cardiac disorders, intellectual disabilities, hearing loss, collagenopathies,
muscular dystrophy, Ashkenazi Jewish genetic disorders, and complex Mendelian disorders. We focused on these specific areas based on the
interest of our collaborative clinical team, suggesting these diseases being the ones in need for the development of a sequencing-screening
assay. We targeted all coding, untranslated regions (UTR) and flanking intronic regions of 650 known disease-associated genes using the
Roche-NimbleGen EZ SeqCapV3 capture system and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 Rapid Run platform. Eight controls with known variants
and one HapMap sample were first sequenced to assess the performance of the panel. Subsequently, as a proof of principle and to explore the
possible utility of our test, we analyzed test disease subjects (n = 16). Eight had known Mendelian disorders and eight had complex
pediatric diseases. In addition to assess whether copy number variation may be of utility as a companion assay relative to these specific
disease areas, we used the Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0 to analyze the same samples. We identified potentially disease-associated
variants: 22 missense, 4 nonsense, 1 frameshift, and 1 splice variants (16 previously identified, 12 novel among dbSNP and 15 novel among
NHLBI Exome Variant Server). We found multi-disease targeted high-throughput sequencing to be a cost efficient approach in detecting
disease-associated variants to aid diagnosis. All data files are available through the Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) under the project ID: Einstein 650 gene panel. Genetically heterogeneous disorders are challenging to
diagnose due to the presence of multiple genes underlying their pathogenic mechanism . High throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) has
the potential to improve clinical care by identifying genetic risk or actionable variants in a time-sensitive and cost-effective manner. In
recent years, technological advances have made it possible to sequence entire exomes (whole exome sequencing, WES) or genomes (whole genome
sequencing, WGS) with the final goal of better understanding the genetic underpinnings of a patient's disease. However, for diseases for
which candidate genes are known, the use of a targeted approach has become a preferred method of choice in terms of clinical utility. This
is because targeted sequencing reduces incidental findings, delivers higher sequence depth, allows more streamlined data analysis, and is
lower in cost than WES and WGS due to pre-capture pooling and high multiplexing capabilities. However, the cost associated with genetic
testing in clinical settings, even for targeted sequencing, is substantial when outsourced to commercial companies and becomes prohibitive
for a low-income population, such as that of Bronx County, considering that the South Bronx where our hospital is located is the 2nd highest
poverty ranked district throughout the US . In addition patients with heterogeneous disorders, such as hypertrophic or dilated
cardiomyopathies, that could be caused by alterations in more than 50 genes may require, if carried on using commercial clinical tests, the
use of 2–3 different sequencing panels to accurately diagnose the specific myopathy with an associated cost for each panel ranging from
$1,500 to $4,000 . In addition to economic status being a limiting factor for these types of genetic tests aimed to improve health care,
there are limited variant data available reflecting the mixed population of Caribbean and Dominican Hispanic populations that make up the
majority of the population in the Bronx. In this type of setting, this poses a challenge both in diagnosis and treatment . To begin
addressing these issues and to establish the potential clinical impact of a large target-sequencing panel, we developed a low-cost high-
throughput multi-disease NGS assay for the analysis of patients seeking care in the Bronx. The assay targets 650 candidate genes associated
with different disorders including rare pediatric Mendelian disorders, sensorineural hearing loss, abnormalities of cardiac rhythm, and
cardiomyopathies. These disorders were chosen based on volume and clinical interest from our affiliated hospital in Bronx County (Montefiore
Medical Center). The sequencing data were combined with Affymetrix Human Genome Wide SNP 6.0 Array data to identify potential pathogenic
copy number variants (CNVs) in the same patients. We summarize the design process, bioinformatic pipeline and interpretation of results
targeting a multi ethnic population from the Bronx presenting with various heterogeneous disorders. We provide the results of our analysis,
highlight the difficulties we encountered throughout the process, and discuss our approach to overcome the main obstacles. To our knowledge,
this is the first report using targeted NGS to investigate multiple disorders in one comprehensive assay for the diagnosis of an underserved
population. While the overall utility and success rate of NGS in challenging clinical settings require further analysis including the
analysis of a larger patient cohort, we believe this study is fundamental as a starting point for implementing targeted NGS in our
environment and other hospitals facing similar challenges. This study was approved by the Albert Einstein College of Medicine Committee on
Clinical Investigations (CCI#99–201), a written informed consent for publication of this case report and any accompanying images was
attained from each patient or guardian during patient enrollment. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of
this journal. A total of 25 samples were included in this study. The DNA from eight patients with confirmed molecular aberrations (proof-of-
principle cohort) were used to assess the performance of the custom panel and Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0. Six samples had variants
within genes included in our panel (BCOR, CFTR, TRPC6, G6PC, HEXA, GBA, CIB2) and two had CNVs (8p23.2 x 3; 18q22.3 x 3) that were
previously detected through the use of a clinical microarray. In addition to patient samples, DNA from one HapMap lymphoblastiod cell line
(NA12878) was obtained from Coriell Cell Repositories (Camden, NJ) and used to further test the sensitivity and specificity of our custom
gene panel. Sample details and previously known variants can be viewed in Table 1. *Proof-of-principle samples 6 and 7 were included in the
sequencing test cohort. Whole blood was collected from sixteen patients that were used as the disease cohort: eight were patients seen at
the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Medical Center, NY (four unrelated and two pairs of siblings) and were diagnosed with congenital
malformations and/or unusual clinical findings; eight patients had a clinical diagnosis of known Mendelian disorders (cardiomyopathies and
arrhythmias). Demographic and clinical information for all patients are listed in Table 2. Legend: Ethnicitiy: AA = African American, Cau =
Caucasian, His = Hispanic, Isr = Israeli, Ben = Bengali, Mex = Mexican, N/A = Not Available; Clinical Information: DD = Developmental Delay,
DF = Dyspmorphic Features, MCA = Multiple Congenital Anomalies, FSGS = Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, ID = Intellectual Disability, VSD
= Ventricular Septal Defect, SD = Speech Delay, PDD = Pervasive Developmental Delay, DCM = Dilated Cardiomyopathy, LQTS = Long QT Syndrome,
CPVT = Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia, SPOH = Severe Postural Orthostatic Hypertension, HCM = Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy. Two samples (TG478.001 and SS1) had been previously analyzed using whole exome sequencing (WES) and were included as an
additional quality control (S1 Table). DNA from all samples was isolated in the Molecular Cytogenetics Core at the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, NY according to standard protocols using the Puregene Genomic DNA Purification kit (Gentra, Minneapolis, MN). The quantity of
the DNA was assessed by spectrofluorometer quantification using Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay Kit, according to standard protocols (Quant-
iT PicoGreen dsDNA Reagent and Kits, Molecular Probes, 2008. Invitrogen). Additionally, all samples were run on a 1% Agarose-TBE Blend gel
to visualize any impurities. We designed a hybridization-based, multi-disease gene panel using Roche-NimbleGen's SeqCap EZ Choice Library
capture system, which uses Sequence Search and Alignment by Hashing Algorithm (SSAHA) to select unique probes (Roche/NimbleGen, Madison,
WI). In this custom design we targeted all exons, including 50 bp of the flanking intronic sequence and 1 kb areas upstream and downstream
of each gene. Disease areas of interest were largely based from the outcome of an extensive investigative process involving all clinicians
at our associated teaching hospital that were interested in genomic sequencing and who felt that their patients would benefit from NGS but
were unable to afford it. Gene selection was based our discussions with collaborators Montefiore's clinicians, and the genes potentially
related to their patients cohort selected based on current scientific knowledge. We also included genes that harbored previously reported
variants for the samples chosen as a proof of principle validation. The custom panel captured 4.98 Mb of genomic sequence comprising 11,496
exons spanning 650 genes (complete gene list and associated syndromes are provided in S2 and S3 Tables). The percent breakdown of genes
related to each disease and abnormality is summarized in Fig 1. The pie chart illustrates the percent of genes included in the custom design
categorized based on specific diseases/abnormalities. Of note the Ashkenazi Jews variant disorders have been kept separate because they
represent an ethnic division commonly associated with specific disease and genetic variants. Libraries were prepared using 5 μg of genomic
DNA according to the Illumina TrueSeq sample preparation protocol as described at http://support.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-
support/documents/myillumina/f5f619d3-2c4c-489b-80a3-e0414baa4e89/truseq_dna_sampleprep_guide_15026486_c.pdf (Illumina, San Diego, CA).
After appropriate quality controls, libraries were pooled and captured using the SeqCap EZ Choice Library (Roche/NimbleGen, Madison, WI)
following the manufacturer’s protocol, as detailed at the following
http://www.nimblegen.com/products/lit/06560881001_SeqCapEZLibraryLR_Guide_v2p0.pdf. Captured libraries were multiplexed two-seven samples
per lane and sequenced to generate 2x150 bp paired-end reads using the HiSeq2500 rapid run mode (Illumina, San Diego, CA). To establish
sensitivity and specificity of our assay Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) libraries from samples SS1 and TG478.001 were prepared using 5 μg of
genomic DNA according to the Illumina TrueSeq sample preparation protocol (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Each library was individually captured
using SeqCap EZ Exome plus UTR Library (Roche/NimbleGen, Madison, WI) following the manufacturer's protocol. Captured libraries were
sequenced individually to generate 2x150 bp paired-end reads using the Illumina HiSeq 2500. All samples were submitted to Einstein's
Genomics Core Facility to test for copy number variations (CNV). All samples were diluted to 10 ng/μL and analyzed by on Affymetrix Genome-
Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 arrays following the manufacturer’s protocol (Affymetrix, Inc.). A comprehensive flowchart illustrating the
pipeline used from sample QC through validation is shown in Fig 2. Samples were submitted through Einstein's Wiki-Based Automated Sequence
Processor (WASP) system software where sequencing reads were aligned and mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh37, UCSC hg19) using the
Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) algorithm, with removal of PCR duplicates using Picard . Local re-alignment, base quality recalibration and
variant calling were performed using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) version 2.0 (Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA) applying the following
quality parameters: sequencing depth ≥15X, base quality score ≥17, and mapping quality of ≥20. Variants that did not meet these quality
standards were removed. We also removed sequence reads exceeding 10 bp from either exonic boundary, as we did not consider variants in this
region interpretable due to lack of functional information. Sample quality is conducted in the laboratory (blue box), subsequent library
prep and sequencing is conducted in the Epigenomics Shared Facility (pink box). The sequence reads automatically progress into the WASP
pipeline for quality control parameters, alignment to reference sequence through BWA and duplicate removal through Picard is performed
(yellow boxes). Local Realignment, base quality recalibration, variant discovery and annotation take place via GATK or VarScan2 (somatic)
(green boxes). Clinically relevant variants are prioritized through Alamut and visualized through IGV (orange boxes). Validation is then
performed by Sanger sequencing and results are visualized through Sequencher 4.0.1 (purple box). Basic functional information (gene ID,
genomic region, etc.) of the detected variants was achieved using ANNOVAR . The gene set recommended by the ACMG for incidental findings was
manually analyzed (Fig 3). We prioritized the remaining variants by excluding those with a minor allele frequency (MAF) >1% based on
population allele frequency (dbSNP, 1000 Genomes Project, Exome Aggregation Consortium-ExAC and NHLBI Exome Project) to assess only rare,
potentially pathogenic variants. In addition, all synonymous variants regardless of MAF were removed from the analysis unless additional
protein-coding variants were identified in the same gene (this filtering method was used to consider possible compound heterozygotes and
recessive modes of inheritance). In silico prediction tools based on multiple factors such as Grantham score, conservation between species
and functionality of domain harboring the variant were taken into consideration to estimate the impact of each variant at the protein level.
Remaining variants including missense, nonsense, frameshift, indel and splice site junction (+10 bp) variants were manually investigated
through Alamut v2.2 software (Interactive Biosoftware, San Diego, CA) to aid in variant interpretation and pathogenicity predictions. All
variants of interest were visually inspected using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) to assess the quality of variant calls and
sequencing uniformity. The vcf file created through the project quality control pipeline is filtered for frequency using 1000Genome, dbSNP,
ExAC, and NHLBI Exome Project. All variants with a MAF <1% are then prioritized by gene function and genomic region. Variants associated
with the patient's phenotype mapping to exons are further prioritized based on functional annotation. If protein-changing variants are
identified in a gene of interest, further analysis of non-protein changing variants, UTRs, and intronic regions are analyzed to consider the
possibility of compound heterozygous variants. Variants are visualized and reviewed though IGV and In silico prediction tools, and taken
into consideration to estimate the possible impact of each variant at the protein level. Variants are also manually investigated through
Alamut v2.2 software (Interactive Biosoftware, San Diego, CA) to aid in variant interpretation and pathogenicity predictions. Of note, we
follow the ACMG guidelines for incidental findings (grey boxes). Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 CN.CHP files that passed the
recommended values for quality contrast (QC>0.4) and mapping (MAPD<0.3; Median Absolute Pairwise Difference) were analyzed and visually
inspected through Affymetrix Chromosome Analysis Suite Software (ChAS). Copy number variants (CNVs) were called if they exceeded 200 kb,
with at least 50 probes covering the region. Results have been reported based on the International System for Human Cytogenetic
Nomenclature, ISCN 2013 (i.e. x 3 indicates a duplication at that particular locus). All variants of interest (see S4 Table) were PCR-
amplified, purified and validated by Sanger sequencing (Genomics Core, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, NY). Primers were designed
through Primer3 . Results were visualized through Sequencher v4.0.1 software (Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, MI). Quantitative PCR was performed to
validate any CNVs of interest. We designed primers amplifying 75-150bp spanning the CNV of interest. Control DNA (Human control genomic DNA,
Promega) was used as a reference in all reactions. Test samples and controls were amplified using the Fast SYBR Green Master Mix on the Spot
One Real Time PCR system (Life Technologies). Ct values of the samples were analyzed using the comparative Ct method also known as the 2–Ct
method, where Ct = Ct,control. We observed, per sample average, a mean depth of 540x, ranging from minimal 260x to maximal 1230x (Tables 3
and S5). Coverage varied per sample across the same target, which is a known issue previously reported in custom targeted-capture assays .
On average, 81% of all targeted bases were covered by at least 20 reads (minimum 73% to a maximum of 91%) and 80% aligned to the reference
sequence (70%- 87%), which was similar between proof-of-principle and test samples. Studies suggest that high GC content or repetitive
elements could be responsible for poorly covered regions . Therefore GC% for each exon was calculated through Einstein's Computation Core
from our target file and compared the mean depth of each exon for each sample. Strong correlation between GC-content and poorly covered
regions was not identified. Studies suggest that probe optimization, library automation, and minor changes to the library preparation
protocol can increase uniformity and reduce sample-to-sample variability . * indicates samples that were multiplexed together. TG471.002 was
added to another lane for logistic reasons. Performance of the panel was evaluated by Roche-NimbleGen and carried-out through comparison of
variants detected in HapMap sample NA12878 against those identified in NA12878 analyzed independently as part of the 1,000 Genomes Project
data set . Within the regions targeted by our panel, a total of 1946 true positive SNPs were detected, yielding 97.60% sensitivity. SNP
classification revealed 15 misclassified genotypes out of the 1946 detected variants, yielding 99.20% specificity. Additionally, of all the
samples used in this study, five had known variants previously identified as part of a clinical follow-up and were used as a proof of
principle (Table 1, samples 1–5). The known variants ranged from missense, nonsense, frameshift, and indels. All six variants were detected
in their correct allelic state. Through the pre-pool custom capture and multiplexing approach, we were able to detect an average of 3,726
SNVs and 693 indels per sample. A custom variant filtering strategy (minor allelic frequency <1%, functional information, in silico
pathogenicity predictions; see methods and Fig 3) was applied to identify rare, possibly pathogenic variants in each of the samples. This
strategy produced an average of 252 candidate SNVs and 342 candidate indels per sample (Table 3). We subsequently prioritized these variants
by assessing gene function in concordance with the observed phenotype. This ultimately resulted in a curated list of a total of 22 missense,
4 nonsense, 1 frameshift, and 1 splice variants (16 previously identified, 12 novel among dbSNP and 15 novel among NHLBI Exome Variant
Server) relevant to the phenotype for all sixteen samples. The cohort analyzed in this study includes patients with various pediatric
disorders. Some are considered Mendelian disorders that have genetic heterogeneous origins, while others are complex disorders with less
well known etiologies . Variance between gene-environment and gene-gene interactions can be responsible for complex inheritance and lack of
penetrance causing discordant phenotypes observed in relatives within the same family, making treatment, diagnosis and risk recurrence
particularly difficult to assess . Eight patients presented with multiple congenital anomalies, mental illness and craniofacial disorders.
All variants and patient clinical features are summarized in Table 2. These variants should be ultimately tested for altered gene functions
and for effects on the protein to validate that they are pathogenic and to establish their contribution to altered gene function. Below, we
highlight two cases from this cohort in which we identified variants with potential diagnostic value. Two fourteen-year-old male siblings
(twins) TG90.001 and TG90.002, were initially referred to the Montefiore Pediatric Genetics clinic for evaluation of multiple congenital
anomalies. At age four, both boys were diagnosed with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) by renal biopsy and were also noted to have
tics, which were felt by their neurologist to be due to a forme fruste of Tourette syndrome. Developmentally, motor and cognitive milestones
were slightly delayed, and both had dolichostenomelia with arm spans significantly greater than height. In addition, each had a high arched
palate, joint laxity, pectus excavatum, mild scoliosis, and pes planus (flat feet). All of these physical findings suggested a diagnosis of
Marfan syndrome (MS) (OMIM#154700). However, since the urologic, renal and developmental problems affecting the siblings are not typically
seen in MS, and cardiac evaluations were normal, it was unclear which testing should be performed. At the time of this evaluation, Fibrillin
1 (FBN1) testing was not clinically available. Testing through our panel revealed that both patients carried one previously-reported
missense variant in the coding region of the FBN1 gene (c.G4001A; p.G1334D; rs191989961), which produces a guanine-aspartate change and it
is predicted as probably-pathogenic by our in silico analysis. This variant was previously reported in one other subject by the Laboratory
for Molecular Medicine (Cambridge, MA) and deemed likely pathogenic based on their systematic approach for variant classification, which
considers disease association from existing data, mechanism of gene function, and the use of several bioinformatic tools to predict the
possible impact of the variant on the gene . MS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and since variants in FBN1 are also commonly
associated with MS, we believe our findings may help explaining the boys’ MS-like features. There were no variants identified in the FSGS-
associated genes present in our panel, suggesting that additional testing is needed in these patients to determine the underlying molecular
cause for their renal and urologic phenotype. Of note, if testing for these patients were to be performed clinically by Sanger sequencing or
using a disease-specific gene panel, the costs associated would have been greater given that two separate testing for each phenotype would
have been required. The cardiac cohort included patients with heritable and potentially lethal disorders of cardiac rhythm followed in the
Montefiore-Einstein Center for CardioGenetics. This group was comprised of individuals with cardiomyopathies and channelopathies, including
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM, OMIM#192600, 1 patient), dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM; OMIM#115200; 3 patients, two siblings, one
unrelated), Brugada syndrome (BS; OMIM#601144, 2 unrelated patients), long QT syndrome (LQTS; OMIM#192500, same patient with Brugada
syndrome), and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT; OMIM#604772, 1 patient). In the eight patients tested (2
related; 6 unrelated), we identified 15 rare variants mapping to 9 of the 154 cardiac specific genes included in our panel (Table 2). We
were able to provide an accurate diagnosis for one patient to be discussed below. A 29-year-old woman, RB1, was referred to the Montefiore
Center for CardioGenetics for evaluation. She had experienced episodes of palpitations and syncope related to exercise since 11 years of
age. Due to intermittent prolongation of her QT interval on electrocardiography (ECG), she was given a provisional diagnosis of either Long
QT syndrome (LQTS) or CPVT. These disorders have some overlapping features and both, if left untreated, may result in sudden death. However,
because the treatment for various forms of LQTS and CPVT differ, determining the exact genetic variants is extremely helpful in managing
patients. In addition, identifying the genetic variant can be life-saving for first degree relatives. Commercial testing is available for
this specific phenotype but requires two separate sequencing panels (one for LQTS and one for CPVT) to differentiate the diagnosis. Because
of lack of insurance and high cost, commercial testing was never performed. Based on the custom multi-disease gene panel that we designed,
this patient was identified to be a compound heterozygote for variants in the calsequestrin 2 (CASQ2) gene, identifying one novel stop
variant (c.C199T, p.Gln67*) and one novel splice site variant (c.532+1G>A). Sanger sequencing confirmed the variants and in addition
detected the presence of the p.Gln67* variant in the patient's child. The splice site variant was absent in the child, indicating that the
mother's variants were in trans. Variants in CASQ2 account for 5–7% of all cases of CPVT, suggesting the most likely mode of inheritance to
be autosomal recessive. Although the c.532+1G>A variant has not yet been demonstrated to alter mRNA splicing, we are conducting further
functional work to determine how this variant affects splicing. The DNA from two sisters, TG471.001, TG471.002, presented to the Center for
CardioGenetics with overlapping phenotypes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM), were sequenced and all cardiac related genes were analyzed.
Several variants associated with cardiac disorders were detected, but only the LDB3 gene is directly associated with DCM (LIM domain-binding
3 gene LDB3; Cardiomyopathy, Dilated, 1C; OMIM#601493) and both sisters harbored the same missense variant (c.G352A, p.V118M; rs35507268).
However, this exact LDB3 variant was also observed in the unaffected mother and upon further investigation categorized as likely benign by
dbSNP, ClinVar, and HGMD. The other variants identified in the sisters were also identified in the unaffected family members, suggesting a
lack of a clear pathogenic effect (see Fig 4 for mutational pedigree). Based upon this analysis, the true disease causing variants remain to
be identified. We recommend whole exome sequencing be performed on this family in order to identify additional variants potentially
associated with DCM. CNV analysis performed on the sisters did not identify variations suggestive of a potentially pathogenic nature.
Affected sisters are indicated in black. Associated variants are provided under each family member. In the 18 samples analyzed, a total of
152 copy number deletions and 351 copy number amplifications were detected. All copy number changes highlighted below may have potential
diagnostic value and were validated through qPCR (S1 Fig and S4 Table). Patient SS1, presenting with a dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with
conduction defects (OMIM#115200) harbored a 3.74 kb deletion that resulted in the heterozygous loss of the alpha-T-catenin gene (CTNNA3).
This gene maps to chromosome 10q21.3, a region linked to autosomal dominant familial DCM . The most common form of myocardial disease, DCM
is associated with a high incidence of ventricular arrhythmias, severe congestive heart failure and an increased risk of sudden death .
CTNNA3 is highly expressed at intercalated discs of cardiomyocytes and peritubular myoid cells of the testis, indicating a specific function
for this gene in particular muscle tissues . Several reports link variants in the CTNNA3 gene with another form of cardiomyopathy,
specifically, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVC; OMIM#107970). Li et al. examined the role of CTNNA3 in the hearts of mice
and found that CTNNA3 acts as a molecular integrator of adherens junctional and desmosomal components at the area composita resulting in
early onset of DCM . This CNV is not common and to our knowledge has never been reported based on a literature search or inquiry of CNV
databases . We propose the deletion may be causative of the patient's phenotype. Patients TG90.001 and TG90.002 (CASES 1 and 2 above), both
harbored two duplications mapping to regions 2q21.1 and 6q27, resulting in an allelic gain to eleven and four genes, respectively. Two
genes, tubulin, alpha 3d (TUBA3D) located in the 2q21 region and kinesin family member 25 (KIF25) located in the 6q27 region are involved in
microtubule formation. The copy number gain observed at 2q21 was maternally inherited, while the gain seen at 6q27 was paternally inherited.
We suspect based on segregation analysis that these duplications, in addition to the potentially pathogenic variant identified in the FBN1
gene (previously discussed) could be responsible for the skeletal and muscular abnormalities observed in the twins, however in order to
confirm this functional studies would need to be performed. When directly comparing the costs of target-capture sequencing to WES, the
former is about one fourth lower than that of WES (Table 4). The large target size of WES prohibits high multiplexing capabilities, commonly
sequenced with only three samples per lane. This experimental setting results in an average depth of ~50X, while the reduced capture size
for of our target panel (4.98Mb) permits extensive pre-capture pooling and increased multiplexing capabilities dramatically lowering the
costs. A panel of ~5Mb, and 150bp paired-end sequencing, allows the multiplexing of 16 samples per lane generating an average predicated
depth of ~150X, which is still much higher than that usually generated by WES. When directly comparing WES and target capture design using
the exact same approach (Roche Nimblegen SeqCap EZ capture, and sequencing using the Illumina HiSeq 2500) the reduced costs are largely
driven by increased multiplexing capabilities and the lower costs of the target capture pool (Table 4). Costs associated to library
preparation as well as hands on time remain the same. * The number of SNVs/InDels identified was based on samples used in the current
analysis (n = 2 for WES and matching target sequencing). ** Based on estimated $1,400/lane 150 bp pair end sequencing on Illumina 2500. In
addition despite the increasing efficacy of pipelines and automated analytical plug-ins being continuously developed, lists of filtered rare
variants generated by the adopted pipelines still require manual inspection by trained personnel. When comparing the number of variants
identified (vcf files comparison) by the target capture panel (Einstein_v1) vs. WES on the same samples, the target capture approach
generates ~40% less (when running the same analytical pipeline). The number of variants that require manual inspection considerably affect
the time and the costs required analysis. We estimated, based on our experience, that 8 minutes are required to perform a general analysis
of one variant. These include visual inspection using IGV, database, and literature screening to determine whether the variant has been
previously reported). This study highlights the challenges and benefits of developing a multi-disease sequencing assay that could be
implemented as a diagnostic tool to assist clinical care in an underserved minority population such as the one that exists in the Bronx.
Patients seeking care in depressed areas are often unable to get access to genetic testing offered by commercial laboratories due to high
costs of the testing. We selected a cohort of patients to test a target-capture approach, followed by high-throughput sequencing, of exons,
exon-intron boundaries and 5’ untranslated regions of 650 known and candidate disease-causing genes related to the cohort of patients
selected for this study. The target disease areas included a variety of heterogeneous disorders ranging from known Mendelian-inherited
conditions to complex pediatric disorders based on discussions with clinicians from our neighboring hospital. Genome-wide Affymetrix 6.0
SNP/CNV microarrays were performed on the DNA obtained from the same patients to complement target sequencing and assess DNA copy number
variations larger than 200 kb. By using both targeted-sequencing and chromosome microarray, our study suggests that an approach based on a
large custom sequencing panel combined with CNV analysis is useful as an aid in clinical care. Our target sequencing results exhibited high
sensitivity and specificity in terms of accurately identifying previously reported variants proving suitable for testing of the case
patients. We could identify a likely disease-associated variant in four patients. These were patients 90.001 and 90.002 with a heterozygous
variant in FBN1 and copy number gains in TUBA3D and KIF25, patient RB1 with nonsense and splice-site variants in CASQ2, and patient SS1 with
a copy number deletion in CTTNA3. In addition based on the sequencing results of our assay we could perform target Sanger Sequencing
analysis on some of the patients’ family members pinpointing to a possible pathogenic variant in the offspring. Lack of obvious disease
causing variants in the other samples could be due to their absence in our gene panel, an over all limitation in this type of studies, and
therefore requiring a more comprehensive analysis . It is also known that the positive success rates, especially those targeting
channelopathies and cardiomyopathies, range from 20–75% , indicating that not all genes linked to these disorders have been discovered.
Alternatively, variant classification curated by several public variant databases and pathogenicity prediction tools may suggest being
benign . However, a position should be interrogated sufficiently and possibly followed up by functional studies in order to rule-out
potential false-negative and false-positive results and clarify its true pathogenicity . We identified several variants that were detected
in both dbSNP and NHLBI but were classified as benign and/or likely pathogenic suggesting the need for more extensive functional work and
advancement in pathogenicity prediction tools to better understand the penetrance of previously identified disease-causing variants,
especially in a less frequently sequenced minority population. These findings suggest that efforts to make available sequencing tools for an
ethnically diverse minority population are an essential step towards a better understanding of variants of unknown significance. Despite the
efforts of large sequencing consortiums the number of variants that don’t have an associated MAF and the ones being predicted with
contradictory outcomes (tolerated vs. damaging) by various predictor tools is still extremely large. This makes the identification of
disease related variants very challenging. We suggest that custom panels similar to the ones we describe can serve as cost-effective tools
that can provide valuable insight to a patient's disease and possible molecular diagnosis. In addition sharing clinical cases and their
associated predicted pathogenic variants trough the literature and the dedicated databases is essential to build knowledge in this quickly
evolving field. A custom design covering a large number of candidate genes seems to be advantageous for low volume sequencing facilities
since this will avoid delays in sample processing due to the need to reach certain multiplexing requirement necessary to contain costs.
Until a large number of sequences of patients from a mixed population, such as the Bronx, is generated and made publicly available, similar
to that of the 1000Genomes and NHLBI ESP Projects, it will be challenging to understand the penetrance of previously reported variants among
minority and mixed populations. This is likely to be achieved if cost-effective comprehensive panels are made available in clinical
settings. Furthermore, sequencing of large cohorts can assist in the discovery of newly pathogenic variants unique to these ethnicities. To
the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to analyze multiple-diseases and syndromes in a single targeted-sequencing assay. With
the approach, we report and discuss the identification of variants in five of the patients from a cohort of individuals selected from the
Bronx County in New York. A high throughput, multiplexed target sequencing approach based on a multi-disease design is more cost-efficient
than a single, or small panel, candidate gene approach. Therefore clinical centers and hospitals serving low-income neighborhoods may
consider a similar approach. A multi-disease design also has the capability to improve detection rates in complex and heterogeneous
disorders, ultimately leading to more accurate diagnoses, improved treatment options, and better genetic counseling possibilities.
Currently, a multi-disease sequencing panel is available only in research settings. We believe that our study demonstrates the clinical
potential that a multiple disease-sequencing panel could provide if implemented in the clinic as a molecular diagnostic tool for the
characterization and diagnosis of heterogeneous disorders. From top to bottom: CTNNA3 validation in sample SS1; KIF25 validation in samples
TG90’ and TUBA3D validation in samples TG90. (TIF) Click here for additional data file. (XLSX) Click here for additional data file. (XLSX)
Click here for additional data file. (XLSX) Click here for additional data file. (XLSX) Click here for additional data file. (XLSX) Click
here for additional data file. The authors would like to thank all the patients and family members for participating in this study as well
as the clinicians who referred patients to this study or provided control samples. We appreciate the technical assistance provided by
several core facilities at Albert Einstein College of Medicine: Dr. Jidong Shan and Ms. Debbie Lewis in the Molecular Cytogenetics Core for
help with DNA isolation; David Reynolds in the Genomics Shared Facility for help with Affymetrix SNP 6.0 genotyping arrays; Dr. Shahina
Maqbool and the personnel of the Epigenomics Shared Facility for library preparation and Illumina sequencing; Mr. Brent Calder and Dr. Jinlu
Cai in the Computational Core for sequence alignment and annotation. We also thank Roche-NimbleGen for their technical support. Lastly, we
are grateful of the support that Albert Einstein College of Medicine has provided to this project, in particular to Dean Spiegel for his
continuous interest and feedback.
