Primary hepatoid carcinoma of the ovary (HCO) is a very rare type of high-grade invasive malignant ovarian tumor with hepatic
differentiation and production of α-fetoprotein (AFP). We describe a 78-year-old Moroccan woman who presented to our hospital with abdominal
distension and purplish nodules infiltrating the para umbilical skin with weight loss and impairment of her performance status. Excisional
biopsy of the para umbilical nodule revealed a cutaneous localization of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and pelvic ultrasonography
noted the presence of a tumoral right adnexal mass. The patient underwent an exploratory laparoscopy which found peritoneal carcinomatosis
with pelvic adhesions allowing only a peritoneal biopsy. Diagnosis of primary hepatoid carcinoma of the ovary was established on the basis
of classic histopathologic findings, immunohistochemical staining and marked elevation in serum of α-fetoprotein more than the carbohydrate
antigen 125. The patient received 3 cycles of chemotherapy based on Carboplatin and Paclitaxel with disease progression. No second line
chemotherapy was given because of the drop of patient's performance status to 3. The patient died one month later. Primary hepatoid
carcinoma of the ovary (HCO) is a very rare type of high-grade invasive malignant ovarian tumor with hepatic differentiation and production
of α-fetoprotein (AFP) . It is different from other ovarian neoplasms that have hepatic differentiation and production of AFP and must be
distinguished especially from metastasis on the ovary of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and hepatoid yolk sac tumors (HYST) . The first case
of primary HCO was described in 1987 by Ishikura and Scully . To date, only 20 patients with diagnosis of primary HCO have been reported. We
describe here the case of a 78-year-old Moroccan woman diagnosed with a primary HCO, the clinical and pathological characteristics are also
briefly discussed. A 78-year-old Moroccan woman with past medical history of Parkinson's disease presented to our hospital with an umbilical
mass with loss of weight and impairment of the performance status (PS) in the last two months. The physical examination revealed an
abdominal distension with purplish nodules infiltrating the para umbilical skin and the PS was scored 2. Nodule biopsy has been performed
and revealed a cutaneous localization of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and pelvic ultrasonography noted the presence of a tumoral
right adnexal mass. Her serum carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) level was 100 U/mL (normal <35 U/mL) and her serum AFP concentration was 150
ng/mL (normal <7.0 ng/mL). Her serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and CA-199 were within normal ranges. An exploratory laparoscopy was
undertaken and found peritoneal carcinomatosis with pelvic adhesions allowing only peritoneal biopsies and there were no visible liver
lesions with homogeneous appearance. Histologic sections of the biopsied peritoneal carcinomatosis showed polyhedral tumor cells with
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, central round vesicular nuclei with variably prominent nucleoli in nests and trabeculae with a sinusoidal
arrangement of vascular channels resembling liver without bile (Figure 1). The tumor was relatively homogeneous with no evidence of ovarian
surface epithelial tumor morphology or germ-cell component. Paraffin tissue blocks were prepared and stained with antibodies to hepatocyte
paraffin-1, AFP, cytokeratin 7(CK7), CK20, CK 8/18, S-100 protein, synaptophysin, inhibin, calretinin and epithelial membrane antigen. The
results showed that tumor cells were positive for hepatocyte paraffin-1 which was diffusely and overwhelmingly expressed (Figure 2).
Histologic sections (HES× 100) of peritoneal biopsy showed polyhedral tumor cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, with a sinusoidal
arrangement of vascular channels resembling liver without bile Immunohistochemical staining of the peritoneal biopsy showed a diffusely and
overwhelmingly expression of the hepatocyte paraffin-1 These hepatoid cells were positive for CK7 and CK8/18 but negative for CK20. Also,
AFP, S-100 protein, synaptophysin, inhibin, calretinin and epithelial membrane antigen were all negative. A computed tomography (CT) scan of
the pelvis showed an extensive omental peritoneal implants and bilateral adnexal masses with 6.8 × 9.9 cm on right (Figure 3) and 3.9 ×
4.1cm on left. The patient got then after a positron emission tomography scan (PET/CT) with fludeoxyglucose (FDG) which revealed a
metastatic disease with an intense hypermetabolisme in the pelvic with standard uptake value SUV max: 3.3 with no uptake in the liver
(Figure 4). It revealed also an intense hypermetabolisme in the eighth dorsal vertebra with pulmonary hilar nodes (Figure 5). The Diagnosis
of primary HCO was established on the basis of classic histopathologic findings, immunohistochemical staining and marked elevation in serum
of α-fetoprotein more than the carbohydrate antigen 125. The disease was metastatic and the patient got a palliative chemotherapy with
paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin with an area under the curve of 5 every 3 weeks. Evaluation after 3 cycles revealed the drop of
patient's performance status to 3 versus 2 with an increase in the AFP level to 350 versus 150 ng/mL and radiologic stability according to
RECIST 1.1(Figure 6). The patient was not legible for receiving a second line of treatment. She died one month later. CT scan cut before
chemotherapy showing peritoneal implants, right adnexal masse of 6.8 × 9.9 cm Positron emission tomography scans with FDG showing an intense
hypermetabolisme in the pelvic (SUV max: 3.3) with no uptake in the liver Positron emission tomography scans with FDG showing an intense
hypermetabolisme in the eighth dorsal vertebra and pulmonary hilar nodes (SUV max: 3.8) CT scan of the pelvis showing after 3 cycles of
chemotherapy a stability according to RECIST 1.1 Primary HCO is a rare type of ovarian tumor which is similar to HCC histologically . It is
an aggressive tumor of uncertain origin which has been described in only post-menopausal women aged from 42 to 78 years with a mean age at
diagnosis of 63 years . The patient presents usually an abdominal distension and lower abdominal pain because HCO commonly presents at an
advanced clinical stage and progresses rapidly with impairment of the general conditions and metastases to the abdomen and occasionally to
the lungs; with median survival about 2 years . Our patient was a post-menopausal woman with advanced clinical stage and PS scored at 2.
Laboratory analysis revealed in HCO an elevation in serum CA 125 which is a marker for ovarian surface epithelial tumors. Also the serum AFP
is elevated but more than the CA125, that suspicious a primary HCO. At diagnosis, our patient had marked elevation in serum of AFP more than
the CA 125. A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed in primary HCO a unilateral ovarian mass (rarely bilateral) which may appear on
gross examination as entirely solid or with cystic areas and there may be multiple foci of hemorrhage and necrosis . Our patient presented
in CT scan bilateral ovarian masses but larger on the right. Microscopically, primary HCO resembles HCC with tumor cells that are arranged
in sheets, cords and trabeculae. These cells have abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and show frequent mitotic activity. Bile canalicular
structures have rarely been described . In our patient, histologic sections of the biopsied peritoneal carcinomatosis showed tumor cells
with classic histopathologic findings in HCC without bile canalicular structures or ovarian surface epithelial tumor morphology. The
hepatoid differentiation of primary HCO is confirmed by expression in the immuno histochemical study of hepatocyte paraffin-1 which the
degree of staining may also correlate with the degree of hepatoid differentiation. In our patient, hepatocyte paraffin-1 was diffusely and
overwhelmingly expressed that suspicious a primary HCO without expression of AFP which can be sometimes focally expressed and consequently
makes difficult to distinguish primary HCO from metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma in the ovary which is also a rare entity . However they
are biologically different, the CK profile of primary HCO resembles that of common epithelial adenocarcinoma which is CK19 and CK20 positive
in primary HCO suggesting an epithelial origin for this entity and negative in CHC . Also, the normal and neoplastic hepatocyte expresses
diffusely the CK18 and doesn't express the CK7 which is expressing in primary HCO . The CK profile of our patient was in favor of primary
HCO with expression of CK7. A 2nd differential diagnosis of primary HCO is the HYST which is another ovarian tumor with hepatoid
differentiation and AFP production but it is negative for hepatocyte paraffin-1. It occurs in younger women and we find a germ-cell tumor .
So it was unlikely that our patient had a HYST. Another differential diagnosis of HCO includes endometrial carcinoma, clear-cell carcinoma
and lipid cell tumor which are all AFP negative . To date, there is insufficient data regarding the optimal treatment of patients with
primary HCO and most patients have been treated with ovarian-like cancer chemotherapy regimens, such as Carboplatine and paclitaxel, with
short lived responses . In second line, there is no therapeutic standard and given the pathologic resemblance of this tumor with HCC, Pandey
M and Truica C reported a case treated by Sorafenib, by analogy to HCC, as second line chemotherapy with no response . Our patient got a
palliative ovarian chemotherapy as a first line of treatment with no response and no second line was permitted given her impairment of the
PS at 3. Primary HCO is a rare highly aggressive tumor. Despite pathologic resemblance between primary HCO and HCC, they are biologically
different and the primary HCO should be treated as an epithelial ovarian. However, most patients have been treated with ovarian-like cancer
chemotherapy regimens with short-lived responses. The development of new therapies targeting this entity with poor prognosis is needed. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Aicha Mazouz: wrote the case and I made the review of the literature. Lamiae
Amaadour: provided us with pertinent articles and helped with the treatment of the patients. Hassania Ameurtesse: provided us with
pathological data and took microphotography figures Laila Chbani: provided us with pathological data and took microphotography figures. Afaf
Amarti: provided us with pathological data and took microphotography figures. Fouad Kettani: provided us with pathological data and took
microphotography figures Omar Addou: provided us with pathological data and took microphotography figures. Siham Tizniti: helped with
radiolography interpretation Nawfel Mellas: coordinated the course of the study and provided us with pertinent advices Samia Arifi: give me
this case and coordinated the course of the study and provided us with pertinent advices.
