Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata is a very rare benign condition of the peritoneal cavity that may mimic peritoneal carcinomatosis or
metastatic leiomyosarcomas. It mainly develops in association with pregnancy, but is also rarely associated with endometriosis. A 31-year-
old Asian woman presented to our hospital with abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant. Her abdominopelvic computed tomography scan
showed a 1.2cm-sized nodule at the appendiceal tip, but no other abnormal findings. We suspected acute appendicitis and performed an
exploratory laparoscopy. Her appendix was enlarged at the tip portion. Also noted were blood-colored fluid collections in her pelvic cavity
and bilateral ovarian cysts. Additionally, several small whitish firm solid nodules, ranging from 0.5 to 1.0cm in size, were present on her
pelvic peritoneum. Her histological examination confirmed that the endometriosis of her appendix coexisted with leiomyomatosis peritonealis
disseminata. We report a case involving a 31-year-old woman with acute symptoms of endometriosis of the appendix associated with
leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata. Appendiceal endometriosis with leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata presenting as acute
appendicitis is extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such case reported in the literature. Acute appendicitis is
the most common surgical emergency encountered by general surgeons. Endometriosis is a common gynecologic disorder characterized by the
presence of endometrial glands and stoma outside the uterine cavity and musculature . Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata (LPD) is a
rare disease characterized by multiple subperitoneal foci or peritoneal proliferation of benign tumorous tissue mainly comprising benign
smooth muscle cells. It is most often associated with pregnancy and prolonged exposure to oral contraceptive pills. The combination of
appendiceal endometriosis and LPD presenting as acute appendicitis is extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such
case reported in the literature. A 31-year-old Asian woman presented to our hospital with abdominal pain in her right lower quadrant. She
had no fever, nausea, vomiting, anorexia or unusual vaginal discharge. Her menstruation cycle was regular, her volume of menstrual fluid was
normal and she had no dysmenorrhea. She had no history of pregnancy. Her last menstrual period was four days prior to presentation. She had
a history of a benign ovarian cyst, uterine leiomyoma and endometriosis. She had undergone a laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy six years
previously and a laparoscopic uterine myomectomy one year previously. She had been intermittently taking oral contraceptive pills since her
most recent post-operative period. She exhibited tenderness at McBurney’s point, but her abdomen was soft and flat. Her vaginal examination
and pelvic sonography revealed no abnormal findings. Her white blood cell count was 4280/mm3 with 57.0% segmented neutrophils, and her
C-reactive protein level was 0.1mg/dL. Her urine analysis and abdominal X-rays showed no significant findings. Her abdominopelvic computed
tomography scan demonstrated a 1.2cm-sized nodule at the appendiceal tip, but no other abnormal findings. We suspected acute appendicitis
and performed an exploratory laparoscopy. Her appendix was enlarged at the tip portion. Also noted were blood-colored fluid collections in
her pelvic cavity and bilateral ovarian cysts (Fig. 1a). Also observed on the pelvic peritoneum were several small whitish firm solid
nodules, ranging from 0.5 to 1.0cm in size (Fig. 1b). We performed a laparoscopic appendectomy and obtained specimens of the peritoneal
nodules for biopsy.Fig. 1Laparoscopic views showed an enlarged appendiceal tip, a bloody fluid collection in the pelvic cavity, multiple
bilateral ovarian cysts (a) and several small whitish firm solid nodules (b), ranging from 0.5 to 1.0cm in size, on her pelvic peritoneum
Laparoscopic views showed an enlarged appendiceal tip, a bloody fluid collection in the pelvic cavity, multiple bilateral ovarian cysts (a)
and several small whitish firm solid nodules (b), ranging from 0.5 to 1.0cm in size, on her pelvic peritoneum Macroscopically, her appendix
was 4.0×0.5cm in size and exhibited an enlarged tip. The appendiceal serosa was mildly inflamed. A histological examination revealed foci of
ectopic endometrial glands and stroma, embedded in fibrous stroma, with patchy aggregates of exuberant hemosiderin-laden histiocytes in the
subserosal area and the muscularis propria of the appendiceal tip portion, confirming a diagnosis of appendiceal endometriosis (Fig. 2). No
suppuration, abscess formation or neoplasms were seen in the appendectomy specimen. The peritoneal excisional biopsy specimens were
characterized by two circumscribed, but nonencapsulated, solid nodules, comprising of interlacing bundles of a fascicular proliferation of
bland-looking, spindle-shaped, mature, smooth muscle cells (Fig. 3a), which were diffusely strongly immunoreactive for desmin (Fig. 3b).
These peritoneal tumors exhibited no histological features of malignancy, with absence of any tumor cell coagulation necrosis, mitotic
activity or nuclear atypia. As a result, they were diagnosed as LPD.Fig. 2Histological examination of biopsy. A histological examination
revealed foci of ectopic endometrial glands and stroma with some hemosiderin-laden histiocytes (arrow) in the subserosa and the muscularis
propria of the appendiceal tip (Prussian blue, ×100)Fig. 3Photomicrograph of the peritoneal nodules, exhibiting interlacing bundles to
fascicular proliferation of bland-looking spindle smooth muscle cells. a Hematoxylin & eosin, ×400. b Desmin, ×200 Histological examination
of biopsy. A histological examination revealed foci of ectopic endometrial glands and stroma with some hemosiderin-laden histiocytes (arrow)
in the subserosa and the muscularis propria of the appendiceal tip (Prussian blue, ×100) Photomicrograph of the peritoneal nodules,
exhibiting interlacing bundles to fascicular proliferation of bland-looking spindle smooth muscle cells. a Hematoxylin & eosin, ×400. b
Desmin, ×200 She had an uneventful clinical course and was discharged from our hospital on post-operative day five. She was followed up on
for one year post-operatively, and no complications or abnormalities were observed. Her follow-up period is currently ongoing. Endometriosis
is a common benign gynecologic disorder of the endometrial glands and stroma located outside of the endometrium . Endometriosis usually
develops in the genital organs and pelvic peritoneum. It may also occur in the gastrointestinal system, greater omentum, mesentery, liver
and in operation scars, but rarely in other organs . Endometriosis can develop anywhere in the gastrointestinal system, from the small
intestine to the anus; the rectosigmoid region is the most common gastrointestinal site (72% of cases), followed by the recto-vaginal septum
(13%), small bowel (7%), cecum (4%) and appendix (3%) . Appendiceal endometriosis was first described in 1860 by Von Rokitansky . According
to several studies, the incidence of appendiceal endometriosis is between 0.8 and 22.0% . Appendiceal endometriosis is classified into
primary and secondary forms. The primary form is characterized by the pathological presence of endometriosis within the appendix without
extra-appendiceal endometriosis, and the secondary form is defined by the pathological presence of internal and/or external endometriosis.
Most studies have described an analogy between appendiceal endometriosis and tubo-ovarian endometriosis. Most patients with appendiceal
endometriosis have menstrual irregularities and uterine leiomyomas, and similar cases of primary appendiceal endometriosis have been
reported [2, 9, 10]. Appendiceal endometriosis can be categorized into four groups, according to the associated symptoms: acute
appendicitis, invaginated appendix, atypical appendiceal endometriosis (symptoms such as abdominal colic, nausea and melena) and
asymptomatic appendiceal endometriosis. The most common type is acute appendicitis, and symptoms usually occur during menstruation [2, 11,
12]. Acute appendiceal inflammation can be caused by partial or complete luminal occlusion by the endometrioma . Another proposed mechanism
involves endometrial hemorrhage within the seromuscular layer of the appendix, followed by edema, obstruction and inflammation. Pain in the
right lower abdominal quadrant is one of the most common symptoms, and one third of affected patients present with a typical appendiceal
symptom . Our patient underwent an appendectomy for the treatment of appendicitis with right lower quadrant pain. Several nodules were found
in her peritoneal cavity, and a biopsy was performed. The histological features of the peritoneal nodules were consistent with LPD, and
those of the appendix were consistent with appendiceal endometriosis. These results appeared to be associated with her history of ovarian
cystectomy by endometriosis and myomectomy. LPD is a rare disease characterized by multiple peritoneal nodules on the omentum or any surface
of the peritoneal cavity. Although LPD was first described by Wilson and Peale in 1952, it was first clearly delineated and named by Taubert
et al. in 1965 [14, 15]. About 50 cases have been reported to date, and most have occurred in patients of reproductive age. Although the
etiology of LPD is unclear, it is thought to originate from metaplasia of submesothelial, multipotential mesenchymal cells. The developing
leiomyomatous nodules probably arise from Mueller’s epithelium, which is distributed throughout the subperitoneal mesenchyme. The
pathogenesis is unknown, but the Mullerian derivatives proliferate along lines of myofibrous differentiation, according to individual
predisposition and excessive hormonal stimulation . More than half of affected patients were reportedly pregnant or taking oral
contraceptive pills at the time of diagnosis . Associations of LPD with granular cell tumor of the ovary, endometrial adenocarcinoma, clear
cell carcinoma of the ovary and estrogen-secreting ovarian fibrothecoma have also been found [14, 18, 19]. Estrogen and progesterone
receptor expression was found in nearly all cases . In some cases, LPD was found in post-menopausal women who had undergone total
hysterectomy several years before and had received no subsequent hormonal therapy [16, 21, 22]. LPD is associated with myomectomy, and
reportedly occurred in two patients after laparoscopic- assisted myomectomy and hysterectomy . The findings in our case report further
confirm an association between LDP and prolonged exposure to estrogen. An association between LPD and endometriosis was first reported in
1980 . Toriyama et al. reported LDP coexisting with endometriosis within the same lesions . This association with endometriosis suggests
that LPD may originate from the metaplasia of submesothelial, multipotential mesenchymal cells. However, this association has been reported
in only a few cases throughout the literature [26, 27]. As in our case report, previously reported cases of LPD seemed to be associated with
multiple factors. LPD is generally benign and has a good prognosis. Malignant change of LPD is very rare; the time from first diagnosis to
malignancy varies from several months to several years. Many patients with malignant change of LPD exhibit no exogenous estrogen
stimulation, estrogen and progesterone receptor negativity within the tumor, and no leiomyoma. Our patient was classified as belonging to
the high-risk group according to Bekker et al. , and required close observation during the first year. No treatment guidelines for LPD have
been established. In most cases, spontaneous tumor regression occurs after hysterectomy and discontinuance of exogenous estrogen
stimulation, such as pregnancy or oral contraceptives. We suggest that the optimal treatment for LPD be determined by the patient’s age,
associated diseases, severity of LPD and chief symptoms. The contributing factors for LPD with appendiceal endometriosis in our patient
appeared to be previous myomectomy, ovarian cystectomy by endometriosis and a history of taking oral contraceptive pills. In conclusion, we
have described a rare case of LPD coexisting with appendiceal endometriosis, which presented as acute appendicitis. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions LWY and NJH were attending doctors for the patient. LWY and NJH performed the surgical
operation. LWY and NJH organized the report and wrote the paper. Both authors were involved in drafting and revising the manuscript, and
both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
