Whipple’s disease is a rare infectious disease caused by Tropheryma whipplei with protean clinical manifestations. This infection may mimic
chronic inflammatory rheumatisms. We report two cases of Whipple’s disease diagnosed in the context of an inflammatory disease with anti-
tumor necrosis factor alpha failure. The first patient was a 58-year-old white man with psoriatic spondylarthritis, who was treated with
adalimumab, etanercept, infliximab, tocilizumab and golimumab. The second was a 73-year-old white man with rheumatoid arthritis, who
received treatment with infliximab, then etanercept and rituximab. Whipple’s disease should be suspected in all patients diagnosed with
chronic inflammatory rheumatism, partially controlled or not controlled by treatment with tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers, whose
condition worsens after treatment. Whipple’s disease (WD) is a rare, chronic, systemic infection caused by Tropheryma whipplei, a Gram-
positive intracellular bacillus related to actinomycetes. WD is a rare infectious disease with protean clinical manifestations. WD may often
manifest itself as chronic seronegative oligoarthritis or polyarthritis, which may mimic various joint diseases (rheumatoid arthritis or
spondylarthritis). The organism may be detectable by periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining of affected organ tissue, especially small bowel,
or with 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) gene identification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification [1, 2]. Increased
susceptibility to infections is a major safety concern with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) antagonist treatment . Infection should be
ruled out in atypical cases by searching for foci . Several authors have shown that treatment with TNF-α blockers seems to increase the risk
of exacerbating WD or worsening preexisting WD, triggering visceral disorders [4, 6]. We describe two cases of patients who were given TNF-α
antagonists to treat long-standing joint disease, who then experienced the involvement of several organs leading to the diagnosis of WD. We
also review the case reports of WD diagnosed during anti-TNF-α treatment. From 2000 to 2012, eight cases of WD were diagnosed at two Spanish
hospitals (Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante and Hospital Marina Baixa, Villajoyosa, Alicante), and two cases were
associated with use of TNF-α antagonists. A 58-year-old white man with inflammatory back pain and large and small joint arthritis had been
diagnosed with psoriatic spondylarthritis 9 years ago. Our patient had been treated with adalimumab for 4 months, after that with etarnecept
for 8 months, then infliximab for 2 months, tocilizumab for 21 months and golimumab for 1 month, to treat the pain in his back and neck with
the consequent difficulty in bending, and arthritis of his knee and interphalangeal joint arthritis. Our patient was admitted to the
hospital with abdominal septic shock. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple retroperitoneal lymph nodes. The colonoscopy result
was normal and the biopsy result was normal. Three months later, he was admitted again with a fever and heart failure, which was interpreted
as a side effect of the golimumab treatment. One year after that, he was admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain, diarrhea and weight
loss progressing to a severe wasting syndrome. At this time, he was being treated with 5mg prednisone plus hydroxicloroquine and
methotrexate (MTX). Abnormal laboratory test results included a white blood cell (WBC) count of 14,630/mm3, a hemoglobin level of 9.6g/dL
and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 58mm/h. A CT scan showed multiple lymph nodes. Endoscopy showed diffuse intestinal
lymphangiectasia (Fig. 1). A duodenal biopsy showed distortion of the villous architecture with abundant macrophages, and bacilliform
intracytoplasmic structures that stained positive with PAS with diastase digestion compatible with WD. A PCR assay for detecting T. whipplei
was not done. Intravenous ceftriaxone (2g daily for 2 weeks) was commenced followed by trimethoprim and sulphamethoxazole with improved
symptoms after 3 weeks; treatment was continued for 18 months. One year later, a new gastroscopy with duodenal biopsy was done. It did not
show intestinal lymphangiectasia. A PCR assay result for T. whipplei was negative. There were no relapses after 19 months.Fig. 1Endoscopy.
White lesions compatible with diffuse intestinal lymphangiectasia Endoscopy. White lesions compatible with diffuse intestinal
lymphangiectasia A 73-year-old white man had been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis with migratory arthralgias of the large joints and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 14 years ago. Our patient had been treated with gold salts, chloroquine and MTX. Fourteen years after
diagnosis of his diseases, infliximab was added to the MTX treatment without improvement, so infliximab was suspended 8 months later because
there was no improvement of his migratory nondeforming polyarthritis; treatment with MTX was continued. After 5 months infliximab was
stopped, and etanercept was added to MTX for 6 months. During treatment with etanercept, he suffered an acute middle cerebral artery
ischemic stroke of atherothrombotic origin, and etanercept was stopped. Six months later, rituximab was added for 3 months, without
improvement. After that, MTX was stopped and leflunomide (20mg/day) was initiated and from that point, our patient presented with abdominal
pain, chronic diarrhea and edema in his lower extremities, a consequence of chronic malabsorption. After 1 year on this treatment, he was
admitted to hospital with rectal bleeding, however, the colonoscopy and gastroscopy results were normal and the colon biopsy showed
unspecific changes. At that time, our patient was being treated with leflunomide, which was then stopped. Three months after that admission,
our patient was admitted with weight loss, abdominal pain and diarrhea. On physical examination, he had hyperpigmentation of the skin but no
other abnormalities. Abnormal laboratory test results included a WBC count of 13,800/mm3, a hemoglobin level of 9.2g/dL, mean corpuscular
volume (MCV) of 72fl, an albumin level of 1.8g/dL, and an ESR of 13mm/h. A thoracic and abdominal CT scan showed pericardial effusion with
calcifications, bronchiectasis in his lower right lung, intestinal bowel with distention and no abdominal lymph nodes. A duodenal biopsy
showed altered architecture and intracellular bacilli on PAS stain. T. whipplei was detected from duodenal tissue by PCR assay. A cerebral
magnetic resonance imaging scan showed multiple hyperintensive lesions in both cerebral hemispheres, cortical retraction, increased
subarachnoid space and ventricular dilatation. The PCR assay result for T. whipplei in his cerebrospinal fluid was negative. Intravenous
ceftriaxone (2g daily) was commenced for 2 weeks followed by trimethoprim and sulphamethoxazole with improvement of his symptoms (the
diarrhea, malabsorption and pericardial effusion). One year later, a new gastroscopy with duodenal biopsy was done. It showed altered
architecture and intracellular bacilli on PAS stain, but the PCR assay result for T. whipplei was negative. Because of mild renal failure,
trimethoprim and sulphamethoxazole was changed for doxycycline plus hydroxychloroquine, and normal renal function was recovered. We reviewed
database cases recorded in PubMed using the following retrieval scheme: [“Whipple disease” and (“infliximab” or “adalimumab” or “etanercept”
or “golimumab” or “tocilizumab”)]. We gathered the following data from the medical cases reported: age, sex, joint diseases, years with
joint disease, TNF-α antagonist therapy, days with TNF-α antagonist therapy before WD was diagnosed, symptoms related to WD, organs affected
by WD, investigations for diagnosing WD, treatment and outcome of WD. We retrieved 14 cases from the PubMed database from January 2004 to
December 2014. All the case reports recorded and the two case reports in this manuscript are from European scientists , except one case from
the United States of America . Four case reports were published in a language other than English [7, 8, 10]. Table 1 shows age, sex, joint
diseases, years with joint disease, TNF-α antagonist therapy, days with TNF-α antagonist therapy before WD was diagnosed, symptoms related
to WD, organs affected by WD, investigations for diagnosing WD, treatment and outcome of WD for 16 WD cases. Out of 16 cases, there were 14
men and two women patients with an age range of 33 to 73 years old. Six patients were diagnosed as ankylosis spondylitis (AS), six as
seronegative spondyloarthropathy (SA) (seronegative chronic polyarthritis), two as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), one as Still’s disease (SD),
and one as psoriatic arthritis. All patients had osteoarticular (with pain and swelling) involvement and 15 had gastrointestinal involvement
(diarrhea, weight loss, abdominal pain, malabsorption, and so on) . Moreover, some patients had extra-articular and gastrointestinal
involvement, such as vertebra , meningitis , pericarditis (, present report 2 (PR2)), abdominal or thoracic lymph nodes ([4, 6], PR1),
gingiva such as scurvy and heart valve involvement . All were diagnosed by histological biopsy, in 14 of 15 cases a PCR assay for DNA
detection of T. whipplei was done, and all were positive. The DNA of T. whipplei by PCR assay was detected in duodenal or other
gastrointestinal-colonic areas; saliva, blood, feces, bone or cerebrospinal fluid . All patients recovered from gastrointestinal involvement
when the TNF-α antagonist was stopped and antibiotic treatment was started.Table 1Features of the patients’ diagnosis of Whipple’s disease
after tumor necrosis factor alpha antagonist initiationAuthors / country / language of publicationAge / sexUnderlying disease previous WD
diagnosis / time with that diagnosisTNF-α drugs and immunosuppressive treatmentStart of acute symptoms after TNF-α blockadeSymptoms after
TNF-α blockadeOrgan involvementHistological diagnosisa Result of PCR for Tropheryma whipplei Treatment for WDOutcomeKneitz et al. (2005) /
Germany / English34y / MSDMethotrexate + infliximab (2w)2wWeight loss, erythema nodosum, diarrhea, lymph node enlargement, and a
sigmoidovesical fistulaSkin, gastroduodenitis and sigmoidovesicalPositive in fistula and lymph nodesPositive in lymph node, small bowel and
sigmoidovesical fistulaSXT (12m)Resolved within 1 yearKremer et al. (2008) / Germany / German47y / MSA / 4yLeflunomide + adalimumabFever,
weight loss, and severe arthralgiaPositive in duodenal tissuePositive in duodenal tissueSXTSpoerl et al. (2009) / Switzerland / English64y /
MSA / 5 + 3yEtanercept4mLethargy, night sweats, weight lossGastrointestinal and vertebralPositive in duodenal tissue and vertebral
tissuePositive in gastric and vertebral tissueCeftriaxone (2w), then, SXT (2y), (12m) then doxycycline + HC (18m)No relapses after 34-month
follow-upAhmadi-Simab et al. (2009) / Germany / German33y / FAS / 8yEtanercept12mDiarrhea, abdominal pain and weight lossNegative in
duodenal tissuePositive in duodenal biopsyCeftriaxone (2w) after SXTHoppé et al. (2010) / France / English67y / FSA / 7yInfliximab
(4m)4mChest pain, dyspnea, polyarthritisPositive in duodenal tissuePositive in duodenal tissue. Negative in blood and salivaCeftriaxone
(2w), then doxycycline (24m)Resolved within 15d. No relapses after 71-month follow-upHoppé et al. (2010) / France / English40y / MAS /
1yInfliximab (18m) then etanercept (7m) then adalimumab (1m)26mDiarrhea, weight loss, fever, arthralgiaWidespread ileocolitis,
gastroduodenitis, meningitisPositive in duodenal tissuePositive in saliva, feces and cerebrospinal fluid. Negative in bloodDoxycycline, HC,
and SXT (15d), then SXT was replaced by sulfasalazine 4g/dayResolved within 2 months. No relapses after 17-month follow-upHoppé et al.
(2010) / France / English60y / MAS / 8yEtanercept (9m)9mFever, night sweats, polyarthritis, chest painPericarditis, mediastinal and
abdominal lymphadenopathy, duodenitisNegative in duodenal tissuePositive in the duodenal sample, saliva, feces, and lymph nodesDoxycycline +
HC (15m)Resolved within 7d. No relapses after 30-month follow-upHoppé et al. (2010) / France / English47y / MRA / 17yInfliximab (36m), then
etanercept (42m), then adalimumab (6m), then rituximab, abatacept then infliximab (1m)85mFever, night sweats, weight loss, polyarthritis,
radio carpal arthropathy. transient diplopia, myalgia, subacute depressionPericarditis, abdominal lymphadenopathy, duodenitisPositive PCR
assay in the duodenal sample, blood, saliva, and feces. Negative PCR assay in cerebrospinal fluidDoxycycline + HC (UT)Resolved within 2m No
relapses after 15-month follow-upHoppé et al. (2010) / France / English38y / MAS / 9yEtanercept (2m)9mDiarrhea, abdominal pain. weight loss,
blurred visionHemorrhagic gastroduodenitis, hemorrhagic colitis, mediastinal and cervical lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, meningitisPositive
in duodenum and colonPositive PCR assay in blood, saliva, cerebrospinal fluid, and fecesDoxycycline 200mg/day. HC 600mg/day. (UT)Resolved
within 3w. No relapses after 13-month follow-upHmamouchi et al. (2010) / France / English35y / MAS / 4yEtanercept4mGingival nodule, purpura,
abdominal pain diarrhea, fatigue, weight lossGingiva and colitisPositive in colon tissuePositive in blood, stool, and cerebrospinal fluidSXT
(NR)Resolved within 3 monthsDaïen et al. (2010) / France / English70y / MSA / 27yEtanercept (18m)NRFever and dyspneaEndocarditis of aortic
valveNegative in duodenal tissue and, aortic valvePositive in aortic valveDoxycycline HC + SXT (18m)Resolved. No relapses after 21-month
follow-upGaddy et al., (2012) / USA / English46y / MAS / 10yPrednisone + MTX + infliximab (24m), then adalimumab24mFever, migratory
arthritis, weight loss, diarrheaGastroenteritisPositive in duodenal tissuePositive in blood and duodenal tissueCeftriaxone (x2w) after
SXTNRSparsa et al. (2013) / France / French53y / MSAEtanercept (3m), then adalimumab (6m)9mPolyarthralgia peripheric, arthritis
metarsophalangealPositive in duodenal tissue biopsyPositive in saliva and duodenal tissueDoxycycline + HC (18m)Resolved within 3 weeks. No
relapses after 18-month follow-upSparsa et al. (2013) / France / French42y / MSA / 2mAdalimumab (9m) and then etanercept
(4m)13mPolyarthralgia periphericPositive in duodenal and gastric tissuePositive in saliva and duodenal tissueDoxycycline + HC and then
doxycycline aloneResolved within 3 weeks. No relapses after 17- month follow-upPresent report58y / MPsoriatic spondyloarthropathy/
14yAdalimumab (4m), then etanercept (8m), infliximab (2m), tocilizumab (21m), golimumab (1m)36mAbdominal pain, diarrhea and weight
lossDuodenitis and abdominal lymph nodesPositive in duodenal tissueNot doneCeftriaxone (14d), then SXT during (UT)Resolved within 3 weeks.
No relapses after 9-month follow-up.Present report78y / MRA / 19yInfliximab (6m), etanercept (6m), rituximab (3m), leflunomide
(24m)24mAbdominal pain, diarrhea and weight lossDuodenitis, and pericardial effusionPositive in duodenal tissuePositive in duodenal biopsy.
Negative in cerebrospinal fluidCeftriaxone (14d), then SXT for (12m) then doxycycline + HCResolved within 3 weeks. No relapses after
18-month follow-up(UT) Patient still under treatment TNF-α tumor necrosis factor alpha, WD Whipple’s disease, PCR polymerase chain reaction,
y year, SD Still’s disease, w week, SXT cotrimoxazole, m month, SA spondyloarthropathy (seronegative chronic polyarthritis), HC
hydroxychlorochine, AS ankylosis spondylitis, RA rheumatoid arthritis, NR not reported, MTX methotrexate aHistological diagnosis =
intracellular bacilli on periodic acid–Schiff stain Features of the patients’ diagnosis of Whipple’s disease after tumor necrosis factor
alpha antagonist initiation (UT) Patient still under treatment TNF-α tumor necrosis factor alpha, WD Whipple’s disease, PCR polymerase chain
reaction, y year, SD Still’s disease, w week, SXT cotrimoxazole, m month, SA spondyloarthropathy (seronegative chronic polyarthritis), HC
hydroxychlorochine, AS ankylosis spondylitis, RA rheumatoid arthritis, NR not reported, MTX methotrexate aHistological diagnosis =
intracellular bacilli on periodic acid–Schiff stain WD is a systemic infection, which involves many chronic manifestations, especially
digestive disorders. Some of the manifestations involved are articular symptoms, which can appear as inflammatory rheumatism, such as
rheumatoid arthritis or spondylarthritis. Beside these symptoms, the microorganism responsible for T. whipplei disease has also been found
in DNA recovered from articular fluid and bones of these patients [13, 14]. Our two cases illustrate that alternative etiologies in patients
with articular symptoms should be considered, most importantly following clinical deterioration by immunomodulatory agents like TNF-α
inhibitors. The reflections to be made with respect to the analysis of these two cases are to speculate that these patients either had WD
with mainly articular manifestations, which had been considered as a rheumatic disease; or in fact, they had a rheumatic disease, which,
through the treatment with TNF drugs, may have reactivated T. whipplei and the appearance, therefore, of its florid symptoms that we managed
to diagnose. Therapies with immunomodulators, TNF-α inhibitors, and corticosteroids may transform an infection with T. whipplei, normally at
a subacute stage, into a septic, life-threatening disease. Thus, it seems that TNF-α blockade allowed for rapid dissemination of T. whipplei
by inhibiting some important immune defense mechanisms. In the later phase of an infection, the TNF-α blocker contributes to limiting the
extent of cell and/or tissue damage by inducing apoptosis and maintaining granuloma formation [15, 16], which are important mechanisms in T.
whipplei infections. TNF-α blockade might result in the loss of some of the immunological control mechanisms and, therefore, facilitate
rapid bacterial dissemination and severe exacerbation of the disease. This is the situation in the first case. In the second case, the TNF-α
blockade was used before the gastrointestinal symptoms appeared. However, with anti-TNF-α treatment, our patient had an acute stroke. After
stopping the treatment, our patient recovered from his central nervous system symptoms. When the gastrointestinal involvement of WD was
discovered, an examination of DNA for T. whipplei was performed but it was negative. In this case, it was not clear that our patient had
neurological involvement of WD, and real improvement of WD after stopping the TNF-α blockade treatment was not clear. There are several
cases reported of patients with rheumatic diseases and, during follow-up, they were diagnosed with WD [13, 14, 17, 18]. Thus, the case
report of a patient with an initial diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis who developed pericarditis caused by WD (diagnosed by pericardial
biopsy) and the patient who had not been treated previously with TNF-α blocker . In summary, anti-TNF-α treatment seems to increase the risk
of exacerbation of WD and WD may mimic a rheumatic disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Ankylosis spondylitis Computed tomography Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Hydroxychlorochine month Mean corpuscular volume Methotrexate Not
reported Periodic acid–Schiff Present report Polymerase chain reaction Rheumatoid arthritis Spondyloarthropathy (seronegative chronic
polyarthritis) Still’s diseases Cotrimoxazole ribosomal ribonucleic acid Tumor necrosis factor alpha week White blood cell Whipple’s disease
year Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors treated the patients
during the years 2002 to 2014. Each of them has made substantial contributions to data acquisition and interpretation. All of them have been
involved in drafting the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We should like to acknowledge the personnel from
the Department of Internal Medicine Rheumatology and Gastroenterology of the Hospital General Universitario de Alicante and the Hospital
Marina Baixa, Villajoyosa, Alicante (Spain) for attending to the patients.
