Symptom of herpes zoster is sometimes difficult to distinguish from sciatica induced by spinal diseases, including lumbar disc herniation
and spinal canal stenosis. Here we report a case of sciatica mimicking lumbar canal stenosis. A 74-year-old Chinese male patient visited our
hospital for left-sided sciatic pain upon standing or walking for 5 min of approximately 1 month’s duration. At the first visit to our
hospital, there were no skin lesions. A magnetic resonance imaging showed spinal canal stenosis between the 4th and 5th lumbar spine. Thus,
we diagnosed the patient with sciatica induced by spinal canal stenosis. We considered decompression surgery for the stenosis of 4th and 5th
lumbar spine because conservative therapy failed to relieve the patient’s symptom. At that time, the patient complained of a skin rash
involving his left foot for several days. A vesicular rash and erythema were observed on the dorsal and plantar surfaces of the great toe
and lateral malleolus. The patient was diagnosed with herpes zoster in the left 5th lumbar spinal nerve area based on clinical findings,
including the characteristics of the pain and vesicular rash and erythema in the 5th lumbar spinal dermatome. The patient was treated with
famciclovir (1,500 mg/day) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. After 1 week of medication, the skin rash resolved and pain relief was
obtained. In conclusion, spinal surgeons should keep in mind herpes zoster infection as one of the possible differential diagnoses of
sciatica, even if there is no typical skin rash. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13104-015-1272-z) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users. Herpes zoster, commonly known as shingles and also known as zona, is a viral disease that
is characterized by a painful skin rash with blisters in a limited area on one side of the body, often in the form of a stripe. The initial
infection with varicella zoster virus (VZV) causes an acute illness (chickenpox), which generally occurs in children and young people . Of
note, VZV can become latent in the nerve cell bodies without causing any symptoms. Years or decades after a VZV infection, however, the
virus may cause viral infection of the skin along the corresponding dermatome of the affected nerve . The characteristic symptoms of herpes
zoster can make it difficult to distinguish from sciatica induced by spinal diseases, including lumbar disc herniation and spinal canal
stenosis . Here we report a case of sciatica mimicking lumbar canal stenosis. The present manuscript confirmed to CARE checklist (Additional
file 1). A 74-year-old Chinese man sought evaluation at our hospital for left-sided sciatic pain upon standing or walking for 5 min of
approximately 1 month’s duration. At the first visit to our hospital, there were no skin lesions. On physical examination, sciatic pain
provocation was observed by extension and left bending of the trunk. There was no apparent motor weakness, sensory disturbance, or vesico-
rectal disturbance. Bilateral dorsalis pedis artery pulsations were palpable bilaterally. The patient claimed that he was able to ride a
bicycle for approximately 1 h. A plain X-ray showed slight anterior listhesis of the 4th lumbar (L4) vertebral body (Fig. 1a) without
instability on a flexion/extension lateral X-ray. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed spinal canal stenosis between the 4th and 5th
lumbar spine (L4/5) level and redundant nerve roots superior to the most stenotic level (Fig. 1b, c). Thus, we diagnosed the patient with
sciatica induced by spinal canal stenosis.Fig. 1Radiographic findings of the lumbar spine. A plain radiogram of lumbar spine (a) showed
slight anterior listhesis of the 4th lumbar spine. A magnetic resonance imaging showed spinal canal stenosis between 4th and 5th lumbar
spinal level and redundant nerve roots superior to the most stenotic level (b, c). Radiographic findings of the lumbar spine. A plain
radiogram of lumbar spine (a) showed slight anterior listhesis of the 4th lumbar spine. A magnetic resonance imaging showed spinal canal
stenosis between 4th and 5th lumbar spinal level and redundant nerve roots superior to the most stenotic level (b, c). We treated the
patient with oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS). Because NSAIDS had a minimal effect, a caudal epidural block was attempted
using a mixture of a local anesthetic (lidocaine) and steroid. The caudal epidural block provided symptom relief for a few days. Because
repeated caudal epidural blocks (twice in 2 weeks) failed to relieve the symptoms, we considered decompressive surgery for the L4/5 level of
stenosis. At that time, the patient complained of a skin rash involving his left foot for several days. A vesicular rash and erythema were
observed on the dorsal and plantar surfaces of the great toe and lateral malleolus (Fig. 2). There were no skin rashes involving the
buttock, thigh, and lower leg. Pain was diffusely localized to the left foot, lower leg, and lateral thigh. The magnitude of pain was
severe, even at rest (85/100 mm on a visual analogue scale of 100 mm). Thus, we consulted a dermatologist in our hospital. The patient was
diagnosed with herpes zoster in the left L5 area based on clinical findings, including the characteristics of the pain (along the L5 area)
and vesicular rash and erythema in the L5 dermatome.Fig. 2Photograph of skin lesion. A vesicular rash and erythema were observed on the
dorsal foot (a, c) and plantar surfaces of the great toe (b) and lateral malleolus (a). c shows greater magnification of boxed area in a.
Photograph of skin lesion. A vesicular rash and erythema were observed on the dorsal foot (a, c) and plantar surfaces of the great toe (b)
and lateral malleolus (a). c shows greater magnification of boxed area in a. The patient was treated with famciclovir (1,500 mg/day) and
NSAIDs. After 1 week of medication, the skin rash resolved and pain relief was obtained. The cardinal signs of herpes zoster are neuralgia
and skin rash. There is a time lag between the two major symptoms of herpes zoster; neuralgia generally precedes the manifestation of skin
lesions for several days to 1 week . The time lag can make it difficult to distinguish sciatica of the lumbar spine origin from herpes
zoster infection . There was also a time lag between the neuralgia and skin manifestations in the present case, which led to a delay in
diagnosis. In fact, the onset of sciatica preceded the skin lesions by 1 month, which was a protracted time lag compared with previous
reports . Therefore, sciatica might be induced by a lumbar spine lesion during the initial period after onset, and might be superseded by a
herpes zoster infection during the course of the disease. There are several reports that have described the differential diagnosis between
herpes zoster infection and sciatica of lumbar spine origin. Sprenger De Rover reported that the absence of abnormal MRI findings in the
lumbar spine can rule out sciatica of lumbar spine origin. Therefore careful history-taking with respect to the exact nature of the pain and
sensory changes is needed to differentiate between herpes zoster infection and radiculopathy if no rash is evident. If needed, definitive
diagnosis of herpes zoster infection can be made by demonstrating viral giant cells using Tzanck’s test, or antibody titers or viral
deoxyribonucleic acid levels in cerebrospinal fluid, although negative results do not rule out the diagnosis . In the present case, the
characteristic symptoms, including neuralgia and skin rash in the corresponding dermatome, enabled the diagnosis by a dermatologist without
further diagnostic tests. The effect of famciclovir supported the diagnosis in the present case. In conclusion, spinal surgeons should keep
in mind herpes zoster infection as one of the possible differential diagnoses of sciatica, even if there is no typical skin rash. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1. The present manuscript confirmed to CARE checklist.
Additional file 1. The present manuscript confirmed to CARE checklist. varicella zoster virus magnetic resonance imaging lumbar spine non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs deoxyribonucleic acid MK, CM, MM, YO, TK, AO and OI analyzed and interpreted the patient data. MO
diagnosed and treated the present patient as a dermatologist. MY and TF performed were major contributors in writing the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. There is no source of funding for all authors. Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.
