Pituitary adenoma combined with intracranial aneurysm is not rare. Some aneurysms are located inside pituitary adenomas, and most do not
rupture. Pituitary apoplexy caused by aneurysm rupture is rare and is easily misdiagnosed as simple pituitary adenoma apoplexy. In this
study, we report one case of rare pituitary adenoma apoplexy caused by the rupture of an anterior communicating artery aneurysm. The patient
was a 49-year-old male who had an untreated pituitary adenoma for 3 years. The patient experienced a sudden headache; computed tomography
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed pituitary adenoma apoplexy and significant subarachnoid hemorrhage. Cranial CT
angiography (CTA) showed a communicating artery aneurysm. Supratentorial intracranial aneurysm clipping and pituitary adenoma resection were
performed. The aneurysm was a ruptured aneurysm located inside the pituitary adenoma. During the surgery, the aneurysm was clipped, and the
majority of the tumor was resected. The patient recovered well after the surgery and received radiotherapy. This rare case demonstrates that
when pituitary adenoma apoplexy is combined with subarachnoid hemorrhage, the possibility of a combined intrasellar aneurysm should be
considered. During transsphenoidal tumor resection, aneurysm rupture should be avoided to prevent disastrous consequences. The coexistence
of a cerebral aneurysm and a pituitary adenoma is not uncommon; however, the presence of an aneurysm inside a pituitary adenoma is rare .
Among the cases of pituitary adenoma associated with aneurysm, most aneurysms were discovered by accident and were not ruptured. The
symptoms in these cases were mainly from the pituitary adenoma ; the main manifestations were hormonal disorders and optic nerve compression
symptoms. A small number of pituitary adenomas presented as hemorrhagic apoplexy. The main reason for apoplexy is the rupture of nutrient
arteries inside the tumor [3, 4]. Among the cases of pituitary adenoma associated with aneurysm, hemorrhagic apoplexy caused by the
associated aneurysm is rare. This article reports one case of pituitary adenoma apoplexy caused by rupture of an anterior communicating
artery aneurysm and reviews the literature to increase the understanding of this disease. The patient was a 49-year-old male who came to our
hospital due to “sudden severe headache accompanied by nausea and vomiting for three hours.” The patient had a medical history of a space-
occupying lesion in the sellar region, which was regarded as a pituitary adenoma and had not been treated. The patient had no history of
hypertension or diabetes mellitus. The examination of neurological system revealed the following: the patient was conscious and could answer
questions correctly, the left eye vision was 0.2, the right eye vision was 0.5, there was bilateral temporal hemianopsia, and optic nerve
atrophy was observed in the fundus. The patient had flexible limbs, normal muscle tension, grade V muscle strength, positive Kernig signs,
and a grade III Hunt-Hess classification. The routine physical examination revealed that the skin was delicate, the pubic hair was sparse,
and the breasts were developed. The laboratory tests showed that prolactin (PRL) was 1020 mIU/L (normal range, 70.81–566.46 mIU/L), growth
hormone (GH) was 0.60 ng/mL (normal range, 1–5 ng/mL), and other indicators did not show any abnormalities. Emergency cranial computed
tomography (CT) revealed space-occupying lesions in the sellar region with suprasellar expansion, local bone mass destruction, increased
density in and around tumors, patchy hemorrhage, and high-density cord-like images in the bilateral sylvian cisterns. The findings were
considered to indicate subarachnoid hemorrhage (Fig. 1a, b). Further cranial CT angiography (CTA) examination showed an anterior
communicating artery aneurysm; the neck of the aneurysm was shifted toward the left anterior cerebral artery, and the Willis Circle was
compressed and pushed to the lateral side (Fig. 1c, d). In addition, cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the tumor in the
sellar region was significantly enhanced, the boundary was clear, the shape was irregular, and the bilateral carotid arteries were encased
by the tumor; the tumor size was approximately 5 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm (Fig. 2a, b). Given the combination of the patient’s medical history, MRI
scans, and laboratory examinations, the confirmed diagnosis of the patient was pituitary adenoma apoplexy and a ruptured anterior
communicating artery aneurysm.Fig. 1Cranial CT and CTA images. a, b Cranial CT showed space-occupying lesions in the sellar region and local
bone destruction. At higher levels, the tumor image could be observed, and the boundary was clear. There appeared to be a capsule, the size
of which was approximately 3 cm × 4 cm. The density inside and surrounding the tumor increased, patchy hemorrhage was observed, and a cord-
like high-density image was observed in the bilateral sylvian cisterns. The findings were considered to be consistent with subarachnoid
hemorrhage. c, d Cranial CTA revealed a cystic-like protuberance, identified as an aneurysm, in the anterior communicating artery. The neck
of the aneurysm shifted toward the A1 segment of the left anterior cerebral artery. The left anterior cerebral artery was thicker. The
Willis Circle was compressed and pushed to the lateral sideFig. 2Cranial MRI imaging and pathological results. a, b The axial and sagittal
planes of the cranial-enhanced MRI clearly showed the tumor in the sellar region. The tumor was significantly enhanced, the boundary was
clear, the morphology was irregular, the bilateral carotid arteries were encased, and the size was approximately 5 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm. c HE
staining (×200) revealed cells with a diffuse distribution. The morphology was consistent, there were fewer interstitial cells, and sinusoid
capillaries were observed. d The immunohistochemistry results were PRL(+). Pathology confirmed that the lesion was a PRL-type pituitary
adenoma Cranial CT and CTA images. a, b Cranial CT showed space-occupying lesions in the sellar region and local bone destruction. At higher
levels, the tumor image could be observed, and the boundary was clear. There appeared to be a capsule, the size of which was approximately
3 cm × 4 cm. The density inside and surrounding the tumor increased, patchy hemorrhage was observed, and a cord-like high-density image was
observed in the bilateral sylvian cisterns. The findings were considered to be consistent with subarachnoid hemorrhage. c, d Cranial CTA
revealed a cystic-like protuberance, identified as an aneurysm, in the anterior communicating artery. The neck of the aneurysm shifted
toward the A1 segment of the left anterior cerebral artery. The left anterior cerebral artery was thicker. The Willis Circle was compressed
and pushed to the lateral side Cranial MRI imaging and pathological results. a, b The axial and sagittal planes of the cranial-enhanced MRI
clearly showed the tumor in the sellar region. The tumor was significantly enhanced, the boundary was clear, the morphology was irregular,
the bilateral carotid arteries were encased, and the size was approximately 5 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm. c HE staining (×200) revealed cells with a
diffuse distribution. The morphology was consistent, there were fewer interstitial cells, and sinusoid capillaries were observed. d The
immunohistochemistry results were PRL(+). Pathology confirmed that the lesion was a PRL-type pituitary adenoma Anterior communicating artery
aneurysm clipping and tumor resection were scheduled. The surgery used the left pterional approach. The tumor was observed in the optic
chiasm space; after the tumor was partially resected, the sample was immediately sent for a pathological examination. The pathological
hematoxylin-eosin (HE) stain demonstrated a diffuse distribution of cells; the shape was constant, there were few interstitia, and sinusoid
capillaries were observed. The immunohistochemistry was PRL positive and confirmed the lesion to be a PRL-type pituitary adenoma (Fig. 2c,
d). The anterior communicating artery aneurysm was observed after separation was conducted along the A1 segment of the anterior cerebral
artery to the anterior communicating artery. A hematoma was observed in the surroundings, indicating the ruptured aneurysm. The aneurysm
pointed to the contralateral side. After the neck of the aneurysm was exposed, the aneurysm was clipped, and the surroundings were explored.
The aneurysm was found to be encased by the tumor. The tumor portion was resected (Fig. 3a–d). After the surgery, the patient recovered
well, and his vision was significantly improved. Cranial CTA was conducted again after 1 week of surgery; the results showed that the
aneurysm was well closured, there was no residual neck in the aneurysm, and the morphology and course of the Willis Circle were normal
(Fig. 4a, b). The patient recovered well and was discharged. After discharge, the patient received gamma knife radiotherapy. After a half
year of follow-up, the patient experienced no clinical complications.Fig. 3Craniotomy images. a A tumor in the optic chiasm was observed.
The carotid artery, optic nerve, and tumor were clearly displayed. b, c Images of the anterior communicating artery aneurysm (before and
after clipping) are displayed. d The surroundings were explored after aneurysmal closure. The aneurysm was observed to be encased by the
surrounding tumorFig. 4CTA after aneurysm clipping. a, b The image of the aneurysm clip is clearly displayed. The anterior communicating
artery aneurysm was completely clipped and closured. There was no residual neck of the aneurysm. The morphology and course of the Willis
Circle was normal, without compression and displacement changes Craniotomy images. a A tumor in the optic chiasm was observed. The carotid
artery, optic nerve, and tumor were clearly displayed. b, c Images of the anterior communicating artery aneurysm (before and after clipping)
are displayed. d The surroundings were explored after aneurysmal closure. The aneurysm was observed to be encased by the surrounding tumor
CTA after aneurysm clipping. a, b The image of the aneurysm clip is clearly displayed. The anterior communicating artery aneurysm was
completely clipped and closured. There was no residual neck of the aneurysm. The morphology and course of the Willis Circle was normal,
without compression and displacement changes Pituitary adenoma combined with intracranial aneurysm is not rare. The studies of Pant et al.
demonstrated that approximately 7.4 % of pituitary adenomas were combined with an aneurysm; 97 % of these aneurysms were located in the
anterior circulation . Because both pituitary adenomas and cerebral aneurysms are common intracranial lesions, these two lesions sometimes
coincide and occur concurrently; however, to date, no exact incidence of pituitary adenoma associated with intracranial aneurysm has been
determined; nonetheless, there is a general consensus that intracranial aneurysms occur more frequently in association with pituitary
adenomas than among the general patient population. In addition, associations with intracranial aneurysms are generally thought to be
stronger for patients with pituitary adenomas than for patients with other brain tumors, although the manner in which a pituitary adenoma
contributes to the formation of an intracranial aneurysm remains unclear . Thus, in addition to speculation of an accidental encounter
between a pituitary adenoma and an intracranial aneurysm, there exist other hypotheses to explain the manifestations in the described case.
Because the pituitary adenoma is a hormone-secreting tumor, the secreted hormones can induce aneurysm occurrence and growth. The study of
Jakubowski et al. showed that in the cases of pituitary adenoma associated with an aneurysm, the pituitary adenomas were mostly of the GH
type; by contrast, among the PRL-type pituitary adenomas that had the highest incidence, the probability of association with an aneurysm was
very low. Therefore, it was speculated that although GH might induce aneurysm development and growth, PRL may have only weak capabilities in
this regard [1, 6]. Despite these weak capabilities, among 5 cases of pituitary adenoma apoplexy or subarachnoid hemorrhage that we
reviewed, at least 4 of the cases involved PRL-type adenomas (Table 1). Oh et al. examined 800 cases of pituitary adenoma associated with
aneurysm and demonstrated that older age and the existence of a cavernous sinus invasion were correlated with an increased incidence of
intracranial aneurysm among patients with pituitary adenomas . Numerous hypotheses to explain this phenomenon have been proposed, including
a direct mechanical effect of the pituitary adenoma on the vasculature, direct infiltration by the tumor, and GH production leading to
arteriosclerotic and degenerative changes in the arterial walls of the circle of Willis, thereby, predisposing patients to the formation of
aneurysms . Therefore, the underlying reasons for the association between pituitary adenomas and aneurysms require continued exploration and
study.Table 1Patients with pituitary adenoma and ruptured aneurysm presenting with pituitary apoplexy or intracranial hemorrhagePatient
no.Author/yearAge (years)/sexClinical manifestationsCT imagingAneurysm locationPathological typeTreatmentOutcome1Suzuki/2001 46/MHeadache,
vomiting, and visual impairmentPituitary tumor with intrasellar and parasellar hemorrhageRight intracavernous carotid
arteryProlactinomaTranssphenoidal surgery; endovascular occlusion of the right internal carotid artery by platinum coilsGood2Okawara/2007
48/FHeadache and visual impairmentPituitary tumor with intratumoral hemorrhage, intraventricular hemorrhage and subdural hemorrhageLeft
intracavernous carotid arteryProlactinomaAneurysm coiling by platinum coils; administration of terguride to shrink the pituitary
adenomaGood3Song/2014 31/MHeadache, vomiting and blurred visionSubarachnoid hemorrhage in basal cisternsPosterior communicating
arteryPituitary adenoma with hemorrhagic necrosisAneurysm clipping; during surgery, pituitary apoplexy was discovered and
removedGood4Almeida/2014 53/MHeadache accompanied by mental confusionSubarachnoid hemorrhage, interhemispheric hematoma, and suprasellar
expansive lesionAnterior communicating arteryProlactinomaAneurysm clipping; partial resection of the pituitary tumorGood5Present
case49/MSudden headache accompanied by a pituitary adenoma that had been untreated for three yearsPituitary adenoma hemorrhage and
significant subarachnoid hemorrhageAnterior communicating arteryProlactinomaAneurysm clipping; major resection of the pituitary tumorGood
Patients with pituitary adenoma and ruptured aneurysm presenting with pituitary apoplexy or intracranial hemorrhage Among the pituitary
adenomas associated with aneurysms, aneurysms at the cavernous sinus segment are the most common. This type of aneurysm is mostly embedded
inside the pituitary adenoma below the sellar diaphragm . In cases involving pituitary adenoma combined with an aneurysm, most of the
aneurysms are inactive and unruptured. The clinical symptoms are mainly caused by hormones secreted by pituitary adenomas or by compression
on the surrounding brain tissues and optic nerve . However, pituitary adenomas have a rare hemorrhagic clinical presentation, namely, tumor
apoplexy; thus, the combined aneurysm factor should be considered. A simple pituitary apoplexy is mainly caused by the rupture and
hemorrhage of blood-supplying arteries within tumors; the major presentations are a hemorrhage confined within the tumor, a rapid increase
in the tumor volume caused by this hemorrhage, and severe headache and vision loss caused by compression of the optic nerve and surrounding
dura . When a pituitary adenoma is combined with an aneurysm under the sellar diaphragm, if the aneurysm is ruptured, it may also cause the
typical pituitary adenoma apoplexy symptoms. For example, in 2001, Suzuki et al. reported one case of an intracavernous carotid artery
aneurysm embedded in a pituitary adenoma. The hemorrhage after rupture was confined inside the tumor, and the presentation included the
typical pituitary adenoma apoplexy symptoms and imaging results . At times, hemorrhage caused by aneurysm rupture is not limited to the
tumor; for instance, in 2007, Okawara et al. reported a case (similar to the case described in this report) that involved an intracavernous
carotid artery aneurysm located in a pituitary adenoma. The manifestations of the hemorrhage that occurred after aneurysm rupture included
intratumoral hemorrhage, intraventricular hemorrhage, subdural hemorrhage, pituitary adenoma apoplexy, and other hemorrhages . In addition
to aneurysms in the cavernous sinus segment, other aneurysms can also cause pituitary adenoma apoplexy; for instance, in 2014, Song et al.
reported a case in which a posterior communicating aneurysm caused pituitary adenoma apoplexy and in which invasive growth had caused the
pituitary adenoma to wrap around the aneurysm . When the aneurysm that is combined with a pituitary adenoma is not inside the cavernous
sinus, the aneurysm may be wrapped by the invasive pituitary adenoma that grows through the sellar diaphragm. Once rupture and hemorrhage
occur, the aneurysm may not be confined inside the tumor and may enter into the subarachnoid space to combine with subarachnoid hemorrhage.
The presentation is pituitary adenoma apoplexy combined with subarachnoid hemorrhage. This disease is very rare. The case reported in this
article falls into this category. The rupture of the anterior communicating artery aneurysm caused hemorrhage inside the pituitary adenoma
and extensive subarachnoid hemorrhage. During the surgery, the aneurysm was confirmed to be ruptured; there were blood clots in the
surroundings, and the aneurysm was inside the pituitary adenoma. The patient successfully underwent tumor removal and aneurysm clipping.
Because of his ignorance of medicine and his difficult living conditions, the patient did not accept a dopamine agonist to treat his
prolactinoma; instead, he chose to adopt a wait-and-see approach to his disease even though he lost a portion of his eyesight. If the
prolactinoma had been dissolved with medication, the treatment of the aneurysm would have been less complex. A case involving mechanisms
similar to those of the case discussed in this article was reported in 2006 by Shahlaie et al., who described how the rupture of an anterior
communicating artery aneurysm caused pituitary gland apoplexy and subarachnoid hemorrhage . Because the anterior communicating artery is
higher, not all pituitary adenomas can grow upward to encase it. For example, in 2014, Almeida et al. reported a case of pituitary adenoma
associated with an anterior communicating artery aneurysm and demonstrated that a hemorrhage after aneurysm rupture could not enter the
pituitary adenoma due to the elevated location of the aneurysm; therefore, the only observed presentations of this hemorrhage were an
interhemispheric hematoma and a subarachnoid hemorrhage . Overall, in pituitary adenoma apoplexy combined with aneurysm rupture, based on
the aneurysm’s location and relationship with the sellar diaphragm, the presentation may (or may not) be combined with subarachnoid
hemorrhage. Therefore, when hemorrhagic apoplexy occurs in a pituitary adenoma and is combined with subarachnoid hemorrhage, the possibility
of an associated aneurysm should be considered. However, the literature reports that simple pituitary adenoma apoplexy might also present
subarachnoid hemorrhage. For example, Nakahara et al. reported one case showing that subarachnoid hemorrhage occurred when the pituitary
adenoma was not associated with an aneurysm. This condition was considered to result from arterial laceration caused by stretching of the
adjacent arteries (such as the superior hypophyseal artery) by tumor expansion and invasive growth . Currently, transsphenoidal resection is
the main treatment method for pituitary adenomas . If the aneurysm diagnosis is missed before surgery, surgical resection of the tumor can
easily cause aneurysm rupture and hemorrhage; the tumor-loading artery cannot be found in the narrow and small surgical space to control the
bleeding, thus, causing disastrous consequences. However, for pituitary adenoma apoplexies caused by intracranial aneurysms, if the
aneurysms could be found, aneurysm coiling combined with transsphenoidal pituitary adenoma resection remains a good treatment option [11,
12]. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to remind physicians to consider the possibility of combined aneurysm rupture when a
pituitary adenoma causes apoplexy combined with subarachnoid hemorrhage. When the lesion is combined with an aneurysm, supratentorial
craniotomy should be selected if possible. During aneurysm clipping, the pituitary adenoma can also be resected, thus, preventing the
aneurysm from rupturing again during transsphenoidal surgery. Aneurysm coiling combined with transsphenoidal pituitary adenoma resection may
be a treatment option for such cases. Written informed consent regarding the publication of this case report and its accompanying images was
obtained from the patient. Copies of the written consent form are available for review upon request. Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JLY wrote the initial draft. YJY and JZ reviewed the literature. KX was the
surgeon who treated the patient. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Ying Zhao for assisting in the
preparation of this paper and the Novo Biology (NB) for English language editing.
