Rickettsias cause a wide spectrum of tick-, flea-, or mite-borne infections. Rickettsial infections have no classical manifestations and can
often lead to encephalitis, which can be fatal if improperly diagnosed. A 74-year-old male farmer was admitted to the hospital with fevers
and a headache that had lasted for 10 days, followed by 4 days of unconsciousness, and his condition continued to deteriorate. Images showed
multiple acute lesions in the brain stem, and bilateral cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres. He was finally diagnosed with endemic typhus
and treated with antibiotics that resulted in improvement. The present report describes a patient with a rickettsial infection and
subsequent deterioration to coma because of an initial misdiagnosis. Because of the similarity to other infectious diseases, physicians
should be more vigilant towards the history and radiologic results to ensure early detection and avoid complications which may prove to be
fatal. Rickettsial infections are caused by a wide spectrum of tick-, flea-, or mite-borne infections, the distribution of which is directly
dependent on the arthropod vector or vectors . The most common symptoms of rickettsial infections include fevers, rashes, headaches,
dizziness, myalgias, arthralgias, and anorexia, with the classic clinical triad being fevers, rash, and unremitting headache . Currently,
there are no detailed data on the epidemiology of typhus, which is sometimes a localized outbreak [3, 4]. Previous Chinese epidemiologic
data have shown that the prevalence of typhus fluctuates between 0.25 and 0.49 per 10,000 population . Endemic typhus caused by Rickettsia
typhi is the most common type of rickettsial infection in China and is considered to be self-limiting [6, 7]. Herein we describe the
misdiagnosis of a severe case of endemic typhus that presented with multiple, diffuse lesions in the cerebral white matter. A 74-year-old
male farmer from Tonglu County in Zhejiang province was admitted to the hospital for acute onset of impaired consciousness preceded by
fevers and headaches lasting for days. The patient was healthy until 10 April 2014 when he presented with severe headaches, fevers, and
dizziness associated with nausea. The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension and a 40-year history of alcohol and tobacco use. A
physical examination and chest X-ray performed at a local clinic were unremarkable. The patient was treated symptomatically for 10 days, but
without improvement. The emergency room evaluation revealed poor orientation to time, place, and person. He was febrile with a temperature
of 38–39 °C. A cranial MRI showed multiple acute lesions with hyperintensity on diffusion weight imaging (DWI) involving the brain stem, and
bilateral cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres (see Fig. 1a-h). Encephalitis with unknown pathogens was suspected. Empiric therapy with
intravenous cefoperazone sulbactam and ribavirin was initiated. On 24 April the patient was admitted to the Neurology ward for further
evaluation. A more comprehensive diagnostic work-up was carried out. A color Doppler cardiac examination was considered normal, thus ruling
out subacute infective endocarditis. A lumbar puncture was performed on the hospital day 2; the CSF findings were non-diagnostic and a serum
sample was obtained; the results are shown in Table 1. Despite aggressive antibiotic treatment, the patient’s neurologic condition worsened.
A neurologic examination was notable for mild coma with neck stiffness, increased muscle tone throughout the body, and an extensor plantar
response bilaterally. A repeat MRI with enhancement showed an increased number of intracranial lesions (Fig. 1i-l). A cranial CT done the
same day indicated a right temporal lobe and left temporal parietal subarachnoid hemorrhage (Fig. 1m-n). On hospital day 3, the patient’s
daughter inadvertently mentioned that her father had been to the family cemetery, which was located in a wild, undeveloped area, 10 days
prior to the onset of his disease. He subsequently complained of an itch resulting from a bug bite. An eschar was noted involving the left
leg (Fig. 1o). On the basis of a detailed medical history and characteristic skin changes, a rickettsial infection was tentatively diagnosed
and minocycline therapy was initiated. Two weeks after the onset of symptoms, 5 mL of blood was collected from the patient with the consent
of his relative and transported to the Department of Rickettsiology of the Institute of Communicable Disease Control and Prevention in
Zhejiang province for testing. Serum IgG to R. typhi, R. conorii, O. tsutsugamushi, and A. phagocytophilum were detected using the IgG IFA
Kit (Fuller Laboratories and Focus Diagnostics, Cypress, CA, USA). The baseline titer for rickettsial antibodies (IgG) was 1:128. Two weeks
later, the rickettsial IgG antibody titer was 1:2048, and a negative serum parasite antibody test was obtained (see Table 1). DNA was
extracted from blood samples using a Universal DNA Extraction Kit (Takara Biotechnology Co., Dalian, China) and tested using nested PCR,
targeting the groEL gene of R. prowazekii and R. typhi. Further genetic sequencing confirmed R. typhi infection; the GenBank accession
number was NC_006142. Based on the test results, a final diagnosis of murine typhus was established. After a 3-week hospitalization, the
patient’s condition improved markedly; specifically, the body temperature returned to normal and the patient regained consciousness. A
subsequent brain MRI and CT showed a reduction in the number of intracranial lesions and resorption of the cerebral hemorrhage (Fig. 2). The
patient was transferred to a local inpatient rehabilitation facility [Brief timeline of events and symptoms have been shown in Table 2].Fig.
1An initial cranial MR image showing hemorrhage in the right temporal lobe, left temporal parietal subarachnoid, and multiple infarcts
throughout the deep white matter. a-d: A diffusion-weighted image (DWI) shows increased intensity in central of the lesion with reduced
intensity surrounding the lesion in the right temporal lobe. Multiple hyperintense lesions can be seen in the brain stem, bilateral
cerebral, and cerebellar hemispheres. e-f: T1-weighted image (T1WI) shows isointensity lesions in the right temporal lobe and multiple
hypointense lesions throughout deep white matter. g-h: T2-weighted image (T2WI) shows hyperintense areas in the right temporal and multiple
hyperintense lesions throughout the deep white matter. i-l: enhanced T1-weighted image shows no enhanced lesions or dural meningeal
enhancement. m-n: cranial CT shows right temporal lobe hemorrhage and left temporal parietal subarachnoid hemorrhage. o: an eschar present
on the left calfTable 1Results of laboratory testsåReference Range for AdultsAdmission (April 24)The second day (April 25)Discharge (May
16)Hemoglobin (g/L)131–172153150145White cell count (per mm3)4.0–109.512.06.2Differential count
(%)Neutrophils50.0–70.065.461.160.9Lymphocytes20.0–40.029.033.331.9Monocytes3.0–10.04.64.93.6Eosinophils0.5–5.00.10.13.4Basophils0.0–1.00.90.60.2C-reactive
protein(mg/L)0.0–8.031.829.05.2CSF examinationCell countRed cell count (per mm3)3000Nucleated cell count (per mm3)20Glucose
(mmol/L)2.5–4.52.9Chloride (mmol/L)120–131134Protein(g/L)0.15–0.450.57Liver function examinationGlutamic pyruvic transaminase
(U/L)5–405812765Glutamic oxalo-acetic transaminase (U/L)8–408213466Phosphocreatine kinase (U/L)38–17425721088Lactate dehydrogenase
(U/L)109–245522412300Albumin(g/L)HBsAgNegativePositiveSyphilisNegativeNegativeAnti-HCVNegativeNegativeAnti-
HIVNegativeNegativeTSPOTNegativeNegativeCytomegalovirus antibody(S/CO)IgM-IgG+8.6Burkitt’s lymphoma virus antibody
(S/CO)IgM+1.1IgG+2.9Herpes simplex virus type 1 antibodyIgGNegativeNegativeIgMNegativeNegativeHerpes simplex virus type II
antibodyIgGNegativeNegativeIgMNegativeNegativeParasitic antibody Paragonimus NegativeNegative Schistosoma japonicum NegativeNegative
Sparganum mansoni NegativeNegative Toxoplasma gondii NegativeNegative Cysticercus cellulosae NegativeNegativeHydatid
cystNegativeNegativeSerum IgG to rickettsial antibody(April 28)(May 12) R. typhus Negative1:1281:2048 R. conorii NegativeNegative O.
tsutsugamushi Negative1:321:128 A. phagocytophilum NegativeNegativeTable 2Timeline of events and symptomsTimeClinical events and
symptoms2014-4-10Onset of disease2014-4-20Date of emergency room visit2014-4-24Admission day2014-4-24Color Doppler cardiac
examination2014-4-25Date of lumber puncture2014-4-26Initiation of minocycline therapy2014-4-28Baseline rickettsial antibody
testing2014-4-28Parasite antibody testing2014-5-12Serial rickettsial antibody testing2014-5-16Discharge dayFig. 2A repeat MR image following
treatment showing a reduced number of intracranial lesions and subsequent absorption of cerebral hemorrhage. a-b: DWI shows hyperintense
lesions in the right temporal lobe and a reduced number of hypointense lesions. c-d: fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) shows
hyperintense lesions in the right temporal lobe and hyperintense lesions in the deep white matter. e-f (T1WI) and g-h(T2WI): also shows
hyperintensity lesions in the right temporal lobe reduced numbers of leseions in the deep white matter. i-l: cranial CT shows high-density
lesions in the right temporal lobe and left temporal parietal subarachnoid; the volume of cerebral hemorrhage has been reduced An initial
cranial MR image showing hemorrhage in the right temporal lobe, left temporal parietal subarachnoid, and multiple infarcts throughout the
deep white matter. a-d: A diffusion-weighted image (DWI) shows increased intensity in central of the lesion with reduced intensity
surrounding the lesion in the right temporal lobe. Multiple hyperintense lesions can be seen in the brain stem, bilateral cerebral, and
cerebellar hemispheres. e-f: T1-weighted image (T1WI) shows isointensity lesions in the right temporal lobe and multiple hypointense lesions
throughout deep white matter. g-h: T2-weighted image (T2WI) shows hyperintense areas in the right temporal and multiple hyperintense lesions
throughout the deep white matter. i-l: enhanced T1-weighted image shows no enhanced lesions or dural meningeal enhancement. m-n: cranial CT
shows right temporal lobe hemorrhage and left temporal parietal subarachnoid hemorrhage. o: an eschar present on the left calf Results of
laboratory tests Timeline of events and symptoms A repeat MR image following treatment showing a reduced number of intracranial lesions and
subsequent absorption of cerebral hemorrhage. a-b: DWI shows hyperintense lesions in the right temporal lobe and a reduced number of
hypointense lesions. c-d: fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) shows hyperintense lesions in the right temporal lobe and hyperintense
lesions in the deep white matter. e-f (T1WI) and g-h(T2WI): also shows hyperintensity lesions in the right temporal lobe reduced numbers of
leseions in the deep white matter. i-l: cranial CT shows high-density lesions in the right temporal lobe and left temporal parietal
subarachnoid; the volume of cerebral hemorrhage has been reduced In China, R. typhi is the leading cause for endemic murine typhus, which is
primarily transmitted by the rat flea . Human murine typhus infection is characterized by high fevers, a skin rash, and a combination of a
variety of symptoms, such as acute hepatitis, pneumonia, and meningitis. The patient described herein presented with fevers, headaches,
dizziness, and coma. Because the patient did not have a rash, which is a typical sign of a rickettsial infection, the condition was
initially misdiagnosed at the local hospital. The unique clinical features of this patient included the following: 1) an elderly
hypertensive male with a history of cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption; 2) a 2-week incubation period with a lack of any observable
skin rashes and a rapidly deteriorating physical condition; and 3) imaging results that showed multiple cerebral infarctions in the white
matter together with intra-cerebral and subarachnoid hemorrhage. On admission, we first ruled out infective endocarditis based on the
negative echocardiographic findings. Second, considering the fevers, headaches, elevated C-reactive protein level, and multiple intracranial
lesions, meningoencephalitis was thought to be a likely diagnosis. The presence of an eschar together with an insect bite history and
positive serum rickettsia-specific antibody tests, led to the final diagnosis of murine typhus complicated by pneumonia, cerebral
infarction, and intracranial and subarachnoid hemorrhage. The correct diagnosis was delayed due to the absence of any skin rashes, although
the absence of rashes has been described in 10 % of reported cases [8, 9]. The pathologic features of endemic typhus include systemic
vasculitis, which can induce damage to multiple organs and the brain. Rickettsia typhi proliferates and spreads via the blood stream causing
injury to endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells, thus resulting in vasculitis. The infection can also involve cerebral arteries and
lead to brain damage [10, 11]. Vascular injury is the pathophysiologic basis for meningoencephalitis and a skin rash. The probable mechanism
leading to infarction may be caused by small artery spasm or occlusion, and hemorrhage caused by increased vascular permeability due to the
infection. The neuroimaging results correlated with the pathologic findings of cerebral vasculitis, infarctions, and arteriolar
thrombonecrosis [12, 13]. Cranial CT scans of rickettsia-infected patients can be normal or show cerebral infarction. MR imaging findings in
typhus patients have been previously shown to include focal arterial infarctions, diffuse edema, meningeal enhancement, and the presence of
prominent perivascular spaces [12, 15]. In our case, the cranial CT results at the local hospital showed no cerebral infarction or
hemorrhage, and the follow-up MR imaging showed multiple white matter lesions, suggesting the presence of infarction, and intracranial and
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Similar MR imaging results have been described in patients with cryptococcosis and Lyme disease, which are also
characterized by cerebral vasculitis [16, 17]. A study showed that 67 % of patients with abnormal neuroimaging ultimately returned to normal
neurologic status and 93 % showed normal imaging after antibiotic treatment . The patient regained consciousness after 2 weeks of antibiotic
treatment and was able to walk unassisted after 1 month of therapy. From the current case and literature review we concludes the following:
1) The medical history and disease evolution are key to the clinical diagnosis of murine typhus. This elderly male farmer presented with a
rash that was initially overlooked. 2) Rickettsia typhi involving the endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells resulting in vasculitis
not only lead to brain injury, but also cause multisystem organ failure. The imaging studies showed multiple infarctions, edema, and
hemorrhage, which are rare in this type of case.3) The proper therapeutic treatment for rickettsial infections is simple and effective with
a good prognosis due to early diagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Competing interests The author(s)
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ZX contributed to manuscript writing and interpretation of the data.
YH and QL contributed to acquisition and interpretation of the data. XC contributed to the critical revision of the manuscript for
intellectual content. XL contributed to the critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
