Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is the most common disorder of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation and a target
disease of newborn screening in many countries. We report on two siblings with mild MCAD deficiency associated with a novel splice site
mutation in the ACADM gene. The younger sibling was detected by newborn screening, while the older sister was missed, but diagnosed later on
by genetic family testing. Both children were found to be compound heterozygous for the common c.985A > G (p.K329E) mutation and a novel
splice site mutation, c.600-18G > A, in the ACADM gene. To determine the biological consequence of the c.600-18G > A mutation putative
missplicing was investigated at RNA level in granulocytes and monocytes of one of the patients. The splice site mutation was shown to lead
to partial missplicing of the ACADM pre-mRNA. Of three detected transcripts two result in truncated, non-functional MCAD proteins as
reflected by the reduced octanoyl-CoA oxidation rate in both patients. In one patient a decrease of the octanoyl-CoA oxidation rate was
found during a febrile infection indicating that missplicing may be temperature-sensitive. Our data indicate that the c.600-18G > A variant
activates a cryptic splice site, which competes with the natural splice site. Due to only partial missplicing sufficient functional MCAD
protein remains to result in mild MCADD that may be missed by newborn screening. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12881-015-0199-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency (MCADD; MIM 201450) is an autosomal recessive disorder of mitochondrial β-oxidation, caused by mutations in the ACADM gene. The
estimated prevalence of MCADD from newborn screening ranges from 1 in 8,100 to 1 in 27,000 among populations of mostly European descent and
is less common in populations of non-European origin . Clinical manifestation comprises hypoketotic hypoglycemia, muscular hypotonia,
lethargy, vomiting, seizures, encephalopathy, coma, and death. Since fatty acid oxidation is essential for energy production during fasting
and increased energy expenditure, metabolic decompensations are predominantly precipitated by metabolic stress. In the absence of screening,
mortality is up to 26 % and many surviving patients develop severe neurocognitive impairment . Since the implementation of tandem mass
spectrometry-based newborn screening (NBS) the prognosis of this inherited metabolic disease has significantly improved . However, NBS also
identifies mild and potentially asymptomatic cases and sometimes also heterozygous individuals, who are at no risk of clinical symptoms. The
typical MCADD acylcarnitine pattern includes elevated levels of C6, C8, C10 and C10:1 acylcarnitines as well as increased disease-specific
acylcarnitine ratios , and . Additionally, elevated levels of hexanoylglycine, isohexanoylglycine, suberylglycine, and
phenylpropionylglycine may be found in the urine of affected individuals. Enzyme activity of MCAD can be determined by measurement of
octanoyl-CoA or phenylpropionyl-CoA oxidation rate in lymphocytes and may be used for risk assessment . This is of special importance as the
molecular diagnostic after a suggestive NBS result often leads to the identification of novel DNA variants, or “variants of unknown
significance” . We report on two asymptomatic siblings with a biochemically mild MCADD phenotype (low levels of MCAD-typical metabolites and
high residual enzyme activity). Only one of them was detected by NBS, while the other one was missed. Mutation analysis revealed a known
pathogenic missense mutation in combination with a novel splice site mutation in the ACADM gene. The consequences of this splice site
mutation were further characterized. All individuals in our study were recruited by physician-initiated referral. The study was conducted in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki protocols and approved by the institutional ethics review board of Freiburg University Hospital,
Germany. Written informed consent for molecular studies was obtained from the affected individuals and/or their legal guardians in
accordance with current German law (GenDG). A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Control
samples and primary cells were collected from ancestry-, sex- and age-matched healthy individuals under the same criteria and regulations.
Patient 1, a 7-year-old girl, is the first child of non-consanguineous German parents. She was born spontaneously at 41 weeks of gestation
after an uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight, birth length and head circumference were 3280 g (56th percentile), 53 cm (87th percentile) and
35 cm (50th percentile), respectively. Three hours after birth she was admitted to the intensive care unit with suspected newborn infection.
She was pale, tachypnoeic and required CPAP ventilation with up to 60 % oxygen. Laboratory parameters were indicative of systemic infection
(Interleukin 6 727 pg/ml, reference range < 30 pg/ml) and chest X-ray revealed pneumonic infiltrations. Under antibiotic treatment her
general condition ameliorated quickly, and the child was dismissed from hospital on day 10. NBS results including acylcarnitine analysis
were unremarkable. After dismission from hospital no further problems occurred and the child developed normally. Five years later her
younger sister, patient 2, was born and NBS was suggestive of MCADD. Urinary organic acid analysis biochemically confirmed the diagnosis.
Mutation analysis revealed compound heterozygosity for the common missense mutation c.985A > G and an intronic sequence variant,
c.600-18G > A, which has not been described previously. Genetic family screening was performed showing that the older sister (patient 1) was
also compound heterozygous for the same two mutations. Heterozygosity for the c.985A > G (p.K329E) mutation was detected in the healthy
mother, while the healthy father and the healthy 3-year-old brother were found to be heterozygous for the intronic sequence variant. An
overview on the ACADM genotypes of the two patients, their brother and their parents is shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 1Pedigree of the patient’s
family showing haplotypes for the ACADM allele variants in the patient, her siblings and her parents. Males are presented by squares,
females by circles. Allele variants without mutation are represented by an open square or circle. Mutated allele variants are indicated by a
solid (c.600-18G > A) or a shaded (c.985A > G) square or circle, respectively Pedigree of the patient’s family showing haplotypes for the
ACADM allele variants in the patient, her siblings and her parents. Males are presented by squares, females by circles. Allele variants
without mutation are represented by an open square or circle. Mutated allele variants are indicated by a solid (c.600-18G > A) or a shaded
(c.985A > G) square or circle, respectively In the following 3 years acylcarnitine analyses in dried blood spots of both girls were
performed repeatedly at times of physical well-being and yielded variable results (Table 1): In patient 1 three of four samples showed an
unremarkable acylcarnitine pattern while patient 2 usually displayed a “typical” MCAD pattern. Free carnitine concentrations were always
within the normal range. Analysis of organic acids in urine showed only mildly elevated concentrations of hexanoylglycine and
isohexanoylglycine in both patients (Table 1). Suberylglycine was only detected in few samples and the concentration of dicarboxylic acids
was usually not elevated. The oxidation rate of octanoyl-CoA was measured in lymphocytes of both patients. In patient 1 enzyme testing was
performed during a febrile episode yielding 17 % of healthy controls. In patient 2, octanoyl-CoA oxidation rate was determined twice, at
time of physical well-being and during fever showing a residual activity of 24 % and 13 %, respectively (Table 1).Table 1Biochemical data of
two siblings with mild MCAD deficiencyPatient 1Patient 2ControlsNewborn screeningUnremarkableSuggestive of MCADDUnremarkableConfirmatory
testingAcylcarnitines in dried blood spots (at different time
points)C60.06–0.27 μmol/l0.13–0.38 μmol/l<1 μmol/lC80.11–1.56 μmol/l0.31–1.5 μmol/l<0.4 μmol/lC10 (including
C4:1-DC)0.07–0.74 μmol/l0.16–0.93 μmol/l<0.2 μmol/lC10:10.07–0.63 μmol/l0.13–0.7 μmol/l<0.2 μmol/l0.01–0.090.02–0.4<0.02Urinary organic
acids (at different time points)Hexanoylglycine+/ n.d.+/ n.d.n.d.Isohexanoylglycine+/ n.d.+/ n.d.n.d.Suberylglycine+/ n.d.+/
n.d.n.d.Dicarboxylic acidsNot elevatedNot elevatedEnzyme activity measurements in lymphocytesOctanoyl-CoA-oxidation17 % (during fever)24 %
(without fever)100 %13 % (during fever) n.d. not detectable, + detectable in traces Biochemical data of two siblings with mild MCAD
deficiency n.d. not detectable, + detectable in traces No inborn errors of metabolism had been detected in other family members so far, and
no cases of unexplained death in infancy were reported. When specifically asked, the parents reported that the older sister (patient 1) had
well tolerated overnight-fasts of 9–10 h at the age of 9 months. She had had several minor febrile infections including gastroenteritis
within her first year of life. At the age of 4.5 years she had suffered from a severe febrile gastroenteritis. During this episode she ate
and drank only sparingly for about 4 to 5 days. Despite this catabolic state her vigilance had always been normal with no signs of
somnolence or lethargy and clinical symptoms of hypoglycemia were not observed. Determination of the MCAD residual activity was achieved by
assaying the oxidation of octanoyl-CoA and C10-CoA in lymphocytes by HPLC as described previously . Genomic DNA was extracted from EDTA
blood with QIAmp® DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). All exons and parts of the flanking intronic regions of the ACADM gene were
amplified according to standard protocols using Quick-Load® Taq 2X Master Mix (New England Biolabs, Frankfurt, Germany). Sequencing
reactions were performed with the BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Weiterstadt, Germany) (primer sequences
are available on request) and were analysed using a 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, USA). Electropherograms were evaluated with the
Sequencing Analysis Software v5.4 (Applied Biosystems, USA). To predict a putative missplicing effect of the sequence variant c.600-18G > A
the Alamut software 2.3.2 was used. Peripheral blood samples were fractionated into mononuclear cells and granulocytes using the standard
Ficoll protocol. Total RNA was isolated from these cells using TRIzol® Reagent (Life Technologies, USA) followed by a phenol-chloroform
extraction, treatment with DNAse I (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) and purification with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Quiagen, Hilden, Germany). Reverse
transcription of RNA into cDNA with oligo-dT primers and M-MLV RT (Life Technologies, USA) was conducted according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The subsequent PCR amplification was performed with specific primers spanning from exons 7 to 9 of the ACADM gene
(For_AACCTGGAGCAGGCTCTGAT and Rev_ACCAGCTCCGTCACCAATTA). PCR products were detected by electrophoresis on a 2 % agarose gel. After excision
and gel extraction with the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), PCR products were evaluated by sequencing analysis
(3130xl Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems, USA). Comparative alignments with the reference coding sequence were carried out by the DNA
Sequence Analysis Software Sequencher 4.9 (Gene Codes Corporation, USA). PCR products of the patient’s monocytes cDNA were ligated into the
pCR™II Vector and transformed into TOP10F’ Chemically Competent E. coli with the TA Cloning® Kit (Life Technologies, USA), according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Plasmids containing the different PCR products were purified with the FastPlasmid Mini Kit (5 Prime, Hamburg,
Germany). After an EcoRI digestion (New England Biolabs, Frankfurt, Germany) fragments were detected on an agarose gel and different splice
variants were identified by their predicted size. To confirm the proportion of the different splicing variants gel fragments were excised,
extracted and sequenced as described above. Fluorescent fragments of DNA were generated via PCR amplification of the cDNA gained from
granulocytes and monocytes of the patient and two independent controls with the For_AACCTGGAGCAGGCTCTGAT primer and a
Rev_ACCAGCTCCGTCACCAATTA 5′ FAM labelled primer, respectively. Fragments were separated using capillary electrophoresis (3130xl Genetic
Analyzer, Applied Biosystems, USA) and sized by comparison to a size standard (GeneScan™ 500 LIZ® Size Standard, Life Technologies, USA). In
the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism database (dbSNP) the sequence variant c.600-18G > A is annotated as an intronic variant with unknown
clinical relevance. In silico splice prediction with the Alamut Interactive Biosoftware was performed and all tools integrated in this
application (Splice Site Finder (SSF), MaxEntScan (MES), Neural Network (NNSplice) and GeneSplicer) identified the variant as a possible
candidate for splicing alteration (Additional file 1: Table S1). To determine the biological consequence of the c.600-18G > A mutation
putative missplicing was investigated at RNA level in granulocytes and monocytes of patient 1. Besides the expected PCR products of ca.
323 bp, we observed additional PCR products of 215 and 294 bp which were only present in the patient’s sample (Fig. 2). Gel extraction
followed by sequencing revealed either a total (215 bp) or partial deletion (294 bp) of exon 8.Fig. 2A novel mutation in the ACADM gene
results in aberrant splicing. Gel documentation visualizes the PCR product of a region of 323 bp from exon 7 to 9 of the ACADM gene in cDNA
of control granulocytes (CTL GRAN) as well as of monocytes (MNC) and granulocytes (GRAN) of patient 1. Arrows point to the additional PCR
products that were detected using cDNA of the patient’s granulocytes and monocytes. Analysis of the two additional PCR products in the gel
eluates of the patient’s samples revealed missplicing resulting in either a partial loss of exon 8 (fragment of 294 bp, upper arrowhead) or
complete skipping of exon 8 (fragment of 215 bp, lower arrowhead) A novel mutation in the ACADM gene results in aberrant splicing. Gel
documentation visualizes the PCR product of a region of 323 bp from exon 7 to 9 of the ACADM gene in cDNA of control granulocytes (CTL GRAN)
as well as of monocytes (MNC) and granulocytes (GRAN) of patient 1. Arrows point to the additional PCR products that were detected using
cDNA of the patient’s granulocytes and monocytes. Analysis of the two additional PCR products in the gel eluates of the patient’s samples
revealed missplicing resulting in either a partial loss of exon 8 (fragment of 294 bp, upper arrowhead) or complete skipping of exon 8
(fragment of 215 bp, lower arrowhead) In silico translation of both splice variants with the help of the ExPASy translate tool predicts
premature stop in the patient’s variants due to missplicing and therefore truncated proteins leading most likely to dysfunctional enzyme
(Fig. 3).Fig. 3Missplicing leads to premature stop codons and therefore truncated MCAD protein products. Shown are extracts of chromatograms
representative for the different splice variants. Specific regions are indicated (exon 7 to exon 9). In silico protein products of the ACADM
gene were generated, the amino acid sequence is displayed under the chromatogram extracts. Both forms of missplicing lead to premature stop
codons and therefore truncated protein products which only differ in two amino acids (WN) at the C-terminus of the truncated protein (a and
b corresponding to fragments 294 bp and 215 bp, respectively). c The region highlighted in grey in the chromatogram reflects the region that
is partly deleted in the patient’s cDNA shown in A due to missplicing. Probable cryptic donor and acceptor sites that lead to missplicing
are indicated. (CTL GRAN = control granulocytes, MNC = monocytes GRAN = granulocytes) Missplicing leads to premature stop codons and
therefore truncated MCAD protein products. Shown are extracts of chromatograms representative for the different splice variants. Specific
regions are indicated (exon 7 to exon 9). In silico protein products of the ACADM gene were generated, the amino acid sequence is displayed
under the chromatogram extracts. Both forms of missplicing lead to premature stop codons and therefore truncated protein products which only
differ in two amino acids (WN) at the C-terminus of the truncated protein (a and b corresponding to fragments 294 bp and 215 bp,
respectively). c The region highlighted in grey in the chromatogram reflects the region that is partly deleted in the patient’s cDNA shown
in A due to missplicing. Probable cryptic donor and acceptor sites that lead to missplicing are indicated. (CTL GRAN = control granulocytes,
MNC = monocytes GRAN = granulocytes) To quantify missplicing two different approaches were used. In the first approach, cDNA of the
patient’s monocytes was cloned into the pCRII-TOPO vector. With this method, the different RNA splicing variants could be identified by
their calculated transcript lengths. The different splice variants were further confirmed by sequencing. The evaluation of 28 transcripts
revealed missplicing in half of all PCR products: Besides the 14 wild type sequences, 5 sequences (18 %) showed skipping of exon 8, and in 9
sequences (32 %) partial deletion of exon 8 could be confirmed (Additional file 2: Figure S1). Consistent with this finding, the second
quantitation approach, based on a fragment analysis with a 5′ reverse FAM labelled primer, revealed an approximate ratio of 45:55 of
aberrant splicing versus normal splicing in the patient’s monocytes and an approximate ratio of 60:40 in the patient’s granulocytes,
respectively (Fig. 4, Additional file 3: Table S2). Interestingly, a minor amount (~10 %) of the transcript with exon 8 skipping could also
be detected in the control sample. Therefore, it is conceivable that ‘natural’ missplicing of the ACADM RNA also occurs in healthy
individuals although to a very limited extent as we could not detect this transcript in the gel.Fig. 4Percental amounts of different splice
products (studied in patient 1). Previously identified splicing fragments were confirmed with fragment analysis (H = height, S = size of the
fragment). Data of the fragment analysis were tabularized (Additional file 3: Table S2) and single fragment heights were set in relation to
overall heights (summarized fragment heights of the particular sample) to determine the percental distribution of the different splice
products in each sample. (CTL GRAN = control granulocytes, MNC = monocytes, GRAN = granulocytes) Percental amounts of different splice
products (studied in patient 1). Previously identified splicing fragments were confirmed with fragment analysis (H = height, S = size of the
fragment). Data of the fragment analysis were tabularized (Additional file 3: Table S2) and single fragment heights were set in relation to
overall heights (summarized fragment heights of the particular sample) to determine the percental distribution of the different splice
products in each sample. (CTL GRAN = control granulocytes, MNC = monocytes, GRAN = granulocytes) In a last step, the transcript sequences
were scanned for possible cryptic splice sites and a scheme for the aberrant splicing process could be developed. In our model, the
c.600-18G > A mutation in intron 7 leads to a splice pattern with strong cryptic donor and acceptor sites that compete with the natural
splice sites, resulting either in partial deletion or complete skipping of exon 8 (Fig. 5). We, therefore, presume the sequence variant
c.600-18G > A to be likely pathogenic which is also reflected by the reduced octanoyl-CoA oxidation rate in both patients.Fig. 5Working
model of the splice reaction with cryptic donor and acceptor sites. Exons are boxed, introns are represented by lines. The mutation in
intron 7 of the patient leads to the activation of cryptic donor and acceptor sites that compete with the natural splice site thereby
resulting in partial deletion (variant 1) or skipping of exon 8 (variant 2) Working model of the splice reaction with cryptic donor and
acceptor sites. Exons are boxed, introns are represented by lines. The mutation in intron 7 of the patient leads to the activation of
cryptic donor and acceptor sites that compete with the natural splice site thereby resulting in partial deletion (variant 1) or skipping of
exon 8 (variant 2) We here report on two siblings with mild MCADD, of whom only one was identified by newborn screening. The genotypes of
patients identified after implementation of NBS differ from those identified in patients with clinical manifestation [12, 13]. The mutation
c.985A > G is the most common mutation in clinically detected patients and has been found in 80 % of these individuals in homozygosity and
in 18 % in heterozygosity [14, 15]. This mutation is considerably less frequent in individuals diagnosed by NBS, while numerous novel
mutations including a second prevalent mutation, c.199 T > C, have been identified in this group of patients [12, 13]. Individuals carrying
these mutations often show significantly lower concentrations of disease-characteristic acylcarnitines [13, 14]. Our patients were found to
be compound heterozygous for the common c.985A > G mutation and a novel splice site mutation, c.600-18G > A. The c.985A > G mutation (K329E)
is well characterized with respect to its functional consequences. The MCAD protein is a tetramer of 4 identical subunits. The amino acid
change K329E is located in the C terminal α domain of the enzyme and compromises tetramer assembly by affecting helix-helix interactions
resulting in degradation of the mutant enzyme . The K329E protein variant has been shown to be thermosensitive . Therefore, febrile episodes
may additionally affect protein stability and function in patients carrying this mutation and may aggravate energy deficiency . The
c.600-18G > A mutation has not been described previously. Variant analysis using a prediction software indicated a splice altering mutation.
Indeed, we could demonstrate the pathogenicity of this mutation by proof of aberrant splicing. We propose an activation of cryptic splice
sites that leads to weakening of the natural splice sites and generates shortened transcripts. Although missplicing is not complete, the
combination of both mutations in the compound heterozygous state may account for the reduced enzyme activity and biochemical abnormalities
in our patients. The residual enzyme activity measured with octanoyl-CoA as substrate was 13-24 % of healthy controls. These values are
higher than those usually found in patients with “classical” MCADD, but lower than those found in heterozygous carriers indicating that the
splice site mutation really has a compromising effect on the MCAD protein. Missplicing is known to be highly tissue and cell type specific
as can be seen from the different splicing patterns in granulocytes and monocytes of our patients. Though no prediction of the prevalence of
missplicing in hepatocytes can be made from our data, it is conceivable that there is a shift in favour of the aberrant splice product in
this cell type. Furthermore, it has been reported that splicing processes can be temperature-sensitive. In case that the original splice
site is still functional temperature may affect splice site selection in favour of the aberrant splice site [20, 21]. Interestingly, we
found a lower residual activity during a febrile infection than at time of physical well-being in patient 2 (Table 1). In the context of
MCADD, in which metabolic decompensations are often triggered by febrile infections, this may be of clinical relevance. Enhanced missplicing
during episodes of increased energy expenditure may aggravate the cellular energy deficiency and therefore have clinical consequences. Only
one of the two sisters was identified by newborn screening due to a characteristic acylcarnitine pattern. This is notable as it has been
shown that even carriers of a single c.985A > G mutation may display mildly elevated C8 acylcarnitine concentrations [22, 23]. Lehotay et
al. reported significantly higher C8 concentrations of 0.302 ± 0.09 μmol/l in c.985A > G heterozygotes compared to healthy controls, while
the C8 concentration in our compound heterozygous patient (0.17 μmol/l) was even below this range. High C8 levels have been shown to be
associated with severe mutations including the common c.985G > C mutation (in homozygosity), deletions, nonsense or splice site mutations .
In a study with 34 MCAD deficient individuals evaluating the correlation between genotype and biochemical phenotype, patients homozygous for
c.985A > G had the highest levels of neonatal octanoylcarnitine followed by compound heterozygotes of c.985A > G and other mutations.
Patients without c.985A > G and compound heterozygotes for c.985A > G and c.199 T > C had the lowest levels of C8. According to this, an
intermediate elevation of the C8 acylcarnitine concentration would have been expected in our patient. Even if the high residual MCAD
activity and the mild biochemical expression in our patients are suggestive of a presumably low clinical penetrance, the potential risk of
metabolic decompensation during severe catabolism cannot be estimated and the clinical relevance of mild MCADD is difficult to establish.
Although the majority of symptomatic patients present within the first three years of life, several late onset cases have been reported [25,
26]. Both girls have remained asymptomatic so far, however, they are only 3 and 7 years old, respectively. Nevertheless, it is of great
interest that patient 1 has experienced many infections and catabolic conditions before diagnosis by family screening not resulting in any
clinical symptoms. The natural course of the disease in individuals with novel mutations is generally unknown . Many of these children may
remain asymptomatic even without detection by NBS. This is reflected by the much higher detection rate of MCADD by NBS compared to
clinically detected cases in unscreened populations. In contrast, one more recent study on structural alterations of several mutant variants
proposed that novel mutations found in NBS, including the c.199 T > C mutation, do not bear a lower risk of metabolic decompensation than
that associated with mutations detected in clinically ascertained patients , although, to our knowledge, only one individual carrying the
c.199 T > C mutation together with a second mutation has ever been symptomatic during follow-up. The mother sought emergency room care for
the infant two times in the first year for listlessness associated with gastroenteritis. At age 22 months altered mental status and variable
hypo- and hyperglycemia were reported during hospital admission for hand/foot/mouth disease . Residual enzyme activities in patients with
proposed mild MCADD are in some cases in the same activity range as in definite heterozygous parents questioning the clinical relevance of
the mutations . So far, there is no consensus to consider certain ACADM genotypes as safe and protective from clinical symptoms [16, 24],
however, we are also aware of an overtreatment of many individuals identified by newborn screening. The same uncertainty is true with
respect to the interpretation of the biochemical phenotype despite a strong relationship between initial C8 levels and outcome . The novel
splice variant c.600-18G > A was shown to activate a cryptic splice site, which competes with the natural splice site. Due to only partial
missplicing sufficient functional MCAD protein remains to result in clinically and biochemically mild MCADD that may be missed by newborn
screening. If patients with such mild phenotypes are at risk of fatal metabolic decompensations remains a matter of debate. Additional file
1: Table S1. In silico splice prediction of the Alamut Interactive Biosoftware. Note that all tools integrated in this application (Splice
Site Finder (SSF), MaxEntScan (MES), Neural Network (NNSplice) and GeneSplicer) identified the variant as a possible candidate for splicing
alteration. Additional file 2: Figure S1. Gel documentation of PCR products of the patient’s monocyte cDNA after EcoRI digestion. Fragments
were detected on an agarose gel. Splice variants were identified by their predicted size and confirmed by sequence analysis. Missplicing was
detected in half of the fragments. Additional file 3: Table S2. Tabularized data of the fragment analysis. Different fragments are indicated
with I (215 bp), II (294 bp) or III (323 bp). Single fragment heights were set in relation to overall heights (summarized fragment heights
of the particular sample) to determine the percental distribution of the different splice products in each sample. CTL GRAN = control
garanulocytes, Patient GRAN = granulocytes of patient, Patient MNC = monocytes of patients. In silico splice prediction of the Alamut
Interactive Biosoftware. Note that all tools integrated in this application (Splice Site Finder (SSF), MaxEntScan (MES), Neural Network
(NNSplice) and GeneSplicer) identified the variant as a possible candidate for splicing alteration. Gel documentation of PCR products of the
patient’s monocyte cDNA after EcoRI digestion. Fragments were detected on an agarose gel. Splice variants were identified by their predicted
size and confirmed by sequence analysis. Missplicing was detected in half of the fragments. Tabularized data of the fragment analysis.
Different fragments are indicated with I (215 bp), II (294 bp) or III (323 bp). Single fragment heights were set in relation to overall
heights (summarized fragment heights of the particular sample) to determine the percental distribution of the different splice products in
each sample. CTL GRAN = control garanulocytes, Patient GRAN = granulocytes of patient, Patient MNC = monocytes of patients. Octanoyl-
carnitine Tandem mass spectrometry Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency Newborn screening
Sarah C. Grünert and A. Wehrle contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions SG collected clinical data and laboratory samples of the patients and drafted the manuscript. AW, PV-L and
EL performed the molecular studies and characterization of the novel splice site mutation and critically revised the manuscript. BV and KOS
contributed to data collection. ST perfomed the enzymatic investigations. All authors participated in data discussion and critically revised
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors are thankful to the family for their support and interest in
this study.
