Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is one of the most frequently performed surgical interventions nowadays in developed countries. While lost
gallstones during the procedure represent a commonly encountered issue, there is an ongoing debate whether split gallstones imperatively
need to be extracted during the same procedure. The reported case of a wall abscess several years after follow-up lights up this debate. A
75-year-old male Caucasian with a history of rheumatoid arthritis and congestive heart failure presented with a recurrent subcutaneous
abdominal wall abscess with occasional, spontaneous drainage of pus. He underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute calculous
cholecystitis 3 years ago with uneventful and prompt recovery. A computed tomography scan showed a cavity in the periumbilical abdominal
wall with peripheral contrast-enhancing, next to a calcified foreign body between the rectus muscle sheets. Wound exploration under general
anaesthesia was performed with drainage of the cavity, extraction of the foreign body and closure of the anterior rectus sheet over a
drainage catheter. The foreign body turned out to be a gallstone lost in the periumbilical port site during the procedure. Antibiotic
treatment with co-amoxiclav was continued for 14 days. The patient was discharged 9 days postoperatively with a clean wound. This case and
short review of the literature is a reminder of the importance of careful extraction of split gallstones during cholecystectomy in order to
avoid early or late complications. This is especially important in the light of one of the most commonly performed surgical procedures in
developed countries with generally low morbidity. Split gallstones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy are a well known issue when the
gallbladder containing the calculus is accidentally perforated during the procedure. An Australian group reviewed eight studies with over
18,000 performed laparoscopic cholecystectomies and found an incidence of perforation of the gallbladder of 18.3% (8–39.9%) and an incidence
of spilt gallstones of 7.3% (0.1–20%), while one third (5–48%) of the split gallstones were left unretrieved . Whether unretrieved
gallstones cause damage has been studied and remains somehow controversial, since some authors found an increased risk of intraabdominal
adhesion and abscess formation while others describe no consequences unless the stones are crushed or associated with acutely inflamed
gallbladder [2, 3]. The aim of the present report is to remind of the potential late consequences of unretrieved gallstones within the
peritoneal cavity or abdominal wall. A 75-year-old male Caucasian with a history of rheumatoid arthritis and congestive heart failure
presented with a recurrent subcutaneous abdominal wall abscess with occasional, spontaneous drainage of pus. He underwent laparoscopic
cholecystectomy for acute calculous cholecystitis 3 years ago. Physical examination revealed periumbilical redness and tenderness with a
draining percutaneous tract. Laboratory testing revealed a white cell count of 13,900 per cubic millimetre. A computed tomography (CT) scan
showed a cavity in the periumbilical abdominal wall with peripheral contrast-enhancing, next to a calcified foreign body between the rectus
muscle sheaths (Fig. 1, arrow). Wound exploration under general anaesthesia was performed with drainage of the cavity, extraction of the
foreign body and closure of the anterior rectus sheet over a drainage catheter. On pathological examination, the foreign body turned out to
be a gallstone. It was lost in the periumbilical port site during the procedure in which gallbladder perforation occurred. “E. coli”
bacteria were found on microbiological array. Antibiotic treatment with co-amoxiclav was continued for 14 days. The patient was discharged
9 days postoperatively with a clean wound, and continued to visit the outpatient clinic for wound follow-up for 8 weeks. Follow-up was
uneventful.Fig. 1Foreign body on computed tomography scan. The arrow highlights the contrast-enhancing abscess cavity next to a calcified
foreign body. Foreign body on computed tomography scan. The arrow highlights the contrast-enhancing abscess cavity next to a calcified
foreign body. Since over 90% of split gallstones never become symptomatic, they often present as incidental findings on CT-scans. Particular
locations such as Morison’s pouch or even intrathoracic stones have been described [4, 5]. “Loose bodies” are prone to change place on
diagnostic imaging and represent a diagnostic challenge . It has been reported that 8.5% of lost gallstones will lead to a complication, and
risk factors such as acute cholecystitis with infected bile, pigment stones, prone to higher bacterial contamination, multiple stones (>15),
the stone size (>1.5 cm) and age have been described . Careful removal of as many stones as possible, intense irrigation and suction (10 mm
device) and avoidance of spread into difficult accessible sites, as well as the use of intraabdominal bags and laparoscopic graspers are
recommended . Stones should routinely be examined for infection and treated accordingly. Informed patient consent with mentioning of this
potential late complication might help to avoid misunderstandings later on. Of note, interventional abscess puncture without stone removal
implies a high risk of recurrence . The recently encountered case of an abdominal wall abscess due to an infected gallstone, split during a
surgical intervention several years ago, is a reminder of this displeasing late complication. It reminds the surgical community of the
importance of prompt and careful removal of these stones, especially when confronted with acute cholecystitis. Treating physicians
confronted with unusual abscess locations should bear in mind this rare complication when confronted with an unusual abscess formation in
patients who have previously undergone laparoscopic gall bladder removal. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. FG, IF and VB were treating physicians during the reported time period. All authors analysed and interpreted the data. FG
drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All authors contributed substantially to the conception, design,
acquisition of data, analysis, and interpretation of data, and were involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for
important intellectual content. There were no sources of funding. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
