Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a type of myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) characterized by the predominant proliferation of megakaryocytes
and granulocytes in the bone marrow, leading to the deposition of fibrous tissue, and by a propensity toward extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Renal involvement in PMF is rare, but kidney tissue samples from these patients reveal MPN-related glomerulopathy, a recently discovered
condition, in the late stages of the disease. We present the first case described in the medical literature of a patient with early renal
glomerular involvement in PMF/MPN. A 60-year-old man with stage 4 chronic kidney disease and a recent diagnosis of PMF (within 4 weeks of
presentation at our renal division) presented with generalized body swelling, acute kidney injury, and massive nephrotic-range proteinuria.
Kidney biopsy was performed to determine the etiology of the patient’s renal dysfunction and revealed early renal glomerular involvement
that was histologically characteristic of MPN-related glomerulopathy. Early diagnosis and prompt medical management returned the patient’s
kidney functionality to the levels seen on initial presentation at our hospital. Large studies with long follow-up durations are necessary
to identify and categorize the risk factors for the development of MPN-related glomerulopathy, to standardize therapeutic regimens, and to
determine whether aggressive management of the myelofibrosis slows the progression of kidney disease. Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs)
are clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders in which proliferation of one or more of the myeloid lineages occurs owing to acquired somatic
mutations in signal transduction pathways, which results in fibrosis of the bone marrow. MPNs generally occur in the elderly . Primary
myelofibrosis (PMF), a type of MPN, is defined by the predominant proliferation of megakaryocytes and granulocytes in the bone marrow,
eventually leading to the deposition of fibrous tissue with progressive pancytopenia, and by a propensity toward extramedullary
hematopoiesis, including enlargement of the liver and spleen . The major complications associated with MPN disease include increased risk of
thrombosis and hemorrhage and transformation into acute myeloid leukemia . Renal involvement in MPN is infrequent. Acute kidney injury may
develop because thrombosis of the renal vessels , occlusion of the urinary tract by blood clots, tumor lysis syndrome, or due to leukemic
infiltration of the interstitium [4, 5]. Patients with MPN develop a distinct glomerular lesion, recently described as MPN-related
glomerulopathy, which differs in morphology and pathology from those caused by other hematologic neoplasms [4, 6]. MPN-related
glomerulopathy is the first glomerular injury that has been associated with myeloid neoplasms . Typical clinical presentation includes
nephrotic-range proteinuria (with or without the full nephrotic syndrome) and chronic renal insufficiency. Diagnosis is confirmed by kidney
biopsy; tissue samples show the histopathological pattern associated with MPN-related glomerulopathy comprising variaing degrees of
mesangial hypercellularity and sclerosis, segmental sclerosis, and intracapillary hematopoietic cell infiltration (most commonly with
megakaryocytes) on light microscopy and absence of immune deposits on immunofluorescence and electron microscopy. Additionally, segmental
subendothelial electron-lucent thickening with glomerular basement membrane double contours is seen in some patients, mimicking a chronic
thrombotic microangiopathy . Proper recognition of MPN-related glomerulopathy and differentiation of this renal disorder from other forms of
sclerosing glomerulopathy, thrombotic microangiopathy, and immune-complex glomerulonephritis are essential for diagnosis and management. We
describe the first case in the medical literature of an early manifestation of MPN-related glomerulopathy in a patient recently diagnosed
with PMF, and significant improvement in kidney function upon successful therapy of PMF with ruxolitinib, an oral JAK inhibitor. A 60-year-
old white man with stage 4 chronic kidney disease (CKD), coronary artery disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and a recent diagnosis of PMF
presented at our renal division with generalized body swelling and an elevated serum creatinine level with massive nephrotic-range
proteinuria. His serum creatinine level was 1.78 mg/dL at the initial consultation at our institution. He was a former smoker of 35 pack-
years. The examination revealed diminished bibasilar breath sounds and severe abdominal distension with massive hepatosplenomegaly along
with profound anasarca. No skin rashes were seen. Laboratory work-up revealed thrombocytosis, hyperlipidemia, and hypoalbuminemia.
Urinalysis revealed proteinuria at 600 mg/dL and 300 mg/dL of glucose, and the spot urine sample had a protein to creatinine ratio of 23
along with multiple granular casts. The estimated glomerular filtration rate was 27 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal range, 90–120 mL/min/1.73 m2).
Given his massive proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and peripheral edema, the differential diagnoses included focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
(secondary to myelofibrosis), membranous glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis, and paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis. Results from the
proteinuria assessment and work-up with serum and urine protein electrophoresis, immunofixation, hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus
tests, and tests for antinuclear antibodies and other immunological markers were unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography images showed
no valvular abnormalities, and the patient had an ejection fraction of 60 % (normal value > 55 %). The patient was placed on a salt and
fluid restricted diet and was treated with bumetanide, lisinopril, hydralazine, carvedilol, isosorbide mononitrate, and rosuvastatin. He was
on hydroxyurea for PMF. He underwent a kidney biopsy (less than 30 days from his initial diagnosis of PMF and nephrotic syndrome) to
determine the etiology of his massive proteinuria and further worsening kidney injury. The patient’s symptoms improved with treatment over
the next 2 weeks, with a reduction in body swelling and abdominal distension. Therapy with a new JAK inhibitor (ruxolitinib) was started;
after 4 months of treatment, the patient’s white blood cell count decreased from 61,000 K/ul to 12,000 K/ul and platelets from
1152,000 K/ul, to normal levels, decrease in splenomegaly from 13 cm to 4 cm, and hepatomegaly from 14 cm to non-palpable,. This was
accompanied with a decrease in his protein to creatinine ratio to 8 g from 23 g and return of his baseline creatinine to 1.78 mg/dL from a
peak value of 4.23 mg/dL. Light microscopic examination of the kidney tissue (Fig. 1a-c) revealed twelve glomeruli which were slightly
enlarged with diffuse mesangial matrix expansion and mild mesangial hypercellularity; however, the segmental capillaries also contained
cells with large atypical-appearing nuclei consistent with megakaryocytes. The expanded mesangial matrix stained positive for periodic acid-
Schiff and Grocott methenamine silver. One glomerulus was globally sclerotic and no glomerulus was segmentally sclerotic. There was a
diffuse mild to moderate increase in tubulointerstitial matrix, but without tubular atrophy. Only a scant mononuclear inflammatory
infiltrate was present. Tubules were mildly ectatic focally with loss of brush borders. Interstitial capillaries also contained occasional
megakaryocytes. Mild to moderate arteriosclerosis with focal hyaline arteriolar sclerosis was present. Immunofluorescence showed weak to 1+
mesangial IgM, but glomeruli were negative for IgG, IgA, kappa light chain, lambda light chain, C3 and C1q. Electron microscopic examination
of three glomeruli (Fig. 2) revealed diffuse, moderate expansion of the mesangial matrix with very focal segmental deposits of slightly
electron- dense material, but typical immune complex deposits were not present. Occasional megakaryocytes with characteristic small dense
core granules and immature myeloid-series cells were seen within the capillaries. Podocyte foot processes were extensively effaced.Fig.
1Microscopy results of kidney and liver tissue from a 60-year-old man with myeloproliferative neoplasm-related glomerulopathy in the early
stages of primary myelofibrosis hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (a) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) (b) stained sections of glomeruli with
moderate mesangial matrix expansion and occasional intracapillary and intra-arteriolar megakaryocytes (arrows). The renal tubulointerstitium
(c) also contained interstitial or intracapillary megakaryocytes (arrow). A biopsy of the liver (d) showed megakaryocytes, nucleated red
blood cells and other immature myeloid cell within the hepatic sinusoidsFig. 2Electron micrographs show glomeruli with segmental
intracapillary megakaryocytes (a and b) and mesangial matrix expansion (a). Podocyte foot processes were extensively effaced. Megakaryocytes
contained characteristic small dense core granules (arrows) and multilobular nuclei (b) Microscopy results of kidney and liver tissue from a
60-year-old man with myeloproliferative neoplasm-related glomerulopathy in the early stages of primary myelofibrosis hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) (a) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) (b) stained sections of glomeruli with moderate mesangial matrix expansion and occasional
intracapillary and intra-arteriolar megakaryocytes (arrows). The renal tubulointerstitium (c) also contained interstitial or intracapillary
megakaryocytes (arrow). A biopsy of the liver (d) showed megakaryocytes, nucleated red blood cells and other immature myeloid cell within
the hepatic sinusoids Electron micrographs show glomeruli with segmental intracapillary megakaryocytes (a and b) and mesangial matrix
expansion (a). Podocyte foot processes were extensively effaced. Megakaryocytes contained characteristic small dense core granules (arrows)
and multilobular nuclei (b) A liver biopsy, performed at the same time as the kidney biopsy (Fig. 1d) showed extramedullary hematopoiesis
characterized by dilated sinusoids which contained moderate amount of immature myeloid cells including megakaryocytes, nucleated red blood
cells, and myelocytes in various stages of maturation and differentiation. The morphological differential diagnosis of MPN-related
glomerulopathy includes diabetic glomerulosclerosis, smoking-related glomerulopathy, primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, thrombotic
microangiopathy, and chronic membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. Mesangial hypercellularity is more prominent in MPN-related
glomerulopathy than in diabetic glomerulosclerosis, smoking-related glomerulopathy, and primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, whereas
nodular mesangial sclerosis is not typically associated with MPN-related glomerulopathy. Absence of immune deposits revealed by
immunofluorescence and electron microscopy differentiates MPN-related glomerulopathy from membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis . Though
it is well known that the myeloproliferation in MPN results from a clonal expansion of the myeloid progenitor cells, the subsequent
myelofibrosis definitive of PMF is hypothesized to be due to a reactive mechanism mediated by megakaryocyte-derived excessive synthesis of
growth factors including platelet-derived growth factor and transforming growth factor-β [8, 9]. Platelet-derived growth factor stimulates
mesangial cell proliferation, mesangial matrix synthesis, and apoptosis of podocytes, whereas transforming growth factor-β aids in mesangial
cell production of collagen and fibronectin. The combination of these effects could cause glomerular lesions specific to MPN-related
nephropathy. Furthermore, aggregation of circulating hematopoietic cells within glomerular presumably capillaries could presumably lead to
endothelial injury and morphological changes mimicking chronic thrombotic microangiopathy [10, 11]. In a recent series of 11 patients with
MPN who developed proteinuria and renal insufficiency, most of the patients (73 %) had PMF, a less prevalent type of MPN, suggesting that
patients with PMF have a higher risk of developing MPN-related glomerulopathy than do patients with other types of MPN . However, PMF is not
considered a pure paraneoplastic disease because of the presence of hematopoietic cell infiltration. In these 11 patients, the clinical
manifestations of MPN-related glomerulopathy, namely proteinuria of greater than 3 g/day with chronic renal insufficiency, tended to
manifest late in the course of MPN (the mean time from diagnosis of MPN to kidney biopsy was 7.2 years) . In a recent study, the frequency
of CKD in a large cohort of 143 MPN patients from Denmark at time of diagnosis was 29 %: 27 % had stage 3 CKD, and 2 % had stage 4 CKD. This
was the first study to describe the progression patterns in renal function over time in MPN patients . This important and speculative
finding of a high frequency of CKD at diagnosis of MPN suggests that MPN disease detrimentally affects kidney function. In this context, MPN
and CKD could be linked by chronic inflammation, which is hypothesized to be a trigger and amplifier of the MPN disease process . The
prognosis of patients with MPN-related glomerulopathy, unlike those with other glomerulopathies, remains guarded even after corticosteroid
therapy, renin-angiotensin system blockade, and treatment of the underlying neoplasm . Most patients continue to have persistent renal
dysfunction with progression to end-stage renal disease, and therefore it was very satisfying to witness significant clinical improvement in
patient’s condition and renal function on therapy with JAK inhibitor, ruxolitinib. Because PMF and MPN-related glomerulopathy were detected
within a relatively short time in our patient, prompt medical management restored stable renal function. However, because our patient also
has stage 4 CKD and multiple co-morbidities, his long-term prognosis remains poor. Larger studies with longer follow-up durations are
necessary to identify and categorize the risk factors for the development of MPN-related glomerulopathy, to standardize therapeutic
regimens, and to determine whether aggressive management of the myelofibrosis slows the progression of kidney disease. We recommend that
patients with hematological neoplasms should be screened for urinary abnormalities, especially proteinuria. An aggressive approach to
urinary screening and kidney biopsy would provide more data on the frequency and course of renal disease in MPN and would provide key
information on the feasibility of conducting clinical trials for treating MPN-related glomerulopathy. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. Chronic Kidney Disease Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Primary Myelofibrosis Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AR: Collected the data needed and helped in writing the manuscript. TN: Helped
in writing the manuscript. MA: Provided valuable input to structure of manuscript and helped in writing. WG: Provided his expertise, written
the pathological findings and edited paper. AP: Helped in writing the discussion. SV: Provide his expertise as the primary oncologist and
helped in writing and editing the paper. AA: Helped in writing and final editing the paper. Overlooked everyone contributions and finalized
the manuscript. All authors have equally contributed to this work and approved the final manuscript. We thank Jill R Delsigne who provided
medical writing services on behalf of The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.
