Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a severe, life-threatening infection of the renal parenchyma and perinephric tissues. This condition is
primarily encountered in patients with diabetes mellitus or ureteral obstruction, and is characterized by the production of intrarenal and
perinephric gas. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is associated with a high degree of morbidity and a high mortality rate. A 72-year-old woman
with a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and renal calculi was referred to our emergency department following 6 days of abdominal
pain. She suddenly developed pain in the entire abdomen, and was transferred. Physical examination was a distended abdomen with hypoactive
bowel sounds. The tenderness was diffuse, but was most prominent in the right upper abdominal quadrant; moreover, rebound tenderness was
noted. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 4,480/mm3, platelet count of 17,000/mm3, creatinine level of 1.64 mg/dl, and
serum glucose level of 603 mg/dl. Abdominal computed tomography indicated the presence of free air in the intraperitoneal cavity and right
perirenal space, hydronephrosis of the right kidney, and stones in the right distal ureter. After 1 hour, the vital signs changed and she
appeared to become drowsy. Therefore, the patient was transferred to the operation room for laparotomy. On exploration of the abdomen, 1.5 L
of pus-colored fluid was removed. Although the abdominal viscera and pelvic organs were examined, hollow viscus perforation site could not
be observed. Moreover, tissue necrosis and a perforation site were identified at the superior border of the right kidney. Thus,
emphysematous pyelonephritis was diagnosed and she underwent right radical nephrectomy. After the surgery, the patient was admitted to the
intensive care unit for postoperative management. Follow-up CT performed after 10 days showed fluid collection and hematoma at the
nephrectomy site. Hence, percutaneous drainage was performed. Another follow-up computed tomography after 3 weeks indicated that the fluid
collection at the nephrectomy site had nearly disappeared. We believe that cases with free intraperitoneal air should promptly undergo
laparotomy to identify the cause of the pneumoperitoneum. Moreover, an immediate nephrectomy may be effective for the treatment of
emphysematous pyelonephritis in cases with poor prognostic factors. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a severe, life-threatening infection of
the renal parenchyma and perinephric tissues. This condition is primarily encountered in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) or ureteral
obstruction, and is characterized by the production of intrarenal and perinephric gas [1, 2]. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is associated
with a high degree of morbidity and a high mortality rate. In the present report, we describe a case of emphysematous pyelonephritis that
presented with pneumoperitoneum. A 72-year-old woman with a history of DM, hypertension, and renal calculi was referred to our emergency
department following 6 days of abdominal pain. She was initially started on intravenous ciprofloxacin at another hospital; despite this
treatment, her symptoms persisted and gradually exacerbated. She suddenly developed pain in the entire abdomen, and was therefore
transferred to our hospital for further management. Her initial vital signs indicated a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg, heart rate of 120
beats per minute, temperature of 37.9 °C, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute. Physical examination on admission was a distended
abdomen with hypoactive bowel sounds. The tenderness was diffuse, but was most prominent in the right upper abdominal quadrant; moreover,
rebound tenderness was noted. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 4,480/mm3 with 86 % granulocytes, hemoglobin level of
11.2 g/dl, platelet count of 17,000/mm3, creatinine level of 1.64 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen level of 44.4 mg/dl, and serum glucose level of
603 mg/dl. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) indicated the presence of free air in the intraperitoneal cavity and right perirenal space,
hydronephrosis of the right kidney, fluid and fat infiltration in the right perirenal space, and stones in the right distal ureter (Fig. 1).
Hence, the patient was started on intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam plus ciprofloxacin, as well as fluid resuscitation on arrival. After
1 hour, the vital signs changed—the blood pressure decreased to 90/50 mmHg and temperature increased to 38.6 °C. Furthermore, she appeared
to become drowsy. Therefore, the patient was immediately transferred to the operation room for laparotomy. On exploration of the abdomen,
1.5 L of pus-colored fluid was removed. Although the abdominal viscera and pelvic organs were examined, hollow viscus perforation site could
not be observed. Moreover, tissue necrosis and a perforation site were identified at the superior border of the right kidney (Fig. 2). Thus,
emphysematous pyelonephritis was diagnosed and she underwent right radical nephrectomy. During the surgery, the patient’s vital signs were
unstable, and hence, vasopressin was intravenously administered. After the surgery, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for
postoperative management. Norepinephrine was administered to maintain the blood pressure, and was tapered on postoperative day 2. The
patient was weaned from ventilator support and extubated on postoperative day 4. Follow-up CT performed 10 days after the initial study
showed fluid collection and hematoma at the nephrectomy site. Hence, percutaneous drainage was performed. Another follow-up CT after 3 weeks
indicated that the fluid collection at the nephrectomy site had nearly disappeared. The patient was discharged to home in a stable
condition, and was advised to attend follow-up visits at the surgery and nephrology departments.Fig. 1Abdominal CT finding. Axial view
showing gas in the right renal parenchyme and perirenal space and intraperitoneal air (arrows)Fig. 2Intraoperative finding. A perforation
site was identified at the superiolateral border of second portion of duodenum Abdominal CT finding. Axial view showing gas in the right
renal parenchyme and perirenal space and intraperitoneal air (arrows) Intraoperative finding. A perforation site was identified at the
superiolateral border of second portion of duodenum Emphysematous pyelonephritis—a serious complication of upper urinary infection—has been
defined as an acute, severe, necrotizing infection of the renal parenchyma and perirenal tissue, which results in the development of gas
within the renal parenchyma, collecting system, or perinephric tissue . It is usually associated with DM and/or urinary obstruction such as
stones . However, the mechanism of gas formation and pathogenesis of emphysematous pyelonephritis are unclear. Huang and Tseng hypothesized
that the high level of blood glucose in patients with DM may provide gas-forming microorganisms with a more favorable environment for gas
formation via mixed acid fermentation of glucose. However, bacterial gas production does not fully explain the pathologic and clinical
manifestations of this condition. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is diagnosed by the identification of gas in renal or perinephric tissue . CT
is reportedly the most sensitive method for detecting gas in and adjacent to the kidney [1, 7–9]. Based on CT findings, Wan et al proposed
that emphysematous pyelonephritis can be classified into two types, in order to determine the prognosis and guide therapy. Furthermore,
Huang and Tseng classified emphysematous pyelonephritis into four types based on the radiological findings on CT. Thus, the prognosis and
treatment course of cases with emphysematous pyelonephritis can be determined according to classifications based on CT findings. However,
pneumoperitoneum caused by emphysematous pyelonephritis has not been included in any of the classification systems based on CT findings.
Emphysematous pyelonephritis can be seen with pneumoretroperitoneum due to its location within the retroperitoneum, and the perirenal
fascial boundaries may be disrupt in fulminant infection, allowing the air migrate into other compartments. Cases of pneumoperitoneum caused
by emphysematous pyelonephritis are rare. To our knowledge, only two other reports in the literature have described cases of
pneumoperitoneum with emphysematous pyelonephritis [11, 12]. Therefore, a standard treatment method has not yet been established. In both
the cases reported in the literature, laparotomy was promptly performed. Moreover, drainage and delayed nephrectomy were performed in one
case whereas only drainage was performed in the other case. In the present case laparotomy and radical nephrectomy were promptly performed.
This surgical treatment was decided because the patient complained of whole abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness, pneumoperitoneum
was noted on CT, her condition deteriorated, and she had severe risk factors. Falagas et al reported that the significant risk factors for
mortality in such cases include conservative treatment alone, bilateral emphysematous pyelonephritis, type I emphysematous nephritis, and
thrombocytopenia. The presence of a systolic blood pressure of <90 mmHg, serum creatinine level of >2.5 mg/dL, and disturbance of
consciousness are also reportedly associated with increased mortality in these cases. Huang and Tseng suggest that cases of extensive
emphysematous pyelonephritis with a fulminant course (≥2 risk factors) should promptly undergo nephrectomy in order to achieve the best
outcome. In addition, the presence of pneumoperitoneum usually indicates visceral perforation. Prompt surgical intervention is usually
required in these patients to reduce the degree and magnitude of enteric contamination within the peritoneal cavity. Thus, surgery is the
main treatment for cases of emphysematous pyelonephritis and pneumoperitoneum. We believe that cases with free intraperitoneal air should
promptly undergo laparotomy to identify the cause of the pneumoperitoneum. Moreover, an immediate nephrectomy may be effective for the
treatment of emphysematous pyelonephritis in cases with poor prognostic factors. Written consent was obtained from the patient for this
publication. A copy of written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Diabetes mellitus Computed tomography
Competing interests All authors disclose no possible conflicts of interest, sources of financial support, corporate involvement or patent
holdings. All authors disclose no financial or personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately
influence authors’ work. Authors’ contributions KKH has made substantial contributions to conception and design. KKH and PSH wrote the
paper. PSH checked bibliographic reference. KKH had primary responsibility for the content. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We would like to thank Editage (www.editage.co.kr) for English language editing.
