This case report details a clinical trial's first recruited liver cancer patient who underwent a course of stereotactic body radiation
therapy treatment utilising audiovisual biofeedback breathing guidance. Breathing motion results for both abdominal wall motion and tumour
motion are included. Patient 1 demonstrated improved breathing motion regularity with audiovisual biofeedback. A training effect was also
observed. S Pollock MSc; R Tse MBBS, MMed; D Martin BAppSc (MRS); L McLean MMRS; G Cho MSc; R Hill PhD; S Pickard PgDip Radiotherapy
Studies; P Aston BAppSc (MRS); C‐Y Huang PhD; K Makhija PGDCA; R O'Brien PhD; P Keall PhD. Conflict of interest: Paul Keall is one of the
inventors of US patent # 7955270 and Paul Keall, Sean Pollock, Ricky O'Brien and Kuldeep Makhija are shareholders of Respiratory
Innovations, an Australian company that is developing a device to improve breathing stability. No funding or support was provided by
Respiratory Innovations. Liver tumours are highly mobile due to their proximity to the thoracic diaphragm. When a patient's breathing motion
is irregular, it exacerbates both systematic and random errors which compromise the accuracy of radiation therapy.1, 2 To reduce these
errors, breathing guidance strategies have been investigated to facilitate stable and regular breathing.3, 4 This study represents a
milestone in breathing guidance investigations as it addresses a gap in the literature by assessing the impact of the breathing guidance
system, audiovisual biofeedback (AVB), on intra‐ and inter‐fraction liver tumour motion, via fiducial marker surrogacy, in liver cancer
patients undergoing stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT). The AVB system, shown in Figure 1, utilises audio and visual prompts to
guide the patient to breathe regularly. External breathing motion from the Real‐time Position Management (RPM) system (Varian Medical
Systems, Palo Alto, CA, USA) of the patient's abdominal wall is shown on the patient display. The marker block moves up as they inhale and
down as they exhale. The patient adjusts their breathing such that the marker block stays within the blue region and traces the motion of
the waveguide (white wave in Fig. 1). Study setup in the linac bunker with the Real‐time Position Management (RPM) marker block and patient
display (left). AVB (audiovisual biofeedback) interface (right). Patient 1 was a 65‐year‐old male with metastatic (recurrent)
cholangiocarcinoma and received 36 Gy across 6 fractions using volumetric‐modulated arc therapy‐based SBRT to a 30 mm solitary lesion in
segment 8 of the liver. Due to previous liver resection, this patient had pre‐existing surgical clips implanted into his liver, which were
utilised for image guidance. He had a number of other comorbidities including bronchiectasis with impaired pulmonary function and was of
Karnofsky performance status 1. Prior to treatment planning, a screening procedure was performed to ensure that the most regular breathing
condition (free breathing (FB) or AVB) was utilised throughout the patient's subsequent course of SBRT. Breathing motion was monitored for 4
minutes for each of the breathing conditions FB and AVB; at the 2‐minute mark, cone beam CT (CBCT) images were acquired. Determining which
breathing condition would be selected was based on the regularity of the 4 minutes of external breathing motion (quantified by the root mean
square error (RMSE) in displacement and period); the lower the RMSE, the more regular the breathing motion. Decisions were made in situ
using a function within the AVB software. Patient 1's screening procedure yielded the decision to utilise AVB for the remainder of their
course of SBRT. Patient 1's treatment planning and treatment delivery proceeded as per the currently implemented clinical liver SBRT
protocol with the addition of the AVB setup (see Fig. 1). CBCT images were acquired prior to treatment delivery on each day of treatment,
motion of the surgical clips was extracted from the CBCT projection images utilising a method developed by Fledelius et al.,5 as a surrogate
for tumour motion. Figure 2 and Figure 3 demonstrate the breathing motion results across patient 1's course of radiotherapy. It was also
observed that AVB increased the average range of tumour motion from 1.5 cm for FB, to 1.8 cm for AVB. AVB (audiovisual biofeedback) and FB
(free breathing) RMSE (root mean square error) results for Screening Procedure (left); and results for AVB across patient 1's course of
treatment (right), for RMSE of displacement (RMSE Disp, blue circle markers) and RMSE of period (RMSE Per, purple triangle markers).
External motion shown as hollow markers/bars and dotted lines, tumour motion shown as solid markers/bars and unbroken lines. The external
motion (top) and tumour (bottom) individual breathing cycles for FB and AVB Decision Sessions (left) and Fraction 6 (right). Unbroken blue
lines represent each individual breathing cycle, and the dotted red line is the average cycle. This study reported on the first patient
recruited into a clinical trial investigating the use of breathing guidance during a course of liver SBRT planning and treatment utilising
an initial screening procedure. A training effect was observed, with the patient's breathing motion becoming more regular
inter‐fractionally, plateauing at peak regularity around Fraction 3. It was also observed that AVB increased breathing amplitude compared
with FB. Given that the AVB waveguide peak‐to‐peak amplitude was set at 1.5 cm and the observed external peak‐to‐peak amplitude was 1.7 cm
indicates that Patient 1 ‘over‐shot’ the AVB breathing limits. For future patients in this study further attention will be given to managing
breathing motion amplitude and patient training. In conclusion, the first patient recruited into this study yielded the decision to utilise
AVB through their course of SBRT. Patient 1 demonstrated good acceptance of the breathing guide in addition to increasingly regular
breathing throughout their course of SBRT. This project was supported by an NHMRC Australia Fellowship and the Bob and Nancy Edwards
Scholarship. The authors thank Julie Baz for reviewing this paper for clarity.
