Dear Editor, A 52-year-old male was referred to our institution because of an intraocular mass in his right eye. An elevated mass was found
behind the iris. Ultrasonography revealed a solid mass and exudative retinal detachment in the lower retina. We recommended further
evaluation and suspected ciliary body melanoma; however, the patient was lost to follow-up. Four years later, the patient presented with a
progressively protruding mass that had developed over the previous 3 months. A large dark-pigmented extraocular mass filled the entire right
eyelid fissure (Fig. 1A). The mass seemed to be an anterior extraocular extension of the previously identified ciliary body melanoma via the
superonasal corneoscleral limbus. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a mass that occupied most of the vitreous cavity with invasion into
the sclera. The lesion demonstrated marked hypointensity and hyperintensity on T2- and T1-weighted images, respectively. After gadolinium
enhancement, the lesion demonstrated homogeneous intense enhancement that was strongly suggestive of melanoma (Fig. 1B). Positron emission
tomography-computerized tomography revealed no distant metastasis. Enucleation was performed with additional resection of the tumor-
surrounding conjunctiva, using the no-touch isolation technique. After removing the eyeball as well as the tumor, a 20-mm porous
polyethylene implant (MEDPOR; Stryker Inc., Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was inserted into the anophthalmic cavity. Histopathological examination
revealed a 47 × 25 × 24-mm-sized solid mass that involved the entire eyeball cavity (Fig. 1C). Tumor cells were compatible with spindle cell
melanoma. The melanin pigment was dispersed throughout the scleral tissue, thereby indicating scleral invasion (Fig. 1D), but there was no
tumor invasion into the optic nerve. No postoperative adjuvant treatment was performed. The patient demonstrated a good clinical course
without local recurrence or distant metastasis for 36 months after the operation. Melanomas that arise from the ocular and adnexal
structures comprise 5% of all melanomas, and 85% of them originate from the uvea . Extraocular extension of uveal melanoma is rare and
difficult to manage. In a retrospective study performed on 610 patients with uveal melanoma, 50 patients (8.2%) had extrascleral extension
and 16 patients (2.6%) had a large extended mass >4 mm. The 5-year survival rate was 22%, which is significantly lower than patients with
smaller melanomas . The tumor in this case was 47 × 25 × 24 mm in size, which, to the best of our knowledge, is the largest of this type of
tumor that has been recorded. Shields et al. reported that the largest basal diameters of uveal melanomas identified in 8,033 eyes ranged
between 1.0 to 33.0 mm . Given the availability of advanced techniques for early detection as well as effective treatment, it is very rare
to observe such a massive uveal melanoma with extraocular extension, in addition to the natural course of expansion. Managing patients with
uveal melanoma and extraocular extension remains controversial. Cases with macroscopic extrascleral extension are generally treated by
enucleation or, in selected cases, orbital exenteration. However, Kersten et al. reported that exenteration is palliative and prognosis is
unaltered in patients who receive exenteration. Some reports suggest that adjunctive radiation treatment should be considered if the tumor
is transected at the time of surgical removal . Some reports on uveal melanomas with anterior extraocular extension have been managed using
enucleation or exenteration. Kimura et al. reported a 64-year-old female with anterior extraocular extension and mixed-cell melanoma through
the sclera who underwent enucleation and adjuvant chemotherapy, but died of systemic metastasis at 6-months post-procedure. In our case, the
patient presented with some factors that were related to poor prognosis, such as the large ciliary body tumor, older age, male sex, and
massive extraocular extension, but we only performed enucleation instead of aggressive orbital exenteration or adjuvant treatment for the
following reasons: 1) the large size was due to anterior extraocular extension, but no tumor involvement was noted in the adjacent
conjunctiva or eyelids; 2) preoperative magnetic resonance imaging provided no evidence of tumor invasion into the optic nerve or other
orbital spaces; 3) positron emission tomography-computerized tomography revealed no distant metastasis; and 4) postoperative histopathology
confirmed spindle-cell melanoma. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest uveal melanoma reported to date with extraocular
extension through the corneoscleral limbus. In cases without significant invasion into the adjacent ocular adnexal tissue or metastasis, we
believe uveal melanoma with anterior extraocular extension can be managed by enucleation alone regardless of size. Conflict of Interest: No
potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
