Anal canal adenoma is an extremely rare disease that has the potential to transform into a malignant tumor. We herein presented a rare case
of metachronous multiple adenomas of the anal canal. A 48-year-old woman underwent total colonoscopy following a positive fecal blood test.
A 9-mm villous polyp arising from the posterior wall of the anal canal was removed by snare polypectomy. Histologically, the tumor was
tubulovillous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia and the cut end was negative for tumor cells. Six years later, an elevated lesion,
macroscopically five millimeters in size, was detected in the left wall of the anal canal in a follow-up colonoscopy. Local excision of the
tumor was performed, and the lesion was pathologically confirmed to be tubular adenoma with high-grade dysplasia limited to the mucosa. The
patient is currently alive without any evidence of recurrence for six months after surgery. Although she had a past history of cervical
cancer, the multiple tumors arising in the anal canal were unlikely to be related to human papilloma virus infection. Our case report
underscores the importance of careful observations throughout colonoscopy to detect precancerous lesions, particularly in anatomically
narrow segments. Anal canal tumors are a relatively uncommon occurrence in the context of all intestinal neoplasms. The predominant
histology is the squamous cell type, whereas adenocarcinomas represent only 10 % of anal canal cancers , with adenomas in this segment being
even more infrequent . We herein described a patient with multiple anal canal adenomas that developed metachronously. Both lesions limited
within the mucosa were removed in minimally invasive manners. A 40-year-old woman visited the Gynecological Department of our hospital with
atypical genital bleeding for one and a half years. She was diagnosed with cervical cancer and subsequently underwent hysterectomy and
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Pathology of the resected cervix showed the non-keratinizing type of squamous cell carcinoma, measuring 2.5
× 2.5 cm in size, without nodal involvement (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) Stage IB1). Immunohistochemistry
revealed that the cancer cells were diffusely positive for p16 (CDKN2A) (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Immunohistochemical staining of p16 in cervical
cancer (original magnification: 200 ×). Bar indicates 100 μm Immunohistochemical staining of p16 in cervical cancer (original magnification:
200 ×). Bar indicates 100 μm During the follow-up, she was referred to our department at the age of 48 due to frequent anal bleeding after
bowel movements. Laboratory blood tests showed no significant abnormalities; there were no signs of infection with hepatitis or human
immunodeficiency viruses, and no elevations in the levels of the serum tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9.
A villous polyp was palpable on the posterior wall of the anal canal by a digital rectal examination. The polyp was just above the dentate
line (Fig. 2a) and removed by snare polypectomy. The lesion was 9 × 5 mm in size and histologically diagnosed as tubulovillous adenoma with
high-grade dysplasia, and the cut end was negative for tumor cells (Fig. 2b). Immunohistochemical staining revealed that almost all tumor
cells were positive for Caudal-related Homeobox Transcription Factor 2 (CDX–2), whereas cytokeratin (CK)-7 staining was partially present.
Moreover CK–20 immunoreactivity was only focally visible (data not shown).Fig. 2Findings of the first anal canal tumor. a Endoscopic
appearance. b Histological appearance of a low magnification (original magnification: 20 ×). The border between adenoma and normal
epithelium is indicated by a pair of arrowheads. Bar indicates 1 mm. The inset shows a higher-magnification view (original magnification:
200 ×) Findings of the first anal canal tumor. a Endoscopic appearance. b Histological appearance of a low magnification (original
magnification: 20 ×). The border between adenoma and normal epithelium is indicated by a pair of arrowheads. Bar indicates 1 mm. The inset
shows a higher-magnification view (original magnification: 200 ×) The colon was regularly checked every year thereafter. At the age of 54, a
follow-up colonoscopy showed another elevated lesion that developed from the left wall of the anal canal (Fig. 3a). The patient had anal
discomfort after each bowel movement. She underwent transanal resection of the tumor. A pathological examination revealed tubular adenoma
with high-grade dysplasia, approximately five millimeters in size (Fig. 3b). Immunohistochemical staining revealed that only a small number
of tumor cells were positive for p16 (CDKN2A) (Fig. 3c). The patterns of CDX–2 and CK7/20 immunoreactivity were essentially the same as the
first anal adenoma (data not shown).Fig. 3Findings of the second anal canal tumor. a Endoscopic appearance. b Histological appearance of a
low magnification (original magnification: 40 ×). The border between adenoma and normal epithelium is indicated by an arrowhead. Bar
indicates 1 mm. The inset shows a higher-magnification view (original magnification: 200 ×). c Immunohistochemical staining of p16 in the
second anal canal tumor (original magnification: 200 ×). Only 4 % of tumor cells were positive for p16. Bar indicates 100 μm Findings of the
second anal canal tumor. a Endoscopic appearance. b Histological appearance of a low magnification (original magnification: 40 ×). The
border between adenoma and normal epithelium is indicated by an arrowhead. Bar indicates 1 mm. The inset shows a higher-magnification view
(original magnification: 200 ×). c Immunohistochemical staining of p16 in the second anal canal tumor (original magnification: 200 ×). Only
4 % of tumor cells were positive for p16. Bar indicates 100 μm The patient has remained free of recurrence seven months after tumor
resection. Primary anal canal neoplasms are relatively rare. The most common histological type is squamous cell carcinoma that originates
from the distal epithelium of this segment. On the other hand, adenocarcinomas only accounted for 10 % of anal canal malignancies . They
include two subtypes according to their origins: 1) mucosal-based adenocarcinomas that originate from colorectal-type epithelium at the
proximal end of the anal canal, and 2) extra-mucosal adenocarcinomas arising from columnar epithelium lining of anal glands which open into
the transitional zone. The latter is often associated with chronic fistulas . Adenomas are distinctly rare entities in the anal canal; only
a limited number of cases have been reported to date . To the best of our knowledge, the present case is the first report in the literature
on multiple anal canal adenomas. Based on the different directions of the tumor origins and the tumor-free margin of the first lesion, the
two tumors are considered to have developed independently, and implantation of the first adenoma as a cause of the second tumor was
unlikely. Furthermore, the CDX–2 positive phenotype indicates that both lesions of the anal canal were mucosal-based tumors, although the
limited expressions of CK–7 and–20 were not typical profiles of colorectal adenomas . Several recent case reports showed that definite
adenocarcinomas arose from adenomas [6, 7]. These cases support the concept that the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, which is well recognized in
colorectal carcinogenesis [9, 10], may be applicable to the development of adenocarcinoma in the anal canal. Multiple etiological factors
have been suggested to be associated with anal canal neoplasms such as anal intercourse, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and
cigarette smoking [1, 11]. Furthermore, human papillomavirus (HPV) has been strongly implicated as a possible cause of tumorigenesis [12,
13]. Regarding histology, several studies showed that 78–92 % of squamous carcinomas and 40–43 % of adenocarcinomas were positive for HPV
DNA [10, 14, 15]. Tachezy et al. reported that HPV positivity was also observed in 40 % of anal canal adenomas . Our patient had a history
of cervical cancer that was mostly linked to infection by HPV . Taken together, we imagined that HPV infection might be a common cause of
cervical cancer and metachronous anal canal tumors. Since the expression of p16 (CDKN2A), a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, reliably
reflects the status of HPV infection in various anogenital and head and neck malignancies [17, 18], we performed immunohistochemical
staining of p16 in a resected specimen of the second anal canal tumor. However, immunoreactivity for p16 was negligible in the anal tumor
cells, in contrast to the diffuse positivity observed in the cervical cancer cells. Our patient did not have other predisposing risk factors
such as familial adenomatous polyposis, ulcerative colitis, or Crohn’s disease . Therefore, we could not identify specific factors that may
account for multiple tumorigenesis in the anal canal and cervix in our patient. The prognosis of anal canal cancers remains unsatisfactory.
The majority of these cancers are diagnosed in advanced stages that often require radical surgery such as abdominoperineal resection [2, 3].
Although multidisciplinary treatments have been introduced including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy, the five-year overall
survival rate was estimated to be 39–63 % [2, 3, 19, 20]. Depth, lymph node metastases, histological grade, and radical surgery were
previously identified as prognostic factors in anal canal cancers [2, 19, 21]. In our case, both lesions in the anal canal were pre-
malignant and confined within the mucosa, suggesting a low risk of recurrence. Accordingly, the patient is now on follow-up without
radiation or chemotherapy. The present case underscores the importance of careful observations throughout colonoscopy to detect neoplastic
lesions in the narrow segment that may potentially acquire an aggressive phenotype. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
prior to publication of this case report. Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor 2A Caudal-related Homeobox Transcription Factor 2 Cytokeratin
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Human Papillomavirus Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions HN was involved in surgical treatments, concept design, literature review and writing
manuscript. SI was involved in surgical treatments and undertook a review of manuscript. TM contributed to slide preparation,
immunohistochemistry, pathological diagnosis, concept generation, and revising the manuscript. JT and TN were involved in surgical
treatments. KY, KO, TT and TK were involved in endoscopy. KK undertook a review of manuscript. KH contributed to reviewing literature and
revising the manuscript. SK contributed to immunohistochemistry and pathological review. HY, ES and JK were involved in concept generation
and contribution to literature review. MF contributed to immunohistochemistry, pathological diagnosis and final review of manuscript. TW
undertook a review of manuscript and contributed to final review of manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
authors thank Dr. Katsutoshi Oda (Department of Gynecology, The University of Tokyo) for providing the data on the patient’s cervical
cancer.
