Academic Editor: Steffen Maune Laryngeal neuroendocrine carcinomas (LNECs) are rare and highly heterogeneous which present a wide spectrum
of pathological and clinical manifestations. Fourteen patients with histologically demonstrated LNEC were collected and analyzed
retrospectively. The 14 cases were classified into 3 subtypes: typical carcinoid in 2, atypical carcinoid in 5, and small cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma in 7. The mean survival time of the 14 patients in this study was 112.5 months (95% CI, 81.5–143.6). Surgeries were
performed for 2 patients of typical carcinoid, and they were alive with no evidence of recurrence after 24 and 47 months of follow-ups.
Patients in the atypical carcinoid group were treated with surgeries and postoperative radiotherapy. After 58.4 months of follow-ups (range:
9–144), 2 patients showed no evidence of disease and 1 was lost to follow-up after 72 months. The other 2 patients died of other unrelated
diseases. In the small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma group, a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy was applied. The mean survival
time was 79.7 months (95% CI, 37.9–121.4), and the 5-year survival rate was 53.6%. In conclusion, the clinical behaviors, treatment
protocols, and prognosis are different for each subtype of LNECs. Laryngeal neuroendocrine carcinomas (LNECs) are rare but are the most
common nonsquamous tumors of this organ, which can be divided into 2 broad categories based on their tissue of origin: epithelial and
neural. Laryngeal epithelial neuroendocrine neoplasms are all malignant lesions. The major categories of LNECs are typical carcinoid,
atypical carcinoid, small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. The neural category is mainly referred to
as paraganglioma, which is invariably benign . Since the first report of an atypical carcinoid tumor of the larynx in 1969 by Goldman et al.
, the larynx has received increasing attention in the potential for development of different neuroendocrine neoplasms there. To date
approximately 700 cases of LNECs have been reported in the literatures , and yet most of them are case reports. The aim of this study was to
improve the understanding of the clinical features by reviewing the literature and analyzing the medical records of patients who were
diagnosed with LNEC in our hospital. Patients diagnosed with LNEC and received treatment in Peking Union Medical College Hospital, China,
between 1989 and 2014 were reviewed retrospectively. Available data of gender, age, clinical presentation, tumor site, tumor subtype,
treatment, treatment outcome, follow-up, and vital status were extracted from the medical records of patients. Among these, endoscopy,
imaging tests, and pathological examination were performed to confirm the location and diagnosis of the mass. The follow-up of the patients
ended on February 28, 2015. Overall survival (OS) was defined as the time from first diagnosis to death from any cause or date of last
follow-up. Participants who were alive at the end of the study period or lost to follow-up were considered censored. Medical record review
for follow-up status of all patients was performed under direct supervision of attending head and neck surgeon. Primary tumor site, clinical
stage, treatment, and vital status were reviewed from medical records as assessed between the initial and final patients contacts recorded.
All histological samples were reconfirmed by one senior pathologist. Survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier method, reported
as mean with 95% confidence intervals (CI). SPSS software, version 16.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA), was used for the statistical
analyses. The Ethics Committee of Peking Union Medical College Hospital approved the protocol of this study. A total of 14 cases of LNECs
were available for analysis. The clinical features are summarized in Table 1. Seven patients were males and 7 were females. The median age
at the time of diagnosis was 57 years (range, 16–75). The chief complaints at presentation included hoarseness, sore throat, hemoptysis, a
lump sensation, and dyspnea. Two cases were pathologically diagnosed as typical carcinoid, 5 as atypical carcinoid, and 7 as small cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma. One of the small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma cases was demonstrated to couple with adenocarcinoma. The mean
survival time of all 14 patients in this study was 112.5 months (95% CI, 81.5–143.6). The 2-year and 5-year survival rate in this series
were 84.4% and 73.9%, respectively. Two patients with typical carcinoid showed supraglottic lesions. Microsurgery was performed for one
case, as the tumor was confined to one side of arytenoid cartilage. Total laryngectomy and neck dissection were performed in the other
patient with more extensive lesions. Both patients were alive with no evidence of recurrence after 24 and 47 months of follow-up,
respectively. Among 5 patients with atypical carcinoid, 3 patients showed supraglottic lesions, and 2 showed glottic lesions in the larynx.
The treatment included surgery and radiotherapy. Four patients underwent laryngectomy with reservation of laryngeal function, and total
laryngectomy was performed for the other patient with more extensive lesions. Neck dissection was performed concurrently in 4 patients
because of lymph node metastases. Postoperative radiotherapy was applied in 2 patients. As a result, 2 patients showed no evidence of
disease and 1 was lost to follow-up after 72 months. The other 2 patients died of rectum carcinoma and nephropathy, respectively, which were
unrelated to the primary diseases. The mean follow-up time was 58.4 months (range: 9–144). Among all 7 patients with small cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma, 5 patients showed supraglottic lesions, 1 showed subglottic lesion, and the other showed glottic lesion in the
larynx. At the presentation, 4 patients developed cervical metastases either unilaterally or bilaterally, but no distant metastases were
found. All patients received chemotherapy (platinum and VP16) and radiotherapy (a median total dose of 58 Gy). Complete remission occurred
in 4 patients and partial remission occurred in 3 cases. Among the 4 patients with complete remission, to date, 3 patients survived for 49,
72, and 129 months, respectively. Another patient presented distant metastases 16 months later and died within 24 months. Two of the
patients with partial remission developed distant metastases and died within 5 and 36 months after diagnosis, respectively. The other one
was diagnosed as small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma combined with adenocarcinoma and lost to follow-up after 30 months. The mean survival
time of the 7 patients was 79.7 months (95% CI, 37.9–121.4). The 5-year survival rate was 53.6%. LNECs account for approximately 1% of all
laryngeal neoplasms . The different subtypes show a variety of different natural history, treatment, and radically different outcomes. They
occurred mainly in elderly men; and smoking has been recognized as one of risk factors. The atypical carcinoid is the most frequent subtype,
followed by the small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, typical carcinoid, and the large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma . The overall average
age of the current series was 52.7 years, while in the current series 3 patients were less than 30 years old and no significant difference
was based on sex. The small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma accounted for the largest proportion (7/14) in our series, which could be
partially due to the limited number of cases. According to the World Health Organization classification, LNECs were divided into three
groups: typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid, and small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. Laryngeal large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma was
classified together with atypical carcinoid group . However, more recent study suggested that large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma should be
separated from atypical carcinoid as a distinct entity because of their much greater aggressive potential . In this study, we reported 14
cases including typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid, and small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. The clinical features are different for each
LNEC subtype. Typical carcinoid presents as submucosal masses which may be either polypoid or nodular. The clinical course is slow owing to
the benign biological behavior. Conservative surgical excision is considered to be the best choice for typical carcinoid of larynx.
Endolaryngeal microsurgery can be an ideal choice for limited tumors. Elective neck dissection is unnecessary . The 5-year survival rate of
typical carcinoid of larynx was 48.7% in a large series report . In our study, surgery was performed in 2 patients who were alive with no
evidence of recurrence after 24 and 47 months of follow-up, respectively. Atypical carcinoid manifests as nodular submucosal masses with
necrosis. The mainstay of treatment is surgical excision. Partial or total laryngectomy is recommended depending on the size and extension
of the tumor considering their highly aggressive nature . Elective neck dissection should be performed concurrently in view of high
incidence of lymph node metastases. Gillenwater et al. reported that a few patients with atypical carcinoid tumors responded to radiotherapy
and chemotherapy; and the 5-year survival rate of this tumor was approximately 46.7% . In our study, surgery was performed in all cases,
which varied from partial laryngectomy to total laryngectomy, and neck dissection was performed in the cases of lymph node metastases.
Postoperative radiotherapy was applied in 2 patients. Since most of cases (3/5 cases) were of censored data, therefore the survival estimate
could not be taken in this group. Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma is the most lethal tumor of the larynx, which develops rapidly. More
than 90% of these patients have metastatic disease in its clinical course, and the most common sites of metastatic spread are the cervical
lymph node, liver, lung, and bone . In the current series, more than half of the patients developed cervical metastases at the presentation.
The therapeutic protocol of a combination of local radiotherapy and chemotherapy has been generally accepted. Baugh et al. reviewed the
various modalities that have been used to treat this cancer. The combination of radiation therapy and adjuvant chemotherapy resulted in a
median survival of 55 months, representing significantly longer survival than with any other treatment regimen. There is no consensus on its
appropriate chemotherapy protocol by now. The main protocol used in our hospital was combination of platinum and etoposide. In our series,
complete remission rate was 57% (4/7) and efficiency rate was 100% (7/7). The survival time in complete remission cases was significantly
better than that of the partial ones, which demonstrated that the response to chemotherapy is closely related to the prognosis. Although
radiation alone might not improve survival, it is successful in controlling primary lesion, which was consistent with our study. Surgical
excision is limited even in the early lesion of small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, which should be avoided . One patient in our study was
diagnosed as having adenocarcinoma preliminarily, so surgery was performed at the beginning, and the patient developed relapse after 12
months. The final diagnosis was acquired as small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma is coupled with adenocarcinoma by endolarynscopic biopsy.
This should be a lesson we may learn from this study. The prognosis of small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of larynx was very poor; 5-year
survival rate was less than 10% [12, 15]. In the current study, the mean survival time was 79.7 months (95% CI, 37.9–121.4). The 5-year
survival rate was 53.6% which was much higher than that in literatures. The reason might be due to the small sample size in our study; thus
it needs larger studies with longer follow-up time to confirm our finding. Laryngeal large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma is a newly
described clinicopathological entity, and therapy is not standardized for this tumor. Similarly to the situation in cases from the lung,
considerable debate has emerged as to whether this tumor should be treated as small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma or in different ways .
However, this type was not included in the current series. In conclusion, LNECs are rare types of nonsquamous neoplasms of the larynx. Owing
to their variation, clinical behaviors, treatment protocols, and prognosis of LNECs are different for each subtype. Therefore, it is
necessary for pathologists and clinicians to be familiar with each type of neuroendocrine neoplasms of larynx so that they can treat these
diseases appropriately. Laryngeal neuroendocrine carcinomas Overall survival Confidence interval. There is no conflict of interests for any
of the authors. Yingying Zhu and Liming Gao contributed equally to this work and served as co-first authors. Clinical features of 14 cases
with LNEC. TC: typical carcinoid; AC: atypical carcinoid; SCNEC: small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma; TL: total laryngectomy; PL: partial
laryngectomy; ND: neck dissection; CRT: concurrent radiochemotherapy; NED: no evidence of disease; DOC: dead of other causes; and DOD: dead
of disease.
