A 12-year-old spayed female Labrador retriever was presented with forebrain signs. Brain MRI revealed a huge cystic lesion with the
thickened falx in the frontal region. The brain parenchyma surrounding the lesion showed significant signs of a mass effect and also
increased intracranial pressure. However, the dog suddenly became lucid after about two weeks, and an MRI scan one month after the initial
study revealed a dramatically shrunken cystic lesion. The dog survived for over a year until it was euthanized for other reasons, and the
brain lesion was diagnosed as a cystic meningioma histologically. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report that described the
reduction of the cystic lesion of a cystic meningioma in dogs. Meningiomas are the most common primary brain tumor in dogs: the incidence of
canine cystic meningioma has been reported to be 12.5–32% [12, 18]. It is not uncommon for a cystic lesion to be larger than a tumor [5,
15]. Sometimes, increased intracranial pressure (ICP) is caused by cyst expansion rather than tumoral growth. We report and discuss a rare
case of cystic meningioma that showed a significant reduction of the cystic component, resulting in long-term survival. To the authors’
knowledge, no reports have described the reduction of the cystic lesion associated with a meningioma either in veterinary medicine or in
human medicine. A 12-year-old spayed female Labrador retriever was presented to a private clinic with cluster seizures, circling towards the
left and decreased mental status (day 0). The owner reported that the dog had one seizure 2 months previously. CBC, serum chemistry, urine
analysis, thoracic and abdominal radiographs, heart and abdominal ultrasound, and ECG were within normal range. A neurological examination
found depression, left circling and decreased postural reactions of the right side, which suggested left forebrain dysfunction. To confirm
the lesion, an initial MRI scan was performed using a 0.4-tesla (T) system (day 10). The MRI revealed a large cystic lesion showing
hyperintensity on T2-weighted images (T2W), and hypointensities on T1-weighted (T1W) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images
extending from the left parafalx olfactory bulb to the frontal region that somewhat extended to the right (Fig. 1Fig. 1.The first MRI. (A)
Sagittal T2W image showing a large, hyperintense structure occupying the frontal lobe. (B) Transverse post-contrast T1W image at the level
of the falx cerebri. The contrast-enhanced and slightly thickened falx was suggestive of a meningioma. (C) Dorsal post-contrast T1W image
revealing an enhanced lesion adhering to the falx cerebri. There was no enhancement of the cystic wall. Uncleared sulci (narrowing
subarachnoid space) of the cerebrum indicated increased ICP.). The left side of the cerebral falx was included within the cystic lesion, and
was slightly thickened and hyperintense on T2W, isointense on T1W and clearly enhanced on Gadolinium-enhanced T1W (Gd-T1W). The outer wall
of the cystic lesion was not enhanced. The maximum diameter of the cyst, including the parenchymal lesion of the falx, was 2.0 cm × 2.2 cm ×
4.2 cm. The cerebral parenchyma surrounding the lesion showed a significant mass effect and other increased ICP findings consisting of
cerebral sulci effacement, displacement of the lamina quadrigemina, deformation of the interthalamic adhesion, rostral cerebellar contour
flatting, third ventricle compression and suprapineal recess compression; however, perilesional edema and brain herniation were not observed
. These MR findings reminded a cystic meningioma as a top of the differential diagnoses that included subarachnoid cyst, brain abscess and
other tumors with cystic lesion. Based on the clinical findings and brain MRI, there was concern about the risk of brain herniation, so
emergency surgical decompression was recommended. Although the owner wanted the surgery to be done as soon as possible, there was a 1-month
wait until it could be performed at the university teaching hospital. During this waiting period, the dog was medically managed with
phenobarbital (Phenobal; Daiichi-Sankyo, Tokyo, Japan) (1.25 mg/kg, BID), zonisamide (Excegran; Dainippon-Sumitomo, Osaka, Japan) (4.1
mg/kg, BID), isosorbide (Isobide; Kowa, Tokyo, Japan) (0.5 ml/kg, BID) and prednisolone (Predonine; Shionogi, Osaka, Japan) (0.3 mg/kg,
SID). The first MRI. (A) Sagittal T2W image showing a large, hyperintense structure occupying the frontal lobe. (B) Transverse post-contrast
T1W image at the level of the falx cerebri. The contrast-enhanced and slightly thickened falx was suggestive of a meningioma. (C) Dorsal
post-contrast T1W image revealing an enhanced lesion adhering to the falx cerebri. There was no enhancement of the cystic wall. Uncleared
sulci (narrowing subarachnoid space) of the cerebrum indicated increased ICP. On the day of the operation (day 38), the surgeon expected
that the dog might be unable to walk or stand normally and would have a decreased level of consciousness due to increased ICP, but the dog
walked herself into the consultation room and was alert. On neurological examination, the dog showed a decreased menace response in the
right eye and a delayed proprioceptive positioning in the right pelvic limbs, but everything else was unremarkable. The owner had said that
the dog had suddenly become lucid about two weeks previously. On the same day, a second MRI scan was performed using a 3.0-T system for
preoperative evaluation. Although there was no change in the contrast-enhancing lesion of the falx, the cystic lesion was 1.2 cm × 2.1 cm ×
3.5 cm, indicating a significant reduction in volume. There was no signal change on the T2W and T1W images; however, the signal intensity of
the cyst was increased on FLAIR images (i.e., unsuppressed fluid signal), suggesting inflammation or hemorrhage. In addition, the increased
ICP findings observed on the first MRI had disappeared. Because of the improvements in clinical signs and in MRI findings, the surgery was
cancelled, and the dog was continued on medical therapy. Hydroxyurea (Hydrea; Bristol-Myers, Tokyo, Japan) (10 mg/kg, SID) was added to the
current regimen of medications stated above (from day 40). Subsequently, orofacial focal seizures and generalized seizures were observed
several times, but there was no progression of neurological abnormalities. A follow-up (third) MRI scan was performed 45 days after
hydroxyurea was started (day 85) using a 0.4-T system. The cyst continued to decrease, reaching a final diameter of 1.0 cm × 1.9 cm × 2.2
cm. In addition, the signal intensity of the cyst on FLAIR images had recovered to hypointensity. The dog lived for more than a year without
any obvious neurological progression, but she developed perianal adenocarcinoma. Because it became difficult for the dog to defecate, it was
euthanized on day 544. Just before the dog was euthanized, a final MRI scan (0.4-T) was performed with the owner’s consent. As compared with
the third scan, there was no significant change in the size of the tumor or that of the cyst (Fig. 2Fig. 2.Comparison with the time course
of the MRI findings. Transverse post-contrast T1W images at the level of the falx cerebri: (A) first (day 10); (B) second (day 38); (C)
third (day 85); and (D) fourth (day 544). Comparing images A and B, there was a significant reduction in the cystic lesion and spreading
into the subarachnoid spaces. There was no obvious change between images C and D.). The autopsy was performed after euthanasia. Comparison
with the time course of the MRI findings. Transverse post-contrast T1W images at the level of the falx cerebri: (A) first (day 10); (B)
second (day 38); (C) third (day 85); and (D) fourth (day 544). Comparing images A and B, there was a significant reduction in the cystic
lesion and spreading into the subarachnoid spaces. There was no obvious change between images C and D. Histological examination of the brain
revealed that the cystic lesion was connected to the falx and consisted of proliferating tumor cells in the left frontal region. The
thickened falx and cystic wall, which comprised proliferating multilayered (stratified) meningeal epithelial cells, led to the diagnosis of
meningothelial meningioma, cystic type. Because the wall of an arachnoid cyst is generally composed of monolayer epithelium, we judged that
this multilayered wall was a neoplastic cyst. The cystic lesions were supposed to dehisce to the midline region (Fig. 3Fig.
3.Histopathological appearance of the cystic lesion. (A) The over view of the frontal cortex with cystic lesion (Cy, Arrow), H&E, × 10. (B)
The cystic tumor was not directly connected with the lateral ventricle (LV), H&E, × 200. (C) Tumor cells of the cystic lesions were mostly
polygonal-shaped with wide, clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, H&E, × 400. Their nuclei were round to oval-shaped with indistinct nucleoli.).
Histopathological appearance of the cystic lesion. (A) The over view of the frontal cortex with cystic lesion (Cy, Arrow), H&E, × 10. (B)
The cystic tumor was not directly connected with the lateral ventricle (LV), H&E, × 200. (C) Tumor cells of the cystic lesions were mostly
polygonal-shaped with wide, clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, H&E, × 400. Their nuclei were round to oval-shaped with indistinct nucleoli.
Meningiomas account for 33–49% of primary brain tumors in dog . In addition, Labrador retrievers are predisposed to developing brain tumors
[2, 4, 18]. Although the cyst, which seemed to be the cause of the clinical signs (increased ICP), was significantly larger than the
parenchymal component, a cystic meningioma was clinically diagnosed based on the MRI findings. Nauta et al. classified cystic formation
associated with meningiomas into four types: those located centrally within the tumor, such that the cyst surrounded by macroscopic tumor
throughout (type I); those located peripherally within the tumor, but still wholly within the margins of the tumor, such that there is a
microscopically visible attenuated rim of tumor cells along the peripheral margins of the cyst (type II); those within the adjacent brain,
such that they actually lie within the adjacent brain rather than within the tumor itself (type III); and those at the interface of the
tumor and brain, as a loculation of CSF in the subarachnoid space, such that they do not appear within either the tumor or the brain itself
(type IV). Because the cyst wall was not enhanced by gadolinium in MR imaging, the tumor in this case was thought to be classified as type
III or IV [5, 7, 9, 10, 16, 20]. However, the histopathological diagnosis was type II. On the first MRI, the brain parenchyma surrounding
the lesion showed a mass effect, and there were findings of increased ICP. On the second MRI, significant reduction of the cystic lesion had
occurred even though the tumoral parenchyma (i.e., enhanced falx) was not changed obviously, and increased ICP findings were no longer
observed. Furthermore, the dog had improved clinically. Although it is undeniable that clinical improvement was caused by medication (i.e.,
isosorbide and prednisolone), because the owner reported that the symptoms improved suddenly, it is unlikely that the medications alleviated
them. It is likely that the cyst had ruptured miraculously due to for some reason. Typically, excessive expansion of cystic lesions in the
forebrain may increase ICP and might lead to transtentorial herniation. In the present case, however, we hypothesized that the cyst wall was
too thin and vulnerable to such a high ICP and ruptured before a transtentorial herniation occurred. The unsuppressed intensity of the
intracystic fluid on FLAIR in the second MRI, which may be indicative of minor inflammatory/hemorrhage due to rupture, supports this
hypothesis. Because the intracystic fluid probably leaked into the subarachnoid space from the hiatus, the dog could survive. In addition,
the present case had a larger cystic volume than mass volume, causing a brain herniation as reported previously . Therefore, if the cystic
lesion of the present case was parenchymatous, it would undoubtedly have caused a transtentorial herniation. On the other hand, many reports
have described the spontaneous reduction of an arachnoid cyst in human medicine [6, 11, 14]. These reports suggest that physiologic
transient elevation of ICP (breath hold, cough or sports activities, etc.), minor head trauma, meningitis and hemorrhage may cause
spontaneous rupture of the arachnoid cyst . Therefore, although the present case was classified as cystic meningioma type II, the
possibility that similar events had occurred cannot be ruled out. However, because there is no history of trauma or other findings, it is
most likely that the cyst had ruptured miraculously due to extremely high ICP. Because the clinical behavior of meningiomas progresses
slowly and the survival duration tends to be longer as compared with other tumors [1, 8], cyst reduction may bring about longer survival
like as observed in the present case. However, the circumstances of this case are thought to be extremely rare, and the authors think that
surgical resection or decompression is still the first choice for the treatment of cystic meningiomas.
