Invasive aspergillosis (IA), generally considered an opportunistic infection in immunocompromised hosts, is associated with high morbidity
and mortality. IA commonly occurs in the respiratory tract with isolated reports of aspergillosis infection in the nasal sinuses, central
nervous system, skin, liver, and urinary tract. Extra-pulmonary aspergillosis is usually observed in disseminated disease. To date, there
are a few studies regarding primary and disseminated gastrointestinal (GI) aspergillosis in immunocompromised hosts. Only a few cases of
primary GI aspergillosis in non-immunocompromised hosts have been reported; of these, almost all of them involved the upper GI tract. We
describe a very rare case of IA involving the lower GI tract in the patient without classical risk factors that presented as multiple colon
perforations and was successfully treated by surgery and antifungal treatment. We also review related literature and discuss the
characteristics and risk factors of IA in the immunocompetent hosts without classical risk factors. This case that shows IA should be
considered in critically ill patients, and that primary lower GI aspergillosis may also occur in the immunocompetent hosts without classical
risk factors. Invasive aspergillosis (IA) usually occurs in immunocompromised hosts.1 Classical risk factors include prolonged neutropenia,
use of high-dose steroids or immunosuppressive agents, and conditions leading to impaired cellular immune responses such as human
immunodeficiency virus infection or hematologic malignancies.123 IA typically involves the lungs, but may also infect the nasal sinuses,
central nervous system, and rarely gastrointestinal (GI) system.134 GI aspergillosis is usually the result of organ involvement from
disseminated systemic infection; isolated GI aspergillosis is rare even in immunocompromised hosts. This case shows that IA should be
considered in critically ill patients without classical risk factors for timely and appropriate management. A 47-year-old man visited the
emergency room because of decreased mentality. He was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (DM), but had not received regular treatment. His
blood pressure was 60/30 mm Hg and body temperature was 38.5℃. Laboratory data showed white blood cell of 13.150×109/L, with a differential
count of 90.7% neutrophils and 8.5% lymphocytes, hemoglobin of 14.3 g/dL, platelet count of 507×109/L, glucose levels of 443 mg/dL, blood
urea nitrogen of 52.5 mg/dL, serum creatinine concentrations of 1.9 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 69 IU/L, alanine transaminase of 38
IU/L, sodium of 125.7 mmol/L, potassium of 5.4 mmol/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) levels of 19.42 mg/dL, ketone bodies in the blood 3 positive
and HbA1c of 18.20%. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a pH of 7.032, pCO2 of 21.8 mm Hg, pO2 of 83.3 mm Hg, and HCO3 of 5.8 mmol/L.
Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans showed multiple consolidation and ground glass opacities in both lung fields (Fig. 1A and B).
The patient was initially diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis as a result of severe pneumonia. An immediate hydration and insulin therapy
were started, and dose-adjusted piperacillin and tazobactam sodium were also administered for pneumonia. The patient was admitted to the
intensive care unit (ICU) for mechanical ventilator therapy. The ketoacidosis had improved with hydration and insulin therapy, but on the
second day of hospitalization, diuretic-resistant pulmonary edema developed and continuous renal replacement therapy was started. Klebsiella
pneumonia was identified in sputum cultures. After 8 days of treatment, the lung lesions had regressed (Fig. 1C). The patient was finally
moved to the general ward. However, on the 5th day in the general ward, he started complaining of vague abdominal pain. His pain had
aggravated with severe tenderness. An erect abdominal X-ray showed gaseous distention of small bowel loops with suspicious stepladder sign,
suggesting mechanical obstruction (Fig. 2A). Subsequent abdominal CT suggested multiple perforation of the transverse colon with
panperitonitis (Fig. 2B and C). An emergency laparotomy was performed. Necrotic intestines were observed from the distal ascending colon to
the proximal transverse colon. Necrotic portions were resected and the Periodic Acid Schiff and Grocott's methenamine silver staining of the
resected specimen showed septated fungal hyphae with acute angle branching, suggesting aspergillus species (Fig. 3). The patient was finally
diagnosed with colonic IA. Intravenous liposomal amphotericin-B (3 mg/kg/day) was additionally administered for 35 days. He was discharged
with oral voriconazole to treat his reported remaining, abdominal discomfort and mildly elevated CRP levels. Voriconazole was discontinued
at a follow-up visit to the outpatient department 2 weeks after discharge when his abdominal discomfort had relieved and CRP levels
normalized. When inhaled, aspergillus spores can cause upper respiratory tract and alveoli infections manifesting as pneumonia.1 Aspergillus
spores are ingested and can reach the upper GI tract, but cannot penetrate the normal intact mucosal barrier. However, they can penetrate
the mucosal barrier in pathologic conditions such as gastric ulcers and severe gastritis. In these situations, these spores can cause
invasive gastric or upper GI aspergillosis.4 There are only a few studies regarding GI aspergillosis in immunocompromised hosts. The largest
study by Kazan, et al.5 investigated 21 cases of primary and disseminated GI aspergillosis and showed that clinical manifestations of GI
aspergillosis are nonspecific, such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, hemorrhage, and occasionally intestinal obstruction and perforation. This
study concluded that invasive GI aspergillosis was rare and its diagnosis extremely challenging without surgical investigation due to poor
symptom specificity and the absence of characteristic image findings. IA is rarely considered until characteristic fungal hyphae are
observed during pathological investigation. Diagnosis can be made by culturing aspergillus, observing tissue invasion by aspergillus hyphae,
or destruction and mucosal changes in tissue biopsy specimens. Meersseman, et al.6 reported that considerable numbers of ICU patients
without underlying hematologic diseases are diagnosed with IA. They suggested that some factors such as prolonged use of antibiotics, use of
central venous catheters, and mechanical ventilation in the ICU may adversely affect the immune systems of critically ill patients and that
patients in sepsis with multi-organ failure have decreased immunity because sepsis causes biphasic immunologic patterns.7 The initial phase
is hyperinflammation, which is later counterbalanced by a following anti-inflammatory response or relative immune paralysis phase
characterized by monocyte deactivation and associated with increased risk of opportunistic infections such as invasive pulmonary
aspergillosis in ICU patients. It is also well known that hyperglycemia in DM impairs immune responses including phagocytosis and complement
function, which may permit bacterial or fungal colonization of skin or mucosa and may sometimes be associated with systemic infections.8910
Choi, et al.11 described a lower GI aspergillosis case in the non-neutropenic host. However, colon cancer, steroid use for 16-days and DM
may be associated with immune dysfunction in their patient. Our case is different from the case described by Choi, et al.; our patient did
not have cancer and steroid use, but was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis at the initial presentation. To our knowledge, there have been
no reports on non-classical risk factors for GI aspergillosis. However, ICU care, antibiotic use, and mechanical ventilation in our patient
could be equivalent to previously reported non-classical risk factors for IA in critically ill patients.6 All of these factors and
uncontrolled DM appeared to contribute to invasive GI aspergillosis in this patient.4 We suggest that IA should be considered in critically
ill patients with non-classical risk factors for timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment because it is no longer only a disease of
immunocompromised hosts. In addition, primary or isolated lower GI aspergillosis may also occur in the immunocompetent hosts without
classical risk factors. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest.
