In 2007 an article was published describing the first forays into the practice of episcleral tattooing. Currently only a handful of people
worldwide have undergone this procedure, whereby a needle is used to inject dye under the bulbar conjunctiva. To date there have been no
previous reports of the risks and complications of this emerging practice in the medical literature. We present a case involving a
complication that arose in one of the few people in Britain to have undergone episcleral tattooing for cosmetic purposes. A 43-year-old
Caucasian man presented to the eye casualty clinic with red, lumpy conjunctivae bilaterally, having undergone episcleral tattooing 7 weeks
previously. On examination there were 3 distinct areas of conjunctival swelling in each eye, representing a total of 6 injection sites. No
other gross abnormalities were identified. The clinical picture remained unchanged 6 months on, apart from a degree of fading of the
conjunctival dye. He will remain under our care to ensure that any further complications such as granulomatous inflammation are managed and
documented. Episcleral tattooing is carried out by individuals with no medical training. The short-term complications reported so far
include: headaches, severe photophobia, persistent foreign body sensation, and migration of ink staining. More serious short-term risks such
as infection, globe penetration, and peri-ocular haemorrhage could occur. For now we can only speculate as to the long-term consequences,
but these may include carcinogenic change or granulomatous inflammation. We feel that the potential risks of the procedure should be
communicated more widely to those body modification practitioners undertaking it. This practice could result in more serious presentations
to acute eye services in the future. In 2007 the Body Modification Ezine published an article describing the first instances of episcleral
tattooing . At present only a handful of people worldwide have undergone episcleral tattooing, whereby dye is injected under the bulbar
conjunctiva, for purely cosmetic purposes. There have been no previous reports of the risks and complications of this emerging practice in
the medical literature. We present a case involving a complication in one of the few people in Britain to have undergone episcleral
tattooing. A 43-year-old man presented with bright red, lumpy conjunctivae bilaterally (see Fig. 1). 7 weeks previously he had undergone
episcleral tattooing and his complaint was that the conjunctival lumps had not subsided. In this case a mixture of two dermal tattoo dyes
(C.I Pigment Red 210 and C.I Pigment Blue 15) was injected under the conjunctiva at 3 sites in each eye. Visual acuity was 6/4 in both eyes
and he reported no visual symptoms or discomfort.Fig. 1Bilateral episcleral tattoos Bilateral episcleral tattoos On slit lamp examination
there were 3 distinct areas of conjunctival swelling in each eye, representing a total of 6 injection sites (Fig. 2). Apart from this
aesthetically poor, persistent lumpy appearance, no other gross abnormalities were identified. Fundal examination and intraocular pressure
measurements were also normal. The clinical picture remained unchanged 6 months on, apart from a degree of fading of the conjunctival dye
(Fig. 3). He will remain under our care to ensure that any further complications such as granulomatous inflammation are managed and
documented.Fig. 2Left eye showing 3 distinct lumps at injection sitesFig. 3Left eye showing fading of conjunctival dye at 6 months follow up
Left eye showing 3 distinct lumps at injection sites Left eye showing fading of conjunctival dye at 6 months follow up The number of body
modification procedures carried out annually is increasing and new trends are pushing the boundaries of “extreme” in many directions.
Procedures such as episcleral tattooing are carried out by individuals with no medical training, who are taking it upon themselves to
pioneer an untested practice through trial and error. The short-term complications reported so far have included: headaches, severe
photophobia, persistent foreign body sensation, and migration of ink staining to nearby tissues [3, 4]. Episcleral tattooing by a non-
ophthalmic trained user without the use of a surgical microscope carries the risk of globe penetration, traumatic cataract, retinal
detachment and endophthalmitis. In addition, tattoos carry the risk of blindness from tattoo-induced uveitis . If distant skin tattoos can
induce uveal sensitization to the dyes in the tattoo, placing the dye under the conjunctiva may result in more severe or more frequent
uveitis. Finally, the presence of chronic granuloma can lead in the long term to scleral thinning or malignancy . We feel that the potential
risks of the procedure should be communicated more widely to those body modification practitioners undertaking it. This practice could
result in more serious presentations to acute eye services in the coming years. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and all of the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of
this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Author’s contributions JB clinical review of
patient, drafting and editing of manuscript. HEG clinical review of patient, photos. AB editing of manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
