Yun Soo Hong and Young Sik Woo contributed equally to this work as first authors. Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL) is a rare
extranodal T-cell lymphoma arising from the intestine. Two types of EATL have been reported. In contrast to the classic EATL type I, EATL
type II occurs sporadically, is unrelated to celiac disease, and comprises 10% to 20 % of all EATL cases. A total of five cases of EATL type
II were diagnosed at our clinic from January 2009 to September 2012. Four of the five patients were diagnosed with the help of endoscopy.
Among the four patients, two of the cases involved both the small and large intestines, whereas in the other two patients, EATL was limited
to the small intestine. Common endoscopic findings included innumerable fine granularities (also called mosaic mucosal patterns) and diffuse
thickening of the mucosa with a semicircular shallow ulceration in the lesions of the small bowel. In contrast, the endoscopic findings of
the colon were nonspecific and could not distinguish EATL type II from other diseases. There are only few published reports regarding the
representative endoscopic findings of EATL. Here, we present the clinical and endoscopic findings of four cases of EATL type II diagnosed by
endoscopy. Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL) is a rare intestinal tumor, accounting for less than 5% of gastrointestinal
lymphoma. It is known to arise from T lymphocytes that reside in the intraepithelial space of the intestines and is classified into two
types.1 The classic EATL, also known as EATL type I, is predominantly found in Western countries and is strongly associated with refractory
celiac disease. In this type, tumor cells are large and pleomorphic and positive for CD3 and CD7 in immunohistochemistry staining, but
negative for CD4, CD8, or CD56. The other type, namely EATL type II, comprises 10% to 20% of all EATL cases. EATL type II is mainly composed
of small to medium-sized cells, which show positivity for CD3, CD7, CD8, and CD56. It develops sporadically and is independent of celiac
disease.2 EATL is most frequently found in the small intestine, especially the proximal jejunum, followed by stomach, colon, and rectum. It
is clinically associated with symptoms of mal-absorption and is typically diagnosed upon laparotomy, as the first presenting signs are
usually spontaneous intestinal perforation and/or obstruction.3 Currently, only few published reports are available regarding the endoscopic
findings of EATL type II distinct from classic EATL. Here, we present four cases of EATL type II diagnosed preoperatively with the
endoscopy. Five cases of EATL type II were diagnosed from January 2009 to September 2012 at Samsung Medical Center. Of the five cases, four
were diagnosed endoscopically and the other one surgically. None of the patients had a history of celiac disease or malabsorption. The
patients (three men and one woman) ranged in age from 48 to 67 years (median, 52.5 years). Two patients presented with chronic diarrhea and
the other two with abdominal pain. Both the small and large intestines were involved in two patients while the disease was limited to the
small intestine in the other two patients (Table 1). A 67-year-old man was admitted for evaluation of abdominal mass, night sweating and
weight loss over the period of 6 months. computed tomography (CT) scanning and positron emission tomography (PET) showed a 6-cm-sized
homogeneous mass on the terminal ileum and ascending colon. Colonoscopy revealed hyperemic, thickened mucosa with central ulceration on the
cecum (Fig. 1A) and a 1.5-cm-sized pinkish flesh-like, flat thickened lesion on the proximal descending colon (Fig. 1B). Biopsy specimens
from each lesion showed diffuse infiltration of small- to medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells with CD4−, CD8+ and CD56+ immunophenotypes.
Despite conventional chemotherapy, leptomeningeal seeding was confirmed after the fourth cycle of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP). He died of disease progression and septic shock due to pneumonia. A 50-year-old man was admitted with
complaints of abdominal pain and low grade fever for 20 days. Colonoscopy revealed about 3-cm-sized discrete ulcerative lesion with
hyperemic edematous mucosa on the proximal ascending colon (Fig. 1C). Biopsy specimens from the lesion showed diffuse infiltration of small-
to medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells with CD4−, CD8+, CD56+, and T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1)+ immunophenotypes (Fig. 2). As
abdominal pain progressively worsened, he underwent urgent exploratory laparotomy. During laparotomy, bowel wall thickening on the distal
ileum extended 15 cm in length, its severe adhesion to surrounding structures forming a mass. The involved segment including the mass was
resected. The surgical specimen also was pathologically consistent with EATL type II. Successful complete remission was achieved after six
cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP). After 3 years, abdominal pain developed. Double-
balloon-enteroscopy (DBE) revealed diffuse fine granularity with circumferential shallow ulceration in the mid-ileum (Fig. 3A) and
pathological examination confirmed the recurrence of EATL. He underwent autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (APBSCT) and
has been free of disease for 11 months. A 48-year-old male was admitted with complaints of chronic diarrhea and weight loss of 14 kg over
the course of 1 year. Although the initial esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy were unremarkable, CT scan revealed the focal
enhancing lesion in small bowel. DBE via antegrade approaches revealed diffuse mucosal thickening and nodularity with multiple shallow
semicircular ulcerations from mid to distal jejunum (Fig. 3B). Pathologic specimens from the lesions demonstrated diffuse infiltration of
small- to medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells. Immunohistochemistry was negative for CD4 but positive for CD8 and CD56. After the
diagnosis, the patient refused further treatment and died at 14 months after diagnosis. A 55-year-old woman was referred to Gastroenterology
Department because of chronic diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss, which persisted for 1 year. Although the initial EGD was
unremarkable, abdomen and pelvic CT revealed luminal narrowing in the 3rd portion of duodenum. She was admitted for evaluation and during
admission, obstructive symptoms, such as vomiting, developed. Re-evaluation with EGD showed luminal obstruction due to an encircling mass at
the proximal jejunum. However, only necrotic debris was found on the pathology. Moreover, without definite 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose
uptake, PET suggested inflammatory condition of the lesion rather than malignancy. During the surgery, there was diffuse swelling and
luminal narrowing from the ligament of Treitz to proximal jejunem and the involved segment was 15 cm in length. Because surgeon judged to
have no resectability, gastrojejunostomy without duodenectomy was performed to relieve obstructive symptoms after the biopsy of enlarged
lymph node. Biopsy specimens from enlarged lymph node revealed only reactive change with no evidence of malignancy. Only 2 weeks after
discharge, she was re-admitted for abdominal pain, nausea, and poor oral intake. A subsequent EGD through the gastrojejunostomy site
revealed shallow ulcerations which encircled the diffusely swollen lumen of the afferent loop of the jejunum (Fig. 3C). Edematous mucosa
with innumerable fine granular elevations, described as velvety or sand-like mucosa, caused obstruction of the, mid to distal jejunum (Fig.
3D). Biopsy specimens from these lesions revealed diffuse infiltration of small- to medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells with CD4−, CD8+,
CD56+, and TIA-1 positivity (Fig. 4). Tissue DNA analysis demonstrated monoclonal T-cell receptor γ rearrangement. Based on these findings,
the diagnosis of EATL type II was made. She was unresponsive to CHOP and chemotherapy regimen was changed. After ten months of therapy, she
underwent APBSCT because of disease progression but during the course, she died of sepsis. EATL is a rare disease in Asia and only a few
case series have been reported.2,4,5 The classic EATL is known to be strongly associated with celiac disease. Tumor cells are large and
pleomorphic, which are positive for CD3 and CD7, but negative for CD4, CD8, or CD56. EATL type II is mainly composed of small- to medium-
sized monomorphic cells, showing immunophenotypic positivity for CD3, CD7, CD8, and CD56. It develops sporadically and is independent of
celiac disease.6 In our cases, CD3, CD8, and CD56 were positive in all patients, while none of them had a history of celiac disease. These
results are consistent with another study conducted in Taiwan.7 The typical endoscopic features of EATL have scarcely been reported.
Recently, there have been a few literatures of EATL type II findings based on double-balloon endoscopy and capsule endoscopy. They reported
that diffuse mucosal thickening and edema with multiple shallow ulcerations, and a nodular or mosaic mucosal pattern were characteristics of
the disease.8–10 In our cases, small bowel was almost always involved and colonic involvement was found in half the patients. Endoscopy of
the small intestine revealed multiple circular or semicircular shallow ulcerations covered with whitish mucus-like exudate. When the ulcers
were encircling the lumen of the small bowel, it was often associated with obstruction. The surrounding mucosa was edematous and thickened
by countless fine granularities, showing so-called mosaic mucosal pattern or velvety mucosa These endoscopic features of small bowel may be
specific to the disease and thus could be useful for the detection of EATL type II. On the contrary, endoscopy of the colon revealed
discrete ulcer with edematous margin or mucosal thickening, sometimes combined with central ulcer. These endoscopic findings of colon are
nonspecific to distinguish EATL type II from other disease. Therefore, it may be difficult to diagnose EATL type II only by endoscopic
findings of the colon without clinical suspicion. Patients treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy regimens had better survival rates
than those treated with other forms of therapy (including surgery) or no therapy at all. However, long-term survival is known to be poor
even with treatment. According to a retrospective study of 31 patients, the 1- and 5-year survival rates were 38.7% and 19.7%,
respectively.3 Another recent study showed that patients treated with high-dose chemotherapy followed by APBSCT had a significantly improved
survival. It has been estimated that approximately 70% of all EATL patients may benefit from this therapy.11 In summary, we report four
cases of EATL type II diagnosed by endoscopy. The endoscopic findings are the mosaic mucosal pattern and diffuse thickening of the mucosa
with circumferential shallow ulcerations causing luminal narrowing or obstruction in the small bowel and a discrete ulcer with diffuse
mucosal thickening in the colon. EATL mainly involves the small bowel causing diagnostic delay due to the difficulty of access, especially
if the symptoms were mild. However, modalities for evaluating the small bowel, such as enteroscopy and capsule endoscopy, have become more
developed. Hence, certain typical endoscopic features may give a clue to both clinicians and pathologists in diagnosing EATL in patients
with unknown causes for abdominal pain, diarrhea, or bowel obstruction. Currently, there is no treatment guideline for EATL. High-dose
chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation may be a better treatment option for EATL compared to conventional
chemotherapy. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Representative features of
endoscopic findings of colonic enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. (A) Colonoscopy revealed hyperemic, thickened mucosa with central
ulceration on the cecum and (B) flesh-like flat thickened lesions on the proximal descending colon. (C) There was a discrete ulcerative
lesion with diffuse mucosal thickening and edematous mucosa on the ascending colon. Representative features of typical pathologic findings
of colonic enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. (A) The colon biopsy showed heavy intraepithelial lymphocytosis involving the surface
epithelium (H&E stain, ×200). Many CD8-positive (B), CD56-positive (C), and T-cell in-tracellular antigen 1-positive (D) intraepithelial
lymphocytes were scattered (×200). Representative features of endoscopic findings of the small-bowel enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma.
(A) Double-balloon-enteroscopy (DBE) showed diffuse fine granularity and edematous mucosa with circumferential shallow ulcerations on the
ileum. (B) DBE revealed diffuse mucosal thickening and nodularity with multiple shallow semicircular ulcerations from the mid to distal
jejunum. In another cases, shallow ulcerations encircled the diffusely swollen mucosa of the jejunum (C), and innumerable fine granular
elevations (velvety or sand-like mucosa) were observed on the mid to distal jejunum (D). Representative features of typical pathologic
findings of small-bowel enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. (A) The small intestine biopsy showed heavy intraepithelial lymphocytosis
involving the surface epithelium (H&E stain, ×200). Many CD8-positive (B), CD56-positive (C), and T-cell intracellular antigen 1-positive
(D) intraepithelial lymphocytes were scattered (×200). Clinicopathologic and Endoscopic Characteristics of Four Cases of Enteropathy-
Associated T-cell Lymphoma Type II IPI, international prognosis index; M, male; CTx, chemotherapy; (D), dead; TIA-1, T-cell intracellular
antigen 1; APSCT, autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation; (A), alive; NA, not available; F, female. The presence of bone marrow
involvement The number of endoscopic procedures for final diagnosis The time interval between the symptom onset and diagnosis The follow-up
period since diagnosis Autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation after the first recurrence.
