A 48-year-old male presented with body aches and a chronic rash. He had no medical history aside from two unsuccessful treatments for
presumed scabies and a recent diagnosis of psoriasis. Physical exam revealed hypotension, tachycardia, and profound, diffuse yellow crusting
of the skin with erythematous erosions covering non-crusted areas (Figure). The patient was resuscitated and treated for septic shock while
microscopic evaluation of scrapings of the crusted skin was performed (Video). The patient had crusted (Norwegian) scabies with associated
Enterobacter sepsis. Crusted scabies is a rare skin infestation caused by Scarcoptes scabiei with parasitic loads in the thousands to
millions. In contrast to common scabies infections, it tends to affect immunosuppressed or debilitated patients and pruritus is not
prominent. Patients present with scaly, hyperkeratotic, gray to erythematous plaques. Given its similarity to other dermatologic processes,
misdiagnosis is common. Clinical diagnosis is aided by microscopic identification of scabies mites, eggs or feces in skin scrapings or under
fingernails. Occasionally videodermatoscopy or biopsy is necessary. Skin breakdown can lead to cellulitis and systemic bacterial
infection.1–2 Treatment for mild cases is the same as for uncomplicated scabies infections. For severe cases, oral or intravenous (IV)
ivermectin should be given. 1 After resuscitation, the patient was admitted with broad-spectrum IV antibiotics and ivermectin as well as
topical permethrin. A Human Immunodeficiency Virus test sent from the emergency department came back positive. After a prolonged hospital
course with multiple complications from his skin breakdown and sepsis, he was discharged with full eradication of his scabies infestation.
Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of
Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial
or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Photograph of the patient’s
skin exam demonstrating diffuse crusting lesions and erythema. Videodermatoscopy of moving scabies mite.
