To the Editor: The human four and a half LIM domain 1 (FHL1) gene, located on Xq26.3, encodes for a protein with only LIM domains. LIM
domains, named after their initial discovery in the proteins Lin11, Isl-1, and Mec-3, are cysteine-rich protein motifs composed of two
contiguous zinc finger domains separated by a two-amino acid residue hydrophobic linker. At least three splice patterns have been
identified, resulting in three protein isoforms: FHL1A with four and a half LIM repeats, FHL1B with three and a half repeats, and FHL1C with
two and a half repeats. All isoforms are highly expressed in skeletal muscle and heart, where they are reported to play multiple roles in
cell growth and function. Mutations of FHL1 gene could cause a series of diseases characterized by cardiac defects and/or skeletal muscle
abnormalities. Recently, the FHL1 gene has been identified as one of the causative genes of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). HCM is
characterized by asymmetric left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction. The phenotype ranged from asymptomatic to dyspnea,
heart failure, syncope, and sudden death. Here we report a Chinese male with HCM and mild skeletal muscle hypertrophy who was identified
with a novel FHL1 mutation. A 19-year-old male was presented for intermittent weakness and exertional dyspnea during the past year. No chest
pain, fatigue, syncope, or paralysis was reported. His parents were completely asymptomatic, with normal results of cardiovascular and
neurological examinations. Both of his maternal grandmother's brothers had unexplained cardiac diseases in their 50s and died 5 years later.
None of his other family relatives had cardiac or skeletal muscle diseases. On general examination, the patient was normotensive. Chest and
heart auscultations were normal. Jugular vein was normal, and there was no peripheral edema. Neurologic examination revealed an athletic
habitus with hypertrophy of all limb muscles, and a short neck. Other neurologic examinations were unremarkable. The 6-min walk test was
within normal range. Laboratory examination revealed increased serum creatine kinase (741 U/L, normal 18–198 U/L) with normal CK-MB and
cTnI. Screening for auto-antibodies was negative. Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm and tittered right axis. Echocardiography
showed asymmetrical LV hypertrophy with a maximal wall thickness of 18 mm at mid-septum. The LV outflow was normal. Left atrium was enlarged
to 36 mm. Pulmonary systolic pressure was slightly raised to 46 mmHg. Magnetic resonance imaging of the heart demonstrated enlarged LV and
right ventricle in a spiral pattern with a maximal wall thickness of 18.3 mm at mid-septum. LV ejection fraction was 64.4%. First pass and
delayed scanning after gadolinium infusion was normal. Pulmonary function was normal. Electromyography test did not detect any muscular or
neurologic abnormality. Biopsy of the thigh muscle demonstrated general moderate hypertrophy of muscular fibers with scattered muscle fiber
atrophy, no necrosis or regeneration was seen. No reducing body (RB) was found. Genomic DNAs were available from the described patient and
his parents. Genetic screening of genes causing hereditary skeletal and cardiomyopathies was performed using targeted next-generation
sequencing, and the screened gene panel included SGCD, TCAP, TRIM32, TTN, FKTN, MYOT, LMNA, CAV3, EMD, FHL1, LAMA2, ITGA7, SEPN1, ACTA1,
DES, CRYAB, LDB3, BAG3, STA, DMD, MYH7, and LAMP2. These results revealed that the young male patient was hemizygous for the nonsense
mutation c.542G>A in exon 6 of the FHL1 gene. Other genes were normal in this patient. His mother was heterozygous at this location, while
his father was normal. Confirmation study with 50 normal females and 100 normal males revealed no mutation at the locus. The clinical
presentation of the reported patient was characterized by clinical HCM and mild skeletal muscle abnormalities. Our patient was similar to
the young male patient described by Malfatti et al., who was presented with HCM and muscle hypertrophy, and was identified with FHL1
mutation. FHL1 mutation could cause a series of diseases. According to the presentence of a special RB at histological examination, these
diseases could be divided into two groups: The RB subgroup, including human RB myopathy, X-linked dominant scapuloperoneal myopathy, and
rigid spine syndrome; and the non-RB subgroup, including X-linked myopathy with postural muscle atrophy and generalized hypertrophy and
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy 6. Recently, a cardiac phenotype has been observed, including arrhythmias, HCM, dilated cardiomyopathy,
and an apical- or mid-ventricular cardiomyopathy phenotype, with none-to-mild skeletal muscle disease. Given the heterogeneity with regard
to the severity of muscle involvement and disease progression, the clinical phenotype of this patient could be explained by FHL1 mutation.
The mutation, c.542G>A, locates in exon 6 and is a novel nonsense mutation. Less than 30 different FHL1 mutations have been reported so far.
Multiple genotype-phenotype studies indicate that the type of mutations and their locations seem to be crucial. Mutations in the proximal
exons, encoding the second LIM domains, produce aggregates of mutant FHL1 proteins in the RB subgroup; while mutations in the distal exons
(exon 6–8), affecting the third or fourth LIM domains, are mainly found in the non-RB subgroups. The function of the third LIM domain has
not been elucidated, some speculated that this domain may interact with nuclear envelope. According to the translational patterns, the
mutation is predicted to result in a premature stop codon, p. Trp181Ter (p.181W>X), in the third LIM domain, affecting isoforms FHL1A and B
[Figure 1], resulting in a truncated protein which was degraded. Studies with transgenic mice showed that FHL1A, localized in the cytoplasm,
is an important component of the stress-sensor complex at the sarcomeric I-band in cardiomyocytes. FHL1B and FHL1C isoforms shuttle between
the cytoplasm and the nucleus, interrupting the normal cardiomyocyte developmental processes. Reduced, instead of accumulation of mutated
protein, and preservation of FHL1C might partially explain the milder phenotype of the HCM predominant patients. Gene, mRNA, and protein
sequence of four and a half LIM domain 1 isoforms. The c.542G>A locates on exon 6, the resultant p.Trp181Ter nonsense mutation results in
premature truncation of the third LIM domain. FHL1A and FHL1B isoforms possess this domain and are probably affected by the mutation, while
isoform FHL1C are preserved. The last panel showed the wild-type sequence from a normal person and the mutated sequence of the presenting
patient. In conclusion, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first Chinese case of FHL1 mutation associated HCM, and the c.542G>A
(p.181W>X) is a novel nonsense mutation. FHL1 mutation should be considered in patients with HCM, especially those accompanied with skeletal
muscle disease. Further pathogenic studies are needed to investigate the causative role of this novel mutation in the pathogenesis of
hypertrophy and mild skeletal muscle involvement. Edited by: Jian Gao and Ya-Lin Bao Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
