Sporadic inclusion body myositis is the most common adult myopathy in persons aged 50 years and older. The clinical presentation includes a
chronic, slowly progressive course with a predilection for weakness of the forearm flexors and quadriceps muscles. Its indolent course makes
it a disease frequently missed or misdiagnosed as other neuromuscular conditions by health care professionals. The degenerative processes
with amyloid accumulation distinguish sporadic inclusion body myositis from other inflammatory myopathies. Currently, no effective therapy
exists. This clinical report highlights the difficulties in diagnosing the disease, examples of misdiagnosis, and inappropriate therapies
that can result from misdiagnosis. We present our clinical experience with 20 patients over a 10-year period and describe in depth two
cases, both men, one of Indian ethnicity and the other of Hispanic ethnicity, who were referred to our neuromuscular division for second
opinions and diagnosed with sporadic inclusion body myositis years after symptom onset. Although sporadic inclusion body myositis is rare
and without effective therapy, accurate diagnosis is crucial to providing adequate counseling and information about the prognosis and
disease course, and to avoiding inappropriate therapy. Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is one of several chronic adult inflammatory
myopathies. Its prevalence varies, but it may be as high as 35 per 1 million adults over age 50 years, with a slight male predominance . The
clinical presentation involves chronic, slowly progressive, distal asymmetric weakness affecting the finger flexors and proximal lower
extremity weakness affecting the quadriceps, which later progresses to other proximal and distal muscles. The indolent disease course
sometimes lasts many years until patients notice significant deterioration leading to medical care . Additional complaints include dysphagia
caused by cricothyroid muscle weakness and decreased pharyngeal propulsion . The pathogenesis of s-IBM is not fully understood, and
currently there is no known treatment [3, 6]. We present two exemplary cases followed by a summary table that highlights the presentation of
20 patients seen in our clinic over a 10-year period. The local institutional review board approved this study. The case presentation
portions of this report were prepared according to recent standardized guidelines . A 58-year-old man of Indian ethnicity with type 2
diabetes mellitus was referred to our hospital for a second-opinion neuromuscular evaluation. Four years prior, he had noted leg weakness,
particularly in his thighs. After initial evaluation and diagnostic studies, his neurologist had diagnosed him with deconditioning and
prescribed vitamin B12 injections. A subsequent electrodiagnostic study revealed denervation changes in his upper extremity muscles and
thoracic paraspinal muscles, leading to a diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which the patient carried for nearly 1 year. He
was prescribed riluzole and advised to plan for end of life. When referred to our institution, the patient described weakness while climbing
and descending stairs without upper extremity complaints. During his physical examination, he was noted to have atrophy in the quadriceps
muscles with moderate weakness. Electromyography (EMG) showed increased membrane instability and early recruitment with fractionation of the
motor unit potentials, showing a brief, small, abundant, polyphasic motor unit potential pattern. His creatine kinase (CK) level was
elevated at 647IU/L. A muscle biopsy showed myopathic features with rimmed vacuoles characteristic of s-IBM. The patient was informed of his
correct diagnosis and counseled on his prognosis. Patient 1 is represented as patient 8 in Table 1.Table 1Retrospective chart
reviewPatientAge (yr)Time to diagnosis (mo)SexSymptomsExamination at initial presentationa Electrodiagnostic studiesMuscle biopsyDiagnosis
before referral15624MGait difficulty, then grip weaknessWE 4− (L), FF 2, HF 5− (L), KE 3, DF 2MyopathicEnd-stage muscle wastingPossible
myopathy27060MAsymmetric leg weakness, recurrent fallsHF 4− (L), HE 4−; HF 3 (R), KE 4−, KF 5−, DF 4,Myopathics-IBM strongly confirmed by
p62-positive fibersUnknown37636MDifficulty getting up from chair then difficulty opening jars; mild dysphagiaSA 5−, EF 4−, EE 4−, FE 4;
digits 4 and 5 FF 4 (L), HF 4−, KE 4Mixed proximal myopathyEnd-stage muscle wasting, no inclusion bodies or lymphocytic infiltratesProbable
myopathy48148MLeg weakness, falls, difficulty getting up from chairMild digit 5 flexion weakness, HF 4MyopathicFibers with adjacent
lymphocytes, inclusions in fibers, interstitial fibrosis, COX-negative fibersComorbid RA58572MDifficulty climbing stairs, then asymmetric
grip weaknessDistal FF 2, KE 3, PF 4+ (L)Length dependent axonopathy, myopathyAtrophy with scattered morula, with mild chronic
inflammationPeripheral neuropathy66760MGrip weakness, then difficulty getting up from chairFF 3, HF 3, KE 2, PF 4NAIntramyofiber
inclusionsUnknown77748FGetting up from chair and gait difficulty, then difficulty opening jarsSA 2, EF 2, EE 4, FF 2, FE 4+, HE 4, HA 4, KE
2, KF 4−, DF 4−, PF 4−MyopathicNAUnknown85548MProximal leg weakness, difficulty getting up from chair, climbing stairsFF 4, HF 5−, HE 5−, KF
4−, KE 4MyopathicChronic and active vacuolar myopathy, severe IBMALS954145MGrip weakness, then leg weakness, getting up from chair and
ambulation difficultyFF 3 (R); 4 (L), KE 3 (L), KE 4− (R)Myopathic2003: polymyositisPolymyositis2013: chronic and active vacuolar
myopathy106848MWeakness with grip, opening jars, handling coins, then proximal leg weaknessEF 5−, EE 4+, FF 3 (R) 2 (L), KE 4− (R); 2 (L),
HF 4+MyopathicIntramyofiber inclusions with fibrosis, absent oxidative positivityNeuropathy vs. myopathy116336FProximal leg weakness, then
finger flexor weakness, some difficulty swallowing solids.Digits 4 and 5 FF 2 (R); digits 2–5 FF 2 (L), KE 4−, DF 4+ (R); 4− (L), PF
4+MyopathicProminent lymphocytic infiltrationUnknown1273120MProximal leg weaknessHE 4, KE 3Chronic denervation in the L4 musclesBiceps with
minimal denervation changes, quadriceps too atrophic to biopsyPossible myopathy134360MFinger flexor and proximal leg weaknessHE 4−, KE 3+
(R); 4− (L)NALymphocytes, myopathyInflammatory myopathy vs. IBM146724MProximal leg weakness, then finger flexorsHF R 4, KE R 4 (R); 4+ (L),
DF R 2 (R); 4+ (L)MyopathicMultifocal endomysial inflammation and fibrosis, intramyofiber inclusionsExtrapyramidal disease vs. lumbosacral
radiculopathy15756ML leg weakness, L hand weakness, b/l arm weaknessSA 4, FF 4−, HF 3, HA 4, KF 4+, DF 4+, KE 4−MyopathicAtrophic myofibers,
minimal endomysial inflammation, rimmed vacuolesUnknown1671120FLeg weakness, then hand weakness, then difficulty swallowingB 4+ (R); 4 (L);
WE 4 (R), FE 3, FF 3, KE 4−MyopathicIntramyofiber inclusionsIBM1781240FProximal leg weakness, then finger flexor weakness; some difficulty
swallowingSA 3 (R); 4− (L), FE 4−, WE 4−, WF 4−, FF 4−, HF 2, HE 3, KE 3, DF3, PF 3NASevere inflammatory myopathyPolymyositis188224MR hand
weakness, then L hand weaknessFF 3R (R); 2 (L)MyopathicRagged red fibers, COX-negative fibersALS195660MProgressive weakness in hand gripWF
5−, FF 4MyopathicNAPossible ALS2055120MDifficulty holding heavy objects, then difficulty getting up from chairEE 4, FF 4, HF 4−, KE
5−NAEndomysial mononuclear infiltration, internal nuclei in many fibers, ragged red fibers with rimmed vacuoles, COX-negative fibersIBM
Abbreviations: ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, B biceps, b/l bilateral, COX cytochrome oxidase, DF dorsiflexors, EE elbow extension, EF
elbow flexion, FE finger extension, FF finger flexion, HA hip abduction, HE hip extension, HF hip flexion, IBM inclusion body myositis, KE
knee extension, KF knee flexion, L left, LE lower extremity, NA not available, PF plantarflexors, pt patient, PT physical therapy, R right,
RA rheumatoid arthritis, SA shoulder abduction, s-IBM sporadic inclusion body myositis, UE upper extremity, WE wrist extension, WF wrist
flexion aStrength is given according to the Medical Research Council grading system. Muscle groups not listed are otherwise normal strength
Retrospective chart review Abbreviations: ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, B biceps, b/l bilateral, COX cytochrome oxidase, DF
dorsiflexors, EE elbow extension, EF elbow flexion, FE finger extension, FF finger flexion, HA hip abduction, HE hip extension, HF hip
flexion, IBM inclusion body myositis, KE knee extension, KF knee flexion, L left, LE lower extremity, NA not available, PF plantarflexors,
pt patient, PT physical therapy, R right, RA rheumatoid arthritis, SA shoulder abduction, s-IBM sporadic inclusion body myositis, UE upper
extremity, WE wrist extension, WF wrist flexion aStrength is given according to the Medical Research Council grading system. Muscle groups
not listed are otherwise normal strength A 54-year-old Hispanic man developed weakness in his grip, followed 1 year later by lower extremity
weakness. His CK level was 2400IU/L, and a muscle biopsy indicated polymyositis (PM). His initial therapy included prednisone followed by
other immunosuppressive medications, including azathioprine, methotrexate, and mycophenolate mofetil. Although the patient’s CK level
decreased to 450IU/L, his condition continued to progress. Nine years later, he was evaluated at our neuromuscular clinic. At that time, he
was unable to get up from a seated position, locked his knees while ambulating to avoid falls, and had severe weakness in his left hand and
moderate weakness in his right hand. During his physical examination, he was noted to have asymmetric atrophy in the forearm flexor and the
quadriceps muscles, with severe asymmetric weakness of knee extension and slight weakness in ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion. EMG
showed active denervation with significant brief, small, abundant, polyphasic motor unit potentials. A repeat muscle biopsy showed variation
in muscle fiber size, endomysial fibrosis, chronic inflammatory cells with macrophages, and rimmed vacuoles with basophilic stippling, all
characteristic of s-IBM. The patient was counseled on his correct s-IBM diagnosis, and immunosuppressive therapy was discontinued. Patient 2
is represented as patient 9 in Table 1. Table 1 shows 20 patients (16 men, 4 women) seen at our neuromuscular division between 2004 and 2014
(including patients 1 and 2 in the present report listed as patients 8 and 9, respectively). The patients’ average age at initial evaluation
at our clinic was 67.8 years (standard deviation, 11.5; range, 43–85). The average number of months from symptom onset to diagnosis was 70.0
(standard deviation, 54.8; range, 6–240). One patient did not follow up to confirm the diagnosis but was clinically diagnosed with s-IBM.
Our clinic population had characteristics of s-IBM similar to those described in previous reports. The topography was proximal leg weakness
presenting as difficulty with ambulation and rising from chairs, in addition to finger flexor weakness presenting as difficulty handling
objects and opening jars and bottles. Four patients had dysphagia. Several patients were misdiagnosed before evaluation at our institute:
two patients (patients 9 and 17) diagnosed with PM who were given immunosuppressive medications; three (patients 8, 18, and 19) who were
diagnosed with ALS; one (patient 5) diagnosed with entrapment neuropathy who underwent cubital tunnel release with no improvement; one
(patient 14) who was diagnosed with extrapyramidal symptoms of Parkinson’s disease versus radiculopathy; and one (patient 16) who was
diagnosed with s-IBM and given etanercept. The remaining 12 patients were referred without diagnosis or for second opinions for myopathy.
(Please note the standard deviations given above for time until the final correct diagnosis, and see below for discussion of trends and how
our findings coincide with the existing published literature.) s-IBM is both a myodegenerative and neurodegenerative disease with β-amyloid-
related deposits and an inflammatory disease with endomysial lymphocytic infiltration. Accumulation of misfolded proteins and inadequate
intracellular repair mechanisms characterize the disease . There is also expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
molecules . A 43 kDa muscle protein, recently identified as cytosolic 5′-nucleotidase 1A, was discovered in 2013 as an autoantigen for s-IBM
autoantibodies . This finding indicates the potential role of humoral immunity in the pathogenesis of the disease in addition to a cytotoxic
T-cell-mediated component. Furthermore, identification of this target of s-IBM autoantibodies could lead to the development of a diagnostic
blood test, potentially eliminating the need for invasive testing such as muscle biopsy. Although muscle biopsy can confirm the diagnosis of
s-IBM, the results may be negative owing to sampling error or to end-stage muscle wasting. Endomysial inflammation and degeneration with
misfolded protein aggregates and/or inclusions and atrophic fibers are often present. Congo red staining or immunofluorescence shows amyloid
β-pleated sheets in and around vacuoles . There are rimmed vacuoles within the myofibril. In cases where the inclusion bodies are not found,
the presence of inflammation alone can lead to an erroneous diagnosis of PM [4, 15]. If there is no definite diagnosis, then biopsy should
be repeated. Currently, there is no cure for s-IBM. Some patients may initially show a limited response to corticosteroids. Other treatments
available for inflammatory myopathies have efficacy in s-IBM in specific cases [3, 16]. Patients with dysphagia may benefit from intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy, along with balloon dilation or botulinum toxin injection . Although this disease is rare and incurable,
making the correct diagnosis is crucial to directing the patient to physical therapy for weakness, gait training, and education to prevent
falls. Occupational therapy may improve a patient’s ability to engage in activities of daily living. Appropriate patients with swallowing
complaints should be referred to a speech therapist for proper education regarding diet consistency and aspiration precautions. Patients may
be assured that s-IBM is not a motor neuron disease or a rapidly deteriorating myopathic condition that is life-threatening . Our university
neuromuscular clinic sees approximately six new patients with s-IBM each year. The median age of the predominantly male population in our
present report was 69 years, and patients’ ages ranged from 43 to 85 years. The median time from symptom onset to final diagnosis was 54
months and ranged from 6 months to 20 years, reflective of the slow disease course that helps to differentiate s-IBM from other disease
mimickers. Experienced neurologists and neuromuscular specialists can diagnose s-IBM based on its topography of weakness of quadriceps and
forearm flexors, but the diagnosis is often missed, delayed, or incorrect. Common misdiagnoses are PM, immune-mediated neuromuscular
disease, entrapment neuropathies, and motor neuron disease. Erroneous diagnosis can lead to inappropriate therapy, as illustrated by some of
the cases described here and in a previous report of patients who received years of corticosteroids and immunosuppressive medication and
experienced serious side effects . IVIG was previously used for treatment of s-IBM until a controlled clinical trial showed lack of efficacy
. Needless surgical treatments for radiculopathy or entrapment neuropathy have occurred, as illustrated by patient 5 in our series. Although
s-IBM is a well-recognized neuromuscular diagnosis that is seen in neurology and neuromuscular specialty clinics, it is well known that it
can masquerade as other disorders . The cases described here confirm and highlight the fact that s-IBM is still difficult to diagnose and
remains frequently misdiagnosed. Our data show that the time to diagnosis averaged 5.83 years, a delay similar to that described by Lotz and
coworkers in 1989 . The fact that this has remained unchanged for 25 years is disappointing but not entirely surprising, given the symptoms
and neurological topography, including asymmetric weakness, finger flexor weakness, loss of grip strength, gait difficulty, and dysphagia,
that overlap with those of non-s-IBM conditions. The electrodiagnostic findings in our clinical neurophysiology laboratory in this case
series also coincide with previous reports of mixed patterns, which may confuse non-neuromuscular clinicians. We find several pitfalls in
the diagnosis of s-IBM. First is an overreliance on electrophysiology. Second, muscle biopsies sometimes do not have all the cardinal
histological features, including endomysial inflammation, newer findings of MHC class II upregulation and invasion of non-necrotic muscle
fibers by lymphocytes, and mitochondrial changes . Also, clinicians may be misled by an incomplete biopsy appearance, with patchy
inflammatory changes being more florid early and patchy degenerative changes more florid later in the disease course. A third pitfall arises
when patients present early with either atypical symptoms, such as camptocormia or foot drop, or an incomplete clinical picture. Clues to
look for in a clinical examination include long finger flexor and quadriceps weakness, as confirmed in our present study. It has been
suggested that s-IBM can be made by clinical diagnosis alone . To the general practice clinician, however, we recommend that all cases of
suspected s-IBM be referred to a center specializing in neuromuscular disease so that an appropriate diagnosis can be made and inappropriate
treatments are avoided. Limitations of our study include the relatively small number of patients. Our present study of 20 patients is only
half the number of the series previously reported by Lotz and colleagues (40 patients) . Also, our study may have university and/or tertiary
geographic referral bias, along with limitations of our single-center experience. We do hope that our aforementioned clinical points are
clear, however, regarding potential misdiagnosis and the importance of correct diagnosis. s-IBM is still difficult to diagnose and
unfortunately remains frequently misdiagnosed, with a delay in accurate diagnosis of just over 5½ years, which has not changed over the last
25 years. Although s-IBM is rare and without effective therapy, accurate diagnosis is of crucial importance to providing adequate patient
counseling and information about the prognosis and course of the disease. Cases of suspected s-IBM should be referred to a center
specializing in neuromuscular disease so that an appropriate diagnosis can be made and inappropriate treatments are avoided. Written
informed consent was obtained from both of the patients for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Biceps Bilateral Cytochrome oxidase
Creatine kinase Dorsiflexors Elbow extension Elbow flexion Electromyography Finger extension Finger flexion Hip abduction Hip extension Hip
flexion Inclusion body myositis Intravenous immunoglobulin Knee extension Knee flexion Lower extremity Major histocompatibility complex
Plantarflexors Polymyositis Patient Physical therapy Right Rheumatoid arthritis Shoulder abduction Sporadic inclusion body myositis Upper
extremity Wrist extension Wrist flexion Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions AC and SRB examined patients 1 and 2. SRB examined all cases presented in Table 1. AC wrote the initial manuscript. SRB
supervised the coordination of clinical care, rewrote and edited the manuscript, did an additional literature search and performed and
interpreted all of the electrodiagnostic studies. RAR reviewed the manuscript and revised and further edited the manuscript using an
additional literature search. SRB and RAR were responsible for the intellectual content of the report, along with critical appraisals,
suggestions and revisions. All authors participated in and provided significant contributions to the writing of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information AC is a recent former clinical neurophysiology fellow at the University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine and Los Angeles County Medical Center (currently in private practice). SRB is a professor of
neurology at the University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine and Los Angeles County Medical Center. SRB is director of the
University of Southern California Neuromuscular Program, a fellow of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Association of
Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine, and board-certified by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology in neurology, clinical
neurophysiology, pain medicine, and neuromuscular medicine. SRB is also board-certified by the American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine
in electrodiagnostic medicine. SRB is a member of the advisory board and the scientific committee of the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of
California. RAR is a deputy editor of the Journal of Medical Case Reports; an associate neurology editor of BMC Neurology, Grand Rounds and
WebmedCentral; and a section editor of BMC Research Notes. RAR practices general neurology at Neurology Consultants Medical Group, serves as
medical director of the PIH Health Hospital-Whittier Stroke Program and the PIH Health Hospital-Whittier Non-Invasive Vascular Laboratory,
is a clinical assistant professor of neurology at the University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine and Los Angeles County
Medical Center, and is a fellow of the American Association of Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine. RAR is board-certified by the
American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology in neurology and vascular neurology, and neurocritical care and neuroimaging by the United
Council of Neurologic Subspecialties. RAR is also board-certified by the American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine in electrodiagnostic
medicine. RAR is a former president of the Los Angeles Neurological Society and is a fellow of the American Academy of Neurology and the
American Neurological Association. We gratefully acknowledge the patients described in this report. We also acknowledge and are grateful to
Jennifer Kelly Shepphird, PhD, of JKS Science & Medical Writing, LLC (www.jkswriting.com) for her assistance in production and revision of
Table 1 as well as calculation of some statistics and general manuscript revision.
