Fetus in fetu (FIF) is a rare congenital anomaly. The most common site at which FIF occurs is the retroperitoneum. The mechanisms underlying
the development of FIF have not been fully elucidated. The monozygotic twin theory postulates that FIF results from the unequal division of
the totipotent cells of the blastocyst. However, the monozygotic twin theory does not explain all cases of FIF. Herein, we describe the
clinical characteristics of a 20-day-old infant with scrotal sac swelling. Ultrasonography and computed tomography revealed the presence of
a mass consistent with a FIF rather than a teratoma. Surgical removal and a subsequent pathological evaluation demonstrated that the
anencephalic fetus exhibited limb buds adjacent to a palpable vertebral column, supporting the diagnosis of FIF. The infant had an
uneventful recovery and was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. In the present report, the pathogenesis, presentation, diagnosis, and
management of FIF, as well as new concepts emerging in this area of research, are discussed. Although the majority of cases of FIF may be
diagnosed preoperatively, FIF should be distinguished from teratoma because the latter has substantial malignant potential. The recommended
treatment for FIF is complete resection. To confirm the diagnosis of FIF, pathological examination, karyotyping, serologic marker
assessment, and DNA restriction site mapping should be performed after removing the mass. Although FIF is thought to be a benign disorder,
follow-up is necessary as a precaution against malignant recurrence, which has been described once. Fetus in fetu (FIF) is a rare congenital
anomaly, with an approximate incidence of 1 in 500,000 live births.1 Although FIF typically presents during infancy and early childhood, a
small number of case reports of patients presenting with FIF during adulthood have been published. A limited number of cases of FIF have
been detected prenatally as cystic intra-abdominal masses growing inside the fetus.2 The oldest patient with documented FIF was a 47-year-
old man.3 To distinguish a FIF from a teratoma, Gunaydin et al4 described a FIF as a mass containing a vertebral axis with organs and limbs
arranged around it. Interestingly, even on pathological examination, approximately 9% of FIF cases in the literature reviewed by Gonzalez-
Crussi5 lacked a vertebral column. Gonzalez-Crussi5 subsequently stated that the diagnosis of FIF should be applied to any fetiform
structure exhibiting significant organogenesis and the presence of an axial skeleton. The majority of FIFs occur in the retroperitoneal
space. Scrotal FIF is extraordinarily rare. We describe a scrotal FIF preoperatively diagnosed and successfully operated. A 20-day-old
infant was hospitalized for scrotal swelling following birth. The boy was born full term via a normal vaginal delivery, with a birth weight
of 3250 g. There was no history of twinning or teratomas in either parents’ families. He had an enlarged scrotum, which contained a 4.5-cm
firm mass. His complete blood count and kidney–liver function test results were within the respective reference ranges. A coagulation
profile test showed the bleeding time, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen level, and fibrin split products
to be normal. Urinalysis values were normal. His β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were
also within the respective reference ranges. His serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 1200 ng/mL. Ultrasonography of the scrotal sac
demonstrated a well-defined fetiform mass measuring 3.5 × 2.0 cm, surrounded by a fluid-filled sac containing bony elements resembling a
vertebral axis (Figure 1A). The left testis was normal in shape and size. The right testis, however, could not be found. A computed
tomography (CT) scan revealed a well-encapsulated mass in which the fetal bone structures were visualized by ultrasonography (Figure 1 B).
This finding was diagnostic of FIF; therefore, the boy was diagnosed with FIF. Scrotal FIF in a 20-day-old male neonate. (A) Ultrasound
featuring a fetiform mass in the scrotal sac. (B) CT scan demonstrating a well-defined mass, measuring 4.5 × 4.0 cm, surrounded by a fluid-
filled sac containing bony elements resembling the vertebral axis and the iliac bones (arrow head). (C and D) Upon incision, the mass
exhibits a pinkish fetiform morphology, with tiny male external genitalia at one pole. (E) Plain radiograph of the FIF demonstrating
vertebral organization (arrowhead). CT = computed tomography, FIF = fetus in fetu. An incision in the right scrotal sac exposed a mass
enveloped by a 4.5 × 4.0 × 3.0-cm capsule supplied by the right testicular artery. The capsule could be easily separated from the scrotal
wall. The capsule was incised, and a skin-covered anencephalic FIF with a palpable vertebral column was subsequently noted. An umbilical
cord-like structure was found to be contiguous with the capsule (Figure 1C). The FIF had 2 limbs that resembled hands with up to 7 digits.
Tiny male external genitalia were clearly recognizable (Figure 1D). A specimen radiograph demonstrated a vertebral column (Figure 1E).
Histopathologically, the FIF consisted of bone, cartilage, mucous glands, and neural and pancreatic tissue. A spinal cord with a central
canal and adjacent vertebrae were found (Figure 2). The karyotype of the FIF was 46 XY. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful
and he was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Histopathological examination revealed the presence of neural tissue, striated muscle
tissue, and connective tissue (hematoxylin and eosin, ×200). Written informed consent regarding the publication of this case report and the
accompanying images was provided by the patient's parents. Copies of the signed informed consent forms are available for review by the
Series Editor of Medicine. This case report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China. Written informed consent was obtained regarding the use of the images in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. FIF is an
extremely rare condition, as <200 cases have been described in the literature worldwide. Since Hoeffel et al6 reviewed 87 cases of FIF in
2000, 89 additional cases have been published between 2000 and 2015. We have summarized the various sites at which FIF has been observed, as
well as the details pertaining to the development of FIF outside of the abdomen (Table 1). The most common site of FIF is the
retroperitoneum (75.6%); atypical locations include the skull (9%), mediastinum, thorax, sacrum, scrotum, mouth, neck, pelvis, and liver.
The sex ratio (male to female) of FIF is approximately 1.5:1. Even under pathological examination, only 84.3% of cases of FIF have been
confirmed to have a vertebral column. Published Cases of FIF With the Exception of Those in the Abdomen and Retroperitoneum A FIF is a
malformed fetiform mass located within a host, defined as an encapsulated, pedunculated, vertebrate, fetiform mass.7 The definition devised
by Gunaydin et al4 requires the presence of an axial skeleton and appears to be too strict. The presence of vertebral bodies indicates that
the FIF progressed through the primary stage of gastrulation. The neural tube develops before the skeleton, including the spinal column, and
is important in the development of other structures; therefore, the absence of a spinal column at term may not preclude the possibility that
one existed at an earlier stage.8 The cases of FIF characterized by the absence of a vertebral column are also often characterized by
identifiable limbs and well-formed long bones, which must initially have been shaped via the influence of innervated muscles.9 A FIF is
typically enclosed within a distinct sac containing either fluid or sebaceous material. An umbilical cord-like structure serves as the
connection between the fetus and the host. FIFs are usually both cardiac and anencephalic. In Spencer's opinion, the absence of the heart is
not conducive to growth or the sustenance of life, which may explain the growth retardation and arrest of organ differentiation observed in
the setting of FIF.7 However, there have been cases of FIF in which a heart was present,10–13 including one in which a heart rate of 108
beats/min was recorded.12 The pathogenesis of FIF remains controversial. Most investigators agree with the monozygotic twin theory, which
postulates that FIF results from the unequal division of the totipotent cells of a blastocyst. According to the monozygotic theory, a FIF is
a diamniotic, monochorionic, monozygotic twin that becomes incorporated into the body of a host twin following the anastomosis of the
vitelline circulation.14 However, the monozygotic, monochorionic, diamniotic twin theory may not explain all cases of FIF, including cases
characterized by the presence of multiple fetuses associated with a single host or a FIF associated with a teratoma.15–17 The monozygotic,
dichorionic, diamniotic twin theory may supply the answers regarding these phenomena. At 30 hours following fertilization, the zygote
consists of 2 cells. Spontaneous division of the zygote into 2 embryos is not considered a hereditary trait but rather a spontaneous event.
If the zygote splits early (within the first 2 days following fertilization), the embryos may develop separate placentas (chorion) and
separate sacs (amnion). These embryos are dichorionic, diamniotic twins. On approximately the fifth day of the development, the blastocysts
implant into the uterine endometrium; however, if one of the blastocysts derived from the conceptus implants into the other blastocyst
instead of the endometrium, or if one blastocystis enclosed by the other implant close together, the subsequent development of such an
inclusion body may result in FIF. From an embryological point of view, the existence of avertebral column in a fetiform mass may reflect its
derivation from the primitive streak. The formation of the primitive streak normally begins during the third week of development in
conjunction with gastrulation, which results in notochord formation and the subsequent development of the vertebral column and segmental
axis. Therefore, a FIF may initially develop in a manner similar to that of normal fetal development. Interestingly, studies of genetic
markers and genotyping suggest that host infants and their fetiform masses are genetically identical, which supports the monozygotic twin
theory.18–21 As mentioned previously, the monozygotic twin theory does not explain all cases of FIF, and the theory surrounding a possible
relationship between FIF and a highly differentiated teratoma remains controversial. Some investigators have hypothesized that a FIF
represents a well-differentiated and highly organized teratoma.22 In other words, FIFs and teratomas may share an underlying pathogenetic
mechanism. Proponents of the teratoma theory argue that FIFs may lack a spinal column and that teratomas may be highly differentiated and
organogenic. Highly differentiated teratomas may contain a variety of organs, such as well-formed limbs, teeth, intestinal loops, a spinal
cord, and brain-like tissue.8 FIFs may be found at many of the sites at which teratomas are located, including the retroperitoneum and
ovaries. FIFs may be associated with teratomas, and retroperitoneal teratoma formation has been described following FIF removal.12,23 As
there are many similarities between the 2 entities at the histological level, attaining a full understanding of the true nature of a FIF is
an essential step toward improving treatment efficiency in the setting of this rare disease. Most cases of FIF involve a single parasitic
twin. However, >1 parasitic twin may be observed in the host body, although such occurrences are rare. To the best of our knowledge, the
maximum number of FIFs documented previously is 11.24 Eighty-nine percent of FIF lesions have been noted before 18 months of age.6 Most FIFs
are located within the retroperitoneal space25; additional sites include the cerebral ventricles,26 mouth,11,27 neck,28 adrenal gland,29
liver,30 scrotum,31 pelvis,32 and mediastinum.33 As FIF is a benign disorder and has been described at various sites ranging from the
cranial cavity to the scrotal sac, FIF lacks specific symptoms. Most FIFs present as asymptomatic, slow-growing abdominal masses. The
symptoms of FIF are usually related to mass effect and include abdominal distension, feeding difficulties, emesis, jaundice, and dyspnea,
which are caused by the compression of adjacent organs and tissues. If an FIF develops in the cranial cavity, neurologic symptoms may be
observed. To diagnose FIF, one of the following characteristics must be present: a mass enclosed within a distinct sac, either partially or
completed covered by skin, with grossly recognizable anatomic features attached to the host via a pedicle containing a small number of
relatively large blood vessels.34 Both ultrasonography and plain radiography may be useful in identifying these features. Different organs
may be observed within a FIF, including limbs (86.0%) and a vertebral column (84.3%). Other organ systems include the central nervous
system, gastrointestinal tract, blood vessels, and genitourinary tract. A FIF may be differentiated from a teratoma by the presence of
vertebral organization with the limb buds and the other organ systems. Ultrasonography may be helpful in the diagnosis of FIF as early as 21
weeks of gestation. It was first used by Nicolini et al35 to make a prenatal diagnosis of FIF. Ultrasonography may reveal the presence of
calcific structures, but it may also result in misdiagnosis. Calcifications within the fetal abdomen may be caused by a teratoma, meconium
peritonitis, a neuroblastoma, viral infections, and adrenal hemorrhage.36 Careful scrutiny of the calcifications, as well as magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), may enable clinicians to make a correct diagnosis. When fetal ultrasonography cannot distinguish between a cyst and
a solid mass, fetal MRI may be useful. Ultrasonography and x-ray imaging may also aid in diagnosing FIF, as both modalities may help
clinicians to visualize various aspects of the fetal skeleton, including the vertebral column. CT and MRI may allow for a more accurate
diagnosis and may help define the relationship between the FIF and any adjacent intra-abdominal structures (Figure 1). In patients with a
FIF, CT and MRI may reveal the presence of a distinct gestational sac containing diverse fetal structures (Figure 2). Distinct bony
structures, such as the spine and the bones of the extremities, may be visualized using CT and MRI, both of which have enhanced the accuracy
of preoperative diagnoses.6,37 Complete blood counts and kidney–liver function tests are frequently performed, and the results are usually
within reported reference ranges. To distinguish a FIF from a malignant teratoma, both serum β-HCG and serum AFP levels should be tested.
Serum AFP is an important indicator of the level of the malignancy of the teratoma, and elevated serum β-HCG levels may reflect either the
presence of chorionic tissues within the mass or teratoma recurrence. Testing serum CEA levels may help clinicians and researchers to
exclude specific types of abdominal tumors. The results of the serological examinations mentioned above may be helpful in making a
preoperative diagnosis of FIF. Despite the above-mentioned tests, making a definitive diagnosis preoperatively is often difficult.
Postoperative pathological examinations, genetic marker assessment, and genotyping should be undertaken to confirm the diagnosis. Under
gross pathological examination, various well-differentiated organs may be observed, including the vertebral column, limbs with digits, and
other organs. Approximately 15.7% of FIF cases lack a vertebral column; however, such cases must have the aforementioned characteristics to
be consistent with a diagnosis of FIF. Even if one mass with a well-differentiated axial skeleton is confirmed, the diagnosis of FIF may not
be 100% certain. Kuno et al38 described a fetiform teratoma with a highly developed axial skeleton that was distinguished from a FIF on the
basis of zygosity. Teratomas are solid tumors that are common in infancy and are composed of various tissues foreign to the sites at which
they arise.7 They are embryonal tumors that develop abnormally from the 3 primitive blastoderm cell layers. They may contain parts of or
each of the 3 germ cell layers, with different degrees of maturity. The tissue types most often observed in highly differentiated teratomas
are epithelium, hair, cerebral tissue, neurocytes, cartilage, bone, and teeth; however, teratomas lack an axial skeleton. However, because
some FIFs lack a spinal column, some investigators have suggested that FIFs area type of highly differentiated teratoma.22 Making the
diagnosis may be difficult in these cases because of the similarities in the entities’ clinical and radiological features, as well as in
their appearances on histological examination. The most common sites are the sacrococcyx, anterior mediastinum, testicles, ovaries, and
retroperitoneum, which are also sites at which a FIF may be observed. The incidence of teratomas is approximately 1/4000 live births,39
which is much higher than that of FIF. Approximately 7% of teratomas are malignant, whereas FIF is a benign disease. Although the pathology
results may be similar between FIF and teratomas,15 karyotyping, serologic marker assessment, and DNA restriction site mapping may confirm
that the mechanism underlying the development of FIF is different than that underlying the development of a teratoma. Regarding fetiform
teratomas, which may have a spinal column, the most common location is the ovaries. This entity may be differentiated from a FIF via
zygosity, as most fetiform teratomas are homozygous, and FIFs are heterozygous. Additionally, fetiform teratomas are most commonly found in
women of reproductive age, whereas FIF is most often observed during infancy.6,40 Meconium peritonitis is the result of sterile chemical
peritonitis, which results from an intrauterine bowel perforation and the subsequent exudation of meconium into the peritoneal cavity. The
most common radiographic finding in newborns with meconium peritonitis is calcification, which is visualized as a classic eggshell
calcification. Other x-ray imaging findings include ascites and pneumoperitoneum, which may also be observed in FIF. The calcifications
associated with FIF, which most often resemble bony structures, are often used to distinguish a FIF from meconium peritonitis.36 The
differential appearances of these diseases on imaging studies are presented in Table 2. Imaging Findings Pertaining to the Differential
Diagnosis of FIF Although FIF is thought to be a benign disorder, the recommended treatment for FIF is surgical excision to relieve
obstruction, prevent further compression, and minimize the risk of hemorrhage. Significant blood loss during surgery is common; therefore,
packing the abdomen may be helpful in achieving hemostasis for cases involving either the abdomen or the retroperitoneum. The resection of
all parts of the mass is necessary because the diagnosis of FIF cannot be confirmed until a pathological analysis has been performed.
Additionally, removing the entire mass may also decrease the risk of local malignant recurrence. The prognosis of most cases of FIF is good,
although the prognosis of intracranial FIF is poor. Only 2 of the 18 patients with an intracranial FIF have survived, 1 of whom has only
minimal head control and suffers from spasticity in the lower extremities.41 The indicators for postoperative follow-up include serum levels
of β-HCG and AFP, which are suggestive of the development of malignant teratoma. Although some cases of FIF are associated with high CEA
levels,14 there is no evidence of a correlation between FIF and CEA. Either CT or MRI should also be performed at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months
following therapy. FIF is a rare entity that typically presents during infancy and early childhood. Current imaging modalities enable more
accurate diagnosis and define the relation of the FIF with the other structures before surgery. FIF should be differentiated from a teratoma
because of the malignant potential of the latter. Although the prognosis of FIF is generally good, cases of malignant degeneration have been
described. Clinical and iconographic follow-up are therefore encouraged. The authors would like to thank their patient's parents for their
cooperation and support, as well as for providing their consent regarding the publication of this manuscript. Abbreviations: β-HCG = β-human
chorionic gonadotropin, AFP = α-fetoprotein, CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen, CT = computed tomography, FIF = fetus in fetu, MRI = magnetic
resonance imaging. YJ, BS, and SC contributed equally to this work and are co-first authors. This project was supported by grants from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 81401606 and 81400862 to YJ and SC), and the Science Foundation for The Excellent Youth
Scholars of Sichuan University (2015SU04A15 to YJ). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
