Heart transplantation is the last option to improve survival in end-stage heart failure. Unfortunately, the increased need for organs far
outweighs the availability of donors. To overcome this situation and to increase the number of available hearts for transplantation, donor
selection criteria were made less stringent1-3. Nowadays, the one-year survival rate after transplantation is close to 90%4-6, with 50% of
the patients surviving for more than 10 years6. The main factor limiting survival is allograft vasculopathy (AV), which occurs in up to 10%
and 50% of the patients at 1-year and 5-year after transplantation, respectively5. ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) is rare in
these patients and is even more uncommon shortly after transplantation. Despite being an uncommon manifestation of AV, STEMI is usually
related to AV6,7. We describe the case of a 65-year-old man, former smoker with diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and end-stage
ischaemic cardiomyopathy who underwent orthotopic heart transplantation. He received the organ from a 55 year-old obese male with
hypertension and dyslipidaemia. The cold ischemic time was approximately 1 hour; the donor was under dopamine perfusion (8mg/kg/min) for 12
hours. The donor heart had normal left ventricular ejection fraction. The heart was harvested without angiographic screening (not mandatory
according to the local policy) and was therefore not tested for the presence of coronary heart disease (CAD). After transplantation, the
patient remained under amine support for 36 hours and mechanical ventilation for 12 hours. He was maintained on a regimen of cyclosporine,
azathioprine, and prednisolone. At the fourth day after transplantation without any clinical signs or symptoms (namely chest pain), a rise
in the ST segment was monitored, associated with an elevation in myocardial lesion markers. Subsequently, an ECG was performed in the
emergency setting and showed an ST elevation from V2 to V6 (Figure 1). The transthoracic echocardiogram revealed moderate left ventricular
dysfunction associated with akinesia of the anterior wall, septum, and apex. The patient underwent urgent cardiac catheterization that
revealed an occluded left anterior descendent (LAD) in the mid segment, without significant lesions in the remaining vessels. Angioplasty
with implantation of a bare metal stent was successfully performed (Figure 2). The patient evolved in Killip Kimball class II with a peak
troponin of 86 µg/L (normal range, < 0.5 µg/L) and an early post-infarct left ventricular ejection fraction of 40%. Despite being under
optimal medical therapy (including dual antiplatelet therapy, ACE inhibitors, spironolactone and statins) he experienced several medical
complications during his hospital stay, including progressive heart failure (NYHA III), multiple infections and sudden death after three
months. The autopsy showed areas of infarct of different evolution stages in the anterior wall and septum, including areas of recent
infarct, which was assumed as the cause of death. ECG durante a fase aguda. Intervenção coronária primária. A) angiograma mostrando oclusão
no segmento médio da artéria descendente esquerda (ADE), B) angioplastia de balão, C) reperfusão da ADE revelando o vaso distal, D)
implantação do stent, E) fluxo TIMI 3. This is a very rare case of an early STEMI in a transplanted heart not associated with AV, but
probably due to "traditional" coronary artery disease of the donor's heart. There are only few epidemiologic and clinical data on MI
following heart transplantation. This lack of data is likely due to the rarity of the event and due to the fact that the diagnosis is missed
in the case of asymptomatic MI7. Moreover, data come from different types of sources such as autopsy registries, clinical trials of
percutaneous intervention, and imaging cohort studies, making the estimation of the overall incidence and the characterization of the event
difficult7. The clinical manifestations include typical angina symptoms (in those 10-30% who have nerve regrowth), fatigue, heart failure,
arrhythmias, and death. However, most patients are asymptomatic or have an atypical presentation as a result of cardiac denervation7.
Therefore, these patients can experience multiple silent MIs at any time after transplantation, resulting in loss of allograft function,
heart failure, or sudden death. STEMI in heart transplant bearers can occur early or late after the transplantation, probably reflecting
different pathophysiologic mechanisms. Intravascular ultrasonography of the coronary circulation of transplanted hearts showed the presence
of two types of lesions: 1) focal, non-circumferencial and proximal, donor-transmitted or de novo lesions and 2) a diffuse, concentric
pattern that is related to AV6-8. Late STEMI is more often related to AV, an accelerated arteriosclerosis characterized by diffuse,
longitudinal, and concentric proliferation of intimal smooth muscle and extracellular matrix8. Early STEMI is very rare and can be related
to procedural features like prolonged organ cold ischemia time, tissue embolization, postsurgical coronary air embolus, and thrombosis. It
can also be associated with CAD of the donor's heart7. An autopsy registry of patients who died within 2 months after transplantation showed
a 30% prevalence of atherosclerosis of the native coronary arteries in early allografts6. All transplanted patients have an increased risk
of MI. Thrombosis can result from surgery/immune related inflammation and immunosuppressive therapy associated metabolic and hemostasis
imbalance. In addition, patients with history of MI may have an underlying basal propensity for thrombosis6,7. This effect can also be more
pronounced in patients who are already at higher risk, like those with established atherosclerosis. The widening gap between waiting
recipients and donors has given rise to ethical issues concerning the allocation of the organs. The awaiting population includes patients
with different orders of priority and borderline candidates (elderly patients, younger patients with significant comorbidities, and patients
requiring re-transplantation). In order to satisfy the needs of these borderline candidates, a policy of extending the criteria and
acceptance of marginal donors has been adopted. Several studies have shown that survival with marginal hearts can be similar to that with
standard donors1,9. Other studies however showed increased early or late postoperative mortality and morbidity10. Some of these unfavorable
results may be due to the fact that older donor hearts traditionally have been allocated to older or high-risk patients or are used as a
biological bridge to transplantation until a younger allograft becomes available1,9. Some surgeons transplant borderline hearts to high-risk
recipients because they feel that these patients may have the greater marginal benefit from these hearts. Others transplant these organs in
low-risk recipients to reduce the overall risk as the recipient risk is the overriding determinant of immediate post-transplant survival2.
Either way, this strategy should be an option only when the survival benefit for the recipient unequivocally exceeds the decrement in early
survival due to transplantation of a high-risk cardiac allograft. Conversely, a risk stratification policy with widespread CAD exclusion is
still lacking and high-risk allografts are harvested and allocated, contributing to worse outcomes. Therefore, only if properly selected,
older donor hearts with negative cardiac history, normal electrocardiogram and echocardiogram, low inotropic support, normal coronary
angiogram, and an expected short ischemic time, will fill the void of organs and better outcomes can be expected1. This case is an example
of the issues that can emerge after transplantation of an organ from a marginal donor to a borderline recipient, and illustrates the need
for correct stratification of the potential donors and recipients. Currently, invasive coronary angiography is not mandatory; however, other
non-invasive tests (with or without use of contrast dye) may be used to exclude CAD, and to estimate the functional reserve of the donor
heart. Cardiac CT using calcium score with or without angiography could be useful to evaluate the presence of significant CAD. Stress
echocardiography can as well diagnose significant CAD and appraise cardiac reserve. Because we are dealing with such priceless resources, it
is important to use all the means we have available to select and allocate properly the transplanted hearts. This is a case of a very early
STEMI after transplantation, which highlights the need for special and continuous attention to clinical, laboratory, and
electrocardiographic features in the early perioperative period, as manifestations are frequently atypical. The proper selection and
allocation of organs is fundamental for the success of transplantation. Therefore risk should be estimated for all possible matches with the
appropriate tests according to institutional resources. Author contributions Conception and design of the research and Writing of the
manuscript: Madeira SL; Acquisition of data and Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Madeira SL, Raposo LF, Madeira
M, Marques M, Rebocho MJ. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of
Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any thesis or
dissertation work.
