Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 27 Final Diagnosis: Obstructive gastric pseudotumor Symptoms: Dyspepsia •
weight loss Medication: Ganciclovir Clinical Procedure: Infectious diseases treatments and surgical treatment Specialty: Gastroenterology
and Hepatology Rare co-existance of disease or pathology Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a common opportunistic pathogen in patients with HIV. It
is also a major cause of gastrointestinal ulcers in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). CMV pseudotumor in the stomach
is a rare cause of digestive tract obstruction. In this study we report a male patient infected with HIV in 2002. In 2014 he evolved C3
stage AIDS with prepyloric gastric ulcer which provoked deformity and pseudotumoral aspect of the gastric outlet. Endoscopic biopsy
confirmed CMV infection. He underwent Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis with good recovery. CMV infection should be considered as an agent
in gastric lesions in HIV-infected patients. Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis is a surgical option for this group of patients, allowing
improvements in quality of life and decreasing risks of perioperative complications. Cytomegalovirus is a common opportunistic pathogen in
patients infected with HIV, especially in those with low CD4+ lymphocyte count. It is a DNA virus and a member of the Herpesviridae family .
After primary infection, it remains hidden and can be reactivated . Patients immunosuppressed by chemotherapy, immunosuppressive drugs, or
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) may have severe disease affecting organs such as the retina, respiratory system, central nervous
system, or gastrointestinal tract . In the gastrointestinal tract, in particular, CMV virus most commonly affects the large bowel (47%),
followed by the duodenum (21.7%), stomach (17.4%), esophagus (8.7%), and (rarely) small intestine (4.3%) . In AIDS patients, CMV is a
frequent cause of gastrointestinal ulcers . CMV virus can cause vasculitis of the submucosal layer, resulting in thrombosis, ischemia, and
mucosal ulceration. It can evolve to lumen narrowing and, eventually, gangrene and perforation of the affected organ . The medical
literature describes Kaposi’s sarcoma and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma as causes of intestinal subocclusion in AIDS patients. However, there are
few reports linking CMV virus as a cause of gastric or intestinal obstruction . Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis can be a surgical option
in dealing with gastric outlet obstruction. This technique offers shorter surgical time and fewer perioperative complications compared to
surgical resection or other bypass procedures. Moreover, Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis is a surgical approach that can eliminate the
alkaline gastritis and its long-term consequences that usually occur in classical gastroenteroanastomosis . Our Brazilian patient was a
27-year-old, white male when he sought our help in the first time in 2002. He had serological diagnosis of HIV infection in a screening test
done due to a blood transfusion and was referred to the Infectious Disease Department of our Faculty. At this first visit, he was
asymptomatic, and had never had opportunistic infections linked to HIV until that date. Also, he had a personal background of cigarette
smoking and alcohol consumption. Physical examination did not show any specific sign or alteration. Furthermore, he cited a previous gastric
ulcer treatment in another medical facility 1 year ago. This information was annotated as personal background and remained without further
details afterwards. Laboratory exams were done (Tables 1, 2). Between 2002 and 2004, he had only 4 medical visits in an outpatient basis. In
1 of them, he complained of dyspepsia and therefore was treated with IBP (omeprazole). He was classified with A2 stage HIV infection at that
time, and received no specific treatment for HIV. Unfortunately, this patient abandoned his clinical follow-up between 2005 and 2013. He
came back to our medical facility on January 2014. Between 2005 and 2013, he did not receive any specific treatment for HIV infection. He
was 39 years old in 2014. He complained of dyspepsia, fever, and recent weight loss. At physical examination, there were augmented cervical
lymph nodes, fever, and abdominal pain. There was also a remarkable weight loss of 19 kilograms (kg) compared to our 2002 data available.
Consequently, it was decided to admit him to the Infectious Diseases ward. New laboratory tests were done, including counts of CD4, CD8, and
viral copies (Tables 1, 2). According to this new clinical picture, he was diagnosed with C3 stage AIDS. Thus, antiretroviral therapy was
initiated with tenofovir, lamivudine, and efavirenz. Those cervical lymph nodes seen on physical examination were examined with fine-needle
aspiration biopsy and were positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis) infection. Indeed, CT scan imaging demonstrated
augmented lymph nodes in the cervical and abdominal regions. In addition, there were images compatible to pulmonary tuberculosis on CT scan,
although sputum tests were negative for M. tuberculosis. Therefore, tuberculosis treatment was started with rifampicin, isoniazid,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. At about the same time, an upper digestive endoscopy (UDE) was performed. UDE showed an ulcer 2 cm in
diameter, with deep fibrin in its base, erythematous and swollen edges comprising the pyloric channel, causing difficulty in endoscopic
progression into the duodenum (Figure 1). Biopsy demonstrated cytological abnormalities consistent with CMV infection and concomitant
presence of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection (Figure 2). Abnormalities were described such as endothelial cells with foamy
cytoplasm and nuclear eosinophilic inclusion compatible with cytopathic viral effect by cytomegalovirus in ulcerated mucosa area.
Consequently, the patient was treated with ganciclovir 5 mg/kg twice a day intravenously for 21 days. At the same time, H. pylori infection
was treated with amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and omeprazole (triple therapy orally for 7 days). After 22 days of in-hospital treatment, he
was discharged without fever or abdominal pain, and continued clinical follow-up on an outpatient basis. He completed his treatment for CMV
with ganciclovir when he was in hospital. Also, he received his treatment for H. pylori infection correctly. However, after 4 months of
discharge, when he was still receiving treatment for M. tuberculosis infection, he presented to us with poor oral diet acceptance, vomiting,
upper abdominal pain, and absence of weight gain. Therefore, UDE was repeated. It demonstrated gastric stasis and a pyloric ulcer that
prevented progression into the duodenum. Nonetheless, this second biopsy did not show signs of CMV infection or H. pylori infection. In
addition, the patient had some improvement in his HIV infection assessment (Table 2). At that time, regarding the new clinical picture, the
surgical team was asked to assess this patient. Considering his poor oral diet acceptance, persistent vomiting, absence of weight gain in
spite of medical treatment, signs of pyloric obstruction on physical exam, and UDE, we decided to perform an elective laparotomy. One
concern was uncertainty linked to oral medication absorption, including that of antiretroviral therapy. Another fact that helped our
decision to surgery was the absence of CMV infection in the last biopsy. During abdominal examination, we observed a tumorous hard mass in
the pyloric region, blocked by omentum, causing great deformity and distortion of the duodenum. An intraoperative biopsy was done and it was
negative for malignancy. In consideration of this intense local blockage hindering the duodenal approach, we performed Roux-en-Y
gastroenteroanastomosis in the posterior wall of the stomach with a 50-cm efferent loop. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course.
Oral diet was initiated on the third postoperative day. Finally, he was discharged on the seventh day after surgery, with good acceptance of
oral diet and improvement of the gastrointestinal symptoms. Six months after surgery, he is asymptomatic, with good oral diet acceptance, no
vomiting, and recovered weight (Tables 3, 4). Gastroduodenal ulcers (GDU) are rare in HIV patients who present upper digestive tract
symptoms . In a study with 497 patients with these characteristics, only 23 (5%) presented GDU in the endoscopy. Moreover, CMV was the only
organism significantly associated with GDU in HIV patients and H. pylori was an uncommon cause of ulcers in this group . Other studies
showed similar results . A study conducted in Taiwan comparing prevalence of H. pylori in patients with and without HIV demonstrated
infection in 70% to 100% in those HIV-negative patients with peptic ulcer. On the other hand, this same study measured H. pylori infection
only in 0% to 49% of HIV-positive patients. The authors of this study estimated that approximately 70% of AIDS patients with GDU had CMV
infection concomitantly. They concluded that in AIDS patients with upper digestive tract symptoms and low CD4+ count, CMV infection is more
common than H. pylori infection . Despite high prevalence of CMV infection in this group of patients, it rarely causes GDU with
pseudotumoral effect leading to pyloric duodenal sub-stenosis . We found in the medical literature 1 report of just 5 cases of gastric
pseudotumor by CMV, of which, only 3 cases were reported causing stenosis by the lesion . Kelesidis et al. described a case of duodenal
pseudotumor solved by oral treatment with valganciclovir and reported another 14 cases of CMV pseudotumor in other parts of the
gastrointestinal tract in their patients . They cautiously concluded that this successful treatment with complete resolution of CMV’s
pseudotumor in their HIV immunosuppressed patient with medication was a unique case in the literature. Finally, they highlighted the
importance of remembering this clinical entity in the differential diagnosis in HIV patients . Surgical treatment for duodenal stenosis,
which can be caused by malignancy, peptic ulcer, or other specific agents, may involve procedures with surgical resection like partial
gastrectomy or bypass techniques like pyloroplasty. Bypass surgery can be done by several approaches as described by Heineke-Mikulicz,
Finney, Jaboulay, Finsterer-Bancroft, as well as gastroenteroanastomosis . In difficult duodenal cases with pseudotumor and local blockage
in the gastric outlet as we describe in this paper, we should consider a bypass like Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis. This surgical option
avoids direct manipulation of the affected region, possibly averting some surgical complications like postoperative duodenal leaking. In
addition, this bypass technique can offer improved acceptance of oral diet and, consequently, better nutritional status and quality of life.
Conventional gastroenteroanastomosis is performed with a side-to-side anastomosis between the stomach posterior wall and the jejunal loop .
However, this technique is linked with bile reflux directly into the stomach, causing dyspeptic symptoms and alkaline reflux gastritis .
Furthermore, chronic alkaline reflux gastritis can increase neoplasia risk in the gastric mucosa in the long term . We perform a modified
gastroenteroanastomosis since 1998. It consists of a precolic side-to-side gastrojejunostomy and a Roux-en-Y end-to-side jejuno-jejunal
anastomosis, with an efferent loop measuring about 50 cm. This procedure is usually performed in patients with unresectable malignancy .
Accordingly, HIV-positive patients presenting GDU must be surveyed with endoscopic biopsies to assess presence of opportunistic infections,
notably CMV infection. In addition, H. pylori infection is an uncommon cause of ulcer disease in these patients . Thus, patients who are not
responsive to traditional ulcer disease treatment should be promptly reviewed by endoscopy with several biopsies to assess the presence of
specific agents like CMV . In conclusion, Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis can be a good option in preventing bilious vomiting compared to
classic gastroenteroanastomosis. Additionally, dyspeptic symptoms linked to alkaline gastritis and malignancy risk decrease in the long
term. It is a safe technique that promotes weight gain and improves patient quality of life. In summary, we described a gastric pseudotumor
case causing pyloric stenosis in an advanced stage AIDS patient. Other opportunistic diseases affected him as well. Biopsy demonstrated that
CMV infection was linked to gastric pseudotumor, a very rare manifestation according to medical literature. Besides, this gastric outlet
obstruction impaired his treatment with oral medications. Lastly, we advocate Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis as a good alternative to
surgical treatment. This approach is linked to lower risk of operative complications compared to classic gastroenteroanastomosis and
provides good quality of life. Disclosure The authors declare no conflict of interest. We acknowledge the Pathology Department, Diagnostic
Center for Digestive Diseases (Gastrocentro), State University of Campinas (Unicamp), especially Dr. Rita Barbosa de Carvalho, M.D., who
kindly provided us the photomicrograph that illustrates this paper. Endoscopic photo showing pre-pyloric gastric ulcer causing stenosis of
pyloric channel (biopsy confirming ulcer etiology by CMV). Photomicrography showing endothelial cells with foamy cytoplasm and nuclear
eosinophilic inclusion compatible with cytopathic viral effect by cytomegalovirus in ulcerated mucosa area (hematoxylin-eosin, 400-fold
increase). Basic laboratory tests are shown. Trace mark (–) means that test was not done. HIV infection laboratory tests are shown. Vital
signs are shown. Nutritional evolution is shown. Trace mark (–) means that test was not done.
