Pleural effusion induced by sarcoidosis is rare, and pleural sarcoidosis is often diagnosed by thoracoscopic surgery. The diagnosis of
pleural sarcoidosis using thoracentesis may be less invasive when sarcoidosis is already diagnosed histologically in more than one organ
specimen. Here we report the case of a 64-year-old woman with pleural sarcoidosis diagnosed on the basis of an increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte
ratio in pleural effusion fluid obtained by thoracentesis. This case report is important because it highlights the usefulness of the CD4/CD8
lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion as an indicator of pleural involvement of sarcoidosis. A 64-year-old Japanese woman visited our
hospital with an initial symptom of dyspnea on exertion for a period of 4 months. Chest computed tomography showed bilateral hilar and
multiple mediastinal lymphadenopathy, multiple small nodular shadows in her bilateral lungs, small nodular shadows along the interlobar
pleura, and bilateral pleural effusion. Her serum angiotensin-converting enzyme and soluble interleukin-2 receptor levels were elevated.
Histological analysis of a resected subcutaneous nodule, and biopsy specimens from a right mediastinal lymph node and from her right lung
revealed non-caseous epithelioid granulomas. Her bronchoalveolar lavage fluid exhibited a predominance of lymphocytes together with an
increase in the CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio. The lymphocytic predominance and the increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio were also detected in the
right-sided pleural effusion fluid obtained by thoracentesis. We diagnosed sarcoidosis with pleural involvement. Because pleural effusion
did not resolve spontaneously and her symptom of dyspnea on exertion worsened, corticosteroid therapy was initiated, which ameliorated the
sarcoidosis and the pleuritis. Analysis of the CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion fluid obtained by thoracentesis may be helpful
for the diagnosis of pleural sarcoidosis when the diagnosis is already made by histological examination of more than one organ specimen.
Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease of an unknown cause that may involve the lungs, lymph nodes, eyes, salivary glands, skin,
liver, spleen, heart, nervous system, muscles, bone, and other organs . A clinical diagnosis is made by the histological confirmation of
non-caseous epithelioid granulomas in more than one organ specimen along with the exclusion of other known etiologies . Sarcoidosis involves
the lungs in more than 90% of cases . Pulmonary sarcoidosis is characterized by the infiltration of activated T-cells bearing CD4 and
macrophages . When the CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid (BALF) is greater than 3.5, the sensitivity and
specificity for the diagnosis of sarcoidosis are 53% and 94%, respectively, with a positive predictive value of 76% . Serum soluble
interleukin-2 receptor (sIL2R) and serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL6) values are correlated with the number of total cells, lymphocytes and
T-lymphocytes bearing CD4 in BALF, suggesting that these may reflect alveolitis induced by sarcoidosis . Sarcoidosis can also involve the
pleura: pleural sarcoidosis is observed in only 1.1% of out-patients with sarcoidosis and in approximately 3% of all cases of sarcoidosis .
Pleural sarcoidosis is diagnosed clinically [3, 5, 6] or histologically by thoracoscopy [7, 8] or percutaneous pleural biopsy [3, 9].
Exclusion of tuberculosis and fungal disease is important for an accurate diagnosis . Thoracoscopy may not always be required to determine
the etiology of pleural effusion in patients with sarcoidosis when the diagnosis is already definitive by the histological analysis of other
plural organ specimens. Here we report the case of a 64-year-old woman in whom analysis of the CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion
fluid obtained by thoracentesis was helpful for the clinical diagnosis of pleural sarcoidosis. A 64-year-old Japanese woman visited our
hospital with an initial symptom of dyspnea on exertion. For the past 4 months she had shortness of breath when she walked approximately 100
meters or went up 10 to 20 steps of a staircase. She visited her neighboring hospital 1 month before visiting our hospital where she
received a diagnosis of bilateral pleural effusions and seven sessions of thoracentesis; however, no clinical diagnosis could be made
although her dyspnea on exertion was slightly improved by the frequent thoracentesis. When she visited our hospital for the first time, she
felt dyspnea on exertion on the ground level after several hundred meters. Before she had dyspnea on exertion, she had not had any diseases
including sarcoidosis nor had she received any continuous medications such as immunosuppressive drugs. She had no previous history relating
pleural effusion, and no family history of sarcoidosis. She did not have any past history for opportunistic infections. A chest radiograph
showed the enlargement of bilateral hilar shadows, reticulonodular shadows in bilateral lung fields, and dullness at the right costophrenic
angle (Fig. 1a). Her serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level was elevated to 44.2 IU/L. Her immunoglobulin G (IgG) and sIL2R levels
were also elevated (Table 1). Bacterial culture for sputum resulted in negative findings for tuberculosis. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
analysis also showed no tuberculosis in her sputum.Fig. 1Chest radiography. a Before the first admission. b Before the initiation of
corticosteroid therapy. c Five weeks after the initiation of corticosteroid therapyTable 1Laboratory findings from an earlier visit to
another hospital and first admission to our hospitalHematologySerologyBronchoalveolar lavage analysisWBC4470/μlCRP0.79mg/dlCell numbers
3.5×105/mlNeu60.3%IgG1893mg/dlCell fractionationLymphocyte20.7%ACE44.2IU/LLymphocyte 33%Monocyte10.1%sIL2R3710U/mlNeutrophil
1%Eosinophil4.0%CEA1.1ng/mlMacrophage 66%Basophil1.2%Blood gas analysisCD4/8 13.43RBC464×104/μlpH7.395Bacterial culture
negativeHb14.0g/dlPaO2 72.9mmHgPleural effusionHt41.8%PaCO2 41.3mmHgpH 7.5Plt22.4×104/μlHCO3 24.8mmol/LSpecific gravity
1.030BiochemistryPulmonary function testRivalta 2+TP6.3g/dlVC1880mlProtein 4.3mg/dlAlb3.3g/dl%VC82.3%Alb 2.3mg/dlAST40IU/LFEV1.01270mlADA
50.4IU/LALT29IU/LFEV1.0%70%CEA 0.8ng/mlALP764U/LPEF3070mL/secondCell numbers 882/μlLDH183IU/LV501040mL/secondCell
fractionationCrt0.65mg/dlV25400mL/secondLymphocyte 98%FBS90mg/dlV50/V252.60Neutrophil 2%Na141mEq/L%DLCO95.4%CD4/8 ratio
5.62K4.5mEq/LDLCO/VA4580mL/minute/mmHg/LPCR negative for tuberculosisCl104mEq/LBacterial culture negativeCa9.2mg/dlIP3.6mg/dl ACE
angiotensin-converting enzyme, ADA adenosine deaminase, Alb albumin, ALP alkaline phosphatase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, AST aspartate
aminotransferase, Ca calcium, CEA carcinoembryonic antigen, Cl chlorine, CRP C-reactive protein, Crt creatinie, DLCO carbon monoxide
diffusion capacity, FBS fasting blood sugar, FEV1.0 forced expiratory volume in 1 second, Hb hemoglobin, HCO 3 bicarbonate, Ht hematocrit,
IgG immunoglobulin G, IP inorganic phosphorus, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, Na sodium, Neu neutrophil, PaCO 2 partial pressure of carbon
dioxide in arterial blood, PaO 2 partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, PCR, polymerase chain reaction, PEF peak expiratory flow, Plt
platelets, RBC red blood cell, sIL2R soluble interleukin-2 receptor, TP total protein, V50 and 25 expirtatory flow at 50% and 25% of vital
capacity, respectively, VA alveolar volume, VC vital capacity, WBC white blood cell Chest radiography. a Before the first admission. b
Before the initiation of corticosteroid therapy. c Five weeks after the initiation of corticosteroid therapy Laboratory findings from an
earlier visit to another hospital and first admission to our hospital ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme, ADA adenosine deaminase, Alb
albumin, ALP alkaline phosphatase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, AST aspartate aminotransferase, Ca calcium, CEA carcinoembryonic antigen,
Cl chlorine, CRP C-reactive protein, Crt creatinie, DLCO carbon monoxide diffusion capacity, FBS fasting blood sugar, FEV1.0 forced
expiratory volume in 1 second, Hb hemoglobin, HCO 3 bicarbonate, Ht hematocrit, IgG immunoglobulin G, IP inorganic phosphorus, LDH lactate
dehydrogenase, Na sodium, Neu neutrophil, PaCO 2 partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood, PaO 2 partial pressure of oxygen in
arterial blood, PCR, polymerase chain reaction, PEF peak expiratory flow, Plt platelets, RBC red blood cell, sIL2R soluble interleukin-2
receptor, TP total protein, V50 and 25 expirtatory flow at 50% and 25% of vital capacity, respectively, VA alveolar volume, VC vital
capacity, WBC white blood cell Three weeks later, she was admitted to our hospital for diagnosis and treatment. Neither restrictive
pulmonary function disorder nor remarkably reduced diffusing capacity of her lungs was observed. The 6-minute walk test revealed that she
could walk up to 370 meters with a minimum blood oxygen saturation (spO2) of 93%, maximum pulse of 126 beats per minute and the worst
modified Borg scale of perceived dyspnea of 1. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple skin nodules, bilateral hilar and mediastinal
lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusion, and multiple small nodules in both lungs and along the interlobar pleura (Fig. 2a-d). Pulmonary
embolism was not observed in chest CT. Multiple subcutaneous nodules were palpable in her neck, back, and bilateral arms. Gallium-67
scintigraphy exhibited abnormal uptake in the right subclavicular area, mediastinum, bilateral hilum, bilateral parotid glands, and spleen,
but no abnormal uptake in her heart, suggesting sarcoidosis or malignant lymphoma (Fig. 3a). A tuberculin test was negative. A skin biopsy
specimen was obtained and bronchoscopy was performed twice, including endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration
(EBUS-TBNA), BAL, and transbronchial lung biopsy. Thoracentesis was also performed. Histological analysis of a resected subcutaneous nodule
from her left upper arm exhibited non-caseous epithelioid granuloma (Fig. 4a). Ziehl–Neelsen staining and Grocott staining tested negative.
Histological analysis of a right mediastinal lymph node (station 4R) obtained by EBUS-TBNA also showed a non-caseous epithelioid granuloma;
malignant lymphoma was ruled out (Fig. 4b). The aspiration sample of the lymph node revealed negative findings for bacteria including
tuberculosis. In addition, PCR analysis for detection of tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium and Mycobacterium intracellulare were negative.
Bronchofiberscopy revealed multiple small nodules in both the main bronchi (Fig. 3b), and histological analysis of an endobronchial nodule
and a transbronchial lung biopsy specimen from the right upper lobe revealed non-caseous epithelioid granulomas (Fig. 4c and d,
respectively). The transbronchial lung biopsy specimen also showed negative Ziehl–Neelsen and Grocott staining. BALF obtained from the right
middle lobe exhibited an increased number of lymphocytes and an increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio of 13.43 (Table 1). Bacterial culture,
including that of Mycobacteria, was negative. On the basis of these findings, a final diagnosis of sarcoidosis was made.Fig. 2Chest computed
tomography findings on admission. a and b: Multiple mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusion, and
multiple small subcutaneous nodules indicated by arrows. c and d: Bilateral multiple small nodular shadows in the lungs and multiple small
nodules along the interlobar pleura (arrow)Fig. 3Gallium-67 scintigraphy and bronchoscopic examination. a Gallium-67 scintigraphy exhibits
abnormal uptake in the right subclavicular area, mediastinum, bilateral hilum, bilateral parotid glands and spleen but no abnormal uptake in
the heart. b A bronchoscopic examination reveals multiple small nodules on the surface of the bilateral bronchi (arrows). A carina is
located at the centerFig. 4Histological analysis. All pictures are obtained at 20× magnification. a Hematoxylin and eosin staining of a
subcutaneous nodule specimen. b Hematoxylin and eosin staining of a right mediastinal lymph node specimen. c Hematoxylin and eosin staining
of an endobronchial nodule specimen. d Hematoxylin and eosin staining of a transbronchial lung biopsy specimen Chest computed tomography
findings on admission. a and b: Multiple mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusion, and multiple small
subcutaneous nodules indicated by arrows. c and d: Bilateral multiple small nodular shadows in the lungs and multiple small nodules along
the interlobar pleura (arrow) Gallium-67 scintigraphy and bronchoscopic examination. a Gallium-67 scintigraphy exhibits abnormal uptake in
the right subclavicular area, mediastinum, bilateral hilum, bilateral parotid glands and spleen but no abnormal uptake in the heart. b A
bronchoscopic examination reveals multiple small nodules on the surface of the bilateral bronchi (arrows). A carina is located at the center
Histological analysis. All pictures are obtained at 20× magnification. a Hematoxylin and eosin staining of a subcutaneous nodule specimen. b
Hematoxylin and eosin staining of a right mediastinal lymph node specimen. c Hematoxylin and eosin staining of an endobronchial nodule
specimen. d Hematoxylin and eosin staining of a transbronchial lung biopsy specimen Thoracentesis on the right side revealed exudative
pleural effusion fluid. Cell fractionation of the fluid showed the predominance of lymphocytes without any malignant cells and an increase
in the CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio to 5.62 (Table 1). Her adenosine deaminase (ADA) level in her right pleural effusion was 50.4IU/L. However,
bacterial culture including that for Mycobacteria was negative and PCR analyses for detection of tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium and
Mycobacterium intracellulare were negative. Examinations of fundus, electrocardiography and echocardiogram revealed no abnormality.
Collectively her lungs, skin, pleura, and, possibly, the parotid glands and spleen were involved in sarcoidosis. She was discharged 5 weeks
after the first visit and was followed up for the spontaneous resolution of the bilateral pleural effusion. However, no improvement was
observed and pleural effusion increased (Fig. 1b). The 6-minute walk test revealed that she could walk up to 315 meters with a minimum spO2
of 90%, maximum pulse of 116 beats per minute and the worst modified Borg scale of perceived dyspnea of 4. In addition, her initial symptom,
which was induced by walking approximately 100 meters or going up 10 to 20 steps of a staircase, seemed to be severe and was partially
improved by frequent thoracentesis. Based on these findings, corticosteroid therapy with a daily dose of 30mg prednisolone was initiated 8
weeks after the first visit. Thirteen weeks later (5 weeks from the initiation of corticosteroid therapy), under a daily dosage of 25mg of
prednisolone, a chest radiograph showed decreased pleural effusion (Fig. 1c), and CT revealed regression of multiple skin nodules,
mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, multiple small nodules in her lungs and the interlobar pleura, bilateral pleural effusion,
and splenomegaly (Fig. 5a-d). The clinical course of pleural effusions corroborates the diagnosis of pleural sarcoidosis. Three years later,
she received 2.5mg of prednisolone per week without any severe adverse events; a chest CT showed only reduced small nodules in her lungs,
lymphadenopathy, and subcutaneous nodules and no pleural effusion.Fig. 5Chest computed tomography findings after 5 weeks of corticosteroid
therapy. a-d The multiple mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusion, small nodules in the lung and the
interlobar pleura, and small subcutaneous nodules have regressed Chest computed tomography findings after 5 weeks of corticosteroid therapy.
a-d The multiple mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusion, small nodules in the lung and the interlobar
pleura, and small subcutaneous nodules have regressed Pleural sarcoidosis is believed to be rare. Huggins et al. reported that 2.8% of out-
patients showed pleural effusion, although a histological diagnosis was made only in 1.1% . In several reported cases, pleural sarcoidosis
is histologically diagnosed by thoracoscopic surgery [7, 8]. Although percutaneous biopsy is useful in some cases [3, 9], it is not always
helpful for diagnosing pleural sarcoidosis . In our case, biopsy specimens obtained from three organs, namely the skin, lymph nodes and
lungs, all exhibited non-caseous epithelioid granulomas, thus supporting a diagnosis of sarcoidosis. However, the ADA level in the right
pleural effusion was elevated in our case. It seemed to be difficult to conclude that the high level of ADA was due to pleural sarcoidosis
before treatment. The ADA level in pleural effusion is well known to be elevated by tuberculosis . When the ADA level in pleural effusion is
cut off at 40IU/L, then all of pleural tuberculosis exceeded 40IU/L, while 2.5% of non-tuberculosis disease exceeded 40IU/L. ADA levels of
two cases of sarcoidosis included in the non-tuberculosis group were less than 40IU/L . We thought that tuberculosis should be carefully
ruled out. The histological analyses by Ziehl–Neelsen staining, the Mycobacterium cultures, and PCR analyses did not support tuberculosis.
Fungal infection was also ruled out by histological examination and bacterial culture of both BALF and pleural effusion fluid. We thought
that thoracoscopy was too invasive for the patient as we regarded this case met the diagnosis criteria of sarcoidosis. We also excluded
malignant lymphoma by histological examination of a EBUS-TBNA specimen because her serum sIL2R level was elevated at the first visit. sIL2R
is not only a marker of malignant lymphoma but is also elevated when a T-cell is activated . Miyoshi et al. reported the elevation of sIL2R
in sarcoidosis with active alveolitis . We finally diagnosed pleural sarcoidosis on the basis of the identification of small nodules along
the interlobar pleura, lymphocytic predominance, and an increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion fluid. The CD4/CD8 lymphocyte
ratio in pleural effusion induced by tuberculosis is reported to be 3.1±1.1 (mean ± standard deviation) . The CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio of
the right pleural effusion in our case showed 5.62, which was higher than the ratio of mean +2 standard deviation value of pleural
tuberculosis reported by Aguiar et al. . Corticosteroid therapy resulted in regression of both small nodules along the interlobar pleura and
bilateral pleural effusion, consistent with the findings in pleural sarcoidosis. We have carefully followed up for more than 3 years after
the initiation of corticosteroid therapy. Bilateral pleural effusions disappeared and have not increased. We regard that tuberculosis and
fungal infection were completely excluded. Therefore we concluded that this was a case of pleural sarcoidosis with the elevation of CD4/CD8
lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion. The increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratios in BALF and pleural effusion fluid suggested that
T-lymphocytes bearing CD4 are activated not only in the lungs but also in the pleura, which may be helpful for diagnosis of pleural
sarcoidosis. When patients with sarcoidosis and pleural effusions are already diagnosed histologically in plural organ specimens, the
increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion fluid obtained by thoracentesis may be a minimally invasive substitute for
thoracoscopic surgery for the diagnosis of pleural sarcoidosis. Pleural involvement of sarcoidosis is considered to be an indication for
corticosteroid therapy in recurrent or symptomatic cases [10, 11]. Asymptomatic pleural effusion may resolve spontaneously . The effects of
corticosteroids for pleural sarcoidosis were satisfactory in our case. This clinical course supports the findings in a previous report that
pleural sarcoidosis is susceptible to corticosteroid therapy . In conclusion, we report a case in which pleural sarcoidosis was diagnosed on
the basis of lymphocytic predominance and an increased CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio in pleural effusion fluid obtained by thoracentesis. This
technique may be useful for the diagnosis of pleural sarcoidosis when sarcoidosis is already diagnosed histologically in biopsy specimens
from more than one organ. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Adenosine deaminase Bronchoalveolar
lavage Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid Computed tomography Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration Polymerase chain
reaction Soluble interleukin-2 receptor Blood oxygen saturation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions TK was the physician in charge of the patient. YT was in charge of pathological diagnosis. TI, JU, KN, and
FI performed bronchoscopic examinations with TK, and they all attended a conference for the diagnosis and treatment of the patient. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank the following staff of Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and
Cardiovascular Diseases: the radiographic examination staff for helping with bronchoscopic examinations and radiodiagnosis, respiratory
medical ward nurses for helping with thoracentesis, and the clinical Banking Inspection Department staff for analysis of CD4/CD8 lymphocyte
ratios in BALF and pleural effusion fluid.
