complete blood count T1‐weighted MRI T2‐weighted MRI magnetic resonance imaging cerebrospinal fluid fluid‐attenuated inversion recovery A
9‐year‐old, female, spayed, domestic longhaired cat presented to The Ohio State University Veterinary Medical Center Oncology Service with a
6‐month history of changes in behavior and weight loss. The owner reported that the cat had become abnormally unfriendly and would growl or
hiss when touched. The cat also had gait changes, manifested by left hind limb weakness, difficulty walking up stairs, and occasionally
losing balance and falling down stairs. The cat was examined by its regular veterinarian and had abdominal radiographs, CBC, and
biochemistry profile performed, which did not detect any abnormalities. On physical examination, the cat was underweight with an estimated
body condition score (BCS) of 1/5. Neurologic examination revealed a very dull mentation, severe generalized muscle atrophy, and a slow,
reluctant, and crouched gait. Cranial nerve examination revealed no abnormalities. There was absence of conscious proprioception in all
limbs. A forebrain lesion was suspected. The cat was examined 8 days later because of progressive signs of neurologic disease. The cat was
obtunded and had a right head turn with a mild right head tilt. The gait showed proprioceptive/right vestibular ataxia with knuckling of
both thoracic limbs on ambulation, a crouched posture, and a splaying outward of the left thoracic limb. There was a decreased menace
response bilaterally that was worse on the left and decreased nasal sensation bilaterally. Spinal reflexes were normal in all limbs.
Neurolocalization was to the right‐forebrain with possible brainstem involvement. An abdominal ultrasound was then performed at the owner's
request to investigate the gastrointestinal tract as a possible explanation for the weight loss, but no abnormalities were identified. CBC
and biochemistry profile showed mild hypercalcemia of 12.4 mg/dL (8–11 mg/dL) and hyperalbuminemia of 4.2 g/dL (2.4–3.9 g/dL). FeLV and FIV
ELISA were negative. Brain MRI was performed with a 3 Tesla magnet1 with the head placed in a knee coil (Philips SENSE Knee‐8coil, Acheiva,
8 channel, receive only). After a localizer spin echo sequence, 2 millimeter, contiguous images were acquired using the following sequences:
T2‐(W)eighted (sagittal, dorsal, and transverse planes), T1‐W pre‐ and postcontrast (sagittal, dorsal and transverse planes), FLAIR
transverse, and Fast Field Echo (FFE) transverse. Contrast medium (0.5 mL gadolinium) was administered IV. A 1.9 × 1.9 × 2.9 cm oval to
lobular extra‐axial mass was identified within the dorsal cerebral cortex on midline with lateral and ventral displacement of the cerebrum.
On T1‐W images, the mass was iso‐ to hypointense to the brain parenchyma with a thick anintense rim and amorphous to focal anintense regions
internally. Except for the anintense regions, the mass was homogenously, moderately, contrast enhancing. Subjectively, the adjacent dorsal
calvarium was mildly thickened (Fig 1a–d). On T2‐W and FLAIR sequences, the mass was diffusely hypointense to the brain parenchyma with
similar anintense rim and internal foci (Fig 1e–g). On FFE images, the mass was more diffusely anintense with patchy regions which were
isointense to brain parenchyma (Fig 1h). There was a focal dilatation of the ventricular system in the region of the quadrigeminal cistern
that could have represented a quadrigeminal cyst. The mass effect also caused flattening of the caudal cerebellar margin and protrusion of
the cerebellar vermis into the foramen magnum (herniation). Radiographic diagnosis was a mineralized extra‐axial mass. Differential
diagnoses included meningioma or primary bone neoplasia of the falx cerebri. Intra‐axial cerebral neoplasia, granuloma, and chronic hematoma
were considered less likely. Cerebellar herniation was secondary to the mass effect. (a) T1 W Axial MRI precontrast; (b) T1 W Axial MRI
postcontrast; (c) T1 W Sagittal MRI precontrast; (d) T1 W Sagittal MRI postcontrast. The mass is iso‐ to hypointense to the brain with a
thick anintense rim. There is heterogenous contrast enhancement. (e) T2 W Axial MRI; (f) T2 W Sagittal MRI; (g) T2 FLAIR Axial MRI. The mass
was heterogenously hypo‐ to anintense on T2 and FLAIR sequences. (h) FFE axial MRI. The mass is diffusely hypointense on FFE. FFE, Fast
Field Echo. Surgical debulking was offered, but medical management was elected initially, and the cat was prescribed prednisolone 1.5 mg per
os (PO) twice daily. The cat was re‐presented 7 days after failing to improve on prednisolone treatment to undergo surgery. A right lateral
rostrotentorial craniectomy and durotomy were performed. The mass was easily identified and appeared tan to yellow in color and very firm on
palpation. The mass was largely debulked. Because of the size of the mass and how far it extended across midline, complete surgical removal
could not be achieved. A postoperative CT scan with IV contrast (iohexol 240 mg/mL: 5 mL IV) showed marked reduction in the size of the mass
and indistinct margins of contrast enhancement thought to represent residual mass, hemorrhage, or both. The cat was recovered in ICU and was
able to be extubated. She was mentally stuporous and recumbent but would respond to noxious stimuli and would look around and vocalize when
handled. She was managed with intravenous isotonic polyionic fluids2 at 4 mL/kg/h, fentanyl constant rate infusion at 3 μg/kg/h, cefazolin
20 mg/kg IV q12 h, and prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg PO q12 h. She was able to eat small amounts of food. Blood pressure measurement 6 hours
postoperatively was 122/86 mmHg. The following morning, approximately 14 hours postoperatively, her mentation appeared to be declining, as
she was less responsive. Supportive care with IV fluids, hypertonic saline, and mannitol were administered, but the cat's condition
continued to deteriorate, and owner elected euthanasia. The next day, approximately 24 hours after death, a necropsy was performed. Gross
lesions were confined to the brain. Situated within the falx cerebri at the level of the frontal cortices and extending caudally to the
level of the corpus callosum, there was a focal, irregularly multinodular, well‐demarcated, unencapsulated meningeal mass measuring
approximately 5 × 10 × 15 mm (Fig 2a). The mass was tan‐brown to yellow, firm, and granular. Adjacent to the meningeal mass, at the site of
surgical debulking, there was an approximately 1.5 cm diameter, round defect in the parenchyma of the right frontal cortex which was filled
with hemorrhage and fibrin. The caudal portion of the cerebellar vermis protruded slightly through the foramen magnum; no evidence of
vascular disturbance was observed, suggesting acute cerebellar herniation. On histopathology, the forebrain mass was found to be originating
from the leptomeninges and demonstrating an exophytic, expansile growth pattern, without evidence of invasion into the cerebral cortex. The
composition of this mass was uniformly heterogeneous, consisting of one population of spindle‐shaped cells arranged in streams and bundles
within a sparse, collagenous matrix and a second population of cells characterized as large, foamy macrophages admixed with multinucleated
giant cells and neutrophils (Fig 2b). These 2 populations were observed in approximately equal numbers, although the relative proportion
varied somewhat throughout the tumor. There were myriad large, oblong to acicular, sharply demarcated, nonstaining cholesterol clefts
interspersed throughout the mass. Scattered foci of hemorrhage, hemosiderophages, and mineralization were also found within the tumor. The
spindle cell component consisted of mildly pleomorphic cells with indistinct cell borders, a moderate amount of wispy, eosinophilic
cytoplasm, and a round to ovoid nucleus containing finely stippled chromatin and 1–2 basophilic nucleoli. Among this population,
anisocytosis and anisokaryosis were mild, and occasional mitotic figures were identified. Immunohistochemistry revealed diffuse negative
staining for cytokeratin, neuron‐specific enolase, and glial fibrillary acidic protein and diffuse positive staining for vimentin (Fig 2c).
Two immunohistochemical stains revealed differential staining between the spindle cell population and the inflammatory infiltrate.
Neoplastic spindle cells demonstrated finely granular positive cytoplasmic staining for E‐cadherin (Fig 2d). Within the same section of
brain, histologically normal leptomeninges and choroid plexus also showed positive staining for E‐cadherin as an internal positive control
(data not shown), whereas sections of lung containing microscopic, subpleural foci of lipogranulomatous inflammation revealed positive
E‐cadherin staining only in pneumocytes (Fig S1). We interpret positive intratumoral E‐cadherin staining as an indicator of meningothelial
origin, differentiating these spindle cells from reactive fibroblasts and epithelioid macrophages. Scattered throughout the mass, numerous
medium‐sized, individual round cells demonstrated strong cytoplasmic staining for Mac387, indicative of macrophage lineage (Fig 2e). Taken
together, our findings suggest that this tumor represents a meningothelial neoplasm with concurrent lipogranulomatous inflammation and
cholesterol clefts, morphologically diagnosed as both transitional meningioma and cholesterol granuloma. (a) Rostrocaudal view of the
forebrain mass at postmortem examination. The tumor is tan‐brown to yellow and irregularly multinodular with an adjacent focus of hemorrhage
at the surgical site. Scale = 1 cm. (b) Histopathology of the mass demonstrates a mixture of spindle cells and foamy macrophages with large
cholesterol clefts. H&E. Scale = 50 μm. (c) Vimentin immunohistochemistry is positive throughout the neoplasm. Scale = 20 μm. (d) E‐cadherin
immunohistochemistry is positive in the spindle cell component of the tumor. Scale = 20 μm. (e) Mac387 immunohistochemistry positively
labels macrophages within the forebrain mass. Scale = 20 μm. This case was unusual in that the histopathology was supportive of a
cholesterol granuloma formation within a meningioma. Meningiomas are the most common primary brain tumor in cats. They are extra‐axial
tumors that arise from the arachnoid layer of the leptomeninges. They are variable in size and shape, and there are many histopathologic
subtypes. Meningiomas are often firm, encapsulated, discrete masses which can contain mineralization or cystic regions. Hyperostosis of the
calvarium adjacent to a meningioma can occur, especially in cats.1, 2, 3 Cats can also develop multiple meningiomas.3, 4, 5, 6 Meningiomas
have also been sporadically reported to occur with other neural disorders including meningioangiomatosis7 and mucopolysaccharidosis type 1.8
Other differential diagnoses for extra‐axial masses in cats include lymphosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and nonneoplastic masses such as
granulomas.3, 9 Rarely, solitary cholesterol granuloma formation occurs in the brain of cats.10, 11, 12 Cholesterol cleft formation occurs
as a pathologic change within some meningiomas.13 However, the extensiveness of cholesterol granuloma formation in this cat was considered
noteworthy. Cholesterol granulomas usually occur as primary nonneoplastic masses often involving the choroid plexus and ventricular
system,14, 15 but also the falx cerebri10, 11 and petrous apex.16 They have been most commonly recognized in horses occurring inside or
outside of the ventricular system.14, 15, 17, 18 They occur rarely in humans,16, 19 dogs,20, 21, 22 and other species including meerkats.23,
24 Cholesterol granulomas might cause neurologic signs, but often are incidental findings. The exact cause of cholesterol granuloma
formation is unknown. A lipid metabolism dysfunction has been hypothesized by some.10 Another hypothesis is chronic deposition of
cholesterol crystals as a result of localized chronic inflammation or hemorrhage, cysts, and neoplasms. Erythrocyte and other cellular
membrane breakdown could result in accumulation of cholesterol crystals that elicit a foreign body granulomatous reaction.11, 12, 13, 14
Cholesterol crystals might develop as a degenerative/senile change within the choroid plexus presumably from prior hemorrhage.25 There is 1
recent case report of a cholesterol granuloma that was adjacent to a meningioma in the brain of a cat.26 This cholesterol granuloma appeared
to develop separately from the meningioma. The mass arose within the lateral and third ventricles, and there was evidence of hemorrhage
which could support chronic hemorrhage as a source of the cholesterol granuloma formation in their case. In our case, the mass arose from
the falx cerebri within the longitudinal fissure and compressed the lateral and third ventricles.26 This cholesterol granuloma appeared to
develop within the meningioma. There was some histopathologic evidence of hemorrhage which could be one cause of the cholesterol granuloma
formation. Other possible causes include inflammation resulting from the meningioma such as coagulation necrosis that may be present with a
large tumor, meningeal cell breakdown resulting in cholesterol crystal deposition, or a combination of these factors. Magnetic resonance
imaging features of the mass in our case demonstrated similarities with the previously published cholesterol granulomas reported in cats.
All cases showed areas of hypo/anintensity on T2‐weighted images as well as a hypointense peripheral rim around the mass in all
sequences.10, 11, 26 Inner regions of the mass were nonhomogenous with primarily hypointense regions on T2, T1, and FLAIR images with
nonhomogenous but fairly robust contrast enhancement.10, 11, 26 Subjectively, there was more contrast enhancement in our case and in the
previously published meningioma‐cholesterol granuloma case than in the other 2 cases of primary cholesterol granuloma in cats. This could be
explained by the presence of the meningioma, which are known to contrast enhance strongly both in dogs and cats1, 2, 5, 10, 11, 26
suggesting that more contrast enhancement on MR images would favor a diagnosis of meningioma or meningioma‐cholesterol granuloma over a
solitary cholesterol granuloma. This case was a unique presentation of an unusually large cholesterol granuloma that appeared to develop
within a meningioma. Cholesterol granuloma or cholesterol granuloma‐meningioma should be considered as a differential in cats with large
ventricular system or falcine mass lesions. Fig S1. E‐cadherin immunohistochemistry in foci of subpleural lipogranulomatous inflammation
shows positive staining only in pneumocytes. Scale = 50 μm. Click here for additional data file. Conflict of Interest Declaration: Authors
disclose no conflict of interest. Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials. Philips Achieva
3T, Cleveland, OH. Plasma‐Lyte A®; Abbot Laboratories, North Chicago, IL.
