To the Editor: We describe a case of an immunocompromised patient with AIDS who sought treatment for immunotolerance to an invasive,
systemic mycobacterial infection that was unresponsive to antimycobacterial therapy alone. The 41-year old man sought treatment in November
2006 for fatigue, dyspnea, and epigastric pain of 4 weeks’ duration and weight loss of 10 kg. HIV-1 infection (20 cells/μL CD4+ T-cells,
viral load 230,000 genome equivalents/mL) was diagnosed. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) and Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis were initiated.
In June 2007, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were detected on mediastinal lymph node specimens obtained by endobronchial-ultrasound-guided biopsy
during a bronchoscopy; empiric antituberculosis treatment was initiated. Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA was not detected by nucleic acid
amplification on these specimens. At the time of referral to our clinic, the physical examination revealed generalized lymphadenopathy and
oral leukoplakia. The patient’s bodyweight was 63 kg. Computed tomography showed extensive mediastinal and abdominal lymphadenopathy without
other abnormalities. Serologic investigations showed negative results for hepatitis A, B, C, and syphilis. Esophageal-gastro duodenoscopy
showed a cottage cheese–like appearance of the duodenal mucosa, and histopathological examination of biopsies documented massive numbers of
AFB (Technical Appendix Figure, panel A). Nucleic acid amplification of 16S-rRNA from biopsies was performed, and sequence comparison to the
National Center for Biotechnology Information database identified the presence of M. tilburgii. In July 2007, specific treatment against
infection with M. tilburgii was initiated with rifabutin, ethambutol, and azithromycin (1). Despite nondetectable levels of viral
replication while the patient was receiving ART, CD4+ T cell count did not rise above 73 cells/μL (Figure). In November 2007, he reported
diarrhea and weight loss of 6 kg (total weight 57 kg); testing showed hypochromic-microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 8.2 g/dL). Bone marrow
biopsy showed infiltration of AFB, and 16S-rRNA amplification confirmed M. tilburgii infection. Macroscopic and microscopic appearance of
the duodenal mucosa was unchanged. Laboratory findings and drug treatment regimen over time for an HIV-infected patient with disseminated
Mycobacterium tilburgii infection, December 2006–October 2014. A) CD4+ T cell count, HIV viral load, and use of interleukin-2 (IL-2; gray
shading). B) antimycobacterial drug combinations, antiretroviral therapy (ART), and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis. During the
next 10 months, antimycobacterial therapy had to be altered as a consequence of adverse drug events (Figure). In November 2007, treatment
with linezolid resulted in an allergic reaction with generalized rash and fever. In March 2008, treatment with rifabutin was discontinued
after pancytopenia developed. Treatment with amikacin between March and November 2008 resulted in hearing loss. During this time, the
patient’s symptoms improved, and he gained 16 kg (total weight: 73 kg) when he received pulsed doses of prednisolone (20 mg/dL), but he had
diarrhea when steroids were tapered to 10 mg/dL. By August 2008, after >1 year of antimycobacterial therapy, there were no improvements of
clinical findings. Adjunctive treatment with interleukin-2 (IL-2 [Proleukin S, Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany]) was administered
subcutaneously (4.5 × 106 IU) on 3 occasions in September, October, and November 2008. The mean post–IL-2 treatment CD4+ cell count was
242/μL, an improvement over 64/μL before the intervention (Figure). In November 2009, the duodenal mucosa appeared normal on inspection, and
no bacteria were found on histopathological examinations (Technical Appendix Figure, panel B). Antimycobacterial therapy (Figure) was
discontinued, steroid administration was gradually reduced, and measured bodyweight stabilized (72–74 kg). At the last examination in
December 2014, the patient remained free of signs and symptoms of recurrence of M. tilburgii infection. M. tilburgii is an uncultivable
nontuberculous mycobacterium related to M. simiae and M. genavense (2). Fewer than 10 clinically relevant cases of M. tilburgii infections
have been described in the literature (2–7); most were intestinal infections in immunocompromised hosts (3). Successful treatment has been
achieved with combination regimens of antimycobacterial drugs that are also effective against M. avium complex (4). In 2 studies that
evaluated the effect of adjunctive IL-2 therapy in addition to ART for previously treatment-naive patients with HIV infection, baseline
median numbers of circulating CD4+ cells increased significantly, but expansion of CD4+ T cells was not associated with the reduction in the
risk for opportunistic diseases or death (8). In contrast to these results, in a study of HIV-positive patients who had low circulating CD4+
T cell counts, the participants experienced fewer AIDS-defining events and fewer deaths occurred when they were treated with adjunctive IL-2
immunotherapy (9). This case report provides lessons for the understanding of mycobacterial diseases. First, despite massive infiltration of
duodenal mucosa, mesenterial lymph nodes, and bone marrow, the lack of inflammatory responses in this patient prevented tissue destruction.
Second, in the absence of a sufficient immune response and an increase in the number of circulating CD4+ T cells, antimycobacterial therapy
without adjunctive immunotherapy did not clear the systemic bacterial infection. Host responses to pathogens are not always beneficial.
Intense immune reactions experienced during episodes of sepsis or HIV immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome are frequently associated
with patient death. Alternately, in the absence of inflammatory responses to pathogens, the patient is unprotected, and even microbiota that
are harmless to an immunocompetent person can adversely invade. In an optimal immune response setting, a balance between proinflammatory and
anti-inflammatory factors in response to pathogens is maintained (10). Duodenal biopsy histology showing effectiveness of therapy for
HIV/mycobacterial co-infection. Suggested citation for this article: Heyckendorf J, Aries SP, Greinert U, Richter E, Schultz H, Lange C.
Functional immune reconstitution by therapy for HIV/mycobacterial co-infection . Emerg Infect Dis. 2015 Sep [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2109.150461 C.L. is funded by the German Center for Infection Research (DZIF).
