Two cases of disseminated enteroviral infection occurred in patients who received the CD20 monoclonal antibody obinutuzumab. Clinical
features included hepatitis, edema, and a dermatomyositis-like syndrome. These manifestations may be unfamiliar to clinicians and are
possibly responsive to intravenous immunoglobulin. Clinicians should remain vigilant for enteroviral infections in patients receiving
obinutuzumab. Viral, fungal, and bacterial infections (1,2) and a recent case of enteroviral meningoencephalitis (3) associated with
obinutuzumab use have been described. Early recognition is critical because the infection can be effectively treated with intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIg).We report 2 cases of disseminated enteroviral infections in patients in Australia treated for lymphoma with the CD20
monoclonal antibody (mAb) obinutuzumab. Clinical features, including hepatitis, edema, and a dermatomyositis-like syndrome, were similar to
those mentioned in the original descriptions of disseminated enteroviral infections in children with X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA)
(4,5). During summer 2014, a 63-year-old woman with symptomatic high tumor burden follicular lymphoma achieved a complete clinical and
radiologic response to induction treatment with 6 cycles of bendamustine and obinutuzumab, then began maintenance therapy with obinutuzumab
for 8 weeks. Eleven months after she began taking obinutuzumab, the patient sought treatment for 4 weeks of fatigue, myalgias, muscle
tenderness, and leg edema without fever. Peripheral blood lymphocyte count was 0.52 × 109 cells/L (reference range 1–4 × 109 cells/L), and
lactate dehydrogenase was 354 IU/L (reference range 100–200 IU/L); serum creatine kinase and inflammatory markers were within reference
ranges. Immunoglobulin levels were also within reference ranges: IgG 10.2 g/L, IgM 0.3 g/L, and IgA 1.3 g/L. The patient had moderately
impaired liver function and was hypoalbuminemic without evidence of renal protein loss. Magnetic resonance imaging of the thighs showed
diffuse inflammatory changes involving subcutaneous tissues, fascia, and musculature (Figure). Results of tests to determine possible causes
of muscle pathologic changes were negative; tests included those for autoantibodies, HIV antibodies, thyroid function, and PCR for
respiratory viruses (including influenza) and herpesvirus. Bone marrow biopsy results indicated no evidence of lymphoma. Muscle
histopathologic findings from a biopsy of the quadriceps showed features of an inflammatory myopathy (interstitial edema, perivascular
lymphocytic cuffing, and degenerating fibers) consistent with the features of early dermatomyositis. Reverse transcription PCR of the muscle
tissue indicated enterovirus RNA. Reverse transcription PCR also detected enterovirus RNA in plasma, nasopharyngeal, and fecal specimens.
Viral protein 1 gene obtained from RNA extracted from muscle was sequenced, and we identified the virus as echovirus 6. When we ceased
treatment with obinutuzumab and gave the patient 0.8 g/kg IVIg, her symptoms rapidly improved. Results from a repeat plasma enterovirus PCR
11 days after initiation of IVIg were negative. Magnetic resonance image of 63-year-old woman in Australia with disseminated enteroviral
infection that manifested after she received obinutuzumab for lymphoma. Image shows patient’s thighs and diffuse inflammatory changes
involving subcutaneous tissues, fascia, and musculature. During summer 2014, a 35-year-old woman with symptomatic follicular lymphoma
achieved a complete clinical and radiological response to induction treatment with 6 cycles of bendamustine and obinutuzumab; she
subsequently took obinutuzumab for an additional 8 weeks. Twelve months after she began taking obinutuzumab, she sought treatment for fever,
headaches, and myalgias. Peripheral blood lymphocyte count was 0.40 × 109 cells/L (1,2,4,5). Cerebrospinal fluid was acellular, but we
detected enterovirus in cerebrospinal fluid and feces by using PCR. Sequencing of the PCR product was unsuccessful, and we could not
identify the enterovirus strain. Immunoglobulin levels were at the lower end of the reference ranges: IgG 7.9 g/L (reference range 7.5–15.6
g/L), IgM 0.6 g/L (reference range 0.5–3.0 g/L), and IgA 1.5 g/L (reference range 0.8–4.5 g/L). Results of liver function tests were
initially normal, but liver function deteriorated after 2 weeks. Peak level of bilirubin was 86 μmol/L (reference range 0–20 μmol/L), of
alanine amino transferase was 1,419 IU/L (reference range 7–56 UI/L), of alkaline phosphatase was 117 U/L (reference range 30–120 U/L), and
of albumin was 28 g/L (reference range 35–45 g/L); international normalized ratio peaked at 2.0 (reference range 0.8–1.2). Results of liver
biopsy showed active hepatitis. Results of tests to determine possible causes of hepatitis and encephalitis were negative; the tests
included those for autoantibodies, HIV antibodies, thyroid function, and PCR for respiratory viruses (including influenza) and herpesvirus.
Bacterial and fungal cultures were negative. Obinutuzumab was ceased, and the patient was treated with 0.8 g/kg IVIg. All clinical and
laboratory features rapidly improved. Anti-CD20 mABs such as rituximab are now standard of care for treatment of B-cell lymphoma in
combination with chemotherapy. The US Food and Drug Administration approved obinutuzumab in September 2013 for use in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia, but indications for use probably will expand. Obinutuzumab is glycoengineered to cause more profound and rapid B-cell depletion
than rituximab, elicited by subtle differences in the orientation of binding to the CD20 molecule between the 2 drugs (6). As a result of
these binding differences, compared with rituximab, obinutuzumab has superior induction of apoptosis, natural killer cell activation, and
antibody-dependent cytotoxicity but less complement-dependent toxicity (6).This mechanism may also explain the differences in susceptibility
to, and patterns of, enteroviral infections associated with obinutzumab, resulting in a phenotype similar to XLA (5). Antibodies are the
main form of defense against enteroviruses (7), and severe, chronic, and disseminated enteroviral infections are generally limited to
neonates or patients with profound B-cell deficiencies (XLA or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation). During the 1970s and 1980s, reports
described the clinical manifestation of disseminated enterovirus infection in children with XLA (4,5) and demonstrated that IVIg is an
effective therapy for disseminated enterovirus infection (7,8). Since then, reports of disseminated enteroviral infections have been
uncommon. Enteroviral infection has not featured prominently among patients with partial B-cell or immunoglobulin deficiencies, such as
patients with chronic variable immunodeficiency (7). Immunoglobulin levels of the 2 patients in our study were within reference ranges, but
analysis of lymphocyte subsets was not performed. Both patients received the combination of obinutuzumab and bendamustine; it is possible
that an association exists between the 2 drugs that results in increased host susceptibility to disseminated enteroviral infection. The
clinical features described in most cases of disseminated enteroviral infections relate to chronic meningoencephalitis (2,5). However,
several reports describe a dermatomyositis-like syndrome with edema and hepatitis that responded to IVIg (5); this syndrome is strikingly
similar to the cases reported here. Enteroviral infections (coxsackieviruses and echoviruses) also have been implicated in the pathogenesis
of myositis (9). Enterovirus PCR was positive from the muscle biopsy of the patient in our report, suggesting that the virus had a direct
role in pathogenesis of the myositis. Reports of enteroviral infections associated with rituximab use since its introduction have been rare,
in contrast to obibutuzumab, for which a case of enteroviral meningencephalitis has been reported (2,3). Of the 11 cases of enteroviral
infection associated with rituximab use, 8 were meningoencephalitis and 2 were myocarditis (2,10–12). To our knowledge, enteroviral
infection has not previously been associated with rituximab use in patients who also had hepatitis, dermatomyositis, and edema, as in the
cases we report and those associated with XLA (5). Future studies could define susceptibility to enteroviruses through the effect of
obinutuzumab on B-cell and immunoglobulin function and host defense against enteroviral infections. It would be clinically useful to
identify biomarkers or clinical predictors of disseminated infection. Future research might also focus on the development of a screening
strategy for enteroviral infections followed by prophylactic or preemptive therapy with IVIg. The clinical manifestation of disseminated
enteroviral infections, particularly those similar to dermatomyositis, may be unfamiliar to clinicians caring for adults because most
experience of the illness is in children and there have been few reports in recent years. Given the therapeutic response to IVIg in the
cases we report, enteroviral infection and the use of IVIg therapy should be considered in patients treated with obinutuzumab who develop
atypical clinical features of organ inflammation. Suggested citation for this article: Dendle C, Gilbertson M, Korman TM, Golder V, Morand
E, Opat S. Disseminated enteroviral infection associated with obinutuzumab. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015 Sep [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2109.150104 S.O. has received speakers’ fees and clinical research funding from Roche. Dr. Dendle is an
infectious diseases physician at Monash Health and researcher at Monash University. She specializes in immunocompromised hosts and is
especially interested in infections in patients with hematologic malignancies and who have undergone transplantation.
