We present the different roles of fractional flow reserve and optical coherence tomography in guiding treatment in a patient with recurrent
chest pain. A 66-year-old Chinese woman presented to our department for the third time for her recurrent chest pain. Her physical
examination was unremarkable; her previous two angiography examinations indicated that there was a stenosis of 50 to 70% in her proximal
left anterior descending coronary artery. Optimal medical therapy was applied, but her symptoms did not disappear. Coronary angiography was
conducted again after admission, accompanied by fractional flow reserve and optical coherence tomography. A lesion of 50 to 70% in her left
anterior descending coronary artery was detected in an angiogram as before; her fractional flow reserve measure was a negative result of
0.88. However, a plaque rupture was found at the location of the lesion in the optical coherence tomography imaging. A stent was implanted
in her left anterior descending coronary artery; she made no complaint of chest pain during follow-up of 1.5 years after her discharge.
Fractional flow reserve is considered the “gold standard” to detect ischemia-causing lesions and provide hemodynamic information of a
stenosis. However, lack of structural information of a stenosis limits the application of fractional flow reserve and coronary pressure may
lie sometimes. We should choose the best strategy for patients according to different examinations and patients’ symptoms, never a single
test. Angina is the most common symptom for patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) when the flow of oxygen-rich blood to the heart
muscle is reduced by atherosclerotic plaque . Fractional flow reserve (FFR) is now considered the gold standard in determining severity of
myocardial ischemia. Current guidelines state that decision making about coronary revascularization should be guided by myocardial ischemia
, and revascularization procedures performed in patients with documented ischemia reduce total mortality through reduction of ischemic
burden [3, 4]. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is another commonly used intravascular examination in clinical practice, which uses near-
infrared light to create images. By presenting a signal-rich layer nearest the lumen, poor signal in middle layer, and rich signal
surrounding the signal poor layer of the media, respectively, three layers of the coronary artery wall can be discriminated in most cases .
In addition, OCT is helpful in identifying different types of coronary plaques, such as fibrous, fibrocalcific, and lipid plaques, according
to their distinctive signals. Furthermore, OCT can detect plaque rupture, erosion, intracoronary thrombus, thin-cap fibroatheroma, and
calcified nodule , which thus is a promising imaging modality for guiding percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) therapy, though not many
studies about OCT in guiding PCI and assessing its impact on cardiovascular outcomes are available at present. Here we report a case with a
negative FFR measurement but positive OCT result, a stent implant was conducted despite the negative FFR and follow-up revealed that the
patient benefitted from this strategy. A 66-year-old Chinese woman presented to our department for the third time for her recurrent chest
pain. No fever, cough, dysphagia, hemoptysis or shortness of breath were reported. She denied history of hypertension, diabetes,
hypercholesterolemia and cigarette smoking. Her father had a heart attack at the age of 70 years. A physical examination was unremarkable.
An electrocardiogram revealed non-specific T-wave changes, but laboratory analysis demonstrated elevated serum troponin (0.063ng/ml, normal
range: <0.014ng/ml) and creatine kinase MB (CK-MB; 8.97ng/ml, normal range: <5ng/ml). She had had two coronary angiography examinations on
31 January 2012 and 17 January 2013, the results showed that there was a 50 to 70% stenosis in her proximal left anterior descending (LAD)
coronary artery (Figs. 1 and 2). A FFR examination was suggested during her second angiography to testify whether there was a lesion-induced
myocardial ischemia but was declined. She was discharged with optimal medical therapy: 100mg/day, atorvastatin 20mg/day, metoprolol
50mg/day, and valsartan 80mg/day.Fig. 1Coronary angiogram of the patient on her first admission. The angiogram was achieved on a spider view
(left anterior oblique 45°, caudal 20°). The white arrow indicates that there is an intermediate lesion (50–70%) in proximal left anterior
descending coronary arteryFig. 2Coronary angiogram of the patient on her second admission. The angiogram was achieved on a spider view (left
anterior oblique 44°, caudal 22°). The white arrow indicates that there is an intermediate lesion (50–70%) in proximal left anterior
descending coronary artery Coronary angiogram of the patient on her first admission. The angiogram was achieved on a spider view (left
anterior oblique 45°, caudal 20°). The white arrow indicates that there is an intermediate lesion (50–70%) in proximal left anterior
descending coronary artery Coronary angiogram of the patient on her second admission. The angiogram was achieved on a spider view (left
anterior oblique 44°, caudal 22°). The white arrow indicates that there is an intermediate lesion (50–70%) in proximal left anterior
descending coronary artery The angiography was conducted again after her third admission. A lesion of 50 to 70% in her LAD was detected in
an angiogram (Fig. 3) as in previous results. In addition to angiography, FFR was also measured with a coronary guidewire (PressureWire
Aeris, St. Jude Medical) during intravenous adenosine-induced hyperemia to assess the hemodynamic severity of each indicated stenosis. The
FFR measured was 0.88 (Fig. 4), indicating that there was no significant myocardial ischemia induced by the LAD lesion. OCT imaging was then
performed at a pullback speed (20mm/second) just under contrast flushing with a C7 Dragonfly catheter (St. Jude Medical), which
characterized the lesion as an eccentric lipid plaque with a rupture (Fig. 5), the minimal luminal area was 4.9mm2. A stent was implanted in
her LAD; she made no complaint of chest pain during follow-up for 1.5 years after her discharge.Fig. 3Coronary angiogram of the patient on
her third admission. The angiogram was achieved on a spider view (left anterior oblique 47°, caudal 30°). The white arrow indicates that
there is an intermediate lesion (50–70%) in proximal left anterior descending coronary arteryFig. 4Fractional flow reserve measurement for
left anterior descending coronary artery of the patient. The fractional flow reserve of left anterior descending coronary artery measurement
was 0.88, indicating that no significant myocardial ischemia was induced by the lesion in left anterior descending coronary arteryFig.
5Optical coherence tomography imaging for the intermediate lesion in left anterior descending coronary artery. Optical coherence tomography
imaging revealed a rupture (yellow arrow) in the intermediate stenosis on left anterior descending coronary artery Coronary angiogram of the
patient on her third admission. The angiogram was achieved on a spider view (left anterior oblique 47°, caudal 30°). The white arrow
indicates that there is an intermediate lesion (50–70%) in proximal left anterior descending coronary artery Fractional flow reserve
measurement for left anterior descending coronary artery of the patient. The fractional flow reserve of left anterior descending coronary
artery measurement was 0.88, indicating that no significant myocardial ischemia was induced by the lesion in left anterior descending
coronary artery Optical coherence tomography imaging for the intermediate lesion in left anterior descending coronary artery. Optical
coherence tomography imaging revealed a rupture (yellow arrow) in the intermediate stenosis on left anterior descending coronary artery FFR
is now widely accepted as the “gold standard” to detect ischemia-causing lesions and provide hemodynamic information of a stenosis. The
prospective multicenter Fractional Flow Reserve versus Angiography for Multivessel Evaluation (FAME) trial revealed that FFR guidance in
lesions with FFR ≤0.8 was associated with a 28% lower rate of major adverse clinical events compared to the previous gold standard non-FFR-
guided angiography procedure . Building upon these results, FAME II documented a significant reduction in downstream major adverse clinical
events for those who underwent coronary revascularization for FFR-positive lesions versus optimal medical therapy . The totality of data
published thus far support ischemia, and FFR-guided revascularization in particular, over angiography guided revascularization. However,
lack of structural information of a stenosis limits the application of FFR and coronary pressure may lie sometimes. As recently as 15 years
ago, doctors thought that heart attacks occurred when plaques gradually built up until the arteries were too narrow to allow blood to flow
to the heart. The majority of people who have a heart attack never have angina or other symptoms, however. Doctors now know that the
majority of heart attacks occur when the artery is only slightly narrowed with culprit plaques that rupture. In addition, some plaques are
less likely than others to rupture; these plaques are called vulnerable plaques. Several characteristics of vulnerable plaques have been
identified by histology, including a large lipid pool, thin fibrous caps (<65μm), and activated macrophages [8, 9]. OCT can detect the
vulnerable plaques or the ruptured ones because of its high resolution, which can add to functional examinations such as FFR, and thus have
an impact on decisions regarding culprit lesion intervention. However, in a recent meta-analysis, D’Ascenzo et al. found that OCT only had
moderate diagnostic accuracy for detection of hemodynamically significant lesions defined by FFR, and the sensitivity and specificity of
minimal luminal area (MLA) or of minimal luminal diameter (MLD) defined in OCT were inadequate to confidently guide revascularization. In
intermediate lesions, although OCT has potential benefit as an adjunct examination in which the anatomy and composition of plaques of
uncertain severity or morphology are evaluated, no recommendation should be given about OCT dimension and need for revascularization without
a functional assessment such as FFR. In this case, we presented a patient with an intermediate stenosis on coronary angiography and an FFR
measurement that identified the lesion as a non-culprit one; however, OCT imaging detected a rupture of the plaque, which may be the reason
for the angina she experienced and a potential factor leading to a heart attack. In this patient, optimal medical therapy had been
administrated, but her symptoms and rupture continued to exist, which placed her at a high risk of rupturing again. We could have chosen a
strategy of sequential medical treatment and clinical follow-up, but we conducted PCI instead for safety and compliance. In summary, we
should choose the best strategy for patients according to different examinations and patients’ symptoms, never a single test. An examination
which can combine the structural and functional assessments for coronary stenoses is strongly needed in the future. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Coronary artery disease Fractional Flow Reserve versus Angiography for Multivessel Evaluation
Fractional flow reserve Left anterior descending Optical coherence tomography Percutaneous coronary intervention Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ND designed the consent and drafted the manuscript. STL
participated in the surgery of the patient. XKL analyzed the OCT data and helped revise the paper. YWX and WML conceived of the study and
analyzed the angiogram and fractional flow reserve data, and participated in the design and coordination of the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
