Recently, biomarkers have been suggested to be incorporated into diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Regarding disease-
specific brain amyloid-beta deposition these comprise low amyloid-beta 1–42 in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and positive positron emission
tomography (PET) amyloid imaging, while neuronal degeneration is evidenced by high total and phosphorylated tau levels in CSF (t-/p-tau),
regional hypometabolism (fluorodeoxyglucose PET, FDG-PET) and characteristic atrophy-patterns (magnetic resonance imaging, MRI). Here we
present a case of clinically and biomarker supported AD (CSF t-/p-tau, MRI, FDG-PET) in a 59-year-old Caucasian man in whom indicators of
amyloid-beta deposition dissociated between CSF parameters and the respective PET imaging. Such cases highlight the necessity to better
understand potential dissociations between PET and CSF data for amyloid-beta biomarkers, because they are currently considered
interchangeably valid with regard to in-vivo evidence for AD pathology. This is more important since amyloid deposition markers can be
considered a very first prognostic indicator of imminent AD, prior to neurodegenerative biomarkers and cognitive symptoms. The case
illustrates the need for further longitudinal data on potential dissociations of AD biomarkers to devise recommendations for their better
prognostic and diagnostic interpretation in the future. Recently, biomarkers have been suggested to be incorporated into diagnostic criteria
for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [1, 2]. Evidence for amyloid-beta protein deposition in the brain is provided by low amyloid-beta 1–42 in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and positive positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid imaging. For downstream neuronal injury and degeneration
elevated total tau (t-tau) and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) levels in CSF, decreased fluorodeoxyglucose uptake on PET (FDG-PET) in
temporoparietal and posterior cingulate cortices, and atrophy in temporal and medial parietal cortices on structural magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) have been established to yield a high diagnostic precision . Biomarkers for brain amyloid-beta deposition may be considered
especially important since they provide very early in-vivo evidence of imminent Alzheimer’s pathology, beside proven AD autosomal dominant
mutations in relevant genes such as presenilin and amyloid precursor protein. Amyloid PET imaging detects amyloid-beta plaques with high
accuracy as shown in several clinical trials . Accordingly, three -labeled amyloid-beta-targeting radiotracers have been approved by the
Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency. However, introduction of amyloid-beta PET imaging into everyday clinical
practice requires validation also in the diagnostic process of single patients to allow personalized evidence-based medicine. Beyond large
scale trials, potential inconsistencies between different disease-specific biomarkers in a single patient, as shown here, require guidelines
for clinical practice. A 59-year-old Caucasian man presented with progressive cognitive decline in the memory domain since 18 months. Memory
impairments were relevant in everyday life and during his work in a garage. Furthermore, he reported problems in dual task management.
Cognition was investigated in several domains (for references see ): the test battery of the Consortium to Establish a Registry for
Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD plus, including Mini Mental State test, MMST) for global cognitive functioning, the Bayer Activities of Daily
Living (B-ADL) scale for daily life functioning, subtests of the Testbatterie zur Aufmerksamkeitsprüfung (TAP) for alertness and divided
attention, the Behavioral Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS) for executive functions, and subtests of the Wechsler Memory Scale
(WMS-IV logical memory and visual reproduction) to assess memory functions. Behavioral impairments were investigated with the
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), as well as the Apathy Evaluation Scale (AES). Comprehensive neuropsychological testing revealed deficits
mainly in learning and memory (CERAD wordlist learning total/recall z = −2.09/−1.99; figures copying/recall z = 0.81/−3.65; WMS-IV logical
memory immediate recall/delayed recall/recognition percentile rank < 1/<1/2, visual reproduction immediate recall/delayed recall/recognition
percentile rank = 5/1/2), in attention (CERAD trail making test A/B z = −2.46/−1,40; TAP tonic/phasic alertness percentile rank = 10/4) and
executive functions (CERAD phonematic/semantic fluency z = 0.18/−1.17; BADS action programme, key search, zoo profile score = 4/4,3/4,0/4).
Executive functions were mainly impaired due to deficits in encoding complex instructions, while planning and error monitoring seemed fairly
normal. The MMSE score was 26/30, which indicates mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Note that the B-ADL scale excluded severe impairments in
activities of daily living as assessed by the patient’s spouse, although the patient had to quit work due to severe memory deficits, which
interfered with his highly responsible job. The NPI identified only minor, unspecific behavioral symptoms in the domains depression, apathy,
and irritability/lability ruling out behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (score 1 for each domain, total score 3) . This was
confirmed by scores below cut-off in the AES. Progression of cognitive dysfunction was based on subjective evaluation by the patient and his
relatives (wife and daughter). A neuropsychological screening three months before our comprehensive examination showed comparable results.
As recommended by the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association , clinical testing was supplemented by biomarker investigations
for brain amyloid-beta protein deposition (amyloid PET imaging using florbetaben as an amyloid imaging biomarker, amyloid-beta 1–42 levels
in CSF), and for neuronal degeneration/injury (t-/p-tau in CSF, structural MRI and FDG-PET). As illustrated in Fig. 1, structural MR imaging
revealed hippocampal (Scheltens score 4) and parietal atrophy. MRI revealed multiple small non-confluent white matter lesions indicating
only mild small vessel disease, but no other pathology. CSF biomarkers showed a typical AD pattern with decreased amyloid-beta 1–42
(345.3 pg/ml; reference value > 450), increased p-tau (78.7 pg/ml; reference value < 61), and slightly elevated t-tau (439.9 pg/ml;
borderline value 300–450, pathological > 450). All other CSF-parameters were normal apart from a mildly increased total protein (547.7 mg/l;
reference value 200–500). Surprisingly, amyloid PET with florbetaben did not show elevated tracer uptake throughout the whole gray matter
(Fig. 1). The composite standard uptake value ratio - an established measure of the mean brain amyloid load [8, 9] - equalled 1.09
(threshold < 1.39) thus not suggesting an AD pathology. All other biomarkers supported AD including a highly AD-typical pattern for glucose
hypometabolism (FDG-PET) in bilateral parietotemporal and posterior cingulate cortex as illustrated in Fig. 1 . The apolipoprotein E status
was E3/E3.Fig. 1Imaging biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Atrophy was evident in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in temporal/hippocampal
regions in T1 (a) and T2 (b) sequence, and in parietal cortex in T1 (c). Single white matter lesions were detected in fast fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR) images (d). Amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) with florbetaben did not show specific binding in the
neocortical gray matter (e), although hypometabolism was detected in bilateral parietotemporal and posterior cingluate cortices with
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (f). Finally, we evaluated statistical deviation of tracer uptake from a normal control group including 94 (amyloid)
or 25 (glucose) normal subjects with the Hermes Brass Software. Z score map of the florbetaben PET (g) did not show relevant (z score > 2.5)
cortical tracer uptake increase, whereas the z score map of fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (h) showed relevant (z score > 2.5) tracer uptake
reduction in bilateral parietotemporal regions and posterior cingulate cortices Imaging biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Atrophy was
evident in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in temporal/hippocampal regions in T1 (a) and T2 (b) sequence, and in parietal cortex in T1 (c).
Single white matter lesions were detected in fast fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images (d). Amyloid positron emission
tomography (PET) with florbetaben did not show specific binding in the neocortical gray matter (e), although hypometabolism was detected in
bilateral parietotemporal and posterior cingluate cortices with fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (f). Finally, we evaluated statistical deviation of
tracer uptake from a normal control group including 94 (amyloid) or 25 (glucose) normal subjects with the Hermes Brass Software. Z score map
of the florbetaben PET (g) did not show relevant (z score > 2.5) cortical tracer uptake increase, whereas the z score map of
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (h) showed relevant (z score > 2.5) tracer uptake reduction in bilateral parietotemporal regions and posterior
cingulate cortices The comprehensive clinical and paraclinical examination confirmed the diagnosis of AD, supported by biomarkers (CSF, MRI,
FDG-PET) [1, 2], although the investigations revealed a dissociation between PET and CSF data for brain amyloid-beta deposition. Other
metabolic, traumatic and medical causes of cognitive symptoms were ruled out. Biomarkers indicating amyloid-beta deposition in the brain
have been suggested to yield in-vivo evidence of Alzheimer’s pathology. Here, we show that biomarkers for amyloid-beta deposition can be
dissociated between PET and CSF. Notably all clinical and further biomarkers (CSF t-tau and p-tau, MRI, FDG-PET) supported the diagnosis of
AD. In line with our finding, a recent study including amyloid-beta PET and CSF levels has shown a considerable dissociation between
florbetapir PET and amyloid-beta 1–42 in CSF in 20 out of 374 subjects (5.3 %) ranging from normal to MCI and AD (103, 249, 22 subjects,
respectively). The 13 participants showing a dissociation with abnormal florbetapir PET vs. normal CSF amyloid-beta 1–42 were normal control
subjects or early MCI cases. The remaining seven participants with more substantial cognitive deficits and higher CSF t-tau (one AD, four
late MCI, one early MCI, one normal) showed the reverse dissociation with normal florbetapir PET vs. abnormal CSF amyloid-beta 1–42. The
latter pattern is confirmed in the here reported case of late MCI/early dementia due to AD and, though it may be rare in AD (one in 22 AD
patients, accordingly approximately 4.5 % in the above mentioned study), it is of relevance to the individualized counselling of patients.
With respect to Landau et al.’s and our findings one might hypothesize specific dissociations in the course of AD with positive amyloid PET
and normal CSF amyloid-beta 1–42 in early MCI and a reverse pattern with decreased CSF amyloid-beta 1–42 and normal amyloid PET in late MCI
or clinically evident AD (dementia stage), although this assumption is based on a small number of cases warranting caution with regard to
generalization. Generally, Landau et al. reported a robust negative correlation between both biomarkers for brain amyloid deposition as
shown by florbetapir PET retention and CSF amyloid-beta 1–42 levels in their AD cohort. This correlation was more robust than correlations
with t-tau or p-tau. Such a negative correlation was also shown in another study with Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) PET retention and levels
of CSF amyloid-beta 1–42 . The latter study additionally revealed a significant negative correlation between CSF amyloid-beta 1–42 levels
and PIB PET retention in parietal (including the precuneus) and temporal cortices, the posterior cingulate, frontal and primary visual
cortex. Interestingly, such a correlation was not established for t-tau or p-tau. Both effects in this study were only observed when
patients with AD (37) and its prestage MCI (21) were pooled, highlighting potential effects of the comparatively low sample size. In
conclusion, our case report shows that biomarkers for amyloid-beta deposition can be dissociated between PET and CSF in clinically and
biomarker supported otherwise typical AD. This finding is of special relevance because amyloid biomarkers have been suggested to be
incorporated into diagnostic criteria for AD [1, 2]. Understanding potential dissociations between PET and CSF data for amyloid-beta
biomarkers is of particular relevance, because these biomarkers are currently considered to interchangeably yield very early in-vivo
evidence of AD pathology prior to neurodegenerative biomarkers and cognitive symptoms . Accordingly, further studies and longitudinal data
are warranted to interpret such dissociated AD biomarker patterns and develop recommendations on how to cope with these discrepancies in
diagnostic procedures in the future. Written informed consent for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images was obtained
from the patient. A copy of the written consent is available for review to the Editor of this journal. Alzheimer’s disease Cerebrospinal
fluid fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography Mild cognitive impairment Magnetic resonance imaging Positron emission tomography
Pittsburgh compound B Phosphorylated tau Total tau Competing interests HB and OS received speaker and consultant honoraria as well as travel
expenses from Piramal Imaging. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MLS drafted the
manuscript and performed the neuropsychiatric assessment; MLS, ST, KTH, HB were involved in imaging acquisition and analyses, ATO in
neuropsychological assessment; ST, AM, ATO, KTH, HB, HO, OS critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This study has been supported by LIFE - Leipzig Research Center for Civilization Diseases at the University of Leipzig - funded
by the European Union, European Regional Development Fund and by the Free State of Saxony within the framework of the excellence initiative
(MLS, OS), by the German Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration, funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(MLS), and by the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation (MLS; Grant No. PDF-IRG-1307).
