Trypanosoma cruzi, causative agent of Chagas disease, displays high intraspecific genetic diversity: six genetic lineages or discrete typing
units (DTUs) are currently recognized, termed TcI through TcVI. Each DTU presents a particular distribution pattern across the Americas, and
is loosely associated with different transmission cycles and hosts. Several DTUs are known to circulate in Central America. It has been
previously suggested that TcI infection is benign and does not lead to chronic chagasic cardiomyopathy (CCC). In this study, we genotyped T.
cruzi parasites circulating in the blood and from explanted cardiac tissue of an El Salvadorian patient who developed reactivation Chagas
disease while on immunosuppressive medications after undergoing heart transplant in the U.S. as treatment for end-stage CCC. Parasite typing
was performed through molecular methods (restriction fragment length polymorphism of polymerase reaction chain amplified products,
microsatellite typing, maxicircle sequence typing and low-stringency single primer PCR, ) as well as lineage-specific serology. We show that
the parasites infecting the patient belong to the TcI DTU exclusively. Our data indicate that the parasites isolated from the patient belong
to a genotype frequently associated with human infection throughout the Americas (TcIDOM). Our results constitute compelling evidence in
support of TcI DTU’s ability to cause end-stage CCC and help dispel any residual bias that infection with this lineage is benign, pointing
to the need for increased surveillance for dissemination of this genotype in endemic regions, the USA and globally. Chagas disease, caused
by Trypanosoma cruzi, is the most important parasitic disease in Latin America, and constitutes an emerging global public health problem,
since thousands of T. cruzi- infected Latin Americans migrated during the last few decades and now live in North America, Europe, Australia,
Japan and other regions . A spectrum of clinical manifestations may result from human infection with T. cruzi, ranging from a total absence
of symptoms to extremely debilitating and often deadly cardiac or digestive syndromes , and T. cruzi’s genetic diversity is suspected to
influence the clinical outcome. Six major genetic lineages or discrete typing units (DTUs) are currently recognized (named TcI through
TcVI), each displaying different biological characteristics . There are as yet no proven associations between T. cruzi genetic lineages and
the clinical presentations of the disease; DTUs TcII, V and VI are frequently reported to be present in the Southern Cone of South America
where serious chronic manifestations include megaesophagus and megacolon, whereas TcI is reported to predominate in endemic countries north
of the Amazon . The pathogenicity of this lineage is evident in acute cases, where patent clinical manifestations, including death, have
been reported in TcI oral outbreaks . However, in terms of chronic symptoms, TcI has been suggested to be benign , with observed chronic
chagasic cardiomyopathy (CCC) in TcI-infected patients attributed to co-infection with other T. cruzi DTUs. Despite being based on limited
sampling, this view has been reiterated in additional publications . Furthermore, it has also been suggested that Chagas disease may be less
severe among patients in the Amazon basin, where TcI infection is likely . TcI exhibits high intra-lineage diversity, with members of a
widely dispersed subgroup (termed TcIDOM) associated with many human infections , although no direct link with clinical manifestations has
been established. Here, we report a case of chronic chagasic cardiomyopathy and reactivation disease accompanied by extensive molecular
characterization of the T. cruzi parasites involved. A 43 year old chagasic patient from El Salvador was admitted to Massachusetts General
Hospital to undergo orthotropic heart transplantation. Immunofluorescence assay to detect anti-T. cruzi IgG previously performed at the
Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC, Atlanta, USA) was positive at >1:256 (diagnostic threshold > 1:32). His cardiac symptoms
corresponded to New York Heart Association class IV and he had a biventricular pacemaker/defibrillator for complete heart block. Fifteen
months previously, he underwent mitral valve replacement, tricuspid valve reconstruction and partial left ventriculectomy, at which time a
left ventricle excision and atrial appendage biopsy showed active and healed myocarditis, consistent with late phase Chagas disease. He had
no other known etiologies for his heart failure. Orthotropic heart transplantation was successful. Pathologic examination of the explanted
heart revealed findings consistent with end-stage CCC, including dilatation with near complete atrophy of the left ventricular wall,
endocardial fibrosis, diffuse myocardial fibrosis, and mononuclear infiltrates with some eosinophils and neutrophils. The infiltrate
(lymphocytic myocarditis) was composed of lymphocytes (many CD3 T cells, more CD8 than CD4, few CD20 B cells) plus many CD68 macrophages.
Amastigotes were not identified on multiple sections examined; however, T. cruzi kinetoplast DNA was detected by PCR in frozen tissue
submitted to the Parasitic Diseases and Diagnostics Branch of the CDC. Weekly microscopic examination of his blood was performed after
transplant, screening for early detection of reactivation disease; this was positive with rare trypomastigotes detected at week six after
transplant. He was given nifurtimox 8-10 mg/kg (as 120 mg four times a day) orally for 10 weeks, and developed severe peripheral neuropathy
with anorexia. He was switched to benznidazole, 150 mg twice a day for 30 days, which he tolerated well, and his peripheral neuropathy and
anorexia resolved. He was monitored monthly for parasitemia for approximately one year after the end of therapy, with no evidence of further
infection. Genotyping directly from patient’s blood samples and parafinized heart explants using a nested PCR-RFLP for the 1f8 flagellar
protein and digestion with Alw21I restriction enzyme (Van der Auwera, unpublished) assigned parasites to DTU TcI (Fig. 1). Hemoculture six
and eight weeks after transplant yielded epimastigotes, which were cloned in solid medium. Cultured parasites and clones were determined to
belong to DTU TcI by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) as in (Fig. 2). Intra-TcI genotyping
was performed with nuclear microsatellites and maxicircle gene fragments . Intriguingly, microsatellite data indicate a close relationship
with TcIDOM, a distinct genotype within DTU TcI which is common among human cases in Latin America (Fig. 3), while the maxicircle sequence
analysis indicates an origin among wild/non-human isolates for North and Central America (Fig. 4). Additionally, LSSP-PCR showed matching
patterns among DNA extracted from patient blood samples, heart explants and cultured parasite clones, indicating that they represent the
same parasite population. Meanwhile, Y-strain, from the TcII lineage, employed as a control, yielded a completely different amplification
pattern (Fig. 5).Fig. 1Molecular typing from clinical samples. DNA was extracted from blood samples and parafinized heart explants. Typing
was performed using a nested PCR-RFLP strategy for amplification of the 1f8 flagellar protein and digestion with Alw 21I (Van der Auwera, et
al., unpublished data). H = DNA extracted from parafinized heart explant tissue, B and B2 = blood samples taken 10 days apart during
reactivation of disease, TcI-TcVI correspond to DTU controls, NC lanes correspond to negative controls for the PCR and nested-PCR. Lanes
corresponding to Alw 21I restriction digest products are labeled with an asterisk (*). Only restriction products are shown for controlsFig.
2Molecular typing for cultured parasites and parasite clones. DNA was extracted from epimastigote hemocultures (HC) and five derived clones
(CL1-CL5). TcI-TcVI correspond to DTU controls, NC corresponds PCR negative control. Lanes containing restriction products are labeled with
an asterisk (*). Only restriction products are shown for controls. DNA was analyzed by the PCR-RFLP scheme proposed by Lewis, et al., 2009 :
as indicated by the brackets on the right side, fragments from the LSUrDNA, HSP60 and GPI genes were amplified by PCR. GPI and HSP60
products were digested with HhaI and EcoRV restriction enzimes, respectivelyFig. 3Neighbour joining dendrogram based on pairwise inverse
allele sharing. Relationship between parasite clones isolated from the patient and others from North, Central and South America are shown.
Branch colours indicate strain origin and values at important nodes indicate percentage of bootstrap support over 1000 trees. Further
details of strains and analytical strategy can be found in Fig. 4Maxicircle sequence-based typing of strain isolated from patient.
Maxicircle sequences for one biological clone were concatenated (accession # KP136828) according to , aligned against 70 TcI strains
encompassing TcI genetic diversity from across North, Central and South America and used to assemble a Maximum-Likelihood topology in PhyML.
The best-fit model of nucleotide substitution was selected from 88 models and its significance evaluated according to the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) in jMODELTEST 1.0. The best fit model selected for this dataset was GTR + G. Bootstrap support for clade topologies was
estimated following the generation of 100 pseudo-replicate datasetsFig. 5LSSP-PCR. DNA from parafinized heart explants and blood samples was
amplified using the S35/S36 primer pair. The 330 bp product was gel-purified and analyzed by LSSP-PCR. Products were run in a 10 %
polyacrilamide gel and silver-stained. H1 and H2 correspond to DNA extracted from two different sections of parafinized heart explant tissue
B and B2 correspond to blood samples taken 10 days apart, starting six weeks after transplant. Cl3 corresponds to DNA from one of the clones
derived from the original T. cruziisolate. Y indicates “Y strain” parasites (TcII DTU) used for comparison. MWM = molecular weight markers
Molecular typing from clinical samples. DNA was extracted from blood samples and parafinized heart explants. Typing was performed using a
nested PCR-RFLP strategy for amplification of the 1f8 flagellar protein and digestion with Alw 21I (Van der Auwera, et al., unpublished
data). H = DNA extracted from parafinized heart explant tissue, B and B2 = blood samples taken 10 days apart during reactivation of disease,
TcI-TcVI correspond to DTU controls, NC lanes correspond to negative controls for the PCR and nested-PCR. Lanes corresponding to Alw 21I
restriction digest products are labeled with an asterisk (*). Only restriction products are shown for controls Molecular typing for cultured
parasites and parasite clones. DNA was extracted from epimastigote hemocultures (HC) and five derived clones (CL1-CL5). TcI-TcVI correspond
to DTU controls, NC corresponds PCR negative control. Lanes containing restriction products are labeled with an asterisk (*). Only
restriction products are shown for controls. DNA was analyzed by the PCR-RFLP scheme proposed by Lewis, et al., 2009 : as indicated by the
brackets on the right side, fragments from the LSUrDNA, HSP60 and GPI genes were amplified by PCR. GPI and HSP60 products were digested with
HhaI and EcoRV restriction enzimes, respectively Neighbour joining dendrogram based on pairwise inverse allele sharing. Relationship between
parasite clones isolated from the patient and others from North, Central and South America are shown. Branch colours indicate strain origin
and values at important nodes indicate percentage of bootstrap support over 1000 trees. Further details of strains and analytical strategy
can be found in Maxicircle sequence-based typing of strain isolated from patient. Maxicircle sequences for one biological clone were
concatenated (accession # KP136828) according to , aligned against 70 TcI strains encompassing TcI genetic diversity from across North,
Central and South America and used to assemble a Maximum-Likelihood topology in PhyML. The best-fit model of nucleotide substitution was
selected from 88 models and its significance evaluated according to the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) in jMODELTEST 1.0. The best fit
model selected for this dataset was GTR + G. Bootstrap support for clade topologies was estimated following the generation of 100 pseudo-
replicate datasets LSSP-PCR. DNA from parafinized heart explants and blood samples was amplified using the S35/S36 primer pair. The 330 bp
product was gel-purified and analyzed by LSSP-PCR. Products were run in a 10 % polyacrilamide gel and silver-stained. H1 and H2 correspond
to DNA extracted from two different sections of parafinized heart explant tissue B and B2 correspond to blood samples taken 10 days apart,
starting six weeks after transplant. Cl3 corresponds to DNA from one of the clones derived from the original T. cruziisolate. Y indicates “Y
strain” parasites (TcII DTU) used for comparison. MWM = molecular weight markers Finally, although patient’s serum reacted against T. cruzi
antigen in three different commercial serological tests (Chagatek-Biomerieux, Chagas III-Abbott BiosChile and Chagatest Recombinante
3.0-Wiener Lab), it did not recognize synthetic peptides derived from the TSSA antigen specific for DTUs TcII, III, IV or V/VI described in
. Therefore, we conclude that the observed CCC was caused by TcI, unequivocally confirming that TcI is an agent of life threatening heart
disease. TcI constitutes the most abundant and widespread T. cruzi DTU and is the predominant DTU in the Amazon region and countries North
of it . For our patient, only TcI DTU parasites were detectable in the clinical samples, hemocultures, and biologically cloned parasites
from hemoculture. Furthermore, antibodies against TcII, III, IV or V/VI - specific peptide epitopes were not detectable in serum, suggesting
the absence of co-infection or previous infection with those lineages; there is currently no adequately sensitive equivalent TcI-specific
serological assay . TcI has considerable intra-DTU diversity ; specific genotypes within TcI are associated with human infection . Based on
nuclear microsatellite information, the patient was infected by TcIDOM, a genotype associated with many human infections in regions north of
the Amazon. TcIDOM has not previously been reported from cardiac tissues in CCC cases, as it has been merely detected in peripheral blood or
hemoculture, where co-infection with parasites from other genetic lineages causing CCC cannot be ruled out. Remarkably, mitochondrial
genotyping suggests a closer relationship with isolates from North and Central America, consistent with local, possibly sylvatic, origin of
the infecting strain. Given the proclivity for mitochondrial introgression into TcIDOM [11, 14, 17, 18] we suggest our observation
represents yet another such hybrid among many, in this case between TcIDOM and a local strain, highlighting the need for control strategies
aimed at domiciliary and extrinsic parasite populations as sources of human infection. The case portrayed herein highlights many of the
challenges that may arise when encountering a case of CCC (end-stage heart failure, need for heart transplant, Chagas disease reactivation
under immune suppression, adverse reaction to parasiticidal treatment) which were very competently handled by a capable medical team in a
non-endemic nation. Awareness of Chagas disease as an emerging global problem is essential for successfully meeting such challenges, which
are predicted to be faced with increased frequency in non-endemic countries. Furthermore, the results of our molecular characterization
constitute compelling evidence in support of the role of TcI as causative agent of end-stage CCC and help dispel any residual bias that
infection with this lineage is benign. Considering the broad distribution of TcI (the only T. cruzi DTU ranging from the Southern United
States to Argentina and Chile) and the frequency with which TcI strains are associated with human infection , there is need for greater
surveillance in TcI endemic regions like Central America. Around 22 million people from Chagas endemic countries live in the US, and most of
these immigrants come from Mexico (74 %) and El Salvador (6.4 %) , where TcI is known to predominate . Thus, a significant proportion of the
estimated 300,000 T. cruzi infections among immigrants in the U.S.A. are predicted to involve the DTU TcI, adding to the growing economic
burden of medical care and interventions associated with Chagas disease in the U.S.A., including transplantation for end-stage heart
disease. The study was approved by MGH’s Internal Review Board and written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Chronic chagasic
cardiomyopathy Discrete typing unit Trypanosoma cruzi lineage I Domiciliary population of Trypanosoma cruzi lineage I frequently associated
with human infection Low stringency single primer polymerase chain reaction Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions JAC conceived and coordinated the study, isolated parasites and performed molecular
characterization, drafted the manuscript; CNK managed the clinical case; ACZ, JEG, MSL and LAM performed molecular characterization; TB
performed lineage specific serology; BAB conceived the study and helped draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We thank Fernanda Latorre, Alejandra Zurita for technical assistance, Gert Van der Auwera for valuable discussion of the data,
Mario Grijalva and Michael Miles for critical reading of the manuscript. Work was funded by PUCE.
