Skin ulcers are a common issue in the elderly, as physiological loss of skin elasticity, alterations in microcirculation, and concomitant
chronic diseases typically occur in advanced age, thereby predisposing to these painful lesions. Wound-related pain is often associated with
skin ulcers and negatively impacts both the patient’s quality of life and, indirectly, wound healing. Pain management is an ongoing issue in
the elderly, and remains underestimated and under-treated in this fragile population. Recent guidelines suggest the use of opioids as the
frontline treatment of moderate and severe pain in nononcological pain in the elderly. However, due to the concerns of adverse reactions,
drug interactions, and addiction, clinicians frequently hesitate to prescribe opioids. This case report describes an elderly diabetic
patient with multiple ulcers of the lower limbs suffering wound-related pain. In our report, oxycodone/naloxone has proved to be an
effective and safe drug, providing pain relief as well as increased compliance when redressing wounds and faster healing compared to that in
similar patients. Our case provides anecdotal evidence, supported by other studies, to justify future, larger studies on chronic pain using
this therapy. Skin ulcers are secondary lesions characterized by chronic damage to the dermis, and subsequently the underlying fascia, with
little or no tendency to spontaneous healing. Skin ulcers may represent the clinical manifestation of the interaction between numerous
systemic and local factors, with various pathophysiological mechanisms present contemporarily. With increased age, the prevalence of chronic
skin ulcers tends to increase, involving especially the geriatric population. Several pathophysiological mechanisms related to aging
underlie this phenomenon, such as the physiological loss of trophic dermo-epidermal elasticity and concomitant alterations in skin
microcirculation in addition to the frequent presence of comorbidities that could adversely affect the development of skin ulcers.1 Pain
associated with chronic skin ulcers is a very significant factor that should be highlighted. Negative outcomes in terms of quality of life
and wound healing are associated with diminished cooperation of the patient during wound redressing. Wound pain can be explained by a
variety of mechanisms: inflammatory processes increasing the sensitivity of pain receptors, tissue damage causing stimulation of pain
receptors, damage to terminal end of the axon and/or presynaptic terminal, and possibly local infections aggravating sensory nerves.2
Therefore, pain management represents an essential side of wound healing as a satisfactory analgesic control is undoubtedly the first step
on the path of healing itself. Chronic skin ulcers, particularly those affecting the lower limbs, are major complications in diabetes and
often lead to radical surgery.3 Type 2 diabetes mellitus is one of the main causes of chronic ulcers in the elderly. The treatment of
diabetic ulcers in this fragile population is a major challenge due to a significant reduction in the skin’s regenerative capacity. These
negative factors are exacerbated by several critical issues in frail geriatric patients such as multiple comorbidities (eg, arterial
insufficiency, neuropathy, and diabetic skin microangiopathy), increased risk of infection, polypharmacotherapy, cognitive impairment, and
poor compliance to dressing procedures.4,5 Despite the high prevalence of chronic pain in the elderly,6 major barriers to the effective
identification and management of pain in the older population have been identified.7 As a matter of fact, pain is often underestimated and
undertreated among elderly people.8 A recent study on 29 patients with scleroderma has proved oxycodone to be an effective and safe
treatment of pain caused by severe scleroderma skin ulcers; in addition, it markedly improved the patient’s compliance to local wound care
procedures.9 Opioids are the established treatment for moderate and severe chronic oncological pain, as recommended by the World Health
Organization (WHO);10 furthermore, recent guidelines suggest opioids as the mainstay of treatment for chronic nononcological pain even in
elderly patients.11,12 One of the main limitations to the use of opioids in the elderly is the fear of adverse gastrointestinal events
(straining, incomplete evacuation, bloating, abdominal distension, and gastric reflux) due to the binding of opioids to receptors in the
gastrointestinal tract. This is known to cause a condition known as opioid-induced constipation (OIC),13 which is potentially even more
harmful in elderly patients. Oral naloxone, due to its very low systemic bio-availability, predominantly antagonizes opioid receptors in the
gastrointestinal tract and is effective in the prevention of OIC.14–17 Oral prolonged-release oxycodone/naloxone combination (OXN-PR) has
also been shown to be equally effective compared to oxycodone alone in patients with moderate-to-severe nonmalignant pain.18–21 OXN-PR has
been shown to be effective and safe in the treatment of neuropathic pain also.22 Recent studies have shown oxycodone/naloxone association to
be safe and effective in the elderly.23–25 To our knowledge, there are no significant systematic data on the use of this combination in the
treatment of pain associated with skin ulcers in the elderly. Here, we describe the case of an elderly diabetic patient suffering from years
of multiple chronic ulcers of the lower limbs associated with significant chronic pain, in which the combination of oxycodone/naloxone has
provided satisfactory analgesic control, and subsequently, complete healing and (long-term) pain relief. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images. Ethics approval is not needed for the present
case report, as it involves current clinical practices. The patient, CA, an 82-year-old female, suffering from type II diabetes mellitus for
over 20 years complicated by peripheral neuropathy and arteriopathy, came to our attention presenting painful skin ulcers of the lower
extremities (Figure 1, day 0 on admission). She was under basal–bolus scheme insulin, and on admission, glycemic values were somewhat
uncontrolled (HbA1c 55 mmol/mol, fasting glucose 180 mg/dL). Despite the ongoing analgesic treatment (acetaminophen 3,000 mg daily), pain
control was poor and wound treatment was strongly limited by the intense pain. She had also been prescribed tramadol by her general
practitioner, stopped early due to nausea and vomiting. On admission, OXN-PR 5/2.5 mg bid (twice a day) was started, and acetaminophen was
stopped. In order to evaluate the effectiveness and tolerability of the OXN-PR association, the following parameters were assessed during
the time of observation: pain intensity (on a verbally administered 0–10-point Numeric Rating Scale , expressed as the mean of assessments
at rest, on movement, daytime, and nocturnal of the last 24 hours), and the impact of pain on daily activities according to the Brief Pain
Inventory (BPI) of both severity and interference domains, cognitive function using the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), and functional
autonomy through the Barthel Index score. Bowel function was evaluated using the Bowel Function Index (BFI, a validated reproducible measure
that detects clinically meaningful changes in constipation, with scores ranging from 0, free from symptoms, to 100, most severe symptoms;
normal bowel function is defined as a BFI value of ≤29). Common opioid-related adverse events (nausea, vomiting, dizziness, drowsiness, dry
mouth, and itching) were also monitored. At baseline, pain was severe and had a markedly negative impact on daily activities. Functional
autonomy was moderately impaired, with preserved cognitive status and bowel function (Table 1). Subsequent pain assessment showed a clear
reduction in the NRS score, which progressively decreased to 5 after 1 week in the absence of opioid-related adverse events. The dose of
OXN-PR was increased to 10/5 mg bid. Residual pain was reported especially in the early hours of the morning and during ulcer dressing
procedures. The evaluation after 2 weeks and 4 weeks showed a further reduction in NRS score, which decreased to 2 points during both
assessments. In concomitance with the striking subjective improvement, the lady became more compliant to dressing procedures, significantly
contributing to the complete healing of the ulcers in the following 4 weeks (Figures 2 and 3). Throughout this period, no minor or major
adverse effects were observed. No significant changes were also found regarding cognitive status and bowel function; at final functional
assessment, optimal analgesic control was associated with a marked functional improvement (Table 1). In caring for this patient, the
association of OXN-PR demonstrated high efficacy and tolerability in the treatment of pain caused by diabetic lower limb ulcers. At the same
time, an increase in the patient’s compliance to ulcer dressing procedures was noted. In total, 20/10 mg daily dose of OXN-PR proved
sufficient in obtaining a more than satisfactory analgesic efficacy. No adverse effects were observed, consistent with the previously
reported tolerability of this oral opioid agonist–antagonist combination in the elderly.16,18,19,26 In particular, no changes were observed
in the BFI score, confirming the previously reported excellent gastrointestinal tolerability of this drug combination, which is certainly of
extreme importance in the geriatric population.27,28 Besides its effectiveness, the additional benefit of OXN-PR is to prevent OIC obviating
the need of laxatives in the majority of patients. Avoiding OIC represents a major issue in older and fragile patients. Topical analgesic
applications for ulcerations are available; on the other hand, topical analgesics are not so widely used, and data from clinical trials are
limited. In our patient, skin ulcers were too large for a topical analgesic treatment. This case report emphasizes three main issues in pain
management in the elderly: 1) switching opioids (in our case, from tramadol to OXN-PR) is a reasonable approach, and it is always worth
considering while managing pain, as current guidelines on pain management for geriatrics suggest;11,12 2) slowly titrating opioids is
required in order to avoid adverse events; prescribing opioids to this fragile population should always follow the rule “Start slowly, go
slowly”;11,12 and 3) OXN-PR, according to its peculiar pharmacological profile, should be considered as a potentially safe tool for managing
pain, preventing OIC in older patients.27,28 In the literature, the OXN-PR combination has previously been demonstrated to be effective in
controlling both neuropathic and nociceptive pain.18,22 As wound-related pain is typically both neuropathic and nociceptive, the OXN-PR
combination could be reasonably considered a potentially ideal solution to a very complex and common problem: chronic pain due to skin
ulcers in geriatric comorbid patients. OXN-PR combination has been recently found effective and safe in the treatment of chronic
nononcological pain in the elderly with a good efficacy profile and a low incidence of adverse effects.22–25 Considering all the current
evidence, as well as our experience, we strongly endorse further clinical studies on larger cohorts of geriatric patients, to formally
evaluate the effectiveness of this drug combination in the management of skin ulcer-related pain in the elderly. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. Disclosure The study was completed independently
with no funding. The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work. Author contributions All authors contributed toward data
analysis, drafting and critically revising the paper and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. Ulcers of the lower limb at
baseline, on admission. Ulcers healing, 14 days after admission. Ulcers healing, 28 days after admission. Clinical findings on admission and
throughout the observation Abbreviations: NRS, Numeric Rating Scale; BPI, Brief Pain Inventory; MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination; BFI,
Bowel Function Index; OXN-PR, oral prolonged-release oxycodone/naloxone combination; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; bid, twice a day.
