Conflict of Interest: None. Collision tumors are characterized by the coexistence of two cancers in the same anatomical site and its
pathogenesis remains controversial. Although uncommon, the association of basal cell carcinoma and melanocytic nevus is the most common
among combinations of skin tumors. Even rarer is the association of two malignant tumors. We report a case of tumor collision representing
melanoma and basosquamous cell carcinoma, a combination not previously described in the literature, since there are no reported cases of
melanoma with this type of basal cell carcinoma. Two tumors can coexist simultaneously in one anatomical site, constituting the called
collision tumors. Although unusual, this association is well reported by several authors.1 In a retrospective review of 40,000 biopsies, 69
examples of collision tumors were found. Most combinations involved basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and melanocytic nevus; melanocytic nevus and
seborrheic keratosis; BCC and seborrheic keratosis; actinic keratosis and melanocytic nevus; BCC and neurofibroma.1 Association of two
malignant tumors is a much more unusual event. The first reported case of melanoma associated with BCC was described by Kao in 1983 and
presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Dermatopathology (ASDP).2 The largest review on this association consists of the
evaluation of 78,000 biopsies of skin cancers, which showed 11 cases of melanoma colliding with BCC. Of these 11 cases, 7 were located in
the trunk and 4 in the arm; 6 patients were men and 5 women. Mean age was 53 years. In all cases, the boundaries of two tumors were well
defined. Apparently, the combination showed no impact on the natural course of each neoplasm. In this study, it wasn't found a melanoma
association with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).3 According to the literature review performed, there are reports of 27 cases of collision
tumors involving melanoma and BCC. In most of these reports, there is no mixing of cells of each tumor and the boundaries of each are well-
defined.4 The interaction between these tumors is seen less frequently and, in such cases, immunohistochemistry may be useful in the
differentiation of cell types.4,5,6 The meeting of invasive melanomas associated with BCC is also unusual: usually a melanoma in situ is
highlighted.7 Male patient, 60 years old, phototype II, married, mason. He came to medical care presenting blackened lesion in the frontal
region. The patient reported emergence of a "wound" that did not heal for about 25 years on the same site. According to the report, he
sought specialized care and underwent curettage without conduction of histopathology. There was local recurrence one year after the
procedure. The lesion was asymptomatic and presented a progressive growth. Patient had hypertension and personal history of prostate cancer
treated with radiotherapy for 6 months and he was still being followed by the urologist. Furthermore, he underwent excision of BCC in the
trunk. He wasn't aware of family history of skin cancer. Dermatological examination showed a brownish macula of 4 cm in diameter,
asymmetrical, with irregular edges and presenting colors variation (Figure 1). Dermatoscopy found multi-component pattern highlighted by the
presence of multiple blue-gray spots, hypochromic area, shiny white streaks and amorphous areas, in addition to atypical vascular pattern
(Figures 2 and 3). Brownish macula of 4 cm in diameter, asymmetrical, with irregular borders and presenting color variation Dermoscopic
examination showing multi-component pattern, with the presence of multiple blue-gray spots, hypochromic area, shiny white streaks and
amorphous areas Atypical vascular pattern observed on the dermoscopic examination, a global standard for multi-components Based on clinical
and dermoscopic findings, diagnosis was melanoma. The patient underwent surgical excision of the lesion with total skin graft removal of the
right infraclavicular region for reconstruction. After grafting with good coaptation of the banks, a Brown bandage was performed and the
material was sent for histopathological examination. This exam showed superficial spreading melanoma, with a thickness of 0.24 mm and Clark
level II; and also absence of mitosis or ulceration in area with marked photodamage. It was also observed the presence of BCC, infiltrative
type, with areas of coexisting squamous differentiation (basosquamous), interspersed with desmoplastic tissue (Figures 4, 5 and 6). Surgical
margins were free of neoplastic involvement. Histopathological examination showing the presence of superfi cial extensive melanoma, with
0.24 mm thickness, Clark level II Combined with the superfi cial extensive melanoma, it was also observed the presence of infi ltrative type
BCC, with areas of coexisting squamous differentiation (basosquamous) and abundant desmoplastic stroma Histopathological examination
demonstrating the presence of squamous differentiation areas in BCC (basosquamous) The patient is being followed-up at 6 months after
surgery, not presenting any complications. Pathogenesis of collision tumors is still a matter of speculation. It is known that severe
intermittent exposure to sunlight is a common risk factor for the development of melanoma and BCC. Some authors believe that the presence of
a tumor may induce epithelial or stromal alterations, responsible for the development of a second tumor.1 Despite the lack of histological
evidence of curetted injury, according to the analysis, it is believed that the patient initially presented BCC that was erroneously
curetted. This would justify the hypochromic area observed in dermoscopy and the fibrotic dermis evidenced in histopathological examination.
The patient had other risk factors for the development of skin cancer, such as low phototype and exaggerated sun exposure due to work.
Melanoma may secondarily evolved in the area of photodamage. Although dermoscopy proved to be useful for early diagnosis of melanoma and for
differential diagnosis of pigmented lesions, the current study did not observe evidences to suggest a collision of skin tumors, because
melanoma overlaps BCC, which wasn't pigmented. Basosquamous or metatypical carcinoma displays histological characteristics of BCC and SCC,
with controversial histogenesis and biological behavior. It has a low incidence, accounting for less than 2% of all malignant skin
neoplasms. Also, it presents greater local aggressiveness, even in the resection with safety margins, and potential to metastasize. The
hypothesis for the basosquamous carcinoma is the presence of totipotent cells in BCC, responsible for squamous cell differentiation. This
squamous differentiation is responsible for the clinical behavior of more local aggressiveness.8 In the case reported the fact that it is a
basosquamous carcinoma makes it even more peculiar. According to the literature review performed, there is no report of melanoma association
with this type of BCC. Prognosis and treatment of these cases are dictated by the more serious tumor. When diagnosed early and excised with
the recommended margins, it tends to develop favorably, as did the patient reported in this study. Outpatient monitoring of these patients
for 5 to 10 years is essential to evaluate local recurrence and early diagnosis of a second primary melanoma. Patients with a prior history
of melanoma have a 10% probability of developing another melanoma in 5 years. After the second episode of melanoma, this chance increases to
30% in 5 years.9 We chose to describe this case due to its peculiarity, the importance of ratifying the need of histopathology before and/or
after performing any invasive procedure and for being the first reported case of melanoma associated with basosquamous carcinoma. Financial
Support: None. How to cite this article: Medeiros PM, Alves NRM, Silva CC, Faria PCP, Barcaui CB, Piñeiro-Maceira J. Collision of malignant
neoplasms of the skin: basosquamous cell carcinoma associated with melanoma. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1): S39-42. Study performed
at Hospital Universitário Pedro Ernesto - Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (HUPE-UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
