Ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt complications are common, but abdominal complications are rare. The objective of this report is to present 2
cases of intestinal obstruction due to a VP shunt and review the literature for data on this rare occurrence. A 4-month-old boy received
surgical resection of a medulloblastoma and a VP shunt was inserted to manage progressive hydrocephalus. Two months later, he was admitted
with intermittent vomiting, and plain abdominal radiography showed complete intestinal obstruction. Emergency laparotomy revealed an
adhesive intestinal obstruction around the catheter, and approximately 5 cm of necrotic ileum was resected. His recovery was uneventful. In
the second case, a 6-year-old boy was diagnosed with a primary nongerminomatous malignant germ cell tumor and a VP shunt was place to treat
hydrocephalus. Two weeks after the first course of chemotherapy, he went into a coma; computed tomography demonstrated enlargement of the
tumor and gross total resection was performed. Two weeks later, he developed abdominal distention; plain radiography showed intestinal
obstruction and laparotomy revealed adhesive intestinal obstruction around the catheter with 15 cm of necrotic ileum. The necrotic bowel was
resected. Unfortunately, the patient developed sepsis and despite treatment remained in a vegetative state. Medline, Central, Embase, and
Google Scholar databases were searched up to May 9, 2014, using the terms VP shunt, shunting, and/or intestinal obstruction. Only cases
involving children or adolescents were included. Eleven reports involving patients with abdominal complications resulting from a VP shunt
for hydrocephalus were identified. The dates of the reports spanned from 1971 to 2014. Volvulus was the most common cause of VP shunt-
related obstruction, and mechanical obstruction due to twisting of the catheter the second most common. Only 1 case in the literature review
was related to intestinal adhesions. Treatment in most cases was laparotomy. Although intestinal obstruction is a rare complication of a VP
shunt, it should be considered in the presence of abdominal symptoms and prompt treatment provided to have a good outcome. A
ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt that diverts cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to the peritoneal cavity via a catheter remains the gold standard
treatment for infants and adults with congenital or acquired hydrocephalus, such as that due to a tumor.1–3 The main advantage of shunting
is that excessive CSF is completely removed from the central nervous system (CNS). A VP shunt to treat hydrocephalus is the most common
pediatric neurosurgical procedure, and although initial placement is typically uneventful, complications of VP shunts are common with
reported frequencies ranging from 45% to 59%.3–6 Complications include infection (usually caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis), obstruction
of the shunt itself, failure of a valve, or over- and underdrainage of a ventricle.7 Intra-abdominal complications of a VP shunt are rare,
and intestinal obstruction as a result of the shunt is very rare. In this report, we describe 2 cases of intestinal obstruction as a result
of a VP shunt, and perform a systematic literature review to obtain data of this rare occurrence. A 4-month-old boy was admitted to our
hospital for progressive head enlargement. Physical examination revealed a bulging fontanelle. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a
heterogeneously enhancing mass (5.3 × 3.4 × 4.7 cm) centered in the posterior fossa with compression of the fourth ventricle and obstructive
hydrocephalus (Figure 1A). The patient underwent posterior fossa craniotomy and gross-total resection of the tumor (Figure 1B). Histological
examination of the tumor revealed a cellular neoplasm arranged in a sheet-like architecture with diffuse invasion of the surrounding
cerebellum, and the final pathological diagnosis was medulloblastoma with anaplasia. A VP shunt was inserted to manage the progressive
hydrocephalus 2 weeks after resection. Case 1. (A) Preoperative sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance images showed a
heterogeneously enhancing mass centered in the posterior fossa with compression of the fourth ventricle and obstructive hydrocephalus. (B)
Postoperative sagittal T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging confirmed gross total resection of the tumor. (C and D) Anteroposterior and
lateral plain abdominal radiography showed complete intestinal obstruction. The VP shunt placed was the CODMAN HAKIM Programmable Valve
System (Codman, Johnson & Johnson Company, Raynham, MA) Programmable Valve System. The catheter is silastic, but not antibiotic impregnated.
Intraperitoneal placement of the catheter was 20 to 25 cm. During the placement of the distal catheter, a horizontal incision was made about
3 cm below the costal margin and centered at the lateral border of the rectus musculature. In most children, this can be accomplished with
an incision of approximately 1.5 to 2 cm in length. After the superficial rectus fascia was opened, the rectus muscle was separated
vertically in a muscle-sparing fashion, the deep rectus fascia was grasped with 2 hemostats, and a 3- to 4-mm incision was made with
Metzenbaum scissors. The peritoneum can be picked up with 2 mosquito hemostats and incised with the Metzenbaum scissors; the peritoneum
cavity can then be confirmed by gently probing with a Penfield 4 instrument. The distal catheter tip was then inserted into the peritoneal
cavity in a craniocaudal direction. Closure was performed in layers, with a single 3-0 absorbable suture reapproximating the deep fascia and
interrupted 4-0 absorbable sutures in the superficial fascia and dermis layers. During closure, it was confirmed that the catheter has not
been cut or dislocated into the subcutaneous tissue. CSF cytology was negative at shunt placement. His postoperative course was uneventful,
and symptoms resolved rapidly. The patient was asymptomatic for 2 months, but was readmitted for an acute episode of intermittent vomiting
lasting for 13 hours. Physical examination revealed abdominal distention with minimal tenderness. Plain abdominal radiography showed
complete intestinal obstruction (Figure 1C and D). An emergency laparotomy was performed, and intestinal obstruction due to adhesions was
detected around the catheter, though the catheter had not migrated and was not directly compressing the intestine. No metastases were noted.
Approximately 5 cm of necrotic ileum was found due to an adhesive band. The necrotic bowel was resected, and an anastomosis was performed.
An Ommaya reservoir was implanted for external drainage until the shunt system could be replaced. Culture of CSF from the abdominal
component of the shunt grew S epidermidis, and the patient received antibiotics for 2 weeks. The patient recovered, and a new VP shunt was
inserted 4 weeks postoperatively. Because of his clinical course, chemotherapy was delayed until the 5th month after the initial surgery, at
which time he received 3, 2-month cycles of chemotherapy, with each cycle consisting of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, vincristine,
carboplatin, and etoposide. At 8 months of follow-up, the patient exhibited no neurological deficits and no radiographic evidence of tumor
recurrence. A 6-year-old boy presented to our emergency department with a 2-week history of headaches and vomiting. Computed tomography (CT)
of the head showed the aqueduct of the midbrain was compressed, the supratentorial ventricles were dilated (Figure 2A and B), and there was
a mixed density 4.0 (transverse) × 3.2 (anteroposterior) × 5.1 (superoinferior) cm mass centered in the pineal region with effacement of the
third ventricle and obstructive hydrocephalus (Figure 2C). MRI confirmed the presence of an inhomogeneous tumor occupying the posterior
third ventricle, which had spread through the tentorium. Serum α-fetoprotein was elevated (555 IU/L), and β-human chorionic gonadotropin was
normal. This patient was diagnosed with a primary nongerminomatous malignant germ cell tumor. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) was
considered, but not performed because of concerns of bleeding from the tumor and restriction of the operating space because of the large
size of the lesion. Thus, a VP shunt was placed. The shunt placed and the placement procedure was the same as described for case 1, and the
placement was performed by the same attending neurosurgeon. CSF cytology was negative at initial shunt placement. Following shunt placement,
chemotherapy (carboplatin + etoposide + bleomycin) was administered. Case 2 (A and B) Preoperative sagittal and axial contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted magnetic resonance images showed an intense but slightly inhomogeneous enhancement of the tumor occupying the posterior third
ventricle and spreading though the tentorium. The aqueduct of midbrain was compressed, and the supratentorial ventricles dilated. (C)
Preoperative noncontrast computed tomography (CT) showed an isodense tumor in the pineal region with calcifications. (D) Two weeks after the
first course of chemotherapy, the patient suddenly fell into coma and the CT scan demonstrated obvious enlargement of the tumor. Shunted
hydrocephalus was noted. (E) Postoperative CT showed gross total resection of the tumor. (F and G) Anteroposterior and lateral plain
abdominal radiography showed partial intestinal obstruction 17 days after tumor resection. (H) Plain abdominal radiography showed complete
intestinal obstruction 15 hours after prior films. Two weeks after the first course of chemotherapy, the patient suddenly fell into a coma.
CT demonstrated obvious enlargement of the tumor (Figure 2D). Emergency surgery was performed via a transcallosal-transseptal-interforniceal
approach with gross total resection of the tumor (Figure 2E). The final pathological diagnosis was an immature teratoma. The patient
recovered from the surgery uneventfully with no obvious neurological deficits. However, on the 17th day postoperatively, he developed the
acute onset of vomiting with abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed abdominal distention, and plain abdominal radiography showed a
partial intestinal obstruction (Figure 2F and G). He was conservatively treated for 15 hours; however, the symptoms worsened and plain
abdominal radiograph showed complete intestinal obstruction (Figure 2H). Laparotomy revealed intestinal obstruction due to adhesions around
the catheter with 15 cm of necrotic ileum. No metastases were noted. The necrotic bowel was resected, and anastomosis performed. The distal
catheter was pulled out of the abdominal wall for continuous external drainage. After surgery, he developed a fever, stiff neck, and
positive Kernig sign, and septic shock was diagnosed. Blood and CSF cultures were positive for Escherichia coli that proved resistant to
most antibiotics. Postoperative and postseptic shock CT without contrast only revealed mild subdural effusion with no evidence of infarction
or herniation. MRI was not performed. The shunt device was totally removed, and replaced with an external ventricular catheter. After 4
weeks of antibiotic therapy, a ventriculoatrial (VA) shunt was inserted. However, the patient emerged in a persistent vegetative state.
Owing to the case report that involved a retrospective analysis of 2 patients, the approval of an institutional review board is not
required. But this report was prepared in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations. The patient's
parents/legal guardians provided informed consent for the case data to be published. A systematic literature review was conducted in
accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines.8 Medline, Central, Embase, and Google
Scholar databases were searched for studies published up to May 9, 2014, using the terms VP shunt, shunting, and/or intestinal obstruction.
Reference lists generated in the search were then hand-searched for relevance, and reports were screened to remove duplicates. Study
inclusion criteria for the systematic review were as follows: patients <18 years of age (children or adolescents; had VP shunt placement;
and developed intestinal obstruction as a complication of the shunt. Non-English and non-Chinese reports were excluded. Studies were
independently identified by 2 reviewers. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement between the 2 reviewers, a third reviewer was consulted to
assess eligibility of the contested article. The following data were extracted from studies meeting the inclusion criteria: name of the
first author, year of publication, age and sex of the patient(s), clinical presentation, cause of the hydrocephalus, cause of the intestinal
obstruction, interval from shunt placement to intestinal obstruction, intervention used to treat the intestinal obstruction, and the
outcome. Data extraction was also conducted by 2 reviewers working independently, and a third reviewer was consulted for any disagreement. A
flow diagram of study selection is shown in Figure 3. A total of 255 articles were identified in the literature search, and of these, 242
were excluded because they did not meet the inclusion criteria. Thus, the full text of 13 studies was reviewed, and 2 were excluded as they
did not mention intestinal obstruction. A summary of findings of the included 11 studies9–19 and the data of our 2 cases are listed in Table
1. Meta-analysis was not conducted as there was an insufficient quantity of complications that could be categorized to provide a clinically
meaningful result. Flow diagram of study selection. Clinical Characteristics of Pediatric Patients With Intestinal Obstruction After
Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt Placement for Hydrocephalus The dates of the reports spanned from 1971 to 2014. Two of the studies did not
provide patient characteristics that could be included in Table 1 because they summarized results from groups of patients.11,12 The age of
the patients ranged from 1 week to 3 years. Intestinal obstruction typically presented as a distended, tender, or acute abdomen, and
vomiting. Although intracranial tumors were the cause of hydrocephalus in the 2 patients reported herein, the 11 published reports
documented a variety of other causes including myelomeningoceles,14,17 chronic subdural hematoma,18 and Dandy-Walker syndrome.19 The time
interval from shunt placement to intestinal obstruction widely varied. Three articles reported evidence of CSF infection: Bal et al10
reported a peritubal collection of CSF that grew Klebsiella pneumonia; the patient reported by Starreveld et al19 had cellulitis around the
shunt tubing under the scalp, and CSF from the P shunt valve tap grew S aureus; and the patient reported by Hlavin et al14 had swelling and
skin breakdown along the shunt tract, and CSF grew S aureus. Treatments of most cases involved laparotomy,9,10,15–19 but laparoscopy and
other less-invasive procedures were also used.11,12,14 Only 1 case had necrotic small bowel that required resection.19 In 1 case, catheter
removal was reported as the only treatment.13 Most studies reported an uneventful recovery. Follow-up times were reported in only 2 of the
studies, with a follow-up of 3 weeks in 1 study10 and 3 years in the other.14 Over 50% of pediatric brain tumors present with obstructive
hydrocephalus at the time of the diagnosis.20–22 Early radical tumor removal is ideal, so often ETV is concomitantly performed with
craniotomy.22 Although preresection VP shunting is not a standard practice, VP shunting remains one of the most commonly performed
interventions for hydrocephalus.4 Complications of a VP shunt, however, are common in both pediatric and adult patients with a reported
incidence of 45% to 59%.3–6 Abdominal complications include volvulus, peritonitis, ascites, perforation of the bowel, bladder, gallbladder
and vagina, peritoneal cysts, CSF ascites, and distal catheter migration via the intestinal tract, umbilicus, scrotum, or vagina.10,23–26 In
our first case, the intestinal obstruction occurred after an infection. We believe that the shunt infection may have contributed to the
development of the bowel obstruction as infection can cause bowel adhesions. Also, of note is that radiotherapy was not administered as the
chemotherapy regimen given has been shown to be effective without the addition of radiotherapy.27 The second case had a much more
complicated course. The VP shunt was placed prior to surgery, and the intestinal obstruction occurred after tumor resection. It is possible
that necrotic, possibly infected brain tissue passed though the shunt into the abdominal cavity contributing to the formation of adhesions.
We believe the patient's neurological deterioration was likely due to poor perfusion as a result of septic shock rather than hydrocephalus
as continuous external drainage was begun at the time of laparotomy. There was no evidence that the patient was immunocompromised at that
time the septic shock occurred, which may have made him less likely to display signs of an acute abdomen. The patient did not have any signs
of intracranial infection after the tumor resection, and there were no obvious neurological deficits. He became symptomatic after the
laparotomy for bowel obstruction, at which time he developed a fever, stiff neck, and positive Kernig sign, and blood and CSF cultures were
positive for E coli. Based on the findings, we believed the intracranial infection was due to septic shock, and the pathogen, E coli,
implied the infection was caused by bacterial translocation from the gut. CT scans were not informative, and unfortunately MRI was not
performed as it has been reported that sepsis-induced leukoencephalopathy can be detected using MRI.28 Unfortunately, the reason for the
persistent vegetative state is unclear, but based on the available data, we believe the primary reason is ischemia due to septic shock.
Although complications of a VP shunt are common, abdominal complications, especially intestinal obstruction, are rare. All of the reports of
intestinal obstruction related to a VP shunt included in this review were in pediatric patients, but it is worth noting that they also
represent the majority of the case reports of this topic, suggesting such problem might be more likely to occur in pediatric patients.
Causes of VP shunt-related intestinal obstruction varied, with volvulus being the most common cause, again likely related to the fact that
volvulus is a relatively common problem in the pediatric population.29 Mechanical obstruction due to twisting of the catheter was the second
most common cause, and in some cases, obstruction occurred as a loop of the shunt catheter tightened around a bowel loop during
removal.18,19 Interestingly, there were only 3 cases in which obstruction was related to adhesions: 2 in this report and 1 other in which
adhesions were related to a volvulus.17 It is still worth noting that volvulus/bowel obstruction or elevated intra-abdominal pressure can
result in the shunt's malfunction or strangulation, a situation that requires urgent externalization or revision to correct. Regardless of
the cause, management of bowel obstruction is the same. Conservative treatment consists of intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement,
along with placement of a nasogastric tube to decompress the stomach. Observation is warranted if a partial bowel obstruction is suspected
in the absence of fever, leukocytosis, and localized abdominal pain. In the presence of complete obstruction with fever, pain, and no
passage of flatus or stool, immediate surgical exploration is warranted. This is especially critical if a shunt is present as the catheter
is a foreign body, and retaining a foreign body is against standard surgical principles of infection management. Furthermore, retrograde
infection to the CNS is possible.6 Laparoscopy has been shown to be useful for the diagnosis and management of shunt-related complications
such as shunt catheter entanglement.11,12 In the second case presented herein, initial surgical management rather than conservative
treatment may have results in a different outcome. In addition, while ETV was not performed due to technical considerations, the procedure
may have eliminated the need for the VP shunt, and again may have produced a different outcome. Shunt infection must be confirmed by CSF
Gram stain or culture. Once CSF infection is confirmed, it requires treatment with appropriate antibiotics and removal of the shunt hardware
and insertion of an external ventricular catheter or Ommaya reservoir. The common practice is to use a new contralateral burr hole. A
recently published study suggested that the use of the ventriculostomy site for VP shunt placement may not add morbidity (infection or need
for revision) as compared with the use of a fresh contralateral site.30 However, the study was performed in subarachnoid hemorrhage patients
with an existing ventriculostomy and no specific data were reported for infected cases. It has been reported that the mean duration of
externalization is about 2 weeks.31 Once CSF sterility is achieved, a new shunt should be inserted and a VA shunt may be a good choice (case
2); a repeat VP shunt, however, can be placed in patients without extensive abdominal adhesions. It has been reported that secondary ETV
instead of shunt revision is a treatment option when shunts fail in patients with obstructive hydrocephalus.32,33 Based on our experience,
if there is no CSF infection, the distal catheter should be pulled out of the abdominal wall and connected to an external collection bag for
continuous external drainage. Once a patient becomes stable, the intestinal obstruction is relieved, and multiple CSF cultures remain
negative, reinternalization is indicated. It has been reported that secondary ETV instead of shunt revision can be attempted whether the CSF
is infected or not.32,33 A suggested algorithm for the treatment of intestinal obstruction after VP shunt placement is presented in Figure
4. Treatment algorithm for patients with intestinal obstruction after ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt placement. CSF = cerebrospinal fluid,
EVD = external ventricular drainage, ETV = endoscopic third ventriculostomy, VA = ventriculoatrial. Of note, according to the Chang Staging
System for Metastasis, both patients treated at our hospital were M0; there was no evidence of gross subarachnoid or hematogenous
metastasis.34 Moreover, no abdominal metastases were noted during the laparotomy. Based on these findings, we can exclude the relationship
between the tumor cells in the CSF and the intestinal obstruction. However, an important potential VP shunt complication (in addition to
infection, obstruction, misplacement, etc.) reported in pediatric patients with the 2 types of brain tumors in the cases at our hospital is
metastasis via the VP shunt to peritoneal region. There have been case reports showing that metastasis can occur via the shunt. For example,
Boyd et al35 reported the case of a 23-month-old male patient with a supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumor who developed metastasis
to the abdomen via the VP shunt. Han et al36 reported the case of a 9-year-old female patient with an atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor of
the third ventricle who developed peritoneal metastasis after shunt placement. Ingold et al37 also reported a rare case of an adult female
patient with abdominal seeding of an atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor of the pineal gland along a VP shunt catheter. On the contrary, Berger
et al38 reviewed the record of 415 pediatric patients with benign or malignant brain tumors of whom 152 had shunt placement, and concluded
that a shunt, regardless of the type, location, revision rate, or filter insertion, did not seem to predispose those patients to extraneural
metastasis. In conclusion, intestinal obstruction is a rare complication of a VP shunt. Based on our cases and the literature review,
volvulus, twisting of the catheter, and adhesions appear to be the most common causes of intestinal obstruction. More studies and cases,
however, are needed to confirm this observation. Although intestinal obstruction is a rare complication of a VP shunt, it should be
considered in the presence of abdominal symptoms as it can lead to serious consequences and prompt treatment should be given. Abbreviations:
CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, VA = ventriculoatrial, VP = ventriculoperitoneal. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to
disclose.
