Conflict of Interest: None. (In memoriam) We present a case of disseminated cutaneous histoplasmosis in a male patient, rural worker, HIV
positive for 20 years, with a history of irregular use of antiretroviral therapy, T cell counts below 50 cells/mm3 and with good response to
treatment with Itraconazole. We highlight importance of skin lesions in clarifying early diagnosis, since this co-infection often leads
patients to death. Histoplasmosis is a systemic mycosis caused by a dimorphic fungus, Histoplasma capsulatum var capsulatum, which is
endemic in Latin America and other tropical countries.1 It is a saprophytic fungus found in soil contaminated by birds feces. Primary
infection is acquired through inhalation of conidia present in nature (caves with bats, chicken coops, etc.). It is a self-limited disease
with clinical signs absent in healthy individuals.2 In individuals exposed to large numbers of spores, late cavitary pulmonary
histoplasmosis, granulomatous mediastinitis or mediastinal fibrosis may occur. 3 Clinical presentations are: acute and chronic pulmonary
histoplasmosis, disseminated and primary cutaneous 2. Infection is limited and restricted to the lungs in 99% of cases; the rest progresses
to disseminated or chronic form. Advanced disease may occur as a progression of acute infection or late reactivation of focus with viable
fungi. 4 In the disseminated form, the main findings are weight loss, fever, hepatosplenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy, and
involvement of bone marrow, CNS, skin and mucous membranes. Regarding skin lesions, they are generally nonspecific, manifesting as macules,
papules, pustules, verrucous plaques and ulcers.2 Ulcers may also be found on oral and labial mucosa. 5 In immunocompromised subjects,
particularly in AIDS patients when their CD4 T-lymphocyte count is less than 50 cells/mm3, histoplasmosis may be presented in the form of a
severe and widespread infection. 5 Skin lesions occur in 4-11% of patients and result from secondary invasion of skin in widespread form of
infection, and it may be the first sign of the disease in immunocompromised individuals.6 The gold standard for diagnosis is the
anatomopathological examination and culture for fungi of the involved skin tissues.2 Fungus may also be evidenced in the sputum, blood, bone
marrow and urine sediment.2 Histopathological examination can detect the fungus through PAS and Grocott stains. The material for culture can
be obtained by biopsy, aspiration, bronchial lavage and blood or marrow punction.2 Detection of polysaccharide antigens in fluids such as
urine or serum are also helpful, but there may be false-positive results, especially in patients with paracoccidioidomycosis.3 Complement
fixation and immunodiffusion tests are usually negative in patients with HIV. 3 PCR on samples of blood and tissue is highly sensitive and
specific. Histoplasmin skin test is indicated for non-endemic areas.2 The objective of this study is to report the case of a subject with
large skin and mucosa lesions, which allowed the diagnosis and early treatment of the disease. The patient was infected with HIV for 20
years and had severe immunosuppression, with disseminated fungal disease and satisfactory clinical outcome despite the severity of co-
infection. Man, 52 years old, rural worker, infected with HIV, with severe immunosuppression due to the irregular treatment with
antiretroviral drugs. He has presented for 2 months poor general condition and verrucous lesions throughout integument, predominantly in the
face and trunk (Figure 1). Examination showed pancytopenia and renal dysfunction (creatinine clearance 27 ml/min). Chest tomography revealed
diffuse accentuation of the lung interstitium. Pathological examination (HE) showed epidermis with central ulceration, necrosis and numerous
macrophages with clear cytoplasm and oval structures (Figure 2). Grocott stain was positive for Histoplasma (Figure 3). Direct mycological
examination revealed fungal structures compatible with Histoplasma. Culture was performed from skin biopsy sample in Sabouraud-dextrose
agar, at room temperature. On macroscopic examination white cotton-wool spots colonies were observed and, on microscopic examination,
presence of hyphae, with rounded microconidia and macroconidia, was noted (Figure 4 and 5). Myeloculture and blood culture for fungus also
showed the presence of Histoplasma capsulatum var capsulatum. Serology for specific antibodies was negative for the fungus. During
hospitalization, the patient developed febrile neutropenia and therapy with Cefepime, Granulokine and reintroduction of antiretrovirals was
started. CD4 was 7 cel/m3 and viral load was 598,342 copies. A chemoprophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and azithromycin was
performed. Therapy adopted was Itraconazole - 200 mg 3 times daily for 3 days in a row followed by 400 mg/day. It was of utmost importance
the reintroduction of antiretrovirals, which led to an CD4 increase. Pili torti. Polarized light microscopy, 10x magnification: Hair twisted
about its longitudinal axis 100X HE: Skin sample containing histiocytic infi ltration in the dermis, which show punctate structures in the
cytoplasm Groccot 400X: In the silver staining it’s possible to note oval and uniform intracellular and grouped structures compatible with
Histoplasma Culture - Microscopic examination: presence of tuberculate microconidia and macroconidia Culture - macroscopic examination:
presence of white cotton-wool spots nies The evolution of the case was satisfactory, with progressive improvement soon after the institution
of specific antifungal treatment. After monitoring for 11 months, the patient had a weight gain of 20 kilos, clinical resolution of all
lesions and improvement in general condition (Figure 6). Culture - macroscopic examination: presence of white cotton-wool spots colonies The
most important risk factor for reactivation of infection and progression to disease is HIV-induced immunosuppression.3 Co-infection of
histoplasmosis and AIDS, particularly when CD4 T-lymphocytes count is less than 50 cells/mm3, leads to a severe and disseminated infection.5
In our case, the importance of skin lesions as a sign of systemic disease was evident, and it also may assist in the early diagnosis of
histoplasmosis. This allowed the immediate start of specific treatment, thus reducing the risk of disease progression, which has a high
mortality rate in immunocompromised patients.3 Skin lesions are present in most Brazilian cases (38-85%) and they are often more extensive
compared with those reported in the USA, thus justifying the tropism for skin of strains diagnosed in South America.3 Skin lesions
predominate when H. duboisii is the etiologic agent.7 Histoplasmosis mortality in immunosuppressed patients is greater than 33%, while in
immunocompetent individuals is approximately 17%. 3 In the literature, the drug of choice for disseminated histoplasmosis is Amphotericin B,
0.5-0.7 mg/kg/day for 10 weeks, followed by Itraconazole, 200 mg 3 times a day and maintenance dose of 400 mg/day for 12 weeks. 8-9 For our
patient, the treatment of choice was Itraconazole, due to the associated comorbidities. The patient presented excellent therapeutic
response, and the drug was kept at a dose of 400 mg/day until reversal of immunosuppression state. The patient remains well during
outpatient follow up, already for 11 months. In conclusion, it should be emphasized that histoplasmosis, particularly in HIV-infected
patients, needs early diagnostic clarification, seeking immediate specific therapy, which will surely bring better progress. Financial
Support: None. How to cite this article: voss Gonzalez T, Mattos e Dinato SL, Sementilli A, Romiti N, Beltrame PM, Veiga APR. Atypical
presentation of histoplasmosis in na immunocompromised patient.. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1): S32-5. Study performed at Centro
Universitário Lusíada (UNILUS) and Hospital Guilherme Álvaro- Santos (SP), Brazil.
