Aortopulmonary collateral arteries are an uncommon variant of alternative blood supply in cases of complex congenital heart disease.
Although surgery may still be the classic approach for this condition, mini-invasive endovascular occlusion has been recently attempted as
an alternative less traumatic procedure. Children born to women with epilepsy are at increased risk of congenital malformations. A
cardiovascular malformation in a 6-year-old white boy with prenatal exposure to carbamazepine is described. At birth, he underwent atrial-
ventricular septal defects repair. At 6 years of age, he was diagnosed to have an aberrant aortopulmonary artery from the descending aorta.
He presented with recurrent respiratory infections and no cardiovascular signs, but there was associated right upper lobe hyperperfusion.
Collateral percutaneous plug embolization was performed because of risk for cardiorespiratory infections, pulmonary hypertension and
atrioventricular dilatation. The post-releasing control showed a complete occlusion of the aberrant artery. A chest radiogram and computed
tomography showed normalization of vascular pattern of his right lung at 9-months follow-up. No complications and no respiratory infections
in the first follow-up year were observed. A good growth gain was obtained. Plug embolization in an aortopulmonary collateral artery is an
interesting alternative to surgery and is suitable for children with minor congenital heart disease and without severe respiratory and/or
cardiovascular symptoms. Management and long-term pediatric multidisciplinary follow-up is recommended. Prenatal exposure to carbamazepine
could be considered in the pathogenesis and diagnosis of the malformation. Major aortopulmonary collateral arteries are reported in patients
with cyanotic congenital heart disease and reduced pulmonary blood flow such as tetralogy of Fallot (TOF). These collaterals are also noted
in neonates, especially premature newborns with bronchopulmonary disorder [1, 2]. The aberrant artery arises from the aorta and supplies one
or more pulmonary regions. The lung receives systemic arterial blood from the aorta resulting in lung hyperperfusion and increased pulmonary
blood pressure. Surgery is the conventional treatment for this condition; however, percutaneous vascular occlusion has recently been
attempted as a mini-invasive procedure [3, 4]. Approximately 1% of all pregnancies are in woman with epilepsy. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs)
have the potential to affect development throughout pregnancy . Children born to women with epilepsy are at increased risk of malformations,
such as heart, orofacial, urologic, skeletal and neural tube defects. We describe a “pseudo” isolated aortopulmonary collateral artery in a
child with prenatal exposure to carbamazepine. Indications to endovascular treatment with plug embolization and technical considerations are
discussed. A 6-year-old white boy was diagnosed to have a large aortopulmonary collateral artery during preoperative evaluation for
adenoidectomy. He had a history of recurrent respiratory tract infection, symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux and scoliosis. Saturation was
normal and no abnormal auscultation findings were noted. His weight was 20.7kg (25–50 percentile) and height 119cm (75 percentile). Prenatal
exposure to carbamazepine because of maternal epilepsy was reported. He was delivered at term (birth weight 3100g). He underwent ventricular
and atrial septal defects correction in the perinatal period. Since birth facial malformations (long philtrum, micrognathia, epicanthic
fold) and paralysis of facial muscles resulting from dysfunction of the seventh cranial nerve were documented. DiGeorge syndrome and array-
CGH deletions were excluded. On chest X-ray were signs of bronchitis and hyperperfusion of his right lung (Fig. 1). An echocardiogram showed
no shunts and no evidence of ventricular overload. A computed tomography (CT) angiography scan revealed an abnormal vessel arising from the
thoracic descending aorta coursing toward his right upper lung. On endovascular occlusion, the angiogram confirmed the hyperperfusion of the
right upper lobe (Fig. 2). The diameter of the aberrant vessel was up to 8mm. No lung anomaly or other abnormal vessels were detected.
Three-dimensional volume rendering of the malformation is shown in Fig. 3.Fig. 1Pre-procedure chest radiogram (Panel a) and coronal
multiplanar reconstruction (Panel b) of contrast-enhanced multidetector computed tomography showing increased pulmonary vascularity of the
right lung mainly in the upper lobeFig. 2Aortogram showing aortopulmonary collateral artery opacifying the lobar superior pulmonary artery
(Panel a). Hyperperfusion of the right upper lobe and hypertrophied venous return (Panel b)Fig. 3Three-dimensional volume rendering of the
malformation Pre-procedure chest radiogram (Panel a) and coronal multiplanar reconstruction (Panel b) of contrast-enhanced multidetector
computed tomography showing increased pulmonary vascularity of the right lung mainly in the upper lobe Aortogram showing aortopulmonary
collateral artery opacifying the lobar superior pulmonary artery (Panel a). Hyperperfusion of the right upper lobe and hypertrophied venous
return (Panel b) Three-dimensional volume rendering of the malformation Pulmonary hyperperfusion is a risk factor for recurrent
cardiorespiratory infection and lung hypertension. This risk is probably higher in syndromic malformations. A mini-invasive vascular
occlusion was attempted after a multidisciplinary evaluation (pediatric cardiologist, pediatrician, pediatric surgeon and interventional
radiologist). Under general anesthesia, ultrasound-guided right femoral common artery access was gained. The major aortopulmonary collateral
artery (MAPCA) was easily catheterized with a 4F vertebral Glidecath catheter. The hypertrophied pulmonary arteries of the superior lobe
were opacified as well as the normal venous drainage excluding a lobar sequestration. Due to the very short length and ascending direction
of MAPCA, coils as embolic agents were excluded because of the high risk of nontarget embolization. Through the Glidecath a 6mm bi-
segmentary Amplatzer plug type IV was released but it appeared undersized and unstable. The plug was withdrawn from the outer portion. The
Glidecath 4F was exchanged over a stiff wire with a 4F 55cm-long Cook sheath with its distal tip in the pulmonary tree. A new tree segments
(or lobes) 8mm Amplatzer plug type II was released through the sheath inside the MAPCA. At completion angiography through the side arm of
the sheath the MAPCA was embolized (Fig. 4). Hemostasis was done at the femoral entry by manual compression.Fig. 4Plug release and closure
of the aortopulmonary collateral artery. Five minutes aortogram control Plug release and closure of the aortopulmonary collateral artery.
Five minutes aortogram control A chest radiogram and CT showed normalization of the vascular pattern of the right lung at 9-months follow-up
(Fig. 5).Fig. 5Chest radiogram (Panel a) and coronal multiplanar reconstruction (Panel b) of contrast-enhanced multidetector computed
tomography showing normalization of the vascular pattern of the right lung (at 9-months follow-up). Vascular plug (arrow) Chest radiogram
(Panel a) and coronal multiplanar reconstruction (Panel b) of contrast-enhanced multidetector computed tomography showing normalization of
the vascular pattern of the right lung (at 9-months follow-up). Vascular plug (arrow) No complications and no respiratory infections in the
first follow-up year were observed. A good growth gain was observed: weight 25kg, 75 percentile; height 121cm, 75 percentile. Aortopulmonary
collateral arteries are usually associated malformations in patients with severe congenital cardiac disease and reduced pulmonary blood flow
such as TOF. Neonatal pulmonary injury, hypoxia, trauma or inflammation could act as stimuli for the persistence of the collaterals in
postnatal life . Systemic arterial supply to normal lung parenchyma with regular bronchial tree, without any congenital malformations is a
rare disorder [1, 2]. The diagnosis of aortopulmonary collateral arteries in carbamazepine syndrome with non-severe congenital heart
malformations, as ventricular and atrial septal defects has not been described yet. Carbamazepine is one of the most commonly used AEDs in
Europe among women of childbearing age. Even though the vast majority of infants exposed to AEDs in utero are born healthy, AEDs remain one
of the most common potentially teratogenic agents in pregnancy. A correlation has been reported in several studies between carbamazepine and
both minor (including the term “fetal carbamazepine face” described as epicanthic folds, short nose, long philtrum, upward slanting
palpebral fissure, nail hypoplasia, front bossing, malar hypoplasia and micrognathia) and major abnormalities (cardiac malformations, neural
tube defects, urinary tract, skeletal abnormalities, and cleft lip/palate) . The exposure to AEDs during pregnancy could play a role in the
pathogenesis of aortopulmonary malformations. The aberrant vessel commonly arises from the descending thoracic aorta, from the proximal
abdominal aorta or the celiac artery. Venous drainage is always via the normal pulmonary vein. CT angiography is a useful technique for
differential diagnosis. Patients could have no symptoms for several years after birth. In adult age, hemoptysis and acute chest pain caused
by pulmonary hypertension may be present. In children it may be discovered following the incidental finding of a continuous chest murmur.
The persistence of lung overperfusion may predispose to respiratory infections, as in our case. In the past, surgery was the elective
approach to ligate an abnormal vessel. However, in recent years, the endovascular approach has replaced surgical treatment. A variety of
techniques/devices are available for percutaneous vascular occlusion. Plug embolization is a safe, fast and precise technique for the
occlusion of large vessels in young patients. Previous studies have described the feasibility of this technique in children with TOF, veno-
venous or arteriovenous collaterals in functional univentricular hearts, pulmonary atresia with a ventricular septal defect, large coronary
artery fistula to the right atrium and in preterm [1, 4]. There were no studies of interventional treatments using plug embolization of an
anomalous systemic artery in children with normal lung and non-severe congenital heart disease. There have been reports of the use of coils
to embolize MAPCA. The more frequent side of MAPCA is toward the left lobar inferior pulmonary arteries where its length and course allow
the artery to be safely filled with coils. In our case coiling was ruled out due to the straight and short course of MAPCA with high risk of
migration and nontarget embolization both distally in pulmonary arteries than proximally in aorta branches. The choice of plug was obliged.
The use of a 55cm-long 4F introducer allowed us to release a larger and safer tree segments 8mm Amplatzer plug type II. Usually the
Amplatzer plug type II requires a 6F guiding catheter to be released; the choice of a long introducer enabled us to maintain a 4F-diameter
approach without enlarging the femoral entry, which would potentially reduce hemostasis complications. MAPCAs up to 8 to 16mm of diameter
can be occluded through 4 to 6F sheaths by means of Amplatzer plug type II. Plug embolization in an aortopulmonary collateral artery is an
interesting alternative to surgery and is suitable for children with minor congenital heart disease and without severe respiratory and/or
cardiovascular symptoms. A lung segment with overperfusion may be vulnerable to respiratory infection and pulmonary hypertension. A
minimally invasive approach is the treatment of choice, if it is feasible and safe. Pediatric multidisciplinary management and follow-up is
recommended. Prenatal exposure to carbamazepine could be considered in the pathogenesis and diagnosis of the malformation. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardians for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Antiepileptic drugs Computed tomography Major aortopulmonary
collateral artery Tetralogy of Fallot Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
GP performed the pediatric surgical support and the writing of the final manuscript. VC performed the draft preparation of the manuscript
and the revision of the literature. SM performed the cardiologic pediatric support. LPM performed the interventional support and the draft
preparation of the manuscript. GL performed the interventional radiologic support. PQ performed the interventional radiologic support and
the writing of the final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We acknowledge Ghassan Nakib for pediatric surgical
support.
