Conflict of Interest: None. There are several studies on the benefits of using TNFα antagonists in the treatment of psoriasis, but few
studies addressing the interaction of these drugs with chronic infections. We report the case of a 52-year-old patient diagnosed with
psoriasis refractory to traditional systemic agents, who was treated with biologic therapies. After one year of treatment with biologic
agents, the patient was diagnosed with Chagas Disease. Long-term safety data on the use of TNF-α antagonists in psoriasis, as well as their
interaction with concurrent comorbidities are still to be properly evaluated. TNF-α agents have been associated with increased risk of
serious infections and reactivation of tuberculosis.1 Increased incidence of opportunistic infections such as cerebral toxoplasmosis and
toxoplasmic chorioretinitis have also been reported secondary to the use of Infliximab.2 Interactions with chronic infectious illnesses such
as Chagas disease (CD) have not been previously assessed. A 52-year-old man from a rural-zone in northern Chile sought our clinic in
December 2007 with a diagnosis of psoriasis established when he was 14-yearsold. He had over 80% of cutaneous involvement (PASI 20.6,
(Figure 1). He had been treated with methotrexate, PUVA and acitretin with limited response. Chest radiography and PPD test were both within
normal limits and we decided to start Etanercept 25 mg twice a week, subsequently titrated to 50 mg achieving only partial response. After
five months, the patient was switched to adalimumab with significant improvement. A: Patient before treatment with adalimumab. B: after
treatment with adalimumab Additionally, he referred a 5-year history of progressive constipation with poor response to laxatives. In August
2009 he underwent surgery due to megacolon (Figure 2). Histology was consistent with chagasic megacolon. The patient had not been previously
diagnosed with Chagas disease (CD), but he most likely had it since childhood. Biologic therapy was subsequently discontinued while the
extent of CD was assessed. Abdominal X-ray examination with Barium enema. Note the dilatation of the sigmoid colon Indirect
immunofluorescence (IIF) IgG, qualitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and real-time polymerase chain reaction (rtPCR, Chart 1) were
performed in order to investigate Trypanosoma cruzi. Esophageal involvement was evaluated with barium swallow and cardiac involvement was
explored with electrocardiogram and echocardiogram, all of which were normal. Specific therapy for CD was initiated with 5-nitrofuran 5
mg/kg/day and increased to 7 mg/kg/day for a 60-day-regimen on two occasions (August 2009 and May 2010 due to an alteration in the
parasitemia dynamics). Parasitological study and follow-up of the patient Captions: IIF: indirect immunofluorescence; PCR: polymerase chain
reaction; PUC: Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile; ISP: Instituto de Salud Pública de Chile Meanwhile, the patient's psoriatic lesions
recurred, dramatically affecting his quality of life. The patient requested to have biologic therapy restarted. Potential adverse effects
were carefully explained and discussed with him. The patient was prescribed adalimumab 40 mg twice a month with excellent response (PASI
2.1, Figure 1) without evidence of CD reactivation as indicated by a non-reactive rtPCR after one-year follow-up. Trypanosoma cruzi
infection is a vectorial parasitic zoonosis caused by a hemoflagellate organism.3 The infection, known to be highly burdensome, is
classified as a Neglected Tropical Disease that affects people in extreme poverty and helps to perpetuate their impoverishment.4 Twenty-
percent of Latin American inhabitants (109 million individuals) are at risk of acquiring the infection, with 7.7 million individuals
infected in 2005.3,5,6 In Chile, there isn't enough information on the disease, however 0.4 - 0.7% of blood donors test positive for T.
cruzi.7 With the advent of traveling and migration, the disease is not only restricted to endemic areas but it is spread worldwide, making
the knowledge on CD mandatory to all physicians and not only those living in the Americas. 3 The effects of immunomodulatory drugs on T.
cruzi parasitemia dynamics and CD course in humans are not known, with only experimental evidence available from animal models with
contradictory results.8-10 Some studies demonstrated myocardial tissue alteration in Chagasic hamsters, with decrease in left ventricular
systolic function, increase in IL-10-mRNA expression and an increase in the subendocardium inflammatory foci.8 Other reports have shown even
a decrease in the myocardial inflammatory foci and myocarditis in animals treated with TNFα antagonists and a down regulation of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells in cardiac tissue, keeping the expression of normal cardiac proteins like connexin-43, which is reduced and disorganized in
untreated infected mice.9,10 The most likely explanation is that TNFα in CD may act as a pro-inflammatory cytokine, inducing target-organ
damage secondary to the recruitment and chemotaxis of neutrophils, lymphocytes and macrophages, thereby maintaining tissue inflammation.8-10
Conversely, TNFα may aid in containing T. cruzi infection and thus help maintaining low serologic levels of the hemoflagellate organism,
leading to a complex interaction between the host and the agent. T. cruzi parasitemia did not change subsequent to anti-TNF administration
in any of these studies.8-10 Similarly, strict follow-up with rtPCR studies did not show any evidence of reactivation of CD with the use of
etanercept or adalimumab in our patient. The detection of 1000 copies of T.cruzi DNA in the rtP-CR performed in May 2010 represents a very
low level and could be explained by the natural fluctuation of T. cruzi parasitemia (or parasitemia dynamics) 11 since this change occurred
while the patient was off biologic therapies. This alteration in parasitemia responded well to an additional course of 5-nitrofuran, and the
rtPCRs performed in December 2010 and May 2011 were negative for T.cruzi DNA despite the patient being on anti-TNF therapy since May 2010.
The possibility that Chagas megacolon was triggered in our patient by our initial TNFα-antagonist therapy seems very unlikely, as the mean
time of development of this chronic complication is namely 20 - 30 years. Anti-TNF drugs' safety profiles and their use in patients with
chronic infections such as CD are still undergoing long-term evaluation. This issue is of particular concern given the increasing prevalence
of biologic therapy for multiple inflammatory disorders worldwide and the potential for their use in patients with unknown concurrent
chronic infections such as CD.3 Screening recommendations for certain chronic infections prior to biologic therapy initiation have already
been published and they include testing for hepatitis and tuberculosis at baseline.1 Screening for additional infectious diseases are not
included in these guidelines. Lassoued et al postulated performing Toxoplasma serology as an initial workup, prior to the starting of anti-
TNFα therapy.2 Screening for hepatitis B virus is also part of the initial workup due to known cases of HBV reactivation and even death
secondary to anti-TNF therapy.12 Furthermore, we suggest adding CD serology to initial screening studies1 before starting biologic therapies
in CD endemic areas. This would allow a full treatment course with 5-nitrofuran prior to anti-TNF therapy, similar to concurrent HBV
infection or TB infection. It would reduce and prevent an unknown but potential risk of CD reactivation, as occurs in 20% of HIV patients
with severe meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, high parasitemia levels and even death (work up is listed in chart 2).13,14 Suggested work-up
for patients in endemic areas (or who are traveling/ have traveled to them) planning to start biologic therapies. Treatment could be
performed with Nifurtimox or Benzimidazole but not with both. Captions: IIF: indirect immunofluorescence Recently, T. cruzi serology was
added as a screening tool in all patients who are candidates to solid organ transplants (unpublished data, observation of MT). A consensus
on guidelines for biologic therapy in the presence of CD has yet to be established and it would aid physicians in the initial workup of
patients, in order to offer the highest safety and risk-benefit profiles to patients. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article:
Navarrete-Dechent C, Majerson D, Torres M, Armijo D, Patel M, Menter A, de la Cruz C. Use of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) antagonists
in a patient with psoriasis and Chagas disease. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(3 Supl 1):S171-4. Work performed at the Department of Dermatology,
Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile - Santiago, Chile.
