Conflict of Interest: None. Proliferating pilomatricoma is proliferative, rare tumor variant of pilomatricoma. It is a benign neoplasm of
hair matrix that can have potentially involve local recurrence. We report the case of a 60-year-old man who presented an asymptomatic nodule
on the scalp. Histological exam demonstrated a basaloid epithelium at the periphery, filled with eosinophilic cornified material containing
shadow cells. The tumor was excised and there was no evidence of recurrence one year later. Proliferating pilomatricoma (PP) is a
proliferative variant of pilomatricoma, first described by Kaddu S. et al in 1997. 1,2 It is considered a benign tumor, but local recurrence
may occur if excision is incomplete. Very few cases of this rare neoplasm have been reported in the world. However, to the best of our
knowledge, no case had previously been described in Brazil. We report a case of PP in the scalp without evidence of local recurrence one
year after surgical treatment. A 60-year-old Caucasian male hada had a three-year history of an asymptomatic nodular mass on the right
temporal region of scalp. The patient reported gradual enlargement, but that quickly increased this size in the previous two months.
Dermatological examination revealed the firm mass, red, painless mass, measuring about 7cm x 3.5 cm, near the right supra-auricular area
(Figure 1). The regional lymph nodes were not enlarged. Firm, red, nodular mass on the right temporal region of the scalp Macroscopic
examination: the tumor was well-circumscribed, nodular, dull white, surrounded by slightly compressed fibrous tissues, measuring about 6 x 3
x 2.3 cm (Figure 2). Macroscopic examination: well-circumscribed, nodular, dull white, surrounded by slightly compressed fibrous tissues
Microscopic examination: lesion predominantly composed of a lobular proliferation of basaloid epithelium at the periphery, filled with
eosinophilic cornified material and shadow cells (Figures 3, 4 and 5). Lesion lined by a basaloid epithelium at the periphery, filled with
eosinophilic cornified material and shadow cells (HE 200x) Lesion with area of basaloid cells with mitotic figures (HE 400x) Detail of the
cornified material and shadow cells with fibrotic stroma (HE 400x) Proliferating pilomatricoma (PP) was diagnosed based on clinical and
histopathological findings. Pilomatricoma or calcifying epithelioma of Malherb (CEM), first described in 1880 by Malherb and Chenantais,
represents approximately 1% of all benign skin tumors and it is the second most common cutaneous neoplasm in childhood and youth. It is a
slow-growing, firm, dermal or subcutaneous neoplasm, usually measuring under 3 cm in diameter. Pilomatricomas are considered benign and
rarely recur after surgical excision. 3-7 However, cases of CEM with a tendency for focal invasiveness and local recurrence have been
reported and designated firstly as aggressive pilomatricomas. 1,2 In 1997 Kadduet al. examined retrospectively cases of CEM and found
instances of unusual, architectural, histopathologic features. On clinical examination, most patients were elderly individuals; the lesions
were found to be painless, dome- shaped, solitary, painless, medium- to large-sized nodules on the head and neck regions. Histopathological
evaluation revealed relatively large lesions predominantly composed of a lobular proliferations of basaloid cells, exhibiting variable
nuclear atypia and mitotic figures, focal areas containing eosinophilic, cornified material, along with shadow cells. Proliferating
pilomatricoma was proposed by these authors as a histopathologically distinctive subset of pilomatricoma and it was considered a
proliferative variant of CEM.1,2 Kadduet al. considered PP a benign tumor because of a histopathological profile that implied benignancy:
relative symmetry, sharp circumscription, lack of ulceration in the majority of cases, a fibrous tissue arranged compactly around the
neoplasm, and lack of perineural or intravascular involvement by basaloid cells. 1 Current incidence and prevalence is unknown due to the
low number of cases reported.1 However, Satohet al.1 compiled the available clinical data from all previously reported cases. Although it
was a small series, some aspects are nevertheless noticeable and some clinical information was highlighted: there were 7 males and 8 females
(men and women are almost equally affected); patients appeared to be older than those with classical pilomatricoma (ranging from 18 to 88
years); the lesions measured 1.5 to 5.5 cm in diameter, typically larger than in classical CEM (0.5-1.6 cm); nodules situated mostly on the
head and neck. Our case entailed the afore mentioned clinical aspects. Differential diagnoses for PP include: basal-cell carcinoma,
epidermal cyst, pyogenic granuloma, other neoplasms with metrical differentiation, and matrical carcinoma (pilomatrix carcinoma). 2,8-10
Malignant transformation of CEM in to a pilomatrix carcinoma should be suspected in cases with repeated local recurrences. 5,10 Hence,
theorically, PP may develop in to pilomatrix carcinoma. The treatment of choice for PP is complete surgical lesion resection, as in the
present case. 1 The lesion was removed with a 3-mm margin. Local recurrence may occur if excision is incomplete. 1,2 Our patient showed no
signs of local recurrence one year after the excision (Figure 6). Patient showing no evidence of local recurrence one year after surgical
treatment Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Kondo RN, Pontello Junior R, Belinetti FM, Cilião C, Vasconcellos VRB, Grimald
DM. Proliferating pilomatricoma - Case report. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1):S94-6. Work performed at the Serviço de Dermatologia do
Hospital Universitário Regional do Norte do Paraná da Universidade Estadual de Londrina (HU-UEL)- Paraná (PR), Brazil.
