Conflict of Interest: None. We report the case of a 38-year-old man, who developed cutaneous metastases in the left inguinal groove 15 years
after curative gastrectomy for advanced gastric adenocarcinoma. Histopathologic examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma
cells. They were stained positive for villin, CDX-2, CKpan (AE1/ AE3), CEA, CK8/18, CK19, CK7, EMA, Ki-67 (50%), and negative for S-100,
CK20, CD34, GCDFP-15 and TTF-1. The patient underwent local excision, after the presence of other metastases was excluded. Nevertheless,
local recurrence developed at the surgical bed one year later and PET/CT revealed metastases to lymph nodes, bone and skin. He died 2 years
after the appearance of cutaneous metastases. We have reviewed the literature and described the immunohistochemical characteristics of
cutaneous metastases from gastric adenocarcinoma. Gastric adenocarcinoma (ADC) is one of the most common causes of cancer deaths around the
world. Cutaneous metastases from gastric ADC are rare, and generally occur at a very end-stage in the course of disease. We report an
extraordinary case of a young man with gastric ADC, who developed cutaneous metastases in the left inguinal groove 15 years after
gastrectomy. To our knowledge, this case represents the longest interval from gastric ADC to cutaneous metastases after curative
gastrectomy. A 38-year-old man complained of a rash and subcutaneous nodules over the inguinal groove in March 2011. He had been previously
diagnosed with poorly differentiated gastric ADC and underwent total gastrectomy in May 1997, followed by subsequent adjuvant chemotherapy
using cisplatin and etoposide for 2 years. Periodical gastroscopy examination did not reveal abnormalities after surgery in the following
years. Physical examination showed multiple, reddish-colored, fixed nodules, measuring between 0.5 and 3cm in diameter in the left inguinal
groove area (Figure 1). Moreover, there were palpable enlarged lymph nodes in the left groin. Histopathological examination revealed tumor
cells with hyper-chromatic nuclei, numerous mitoses and prominent ductal formation, consistent with adenocarcinoma, and tumor nests
extending from the epidermis into the dermis (Figure 2). Immunohistochemical examination showed that these cells were positive for
cytokeratin pan (CKpan), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), villin, CK8/18, caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX-2), Ki-67 (50%),
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CK7, CK19, but negative for S-100 protein, CK20, GCDFP-15, TTF-1, CD34 (Figure 3). Examination with
18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed lymph node metastases and skin
metastases in the left inguinal groove. The nodules were surgically removed and inguinal lymph nodes were cleared. He was prescribed
chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil in combination with paclitaxel for four cycles, and paclitaxel plus capecitabine for two cycles. However,
there were red papules again on the former surgical bed in October 2012. Also, the patient reported bone pain bilaterally over the knees and
hip joints. PET/CT revealed multiple areas of focal activity on the femur, vertebral column and ribs. The Radiotherapy Department used
stereotactic radiosurgery with total irradiated dose (TD) of 33Gy/3 fractions (fx) with 75% isodose line. The patient's pain caused by bone
metastases subsided. Nonetheless, chemotherapy did not improve his general condition, skin nodules persisted, and he died in December 2013.
Multiple, reddish-colored, fi xed nodules, measuring between 0.5 and 3cm in diameter in the left inguinal groove area Histopathological
examination revealed that tumor cells had hyperchromatic nuclei, numerous mitoses and prominent ductal formation, consistent with
adenocarcinoma, and tumor nests extended from the epidermis into the dermis. (A HE×100, B HE×400) Immunohistochemistry of cutaneous
metastasis from gastric adenocarcinoma. (100×): (A) CDX-2, (B) CKpan, (C) CK19, (D) CD8/18, (E) CK7, (F) EMA, (G) villin, (H) Ki-67, (I)
CKpan (J) CEA Gastric ADC usually metastasizes to the liver, peritoneal cavity and regional lymph nodes. Cutaneous metastases are rare,
developing in less than 5% of gastric ADC patients. Cutaneous metastases may be the first presentation of such malignancies, or occur during
follow-up.1,2 They usually manifest as solitary or multiple red or violaceous dermal or subcutaneous painless nodules, and may also appear
as cellulitis-like or erysipelas-like erythematous plaques.2-4 This case is remarkable for several reasons. Firstly, it is noteworthy for
the rarity and the unusual cutaneous metastases localization in the left inguinal groove. Most cutaneous metastases usually derive from
breast cancer (18.6%-50%) in females or lung cancer (3%-7.5%) in males, with gastric ADC accounting for only 6% of all skin metastases.3
Cutaneous metastases from gastric ADC usually develop on the abdominal skin, including the umbilicus (sister Mary Joseph nodule). Less
common sites have also been reported such as face, scalp, breast, eyelids, dorsal area, neck, extremities and palms. 3,5-8 Inguinal groove
metastases, however, are rare. Tumor cells metastasize to skin through several routes, including direct invasion from underlying structures,
extension and embolization through lymphatic and blood vessels, and accidental implantation during surgery. Secondly, the patient presented
long-term survival and tumor-free survival after surgery. Gastric cancer is a disease with high mortality rate. This case represents, to our
knowledge, the longest interval from primary cancer to cutaneous metastases after curative gastrectomy. Cutaneous metastases from gastric
ADC are considered to be a predictor of poor prognosis. Therefore, cutaneous metastases must be distinguished from primary cutaneous
carcinoma, which is critical for clinical diagnosis and outcome assessment. Histologic phenotype is a crucial feature in the diagnosis of
cutaneous metastases, as it is similar to that of the primary tumor. The primary gastric specimen of our patient was unavailable, because
the resection had been done too long ago and the sample was not saved. According to literature review, we found that tumors from gastric
origin are distinguished by the expression of some adenoepithelial and/or gastrointestinal markers including Ckpan (AE1/AE3), CK7, CK8/18,
CK19, CEA, CDX-2 or EMA, which were all positive in our case (Table1).1,2,5-10 The clinical history is usually helpful. Therefore, we
diagnosed this patient with cutaneous metastases from gastric adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical characteristics of cutaneous metastases
from gastric ADC in currently available reports Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Liu F, Yan WL, Liu H, Zhang M, Sang H.
Cutaneous metastases from gastric adenocarcinoma 15 years after curative gastrectomy. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1): S46-50. Work
performed at the Department of Dermatology, Jinling Hospital affi liated to Nanjing University School of Medicine - Nanjing, China.
