Aspergillus tracheobronchitis (ATB) represents a rare disease entity accounting for 3.5% to 5.0% of cases of invasive aspergillosis.
Particularly, mass-forming ATB is extremely rare, and clinical reports are limited. Given that the patency of the trachea and bronchi are
essential for maintaining sufficient airflow, a central airway mass originating from an Aspergillus infection is likely to be associated
with severe clinical manifestations and fatal outcomes. Although several therapeutic options for ATB have been suggested, including
medication and airway interventions, the optimal choice of treatment in diverse clinical conditions remains under discussion. We report a
case of ATB that initially manifested as severe dyspnea and total atelectasis of the left lung in a patient with newly detected diabetes.
Radiographic study, bronchoscopy, and pathologic findings of the lesion revealed mass-forming type of ATB. Interestingly, our patient's
symptoms dramatically resolved with voriconazole without further invasive intervention. This clinical experience highlights the beneficial
role of voriconazole in the treatment of rare and potentially fatal cases of ATB. Aspergillus tracheobronchitis (ATB) refers to a unique
type of Aspergillus-associated pulmonary disease in which the trachea and bronchi may be the main or even sole site of infection.1 ATB
represents a rare disease entity accounting for only 3.5% to 5.0% of all cases of invasive aspergillosis and is known to occur primarily in
immunocompromised hosts.1,2 Furthermore, 1 report indicated that ATB leads to devastating clinical outcomes with a mortality rate of up to
84% in severe immunocompromised hosts.3 To aid characterization and early diagnosis of ATB, there are several classification systems based
on bronchoscopic findings with histologic data and depth of invasion (eg, obstructive, ulcerative, and pseudomembranous ATB by Denning;4
superficial infiltration, full-layer involvement, occlusion, and mixed type by Wu et al).5 However, it is difficult to characterize various
types of tracheobronchial involvement into a uniform system. Moreover, diverse clinical manifestations and the rarity of ATB render its
diagnosis quite difficult. In particular, mass-forming types of ATB may not fit clearly into the suggested ATB classification systems, and
to the best of our knowledge only 2 cases of mass-forming ATB have been reported to date.6,7 Given that the patency of the trachea and
bronchi are essential for maintaining sufficient airflow, a central airway mass containing Aspergillus is likely to be associated with
severe clinical manifestations and fatal outcomes. For example, symptoms in these patients involve severe dyspnea and/or wheezing.6,7
Herein, we report a case of ATB that initially manifested as severe dyspnea and total atelectasis of the left lung in a patient with newly
detected diabetes. Radiographic study, bronchoscopy, and pathologic findings of the lesion led to a diagnosis of mass-forming ATB.
Interestingly, the obstructing lesion dramatically resolved with voriconazole without further invasive interventions. A 31-year-old man with
no past history of known medical illnesses was admitted to our emergency department because of severe dyspnea and accompanying tachypnea (30
breaths per minute). The patient had never smoked and had no previous history of allergic diseases. On physical examination, there was
dullness over the left lung field, and decreased breath sounds on the left lung heard on auscultation. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in
the body. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed PO2 80.3 mmHg, PCO2 33.1 mmHg, pH 7.46, and SaO2 96.5%. Laboratory data showed that
platelets, white blood cells, and differential cell counts were within the normal range. The patient's erythrocyte sedimentation rate was
70 mm/hour (reference range: 0–9 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein was 27.75 mg/L (reference range: 0–5 mg/L), which together indicated an
underlying inflammatory process. Notably, urine glucose was 4+ and HbA1c was 19.4%, confirming underlying diabetes mellitus. On imaging
studies, chest radiographs showed total opacification of the left lung (Figure 1A). Subsequently, chest computed tomography (CT) revealed
total atelectasis of the left lung and a mass-forming lesion at the distal trachea (Figure 1B, white arrow). However, simultaneous
mediastinal or hilar lymphadenopathy was not detected. Examination of the lesion with bronchoscopy revealed an erythematous, swollen, and
soft mass approximately 4 cm above the carina (Figure 1C). We subsequently performed transtracheal biopsy of the lesion; however, we were
unable to obtain enough tissue for culture due to the severe clinical condition of the patient during bronchoscopic examination. Bronchial
washing culture revealed no microorganisms; however, upon histopathologic examination using Grocott-Gomori's methenamine silver staining
(Figure 2A, black arrows), invasion of the tracheal cartilage by septate hyphae was observed (Figure 2B, black arrows). In addition,
numerous inflammatory cells were recruited to the adjacent tracheal epithelium (Figure 2B, inset box). The invading hyphae exhibited acute
angle branching patterns, indicating possible infection with an Aspergillus species. Based on these findings, a presumptive diagnosis of ATB
was established. (A) Chest X-ray demonstrating total opacity of the left lung. (B) Coronal view computed tomography (CT) scan showing a
mass-forming lesion (white arrow) and total atelectasis of the left lung. (C) Bronchoscopic examination at the distal trachea revealed an
erythematous, swollen, and soft mass. The initial attempt of bronchoscopic biopsy caused bleeding as shown in the figure. (A) A
transbronchial biopsy of the lesion showing Aspergillus species with acute angle branching and septate hyphae (black arrows) (GMS, ×400).
(B) Biopsy showing deep invasion of Aspergillus hyphae into tracheal cartilage (black arrows) and various inflammatory cells infiltrations
(H&E, ×100); inset shows a higher magnification of infiltration of inflammatory cells (H&E, ×200). (C, D) A follow-up bronchoscopic
examination and CT scan on the 19th day of medication revealed successful resolution of the lesion. GMS = Grocott-Gomori's methenamine
silver, H&E = hematoxylin and eosin. During the bronchoscopic examination, we attempted to perform debridement of the lesion via
bronchoscopy to maintain airway patency. However, the patient's clinical condition and respiratory symptoms worsened after bronchoscopy
necessitating endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation (oxygen saturation was 74.8% in spite of maximal degree of supplementary
oxygen). Moreover, the likelihood of procedure-associated adverse events (eg, bronchoesophageal fistula) was substantially high considering
the severity of the pathologic findings including deep invasion of the Aspergillus species into the cartilage wall and the presence of
uncontrolled diabetes. Thus, we decided to treat the patient with voriconazole. On the first day of treatment, 6 mg/kg of voriconazole was
administered intravenously for every 12 hours as a loading dose, which was then switched to 400 mg/day of oral voriconazole as a maintenance
dose according to the guidelines for treating invasive aspergillosis.8 After treatment with voriconazole, the respiratory symptoms of the
patient gradually improved without additional invasive management. On the 19th day of medication, follow-up CT and bronchoscopy showed
successful resolution of the lesion (Figure 2C, D). After a month of admission, the patient was discharged without any respiratory sequelae.
The patient was treated with voriconazole for a total of 10 weeks, and there has been no evidence of recurrence of disease in this patient
at the time of this publication. Here, we report a rare and severe case of ATB that occurred in a young patient with newly detected diabetes
but without severe immune suppression. The patient suffered from dyspnea owing to an obstructive mass in the distal trachea coinciding with
total atelectasis of the left lung. Subsequent examinations revealed that the lesion was an extremely rare type of ATB, namely, mass-forming
ATB. Although clinical symptoms of the patient required urgent therapeutic intervention, the possibility of intervention-associated
complications was considerably high due to the extensive invasion of ATB into the tracheal cartilage and to the presence of uncontrolled
diabetes. Therefore, we chose monotherapy with voriconazole. Interestingly, signs and symptoms of respiratory illness in the patient
gradually improved, and the lesion successfully resolved based on follow-up images 19 days after treatment with voriconazole. In general,
immunocompromised patients are usually associated with poor prognoses. Several previous reports have suggested that the immune status of
patients with mass-forming ATB is not uniform. For example, Routsi et al6 reported a mass-forming type of ATB in an immunocompromised
patient who took chemotherapy for erythroleukemia whereas another study reported that a relatively immunocompetent patient with well
controlled diabetes mellitus experienced mass-forming ATB.7 The symptoms of the patient in this study were devastating with subsequent
respiratory failure, but the patient's immune system was not severely impaired. The spectrum of the initial clinical manifestations and the
underlying immune status of our patient made establishing an appropriate therapeutic strategy quite difficult. Interestingly, the patient
showed dramatic therapeutic response to voriconazole after treatment for 19 days, with the ATB resolved completely thereafter. This outcome
was in contrast to a previous report on ATB, where antifungal treatment lasting approximately 4 to 19 months was required to achieve
complete resolution on chest CT.9 Based on our experience, monotherapy with voriconazole appears to have a beneficial role even in treating
rare and severe types of ATB. Although the reason for mass formation in ATB is not clearly understood, intact immune responses in the host
appear to influence mass development partly through the accumulation of various inflammatory cells as depicted in the pathologic examination
of a previous case.7 Similarly, the pathologic examination of our case also showed prominent infiltration of various inflammatory cells.
Moreover, our patient had newly detected diabetes with a high level of HbA1c (19.4%) before the onset of evident metabolic decompensation.
Considering the impact of hyperglycemia in the immune system (eg, impairment of transmigration and chemotaxis of neutrophils, decrease of
their bactericidal activity, decrease of response to antigens of CD4+ cells, and unnecessary glycosylation of antibodies),10 the gradual
decrease in the competence of immune system likely affords sufficient time for mass formation following Aspergillus infection. In the same
context, the relatively well preserved immune system in our patient may have played an important role in the dramatic response to
voriconazole. In this report, we describe a case of mass-forming ATB that presented with disastrous respiratory signs and symptoms that
required immediate airway management. However, considering the significantly high possibilities of procedure-associated complications, we
decided to treat with voriconazole without further interventions. Surprisingly, the patient's respiratory symptoms were successfully
improved with voriconazole. This clinical experience suggests that medication with voriconazole may be an effective therapeutic option in
rare and severe ATB patients who are not candidates for invasive airway procedures. The Institutional Review Board of Chonbuk National
University Hospital stated that it was not necessary to achieve IRB approval for this case report, but that patient consent was required as
the study dealt only with retrospective use of the patient's medical record and related images. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient prior to the publication of this case report and accompanying images. The authors thank Professor Mie-Jae Im for critical
reading of the manuscript and Peter Lee for correction of grammatical errors. This work was supported by the Korea Healthcare Technology R&D
Project, Ministry for Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (Grant A121931), by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2014R1A2A1A01002823), and by the fund of
Biomedical Research Institute, Chonbuk National University Hospital. This study was performed under a project entitled “Medical school
students training program: Dream of being a Nobel Prize Winner,” part of the Research Center for Pulmonary Disorders, Chonbuk National
University Medical School and Research Institute of Clinical Medicine of Chonbuk National University-Biomedical Research Institute of
Chonbuk National University Hospital. Abbreviations: ATB = Aspergillus tracheobronchitis = CT, computed tomography. DSK, JSJ, and SRK are
contributed equally to this work. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
