Conflict of Interest: None. We report the case of a 35-year-old woman with deep-red asymptomatic macules on the plantar and dorsal skin of
the right great toe. Histopathologic fi ndings were compatible with Angioma serpiginosum. Immunohistochemical stains for estrogens and
progesterone receptors were negative. Dermoscopy showed an erythematous parallel ridge pattern with double rows of irregular dots and
globules. We report an unusual case of angioma serpiginosum with acral volar skin involvement. The dermoscopic features described may aid in
the diagnosis of AS in this specifi c skin area. Acral volar skin involvement must be included in the clinical spectrum of Angioma
serpiginosum and in the differential diagnosis of acral vascular lesions. Clinical features of angioma serpiginosum (AS) are patches that
consist of multiple, small, asymptomatic, non-palpable, deep-red to purple punctate macules organized in small clusters and sheets. The
lesions enlarge peripherally and their extension may produce a serpiginous pattern. The extremities are most commonly affected, initially
with a unilateral distribution. Palms, soles and mucous membranes are usually not involved.1 A 35-year-old woman was referred to our
dermatology department for assessment of asymptomatic erythematous skin lesions that had involved the right foot in the previous 5 years.
She noted that the lesions had spread from the sole to right great toe during the last year. The patient's and family medical history were
unremarkable. Dermatologic examination revealed deep-red macules, with persistence of purple-coloured punctate under diascopy on the right
sole (Figure 1A). On the dorsum of the right great toe, a deep-red punctate was observed (Figure 1B). In the acral volar skin, the
dermoscopy showed an erythematous parallel ridge pattern with an irregular globular component. The red bands were composed of reddish rows
of dots and globules arranged in a double line, and the openings of the acrosiringia were not affected (Figure 2). On the dorsum of the
great toe, the dermoscopy showed small, sharply demarcated red lagoons. Blood analysis and foot x-rays were normal. Histopathologic
examination revealed multiple areas of glomerulated proliferation of dilated capillaries in the papillary dermis (Figure 3A). The
immunohistochemical stains for estrogens and progesterone receptors were negative (Figure 3B). Findings were consistent with the diagnosis
of AS. The patient refused any treatment and therefore, we decided to monitor the lesion. A. Clinical features. Deep-red macules, with
purple-coloured punctuate macules on the right sole. B. Clinical features. Deep-red punctuate macules with a serpiginosum pattern are
observed on the dorsum of the right great toe Dermoscopy shows an erythematous parallel ridge pattern with an irregular globular component.
The red bands are compose of reddish rows of dots and globules arranged in a double line, and the openings of the acrosiringia are not
affected A. Multiple areas of glomerulated proliferation of dilated capillaries in the superfi cial dermis of the acral skin (H&E x 100).
Inset: glomerulated proliferation of dilated capillaries. B. Negativity of the immunohistochemical stains for estrogens and progesterone
receptors (magnifi cation × 400) AS is an unusual vascular disorder that typically affects female patients and classically begins in
childhood, rarely showing partial or complete regression. It is characterized by multiple, small, asymptomatic, non-palpable, deep-red
punctate macules organized in small clusters and sheets. The arrangement and extension of the lesions may produce a serpiginous pattern and
it rarely affects acral volar skin.1 A case of AS presenting in an asymmetric, systematized, segmental pattern was reported. This pattern
may reflect cutaneous mosaicism and it has been suggested that AS might be best categorized as a vascular nevus.2 However, AS is widely
accepted as a capillary malformation with endotelial proliferation and differentiation.3 The female predominance, the onset in adolescence
and the rapid progression of AS during pregnancy have been implicated as indirect evidence of estrogen dependence.4 In our case,
immunhistochemical analysis revealed the absence of estrogen and progesterone receptors, as found in others studies, suggesting that there
is no hormonal stimulus in the pathogenesis of AS.5,6 There are only a few case reports of AS with extensive cutaneous involvement, and some
of these have described extensive involvement of the extremities but have not specified any acral volar skin lesions. 7,8 We found two cases
with clear acral volar skin involvement in the literature review and both cases compromised the plantar area (Table 1).6,9 These cases
shared histopathological features and clinical progression with our patient's case. Angioma serpiginosum with acral skin involvement Our
case. Many dermoscopic patterns have been reported in vascular disorders and some of these are useful for differential diagnosis. The
dermoscopy of AS has been described as numerous, small, and relatively well-demarcated round to oval red dots and globules. 10 These red
lagoons in AS reflect the superficial distribution of dilated capillaries in the papillary dermis. To our knowledge, the dermoscopy pattern
s of AS affecting acral skin have not been previously described. In our case, the dermoscopy revealed an erythematous parallel ridge pattern
with an irregular globular component. The red bands were composed of red rows of dots and globules arranged in a double line, with no
involvement of acrosyringia openings. This dermoscopy pattern could be correlated with the glomerulated proliferation of dilated capillaries
observed in the papillary dermis. In conclusion, we report an unusual case of AS with a late plantar onset. The clinical features,
progression of the lesions and histopathologic findings confirmed the diagnosis in our patient. The dermoscopic pattern described in the
acral skin may aid in the diagnosis of AS in this particular skin area. Acral skin involvement should be included in the clinical spectrum
of AS and in the differential diagnosis of acral skin vascular lesions. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Freites-Martinez
A, Martinez-Sanchez D, Moreno-Torres A, Huerta-Brogeras M, Hernández-Núñez A, Borbujo J. Angioma serpiginosum: report of an unusual acral
case and review of the literature. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(3 Suppl 1):S26-8. Study conducted at the University Hospital of Fuenlabrada -
Madrid, Spain.
