Conflict of Interest: None. The microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a rare, locally aggressive malignant adnexal neoplasm associated with
signifi cant morbidity. It is often underdiagnosed due to clinical and histopathological resemblance with other cutaneous neoplasms and / or
a combination of lack of familiarity associated with inadequate samples. We report a case with clinical hypothesis of scarring alopecia and
histopathological diagnosis of microcystic adnexal carcinoma with favorable outcome in a follow-up of eleven years, after surgical
treatment. Adnexal cutaneous tumors represent a diverse and broad spectrum of tumors originated from hair, sebaceous glands, apocrine and
eccrine glands, encompassing numerous subgroups of both benign and malignant appendicular neoplastic processes.1 Microcystic Adnexal
Carcinoma (MAC) is a malignant adnexal cutaneous neoplasm, rare, with follicular differentiation, indolent, locally aggressive, of invasive
pattern and destructive, rarely evolving with metastases and easily mistaken, clinically and histologically, for other cutaneous neoplasms,
both benign and malignant.1 Due to its innocuous clinical appearance and slow progression, a delay between onset of lesion and diagnosis is
frequently observed. 2 We present a clinical case of MAC with initial diagnostic hypothesis of scarring alopecia. Female patient, white, 67
years old, presenting a whitish hardened plaque, with a smooth and shiny surface, without hairs, painless and measuring about 5 cm in
diameter in the occipital region (Figure 1). Such findings led to a clinical hypothesis of scarring alopecia. Initially, the
histopathological report of the fragment obtained by punch biopsy was a neoplastic process of epithelial lineage, infiltrative and with
syringomatoid differentiation.3 Later, histopathology of the surgical piece, after augmented excision of the tumor, revealed an infiltrative
neoplastic process with areas of syringomatoid differentiation and areas of follicular differentiation, suggesting low degree Microcystic
Adnexal Carcinoma infiltrating dermis and hypodermis, with compromised surgical margins (Figures 2, 3 and 4). A third augmented excision,
with the confection of cutaneous flap, was performed and it still presented residual neoplasm, although with free surgical margins. A fourth
reparative surgery was necessary for the reconstitution of extensive and deep losses of tissue in the scalp, with bone exposure resulting
from previous augmented resection of the tumor. Postoperative evolution was satisfactory and the patient remains asymptomatic, without
relapse of the disease in eleven years of clinical follow-up. Hardened plaque with smooth and shiny surface, without hairs, measuring 5 cm
in diameter located in the occipital region Nodular aggregates and epithelial cell cords associated with corneal microcysts in the most
superfi cial dermis. H&E 100X Cell aggregates and epithelial cords, surrounded by dense fi brous stroma, infi ltrating the deep dermis and
subcutaneous cell tissue. Observe the absence of pilosebaceous units. H&E 40X Infi ltrative pattern, dense fi brous stroma and absence of
nuclear pleomorphism. Observe the syringomatoid aspect, hence the synonymy “syringomatous carcinoma” H&E 100X The study of epidemiological
characteristics and natural history of MAC is difficult in light of the rarity of this neoplasm.3 It predominates in females and usually
manifests itself between the 4th and 6th decade of life, although there are reports of occurrences in children. 4,5 It occurs more
frequently in white patients, being rare in blacks. It demonstrates predilection for the head, particularly the periorbital and nasolabial
regions. 3 Lesions on the neck, scalp and orbit are rare.6,7 Its etiology is unknown, with evidences that therapeutic cutaneous irradiation,
UV radiation and immunodeficiency are predisposing factors.4 The typical clinical presentation is a plaque or a poorly-defined and hardened
nodule, solitary, skin colored to yellowish, smooth surface, rarely ulcerated, of slow growth and usually painless, measuring 0.5 to 2 cm,
but reaching up to 12 cm in its largest diameter. 2 In general it is asymptomatic, but it can manifest pain, burning, stinging sensation,
anesthesia or paresthesia arising from perineural invasion. It is locally aggressive, with potential of tissue destruction; metastases have
been reported.3,6 Histologically it is infiltrative and poorly defined, presenting glandular and follicular differentiation. Cords and nests
of squamous and basal cells of benign aspect as well as keratocysts are observed in the papillar and medium dermis. As it invades the
reticular dermis it presents ductal structures similar to glands, covered by one to two layers of flat or cuboidal cells, with penetration
of perineural spaces, skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. The stroma is dense, fibrous and of sclerotic appearance in infiltrative areas. 7
Nests and ductal structures may present appendages similar to tadpole tails, seen in the syringoma and in the desmoplastic
trichoepithelioma. Eccrine glandular differentiation is more common, but apocrine differentiation may also occur.7 Cytologic atypia and
mitoses are rare, being frequent in recurrent tumors, which is probably associated with a more aggressive biological behavior.8 The
immunohistochemical pattern consists in the expression of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and cytokeratin
cocktail (AE1/AE3), sustaining follicular and eccrine differentiation. Backing the follicular differentiation, the tumor expresses hard
cytokeratin (AE13 and AE14).7,8 It presents a low proliferation index in immunolabeling with MIB.1,9 Occasionally there is immunoreactivity
for hormone receptors, which requires thorough clinical investigation to exclude breast carcinoma.3 Histopathological differential diagnosis
includes trichoadenoma, syringoma, desmoplastic trichoepithelioma, sclerodermiform basal cell carcinoma, desmoplastic squamous cell
carcinoma and metastatic breast carcinoma.7 The therapeutic modalities employed include radiotherapy, simple excision and Mohs micrographic
surgery.4 Long-term follow-up is recommended due to the elevated rates of recurrence. Overall survival is satisfactory. The majority of
recurrences occur on average in the first 3 years, however there are reports of relapse in up to 30 years after surgery.10 In the case
reported, the initial clinical hypothesis of scarring alopecia is justified by the locally aggressive biological behavior of MAC causing the
destruction of pilosebaceous follicles and the dense fibrous stroma mimicking a scarring process, besides the uncommon topography. The
inclusion of MAC in the differential clinical diagnosis of scarring alopecias is also suggested, in spite of being a remote possibility. We
also emphasize the importance of a representative incisional biopsy covering the depth of the lesion, providing a correct initial diagnosis
and consequently a less mutilating and definitive treatment, avoiding relapses. Financial Support: No charge. How to cite this article:
Castanon MCMN, Casali SMG, Lamim RFB, Nagahama MV, Silva CBXV, Carvalho RGN. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma simulating scarring alopecia. An
Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1): S36-8. Work performed in partnership with: Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, private dermatology
clinic and Pathology laboratory/Charity Hospital (Santa Casa de Misericórdia) in Juiz de Fora (MG), Brazil.
