Conflict of Interest: None. In Brazil, visceral Leishmaniasis is caused by Leishmania chagasi. The development of cutaneous lesions in
visceral leishmaniasis patients has been described in two different clinical contexts. Patients with compromised immunity can develop skin
lesions as a direct consequence of a current visceral disease. Equally, patients with a history of kala-azar and progressive, immune
improvement occasionally develop skin lesions as a consequence of immune reconstitution infl ammatory syndrome. These cases manifest in
similar fashion to the classic form of post-kala-azar dermal Leishmaniasis. We describe different cases that exemplify these two clinical
presentations. The development of skin lesions in the context of Leishmania sp and HIV co-infection has been described in two different
situations.1,2 Habitually, cutaneous involvement occurs after starting of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in the context of
immune reconstitution syndrome. 1 Dermatological lesions can also occur due to a current kala-azar episode.2 A male AIDS sufferer of 6
years, aged 35, needed assistance at the dermatology department during antiretroviral therapy, due to erythematous nodules, some of which
were confluent, leading to infiltrated patches with mild scaling that had emerged one year and three months earlier (Figures 1 and 2). The
lesions were disseminated. At that point, he did not present systemic signs or symptoms. He had experienced a visceral Leishmaniasis episode
four years previously, treated with Amphotericin B, and subsequently underwent prophylaxis with this drug, due to frequent relapses of the
disease. Histopathological examination of the skin sample showed amastigote forms of Leishmania sp. The PCR for Leishmania chagasi, using
the Primers RV1 and RV2, was positive and the Montenegro's reaction was 14mm. At the time, the CD4+ cell count was 330cel/mm3, while the
CD4+ cell count was 92cels/mm3, three months before lesions developed. This patient was treated using Amphotericin B, with complete
resolution of skin lesions. Papular and nodular lesions on the trunk. They were also present on the extremities and back Facial lesions A
male, aged 42, HIV-positive for 13 years, undergoing irregular use of antiretroviral therapy, sought assistance due to fever, weight loss
and skin lesions that had appeared in the two preceding months. Physical examination revealed disseminated, slightly erythematous papules
and nodules, as well as papular lesions on the palate (Figures 3 and 4). He had a 4-year history of visceral Leishmaniasis and since then,
had been under prophylactic therapy with amphotericin B. At that point, the CD4+ cell count was 56 cells/mm3, while two months before skin
lesions developed, the CD4+ cell count was 108cells/mm3. Leishmania sp amastigotes were present on the myelogram, while the PCR, using the
RV1 and RV2 primers, was positive in peripheral blood. The patient was treated with Lipossomal Amphotericin B, leading to complete
resolution of the visceral and cutaneous condition. Papules and nodules on the abdomen. Similar lesions were present throughout the body
Lesions on the palate We present two rare cases of disease association. The development of skin lesions in patients with HIV/Kala-azar
coinfection has been described in two different situations. 1,2 Cutaneous lesions can develop in the context of immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), caused by Leishmania. 1 IRIS comprises a group of disorders that occur after some degree of immune
restoration, which results in pathological inflammation to pathogens and their antigens. 3 Clinical manifestations depend on the agent
involved. 3,4 The diagnosis is clinical and opportunistic infections should be considered in the differential. 4 In HIV-positive
individuals, one essential criterion for diagnosis is that patients be receiving antiretroviral therapy, with strong virological and
immunological responses, meaning an increase in CD4+ cell count from the baseline and a decrease in HIV RNA level. 3 IRIS cases related to
Leishmania generally present with post-kala-azar dermal Leishmaniasis (PKDL), with a mean CD4+ cell count of 175 cells/mm3 when skin lesions
emerge. 1 Similarly to the classical form of PKDL, the ability to mount an immunologic response to the parasite still present in skin has
been implicated in the development of cutaneous lesions. 5 Papules and nodules that are commonly located on the cephalic region typically
occur at variable moments once the visceral disease is cured. 6 Case 1 is an example of PKDL in the context of IRIS, as demonstrated by the
increasing CD4+ cell counts and the good immunologic response, confirmed by the positive Montenegro’s skin test. Furthermore, the patient
did not show signs of visceral involvement, which would be expected in a case of visceral Leishmaniasis with secondary skin involvement.
Another possible dermal presentation of the HIV/kala-azar co-infection is the emergence of disseminated, cutaneous lesions during an active,
visceral Leishmaniasis episode1. The most common symptoms of kala-azar in HIV-positive individuals are paleness (91.4% of cases) and fever
(85.9% of cases).7 Moreover, patients with active infection habitually present moderate to severe immunosuppression and the mean CD4+ count
is between 44 and 123 cells. 8,9,10 Patient 2 presented signs of visceral involvement caused by Leishmania and his CD4+ cell count was
decreasing. This data support the diagnosis of a kala-azar episode with secondary skin involvement in a patient with progressive immune
depletion. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Barroso DH, Silva CEF, Vasconcelos ACDP, Cavalcanti SMM, Brito MEF, Medeiros
ACR. Post-Kala-azar dermal Leishmaniasis in two different clinical contexts. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1):S108-10 Work performed at
the Hospital Universitário Oswaldo Cruz - Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE) - Recife (PE), Brazil.
