Conflict of Interest: None. Muir-Torre Syndrome is defined by the coexistence of sebaceous skin tumors and internal malignancies. Mutations
in the DNA mismatch repair genes are found in the inherited form of the disease, resulting in the absence of crucial enzymes involved with
DNA replication process. This case describes a patient with sebaceous adenoma and colorectal carcinoma, meeting the criteria for Muir-Torre
Syndrome. The immunohistochemical analysis of the skin lesion was an important tool to confirm the diagnosis, as it revealed nuclear
negativity for MSH2 and MSH6. Described by Muir et al and Torre, Muir-Torre Syndrome (MTS) is a rare autosomal dominant condition with a
high degree of penetrance.1,2 In 1995, diagnostic criteria for the syndrome were proposed by Schwartz and Torre, which included the presence
of a sebaceous tumor (sebaceous adenoma, sebaceous carcinoma or sebaceoma) and at least one visceral malignancy.3 Currently, it is believed
that there are two types of MTS. The most common form is a variant of Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer or Lynch Syndrome,
associated with germline mutations in DNA repair genes encoders of proteins MutL Homolog 1 (MLH1) and MutS Homolog 2 (MSH2). Recently,
mutations in genes of proteins MutS Homolog 6 (MSH6) and Postmeiotic Segregation Increased 2 (PMS2) were also implicated. The other spectrum
of the disease, however, has no correlation with family history and seems to involve other genes than the DNA repairing ones.4,5 In this
article, the authors report the case of a male patient with multiple sebaceous tumors and history of colorectal carcinoma. The
immunohistochemical study of the cutaneous neoplasm was used to corroborate the diagnosis of Muir-Torre Syndrome, revealing the expected
negativity for DNA repair enzymes. Male patient, 41 years old, presented at the Dermatology service complaining about the onset of multiple
yellowish papules with central umbilication located on the face (Figures 1 and 2). The anatomopathological examination was conclusive for
sebaceous adenoma (Figure 3). An immunohistochemical study was performed through a standard technique, with parts (sugestão: tissue pieces)
in paraffin blocks and histological sections incubated with a panel of monoclonal antibodies. A polymer-based detection system was used. The
antibodies used were repair enzymes MSH2, MSH6 and MLH1, with nuclear negativity occurring for MSH2 and MSH6 and inconclusive MLH1 search
(Figures 4 and 5). Sebaceous adenomas on the face of patient with Muir-Torre Syndrome Detail of papular lesions on the face
Anatomopathological examination: sebaceous adenoma Immunohistochemical examination: sebaceous adenoma revealing nuclear negativity for
repair enzyme MSH2 Immunohistochemical examination: sebaceous adenoma in a positive control patient showing preserved nuclear reactivity for
repair enzyme MLH1 The most frequent MTS subtype is the phenotypic spectrum of Lynch syndrome, in which mutations of DNA repair genes can be
detected. The DNA repairing system is critically important to maintain genome stability during DNA replication. Failure in this process
results in mutation of genetic material and microsatellite instability. For example, the loss of expression of the protein coded by gene
MSH2 leads to the accumulation of replication errors, which ultimately is related to tumor susceptibility. 6,7 MTS mutations predispose for
the onset of cutaneous tumors of sebaceous origin. Notwithstanding, the mechanism through which the loss of repairing proteins and
microsatellite instability result in this type of tumor has not yet been elucidated.8 In general, sebaceous tumors are rare in the
population, and for this reason their onset represents an important marker for investigation of the syndrome.9 The most frequently found
cutaneous neoplasms are sebaceous adenoma, sebaceous carcinoma and sebaceoma, which are usually subsequent to the diagnosis of visceral
carcinoma in 56% of the cases. Keratoacanthomas and non-melanoma skin carcinomas are also described with sebaceous differentiation in the
carriers of the disease.4 As to visceral neoplasms, colorectal carcinomas account for 51% of the cases. Malignancies of the genitourinary
system, breast, lungs, parotid gland, upper gastrointestinal tract, larynx and blood may be present, although rarely. The follow-up of these
patients is comprised of colonoscopy every 3-5 years, starting at 25-30 years of age, cystoscopy and intravenous pyelogram at regular
intervals, computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis every 2-5 years, yearly mammogram and endometrial biopsy every 3-5 years in women
over 50 years of age 4,10 The diagnosis of MTS is eminently clinical, corroborated by exams such as immunohistochemistry and molecular
analysis. Since the first publications reporting the detection of repairing enzymes through the immunohistochemical method, loss of MLH1 and
MSH2 expression was observed in colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability. Despite the micro-satellite instability detected
through PCR remaining as standard methodology, the employment of immunohistochemistry in literature has expanded. 8,10 Analogous to this,
the immunohistochemical study with antibodies against repair proteins MSH2, MLH1 and MSH6 is currently the accepted method for evaluation of
the function of these proteins in sebaceous neoplasms. The lack of nuclear immunoreactivity in tumor cells suggests MTS and has shown good
correlation of this finding with microsatellite instability when compared to gold-standard tests. 8 Mathiak et al emphasize that the repair
enzymes express themselves properly in sporadic cases of sebaceous carcinoma, which reinforces even further the role of immunohistochemistry
in the characterization of MTS.6 Therefore, immunohistochemistry presents applicability in clinical practice as an element of identification
of neoplasms, which carry deficiency in the activity of repair enzymes and phenotype of microsatellite instability. It is outstanding for
MTS confirmation, as it is more accessible and less costly than molecular analysis, allied to its high positive predictive value. 6 When
suspicious of MTS, the dermatologist may proceed with an immunohistochemical study of sebaceous tumors, if molecular analysis is not
available to confirm the disease, thus allowing secondary prevention of visceral tumors. In our case, the absence of repair enzymes MSH2 and
MSH6 in the immunohistochemical study reiterated the diagnosis of MTS and triggered a series of propedeutic actions, aiming for early
diagnosis of morbidities and genetic counseling. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Oliveira CMPB, Campos JC, Maia MR, Lobo
LES, Valle FF. The role of immunohistochemistry in the Muir-Torre Syndrome. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1):168-70. Work performed at
Hospital Universitário Getúlio Vargas - Universidade Federal do Amazonas (HUGV-UFAM) and Fundação Centro de Controle de Oncologia do Estado
do Amazonas - Manaus (AM), Brazil.
