Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma is an extremely rare soft tissue tumor, also named as epithelioid sarcoma-like hemangioendothelioma,
which occurs more frequently in young adult males. It was originally recognized as a variant of epitheloid sarcoma, however it is now
concluded as a distinctive, rarely metastasizing endothelial neoplasm. We present a case of pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma in the lower
limb in a 49-year-old female who has a long course of disease and suffered from twice local recurrences and lymph node affection of the
tumor. The mass was subcutaneous and the margins were ill-defined. Morphologically, the tumor cells show diversity, composed of large
spindle cells and round cells, both with abundant eocinophilic cytoplasm, mimicking rhybdomyoplasts and epitheloid cells respectively. The
tumor cells show diffuse strong expression of Factor VIII, Fli-1, INI-1, vimentin, MDM2, and CDK4, local expression of CD31, AE1/AE3, EMA
and P63, and no expression of CD34, S-100, actin-sm, desmin, MyoD1, and HMB45. Based on these information, this case is diagnosed as
pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma after ruling out the main differential diagnosises including epithelioid sarcoma, malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor and rhabdomyosarcoma. From this case we suggest that pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma may be confused with a variety
of soft tissue neoplasm histologically. The clinical feature of the case of a long course of disease with twice local recurrences and final
lymph node involvement 10 years after excision of the primary tumor indicates a relative indolent behavior of this tumor. Pseudomyogenic
hemangioendothelioma, also known as epithelioid sarcoma-like hemangioendothelioma, occurs more frequently in young adult males and usually
arises in the extremities, especially on the lower limb, and often involves multiple tissue planes . It histologically mimics a myoid tumor
or epithelioid carcinoma due to abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and the cell shape . It is now characterized as a distinctive, rarely
metastasizing endothelial neoplasm . The tumor is composed of large round or spindle cells, or commonly both parts, arranged in sheets or
fascicles. The cells rarely show notable pleomorphism or nuclear atypia . Clinically, more than half of the patients experience local
recurrence, and lymph node and distant metastasis in a few cases has also been reported . In the case we present here, the patient
experienced a long course of disease and twice recurrences and lymph node involvement of the tumor after excision of the primary tumor
10 years ago. Morphologically, the tumor is composed of both areas of round and spindle cells with abundant eocinophilic cytoplasm, which
may lead to confusion with a variety of other soft tissue neoplasm such as epithelioid sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and
rhabdomyosarcoma. The immunophenotype of expression of INI-1, AE1/AE3, and endothelial markers such as Factor VIII, Fli-1 and CD31, and
negative staining of desmin, MyoD1, and S-100 supports the diagnosis of pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma in this case. A 49-year-old
female referred to our hospital for recurrence of soft tissue tumor with multiple nodules in her left lower limb. MRI shows that the nodules
were subcutaneous at the left calf below the knee and integrated to a mass about 6 cm × 5 cm. The mass has been growing up gradually for
2 years without treatment. Before that, the patient had a primary tumor about 1 cm × 1 cm in the same location about 10 years ago. The
patient experienced once recurrence with a new mass at the same location around the incision 2 years after local excision of the primary
one. This new mass grew up to about 5 cm × 3 cm in 3 years and then the patient received a second surgery. And now it is the second
recurrence of the tumor and the third time for her to receive surgery. MRI also detected a subcutaneous mass about 3.2 cm × 3.4 cm at her
left thigh near the inguinal area this time. Blood test of the patient shows no abnomity. The urinary test shows slight high levels of red
blood cells (5.11/HPF), white blood cells (3.09/HPF), epithelial cells (2.02/HPF) and urea (7.73 mmol/L). The resected specimens of the
tumor were fixed with 10 % neutralbuffered formalin and embedded in paraffin blocks. Tissue blocks were cut into 4 μm-thick sections and the
sections were dewaxed in xylene and rehydrated stepwise in descending ethanol series. Then the sections were boiled in citrate buffer
(pH 6.0) within an autoclave. Endogenous peroxidase activity and non-specific binding were blocked with 3 % H2O2 and non-immune sera,
respectively. The sections were then incubated with the following primary antibodies: actin-sm (1:50, DAKO), AE1/AE3 (1:50, DAKO), CD31
(1:100, DAKO), CD34 (1:100, DAKO), cytokeratin 18 (CK18, 1:200, DAKO), cytokeratin 19 (CK19, 1:200, DAKO), CDK4 (1:50, Abcam), desmin (1:50,
DAKO), EMA (1:100, DAKO), Fli-1 (1:100, Abcam), Factor VIII (1:100, Abcam), HMB45 (1:50, Abcam), INI-1 (1:100, Santa Cruz), Ki67 (1:200,
DAKO), Melan-A (1:50, DAKO), myoD1 (1:50, DAKO), MDM2 (1:50, Abcam), P63 (1:100, DAKO), S-100 (1:50, DAKO), and vimentin (1:200, DAKO)
overnight at 4 °C. Thereafter, the catalyzed signal amplification system (Maixin Biotechnology, Fuzhou, Fujian, China) was used for staining
of these proteins according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The antibodies were detected by a standard avidin-biotin complex method with
biotinylated secondary antibodies (Maixin) and an avidin-biotin complex (Maixin), and developed with diaminobenzidine. Counterstaining was
done lightly with hematoxylin, and the sections were dehydrated in alcohol before mounting. This study was prospectively performed and
approved by the institutional Ethics Committees of China Medical University and conducted in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki. The resected samples inspected include nodules from the left calf and thigh of the patient. The masses are
subcutaneous with multiple nodules integrated with each other and the margins are ill-defined. The mass from the calf is about
5.5 cm × 4.2 cm × 2.5 cm, and the one from the thigh is about 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm × 2.5 cm. The cut surface of the masses is firm, and grey and
yellowish white. MRI shows multiple subcutaneous nodules at the left calf below the knee integrating to a mass about 6 cm × 5 cm. The
biggest one was about 1.4 cm × 0.9 cm (Fig. 1a, T1-weighted image shows low signal intensity; 1B, T2-weighted image (STIR) shows high signal
intensity). MRI also detected a subcutaneous mass about 3.2 cm × 3.4 cm at the left thigh near the inguinal area (Fig. 1c, T1-weighted image
shows low signal intensity; 1D, T2-weighted image (STIR) shows high signal intensity).Fig. 1The imaging (MRI) of the tumor. MRI shows
multiple subcutaneous nodules at the left calf below the knee integrating to a mass about 6 cm × 5 cm. The biggest one was about
1.4 cm × 0.9 cm. (a, T1-weighted image shows low signal intensity, ; b, T2-weighted image (STIR) shows high signal intensity, ). MRI also
detected a subcutaneous mass about 3.2 cm × 3.4 cm at the left thigh near the inguinal area (c, T1-weighted image shows low signal
intensity, ; d, T2-weighted image (STIR) shows high signal intensity, ) The imaging (MRI) of the tumor. MRI shows multiple subcutaneous
nodules at the left calf below the knee integrating to a mass about 6 cm × 5 cm. The biggest one was about 1.4 cm × 0.9 cm. (a, T1-weighted
image shows low signal intensity, ; b, T2-weighted image (STIR) shows high signal intensity, ). MRI also detected a subcutaneous mass about
3.2 cm × 3.4 cm at the left thigh near the inguinal area (c, T1-weighted image shows low signal intensity, ; d, T2-weighted image (STIR)
shows high signal intensity, ) The tumor cells are diffusely distributed between the subcutaneous tissues with an invasive growth pattern
and ill-defined (Fig. 1a). Most of the tumor tissues are cellular, and a few areas of the tumor have myxoid stroma and scattered tumor cells
(Fig. 1b, c, d). The tumor cells are round or spindle in different areas, both with abundant eocinophilic cytoplasm, arranged in sheets,
fascicles or irregularly (Fig. 1b, c, d, e, f). The tumor cells are large and plump, but show no apparent pleomorphism. The nuclei of the
cells are also plump with small nucleoli without notable atypia and the mitotic activity is scarce (Fig. 1e, f). The microscopic features of
the primary tumor were the same as the recurrent tumor (Fig. 1g, h). The microscopic feature of the mass from the left thigh indicates lymph
node metastasis of the tumor (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Morphological features of the tumor. Ill-defined tumor cells are diffusely distributed between
the subcutaneous tissues (a,×100). Most of the tumor tissues are cellular with large plump spindle cells (b,×200) or round cells (c,×200).
Some areas of the tumor have myxoid stroma and scattered small round tumor cells (d,×200). The tumor cells are spindle (e,×100) or round
(f,×400) in different areas, both with abundant eocinophilic cytoplasm. The tumor cells are large and plump, showing no apparent
pleomorphism. The nuclei of the tumor cells have small nucleoli without notable atypia and the mitotic activity is scarce (e, f,×400). The
microscopic features of the primary tumor were the same as the recurrent tumor (g, ×100; h,×400) Morphological features of the tumor. Ill-
defined tumor cells are diffusely distributed between the subcutaneous tissues (a,×100). Most of the tumor tissues are cellular with large
plump spindle cells (b,×200) or round cells (c,×200). Some areas of the tumor have myxoid stroma and scattered small round tumor cells
(d,×200). The tumor cells are spindle (e,×100) or round (f,×400) in different areas, both with abundant eocinophilic cytoplasm. The tumor
cells are large and plump, showing no apparent pleomorphism. The nuclei of the tumor cells have small nucleoli without notable atypia and
the mitotic activity is scarce (e, f,×400). The microscopic features of the primary tumor were the same as the recurrent tumor (g, ×100;
h,×400) Immunohistochemical examination indicates that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for Factor VIII, Fli-1, CDK4, INI-1, MDM2,
vimentin, focally positive for AE1/AE3, CD31 and negative for actin-sm, CD34, desmin, myoD1 and S-100 (Fig. 3). Ki67 index was about 5 %
(Fig. 3). In addition, EMA and P63 expression was focal, CK18, CK19, HMB45 and melan-A were negative in the tumor cells. The primary tumor
also shows a typical Fli-1 and INI-1 positive immunostaining phenotype (Fig. 5).Fig. 3Lymph node metastasis of the tumor in the thigh far
from the primary lesion of the recurrenct tumor and the original tumor. The large round epithelioid tumor cells are similar in shape to
those in the tumor from the lower limb of the patient (a × 100; b × 200)Fig. 4Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor. Fli-1 in tumor
cells was diffusely positive and the staining was strong as well as in the endothelial cells. CD31 was focally positive. INI-1 expression
was retained. AE1/AE3 staining was focal and not very strong. CD34 in tumor cells was very weak or absent compared to endothelial cells.
Vimentin was strongly and diffusely positive. Desmin, S-100 and myoD1 were negative. MDM2 and CDK4 were strongly and diffusely positive.
Ki67 index was about 5 %Fig. 5Immunohistochemical staining of the primary tumor. It also shows a typical immunostaining phenotype of
positive Fli-1 and INI-1 expression as the recurrent tumor Lymph node metastasis of the tumor in the thigh far from the primary lesion of
the recurrenct tumor and the original tumor. The large round epithelioid tumor cells are similar in shape to those in the tumor from the
lower limb of the patient (a × 100; b × 200) Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor. Fli-1 in tumor cells was diffusely positive and the
staining was strong as well as in the endothelial cells. CD31 was focally positive. INI-1 expression was retained. AE1/AE3 staining was
focal and not very strong. CD34 in tumor cells was very weak or absent compared to endothelial cells. Vimentin was strongly and diffusely
positive. Desmin, S-100 and myoD1 were negative. MDM2 and CDK4 were strongly and diffusely positive. Ki67 index was about 5 %
Immunohistochemical staining of the primary tumor. It also shows a typical immunostaining phenotype of positive Fli-1 and INI-1 expression
as the recurrent tumor Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma, also named as epithelioid sarcoma-like hemangioendothelioma, which
morphologically mimics a myoid tumor or epithelioid carcinoma, is now concluded as a distinctive, rarely metastasizing endothelial neoplasm
. This tumor occurs more frequently in young adult males and usually arises in the extremities . In the case we presented here, the patient
was a 49-year-old female who had a long course of disease about 10 years with this tumor in her lower limb. The tumor is composed of large
spindle cells, arranged in sheets or fascicles. Tumor cells with epithelioid cytomorphology are also often present . In this case, the tumor
is subcutaneous and both areas with spindle cells and round epithelioid cells exist. The cells are large and have abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm, mimicking a myoid tumor or epithelioid carcinoma cells. The tumor cells are plump, but show no apparent pleomorphism. The nuclei
of the cells have small nucleoli without notable atypia and the mitotic activity is scarce. Based on these information, the main
differential diagnosises should include epithelioid sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and rhabdomyosarcoma. Epithelioid
sarcoma is a mesenchymal neoplasm exhibiting epithelioid cytomorphology, the classic subtype of which often occurs in the extremity .
Spindle tumor cells can also present in this tumor. The cell pleomorphism and nuclear atypia are not notable usually in this tumor either.
However classic epithelioid sarcoma usually consists of cellular node with central degeneration which is not seen in this case though it
cannot be ruled out only based on this feature. The tumor cells in this case exhibit abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm mimicking myoid tumor.
Thus rhabdomyosarcoma or leiomyosarcoma should also be considered. Leiomyosarcoma is a malignant neoplasm exhibiting pure smooth-muscle
differentiation . The tumor consists mainly of spindle sells arranged in fascicles. However epithelioid cytomorphology can also exist,
though relatively rare. The nuclear pleomorphism is generally notable in leiomyosarcoma which was not seen in this case. There are several
subtypes of rhabdomyosarcoma, among which spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma is the most important to be differentiated for this case.
This subtype has spindle cell morphology with eosinophilic cytoplasm and shows a fascicular or plaxiform growth pattern . Epithelioid cells
are rare and nuclear atypia is common in this subtype, which is different from this case. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor is a
malignant tumor arising from peripheral nerves, which mostly arises in the extremities . Typical type of this tumor consists of spindle
cells showing a fascicular growth pattern. However there is also an epithelioid subtype of this tumor composed of epithelioid cells with
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, which should also be considered for this case. The neoplasmic cells of this type are cohesive together or
scattered and embedded in the extracellular myxoid matrix. The similar areas also exist in this case. However prominent nucleoli are often
seen in the tumor cells of this type but not in this case. Moreover areas with spindle cells are also main parts of the tumor in this case
which is not usual in the epithelioid subtype of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. However, a variety of complicated and similar
histological features can present in all these tumors and the microscopic features could not be the only basis for differentiation for these
tumors. In the current case, immunohistochemical examination shows that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for endothelia cell markers
Factor VIII and Fli-1 and focally positive for CD31. However these markers are not absolutely specific for endothelial cells. The other
mesenchymal tumors mentioned above should be ruled out. INI-1 expression has been found to be lost in some tumors including epithelioid
sarcoma . In this case INI-1 expression was retained. The myoid tumor markers such as actin-sm and desmin were negative in this case. S-100,
a marker usually positive in tumors arising from nervous system including malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, was also negative in this
case. However even in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, S-100 expression is not always detected . We need to differentiate theses
tumors more carefully based on more information but not only on one marker like S-100. vimentin was diffusely positive in the tumor cells,
which supports but cannot fully prove the tumor as a mesenchymal neoplasm. As for keratins, AE1/AE3 was focally but not diffusely positive
in this case. AE1/AE3 was usually positive in cases of pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma reported so far [1–5, 10–14]. Some documents
mentioned that the immunostaining pattern is diffuse. However the documents are limited and more cases are still in need to be studied to
verify the immunostaining pattern of this marker. CD34 expression is usually negative in pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma, however a
report indicates that it was positive in some cases . In a word, the immunophenotype of this tumor is still to be studied and characterized.
From these information it may be more reasonable to considere this case as an endothelial neoplasm but not myoid tumor, peripheral nerve
sheath tumor, or epithelioid sarcoma. Ki67 index in this case was about 5 % and not very high. MDM2 and CDK4 overexpression are not usually
seen in benign tumors but quite common in intermediate or malignant mesenchymal tumors [15, 16] and was diffusely positive in this case.
These three markers are helpful to understand the nature of the tumor and support the consideration of it as a tumor with a certain extent
of malignant potentials. However, the histological feature and immuostaining findings are not enough for fully understanding and
characterizing the tumor of this case as usual. The clinical feature is important for the diagnosis and should be carefully studied as
always. The patient of this case had experienced a long course of disease with the tumor about 10 years which indicates the tumor is
relative indolent. Approximately 60 % of patients with pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma experience local recurrence of the tumor . In
this case the patient experienced twice local recurrences at the same location after local excisions. After 10 years the tumor has developed
a regional subcutaneous lymph node metastasis in her thigh. No distant metastasis in other organs was found in this patient. Pseudomyogenic
hemangioendothelioma is now concluded as a intermediate, rarely metastasizing endothelial neoplasm. The clinical feature of this patient is
also in accordance with that of pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma. Cancer can be caused by various factors including inflammation which
can promote the formation of premalignant lesions and promote cancer progression. The immune system plays complicated roles in the
progression of malignant tumors . In this case, the patient experienced a couple times of recurrence and at last developed lymph node
metastasis. However, there wasn’t any clue of inflammation or auto-immune diseases related found in this patient. So far, the pathogenesis
and mechanism involved in the progression of this tumor is not uncovered. Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma is a rare endothelial neoplasm
which often mimics myoid and epithelioid tumors morphologically. A variety of mesenchymal neoplasms with similar architecture and cell
morphology should be carefully differentiated from this tumor. For the diagnosis the immunostaining is very important but not decisive and
enough. Clinical information including age, gender, tumor location, disease course and recurrence is important for appropriate diagnosis and
fully understanding of the tumor and is indispensable. Analysis based on any single factor or incomplete information may easily lead to
arbitrary conclusion. However the reports of this tumor are limited. Further studies on more cases are in need for fully understanding and
appropriate diagnosis of it. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions FCF, YLH, and LXY participated
in the histopathological evaluation, performed the literature review, acquired photomicrographs and drafted the manuscript. FCF and JYF
carried out the immunohistochemical stains evaluation. FCF and YLH conceived and designed the study. FCF, LXY and WEH gave the final
histopathological diagnosis and WEH revised the manuscript. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no.81472599 to Chuifeng Fan, MD).
