Association of leukoencephalopathy and atypical mycobacteriosis has been rarely reported. We present a case that is relevant for its unusual
presentation and because it may shed further light on the pathogenic mechanisms underlying reversible encephalopathies. We report the case
of a Hispanic 64-year-old woman with cognitive decline and extensive leukoencephalopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed white-matter
lesions with increased water diffusivity, without blood–brain-barrier disruption. Brain biopsy showed tissue rarefaction with vacuolation,
mild inflammation, few reactive astrocytes and decreased aquaporin water-channel expression in the lesions. Six months later, she was
diagnosed with atypical mycobacterial pulmonary infection. Brain lesions resolved after antimycobacterial treatment. We hypothesize
leukoencephalopathic changes and vasogenic edema were associated with decreased aquaporin expression. Further studies should clarify if
reversible leukoencephalopathy has a causal relationship with decreased aquaporin expression and atypical mycobacterial infection, and
mechanisms underlying leukoencephalopathy resolution after antimycobacterial treatment. This article may contribute to the understanding of
pathogenic mechanisms underlying magnetic resonance imaging subcortical lesions and edema, which remain incompletely understood. Reversible
leukoencephalopathy is characterized by headaches, seizures, vomiting, and confusion, associated with extensive bilateral white-matter
subcortical neuroimaging abnormalities, suggestive of vasogenic edema without infarction . Most cases of reversible encephalopathy are
referred to as posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), since white matter changes are more prominent in the posterior cerebral
regions. Brainstem, cerebellum and other brain regions may also be affected . PRES has been associated with severe hypertension (including
eclampsia), renal dysfunction, infection, autoimune disease, and immunosuppressant drug use . The hallmark of PRES is reversible cerebral
edema due to blood–brain-barrier dysfunction . Pathogenic mechanisms underlying magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) subcortical lesions and
edema remains incompletely understood. Association of brain edema and mycobacteria has previously been reported in the setting of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection , and in one patient who presented with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) associated with
Mycobacterium intracellulare meningitis, who responded to high dose steroid pulse therapy . In all reported cases of mycobacterial infection
associated with edema, underlying mechanisms involved demyelination and inflammation. Association of a non-demyelinating leukoencephalopathy
and atypical mycobacteriosis has not, to our knowledge, been previously reported. We report neuroimaging and brain histology features of a
patient with extensive leukoencephalopathy with brain edema and absence of demyelination, that resolved after atypical mycobacterial
pulmonary infection treatment. A Hispanic 64-year-old woman was admitted with headaches, vomiting and confusion. A month earlier, the
patient presented with subacute new-onset headaches, nausea, vomiting, gait impairment, and anorexia. There was no history of fever, cough,
abdominal pain, previous medical disease or immunosuppressant drug use. Blood pressure was normal. Physical examination was unremarkable.
Neurologic examination showed an unsteady gait, without motor weakness or ataxia. Cognitive tests showed a Mini-Mental Status Exam (MMSE)
score of 18/30, impaired attention, executive functions, verbal fluency and episodic memory (Table 1).Table 1Cognitive evaluations in a
patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy before and after atypical mycobacteria treatmentInitial assessmentFive months after initial
assessment (no mycobacterial treatment)Eighteen months after initial assessment (one year of mycobaterial treatment)Mini Mental State Exam
(MMSE)18/3018/3022/30Digit span (direct/indirect)3 / 03 / 04 / 2Short Memory Test with 10 items (incidental memory / immediate memory /
learning)* 3 / 7 / 84 / 1 / 15 / 7 / 8Delayed Memory Test with 10 items (after distraction) without / with hints* 6 (1) / 83 / 4 (3)8 /
10Verbal fluency (semantic / phonemic)5 (animals) / 1 (letter P)6 (animals) / 1 (letter P)10 (animals) / 1 (letter P)Clock-drawing
testDisexecutive: distortion of number placement (4 points)Disexecutive: crowding numbers to one side (5 points)More noticeable errors in
hand/number placement (8 points)Functional Activity Questionnaire (FAQ)25/3010/30Patient’s education: 4 YearsLegend: *Number of intrusions
between brackets Cognitive evaluations in a patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy before and after atypical mycobacteria treatment
Patient’s education: 4 Years Legend: *Number of intrusions between brackets Brain MRI disclosed diffuse and symmetric confluent nonenhancing
white matter lesions, that were hyperintense in T2/FLAIR images (Fig. 1a to d). Corresponding apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) maps
suggested vasogenic edema (Fig. 1f). MRI angiography was unremarkable (not shown). Multivoxel spectroscopy, dynamic susceptibility contrast
(DSC) perfusion (T2*) and dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) permeability (T1) did not disclose relevant abnormalities (Fig. 1e, g and h).
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal cell count (4 cells/mm3), protein (32 mg/dL) and glucose (80 mg/dL) levels, normal protein
electrophoresis values, negative oligoclonal bands and polymerase chain reaction for infectious agents (including tuberculosis). Systemic
evaluation was negative for cancer, autoimmune diseases (Anti-nuclear antibodies = negative, Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies = negative), and infectious diseases. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed nonspecific patchy lung infiltrates. Blood
laboratory tests were normal (i.e. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate = 2 mm; C-reactive protein = 1,3 mg/L; Leucocytes = 6,880/mm3).
Electroencephalogram EEG showed mild diffuse slowing and brief bursts of diffuse delta waves. The patient underwent two brain biopsies that
showed tissue rarefaction with vacuolation, very mild inflammatory cell and macrophage infiltrates, absence of demyelination, malignant
cells or granulomas, and no signs of tissue infarction or hemorrhagic changes (Fig. 2a to j). Immunostaining showed scarce CD45+ lymphocytes
and CD68+ macrophages, without axonal or myelin damage, with few reactive astrocytes and low aquaporin-4 staining in the lesion compared to
the normal surrounding areas. Aquaporin-1 staining was also reduced in the lesion, less extensively than aquaporin-4.Fig. 1Serial brain
magnetic resonance imaging studies of a patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Initial FLAIR
images (a-d) show diffuse symmetrical confluent hyperintensities involving cerebral white matter, extending to the brainstem and cerebellar
white matter. Note mass effect evidenced by sulci, fissure and ventricle effacement (more remarkable considering patient’s age - 64 years
old). Corresponding white matter MR spectroscopy (e) (multivoxel, TE = 135 ms) demonstrates no definite metabolic changes. Apparent
diffusion coefficients (ADC) map (f) demonstrates diffusion facilitation, signaling vasogenic edema. There was no contrast enhancement (not
shown) or significant changes appreciated in color maps proportional to relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) (g) obtained from a dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) perfusion (T2*) study. Color maps proportional to wash in rate (h) obtained from a dynamic contrast-enhanced
(DCE) permeability (T1) sequence were also unremarkable. Images F-H are in the same level as D. After treatment for atypical
mycobacteriosis, white matter changes disappeared, as shown in (FLAIR) images (i-l) obtained two years after the initial exam (arrows in J
and L point to biopsy sites, partially characterized in these images)Fig. 2Brain biopsy results of a patient with reversible
leukoencephalopathy. a to j: Brain biopsy results of the patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy prior to atypical mycobacteria
treatment shows (a) mild tissue rarefaction with vacuolation, very sparse perivascular inflammatory infiltrates, and (b) no evidence of
demyelination. c–d Presence of relatively few glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) positive astrocytes with reduced aquaporin-4 expression
in the lesion compared to the surrounding area. Scale bar = 100 μm. High magnification (400x) on D shows aquaporin-4 on the membrane of
reactive astrocytes. Scale bar = 10 μm. e Aquaporin-1 expression is also reduced in the lesion, but in less extensively than aquaporin-4.
f–g Myelin sheath is preserved with no loss of myelin basic protein (MBP) and myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG). h No signs of neuronal
or axonal damage. i–j Few lymphocytes (CD45+) and macrophages (CD68+) are found in the perivascular space, while immunoglobulin and
complement C9neo deposition are absent (not shown). Scale bar = 50 μm. (Magnification a–d = 100x; e–j = 200x) Serial brain magnetic
resonance imaging studies of a patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Initial FLAIR images
(a-d) show diffuse symmetrical confluent hyperintensities involving cerebral white matter, extending to the brainstem and cerebellar white
matter. Note mass effect evidenced by sulci, fissure and ventricle effacement (more remarkable considering patient’s age - 64 years old).
Corresponding white matter MR spectroscopy (e) (multivoxel, TE = 135 ms) demonstrates no definite metabolic changes. Apparent diffusion
coefficients (ADC) map (f) demonstrates diffusion facilitation, signaling vasogenic edema. There was no contrast enhancement (not shown) or
significant changes appreciated in color maps proportional to relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) (g) obtained from a dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) perfusion (T2*) study. Color maps proportional to wash in rate (h) obtained from a dynamic contrast-enhanced
(DCE) permeability (T1) sequence were also unremarkable. Images F-H are in the same level as D. After treatment for atypical
mycobacteriosis, white matter changes disappeared, as shown in (FLAIR) images (i-l) obtained two years after the initial exam (arrows in J
and L point to biopsy sites, partially characterized in these images) Brain biopsy results of a patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy.
a to j: Brain biopsy results of the patient with reversible leukoencephalopathy prior to atypical mycobacteria treatment shows (a) mild
tissue rarefaction with vacuolation, very sparse perivascular inflammatory infiltrates, and (b) no evidence of demyelination. c–d Presence
of relatively few glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) positive astrocytes with reduced aquaporin-4 expression in the lesion compared to
the surrounding area. Scale bar = 100 μm. High magnification (400x) on D shows aquaporin-4 on the membrane of reactive astrocytes. Scale
bar = 10 μm. e Aquaporin-1 expression is also reduced in the lesion, but in less extensively than aquaporin-4. f–g Myelin sheath is
preserved with no loss of myelin basic protein (MBP) and myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG). h No signs of neuronal or axonal damage. i–j
Few lymphocytes (CD45+) and macrophages (CD68+) are found in the perivascular space, while immunoglobulin and complement C9neo deposition
are absent (not shown). Scale bar = 50 μm. (Magnification a–d = 100x; e–j = 200x) The patient was treated initially with intravenous
methylprednisolone (1 g/day for three days), followed by oral dexamethasone (10 mg/day) for six months. Clinical and neurologic status and
brain MRI remained unchanged. Activities of daily living were impaired, with a Functional Activity Questionnaire (FAQ) score of 25 and MMSE
score of 18. Whole body positron emission tomography-computed tomography obtained at this point revealed a hypermetabolic right pulmonary
mass. Lesion histology showed granulomas containing Mycobacterium abscessus. The patient was treated with levofloxacin, clarithromycin and
amycacin. Steroids were tapered and discontinued. A year later, cognitive functions and functional status were improved (MMSE = 21; FAQ
score = 10) (Table 1), and brain MRI disclosed remarkable resolution of white matter changes (Fig. 1i–l). This report illustrates a case of
leukoencephalopathy associated with atypical pulmonary mycobacteriosis. Although we cannot establish a cause-effect relationship of atypical
mycobacteriosis and leukoencephalopathy, lack of central nervous system (CNS) granulomas and caseous necrosis, lack neurological worsening
following steroid therapy, and improvement after antimycobacterial treatment suggest a remote effect of the lung infection, causing the CNS
disorder. Initial chest CT had initially shown nonspecific patchy lung infiltrates, that could, retrospectively, indicate early stage
atypical mycobacterial infection. Additionally, the patient presented remarkable, albeit partial, neurological improvement after
antimycobacterial treatment. There was no response to steroid therapy, brain pathology studies did not disclose inflammatory activity, and
there was absence of intra-thecal antibody production, rendering the possibility of an adaptative immune mechanism (i.e. antibody or cell-
mediated immune responses) extremely unlikely. Steroid therapy may have contributed to worsening of the mycobacterial lung infection.
Mycobacteria are known to be highly immunogenic: mycobacteria containing compounds are used in mouse models of ADEM and Multiple Sclerosis,
through activation of adaptative immunity [17, 18]. Mycobacteria also activate the innate immune system, with production of cytokines and
inflammation mediators, such as nitric oxide . Mechanism of brain involvement in this case can be inferred from imaging and pathology
findings of tissue edema with scarce reactive astrocytes, and reduced aquaporin-4 and aquaporin-1 expression in the lesion, compared to
surrounding areas. Considering the lack of evidence of adaptative immune response in the brain, we speculate that activation of an innate-
immune response in the lung either by the mycobacteria or through a host mediated response may have exerted a remote effect on aquaporin
expression in the brain, leading to interstitial white matter edema. Alternatively, but less likely, antimycobacterial agents may have
exerted a direct action reverting white matter lesions . Few studies have evaluated pathological findings in reversible encephalopathies [1,
2, 8, 21], and some studies suggest the pathogenic role of cellular channel dysfunction. Reversible leukoencephalopathy has been described
in few anti-aquaporin-4 antibody positive neuromyelitis optica (NMO) cases following immunotherapeutic interventions . Lesion reversibility
in these cases suggests that immune-mediated tissue destruction associated with blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption may not be the main
underlying mechanism. It is conceivable that vasogenic edema noted on diffusion-weighted MRI sequences in reversible leukoencephalopathy
cases represents parenchymal excess water content, caused by impaired water influx control, independent from BBB disruption. In our case,
water influx control was probably impaired due to astrocyte aquaporin dysfunction, in a mechanism akin to that hypothesized in brain edema
associated with NMO . Additionally, experimentally induced acute hypertension in rabbits led to exogenous markers leakage in arterioles and
capillaries through channels (often sigmoid-shaped) and cytoplasm and by transendothelial pinocytosis, causing brain-barrier disruption and
edema . These findings suggest impaired water channel function as a possible mechanism underlying reversible leukoencephalopathy. We are not
aware of previous non-demyelinating reversible leukoencephalopathy cases that improved after atypical mycobacteriosis treatment. We found
vacuolated white matter lesions with paucity of reactive astrogliosis and decreased aquaporin water-channel expression. A causal
relationship between mycobacteriosis and interstitial edema remains speculative. Alternatively, unexpected drug effects may have contributed
to brain changes resolution. Elucidating pathogenic mechanisms underlying reversible leukoencephalopathies may lead to improved therapeutic
strategies to treat this condition. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis Apparent diffusion coefficients Blood–brain barrier Central nervous system Computed tomography Dynamic contrast-enhanced
Dynamic susceptibility contrast Fluid attenuation inversion recovery Functional Activity Questionnaire Magnetic resonance imaging Mini-
Mental Status Exam Neuromyelitis optica Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome Relative cerebral blood volume Competing interests Dr.
Oliveira has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Dr. Castro has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Dr. Sato is an associated editor of
the Arquivos de Neuropsiquiatria (official journal of the Brazilian Academy of Neurology), receives scholarship from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan, has received research support from Ichiro Kanehara Foundation (2011),
and speaker honorarium from Novartis. Dr. Soares-Neto has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Dr. Lucato has no conflicts of interest to
disclose. Dr. Callegaro has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Dr. Medeiros has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Prof. Misu has
received speaker honoraria from Bayer Schering Pharma, Biogen Idec Japan, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Asahi Kasei Medical Co., and
Astellas Pharma Inc. and has received research support from Bayer Schering Pharma, Biogen Idec Japan, Asahi Kasei Kuraray Medical Co., The
Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, Teva Pharmaceutical K.K., Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Teijin Pharma, and Grants-in-Aid
for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan.
Prof. Fujihara serves on scientific advisory boards for Bayer Schering Pharma, Biogen Idec, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Novartis
Pharma, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Ono Pharmaceutical, Nihon Pharmaceutical, Merck Serono, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Medimmune and Medical
Review; has received funding for travel and speaker honoraria from Bayer Schering Pharma, Biogen Idec, Eisai Inc., Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma
Corporation, Novartis Pharma, Astellas Pharma Inc., Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Asahi Kasei Medical Co., Daiichi Sankyo, and
Nihon Pharmaceutical; serve as an editorial board member of Clinical and Experimental Neuroimmunology (2009-present) and a advisory board
member of Sri Lanka journal of Neurology; has received research support from Bayer Schering Pharma, Biogen Idec Japan, Asahi Kasei Medical,
The Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, Teva Pharmaceutical, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Teijin Pharma, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Ono
Pharmaceutical, Nihon Pharmaceutical, and Genzyme Japan; is funded as the secondary investigator (#22229008, 2010–2015) by the Grants-in-Aid
for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Japan and as the secondary investigator by the Grants-in-
Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Labor of Japan (2010-present). Prof. Nitrini has no conflicts of
interest to disclose. Authors’ contributions MCBO = conception and study design, data analysis and drafting the manuscript; LHMC = study
design, data analysis, and drafting the manuscript; DKS = study conception, data analysis and drafting the manuscript; HRSN = data analysis,
and drafting the manuscript; LTL = data analysis and review of the manuscript; DC = conception of the study, data analysis and review of the
manuscript; RSSM = data analysis and review of the manuscript; TM = design of the study, data analysis, and drafting the manuscript;
KF = study conception, data analysis and review of the manuscript; RN = study conception, data analysis and review of the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was partially supported by KAKENHI (22229008) of The Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan, and by the Health and Labor Sciences Research Grant on Intractable Diseases
(Neuroimmunological Diseases) from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan. The funding sources had no role in the design,
collection, analysis, or interpretation of the study, nor in the writing of the article or decision to submit.
