Deletions of the long arm of chromosome X in males are a rare cause of X-linked intellectual disability. Here we describe a patient with an
interstitial deletion of the Xq21.1 chromosome. In a 15 year boy, showing intellectual disability, short stature, hearing loss and
dysmorphic facial features, a deletion at Xq21.1 was identified by array-CGH. This maternally inherited 5.8 Mb rearrangement encompasses 14
genes, including BRWD3 (involved in X-linked intellectual disability), TBX22 (a gene whose alterations have been related to the presence of
cleft palate), POU3F4 (mutated in X-linked deafness) and ITM2A (a gene involved in cartilage development). Correlation between the clinical
findings and the function of gene mapping within the deleted region confirms the causative role of this microrearrangement in our patient
and provides new insight into a gene possibly involved in short stature. Cytogenetically detectable chromosomal deletions involving
chromosome X are rare in males due to the incompatibility with life of nullisomy for large portions of this chromosome. In particular,
deletions at Xq21 are poorly described in the literature and only a few cases are reported of male patients with complex phenotypes
including neurosensorial deafness, choroideremia, intellectual disability and dysmorphisms . About 50 % of the carrier females display
almost or completely skewed X inactivation, silencing the abnormal X resulting in a relatively benign phenotype . The development of high
resolution genomic arrays has made it possible to increase the imbalance detection rate with the identification of cryptic small
rearrangements on the X chromosome, some of these containing only a few genes or even just a single gene [3, 4]. However, despite the
improvement of the analysis resolution, rearrangements at Xq21 are still rarely reported. Here we describe a male patient with an
interstitial deletion of the Xq21.1 chromosome, determined through array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH). We sought to explain the
clinical outcome, according to genotype-phenotype correlation, focusing on the genes possibly involved in the clinical phenotype including
intellectual impairment, hearing loss, cleft-palate and short stature. The patient was born at the 41st week of gestation by caesarean
section due to fetal macrosomia. The birth weight was 4,530 g (>97° percentile), birth length 54 cm (90–97° percentile), and head
circumference 40 cm (>97° percentile). Apgar scores were 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. The propositus was the only child of
non-consanguineous Italian parents. The father was 36 and the mother was 28 years old. At birth, the patient showed cleft palate (plastic
surgery of the hard palate was performed at the 5th month of life), hip dysplasia (corrected with retractor), right blepharoptosis
(surgically corrected at 7 years of age) and dysmorphic face. At the fourth month of age, the parents noted the presence of severe head and
limb hypotonia and a delayed psychomotor development. At 18 months, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss was diagnosed and a bilateral
hearing aid was implanted. The standard cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal male karyotype (46,XY). The patient proved negative for
chromosome 22.11.2 deletion syndrome and fragile-X syndrome analysis. The family history was negative for intellectual disability.
Neurological examinations were performed, including a brain MRI at the age of 1 year with evidence of perinatal outcome suffering of the
white matter, thinning of the corpus callosum and mild ventricular asymmetry. At 8 years of age, the brain MRI was repeated and showed the
presence of mild ectasia of the perivascular spaces, soft signal hyperintensity of the periventricular white matter in the occipital region
bilaterally as incomplete myelination. At 3 years of age, because of short stature, a growth hormone (GH) stimulation test with arginine (GH
peak: 5 ng/ml; n.v. > 10 ng/ml) and with glucagon (GH peak: 2.1 ng/ml; n.v. > 10 ng/ml) were performed and led to a diagnosis of complete
growth hormone deficiency (GHD). GH replacement therapy was therefore started at the age of 4 years and stopped at the age of 9 years, for
poor growth response. The patient did not return for further medical examination until the age of 15 years, when he was reassessed at our
center for growth arrest associated with suspected hypogonadism (gonadal volume 2 cc bilaterally). His height was 151 cm (−2.23 SDS), BMI
26.97 kg/m2 (1.47 SDS). The gonadotropin evaluation tests performed with luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) revealed deficit of
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) with a LH peak of 4.1 mU/ml (prepubertal value) and FSH peak of 7.3 mU/ml
(prepubertal value). The stimulation test with growth-hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) and arginine confirmed the severe GHD (GH peak:
0.1 ng/ml; n.v. > 19 ng/ml). Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) was below the normal range (<25.0 ng/ml; −7.81 SDS). Adrenal, thyroid, liver
and kidney function showed normal range values. The ECG and the cardiological examination were normal. A delayed bone age of 2 years
compared with chronological age was detected. A pituitary MRI was also performed and showed a normal morphology of the adenohypophysis,
smaller than normal for the age without significant alterations in signal intensity before, during and after the administration of contrast
medium. The patient therefore restarted GH replacement therapy. For the psychomotor retardation with hyperactivity, the child attends
psychomotor and speech therapy regularly and he is currently being treated with Levomepromazine (75 mg/day) and Promazine (50 gtt/day). The
boy has a poor ability to tolerate frustration and there have been some episodes of verbal aggression against its peers. A neuropsychiatric
test (Wisc IV test) showed an intellectual disability with an IQ < 70. Concerning the morphological aspect (Fig. 1), the patient presents
gynoid habitus, abdominal fat, pseudogynecomastia (presence of only adipose tissue), hypoplastic genitalia with microtestes (volume of
2 ml), generalized hypotonia, genus valgus, pes planus, short toes, café au lait spot on the left shoulder and in the right lumbar region.
Facial features (Fig. 2) are characterized by: macrocephaly, broad forehead, prominent nose root and coarse nasal pyramid, anteverted nares,
white tuft of hair on the top of his head (Fig. 3).Fig. 1Morphological appearance of the patient at 15 years of age. Gynoid habitus,
abdominal fat, pseudogynecomastia (presence of only adipose tissue), hypoplastic genitalia with microtestes (volume of 2 ml), generalized
hypotonia, genus valgus, pes planus, short toesFig. 2Facial features of the patient. Patient showing facial characteristics, including
macrocephaly, broad forehead, prominent nose root and coarse nasal pyramid, anteverted nares, short palpebral fissures, large and prominent
earsFig. 3White tuft of hair on the top of the head Morphological appearance of the patient at 15 years of age. Gynoid habitus, abdominal
fat, pseudogynecomastia (presence of only adipose tissue), hypoplastic genitalia with microtestes (volume of 2 ml), generalized hypotonia,
genus valgus, pes planus, short toes Facial features of the patient. Patient showing facial characteristics, including macrocephaly, broad
forehead, prominent nose root and coarse nasal pyramid, anteverted nares, short palpebral fissures, large and prominent ears White tuft of
hair on the top of the head The mother of the boy presents some atypical characteristics, such as coarse facial features, prominent frontal
bossing, big hands and progressive hearing impairment. She showed normal height and good intellectual development. DNA was extracted from
whole blood of the patient by standard procedures. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) was performed using the Cytochip ISCA
4x180K (BlueGnome) containing 181,873 oligonucleotide probes (BlueGnome Ldt, Cambridge, UK) with a mean resolution of 16.30 Kb (25 Kb
resolution on the backbone, 3.4 Kb resolution on genes). The CytoChip ISCA arrays are designed to investigate constitutional disorders
through a combination of increased probe density in regions or genes associated with known constitutional disorders and regular spacing of
probes on the genomic backbone, with no known disease association. Data analysis was performed using InnoScan 710 Microarray Scanner
(Innopsys Inc. Chicago IL, USA) and Bluefuse software (BlueGnome Ldt, Cambridge, UK). Copy number variations (CNVs) reported in the Database
of Genomic Variants http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/and in in-house databases of benign CNVs were excluded from further analysis. Genomic
positions refer to the Human Genome February 2009 assembly (GRCh37/hg19). The PROP1 and GJB2 genes were screened for the presence of
causative mutations by direct sequencing. Briefly genomic DNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers designed to
specifically amplify the coding regions and the intron/exon boundaries of each gene. PCR conditions and primer sequences are available upon
request. The PCR products were visualized on a 2 % agarose gel and purified using ExoSAP-IT enzymatic PCR clean up system (Affimetrix, Santa
Clara, CA). The purified products were then sequenced with the Big Dye Terminator kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and the
automatic sequencer ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). We performed a search in DECIPHER database
(https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/) and ISCA (https://iscaconsortium.org/) in order to identify cases of patients carrying similar deletions.
At the age of 18 months, the patient was tested for the presence of causative mutations in the gene encoding connexin 26 (GJB2), as he
manifested bilateral neurosensorial hearing loss. No mutation associated with hearing impairment was identified in this gene. The array-CGH
analysis, performed at the age of 13 years, revealed the presence of an interstitial deletion at Xq21.1
(77.456.818x1,77.489.632-83.255.802x0,83.287.869x1), of approximately 5.8 Mb (Fig. 4). The same deletion was present at the heterozygous
state in the mother.Fig. 4Xq21.1 Deletion. a Graphic representation of part of Xq (corresponding to the region included in the dotted box)
with protein coding genes included in this region. The deletion at Xq21.1 detected in our patient
(ChrX:77.456.818x1,77.489.632-83.255.802x0,83.287.869x1) is represented by a red rectangle above the boxed region. b Schematic
representation of the Xq21.1 deleted region (in red) in our patient and other deletions reported in the Decipher and ISCA database in male
patients (in black) and female patients (in grey). The ID of each patient is reported. The clinical features of the patients are reported in
parentheses below the corresponding deletion as described in Decipher (https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/) and ISCA
(https://iscaconsortium.org/) Xq21.1 Deletion. a Graphic representation of part of Xq (corresponding to the region included in the dotted
box) with protein coding genes included in this region. The deletion at Xq21.1 detected in our patient
(ChrX:77.456.818x1,77.489.632-83.255.802x0,83.287.869x1) is represented by a red rectangle above the boxed region. b Schematic
representation of the Xq21.1 deleted region (in red) in our patient and other deletions reported in the Decipher and ISCA database in male
patients (in black) and female patients (in grey). The ID of each patient is reported. The clinical features of the patients are reported in
parentheses below the corresponding deletion as described in Decipher (https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/) and ISCA
(https://iscaconsortium.org/) A paternal inherited deletion on chromosome 22q11.2 of about 105 kb (18.894.864x2, 18.905.139-19.010.478x1,
1.190.35352x2) was also identified, included within the 3 Mb deletion of the DiGeorge syndrome. However, it is likely a benign CNV as it is
present in the Database of Genomic Variants (http://dgv.tcag.ca/dgv). The Xq21.1 deleted region was examined using the Human resource
websites (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/guide/human) at NCBI and the Archive EnsEMBL
(http://www.ensembl.org/info/website/archives/index). This region contains 14 genes, some of them with a known function (Table 1). Among
these, three genes (TBX22, BRW3 and POU3F4) have been previously reported mutated in well defined disorders, thus facilitating the
phenotype-genotype correlation in our patient (Table 1). However, none of the genes included in the deletion have been previously correlated
to the pituitary hormone deficiencies observed in our patient. The PROP1 gene was thus sequenced in order to detect a gene defect elsewhere
that could explain the GH and gonadotropin deficiency, but no mutation was identified.Table 1Protein encoding genes with a known function
included in the Xq21.1 deletionGeneProteinProtein functionDisease CYSLTR1 Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1Mediation of bronchoconstriction
via activation of a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger systemNone ZCCHC5 Zinc finger, CCHC domain containing 5Member of a family
of gag-related retrotransposon genesNone LPAR4 Lysophosphatidic acid receptor 4Monocytic differentiationNone P2RY10 Purinergic receptor P2Y,
G-protein coupled, 10Stimulation of diacylglyceride-dependent protein kinasesNone GPR174 G protein-coupled receptor
174Lysophosphatidylserine receptor involved in intracellular cAMP increaseNone ITM2A Integral membrane protein 2AChondrogenesisNone TBX22
T-box 22PalatogenesisCleft palate with ankyloglossia BRWD3 Bromodomain and WD repeat domain containing 3Chromatin-modificationIntellectual
disability X-linked with macrocephaly HMGN5 High mobility group nucleosome binding domain 5Nucleosomal binding and transcriptional
activationNone SH3BGRL SH3 domain binding glutamate-rich protein likeSignal transductionNone POU3F4 POU class 3 homeobox 4Inner ear
developmentNon-syndromic hearing loss CYLC1 Cylicin, basic protein of sperm head cytoskeleton 1Spermatid differentiationNone Protein
encoding genes with a known function included in the Xq21.1 deletion We report a maternally inherited deletion of approximately 5.8 Mb at
Xq21.1, in a male subject with developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features, cleft palate, intellectual disability, short stature and
hearing loss. The deleted region includes 14 OMIM genes: CYSLTR1, ZCCHC5, LPAR4, P2RY10, GPR174, ITM2A, TBX22, BRWD3, HMGN5, SH3BGRL, HMGN5,
SH3BGRL, POU3F4, CYLC1 (Fig. 4 and Table 1). Among these, TBX22, BRWD3 and POU3F4 well explain some of the clinical features of this
patient. Mutations in the TBX22 gene are a well established cause of X-linked cleft palate with ankyloglossia as well as contributing to the
prevalence of isolated cleft palate . More rarely, other craniofacial anomalies including cleft lip and hypodontia have also been related to
TBX22 variants . The phenotypic spectrum of subjects bearing TBX22 mutations can vary, even within the same family, from asymptomatic
females to males or females with a bifid uvula, a cleft of the soft palate, or a complete cleft of the hard and soft secondary palate, along
with ankyloglossia . Genetic hearing loss has an extremely varied etiology, with a plethora of genes involved in the autosomal and X-linked
forms with overlapping phenotypes . Among the main genetic defects, mutations within connexin 26 (GJB2) and connexin 30 (GJB6) are usually
associated with severe to profound sensorineural deafness. Our patient had been screened for the presence of mutations in GJB2 before
performing array-CGH, and was negative. The deafness causative gene is undoubtedly POU3F4, which causes the X-linked neurosensorial deafness
DFN3. This defect is associated with either POU3F4 point mutations or small deletions in a region located at 900 Kb upstream of the gene and
disturbing a regulatory element . Male patients show a well characterized phenotype with both stapes fixation and progressive mixed hearing
loss [10, 11]. Hearing loss was also observed in the mother of our patient as well as in about 40 % of the POU3F4 mutation carrier females.
Carrier females usually exhibit a postlingual onset of the hearing impairment that progresses over time with a variable expressivity
attributable to variations in the degree of skewing of X inactivation. Loss of function mutations affecting BRWD3 are associated with a
phenotype including mild to moderate intellectual disability, macrocephaly, dysmorphic facial features, skeletal signs and behavioral
disturbance [13, 14]. Among these alterations, a partial deletion encompassing 74 Kb and including the 30 last exons of the BRWD3 gene was
reported in a male with high forehead, deep-set eyes, hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, anteverted nares, downturned corners of the
mouth, pointed chin, and skeletal anomalies. This phenotype is similar to that of the patient presented here: macrocephaly, dysmorphic
facial features including prominent forehead and abnormal ears, behavioral disturbance, skeletal symptoms like pes planus, and cubitus
valgus. These findings strongly suggest that the lack of BRWD3 causes intellectual disability, macrocephaly and possibly the skeletal
symptoms (pes planus and cubitus valgus) observed in our patient. It has been demonstrated that BRWD3 plays a crucial role in
ubiquitination, as part of the ubiquitin/proteasome system. In Drosophila, BRWD3 belongs to the CUL4-ROC1-DDB1 E3 ligase complex in which it
acts as a CULLIN (CUL)4-associated factor that mediates light-dependent binding of CRY (Cryptochrome, a circadian photoreceptor) to the
complex, inducing the ubiquitination of dCRY and its light-induced degradation . The ubiquitin-proteasome system plays a crucial role in
brain development and is a critical regulator of the synaptic plasticity and long-term memory formation . Intriguingly, in humans mutations
of the CUL4B, which encode a ubiquitin 3 ligase subunit cause an X-linked syndrome characterized by intellectual impairment, macrocephaly,
central obesity, hypogonadism, pes cavus and tremor , a phenotype that largely overlaps with that observed in patients carrying BRWD3
mutations/deletions, including the present case. As both BRWD3 and CUL4B are part of the same complex it is likely that alterations of BRWD3
influence the ubiquitin-proteasome system similarly to other intellectual disability syndromes, whose prototype is represented by the
Angelman Syndrome which is caused by mutations of the ubiquitin ligase-encoding UBE3A gene (MIM 105830). The search in the Decipher and ISCA
databases for similar size deletions at Xq21.1 led to the identification of six deletions in males with syndromic intellectual disability
and developmental delay (DECIPHER 287069,253735, 257570,292180 and ISCA nsv533989, nsv530231, Fig. 4) and in one patient with no further
phenotype details (DECIPHER 283100, Fig. 4) but none of these exactly corresponds to that of our patient. However, among those observed in
female patients, there are two deletions (DECIPHER 262726 and 265126, Fig. 4) that completely cover that of our patient. The milder
associated phenotype includes broad nasal tip, skeletal defects, speech delay, and cleft palate, which are also features of the present
patient. Other remarkable clinical signs of our patient are short stature and multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. The presence of
mutations in PROP1, the most common genetic cause of combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) associated with short stature , was
excluded. It is interesting that the deletion partially overlaps with regions duplicated in patients with multiple congenital anomalies,
developmental delay, GH deficiency and short stature . This suggests that Xq21.1 might contain either a protein coding gene or a regulatory
element involved in pituitary hormone secretion. Within the 5.8 Mb region there is no evidence for a protein coding gene directly involved
in pituitary functioning. However, ITM2A, included in the deletion, might be related to the severe short stature as it encodes an integral
transmembrane protein involved in early cartilage development . It has been suggested that the expression of ITM2A influences the
chondrogenic differentiation potential of mesenchymal stem cells in vitro . It might be hypothesized that the absence of ITM2A greatly
influences the cartilage development with a possible impact on postnatal growth. In conclusion, a detailed comparison of the clinical
characteristics and the function of the genes included in the Xq21.1 delete region confirm the causative role of this rearrangement in our
patient. Moreover, the presence of a gene involved in cartilage differentiation suggests that ITM2A might be responsible for growth
impairment. Written informed consent was obtained from the mother of the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Array comparative genomic hybridization
X-linked Intellectual disability Growth hormone deficiency Magnetic resonance imaging Intelligence quotient Growth hormone Luteinizing-
hormone-releasing hormone Luteinizing hormone Follicle-stimulating hormone Growth-hormone-releasing hormone Insulin-like growth factor
Standard deviation score Electrocardiography Copy number variations Polymerase chain reaction Combined pituitary hormone deficiency M.
Giordano and C. Gertosio contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions GM and GC made substantial contributions to acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data; they were also involved
in drafting the manuscript; FI played a role in molecular diagnosis; PS, MC, and BE organized the clinical data for the manuscript,
contributed to revision and interpretation of genetic studies; BM made substantial contributions to conception and design, revised the
manuscript critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors are grateful to
Susan West for English revision of the paper.
