Perinatal-lethal Gaucher disease is very rare and is considered a variant of type 2 Gaucher disease that occurs in the neonatal period. The
most distinct features of perinatal-lethal Gaucher disease are non-immune hydrops fetalis. Less common signs of the disease are
hepatosplenomegaly, ichthyosis and arthrogryposis. We report a case of Gaucher's disease (type 2) diagnosed in a newborn who presented with
Hydrops Fetalis. Gaucher disease (GD), is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder, caused by a deficiency in the enzyme
glucocerebrosidase. It is the most common of the lysosomal storage disorders. Type 2 GD, the most severe and progressive form, manifests
either prenatally or in the first months of life . Perinatal-lethal GD is very rare and is considered a variant of type 2 GD. The most
distinct features are non-immune hydrops fetalis [2, 3]. We report a case of type 2 Gaucher's disease diagnosed in a newborn who presented
with hydrops fetalis. The patient, a female newborn, was the second infant from a 31 year-old gravida 2 para 2 mother. The maternal past
medical history included a previous preterm male stillborn with undiagnosed case of non-immune hydrops fetalis. Family history revealed also
two undiagnosed cases of hydrops fetalis in two preterm stillbirths. Third trimester fetal ultrasonography revealed severe hydrops fetalis
with skin edema, polyhydramnios, hepatomegaly, clustered bowel loops, and fetal hypokinesia. Maternal prenatal tests showed blood type A, Rh
+, negative maternal serum indirect Coombs test, immunity to rubella and negative serology results for toxoplasma, hepatitis surface antigen
and cytomegalovirus. The infant was delivred by cesarean section indicated for breech presentation and polyhydramnios, at 36 weeks of
gestation. Apgar scores of 2 and 3 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Body weight was 2600gm (39th percentile), length was 44 cm (10th
percentile), and head circumference was 34 cm (82thpercentile). At birth, she was apneic and required endotracheal intubation. Physical
examination revealed a state of hydrops with generalized skin edema, thickened and shiny skin, hepatosplenomegaly, hypertonia,
arthrogryposis and akinesia. No Dysmorphic facial features or other congenital anomalies were associated (Figure 1). Chest radiograph showed
an enlarged cardiac silhouette (Figure 2). Laboratory results included blood type A, Rh +, negative direct Coombs test, a normal blood cell
count. Bacterial and viral cultures are negative, SGOT / SGPT: 237/22U/L. Urinary screening for metabolic disorders was negative. Specific
tests was as follows: low glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity on leucocytes (patient level =0.4 nmol/h/mg, controls = 20 nmol/h/mg); and
high serum chitotriosidase level (patient = 16 200 nmol/h/ml, controls 200 nmol/h/ml). Parent's measurement of glucocerebrosidase enzymatic
activity on leucocytes showed results consistent with a heterozygous for GD. The infant died on the first day of life after stopping
resuscitation. Diagnosis was confirmed by direct sequencing of glucose rebrosidase gene (GBA). A single nucleotide substitution was found in
exon 9: c.1255G > A leading to the substitution of Aspartic Acid by Asparagine (p.Asp419Asn). This diagnosis has allowed two prenatal
diagnoses for the next pregnancies. The foetuses were unaffected. Neonatal presentations of Gaucher disease demonstrating hydrops, peeling
and shiny skin Chest radiograph showing an enlarged cardiac silhouette Hydrops fetalis, has been associated with several lysosomal storage
disorders, including Type 2 GD . Cases involving hydrops tend to be perinatal lethal disorders and the pathophysiology is not well
understood . Generally, when hydrops is present in Type 2 GD, the fetus dies in utero, or is delivered prematurely and dies within the first
days of life . In our case, there were three family histories of undiagnosed perinatal death in the same circunstances. Our patient was
intubated and maintainded under mechanical ventilation just to perform laboratory tests and enzymes studies, necessary to inform future
pregnancies. When a lysosomal storage disease is suspected in a fetus or a new born because of hydrops fetalis or neonatal
hepatosplenomegaly, the presence of arthrogryposis and ichthyosis should raise suspicion for GD. In our case, the infant had a shiny and
thickened skin, reminiscient of a collodion-baby phenotype. This finding may have potential diagnostic importance. Patients with Type 2 GD
exhibit epidermal abnormalities regardless of whether ichthyosis is clinically evident [5, 6]. The most reliable diagnostic methods are
measurement of glucose rebrosidase enzymatic activity and direct sequencing of GBA1. Enzymatic assays can be performed on leukocytes,
fibroblasts, or tissue samples such as liver or spleen. Genetic testing for GD by direct sequencing of GBA1 can be used to determine disease
and carrier status . The occurrence of an index case invites to offer genetic counselling to parents. Unusual mechanisms including de novo
mutations have been described in patients with GD . Thus the recurrence risk is not always obvious. In the presented case, the parents were
heterozygous for GD, with a significant risk of recurrence of the disease in their offspring. The diagnosis has allowed genetic counselling
in the next pregnancy. A greater physician awareness of hydrops fetalis as a possible clinical presentation of GD will allow early
recognition and therefore prompt diagnosis, moreover it will allow better estimation of the incidence of this disease. An accurate and
timely diagnosis of GD is critical for genetic counselling, patient and family management that can inform future pregnancies. We thank
Catherine Caillaud for technical assistance in molecular analysis. Written consent for publication was obtained from the patient or their
relative. The authors declare no competing interest. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have
equally contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
