Enchondroma represents a common bone tumor of the hand. The scaphoid is a rare location. We report the case of a scaphoid enchondroma
presenting as chronic wrist pain following a relatively minor trauma. The diagnosis was suggested by radiological study and then confirmed
by histological study after biopsy. Enucleation and vascularized bone graft with osteosynthesis provided good results. The clinical,
radiological and therapeutic aspects of this rare condition are discussed. Enchondroma is a common benign cartilaginous turnout that grows
from the medullary cavity, in particular in the phalanxes of the hand and feet. Carpal bone enchondroma however, is rare; few cases of
carpal bone enchondroma have been reported in the literature. We report a rare case of an enchondroma of the scaphoid presenting as chronic
wrist pain following a relatively minor trauma. A 34-year-old manual worker complained from pain in his right wrist. The symptoms became
more severe after strenuous work. There was no reported history of previous major trauma, collagenous or infectious disease. Six months
earlier, the patient had experienced sudden pain and tenderness in his right wrist, which was diagnosed as tendinopaty and treated with a
splint and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Clinical study showed slight swelling of the dorsoradial aspect of the joint, limited and
painful motion, and decreased grip strength. Radiographs revealed a fracture through a lucency in the middle third of the scaphoid, the
speckled calcifications in the cyst are suggestive of an enchondroma (Figure 1). Scan computed tomography confirms the fracture of scaphoid
and provides a precise localization of the lesion and the speckled calcifications. The other bones of the carpus were of homogeneous density
and normal in shape (Figure 2). The diagnosis was confirmed by histological study after biopsy. A dorsolateral approach was performed. The
lesion was meticulously enucleated then curetted until both proximal and distal surfaces demonstrated diffuse bleeding when the tourniquet
was released (Figure 3). The remaining gap was filled with a Zaidenberg vascularized bone graft. Two percutaneous Kirschner wires were
placed to fix the grafted scaphoid (Figure 4). The arm was immobilized for 6 weeks in a long cast with the wrist in slight ulnar deviation
and the thumb in opposition. Histology showed small fragments of bone and ossifying cartilage in a reactive fibroblastic connective tissue
stroma, consistent with an enchondroma. Four years postoperatively, wrist motion was at 60° of flexion and 45° of extension and an arc of
30° for radioulnar deviation. The bone graft was fully incorporated and remodelled without signs of recurrence (Figure 5). (A)
anteroposterior radiograph demonstrate cystic lucency in the middle third of the scaphoid. The speckled calcification in the cyst is
suggestive of an enchondroma; (B) Scaphoid view radiograph demonstrate cystic lucency in the middle third of the scaphoid. The speckled
calcification in the cyst is suggestive of an enchondroma Scan of the wrist providing precise localization of the lesion, revealed the
fracture of the scaphoid and the speckled calcification Per operative radiograph demonstrate curettage of the lesion (A) Anteroposterior
radiograph shows vascularized bone graft fixed by kirschner wires; (B) Lateral radiograph shows vascularized bone graft fixed by kirschner
wires Anteroposterior radiograph at 4-year follow-up demonstrating good integration of the bone graft with no recurrence Enchondroma is a
benign tumor of hyaline cartilage and represents the second most common benign chondral tumor after osteochondroma. It is assumed that
enchondromas arise due to the displacement of embryonic remains of cartilage growth plate in the metaphysis. Regarding the location, around
40-65% of enchondromas are found in the small bones of the hand especially the proximal phalanx . All other locations are rare. The carpus
is another rare location of occurrence for enchondromas . Takigawa reported 110 cases of hand enchondromas, only 2 cases were involving the
carpal bones (scaphoid, lunate). On the other hand, enchondromas are even uncommon within all carpal lesions. Emecheta , reported only three
enchondromas in a serie of 86 treated carpal bone lesions. Enchondroma is usually symptom-free, the growth of the associated bone however
causes cortical thinning and endosteal resorption, with a high predisposition to pathologic fracture [5, 6]. Scaphoid is the most common
localization of the carpal enchondroma, and it is usually minimally or asymptomatic until a pathologic fracture occurs . Takka reported 5
cases presenting with pathologic fracture out of 8 cases of scaphoid enchondroma. Malignant transformation of solitary enchondroma is very
rare, and it has not been described in the carpus. Although the standard X-ray findings are essentiel in the diagnosis of enchondroma of the
carpal bone, the diagnosis of enchondroma may require further investigations such as CT-scan or MRI. MRI is particularly helpful in
identifying enchondroma, demonstrated by a low signal intensity on T1 sequences and a high signal intensity on T2 sequences . Treatment aims
to preventing recurrence with an appropriate excision of the lesion, and reconstruction of the scaphoid bone with a grafting procedure with
minimal morbidity [11, 12]. A vascularized bone graft was selected over conventional grafting methods . The enchondroma is a well-known
benign bone tumor. Its location in the scaphoid bone is exceptional. The pathologic fracture is the most common way of revelation. Diagnosis
is suspected on plain radiographs and CT, and is confirmed by the anatomopathologic study. Enucleation and vascularized bone graft with
osteosynthesis provides good results. The author's declare no competing interests. All authors contributed significantly to this work.
