Mutations in the EDAR-gene cause hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with defects in ectodermal appendage development including teeth, skin,
exocrine glands and hair. Hair defects are sparsely described in genetically defined samples. The aim of this study was to investigate hair
structures in three families with a heterozygous c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR gene using scanning electron microscopy. Three Swedish
families, where some members had a known c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR gene with an autosomal dominant inheritance (AD) were included
(n = 37) of which 17 carried the mutation and 20 did not. Thirty-two age and gender matched not related individuals served as a reference
group. Confirmation of the c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR gene was performed by genomic sequencing. Hairs were subjected to blinded
scanning electron microscopy examination and hair defects were categorized and scored. The minimum and maximum diameters of hairs were lower
in the mutation group compared to the reference group. Subjects in the mutation group had to greater extent deep deformations in hair shafts
compared to the non-mutation group and the reference group (p < 0.001). Individuals with a c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR-gene displayed
more hair shaft deformations confirming the role of EDAR for human hair follicle development and postnatal hair follicle cycling. Ectodermal
dysplasias (EDs) are genetic disorders with lack or dysgenesis of at least two of the ectodermal derivatives; hair, nails, teeth or sweat
glands . Yavuz et al reported that the most frequent abnormality in ectodermal dysplasia is skin disorders (93 %), followed by hair and nail
disorders (86 %). Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) which is the most common form of ectodermal dysplasia is characterized by severe
defects in ectodermal appendage development, including hairs, teeth, and exocrine glands. Common symptoms in individuals with HED are
reduced number of teeth, reduced saliva secretion, dry skin and sparse and thin hair . HED can be inherited in X-linked, autosomal dominant
(AD) or autosomal recessive (AR) manner. Four genes (EDA1, EDAR, EDARADD and WNT10A) account for 90 % of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
cases and mutation in EDAR have been reported to account for 25 % of non-EDA1 HED cases . Hair shaft phenotypes in ectodermal dysplasia have
been reported from mainly genetically undefined samples. In a three generation family with putative AD HED, scanning electron microscopy
showed longitudinal grooves in the hair shafts and defective cuticular layers . In another study structural hair abnormalities were found in
a group of patients with phenotypically heterogeneous ED . Furthermore, structural abnormalities such as twisted hairs and longitudinal
grooves were found in hair samples from patients with hypomelanosis of Ito and some other ectodermal dysplasias . In X-linked hypohidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia with an EDA1 mutation fewer hair follicles and hairs with decreased thickness were observed . The hair follicle is a
skin appendage that develops in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions between epidermal keratinocytes committed to hair-specific
differentiation and a cluster of dermal fibroblasts that forms the follicular papilla. Mice studies documented the role of Edar signalling
for i) the control of hair follicle development and growth that takes place in a sequential series of epithelial–mesenchymal interactions,
as well as ii) postnatal hair follicle regeneration by regulating the apoptosis in keratinocytes. This takes place in a cross-talk between
Edar and other signalling pathways. The Wnt pathway is considered to be the master regulator during hair follicle morphogenesis and Wnt
signalling proceeds through EDA/EDAR/NF-kB signaling. NF-kB regulates the Wnt pathway and acts as a signal mediator by upregulating the
expression of Shh ligand . Effects on human hair structure related to deficient EDAR signaling have previously not been described.
Previously we characterized individuals with a heterozygous c.1072C > T mutation (p.ARG358X) in the EDAR gene with respect to dental signs
and symptoms from other ectodermal structures but not hair . The aim of the present study was to investigate hair structures in three
families with a heterozygous c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR gene using scanning electron microscope. The null hypothesis was that there
were no differences compared to family members without the mutation. Forty-six members of three families, where some had a known mutation in
the EDAR gene , were invited to participate in a clinical examination of signs and symptoms from ectodermal structures. Nine family members
declined participation and thus the material consisted of 37 subjects. Confirmation of the c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR gene was
performed by genomic sequencing . Seventeen out of the 37 family members carried the mutation in the EDAR gene. The reference group
consisted of 32 individuals who were age and gender matched to all subjects with the mutation, and to 15 of 20 individuals without the
mutation. The mean age of the family members was 31.5 ± 23.1 years; 35.6 ± 22.6 in the mutation group and 28.2 ± 23.7 in the non-mutation
group (p > 0.05); 49 % were males, 47 % in the mutation group and 50 % in the non-mutation group (p > 0.05). One male individual with the
known mutation was completely bald and consequently not included in the hair analysis. Written informed consent was received from all
participating individuals. Parents provided consent for individuals below 18 years of age. The study was approved by The Regional Ethical
Review Board in Umeå, Sweden (Dnr 2011-123-32 M). Five to 15 hairs were collected from each participant and they were stored dry at room
temperature in a plastic bag until examination of scale structure of cuticle layer, diameter, deformation-grade, and deformation-extent
using scanning electron microscopy. All hairs were in its native state, and not chemically treated prior to the examination. All
participants regularly used shampoos for cleaning and some had used additional products such as conditioners, wax and gel. Before
examination the purity of the hairs were assessed. The scanning electron microscopy examinations were performed blinded at the electron
microscope platform at Umeå University by an experienced examiner and the maximum and minimum diameters of hairs were measured as well as
variation of diameters. Still blinded, scale structure of cuticle layer and deformations were categorized from photos and scored according
to the criteria in Table 1.Table 1Scoring of variables assessed in electronic microscopyVariablesScores/measurePurity1. Completely clean2.
Relatively clean3. Not completely cleanScale structure of cuticle layer1. Normal2. Incipient loss of structure3. Almost no structure4.
Smooth surface5. Erosions6. Reinforced scale structureDiameter minμmDiameter maxμmVariation in diameter1. No variation2. Continuous
variation of the same size3. Large local variationDeformation grade1. None2. Superficial (no obvious grooves present)3. Deep (obvious
grooves present)Deformation extent1. None2. Patchy3. Large surface areasTwisted hair1. No2. Yes Scoring of variables assessed in electronic
microscopy The results for the categorical variables are presented in percentages for the three groups, while the continuous variables are
described by mean, standard deviation (sd), median and interquartile range (IQR). The difference between the groups was tested by Fisher
exact test for the categorical variables and by the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon or Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test for the interval scale
measurements. A p-value of < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. No noticeable differences were identified between the three
groups regarding the scale structures of the cuticle layer of hair. The minimum and maximum diameters of hair were lower in the mutation
group compared to the reference group (p < 0.001), (Table 2, Fig. 1). No statistically significant difference in minimum diameter
(p = 0.422) or maximum diameter (p = 0.122) was found between the mutation group and non-mutation group. The variation of the hairs diameter
did not differ between the mutation group and the non-mutation group (p = 0.448) or between the mutation group and the reference group
(p = 0.254).Table 2Distribution of gender, number of examined hairs, scored scale structure and deformation variablesReference groupNon-
mutation groupMutation group n = 32 n = 20 n = 17a Women, n (%)17 (53.1 %)10 (50.0 %)9 (56.3 %)Examined hairs, mean (sd)9.5 (2.2)10.2
(2.0)9.6 (2.3)Scale structure of cuticle layer 1. Normal23128 2. Incipient loss of structure211 3. Almost no structure322 4. Smooth
surface351 5. Erosions103 6. Reinforced scale structure001Diameter (Min/Max) μm40/11015/11020/90Variation in diameter μm 1. No
variation001 2. Continuous variation of the same size311714 3. Large local variation131Deformation grade 1. None720 2. Superficial (no
obvious grooves present)24154 3. Deep (obvious grooves present)1312Deformation extent 1. None720 2. Patchy8136 3. Large surface
areas17510Twisted hair002Baldness001 aOne subject bald and consequently not included in hair analysisFig. 1Minimum and maximum diameters of
hair. Boxes show 50 % of the cases, lines across boxes denote median values, and whiskers show the IQR × 1.5 ± Q1/Q3 and outliers are
indicated with a circle Distribution of gender, number of examined hairs, scored scale structure and deformation variables aOne subject bald
and consequently not included in hair analysis Minimum and maximum diameters of hair. Boxes show 50 % of the cases, lines across boxes
denote median values, and whiskers show the IQR × 1.5 ± Q1/Q3 and outliers are indicated with a circle The proportion of individuals with a
deep deformation grade was highest in the mutation group (75.0 %) compared to the non-mutation group (15.0 %) and reference group (3.1 %),
(Table 2). The difference was statistically significant between the mutation group compared to the non-mutation group and compared to the
reference group, (p < 0.001) for both comparisons while no statistically significant difference could be identified between the non-mutation
group and the reference group (p > 0.05), (Fig. 2). Sixty-two per cent in the mutation group, 25 % in the non-mutation group 53 % in the
reference group had deformations on large surface areas of the hair (Table 2), but the differences were not statistically significant
between the mutation group and the non-mutation group (p = 0.058) or between group of the mutation and the reference group (p = 0.114),
(Table 2, Fig. 3). Two male participants in the mutation group had twisted hair compared to none in the non-mutation and none in the
reference group (Fig. 4).Fig. 2Deformation grade of hair in the reference group (n = 32), non mutation group (n = 20) and mutation group
(n = 16)Fig. 3Deformation extent of hair in the reference group (n = 32), non mutation group (n = 20) and mutation group (n = 16)Fig.
4Examples of hairs. a Normal scale structure and no abnormalities. b Lack of scale structure. c Deformation grade deep. d Twisted hair
Deformation grade of hair in the reference group (n = 32), non mutation group (n = 20) and mutation group (n = 16) Deformation extent of
hair in the reference group (n = 32), non mutation group (n = 20) and mutation group (n = 16) Examples of hairs. a Normal scale structure
and no abnormalities. b Lack of scale structure. c Deformation grade deep. d Twisted hair This study describes the effect on hair structure
of a heterozygous c.1072C > T mutation (p.ARG358X) in the EDAR gene which has previously not been described in a genetically defined human
clinical material. Deep hair deformations were more common in the mutation group and the null-hypothesis could therefore be rejected for
deformation of hairs. The mutation which changes a CGA arginine codon to a TGA stop codon has earlier been described . Structural hair
defects may be a marker for an underlying metabolic disorder, the expression of a genetic disorder affecting hair growth or part of a
congenital syndrome with accompanying hair malformations . The subjects in the mutation group fulfilled the criteria of having a congenital
syndrome because of the combination of missing teeth due to agenesis, aberrant tooth form, reduced salivary secretion and reduced sweating
ability . Therefore, the structural hair defects can be seen as an additional developmental defect linked to the dysfunctional EDAR gene.
Our characterisation of hair phenotype of the heterozygous c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR gene gives a clinical confirmation for the role
of EDAR for human hair follicle development and postnatal hair follicle cycling. The corresponding role of Edar in mice has earlier been
shown . The comparison with both the related non-mutation group and the reference group is a strength of this study. To control for a
familial impact on hair deformations and thickness we selected an age- and gender matched not related reference-group. There was a clear
difference of hair diameters, both in minimum and maximum diameters, between the mutation group and the non-related reference group.
However, we detected no difference between the mutation group and the related non-mutation group. Our data may therefore reflect a familial
impact on hair thickness but not on hair deformations. This indicates that there are other genetic variants associated with hair thickness .
Fewer hair follicles and lower average terminal hair diameter were seen in 12 males with X-linked ectodermal dysplasia with an EDA1 mutation
compared to 13 non-related controls. However, no comparison with related healthy family members was performed . The average reported
thickness of hairs was 51 μm for males with the mutation and 71 μm for the control group and these figures correspond well with our data. We
did not assess number of hair follicles. However, it was a clinical impression that many subjects in the mutation group had sparse hair and
consequently fewer hair shafts than family members that did not carry the mutation. Sparse hair were described clinically in a large family
with AD HED without any comparison with un-affected family members . Interestingly, the deformations in hair shafts shown in the present
material resembles the longitudinal grooves in hairs described by Jorgensen et al. in a three generation family with putative AD HED and by
Selvaag et al. in a group with different ED’s . We have earlier shown that the deficiency in EDAR signaling because of a heterozygous
c.1072C > T mutation also is associated with a higher number of missing teeth due to agenesis, reduced saliva secretion and reduced ability
to sweat . However, the severity of sign and symptoms were generally milder than in the more common EDA1 mutations, particularly for
sweating problems [9, 21] and varied between individuals. Variations between individuals who have the mutation were also obvious in hair
deformities. The scanning electron microscopic examination showed thin twisted hair in two male subjects in the mutation group; they were
both affected with severe problems of dry skin and had severe oligodontia. The 22-year-old brother to one of the subjects with twisted hair
in the mutation group was suffering from complete baldness since before the age of 20 and could consequently not be included in the hair
analysis. He was congenitally missing 14 permanent teeth except third molars. Unfortunately, although this individual had baldness as the
most severe expression of a hair mutation, he could not be in included in the statistical analyses of the hair anomalies and increase the
statistical power. Individuals with a heterozygous c.1072C > T mutation in the EDAR-gene displayed more hair shaft deformations confirming
the role of EDAR for human hair follicle development and postnatal hair follicle cycling. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CSB and MSE planned the study, searched for ethical permission, drafted the manuscript
and revised it critically. CFK collected samples for confirmation of the mutation by genomic sequencing, hair and scored hair structures
after electron microscopic examination. DH contributed with statistical analyses and figures. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors would like to thank all participants in this study. We are thankful to Per Hörstedt for the scanning electron
microscopy.
