To characterize photoreceptor structure and mosaic integrity in subjects with ​RGS9- and R9AP-associated retinal dysfunction (bradyopsia)
and compare to previous observations in other cone dysfunction disorders such as oligocone trichromacy. Observational case series. setting:
Moorfields Eye Hospital (United Kingdom) and Medical College Wisconsin (USA). study population: Six eyes of 3 subjects with disease-causing
variants in ​RGS9 or R9AP. main outcome measures: Detailed retinal imaging using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography and confocal
adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy. Cone density at 100 μm from foveal center ranged from 123 132 cones/mm2 to 140 013 cones/mm2.
Cone density ranged from 30 573 to 34 876 cones/mm2 by 600 μm from center and from 15 987 to 16,253 cones/mm2 by 1400 μm from center, in
keeping with data from normal subjects. Adaptive-optics imaging identified a small, focal hyporeflective lesion at the foveal center in both
eyes of the subject with RGS9-associated disease, corresponding to a discrete outer retinal defect also observed on spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography; however, the photoreceptor mosaic remained intact at all other observed eccentricities. Bradyopsia and oligocone
trichromacy share common clinical symptoms and cannot be discerned on standard clinical findings alone. Adaptive-optics imaging previously
demonstrated a sparse mosaic of normal wave-guiding cones remaining at the fovea, with no visible structure outside the central fovea in
oligocone trichromacy. In contrast, the subjects presented in this study with molecularly confirmed bradyopsia had a relatively intact and
structurally normal photoreceptor mosaic, allowing the distinction between these disorders based on the cellular phenotype and suggesting
different pathomechanisms. The phenomenon of bradyopsia (“slow vision”: OMIM 608415) was first described by Kooijman and associates in 4
patients from 3 unrelated Dutch families.1 Disease-causing sequence variants have been identified in either RGS9 (encoding a GTPase-
activating protein) or R9AP (encoding its membrane anchor protein), with both playing a critical role in the recovery phase of visual
transduction.2, 3 Bradyopsia (RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy) is characterized by reduced central vision from childhood, with mild
photophobia, absence of nystagmus, normal color vision and night vision, and normal fundus appearance. However, patients report slow visual
adaptation to changes in illumination, in both dark- and light-adapted states.3, 4, 5 These symptoms are shared with oligocone trichromacy,
another cone dysfunction syndrome characterized by normal fundus appearance, normal or near-normal color vision, reduced visual acuity from
infancy, and mild photophobia.5, 6, 7 Unlike RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy, the underlying molecular genetic basis of oligocone
trichromacy remains uncertain. Oligocone trichromacy and/or a “marked incomplete achromatopsia (ACHM)-like” phenotype have been reported in
association with “hypomorphic” mutations in the CNGA3, CNGB3, PDE6C, and GNAT2 genes.5 However, some of these cases arguably have features
more in keeping with incomplete achromatopsia per se, rather than oligocone trichromacy.5 Electroretinograms according to the protocol
recommendations by the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV)8, 9 also do not allow for the distinction to
be made between RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy and oligocone trichromacy, with more comprehensive electroretinograms than those mandated
by the ISCEV in the electroretinogram standard document being needed. Extended electroretinogram testing includes dark-adapted red flash
electroretinogram (which has both a cone and rod system component) and dark-adapted 10.0 (or 11.5) electroretinograms with a wider range of
increasing interstimulus intervals are necessary to establish the correct diagnosis.3, 10 However, both oligocone trichromacy and RGS9/R9AP-
associated retinopathy are associated with generalized cone system dysfunction, with an undetectable light-adapted 30 Hz flicker
electroretinogram and a severely reduced light-adapted 3.0 electroretinogram. Recently, photoreceptor topography was assessed in 3 subjects
with typical oligocone trichromacy, confirmed to not harbor variants in either RGS9 or R9AP, using adaptive-optics flood-illuminated
ophthalmoscopy (AO-Flood).11 These patients were all found to have a reduced number of waveguiding cones at the fovea, with no structure
visible outside the central fovea—thereby confirming the original hypothesis of the underlying basis of oligocone trichromacy, that the
disorder was caused by a reduction in number of otherwise functional cone photoreceptors. In this study, we have undertaken deep phenotyping
of molecularly proven patients with either RGS9- or R9AP-associated retinopathy. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography was used to
both qualitatively and quantitatively examine retinal laminar integrity and confocal adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy was used
to directly probe photoreceptor mosaic architecture in order to determine (1) whether oligocone trichromacy and RGS9/R9AP-associated
retinopathy could be discerned at the cellular level, and (2) whether the generalized retinal dysfunction in RGS9/R9AP-associated
retinopathy is secondary to cone cell loss/structural deficit or a functional deficit in otherwise intact receptors. This observational case
series was conducted in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki (1983 Revision) and the applicable regulatory
requirements, and in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). After approval of the study and its
procedures by the local ethics committees of Moorfields Eye Hospital and the Medical College of Wisconsin, informed consent was obtained
from all participating subjects prior to enrollment. All 3 subjects have been previously reported: subjects MM_0032, MM_0033, and JC_0759
correspond to cases 1A, 2A, and 3, respectively, in the series published by Michaelides and associates.3 The Table summarizes clinical
findings and subject demographics. All subjects had the pathognomonic electroretinogram findings associated with bradyopsia as described
previously3: In brief, the dark-adapted 0.01 electroretinogram (rod electroretinogram), the dark-adapted red flash electroretinogram (which
has both a cone and rod system component), and the dark-adapted 3.0 electroretinogram (combined rod-cone standard flash electroretinogram;
rod dominated given numerosity) with interstimulus interval of 2 minutes were all normal. However, with an interstimulus interval of 20
seconds, amplitude reduction was observed in DA 11.5 electroretinograms, which was progressively less marked with increasing interstimulus
interval, consistent with delayed recovery after the flash. Light-adapted testing revealed an undetectable pattern electroretinogram and
30 Hz flicker electroretinogram. Pupils of each patient were dilated using 1 drop each of phenylephrine (2.5%) and tropicamide (1%) before
imaging in the study herein. All subjects underwent spectral-domain optical coherence tomography using an Envisu C2300 system (Bioptigen,
Morrisville, North Carolina, USA) through the macular region. Macular scans, either 750 A-scans/B-scan and 150 B-scans or 1000
A-scans/B-scan and 100 B-scans, over a nominally 7 × 7 mm area were acquired to locate the center of the fovea. Then, high-density line
scans were acquired (1000 A-scans/B-scan), and ImageJ (NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA) was used to register up to 100 B-scans and average them
to reduce speckle noise.11 To correct for retinal magnification, axial length was measured in all subjects (Zeiss IOL Master; Carl Zeiss
Meditec, Dublin, California, USA) in order to estimate the lateral scale of each image and to correct the interindividual differences.12 In
order to analyze the retinal cross-section and determine total retinal thickness, inner retinal thickness, and outer nuclear layer
thickness, foveal scans were manually segmented using ImageJ (NIH) and a Matlab (MATLAB; MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts, USA)-based
algorithm.13, 14 The following definitions were applied: total retinal thickness was defined as the distance from the inner limiting
membrane to the retinal pigment epithelium; inner retinal thickness as the distance from the inner limiting membrane to the outer plexiform
layer; and outer nuclear layer thickness as the distance from the outer plexiform layer to the external limiting membrane. Layer
designations are shown in Figure 1 (Top left). Thicknesses were compared to those derived from a normative database collected at Medical
College Wisconsin, consisting of 167 normal individuals (72 male, 95 female, average age of 32.6 years [range 7-60 years]).13, 15 Images of
the photoreceptor mosaic were obtained using 1 of 2 nearly identical adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopes located at Medical
College Wisconsin and Moorfields Eye Hospital.16, 17 The difference between the systems was the center wavelength of the imaging source. The
imaging source at Moorfields Eye Hospital was a 790 nm superluminescent diode (Superlum Ireland, Carrigtwohill, County Cork, Ireland) while
the imaging source at Medical College Wisconsin was a 775 nm superluminescent diode (Inphenix Inc, Livermore, California, USA). Both systems
operated at ∼17 frames/second. Wavefront aberrations were corrected using a 97-actuator deformable mirror (ALPAO, Biviers, France). Image
sequences were recorded at different locations across the central fovea and parafovea. Each image sequence was desinusoided and registered
using algorithms described by Dubra and associates.18 The resultant image from each sequence was then manually combined into a large montage
(Adobe Photoshop; Adobe Systems, Inc, San Jose, California, USA). Each subject's axial length was used to determine the absolute scale of
his or her retinal images, ensuring the accuracy of subsequent measurements of the cone mosaic. From these images, cone density measurements
were obtained using a Matlab-aided direct counting procedure.12, 13 Cone photoreceptors were identified within an 80 × 80 μm region of
interest at the location of peak cone density (0) when possible, and at 100, 200, 300, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1200, and 1400 μm temporal
eccentricity. Cone density was then calculated over the central 55 × 55 μm area to mitigate the effect of edge artifacts.19 Cone densities
were compared to normal data published by Curcio and associates.20 Owing to the focal foveal lesion present in JC_0759, the center of the
lesion was assumed to be the location of peak cone density, and all measurements were based from this location. Volumetric and foveal
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography images were obtained in both eyes of all subjects. Foveal scans from all subjects are shown in
Figure 2. Qualitative assessment of the inner segment ellipsoid band showed that JC_0759 had focal foveal disruption of the inner segment
ellipsoid band in both eyes, while there was normal macular lamination in both eyes of MM_0032 and MM_0033 (Figure 2). Total, inner retinal,
and outer nuclear layer thickness was within 2 standard deviations of normal for all subjects (Figure 1). Adaptive-optics scanning light
ophthalmoscopy imaging identified a small focal central hyporeflective lesion (nonwaveguiding cones) in both eyes of JC_0759. The lesion was
present at the foveal center; however, cone mosaic integrity was intact at all other observed eccentricities. A foveal montage for subject
JC_0759's right eye is shown in Figure 3. Subjects MM_0032 and MM_0033 had qualitatively normal waveguiding cone photoreceptors at all
imaged locations. The foveal montage for subject MM_0033's right eye is shown in Figure 3. Selected location photoreceptor images are shown
in Figure 4. Consistent with the focal lesion in JC_0759, no photoreceptors are visible at the center using confocal adaptive-optics
scanning light ophthalmoscopy. Cone photoreceptors are visible (roughly equally sized circular objects) in the images from peak density
until 400 μm from the center. Measured cone densities were within the normal range reported in histologic analysis at all 10 locations in
both eyes of subjects MM_0032 and MM_0033.20 The aforementioned foveal defect in patient JC_0759 was reflected by a decreased cell number at
the area of expected peak cone density. Cone density at 100 μm from center, the location closest to center measureable for all 3 subjects,
ranged from 123 132 to 140 013 cones/mm2. Cone density ranged from 30 573 to 34 876 cones/mm2 by 600 μm from center and 15 987 to 16 253
cones/mm2 by 1400 μm. These cone densities at different locations are entirely in keeping with both published histologic and in vivo image
analysis.20, 21, 22 Quantification of cone photoreceptor density at all measured eccentricities is shown in Figure 5. Oligocone trichromacy
and RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy share clinical characteristics including stationary cone dysfunction, mild photophobia, normal color
vision, and normal fundi. RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy can be distinguished from oligocone trichromacy on the basis of molecular
screening and distinct electrophysiologic findings following extended assessment.3, 5, 10 We conducted this study to characterize the
retinal architecture in RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy and thereby shed light into any structural differences between oligocone
trichromacy and RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy. We hypothesized that they could be discerned on the basis of their cellular phenotype. In
a previous study in oligocone trichromacy, cone photoreceptor imaging identified 2 types of subject. In 3 (out of 4) subjects, representing
typical oligocone trichromacy, a uniform reduction in cone density was identified, in combination with a reduced outer nuclear layer
thickness on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography; these findings support the original hypothesis that oligocone trichromacy is
characterized by a reduced number of functional cones.11 The findings of our present study in RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy are in direct
contrast, providing evidence that cones are present in normal numbers but are dysfunctional (Figure 6). This is in keeping with the normal
cone density identified histopathologically in RGS9-knockout mice.23 Adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy imaging revealed a small
focal hyporeflective lesion in both eyes at the foveal center in the subject with RGS9-associated retinopathy, which also correlated with a
decreased cell number at this location, as well as bilateral focal interruption of the interdigitation zone and inner segment ellipsoid
bands on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. There are at least 3 possible explanations for these structural changes: (1) they may
be directly associated with the RGS9 genotype; (2) they may be age related (indicative of progression), given that the subject with RGS9
variants is significantly older than the R9AP subjects; and (3) since the RGS9 subject also reported repeated blunt trauma to both eyes in
the past, the possibility of an unrelated comorbidity cannot be entirely ruled out, especially given previous reports of subclincial
photoreceptor disruption in response to trauma.24, 25 High-resolution imaging of further molecularly proven patients, perhaps using newer
nonconfocal imaging,26 will help to clarify the underlying cause of the outer lamellar defect and photoreceptor mosaic disruption. Both RGS9
and R9AP play critical roles in enabling the rapid recovery of the phototransduction cascade.3 RGS9 significantly accelerates the hydrolysis
of α-transducin bound guanosine-5′-triphosphate to guanosine diphosphate, with lack of RGS9 leading to a substantial delay in the recovery
from light response in knockout mice.2, 27 Similar observations have been made in the absence of R9AP, which serves as an anchor protein for
RGS9 to the photoreceptor outer segment membrane and enhances its activity by up to 70-fold.2, 28 This delayed recovery phase is reflected
in subjects with RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy by electrophysiologic assessment; with the dark-adapted 10.0 (or 11.5) electroretinograms
with ISCEV standard interstimulus interval of 20 seconds showing amplitude reduction, which is progressively less severe with increasing
interstimulus interval, consistent with delayed recovery following the flash, thereby demonstrating the need for an extended interstimulus
interval to obtain full recovery of the electroretinogram following the previous flash.3, 10 In RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy subjects,
the dark-adapted 0.01 electroretinogram (rod electroretinogram), the dark-adapted red flash electroretinogram (both an early cone and later
rod system component), and the dark-adapted 3.0 electroretinogram (combined rod-cone standard flash electroretinogram; rod dominated given
numerosity) with interstimulus interval of 2 minutes are all normal—all in keeping with the relatively intact cone and rod photoreceptor
mosaic observed in our study. However, with light-adapted testing, a generalized reduction or absence of cone responses is observed (pattern
electroretinogram, light-adapted 30 Hz flicker and light-adapted 3.0 electroretinograms). This may at first sight appear to be incongruous
with structural observations. However, aforementioned electroretinograms to a red flash under dark adaptation, which in a normal subject
gives an early cone system–derived response and a later rod system–derived response, are completely normal, showing that dark-adapted cones
function normally, at least initially. Indeed, even dark-adapted 30 Hz flicker responses (albeit to a dim flash, with a short presentation
time) are normal initially, but become undetectable after approximately 10 seconds of stimulation.3, 10 These observations thereby are all
in keeping with our findings that cones are not only present in normal density, but also capable of normal function, and thus potentially
amenable to rescue. While patients with either RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy or oligocone trichromacy have very similar clinical
phenotypes, we highlight the utility of cellular imaging in both effectively distinguishing between these conditions and determining the
potential for therapeutic intervention. Adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy will be valuable to assess whether RGS9/R9AP-
associated retinopathy is indeed an entirely stationary condition, given our findings in the RGS9 subject and the increasing evidence of
progression in the cone dysfunction syndromes.5, 14 Rupert W. Strauss, MD, FEBO, is a clinical research fellow in the Departments of
Inherited Retinal Disease and Genetics at Moorfields Eye Hospital and the Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London (United
Kingdom), respectively. He is also an honorary fellow at the Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University Baltimore (USA), where he has
been working in the same field. He has been affiliated with the Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University Graz (Austria) since 2010.
Funding/Support: The work was supported by grants from the National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields
Eye Hospital National Health Service Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, National Institutes of Health (US) grants
R01EY017607, P30EY001931, C06RR016511, Fight For Sight (UK), Moorfields Eye Hospital Special Trustees, Moorfields Eye Charity, the
Foundation Fighting Blindness (USA), Retinitis Pigmentosa Fighting Blindness, Research to Prevent Blindness (RPB), and The Wellcome Trust .
Alfredo Dubra is the recipient of a Career Development Award from RPB. Rupert W. Strauss is supported by the Austrian Science Fund (Erwin
Schroedinger Stipend, Project # J3383-B23) and the Foundation Fighting Blindness Clinical Research Institute. Michel Michaelides is
supported by an FFB Career Development Award. This project was supported in part by the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, through grant UL1TR000055. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. The funding organizations had no role in the design or conduct of this research.
Financial disclosures: The following authors have no financial disclosures: Rupert W. Strauss, Adam M. Dubis, Robert F. Cooper, Rola Ba-
Abbad, Anthony T. Moore, Andrew R. Webster, Alfredo Dubra, Joseph Carroll, and Michel Michaelides. All authors attest that they meet the
current ICMJE criteria for authorship. The authors would like to thank Anthony Robson, PhD, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology and Moorfields
Eye Hospital, for support with electrophysiological testing. Rupert W. Strauss is affiliated with the Department of Ophthalmology, Medical
University Graz, Graz, Austria. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography B-scans in 3 subjects with bradyopsia. Top left: A
representative macular line scan is shown with designated layer thickness measurements. Bottom left: Total retinal thickness was normal in
all subjects compared to a normative database. Normative average thickness is shown as a black line ± 2 standard deviations (gray shaded
region). Inner retinal thickness (Top right) and outer nuclear layer thickness (Bottom right) was within the normal range for all subjects
compared to a normative database. Subject JC_0759 is represented by a triangle, MM_0032 as a square, and MM_0033 as a circle throughout.
Horizontal spectral-domain optical coherence tomography images through the fovea of all 3 bradyopsia subjects. Qualitative spectral-domain
optical coherence tomography analysis shows a focal disruption in the inner segment ellipsoid and interdigitation zone in JC_0759 (Top).
This contrasts to the intact outer retinal lamination present in MM_0032 (Middle) and MM_0033 (Bottom). The arrows on JC_0759 and MM_0033
indicate the location of the adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy montage shown in Figure 3. Foveal montages derived from adaptive-
optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy for the RGS9 subject JC_0759 and R9AP subject MM_0033. The foveal montage for JC_0759 (Top) shows a
hyporeflective lesion that corresponds to the disruption seen on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography in Figure 2. Conversely, the
foveal montage from MM_0033 (Bottom) shows a qualitatively normal cone mosaic across the foveal region. Scale bar is 100 μm. Photoreceptor
images from multiple eccentricities obtained with adaptive-optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy in 2 bradyopsia patients. Photoreceptor
images are shown at the center of peak density (lesion: JC_0759, Top row, and MM_0033, Bottom row), and 200, 400, 800, and 1200 μm away from
center of peak density. Cone photoreceptors were readily identifiable at all locations except the center of JC_0759. Scale bar is 20 μm.
Cone photoreceptor density in relation to eccentricity in 3 subjects with bradyopsia. Normal cone density established by histologic analysis
(Curcio and associates20) is shown as the gray shaded region. Subject JC_0759 is represented by a triangle, MM_0032 as a square, and MM_0033
as a circle. The 3 subjects with bradyopsia have very similar cone densities from 0.3 mm from peak density and thereby their respective
symbols overlap. Comparison of foveal cone mosaics as imaged by adaptive-optics light ophthaloscopy in normal subjects and subjects with
oligocone trichromacy and RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy. Normal (Left) and RGS9/R9AP-associated retinopathy (Right) subjects have a
continuous cone mosaic across the foveal region. In contrast, a decreased cone mosaic is observed in oligocone trichromacy (Middle). Scale
bar is 25 μm. Demographics and Clinical Findings for 3 Subjects With Genetically Confirmed Bradyopsia AOSLO = adaptive-optics scanning light
ophthalmoscope; MCW = Medical College of Wisconsin; MEH = Moorfields Eye Hospital.
