Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) usually affects patients aged 50–70 years but earlier onset (25–40 years) may occur in hepatitis B endemic
areas. 70–90 % of HCC develop on a background of cirrhosis. However, hepatitis B virus is directly oncogenic and can cause HCC in the
absence of cirrhosis. This may represent a major cause of death from late diagnosis in resource-limited areas. We report a black African
family in which clinical diagnosis of HCC was made on two male siblings in the south west region of Cameroon. The highest risk for HCC may
occur in families in which a hereditary component may be acting in concert with hepatitis B virus. In all cases of HCC, it is important to
screen all first degree relatives to detect early and asymptomatic disease. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s13104-015-1366-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
the fifth most common cancer worldwide, with more than 80 % of cases found in endemic areas of hepatitis B such as Africa or East Asia. The
rising incidence in the West is due to increasing incidence of hepatitis C infection . 70–90 % of HCC develop on background of cirrhosis.
Hepatitis B is strongly associated (100 fold increase in risk) and alcoholic cirrhosis is the commonest predisposing factor in the Western
world. HCC occurs from the processes of chronic injury and regeneration (cirrhosis), and dysplasia. Thus it usually affects patients aged
50–70 years . However, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is directly oncogenic by incorporating into host genetic material and can cause HCC in the
absence of cirrhosis. Thus an earlier onset (25–40 years) may be seen in endemic areas with earlier exposure . The rare fibrolamellar
variant in non-cirrhotic livers of young adults is a distinct entity not associated with hepatitis B infection. It is due to a heterozygous
deletion on chromosome 19 that encodes a functional chimeric protein (DNAJB1-PRKACA) and characterized by being less aggressive with a
normal alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) tumour marker and a female predominance [5, 6]. This is in contrast to conventional HCC which has a twofold
to fourfold male predominance and occurs mostly in hepatitis B endemic areas . Chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis of the liver, and HCC are known
to be related to the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) positive rate suggesting the possibility of maternal transmission [4, 7]. The
genetic abnormality that lead to HCC are not yet known but new genetic markers for diagnosis of hepatitis C related HCC have been
demonstrated . Only limited attention has been given to the role of primary genetic factors in HCC, but scattered anecdotal reports have
identified familial aggregations of HCC (Table 1) . Being rare familial fibrolamellar HCC has never been reported . We propose that greater
attention should be given to the role of primary genetic factors in HCC and that appropriate consideration be given to interaction with
environmental factors, such as HBV infection and aflatoxin exposures [6, 9].Table 1Familial hepatocellular carcinomaKaplan and Cole 3 male
adult siblings aged 64, 49 and 44Hagstrom and Baker 3 male siblings aged 11, 22 and 31Denison et al. Familial hepatoma on background
micronodular cirrhosisOhbayashi et al. Familial clustering of asymptomatic carriersGilmore et al. 3 or 4 male siblings in Chinese
familyLynch et al. 2 familial aggregations in Costa RicaHarvey et al. 3 male siblings aged 33, 43, 46Chang et al. 2 pairs of young brothers
(5 and 7years) and (9 and 7years)Lok et al. Morbidity and mortality from chronic hepatitis B virus infection in family membersAlberts et al.
Clustering of hepatocellular carcinoma in Alaska Native familiesWeledji et al. BMC Research notes 2 male siblings aged, 24 and 35 in endemic
area in Cameroon Familial hepatocellular carcinoma A 35-year- old black African male presented with a 3-month history of fever, and vague
upper abdominal pain and progressive abdominal distension. This was associated with rapid weight loss and anorexia. He also complained of
difficulty in breathing because of the abdominal distension and could only sleep upright whilst sitting on a chair. He had no altered bowel
habit and the stools and urine were of normal colour. There was no past history of jaundice or hepatitis and he did not smoke nor consumed
alcohol. He had his normal childhood vaccinations. The patient had been otherwise healthy and working for an airline hotel company. His
younger brother had died 9 years previously, aged 24, from liver cancer. He had undergone an ‘open and close’ laparotomy for a large HCC on
the left lobe. His symptoms and signs were almost the same as his sibling. He had moderate ascites but no stigmata of chronic liver disease.
He suffered agonizing pain in the terminal stage of the illness for which I palliated with narcotics. On examination of the senior brother
9 years after, apart from the respiratory distress the vital signs were within normal limits. He was not jaundice, but cachetic with gross
ascites. There was severe bilateral pitting oedema of the legs with no palpable lymphadenopathy. There was a palpable non-tender nodular
liver in the epigastrium but no peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease such as leuconychia, palmar erythema, spider naevi,
koilonychia, clubbing, jaundice, splenomegaly etc. An Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy in the early stage of his illness had revealed a
healed antral ulcer but no oesophageal varices. An ultrasound scan confirmed ascites and a heterogenous mass of 9 cm in the left lobe of the
liver. There were also few nodules in the right lobe with greatest diameter of 4 cm. There was no paraortic lymphadenopathy nor
splenomegaly. The picture was consistent with HCC of a nodular type (Fig. 1). A chest X-ray was normal. A hepatitis screen for HBsAg and
hepatitis C virus antibody (HCV Ab), along with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology were negative. His haemoglobin level was normal
(14 g/dl). Liver function tests and serum biochemistry were not available but serum alpha fetoprotein was within the normal limits (1.14;
normal range <8.5 ng/ml). A diagnostic ascitic tap demonstrated a yellowish exudate (protein 50.3 g/lg/l) with predominantly lymphocytes
consistent with malignancy or inflammation. He was put on a salt-free diet and commenced on spironolactone 100 mg/day for 5 days which was
increased to 200 mg/day thereafter. The malignant ascites remained refractory and a therapeutic paracentesis, with intravenous colloid
replacement removed 3 l ascitic fluid per day for 3 days. His respiratory distress subsided and pitting oedema diminished. Just as we
planned to do a percutaneous biopsy of the liver lesion, he deteriorated rapidly, with generalized weakness that required assistance with
his oral feeding. He died a few days after. Fig. 1Transabdominal ultrasonography of liver showing multinodular HCC in left lobe and a
nodular HCC with posterior enhancement in right lobe Transabdominal ultrasonography of liver showing multinodular HCC in left lobe and a
nodular HCC with posterior enhancement in right lobe With respect to the natural history of hepatitis B, it takes 10 years to develop
chronic hepatitis, 20 years to develop cirrhosis and 30 years to develop HCC [3, 4]. The rapid development of ascites, increasing liver size
or jaundice, in a patient with known cirrhosis would always suggest HCC . Although there was no histological verification, a clinical
diagnosis of early-onset HCC was made in the two male siblings based on the fever, weight loss, right hypochondrial pain from nodular liver
lesions and refractory ascites. There was no evidence of portal hypertension as there was no stigmata of chronic liver disease, the ascites
was exudative and the ultrasonic examination did not reveal an underlying cirrhosis . The bilateral limb oedema was due to hypoalbuminaemia
more from nutritional insufficiency than from liver dysfunction. The differential diagnosis would include the rare fibrolamellar variant of
HCC (FHCC) especially as the hepatitis screen was negative and it typically affects adolescents and young adults with often no coexistent
liver disease nor history of hepatitis B infection . Although FHCC mostly occurs in non-hepatitis B endemic areas, some cases have been
reported in relatively endemic areas . It is characterized by the lack of symptoms until the tumour is sizeable and is thus often advanced
when diagnosed as in these siblings. Serum neurotensin, a new tumour marker for FHCC may discriminate it from HCC especially as a negative
or normal value of alpha feto-protein tumour marker does not exclude an HCC . Alpha feto-protein tumour marker is elevated in only 50–60 %
of cases of HCC . Global gene expression profiling revealed a small set of genes, SPINK 1, a secretory trypsin inhibitor as a potential HCC
marker . Although operator dependent, ultrasound scan is capable of detecting 2 cm lesions, but further characterization by computed
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is necessary . Biopsy is usually not indicated except in specialist centres, or in
inoperable cases. It is considered to carry a risk (1–2 %) of tumour seeding along the needle track, which may convert an operable tumour
into an inoperable one . A CT scan with or without biopsy of non-tumour liver is useful if in doubt of an underlying liver disease. CT
chest ± bone scintigraphy would also exclude extrahepatic disease . Tumour differentiation and vascular invasion are important predictors of
survival after surgical resection or liver transplantation for HCC . There must be a genetic basis for the aggressive liver malignancy
occurring in two siblings during their early adulthood. It is unlikely to be by chance. The early age of onset especially in the 24-year
old, harbour important implication for hereditary susceptibility to this lesion [6, 17]. Being in an endemic area it is very likely that the
brothers were carriers of HBsAg. Even though the serology was negative, occasionally infection without detectable serum HBsAg occurs. In
these cases hepatitis B virus DNA (HBVDNA) and hepatitis B core antibody (HBcAb) tests would be mandatory . In addition changes in HBsAg
variants in carrier children before and after universal vaccination have been reported . Up to 20 % of the population in these highly
endemic areas may be asymptomatic HBsAg positive chronic carriers [1, 4]. Vertical transmission of the hepatitis B virus is probably a major
reason for the high incidence of hepatitis B infection in the endemic areas, infants acquiring the virus from infected mothers in utero, at
birth or shortly after birth (Fig. 1) . With the impaired immunity of the baby compared with later life the infant is then at increased risk
of developing persistent hepatitis B carriage, chronic active hepatitis, progressive liver damage and hepatocellular cancer . The reason for
some individuals becoming chronic HBsAg carriers, with development of chronic liver disease or HCC in their adult years remains unclear.
Genetic contribution may thus explain the presence of healthy or non-healthy carriers of HBsAg [4, 6]. The earlier onset of HCC in the
younger sibling may indicate a greater genetic contribution to persistent infection than in the older sibling. Familial occurrence of HCC
was first reported by Kaplan and Cole which involved 3 male adult siblings aged 64, 49 and 44 . Hagstrom and Baker described HCC in 3 male
siblings aged 11, 22 and 31 and with no evidence of associated hepatic disease . Denison et al. reported familial hepatoma on a background
micronodular cirrhosis associated with hepatitis-associated antigen . Lynch et al. reported two familial aggregations of HCC from Costs Rica
. The maternal transmission of HBsAg and susceptibility to HCC as suggested by the pattern of involvement, with the mother and three sons
(one of a different father) affected was demonstrated by Harvey et al. . Chang et al. reported fraternal hepatocellular carcinoma in young
children in two families . Alberts et al. reported clustering of hepatocellular carcinoma in Alaska native families . Lok et al. Revealed
the morbidity and mortality from chronic hepatitis B virus infection in family members of patients with malignant and non-malignant
hepatitis B virus—related chronic liver disease . Gilmore et al. observed familial clustering of HCC in a Chinese family and concluded that
HCC observed in 3 or 4 male siblings even in the presence of hepatitis B infection seemed statistically unlikely to occur by chance . It was
therefore suggested that another risk factor such as environmental (aflatoxin from fermented crops) exposure in certain parts of Africa
and/or genetic factors may be involved [8, 28, 29]. Being rare, familial fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma clustering has never been
reported [7, 30, 31]. HCC-prone families of the type reported here could provide powerful models for studying the preventive measures of a
hepatitis B vaccination [32, 33]. It would seem prudent that hepatitis vaccination be given the highest priority to those individuals where
the HCC yield is increased. The optimum timing for immunization in conjunction with the administration of hepatitis B immunoglobulin at a
contralateral site is immediately after birth or within 12 h . We suggest a more extensive investigation of the genetic hypothesis of HCC
and its variant (FHCC). Although not histologically verified because of the refractory ascites and minimal resources including autopsy, our
observations document familial clustering of HCC. The highest risk for HCC may occur in families in which a hereditary component may be
acting in concert with hepatitis B virus. In all cases of HCC it is therefore important to screen for genetic markers of HCC in all first
degree family members and selected second degree relatives so as to detect early and asymptomatic disease (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Family tree of two
generations depicting carrier state commoner in males Family tree of two generations depicting carrier state commoner in males “Written
informed consent was obtained from the parents of the deceased for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.” Additional file 1. Familial hepatocellular carcinoma.
Additional file 1. Familial hepatocellular carcinoma. hepatocellular carcinoma fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma hepatitis B surface
antigen hepatitis C antibody hepatitis B DNA hepatitis B core antibody EPW was the main researcher and carried out literature search, DSN
provided some public health advice, GE was the pathologist who assisted with the laboratory investigations and MM was the clinical biologist
who ensured the alpha-fetoprotein test was done. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We acknowledge the parents of the
patients who within a low income and resource-limited setting worked extremely hard to support their sons in their illness. We acknowledge
the quarterly research allowance to university lecturers from the Ministry of Higher Education, Cameroon. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.
