The objective of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment of fibular osteomyelitis by Ilizarov bone transport. We
retrospectively reviewed 5 patients with fibular osteomyelitis treated by Ilizarov bone transport. Our study included 4 males and 1 female
with a mean of age 29.2 years. The average length of the bone defects after radical debridement was 7.6 cm (range 6.5-10 cm). The mean
follow-up was 24.8 months (range 14–34 months). No patient was lost to follow-up. All the patients had bone union and no recurrence of
infection was observed. The mean external fixation time was 8.8 months (range 8-10 months), and the mean external fixation index was 1.18
months/cm (range 0.90-1.43 months/cm). There was no sign of knee or ankle instability by clinical examination in all the patients. According
to Association for the Study and Application of the Method of Ilizarov (ASAMI) classification, bone results were excellent in 3 patients,
good in 2 patients; functional results were excellent in 3 patients, good in 2 patients. Our study suggested that Ilizarov bone transport
may be a good choice for the treatment of fibular osteomyelitis, especially for the patient with distal fibular loss. Fibular osteomyelitis
is rare in clinical practice, but some intractable problems usually complicate the osteomyelitis including persistent infection, bone
necrosis, soft tissue loss and fracture instability [1, 2]. At present, the common treatment for fibular osteomyelitis is partial
fibulectomy. Compared with other operative treatment options, partial fibulectomy has some advantages. It can offer effective solution
without the uncertainty of bone union following operative fixation or bone grafting. In addition, it does not require the implantation of
orthopedic hardware, which can decrease the surgical time, expense and complexity of the treatment . However, several clinical and
biomechanical studies have reported that partial resection of the fibula can impair knee stability, disturb ankle kinematics significantly
and cause weakness of the deep muscles . Therefore, in order to get a better treatment result, restoration of fibular integrity maybe
necessary. Ilizarov bone transport can treat osteomyelitis of any length with a less invasive and more versatile compared to other methods.
It has been successfully used in the treatment of tibia, femur and upper limbs . Nevertheless, to our best knowledge, there is no report
about fibular osteomyelitis treated by Ilizarov bone transport. Therefore, we described our successful experience in the treatment of
fibular osteomyelitis by Ilizarov bone transport in the following report. Between January 2004 and January 2013, 8 patients with fibular
osteomyelitis were treated in our institution. Our eligible criteria were: (1) patients of age of 18 years or more; (2) patients with
proximal or distal fibular osteomyelitis treated by Ilizarov bone transport; (3) patients without an associated permanent nerve injury of
the ipsilateral lower extremity. At last, 5 patients were included in our study. Our study was retrospective and it didn’t have any harm to
our patients. Before performing the surgery, we informed every patient of all possible results that would happen during and after the
surgery, and all the patients agreed to receive the surgery and signed the written consent for the surgery. We got the verbal informed
consent from the 5 patients through telephone before performing the retrospective study, and our study was approved by the Chinese PLA
General Hospital committee for clinical research. There were 4 males and 1 female with an average of 29.2 years (range 20–39 years). The
mechanisms of initial injury involved traffic accident in 3 patients and falling in 2 patients. The site of fibular osteomyelitis involved 4
distal parts and 1 proximal part. The average length of bone defects was 7.6 cm (range 6.5-10 cm), which were measured in the operation. All
the fibula infection was caused by iatrogenic operation. Fibular osteomyelitis existed at the time of surgery and the mean number of
previous operations was 2.2 (range 1–3 operations). Infecting samples that were obtained from purulent drainage or deep bone at the site of
osteomyelitis were cultured and the results were 4 patients with infecting organism of Staph. aureus and 1 patient with Pseudomonas. Further
details were listed Table 1.Table 1Characteristics of 5 patients with fibular osteomyelitisCase numberSexAge (years)Mechanisms of initial
injurySite of fibular osteomyelitisBone defect (cm)Number of previous operationsInfecting organism1Male20FDistal103Staph.
aureus2Male28TADistal7.52Staph. aureus3Female30FProximal6.53Staph. aureus4Male35TADistal71Pseudomonas5Male33TADistal72Staph. aureus F
falling; TA traffic accident Characteristics of 5 patients with fibular osteomyelitis F falling; TA traffic accident The patients were
positioned supine on a radiolucent table. The operative incisions were performed in accordance with previous surgical incisions when
possible. Then the infected scarred soft tissue and necrotic bone were debrided radically. Cortical bone bleeding, described as the so-
called paprika sign, was accepted as an indication of vital tissue . Representative tissue cultures were obtained from infected tissue for
the sake of finding out the infectious bacterium to choose sensitive antibiotics. The assembled Ilizarov external fixator was fixed to the
fibular or tibia as the way that Ilizarov rings were placed on the distal and proximal fragments parallelled to their respective joints and
the fixed pins were inserted into the same plane and perpendicular to the mechanical axis of the fibular or tibia under the image
intensifier control; A 1–2 cm incision was made in order to expose the pre-selected osteotomy site, and then a subperiosteally transverse
osteotomy was performed. The periosteum was sutured and the incisions were closed with drainage tubes. If the infected site had large soft
tissue defects, open dressing changing or vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) were made to close the wound. If the bone defect located in the
distal part of fibular, bone transport was performed from the proximal to the distal in the fibular; if the bone defect located in the
proximal part of fibular, bone transport was performed from the distal to the proximal in the fibular. All patients received a course of
sensitive antibiotics for 2 to 4 weeks in intravenous way and were encouraged to partial weight-bearing with crutches, isometric muscle and
joint range-of-motion exercises on the second day after operation. The latency period before bone transport was 7–10 days and the rate of
distraction was 0.25 mm per 6 h. When bone transport completed, the fibular docked ends were compressed by 0.25 mm per day in order to
provide full contact until the patient felt pain at the docking site. Radiographs were reviewed every 2 weeks during the distraction period
and monthly during the consolidation period. Ilizarov external fixator was removed when radiographs showed solid docking-site union and the
regenerate area had a minimum of three complete cortices. The flexion and extension of knee joint, and the plantarflexion and dorsiflexion
of ankle joint were evaluated at the end of follow-up. Bone results and functional results were evaluated according to Association for the
Study and Application of the Method of Ilizarov (ASAMI) classification . The mean follow-up was 24.8 months (range 14–34 months). No patient
was lost to follow-up. All the patients had bone union and no recurrence of infection was observed. The mean external fixation time was 8.8
months (range 8-10 months), and the mean external fixation index was 1.18 months/cm (range 0.90-1.43 months/cm). The mean degrees of knee
flexion was 124° (range 120°-130°), and the mean degrees of knee extension was 1° (range 0°-5°). The mean degrees of ankle plantarflexion
was 40° (range 35°-45°), and the mean degrees of ankle dorsiflexion was 15° (range 10°-20°). There was no sign of knee or ankle instability
by clinical examination in all the patients. All the patients felt that the muscle strength of injured limb was up to the level of
contralateral limb muscle. According to Association for the Study and Application of the Method of Ilizarov (ASAMI) classification, bone
results were excellent in 3 patients, good in 2 patients; functional results were excellent in 3 patients, good in 2 patients. Further
details were listed in Table 2 (Fig. 1).Table 2Results of treatment in the 5 patientsCase numberExternal fixation time (months)External
fixation index (months/cm)Follow-up (months)Knee flexion/extension (°)Ankle Plantarflexion/dorsiflexion (°)Bone resultFunctional
result190.9024125-0-045-0-15GoodExcellent281.0730130-0-040-0-10ExcellentExcellent381.2322120-0-040-0-20ExcellentGood4101.4334120-0-035-0-15GoodGood591.2914125-0-540-0-15ExcellentExcellentFig.
1A 20-year-old man with osteomyelitis of the left fibular was treated by Ilizarov bone transport. a Radiograph of a 20-year-old man (case 1)
who had osteomyelitis of the left fibular. b Debridement of the site of infected nonunion with 10cm bone defect in fibular and corticotomy
of fibular (red arrow) after application of the fixator. c Four months after operation with bone transport, bone ends contacted at the
docking site. d Nine months after operation, it showed good consolidation of the regenerate, and bone union at the docking site was obtained
by bone grafting. e The external fixator was removed after nine months of the surgery, and it showed complete bone union Results of
treatment in the 5 patients A 20-year-old man with osteomyelitis of the left fibular was treated by Ilizarov bone transport. a Radiograph of
a 20-year-old man (case 1) who had osteomyelitis of the left fibular. b Debridement of the site of infected nonunion with 10cm bone defect
in fibular and corticotomy of fibular (red arrow) after application of the fixator. c Four months after operation with bone transport, bone
ends contacted at the docking site. d Nine months after operation, it showed good consolidation of the regenerate, and bone union at the
docking site was obtained by bone grafting. e The external fixator was removed after nine months of the surgery, and it showed complete bone
union All the patients had a feeling of pain during the distraction period and required oral analgesics. 4 patients had a pin-track
infection (case 1–4), and these patients had only local inflammation, which was treated by pin care and empirical broad spectrum antibiotics
for oral administration. 3 patients required bone grafting at the docking site to obtain union (case 1 and case 3–4). There were no
neurovascular complications or a compartment syndrome. This is a retrospective study of Ilizarov bone transport for the treatment of fibular
osteomyelitis. The present study showed that the treatment of fibular osteomyelitis by Ilizarov bone transport acquired satisfied results.
The kinematics of knee and ankle joint were not disturbed by this treatment, and the motion ranges of knee and ankle joints were nearly
normal levels. There was no sign of knee or ankle instability by clinical examination in all the patients. All the patients achieved bone
union in the fibular. It was reported that fibular bore one sixth of the force transmitted from femur . It has an important localization
between the knee and ankle joints and contains muscles related with the two joints. The dynamic features of fibular motion and its
importance in the clinical have been presented by several studies [6, 19–21]. Leg morbidity after fibular resection has been put forward by
some studies [6, 22]. Some clinical and biomechanical studies suggested that the fibular has an important effect on knee stability, ankle
kinematics and the strength of deep related muscles [6, 7, 19, 22]. Therefore, our main goals of the treatment of fibular osteomyelitis are
to debride infectious tissues radically, regain proper length, and achieve bone union, and obtain better functions of knee and ankle joints.
We adopted Ilizarov bone transport to treat fibular osteomyelitis, because it can afford surgeon the ability to treated osteomyelitis and
its associated factors simultaneously. In our study, although we got a good treatment result, there were some complications happened. The
rate of pin-track infection was 80 % (4/5) and the rate of bone grafting was 60 % (3/5). We recognize that meticulous care, patient’s
compliance, and surgeon’s experience are the key factors to decrease the rate of complication. In our experience, some important aspects
should be paid attention in the treatment of fibular osteomyelitis by Ilizarov bone transport. (1) The external fixator should be assembled
preoperatively under the image intensifier control in order to decrease the difficulty of reduction. (2) A radical debridement was necessary
in the site of fibular osteomyelitis. (3) Particular attention should be paid to protect the integrity of the distal tibiofibular
syndesmosis. (4) We should perform bone grafting when the docking site has a delayed union or nonunion. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first study about fibular osteomyelitis treated by Ilizarov bone transport. The main strength of our study is that all the operations
were performed by the same orthopedic surgeon, which can avoid the differences caused by different surgeons’ preference and experience. A
number of data on the characteristics of patients, treatment results and complications were reported in our study. However, our study has
its limitations. Muscle strength has been assessed subjectively, and there is no objective comparison of the muscle strength. It is
retrospective in nature and the number of patients is relatively small, and there is no control group to compare our results with. More
prospective randomized controlled trials are needed to overcome the limitations of our study. Our study suggested that Ilizarov bone
transport may be a good choice for the treatment of fibular osteomyelitis, especially for the patient with distal fibular loss. Restoration
of the integrity of distal fibula would be fruitful for ankle stability. Association for the Study and Application of the Method of Ilizarov
Peng Yin Lihai Zhang and Lining Zhang contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions PY performed the design and conception of the research, collected and analyzed the data, and drafted the
manuscript. LHZ joined the design and conception of the research and revised the manuscript critical for important content. LNZ joined the
design of the research, and collected the data and underwent data analysis. TTL joined the design and conception of the research. ZRL
underwent data analysis. JTL underwent data analysis. JFZ joined the conception of the research.QY performed the design and conception of
the research and analyzed the data. QZ performed operations and joined the design and conception of the research. PFT performed the design
and conception of the research, analyzed the data, and gave some precious comments in revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. Our authors would like to thank all patients included in the research, and all nurses and doctors in our department.
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81000796; 30973068; 81401809).
