Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 58 Final Diagnosis: Vasospastic angina Symptoms: Chest pain Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Medical treatment Specialty: Cardiology Rare disease The clinical conditions of various diseases, including coronary
artery disease, are determined by genetics and the environment. Previous investigations noted the significance of genetic mutations and
polymorphisms in cases of coronary spasm. We report on monozygotic identical twins who almost simultaneously presented with vasospastic
angina. The 58-year-old younger twin was admitted to our hospital because of persistent chest pain. An electrocardiogram showed an inverted
T wave in the left precordial leads. Coronary angiographies revealed a short left main trunk (LMT) and 50% stenosis at the proximal portion
of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Infusion of acetylcholine to his left coronary artery caused marked vasoconstriction
associated with a sensation of chest oppression. Nitroglycerine completely reversed this response. Based on these findings, we diagnosed
Twin A with vasospastic angina. At nearly the same time, his identical twin brother was diagnosed with vasospastic angina at another
hospital. Comparison of both coronary angiograms indicated similar structure of coronary vessels, including short LMT and mild stenosis at
the proximal portion of LAD. These 2 cases highlight the importance of genetic factors in the pathogenesis of vasospastic angina. It may be
important for individuals to receive medical attention if their identical twin presents with vasospastic angina. Coronary spasm plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of ischemic heart diseases, including vasospastic angina, acute coronary syndrome, and sudden cardiac
arrest. The mechanisms underlying its development are still poorly defined and are likely multifactorial, involving disturbance of the
autonomic nervous system, endothelial dysfunction, and hypercontractility of smooth muscle cells. In general, the clinical conditions of
various diseases, including coronary artery disease, are determined by genetics and the environment. Previous investigations noted the
significance of genetic mutations and polymorphisms in cases of coronary spasm. Here, we report a case of monozygotic identical twins
presenting nearly simultaneously with vasospastic angina. A 58-year-old man (Twin A) had been suffering from angina for approximately 10
months. It occurred in the early morning and lasted for a few minutes. He was a former smoker and had hypertension and dyslipidemia. One
morning he had a feeling of chest oppression associated with diaphoresis at the stool and presented at our emergency department. On
admission, the blood pressure was 172/79 mmHg and his pulse rate was regular (66 beats per minute). The jugular vein was not dilated, and
heart sound was normal. Laboratory test shows that serum levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides were elevated,
whereas myogenic enzymes including creatine phosphokinase (CPK), CPK-MB, aspartate aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase were within
normal levels. A chest x-ray was normal (Figure 1A), and an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed inverted T waves in the left precordial leads,
but showed no abnormal Q waves (Figure 1B). A coronary angiogram revealed a short left main trunk (LMT), and 50% stenosis at the proximal
portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) (Figure 2A). A provocation test to induce coronary spasm was subsequently performed. An
infusion of acetylcholine to the left coronary artery caused marked vasoconstriction (Figure 2B) associated with a sensation of chest
oppression, as well as the elevation of the ST segment of the ECG. Nitroglycerine completely reversed it (Figure 2B, 2C). Based on these
findings, we diagnosed Twin A with vasospastic angina. Interestingly, Twin A’s older identical twin brother (Twin B) had been diagnosed with
vasospastic angina at another hospital 8 months earlier. He had felt chest pain late one winter night and had gone to Obama Hospital in
Fukui, Japan. Like his twin, he had hypertension and dyslipidemia. A coronary angiogram revealed a short LMT and 50% stenosis at the
proximal portion of the LAD. Thus, the findings of the coronary angiograms were quite similar in Twin A and Twin B (Figure 3). During his
hospital stay, Twin B felt strong chest pain and an ECG showed ST elevation in the precordial leads (Figure 4). This symptom continued for
several minutes and subsequently disappeared at the same time as the ST change. Based upon these clinical findings, Twin B was also
diagnosed with vasospastic angina. It is well established that smoking, hyperlipidemia, and mental stress are potent modifiable
environmental risk factors for vasospastic angina. Polymorphisms of some genes such as those encoding endothelial nitric oxide synthase
(eNOS) and phospholipase C-δ1 are also associated with vasospastic angina. In a Japanese cohort study, the NADH/NADPH oxidase p22 phox gene
was a susceptibility locus for coronary spasm in men, while the genes encoding stromelysin-1 and interleukin-6 genes were susceptibility
loci in women . Thus, there is a possibility that genetic factors are involved in the pathogenesis of vasospastic angina. Although gene
polymorphisms were not analyzed, our cases highlight the importance of the genetic factors in the pathogenesis of vasospastic angina.
Several cases of coronary artery disease in identical twins have been reported , showing the similarities in the coronary anatomy and
atherosclerotic lesions in identical twins, as in the present case report. Interestingly, Turley et al. described a pair of identical twins
presenting almost simultaneously with coronary artery disease and identical atherosclerotic lesions despite significant differences in their
environmental risk factors and geographic location (12 000 miles apart) . Only 1 case of vasospastic angina in identical twin has been
published in a Japanese journal, although cases of vasospastic angina in brothers and sisters have been reported . Both twins had a short
left main trunk and the atherosclerotic stenosis lesions at the proximal lesion of LAD, and the timing of the onset of angina was nearly
simultaneous. These findings suggest that the development of the coronary vessel tree has a genetic basis. Cohort studies have shown a high
concordance of coronary artery disease in monozygotic twins. For example Zdravkovic et al. showed moderate-to-high heritability of CHD
mortality [15, 16], and a recent large genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified 46 loci that are significantly related to coronary
artery disease . In addition to genetic factors, environmental risk factors, such as diet or those encountered in daily life, may also be
shared by identical twins. Therefore, a gene-environment interaction should be considered. Coronary angiography revealed similarities in the
coronary artery anatomy of identical twin brothers. Their concomitant onset of vasospastic angina suggests that genetic factors contribute
significantly to the pathogenesis of vasospastic angina. Therefore, it may be important for individuals to receive medical attention if
their identical twin presents with vasospastic angina. Chest roentgenogram (A) and electrocardiogram (B) at the admission for Twin A. The
chest x-ray shows no specific abnormalities. The electrocardiogram shows inverted T waves in the left precordial leads. (A) Right anterior
oblique view (left panel) and left anterior oblique view (right panel) of the coronary angiogram for Twin A showing a short left main trunk
and 50% stenosis at the proximal portion of the left anterior descending artery in left anterior oblique view, as indicated by an arrow. (B)
Provocation test to induce a coronary spasm via the intracoronary infusion of acetylcholine (Ach) into the left coronary artery. Left panel:
left anterior oblique view (right panel) of the coronary angiogram indicating mild coronary stenosis (arrow). Middle panel: Marked
vasoconstriction induced by the infusion of Ach (100 µg) to the left coronary artery. Right panel: Reversal of the coronary spasm induced
via the intracoronary infusion of nitroglycerin. (C) Changes of the ECG during the provocation test for coronary spasm. During the induction
of the coronary spasm, the ST segment was elevated. Comparison of the structure of the left (left and middle panels) and right (right panel)
coronary arteries between Twin A (A) and Twin B (B). The right upper (Twin A) and lower (Twin B) panels show left coronary arteries from the
right anterior oblique (RAO) 30°/caudal 30° views. The middle upper (Twin A) and lower (Twin B) panels show left coronary arteries from left
anterior oblique (LAO) 45° and LAO 30°/cranial 30° views, respectively. The left upper (Twin A) and lower (Twin B) panels show right
coronary arteries from LAO 45° views. Comparison of coronary angiograms indicated similar structure of coronary vessels, including short
left main trunk. Referring to the middle panels, coronary angiograms revealed there was 50% stenosis at the proximal portion of the left
anterior descending coronary artery (indicated by an arrow), although the angles of LAO view were different. ECG changes during chest pain
attack for Twin B. Compared with ECG at the admission (A), the ST segment at V2–V4 was elevated during the chest pain attack (B). This ST
elevation disappeared along with remission of symptoms.
