McCune–Albright syndrome is a rare sporadic disease characterized by fibrous bone dysplasia, café-au-lait skin spots and variable
hyperfunctional endocrinopathies. McCune–Albright syndrome is caused by somatic postzygotic activating mutations in the GNAS gene that
produce a broad spectrum of effects. We report a case of McCune–Albright syndrome with multi-organ manifestations in the neonatal period. A
newborn preterm black girl was referred to our Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at the age of 17 days for suspected extrahepatic cholestasis. On
clinical examination she presented failure to thrive, jaundice, hypertension, marked hypotonia and café-au-lait spots on her back and lower
limbs. An abdominal ultrasound excluded extrahepatic causes of cholestasis but revealed bilateral serpiginous adrenal hyperplasia. These
clinical findings suggested a diagnosis of McCune–Albright syndrome with multi-organ involvement. Laboratory data confirmed
adrenocorticotropic hormone-independent Cushing’s syndrome, hyperthyroidism, cholestasis and elevated transaminases. Ventricular hypertrophy
was demonstrated by echocardiography. The baby girl underwent medical treatment of Cushing’s syndrome with metyrapone which was followed by
a rapid recovery. A mosaic activating GNAS gene mutation was found on DNA extracted from a buccal swab sample. However, she died at 4 months
due to a respiratory infection. In the neonatal period the diagnosis of McCune–Albright syndrome depends on having a high index of suspicion
and café-au-lait spots may be the clue for the diagnosis. McCune–Albright syndrome (MAS) is a rare sporadic disease characterized by bone
fibrous dysplasia, café-au-lait (CAL) skin spots and a variable association of hyperfunctional endocrinopathies . The estimated prevalence
ranges between 1/100,000 and 1/1,000,000 . MAS manifestations are due to somatic activating mutations in the GNAS gene which codes for the
alpha subunit of the stimulatory G-protein (protein Gsα) that is involved in intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production
. A wide spectrum of extraskeletal manifestations can be found in MAS as would be expected from the broad tissue distribution of Gsα and the
mosaic distribution of the mutation . Cushing’s syndrome may develop at any time in childhood but affects a minority of patients with MAS
and has a quite heterogeneous natural history, ranging from spontaneous resolution to the need for adrenalectomy or even death . Liver and
cardiac diseases are additional less common extraskeletal manifestations of MAS and are markers of prognosis in children with Cushing’s
syndrome, which may suggest the need for prompt adrenalectomy . Severe neonatal presentation of MAS is rare. We report a case of MAS in the
neonatal period with multi-organ manifestations. A 17-day-old black female neonate was referred to our Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
for suspected biliary atresia on the basis of cholestasis with acholia. She was the first child of healthy non-consanguineous parents.
Prenatal care was minimal. She was born at 35 weeks and 5 days, weighing 1590g (below third centile). Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5
minutes respectively. Jaundice was noted from the second day onwards and acholic stools were occasionally observed. Abdominal
ultrasonography prompted concern for a choledochal cyst and apparent atresia. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy was performed but the results were
inconclusive. She also had a history of respiratory distress requiring oxygen therapy as well as hypertension treated with propranolol since
day 14, at which an echocardiogram was reported as normal. On clinical examination she was small for gestational age (length 39.5cm, weight
1545g, head circumference 28.5cm, all below the third centile). Her blood pressure was elevated (118/90mmHg, above the 95th centile). She
had marked hypotonia, well-defined CAL spots following Blaschko’s lines on her back and lower limbs, heart murmur on cardiac auscultation
and palpable liver edge 2.5cm below the costal margin (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Café-au-lait spots extending from the midline to lateral left and right
dorsum, occupying most of its extension Café-au-lait spots extending from the midline to lateral left and right dorsum, occupying most of
its extension Laboratory findings confirmed cholestasis and abnormal liver function: total bilirubin 10.8mg/dL (normal <1mg/dL); conjugated
bilirubin 9.5mg/dL (normal <0.3mg/dL); aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 211U/L (normal <34U/L); alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 623U/L
(normal 12 to 78U/L); gamma-glutamyltransferase (γGT) 1219UI/L (normal <38UI/L); total cholesterol 343mg/dL (normal <190mg/dL);
triglycerides 240mg/dL (normal <150mg/dL); total serum proteins, albumin, activated partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time and
fibrinogen were normal. Further investigations ruled out the most common causes of cholestasis (metabolic disease included in the neonatal
screening, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, and cystic fibrosis). Because of ongoing cholestasis, ultrasonography of her abdomen was repeated; it
demonstrated the absence of a choledochal cyst and normal biliary tree but revealed bilateral serpiginous adrenal hyperplasia. The
association of abnormal skin pigmentation, cholestasis and adrenal hyperplasia led to genetic assessment and diagnosis of MAS. A chest
radiograph showed cardiomegaly. Repeated echocardiograms were performed revealing left ventricular hypertrophy, with initial thickness of
the interventricular septum of 5.2mm (Z-Score 2.06) reaching a maximum of 7mm (Z-Score 3.44). Systemic hypertension (systolic pressures 90
to 145mmHg, diastolic pressures 55 to 105mmHg) was confirmed. Primary renal disease was excluded by normal values of plasma renin activity
and aldosterone, as well as renal imaging studies; her urinary catecholamines were normal. Echocardiography also documented the presence of
pulmonary hypertension (systolic pulmonary artery pressure 55 to 60mmHg) at 73 days of age, with progressive improvement until
normalization. As the baby presented markedly decreased muscle tone, growth restriction, hypertension and hyperglycemia (150 to 345mg/dL),
other endocrine investigations were performed. Data showed hyperthyroidism: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 0.01uU/mL (normal 0.5 to
6.0uU/mL); free thyroxine (T4) 2.51ng/dL (normal 0.8 to 1.76ng/dL); free triiodothyronine (T3) 3pg/dL (normal 2.3 to 4.2pg/dL). Levels of
antithyroid antibodies were undetectable. Urinary free cortisol was increased (>75.0ug/dL/24 hours) and she had high serum cortisol without
circadian variation (73.7ug/dL at 8 a.m., normal 4.3 to 23; 93.3ug/dL at 11 p.m., normal 2.4 to 13.6ug/dL) and no suppression on high-dose
dexamethasone (108.4ug/dL). Her adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level was normal (9.2pg/mL, normal 0 to 46pg/mL). These results were
concordant with the diagnosis of ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome. A skeletal survey revealed generalized reduction of bone density,
irregular ossification with areas of radiolucence surrounded by sclerosis most evident in her radius and ulna (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 a Radiographic
appearance of bone fibrodysplasia. An important cardiomegaly is also observed. b Diaphyseal fracture of the ulna. In McCune–Albright
syndrome fractures occur as a result of osteopenia associated with cortical thinning a Radiographic appearance of bone fibrodysplasia. An
important cardiomegaly is also observed. b Diaphyseal fracture of the ulna. In McCune–Albright syndrome fractures occur as a result of
osteopenia associated with cortical thinning Molecular diagnosis was possible in DNA extracted from a buccal swab sample, followed by
amplification of the GNAS gene and direct sequencing. The activating mutation c.602G> A, leading to p. Arg201 to His, was identified in
mosaic, confirming the clinical diagnosis of MAS. The baby girl underwent medical treatment of Cushing’s syndrome with metyrapone (six daily
doses of 40mg) from day 38 of age which was followed by rapid normalization of cortisol levels with glycemic and mean arterial pressure
improvement (Fig. 3). Her growth velocity accelerated, producing gradual catch-up growth.Fig. 3Metyrapone effectiveness in the control of
serum cortisol Metyrapone effectiveness in the control of serum cortisol Her thyroid function was controlled with methimazole 1mg/kg three
times a day. Otherwise, her liver function test levels remained high (AST 709U/L, normal <34U/L; ALT 1656U/L, normal 12 to 78U/L; γGT
1541UI/L, normal <38UI/L; total bilirubin 7.65mg/dL, normal <1mg/dL; conjugated bilirubin 6.77mg/dL, normal <0.3mg/dL; total cholesterol
534mg/dL, normal <190mg/dL; triglycerides 198U/L mg/dL, normal <150mg/dL). A trial of phenobarbital and ursodeoxycholic acid was initiated
in an effort to stimulate bile flow, but jaundice persisted. Hyperglycemia required insulin infusion from day 37 to day 47 of life and
normalized after Cushing’s syndrome control. Hypertension control required the combination of two antihypertensive agents (propranolol and
captopril) but normalized only after the introduction of metyrapone. Her echocardiogram showed a decrease in ventricular hypertrophy. She
had developmental delay with no apparent vision or hearing impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging showed hypoplasia of the cerebellar
vermis. The baby girl remained hospitalized due to oxygen dependence. At 4 months she was transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit
for acute respiratory failure in the context of a pulmonary infection leading to her death. No infectious agent was isolated. An
anatomopathological examination was performed. Macroscopic observation of her habitus internus (internal general physical appearance)
revealed lungs with increased consistence compatible with pneumonia, heart with biventricular hypertrophy, liver with chronic congestion
abnormalities and increased weight, and cortical suprarenal increased thickness. Her ovary abnormalities were most remarkable, with her
right ovary 3cm long and her left ovary replaced by a cystic formation of 5.5cm greater diameter (Fig. 4). At microscopic examination,
micronodular hyperplasia of the adrenal glands confirmed the etiology of Cushing’s syndrome (Fig. 5).Fig. 4Left ovary substituted by cystic
formation. Enlargement of right ovaryFig. 5Microscopic examination confirmed micronodular hyperplasia at adrenal glands Left ovary
substituted by cystic formation. Enlargement of right ovary Microscopic examination confirmed micronodular hyperplasia at adrenal glands
Cushing’s syndrome is the rarest of endocrine abnormalities found in MAS, and is caused by activation of Gsα in the adrenal cortex, leading
to cortisol overproduction. Its prevalence in patients with fibrous dysplasia registered at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) was 7.1%
. Its occurrence in the neonatal period causes severe growth failure, poor muscle tone, muscular hypoplasia and hypertension; it is
associated with increased and early mortality due to opportunistic infections, hence the importance of prophylactic treatment, notably for
Pneumocystis species . Brown et al. reviewed all the published cases of Cushing’s syndrome in MAS (n = 30) and listed the following signs
and symptoms: small for gestational age (50%), round facies (66.7%), failure to thrive (60%), hypertension (33.3%), nephrocalcinosis (30%),
hirsutism (26.6%), hyperglycemia (20%), and linear growth arrest (10%). Additional clinical features included liver disease, such as
cholestasis or elevated transaminases (36.7%), and heart disease, such as cardiomyopathy (26.7%) . In the present case, Cushing’s syndrome
is likely to have manifested in utero, since the baby was born small for gestational age and profound hypotonia most probably as a result of
prolonged exposure to hypercortisolism. The triad of failure to thrive, hypertension and hyperglycemia is the result of adrenal gland
hyperplasia leading to high levels of serum cortisol. It is also possible that her comorbidities, such as hyperthyroidism and heart disease,
contributed to her failure to gain weight. Although Cushing’s syndrome can resolve spontaneously, many cases necessitate medical or surgical
treatment [5, 6]. No long-term effective medical treatment for ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome is available. It is difficult to
recognize which patients could safely be monitored and treated medically and which could benefit from adrenalectomy. We decided for medical
treatment with metyrapone as our patient had cholestatic hepatitis that contraindicated the use of ketoconazole. In particularly sick
children, medical treatment with metyrapone may gain time until the child is healthy enough for surgery . Metyrapone was effective and well
tolerated (Fig. 3). Therefore we agree with other authors that it is probably most appropriate to treat with metyrapone until a child is a
suitable candidate for surgery. Long-term sequelae of Cushing’s syndrome in MAS comprise a significantly increased prevalence of cognitive
disorders, including specific learning or speech disorders such as speech apraxia, and global developmental delay . These children need
developmental follow-up. A case–control analysis of patients with MAS with and without Cushing’s syndrome revealed that the presence of
Cushing’s syndrome was correlated with an increased number of clinical features of MAS, such as CAL spots, precocious puberty,
hyperthyroidism, cognitive disorders and total number of MAS manifestations . An alternative explanation is that mutated Gsα is present in
multiple organs as part of the mosaic MAS distribution, with Cushing’s syndrome signaling a greater total body mutation burden and
consequently associating with more severe phenotypes. In fact, Cushing’s syndrome usually occurs in patients with MAS with significant
involvement of multiple other tissues. Table 1 represents the previously reported cases of Cushing’s syndrome in patients with MAS
associated with heart and liver disease, as described in the presented case.Table 1Reported cases of McCune–Albright syndrome with Cushing’s
syndrome, hepatobiliary and cardiovascular diseaseSexAgeCushing’s syndromeLiver diseaseHeart diseaseTreatment/OutcomeReferenceF37
days+Elevated LFTsCardiomegalyDeath (heart failure age 132 days)M10 months+Elevated LFTs, direct hyperbilirubinemiaCardiomegaly, low
ejection fraction, hypertensionAminoglutethimide and metyrapone until age 2 years. Adrenalectomy at 2-years old. Death from cardiac arrest
at age 3 yearsF2 months+Elevated LFTs, direct hyperbilirubinemiaLeft ventricular hypertrophyAdrenalectomy at 3 months. Death at age 2 years
from anaphylaxis and/or adrenal insufficiencyM10 weeks+HepatomegalyCardiomegalyNRF17 days+Elevated LFTs, direct hyperbilirubinemia,
hepatomegalyLeft ventricular hypertrophyMetyrapone. Death from pneumonia at age 4 monthsPresented case F female, LFTs liver function tests,
M male, NR not reported Reported cases of McCune–Albright syndrome with Cushing’s syndrome, hepatobiliary and cardiovascular disease F
female, LFTs liver function tests, M male, NR not reported CAL spots are typically the first manifestation of the disease, appearing usually
either at or shortly after birth . As such, they can be an early clue to the diagnosis of MAS. Classically, CAL spots have irregular borders
(often described as similar to the coast of Maine). To what extent the size of spots correlates to the extent of disease is controversial.
The presence of the Gsα mutation in thyroid tissue results in ligand-independent activation of the TSH/G-protein/cAMP pathway, which is
known to result in both hyperplasia and hyperfunction . In addition, the Gsα mutation results in increased T4 to T3 conversion, which
accounts for the T3-dominant biochemical phenotype of patients with MAS with hyperthyroidism . Although the development of thyroid cancer is
rare, patients should be monitored with annual thyroid ultrasound . Spontaneous resolution rate is impossible to predict, so some form of
treatment must be initiated. In our patient, her hyperthyroidism responded quite well to methimazole. Hepatobiliary dysfunction is included
in the nonendocrine abnormalities associated with MAS and although it appears to be a rare manifestation, severe neonatal cholestasis and
persistent elevated serum liver enzymes have been described . The mechanism by which activated Gsα might cause hepatobiliary dysfunction
remains unknown. Hepatitis is more pronounced after birth, has laboratory manifestations consistent with cholestasis, progressively wanes
with age but usually persists into adulthood (albeit mild) and is virtually never associated with a functional defect in the synthesis of
important hepatic factors . Both extra and intrahepatic bile ducts were patent in our patient, confirming that the defect lies at the level
of the hepatocyte and/or biliary canalicular membrane, with the abnormal protein possibly interfering with the secretion of normal biliary
components. The outcome of liver disease in previously described patients is not known . Weinstein et al. demonstrated that cardiac Gsα
mutation is more likely to be found in patients with extensive disease. Sudden death, tachycardia, ventricular hypertrophy, high-output
heart failure and aortic root dilatation have all been reported in association with MAS . It is not known whether it is a direct result of
the presence of a primary cardiac Gsα mutation, or a secondary physiologic response to increased metabolic demand by hypercortisolism,
hyperthyroidism and/or growth hormone excess. In this patient hypertension control required the association of two antihypertensives but it
was only when Cushing’s syndrome was treated that the patient achieved the appropriate mean arterial pressure and myocardial hypertrophy
reduced. Respiratory distress was due to multiple factors, such as prematurity and a high cardiac output. Control of the hypercortisolism
did not improve respiratory function; although this was not previously described in the literature, perhaps pulmonary involvement was also
the result of Gsα mutation in the lungs. The diagnosis of MAS with Cushing’s syndrome depends on having a high index of suspicion and CAL
spots may be the clue for the diagnosis. In these patients rapid assessment for significant comorbidities should be performed, including
hyperthyroidism, cardiac and liver disease. Evaluation for complications of the hypercortisolism should also be conducted, including
hypertension and hyperglycemia, and hypercortisolism needs to be medically managed until definitive therapy. We conclude that the poor
outcome of Cushing’s syndrome in this group reflects a greater burden of mutation-carrying cells. ▶ Cushing’s syndrome in the neonatal
period may suggest a diagnosis of MAS. ▶ CAL skin pigmentation in neonates must lead to the consideration of MAS in the differential
diagnosis. ▶ Neonatal cholestasis is rarely associated with MAS. ▶ Multiple endocrine abnormalities should alert the clinician to the
possibility of MAS. ▶ Families should be counseled that MAS is sporadic and displays no known environmental association or predilection for
ethnic group. ▶ Cushing’s syndrome in the neonatal period may suggest a diagnosis of MAS. ▶ CAL skin pigmentation in neonates must lead to
the consideration of MAS in the differential diagnosis. ▶ Neonatal cholestasis is rarely associated with MAS. ▶ Multiple endocrine
abnormalities should alert the clinician to the possibility of MAS. ▶ Families should be counseled that MAS is sporadic and displays no
known environmental association or predilection for ethnic group. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian(s)
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. Adrenocorticotropic hormone Alanine aminotransferase Aspartate aminotransferase Café-au-lait Cyclic adenosine
monophosphate Gamma-glutamyltransferase Alpha subunit of the stimulatory G-protein McCune–Albright syndrome Triiodothyronine Thyroxine
Thyroid-stimulating hormone Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All the
authors contributed to the work up of the patient including clinical evaluation, investigation and treatment planning. The manuscript has
also been reviewed and approved by all authors. We thank Dr Emília Vitorino for providing the information and photos of the
anatomopathological examination.
