The identification of oncogenic driver mutations has largely relied on the assumption that genes that exhibit more mutations than expected
by chance are more likely to play an active role in tumorigenesis. Major cancer sequencing initiatives have therefore focused on recurrent
mutations that are more likely to be drivers. However, in specific genetic contexts, low frequency mutations may also be capable of
participating in oncogenic processes. Reliable strategies for identifying these rare or even patient-specific (private) mutations are needed
in order to elucidate more personalized approaches to cancer diagnosis and treatment. Here we performed whole-exome sequencing on three
cases of childhood pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL), representing three cytogenetically-defined subgroups (high hyperdiploid,
t(12;21) translocation, and cytogenetically normal). We applied a data reduction strategy to identify both common and rare/private somatic
events with high functional potential. Top-ranked candidate mutations were subsequently validated at high sequencing depth on an independent
platform and in vitro expression assays were performed to evaluate the impact of identified mutations on cell growth and survival. We
identified 6 putatively damaging non-synonymous somatic mutations among the three cALL patients. Three of these mutations were well-
characterized common cALL mutations involved in constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (FLT3 p.D835Y, NRAS
p.G13D, BRAF p.G466A). The remaining three patient-specific mutations (ACD p.G223V, DOT1L p.V114F, HCFC1 p.Y103H) were novel mutations
previously undescribed in public cancer databases. Cytotoxicity assays demonstrated a protective effect of the ACD p.G223V mutation against
apoptosis in leukemia cells. ACD plays a key role in protecting telomeres and recruiting telomerase. Using a telomere restriction fragment
assay, we also showed that this novel mutation in ACD leads to increased telomere length in leukemia cells. This study identified ACD as a
novel gene involved in cALL and points to a functional role for ACD in enhancing leukemia cell survival. These results highlight the
importance of rare/private somatic mutations in understanding cALL etiology, even within well-characterized molecular subgroups. The online
version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12885-015-1639-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia is a heterogeneous disease both biologically and clinically, and is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths
among children. Despite significant advances in our understanding of the pathobiology of cALL leading to risk-based treatment regimens and
increased survival rates, the etiological causes of this disease remain elusive. Approximately 75 % of pre-B cALL cases exhibit
hyperdiploidy or a recurring gross chromosomal rearrangement, detection of which is central to disease diagnosis, risk stratification and
management . While these chromosomal alterations play an important role in driving the leukemic process by affecting molecular pathways that
halt lymphoid progenitor cell differentiation and promote cell proliferation and survival, they are not sufficient for leukemic
transformation and are often detected years before leukemia onset. This suggests a need for additional cooperating events in order to
achieve overt leukemogenesis . Thorough investigation of cALL genomes is crucial to better understand the underlying genomic complexity of
this disease and thus better diagnose and treat it. Toward these goals, recent large-scale sequencing efforts revealed many somatic driver
mutations/genes recurrently mutated in cALL . The identification of these high frequency driver mutations is essential to better understand
disease etiology and characterize prognostic subgroups. Yet accumulating evidence has also shown that low-frequency mutations within a
cancer type can contribute to onset and progression of the disease , and play a role in intra-tumor and inter-patient heterogeneity. The
identification of patient-specific mutations could provide crucial information regarding molecular pathways underlying cALL tumorigenesis
and thus point to new therapeutic avenues. Here, we performed whole-exome sequencing of 3 pre-B cALL cases. Case 1 was diagnosed with high
hyperdiploiy (>50 chromosome) cALL and Case 2 harboured the t(12;21) (ETV6-RUNX1) translocation. Together these two molecularly defined
subgroups represent over 40 % of cALL cases. Case 3 was cytogenetically normal at diagnosis. Using a unique quartet design, we sequenced
matched normal (blood following remission) and tumor (bone marrow at diagnosis) patient samples, and the parents of each case. We
successfully identified known recurrent drivers, as well as novel patient-specific somatic mutations with high functional potential. Using
in vitro assays, we showed that the private p.G223V mutation, adjacent to the TEL patch of the telomere protein ACD (also known as TPP1),
leads to apoptosis resistance and may contribute to leukemia cell survival by promoting telomere maintenance and protection. All study
subjects were self-declared French-Canadians of European descent from the established Quebec cALL (QcALL) cohort . The Sainte-Justine UHC
Research Ethics Board approved the protocol. Informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patients to participate in this study and
for publication of this report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Case 1, a 10 year old male, was classified as high risk based on his age. He presented with a platelet count of 15.0 × 109/L, a
white blood cell count (WBC) of 9.0 × 109/L, and 63 % and 97 % lymphoblast cells in the blood and bone marrow samples respectively. The
cytogenetic analysis revealed high hyperdiploidy (karyotype: 53,XY,+3,+4,+6,+10,+14,+17,+18). He was enrolled on the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute (DFCI) ALL Consortium protocol 95–01. He achieved complete remission and has been out of treatment for over 60 months with
leukemia free-survival (LFS). Case 2 was a 4 year old female with a platelet count of 35.0 × 109/L, a WBC of 33.1 × 109/L, and 75 % and 96 %
lymphoblast cells in the blood and bone marrow samples respectively. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a t(12;21) translocation. Despite her
karyotype, usually associated with a good prognostic, she was classified as high risk based on the presence of leukemia cells in the
cerebrospinal fluid. She was enrolled on DFCI/ALL Consortium protocol 2000–01. She also achieved complete remission and has been out of
treatment for over 60 months with LFS. Case 3 was a 6 year-old male with a WBC of 183.1 × 109/L, a platelet count of 29.0 × 109/L, 87 % and
95 % lymphoblast cells in the blood and bone marrow samples respectively, and presented with a normal karyotype according to the cytogenetic
analysis. The patient was classified as high risk based on hyperleukocytosis and was treated on DFCI/ALL Consortium Protocol 2000–01. Case 3
experienced a first relapse 41 months post diagnosis, and following 2 subsequent relapses he died 73 months post diagnosis. DNA was
extracted from bone marrow samples (at diagnosis) and peripheral blood samples (obtained after remission) from the cases and their parents
using standard protocols as described previously . Whole exomes were captured in solution with Agilent’s SureSelect Human All Exon 50 Mb
kits for SOLiD sequencing (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, were sequenced on the Life Technologies SOLiD System
(mean coverage =32X) and aligned to the Hg19 reference genome using LifeScope Genomic Analysis Software (see Fig. 1 for complete sequencing
analysis workflow). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) duplicates were removed using Picard . Base quality score recalibration was performed
using the Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK) and reads that failed the quality control were removed. Cleaned BAM files were used to create
pileup files using SAMtools . Somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) were called from pileup files using SNooPer, an in-house variant
caller that is based on a machine learning approach that integrates tumoral and normal data and that was specifically trained for optimal
identification of somatic mutations in our low-depth SOLiD sequencing data (manuscript submitted and software available upon request).
Furthermore, using the familial design, we were able to use parental sequence information to remove Mendelian inconsistencies, reduce false-
positive sequencing and alignment errors and facilitate somatic variant identification. The robustness of this approach was further
demonstrated using high-depth sequencing on an independent platform to confirm top-ranked somatic mutations (see below). Resulting somatic
SNVs were queried against publically available datasets such as 1000 Genomes and NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) to filter out
common polymorphism eventually remaining (minor allele frequency >0.01).Fig. 1Whole-exome sequencing analysis workflow. Boxes represent the
analysis/cleaning steps. Cylinders represent the SNV filtering steps used in the data reduction strategy to identify functional somatic
mutations. The number of variations remaining after each step is shown in brackets. Note that only SNVs that passed a given filter were
tested for in the subsequent step. Using public databases and variant annotation tools, we identified 6 top-ranked mutations among the pre-B
cALL patients, including 3 SNVs referenced in COSMIC v71 and 3 candidate rare/private SNVs in ACD (p.G223V), DOT1L (p.V114F) and HCFC1
(p.Y103H) with a potential functional impact Whole-exome sequencing analysis workflow. Boxes represent the analysis/cleaning steps.
Cylinders represent the SNV filtering steps used in the data reduction strategy to identify functional somatic mutations. The number of
variations remaining after each step is shown in brackets. Note that only SNVs that passed a given filter were tested for in the subsequent
step. Using public databases and variant annotation tools, we identified 6 top-ranked mutations among the pre-B cALL patients, including 3
SNVs referenced in COSMIC v71 and 3 candidate rare/private SNVs in ACD (p.G223V), DOT1L (p.V114F) and HCFC1 (p.Y103H) with a potential
functional impact Publically available microarray expression data were used to filter variants based on the assumption that expressed genes
are more likely to carry functionally relevant mutations . Mutated genes identified from each case were compared to the expression profiles
of the corresponding cALL subgroup (hyperdiploidy, t(12;21), or “others”) and only expressed genes were subsequently retained in the somatic
variant analysis. Top-ranked rare/private candidate mutations, as well as common somatic mutations identified in the pre-B cALL cases were
validated on the Ion Torrent system. Selected variant regions (~125pb flanking the identified somatic mutation) were amplified and PCR
products were sequenced on the Ion PGM Sequencer (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with a mean coverage >1,800X.
Primer sequences and PCR protocols are available upon request. Identified mutations were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis into the
complementary DNA (cDNA) sequence of each gene cloned into a pDONR221 vector. Using the pLenti-CMV-DEST Gateway Vector (w118-1), we
subcloned the wild-type (WT) or mutant coding sequences and generated lentiviruses using a Third Generation Packaging System in 293 T cells.
Lentiviral particles were then harvested and used to infect Nalm-6 (human leukemia pre-B cells) with 8ug/mL polybrene. Infected cells were
selected with puromycin 1 μg/μL, seeded at 5 × 105 cells/mL in their culture medium and treated with 5 μM of camptothecin for 3 h. Apoptosis
was measured using conventional Annexin V/Propidium iodide (PI) staining and quantified by flow cytometry (BD Biosciences FACS Fortessa).
All experiments were done in triplicate. Parental Nalm-6 cells and Nalm-6 cells overexpressing mutant ACD p.G223V (Nalm-6 ACD G223V), the
wild-type ACD (Nalm-6 ACD WT) or Nalm-6 cells infected with the empty vector alone (Nalm-6 pLENTI) were used for TRF assays. For each cell
line, extracted DNA at passage 16 (p16) (population doublings ≈ 50) and p27 (population doublings ≈ 80) after selection was digested with
HinfI and RsaI restriction enzymes and fractionated on an electrophoresis gel apparatus. After drying, the gel was hybridized with a [γ
-32P] adenosine triphosphate (ATP)end-labelled (T2AG3)3 probe and exposed on X-ray film. Mean TRF length was calculated as previously
described . The TRF assay was performed in duplicate. Assuming that functionally important genes can also be mutated more rarely and in
specific tumor contexts, we performed whole-exome sequencing of three pre-B cALL patients and their parents and applied a data reduction
strategy to identify both common and novel rare/private events with high functional potential (Fig. 1). SNVs were queried against public
databases, annotated using ANNOVAR , and were binned according to frequency and function (Methods). Non-synonymous mutations that were
expressed in cALL subgroups (based on microarray cALL expression data ) were then filtered based on a CONsensus DELeteriousness score >0.6
(measure of the degree of coherence of individual methods about the likelihood that a SNV is deleterious) . This led to the identification
of 6 expressed damaging non-synonymous somatic mutations among the 3 patients (FLT3 p.D835Y, NRAS p.G13D, BRAF p.G466A, ACD p.G223V, DOT1L
p.V114F, HCFC1 p.Y103H) (Table 1) that were subsequently confirmed using targeted ultra-deep re-sequencing (mean coverage >1800X). Among
these 6 somatic SNVs, FLT3 p.D835Y, NRAS p.G13D and BRAF p.G466A were referenced in the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC)
database (v71) and previously shown to constitutively activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and to increase tumor
proliferation . The identification of previously reported driver mutations validates the robustness of our approach. The NRAS p.G13D gain of
function mutation was identified in Case 1, which corroborates previous studies that report postnatal RAS activating mutations in ~30 % of
pre-B hyperdiploid cALL patients . The BRAF p.G466A mutation identified in Case 2 is associated with a mild increase of ERK activation .
While mutations in BRAF are identified in almost 70 % of patients with multiple myeloma , screening of childhood pre-B cohorts only
identified a few cases harbouring these events . Although alterations of the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 are frequent in hyperdiploid cALL
and rare in other subtypes , FLT3 p.D835Y was identified in the cytogenetically normal Case 3. While Case 3 suffered a relapse and activated
forms of FLT3 are usually associated with a poor outcome in acute myeloid leukemia patients , this association is not confirmed in cALL
.Table 1Candidate somatic mutations identified in each patientPatientSubgroupGeneGenomic changeProtein changeClassVAFCOSMIC v71Case
1HDNRASg.chr1:115258744C > Tp.G13DMissense0.48Haematopoietic and Lymphoid
tissueACD/TPP1g.chr16:67693443C > Ap.G223VMissense0.51-DOT1Lg.chr19:2191086G > Tp.V114FMissense0.46-Case
2t(12;21)BRAFg.chr7:140481411C > Gp.G466AMissense0.15ThyroidHCFC1g.chrX:153230064A > Gp.Y103HMissense0.51-Case
3CNFLT3g.chr13:28592642G > Tp.D835YMissense0.44Haematopoietic and Lymphoid tissueVariant allele frequencies (VAF) (number of supporting
reads/coverage) were calculated based on ultra-deep targeted re-sequencing data (mean coverage >1800X). Only tissue types harbouring the
highest occurrence of the mutation in the COSMIC database (v71) are presented. HD hyperdiploid, CN Cytogenetically normal Candidate somatic
mutations identified in each patient Variant allele frequencies (VAF) (number of supporting reads/coverage) were calculated based on ultra-
deep targeted re-sequencing data (mean coverage >1800X). Only tissue types harbouring the highest occurrence of the mutation in the COSMIC
database (v71) are presented. HD hyperdiploid, CN Cytogenetically normal Our sequencing analysis pipeline also led to the identification of
three candidate novel pathogenic mutations in Cases 1 and 2 (DOT1L p.V114F, HCFC1 p.Y103H, ACD p.G223V), that were neither previously
reported nor referenced in public databases. Based on our strict filtering criteria, no private mutations were identified in Case 3. DOT1L
is a histone writer and HCFC1 is a broad transcription regulator that plays a critical role in cell proliferation via its involvement in
chromatin-modifying activities . These results are consistent with recent cancer sequencing initiatives that highlighted the important role
of chromatin remodeling genes in leukemogenesis . Furthermore, DOT1L has recently been implicated in the development of MLL-rearranged
leukemia and shown to be essential for leukemic transformation . On the other hand, ACD is a core protein in the shelterin complex and
mediates the access of telomerase to the telomere. It is essential for telomere homeostasis in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell
particularly [27, 28]. The high variant allele frequency (VAF) of these rare/private mutations (DOT1L, VAF =0.46; HCFC1, VAF =0.51; ACD, VAF
=0.51), calculated based on our ultra-deep targeted re-sequencing data (Table 1), was indicative of early clonal selection supporting a
possible functional role in leukemia development. Functional validation of the ACD p.G223V mutation (Fig. 2a) was further pursued using in
vitro expression assays, however our in vitro lentiviral expression system did not permit functional characterization of neither DOT1L nor
HCFC1, due to the size of the open reading frames (ORFs) (4.6 kb and 6.1 kb, respectively) that were beyond the viral packaging capacity of
the capside . Further investigation of these two novel mutations using alternative functional screening methods is ongoing. In vitro
expression assays of ACD using the topoisomerase I inhibitor camptothecin, showed that leukemic cells overexpressing mutant p.G223V ACD
(Nalm-6 ACD G223V) exhibit lower levels of apoptosis compared with cells overexpressing wild-type ACD (Nalm-6 ACD WT) (P =0.014,
Mann–Whitney U test) and the empty vector (Nalm-6 pLenti) (P =0.014, Mann–Whitney U test) (Fig. 2b). The p.G223V mutation is adjacent to the
TEL patch in the oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding (OB) fold domain of ACD that interacts directly with the catalytic subunit of
telomerase. Within the shelterin complex, ACD was specifically shown to interact with POT1 to protect telomeres and recruit telomerase at
chromosome ends . Interestingly, recurrent somatic mutations in the OB domains of POT1 have been shown to cause telomere dysfunction in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia suggesting that alteration of shelterin-mediated protein-telomere binding could lead to genomic instability and
cancer . Furthermore, very recently, germline mutations in the POT1 binding domain and the TEL patch of ACD were respectively associated
with familial melanomas and bone marrow failure disorders (Fig. 2a). Although further studies are needed to decipher the underlying
molecular mechanisms implicating ACD in apoptosis inhibition, taken together, these data strongly support a role for ACD p.G223V in
promoting leukemia cell maintenance.Fig. 2ACD p.G223V protects from camptothecin-induced apoptosis and increases telomere length. a.
Schematic representation of the ACD protein. The p.G223V mutation, depicted in black, is adjacent to the TEL patch of the OB-fold domain
involved in telomerase recruitment and composed of seven critical amino acids located in a region defined by the curly bracket (E168, E169,
E171, R180, L183, L212 and E215) . p.Q320X, p.P491T and p.K170del, depicted in grey, are three germline mutations recently identified and
associated with familial melanomas and bone marrow failure disorders . TPP1C corresponds to the TIN2-binding domain. Together, the OB
(oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding) and PBD (POT1 binding domain) domains form the ACDN domain necessary for POT1 binding to telomeric
DNA and the stimulation of telomerase processivity. b. In vitro apoptosis assays show overall reduced levels of apoptosis associated with
ACD p.G223V. The c.659 g > t mutation was introduced into the ACD transgene by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Nalm-6 cells. The
graph shows annexin V/PI staining for 3 h on Nalm-6 pLenti (empty vector), Nalm-6 ACD WT and Nalm-6 ACD G223V cells. c. The telomere
restriction fragment assay (TRF) showed a quantitative increase in telomere size for Nalm-6 ACD G223V cells at passage 16 (p16) and p27
after selection. Mean TRF length = ∑ (ODi)/∑ (ODi/Li) where ODi is the radioactive signal, Li is the TRF fragment length at position i. The
bar chart of Fig. 2c (bottom) represents the mean TRF length for each condition directly quantified from each corresponding lane of the TRF
gel presented at the top of Fig. 2c Significance (in b and c) was determined by a Mann–Whitney U test; p-values <0.05 are represented by an
asterisk ACD p.G223V protects from camptothecin-induced apoptosis and increases telomere length. a. Schematic representation of the ACD
protein. The p.G223V mutation, depicted in black, is adjacent to the TEL patch of the OB-fold domain involved in telomerase recruitment and
composed of seven critical amino acids located in a region defined by the curly bracket (E168, E169, E171, R180, L183, L212 and E215) .
p.Q320X, p.P491T and p.K170del, depicted in grey, are three germline mutations recently identified and associated with familial melanomas
and bone marrow failure disorders . TPP1C corresponds to the TIN2-binding domain. Together, the OB (oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding)
and PBD (POT1 binding domain) domains form the ACDN domain necessary for POT1 binding to telomeric DNA and the stimulation of telomerase
processivity. b. In vitro apoptosis assays show overall reduced levels of apoptosis associated with ACD p.G223V. The c.659 g > t mutation
was introduced into the ACD transgene by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Nalm-6 cells. The graph shows annexin V/PI staining for
3 h on Nalm-6 pLenti (empty vector), Nalm-6 ACD WT and Nalm-6 ACD G223V cells. c. The telomere restriction fragment assay (TRF) showed a
quantitative increase in telomere size for Nalm-6 ACD G223V cells at passage 16 (p16) and p27 after selection. Mean TRF length = ∑ (ODi)/∑
(ODi/Li) where ODi is the radioactive signal, Li is the TRF fragment length at position i. The bar chart of Fig. 2c (bottom) represents the
mean TRF length for each condition directly quantified from each corresponding lane of the TRF gel presented at the top of Fig. 2c
Significance (in b and c) was determined by a Mann–Whitney U test; p-values <0.05 are represented by an asterisk To further investigate the
effect of p.G223V mutant ACD on telomere structure, we performed a TRF assay (Fig. 2c) and showed that decreased apoptosis correlates with
increased telomere length in Nalm-6 ACD G223V at both tested passages compared to Nalm-6 ACD WT and Nalm-6 pLenti (P =0.029, Mann–Whitney U
test), confirming stable alteration of telomere homeostasis. ACD mutant induced telomere elongation in leukemia cells is consistent with
reports demonstrating disrupted shelterin complex function and telomere lengthening due to mutations in POT1 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
[33, 37]. Furthermore, as observed for POT1 at the same population doubling point , overexpression of WT ACD did not increase telomere
length (Fig. 2c), confirming that the observed telomere lengthening is due to the p.G223V mutation and not caused by global overexpression
of ACD. Concomitant lengthening of the telomeres and decreased apoptosis levels in NALM-6 ACD G223V following camptothecin treatment
corroborates previous findings that altered telomerase activity can lead to hypersensitivity of tumor cells to topoisomerase inhibitors [38,
39]. Further investigation is required to characterize the influence of the p.G223V mutation on the recruitment and processivity of
telomerase and on telomere-length regulation. Missense or frameshift mutations in ACD, many of which are located in the OB fold, adjacent to
the TEL patch, and in the POT1 interaction domain, have been described in multiple cancer types (Additional file 1 Table S1) with the
highest prevalence found in melanoma (2.7 %), suggesting that ACD mutations may participate in a common underlying cancer-promoting pathway
that involves telomere dysfunction. Case 1 who carries the ACD p.G223V mutation had high hyperdiploid cALL and although telomere dysfunction
can cause chromosome destabilization and aneuploidy [40, 41], it is unlikely that this mutation precluded the mitotic event producing the
hyperdiploid phenotype. However, our results do support a role for ACD p.G223V in the earlier stages of clonal expansion contributing to
telomere maintenance and apoptosis resistance, at least in vitro. Further investigation is required in order to characterize the mechanistic
role of ACD p.G223V within this patient’s specific tumor context. The prenatal origins of cALLs are well established, along with the need
for additional postnatal mutations in order to drive overt leukemogenesis [42, 43]. The extent to which rare/private genetic events
contribute to the onset and progression of cALL however is largely unknown. Through whole-exome sequencing of 3 cALL cases, we successfully
identified not only common drivers (NRAS p.G13D, FLT3 p.D835Y, and BRAF p.G466A), but also rare/private somatic mutations (DOT1L p.V114F,
HCFC1 p.Y103H, ACD p.G223V), in well-characterized cALL molecular subgroups. The identification of patient-specific events with a functional
potential is not surprising and further confirms the underlying genetic complexity of this disease. We went on to demonstrate the functional
impact of ACD p.G223V on apoptosis resistance and telomere-length regulation in pre-B ALL cells. The high VAF of this somatic mutation
suggests that it is likely present in the major subclone; while this does not necessarily imply functionality, it does support an early role
for ACD p.G223V in driving the leukemic process. Though further investigation is needed to fully characterize the influence of the
identified mutation on telomere homeostasis, this study is the first to describe the functional implications of a somatic mutation in ACD on
leukemic cell behaviour, supporting a role for ACD and telomere regulation in leukemia cell resistance to apoptosis. In conclusion, these
results support the need of thorough investigation of rare/private mutations to reveal the underlying complexity of cALL landscapes,
including within well-characterized subgroups, and the inter-patient variability that may influence diagnosis and prognosis. The Sainte-
Justine UHC Research Ethics Board approved the protocol. Informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patients to participate in
this study and for publication of this report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor of this journal. Additional file 1: Table S1.Description of data: Non-synonymous and frame-shift mutations in ACD referenced in the
public cancer database COSMIC version 71. (PDF 120 kb) Description of data: Non-synonymous and frame-shift mutations in ACD referenced in
the public cancer database COSMIC version 71. (PDF 120 kb) childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia White blood cell count Dana Farber Cancer
Institute Leukemia free-survival Genome Analysis ToolKit Somatic single nucleotide variants NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project Telomere
restriction fragment Catalogue of Somatic Mutations In Cancer Variant allele frequency CONsensus DELeteriousness score Polymerase chain
reaction Wild-type Propidium iodide Oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding fold domain POT1 binding domain TIN2-binding domain hyperdiploid
Cytogenetically normal Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DS is the
principle investigator and takes primary responsibility for the paper. JFS, JH, and DS contributed to the conception and design of the
study. JFS, PC, MO and CR were involved in sample and library preparation. VS analyzed raw sequence data and provided bioinformatics
support. JFS performed whole-exome and targeted sequencing analysis. PC, PR, NG, and CD performed the functional validations: PC, NG and CD
performed the apoptosis resistance assays, PR performed the telomere restriction fragment assays. JFS and JH wrote the paper and PC, NG, CA
and DS contributed to the interpretation of the data and were involved in critical manuscript revision. All authors approved the final
version. The authors are indebted to the patients and their parents for participating in this study. This study was supported by research
funds provided by the Terry Fox Research Institute and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research. JFS is the recipient of a Réseau de
médecine génétique appliquée (RMGA) Fellowship. NG is the recipient of postdoctoral Cole Foundation Fellowship. DS holds the François-Karl-
Viau Research Chair in Pediatric Oncogenomics. Whole exome sequencing was performed at the Child Health Genomics Platform of the Sainte-
Justine UHC Research Center; Targeted re-sequencing was performed at the McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre; Computations
were made on the supercomputer Briarée from Université de Montréal, managed by Calcul Québec and Compute Canada. The operation of this
supercomputer is funded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), NanoQuébec, RMGA and the Fonds de recherche du Québec - Nature et
technologies (FRQ-NT).
