Author contributions Acquisition of data: Sridhar GS, Han CK, Ahmad WAW; Writing of the manuscript: Sridhar GS, Watson T, Han CK, Ahmad WAW;
Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Watson T. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest
relevant to this article was reported. A 67-year-old woman with drug-refractory essential hypertension was admitted for renal sympathetic
denervation (RDN). The secondary causes of hypertension were fully investigated in this patient. A 24-h ambulatory blood pressure (BP)
monitor documented a mean daytime BP of 172/101 mmHg, a mean nighttime BP of 151/84 mmHg, and an overall mean BP of 167/97 mmHg despite
compliance with metoprolol (50 mg twice daily), amlodipine (10 mg once daily), lisinopril (20 mg once daily), prazosin (2 mg thrice daily),
and hydrochlorothiazide (50 mg once daily). The patient was fasted for 4 h. Her usual antihypertensive drug therapy was continued. After the
administration of 5,000 international units of heparin and 100 μg of fentanyl, a 7-F Renal Double Curve guide catheter (Cordis Corporation,
Fremont, CA ,USA) was inserted into the right renal artery (no accessory vessel). A 0.014-in Runthrough floppy guide wire (Terumo Medical
Corporation, Somerset, NJ, USA) was advanced into place. A 6-mm ONESHOTTM (Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) irrigated RDN balloon was advanced
into place (Figure 1), and a single ablation was performed. The procedure was then repeated on the other side. The patient remained
hemodynamically stable throughout and at the completion of the procedure with a BP of 150/80 mmHg. Hemostasis was achieved with the Perclose
ProGlide Suture-Mediated Closure System (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and the patient was then returned to our ward for
monitoring. Renal Denervation Procedure. Selective angiography performed with a 7-F Renal Double Curve guide catheter in the left anterior
oblique 10° projection. Note that a single renal artery supplies each kidney and that the caliber and length of the main renal artery prior
to bifurcation is ideally suited to denervation. One hour later, the patient complained of dizziness and blurring of vision. Her Glasgow
Coma Scale score remained 15 with preserved mentation. She was not in pain. Her pulse rate was 87 bpm, and her BP was 77/38 mmHg. However,
she appeared well perfused and was clinically euvolemic. There was no evidence of a groin hematoma, and her abdomen was soft. A 12-lead
electrocardiogram showed no change, and a transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular function. Her hemoglobin level was
similar to baseline, and her arterial blood gas levels, including lactate, were unremarkable. She was given intravenous dopamine that was
titrated to response. At 10 μg/kg/min, her BP rose to 120/70 mmHg, and her symptoms resolved entirely. Over the subsequent 48 h, she was
extremely sensitive to reductions in the dose of dopamine and exhibited a markedly fluctuating BP. However, by 72 h, the dopamine had been
carefully weaned and discontinued. She was discharged home after she remained stable for a further 24 h. At a 3-month review, she remains
well with a mean daytime office BP of 124/72 mmHg while on amlodipine (5 mg once daily). Around 12% of patients with essential hypertension
who are considered resistant to conventional therapy have persistently elevated BP despite the use of three or more pharmacological
agents1,2. In such instances, abnormal renal excretory function, which is largely influenced by renal sympathetic nerve activity, may have a
central role3. Catheter-based RDN, which is a modern incarnation of a historically effective treatment, has recently emerged as a novel
therapeutic strategy. Proof of concept and subsequent randomized (unblinded) data that were collected while using the Symplicity® catheter
(Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) have demonstrated reductions in office BP of 20/10, 24/11, 25/11, and 23/11 mmHg at 1, 3, 6, and
12 months, respectively, in a group of patients taking an average of five antihypertensive drugs4,5. Such early exciting reports have
stimulated the development of numerous other similar devices, including the ONESHOTTM catheter that was used in this case6. In some cases,
early BP reductions have been reported following RDN. However, in other cases, the response is not always immediate, or it can take several
months to appear. Additionally, RDN is associated with a failure rate of 10%-30%, and the only predictor of response in early studies is the
magnitude of the systolic BP elevation at baseline7. Explanations for this broad variability in outcome are uncertain, except that raw BP
measurements may lack the sensitivity required for them to be considered a true measure of successful RDN8. This may in part explain the
lackluster performance of RDN in the Symplicity-3 trial, in which RDN failed to demonstrate superiority over conventional treatments when
compared to a sham-control procedure9. However, despite this, the use of RDN does seem to significantly reduce renal norepinephrine
spillover10. Therefore, it is possible that those patients who exhibit more sympathetic over-activity may experience a greater degree of BP
reduction with RDN. Because sympathetic over-activity is not routinely measured in clinical practice, this remains speculative. Nonetheless,
the role of RDN in the treatment of resistant hypertension remains uncertain, but the sustained and impressive BP reductions that were
observed in this and other cases should encourage further research to improve the understanding of the mechanisms through which hypertension
is mediated and to identify those patients who are likely to achieve the most dramatic responses with RDN. Sources of Funding There were no
external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
