Funding Information No funding information provided. Delayed posthypoxic leukoencephalopathy (DPHL) is a rare and underrecognized entity
where patients manifest a neurological relapse after initial recovery from an acute hypoxic episode. We sought to describe the magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) findings in a group of patients with DPHL and review the available literature. Retrospective case series including
patients who presented with neurological and/or psychiatric symptoms after recovery from an acute hypoxic episode. The history and clinical
presentation were reviewed from the electronic medical records. MRI scans were evaluated from the picture archiving and communication
system. We performed a comprehensive review of the English medical literature for prior published cases of DPHL and describe the key imaging
findings that have been reported related to this condition. A total of five patients were identified, including four patients with
respiratory failure due to drug overdoses from benzodiazepines, opioids, and/or barbiturates, and one patient who presented after
cardiopulmonary arrest due to pulmonary embolism. All patients showed diffuse, extensive, and confluent white matter signal abnormalities
including prominent restricted diffusion, extending to the subcortical white matter and respecting the U-fibers. There was no gyral edema or
contrast enhancement. In one case histopathology was available, which highlighted patchy subcortical myelin loss with sparing of U-fibers
and demonstrated prominent macrophage/microglial inflammation with extensive axonal damage. Of the other four patients, two were at their
neurological baselines and two had persistent neurological deficits at the time of discharge. The described constellation of MRI findings is
highly suggestive of DPHL in the appropriate clinical setting. Delayed posthypoxic leukoencephalopathy (DPHL) is a rare and underrecognized
entity characterized by neurological relapse following a period of clinical stability or improvement after an episode of hypoxia. Patients
usually present between one and 4 weeks after the initial event with relatively lucid intervening periods of variable lengths. While the
exact mechanism behind its delayed manifestation has not been elucidated, DPHL is considered a distinct process from various direct causes
of acute leukoencephalopathy such as toxic and metabolic injury. The majority of DPHL cases reported to date have been associated with
carbon monoxide intoxication, where the incidence is approximately 2.8% (Choi 1983). However, delayed neurological sequelae have also been
documented in other causes of hypoxia, particularly due to respiratory failure in drug overdoses (Rozen 2012; Salazar and Dubow 2012; Meyer
2013). Histopathologically, DPHL is characterized by widespread demyelination with axonal preservation (Gottfried et al. 1997). Diffuse and
confluent white matter changes are present on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), most notably with extensive, symmetric, and often striking
restricted diffusion (Molloy et al. 2006). Such a pattern is distinctly different from that seen in acute hypoxic-ischemic injury in the
adult, which involves predominantly the gray matter structures (Huang and Castillo 2008). Although DPHL as a clinical phenomenon has been
known for many years, the presence of extensive restricted diffusion has only been recognized after the relatively recent advent of
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and probably constitutes the most remarkable MRI feature. To date, the literature regarding MRI findings is
relatively scarce and consists of scattered case reports on patients with various etiologies of hypoxia and two small series of DPHL after
carbon monoxide poisoning (Kim et al. 2003; Hsiao et al. 2004). Herein, we describe the MRI characteristics of DPHL in a series of five
adult patients, the majority of whom presented following drug overdoses, with histopathologic correlation in one case. We also offer an
extensive review of the literature including cases where MRI was performed. This retrospective case series was approved by our institutional
review board which waived requirement for informed consent. Adult patients (≥18 years of age) who fulfilled the following criteria were
included in the study: (1) neurological deterioration caused by an initial hypoxic event; (2) subsequent clinical improvement with return to
(prehypoxic event) baseline or near baseline; and (3) neurological relapse or new neurological or psychiatric symptoms following clinical
improvement. Patients with continued deterioration after the initial hypoxic event without a lucid period or a clear relapse or with an
alternative explanation for neurologic deterioration were excluded. Studies were performed on 1.5 T (Magnetom Aera, Siemens, Erlangen,
Germany; Signa, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI) or 3.0 T (Magnetom Skyra, Siemens) MRI scanners and typically consisted of T1- and T2-weighted
sequences, T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), trace isotropic DWI at b = 1000, and gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted sequences.
Parameters were as follows: for T2 FLAIR, TR = 8000–9000, TE = 101–126, and IR = 2200–2500; for T2, TR = 2683–5940, and TE = 102–117; and
for DWI, TR = 7500–10,000, TE = 80–99, number of excitations = 1 or 2, matrix = 128 × 128 to 192 × 192; field of view, 22 × 22 cm to
24 × 24 cm, slice thickness = 4–5 mm, and gap 4–6.5 mm. The electronic medical records of each patient were reviewed to determine the
clinical presentation, history, etiology of hypoxia, time to neurological relapse, and clinical manifestations during relapse. MRI studies
were extracted from our picture archiving and communication system. Time from the initial hypoxic event to identification of diffuse white
matter abnormalities on MRI (FLAIR and DWI) was recorded. The following imaging characteristics were visually analyzed: morphology (patchy
or homogeneous), symmetry, relative extent of FLAIR and ADC abnormalities, spared structures, presence of mass effect or gyral edema,
contrast enhancement, or hemorrhage. For the autopsy case, the brain was fixed in formalin for 2 weeks. Following brain cutting
representative sections were taken for microscopic assessment. Histochemical staining was done with hematoxylin and eosin, with Luxol fast
blue added to label myelin. Immunohistochemistry was performed to detect expression of SM31 (Sternberger) for neurofilaments and CD68
(Ventana) for macrophages. We queried the PubMed database using the following terms for articles written in the English language: “delayed
hypoxic encephalopathy”, “delayed hypoxic leukoencephalopathy”, “delayed leukoencephalopathy”, and “delayed hypoxic-ischemic
leukoencephalopathy”, as well as various permutations substituting “reversible” for “delayed” and “post-hypoxic” for “hypoxic” and “post-
anoxic.” All articles were reviewed for redundancy of patients and only those who had a clear delayed presentation fulfilling the criteria
above and who underwent MRI were included. A total of five patients (three men and two women) fulfilled criteria for inclusion in this case
series. Median age (interquartile range) at presentation was 63 years (59–64). All patients were 59 years or older except for one patient
who was 32 years old. Four patients were brought to our facility following an episode of respiratory failure due to drug overdose with
opioids, benzodiazepines, and/or barbiturates. Three of them were found unresponsive and one had altered mental status in the setting of
respiratory failure. One of five patients developed pulmonary embolism at home 8 days after being discharged for bowel surgery and was
brought to the hospital in cardiorespiratory arrest. After this initial admission for respiratory failure/hypoxia, all patients
were discharged from the hospital at their baseline or near baseline. Relapse was made manifest with neuropsychiatric symptoms such as
erratic behavior, ataxia, urinary and/or fecal incontinence, delusions, akinetic mutism, and deficits in executive functioning including
memory and attention. Two patients presented with pyramidal signs at relapse, consisting of triple flexion response on plantar stimulation
(patient 2) and a pronator drift (patient 3). Other symptoms included increased tone, tremors, and cogwheel and leadpipe rigidity. Median
time to relapse was 23 days (14–32). One patient continued to worsen after relapse and died 24 days after readmission. The other four
patients progressively improved and were discharged at a median 24.5 days (21.5–33.75) after relapse. Two out of four patients were at their
neurological baselines at discharge. The other two patients had shown significant improvement but had persistent deficits (Table 2000).
Clinical characteristics of patients with delayed posthypoxic leukoencephalopathy Median time to identification of white matter
abnormalities since the initial hypoxic event was 40 days (30–50). All cases demonstrated extensive and confluent T2 and FLAIR
hyperintensity involving predominantly the periventricular white matter and centrum semiovale, bilaterally and in a symmetric fashion
(Fig.1). In two out of the five patients, restricted diffusion matched the extent of the T2-FLAIR hyperintensity, while in three patients
the restrictive abnormalities were relatively less extensive. The white matter lesions were confluent and homogeneous in two patients. Three
patients had evidence of more heterogeneous, patchy lesions which still followed an overall symmetric distribution. In all patients the T2
abnormalities involved the subcortical white matter but spared the U-fibers (Fig.2), and were confined to the supratentorial brain without
affecting the basal ganglia, thalami, brain stem, or cerebellum. There was no gyral edema or sulcal effacement, and there were no areas of
contrast enhancement following the intravenous administration of gadolinium (Table 2004). These findings were new in four out of the five
patients in whom baseline MRI studies from their initial presentation were available for review. In one out of five patients, we did not
have the initial imaging studies from an outside institution; however, these reportedly did not show an acute abnormality. Initial baseline
MRI on patient number four showed three small subacute-appearing embolic infarcts in the supratentorial brain, without the confluent and
symmetric white matter abnormalities that were seen on an MRI study performed 9 days later. Of the other patients who had a baseline study,
two demonstrated chronic white matter ischemic changes and one did not show any significant findings. MRI characteristics in a series of
patients with delayed posthypoxic leukoencephalopathy Time to MRI abnormality since the original hypoxic event (during relapse). MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery. 65-year-old male presenting
after an acute hypoxic episode secondary to opioid and benzodiazepine overdose (case 4). Baseline MRI (A through D) demonstrate a few
nonspecific subcortical T2 and FLAIR white matter hyperintensities (A and B) without restricted diffusion (C and D) probably representing
chronic small vessel ischemic changes in a patient of this age. MRI after neurological relapse (E through H) shows diffuse confluent white
matter abnormalities in the centrum semiovale involving the subcortical white matter. There is corresponding signal hyperintensity on DWI
(G) with somewhat less extensive hypointensity on the calculated ADC maps (H), indicating some degree of T2-shine through superimposed on
cytotoxic edema. FLAIR: TR = 9000, TE = 126, and IR = 2490; DWI: TR = 9000, TE = 98, number of excitations = 2, matrix = 192 × 192; field of
view, 23 × 23 cm to 24 × 24 cm, slice thickness = 4 mm, and gap 4. Cropped and digitally magnified region from Fig.1E demonstrates that the
white matter signal abnormality (asterisk) involves the subcortical white matter but spares the U-fibers which appear as a curvilinear dark
band (arrowhead). The adjacent gray matter is also visualized (arrow). Autopsy examination of the brain in case 5 demonstrated no
significant edema or sulcal effacement. Microscopically, there was extensive white matter injury with myelin loss and axonal swelling, as
well as abundant reactive astroglia, in a mildly vacuolated background neuropil. These changes involved the subcortical white matter in a
patchy distribution, although the U-fibers were preserved (Fig.3). MRI and histologic sections from a 59-year-old female who developed DPHL
after being found unresponsive in the setting of opioid overdose. Axial T2-weighted image demonstrates more patchy white matter lesions
compared to the case in Fig1, with corresponding low apparent diffusion coefficient (B) indicating restricted diffusion. T2: TR = 2683 and
TE = 103; DWI: TR = 10,000, TE = 80, number of excitations = 2, matrix = 128 × 128, field of view, 24 × 24 cm, slice thickness = 5 mm, and
gap 5 mm. (C) Abundant reactive astroglia characterized by brightly eosinophilic cytoplasm and enlarged nuclei are numerous in subcortical
white matter. The mildly vacuolated background neuropil demonstrates ubiquitous eosinophilic ‘blebs’ which impart a rough or stippled
character. Occasional macrophages are appreciated, for example, at 9 o’clock position. Hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification 200×.
(D) The subcortical u-fibers at the gray white junction exhibit normal myelin, but white matter beneath these shows marked patchy pallor.
Hematoxylin and eosin with luxol fast blue, original magnification 20×. (E) CD68 stain highlights lysosome-enriched cells, microglia and
macrophages, abundant in the neuropil. Immunohistochemistry for CD68, original magnification 100×. (F) Neurofilament stain highlights
frequent axonal swelling, indicative of damage, in white matter. Immunohistochemistry for SM31, original magnification 200×. The gray matter
of the adult brain demonstrates selective vulnerability to acute hypoxic-ischemic injury, which is triggered by a complex cascade of
cellular events resulting in glutamate excitotoxicity, release of free radicals, and apoptosis (Won et al. 2002). Hypoxia preferentially
affects the basal ganglia, thalami, neocortex, and hippocampus, with relative sparing of the brainstem, and results in a consistent pattern
of abnormalities on MRI which are most evident on DWI within the first few hours following injury (Huang and Castillo 2008). On the
contrary, white matter is relatively resilient to the effects of hypoxia, with the exception of carbon monoxide poisoning, which can cause
acute demyelination preferentially damaging the globi pallidi and subcortical white matter (Adams et al. 2000). In the setting of drug
overdose, there are two principal mechanisms by which white matter can be injured. First, a form of spongiform leukoencephalopathy with
intramyelinic vacuolization has been described from inhalation of the pyrolysate vapors produced after heating heroin in a practice known as
“chasing the dragon”, which primarily presents as a cerebellar syndrome causing ataxia, dysarthria, and bradykinesia (Won et al. 2002; Keogh
et al. 2003). White matter injury in heroin inhalation encephalopathy favors the cerebellum, brainstem, posterior cerebral white matter, and
posterior limb of the internal capsule (Keogh et al. 2003). This is in contradistinction to a second mechanism consisting of delayed
demyelination, seen in DPHL, which occurs weeks after the initial hypoxic event and typically spares the cerebellum, brainstem, and basal
ganglia. This particular distribution was evident in our study and is also concordant with the MRI findings of DPHL in the majority of
published case reports and series. Findings reported in the literature are described in detail in Table 2012 (Weinberger et al. 1994; Lee
and Lyketsos 2001; Arciniegas et al. 2004; Molloy et al. 2006; Shprecher et al. 2008; Mittal et al. 2010; Wallace et al. 2010; Nzwalo et al.
2011; Huisa et al. 2013; Meyer 2013; Tormoehlen 2013; Geraldo et al. 2014). Review of studies in the literature including MRI ADC, apparent
diffusion coefficient; Cho, choline; Cr, Creatine; DWI, diffusion-weighted imaging; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; Lac,
lactate; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; NAA, N-acetylaspartate; WM, white matter; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MRS, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. Back issue not available for review. On histopathologic examination, DPHL demonstrates widespread demyelination with
axonal sparing as well as macrophages and reactive astrocytes (Plum et al. 1962; Gottfried et al. 1997). The U-fibers and cerebral cortex
are noticeably spared (Plum et al. 1962). As opposed to the spongiform leukoencephalopathy seen in heroin pyrolysate (Wolters et al. 1982;
Kriegstein et al. 1999), there is usually no intramyelinic vacuolization in DPHL (Plum et al. 1962; Gottfried et al. 1997). To date, the
pathophysiology of DPHL remains elusive. A proposed mechanism relates to the fact that the turnover rates for some myelin-related proteins
range between 19 to 22 days, which is close to the average time for clinical relapse after initial injury (Meyer 2013). This would be
consistent with our study, where the median time to neurological relapse was 23 days. However, while this is plausible, it would not explain
why DPHL is such an uncommon phenomenon. Additionally, there have been reports of patients with decreased levels of arylsulfatase A, which
is deficient in metachromatic leukodystrophy, suggesting that this could represent a predisposing factor (Weinberger et al. 1994; Gottfried
et al. 1997). However, levels of this enzyme in other reported cases have been normal (Salazar and Dubow 2012). We did not measure
arylsulfatase A in our patients. It is also worth mentioning that DPHL appears to occur after mild-to-moderate episodes of hypoxia, as
severe hypoxia would likely result in acute hypoxic-ischemic injury with typical damage to gray matter structures. In our series, the white
matter abnormalities were extensive, bilateral, and symmetric, and invariably involved the subcortical white matter while preserving the
U-fibers. In particular, a remarkable imaging finding was the presence of extensive restricted diffusion, which has been partially described
in some cases (Kim et al. 2002; Arciniegas et al. 2004; Molloy et al. 2006; Shprecher et al. 2008; Lou et al. 2009; Betts et al. 2012;
Salazar and Dubow 2012; Huisa et al. 2013). The majority of reports available, however, do not include DWI sequences (Hori et al. 1991;
Weinberger et al. 1994; Gottfried et al. 1997; Lee and Lyketsos 2001; Hsiao et al. 2004; Mittal et al. 2010; Wallace et al. 2010; Nzwalo
et al. 2011; Rozen 2012; Choi et al. 2013; Meyer 2013; Tormoehlen 2013; Geraldo et al. 2014), and those that do, lack the level of detail
that we include in our series, specifically in terms of spared structures, symmetry, and morphology of the signal abnormalities, and
presence of T2-FLAIR/ADC mismatch. We have shown that the FLAIR abnormalities were more extensive than the areas of restricted diffusion in
three of our patients, although both showed a similar distribution and were symmetric. These findings were not present on baseline MRI,
which was available in 80% of our cases, further substantiating the fact that such changes constitute a delayed manifestation rather than a
direct effect of acute injury. While none of the studies in the literature have reported signal abnormalities in the cerebellum or
brainstem, there are a few instances where lesions were present in the basal ganglia, presumably related to the hypoxic injury (Hori et al.
1991; Gottfried et al. 1997; Kim et al. 2002; Hsiao et al. 2004; Lou et al. 2009; Betts et al. 2012; Rozen 2012; Salazar and Dubow 2012;
Choi et al. 2013). Specific injury to the globi pallidi has been described in several cases, not only in the setting of carbon monoxide
poisoning (Kim et al. 2003; Hsiao et al. 2004), but also following drug overdose and arrest after massive hemorrhage (Gottfried et al. 1997;
Lou et al. 2009; Betts et al. 2012; Rozen 2012; Salazar and Dubow 2012). The authors of one case report describe isolated injury to the
basal ganglia in a patient with delayed encephalopathy after strangulation (Hori et al. 1991). However, this is the earliest case with MRI
and it is possible that subtle abnormalities may have been missed. Additionally, no DWI was available at that time. A delayed-onset dystonia
following anoxic injury, without white matter abnormalities and progressive over time, has also been reported in two cases (Kuoppamaki
et al. 2002). The lack of gyral edema in our series also supports a delayed presentation rather than acute toxic or metabolic injury. The
absence of contrast enhancement argues against an active inflammatory or demyelinating process, which is possible if myelin injury has
already occurred. None of the reviewed publications described contrast enhancement, and if such is present an alternative diagnosis should
be sought. Additionally, the clinical presentation in DPHL is different from that of acute hypoxia, with most patients showing bizarre
behavior, akinetic mutism, psychomotor retardation, and deficits of executive functioning. The presence of pyramidal signs as well as
Parkinsonism and other movement disorders is also relatively common. We believe that, in the appropriate clinical setting, the constellation
of MRI findings described above is highly suggestive of DPHL, which usually warrants supportive treatment and bears a relatively good
prognosis in most patients. Our findings are similar to those presented by Kim et al. (2003), although that study only included patients
with DPHL after carbon monoxide poisoning. The main limitations of our study are related to the small number of subjects and its
retrospective design, which are difficult to avoid given the rarity of this disorder. While a prospective cohort study (e.g., including all
patients with neurological deterioration caused by an initial hypoxic event) would be ideal, this type of research is not well suited for
rare diseases as an impractically high number of study subjects would be required (Mann 2003). It is possible that we could have identified
more cases but the delayed presentation of this entity and the fact that many patients may present primarily with psychiatric symptoms
(Tormoehlen 2013) may cause it to go underrecognized. Additionally, the time from symptom onset to MRI is variable among different patients,
which is an inherent drawback related to the retrospective nature of this study. We could also not follow patients longitudinally to assess
the reversibility of imaging findings over time. A prior case report in a patient with DPHL from carbon monoxide intoxication showed gradual
resolution of restricted diffusion but persistence of the abnormal periventricular T2 signal abnormality which remained largely unchanged
for over a year (Kim et al. 2002). Another case report documented incomplete resolution of the white matter abnormalities 1 year
postoverdose (Shprecher et al. 2008), while separate reports showed improved but persistent abnormalities 6 months and 8 years after initial
presentation, respectively (Molloy et al. 2006; Betts et al. 2012). Two-year clinical follow-up on another study, in patients with carbon
monoxide-related DPHL, showed 75% recovery within 1 year (Choi 1983). Therefore, the use of the term “reversible” as in some of the prior
descriptions of the disease might not be appropriate. Finally, DPHL has been shown to usually occur in older individuals. None of the
patients in a large study of DPHL after carbon monoxide poisoning was less than 30 years of age (Choi 1983). Our patients were close to or
above 60 years of age, with the exception of one patient who was 32 years old. Interestingly, this younger patient showed the most rapid
clinical improvement of our cohort and was at his neurological baseline at discharge. The characteristics and distribution of imaging
findings in DPHL can be striking on MRI. We have performed an exhaustive review of the literature on this entity and present our findings on
its imaging aspects in great detail. In the appropriate clinical setting, bilateral and symmetric white matter signal abnormalities confined
to the supratentorial white matter without gyral edema or enhancement, are highly suggestive of DPHL, which carries a relatively favorable
prognosis compared to other acute toxic or metabolic causes of white matter injury. None. None declared.
