A temporary protective loop ileostomy is a routine procedure to protect the anastomosis in patients who undergo low anterior resection for
rectal cancer. The aim of this case report is to present a rare complication caused by Meckel’s diverticulum. We describe a case of a
71-year-old white man with dysfunctional ileostomy after low anterior resection for rectal cancer due to adhesions and pressing effects of
Meckel’s diverticulum near the ileostomy site, which led to volvulus of his small intestine and obstruction. As a result he underwent a
supplementary operation to resolve this complication by Meckel’s diverticulum resection. During a low anterior resection for rectal cancer
and a protective ileostomy procedure the presence of Meckel’s diverticulum should not be ignored. Our proposal is the primary resection of
Meckel’s diverticulum as the best surgical choice; according to the limited international literature on such cases we report a possible
alternative to a protective ileostomy by creating a conduit using Meckel’s diverticulum as a stoma. A temporary protective ileostomy is a
routine procedure for patients who undergo a low anterior resection for rectal cancer with anastomosis less than 5cm from the anal verge. We
present a rare case of dysfunctional temporary loop ileostomy due to adhesions and volvulus caused by Meckel’s diverticulum (MD) which was
primarily ignored. A 71-year-old white man was diagnosed with rectal adenocarcinoma 5cm from the anal verge. Computed tomography (CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) highlighted circumferential thickened rectal mucosa. The tumor was considered to be resectable and he
underwent a low anterior resection with an end-to-end anastomosis 2cm from the rectal verge in which circular staplers EEA™ 28mm were used.
A protective ileostomy was created. A Meckel’s diverticulum was encountered near the site of the ileostomy, 7cm away from the afferent limb
of the protective ileostomy, without any further action. During the early postoperative period his progress was satisfactory and the loop
ileostomy was functional, but on postoperative day (POD) 4 the ileostomy appeared dysfunctional and he presented symptoms of incomplete
ileus. During POD 5 a Foley catheter was inserted in the ileostomy and remained there for 2 days. The ileostomy started to be more
functional, but after the catheter was removed, obstruction symptoms reappeared. An endoscopy in the ileostomy revealed mechanical
obstruction of the ileostomy by adjacent bowel loop and possible volvulus of the ileostomy loop. In consequence, the patient underwent a
supplementary operation, in which we found volvulus of loop ileostomy as a result of adhesions and pressing effects of MD, which was
encountered close to the ileostomy. Adhesiolysis and a resection of the MD (Fig. 1) were performed as well as closure of the ileostomy. His
postoperative progress was optimal and he was discharged on POD 8 after the closure of the ileostomy.Fig. 1Resected specimen of Meckel’s
diverticulum with part of small bowel Resected specimen of Meckel’s diverticulum with part of small bowel Colorectal cancer represents 9% of
all cancers around the globe. It is the third most common cause of death in the USA . In 2008, 148,000 new cases of colorectal cancer were
recorded . There are similar incidence rates for cancer of the colon in both sexes, and a slight male predominance for rectal cancer. In the
UK, colorectal cancer is the second most common cause of death, with 20,000 new cases every year . In addition, in many countries around the
world, including European countries, rates of colorectal cancer are high. Diagnosis and staging of rectal cancer includes CT scan, MRI (in
some cases), endoscopy and biopsies. MD was first described in 1803 as a vestigial remnant of the omphalomesenteric duct. It is often
encountered incidentally during appendectomy and it is associated with serious complications such as obstruction, intussusception,
perforation, diverticulitis and gastrointestinal bleeding . In low anterior resection for rectal cancer, protective ileostomy is strongly
suggested when anastomosis is performed less than 5cm from the anal verge . The construction of a protective stoma significantly reduces the
incidence of anastomotic leakage and re-operation [5, 6]. Our case report is about a rare case of dysfunctional ileostomy in which the MD
caused volvulus of the small intestine near the ileostomy and this in combination with its adhesions led to bowel obstruction and, as a
result, dysfunction of the protective ileostomy. Research of the limited international literature on cases similar to this case report
revealed a report of the use of MD as a urinary conduit . We found a case report by Sheena et al. that used MD as an alternative conduit to
a defunctioning ileostomy, which reported satisfactory results . In conclusion, during a low anterior resection for rectal cancer and a
protective ileostomy procedure, the presence of MD should never be ignored. Our proposal is the primary resection of MD as the best surgical
choice for avoiding the complication we have described in our case report. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Computed tomography Meckel’s diverticulum Magnetic resonance imaging Postoperative day Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions KGS and EES analyzed and interpreted the patient data and were the major
contributors to the writing of the manuscript. MEF, EKR, EMP, and GEK participated in the design and coordination; TGP, MSH and MCT helped
to draft the manuscript. All authors performed the surgical treatment and the postsurgery observation of the patient. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
