Sarcomatoid carcinoma of the urinary bladder is a rare bidirectional malignant neoplasm with epithelial and mesenchymal differentiation. The
epithelial component is mainly high-grade urothelial carcinoma, and the mesenchymal component includes rhabdomyosarcoma. However, proper
differential diagnosis of adult rhabdomyosarcomatous tumors of the bladder can be a challenge. Moreover, low-grade urothelial carcinoma as
the epithelial component of sarcomatoid carcinoma has not been reported. A 64-year-old Asian man with a history of transurethral resection
of low-grade urothelial carcinoma of the bladder visited our department with complaints of frequent urination and macroscopic hematuria.
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a large mass located in the anterior wall of the bladder. Pathological
diagnosis of transurethral biopsy was low-grade, non-invasive papillary urothelial carcinoma, and tumor tissue was removed by total
cystectomy. Immunohistochemical studies and fluorescence in situ hybridization assay of the resected neoplastic tissue revealed extensive
rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation causing the formation of a large pedunculated polyp with a papillary appearance of recurrent low-grade
urothelial carcinoma. No evidence of recurrence was detected during 2 years of follow-up without further treatment. Urothelial carcinoma of
the urinary bladder with extensive rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation is rare, but it should be considered in the differential diagnosis
even when urothelial carcinoma coexisting with a rhabdomyosarcomatous component is low-grade and non-invasive. Sarcomatoid carcinoma (SC) is
a rare bidirectional malignant neoplasm with epithelial and mesenchymal differentiation that accounts for less than 0.3% of all histological
subtypes of primary urinary bladder tumors [1, 2]. The epithelial component is mainly high-grade urothelial carcinoma (UC), and the
mesenchymal malignant component consists of osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), and so forth . Inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor (IMT), also referred to as inflammatory pseudotumor, pseudosarcomatous fibromyxoid tumor, and post-operative spindle
cell nodule, is an unusual, benign, myofibroblastic spindle cell lesion that can arise from various organs, including the urinary bladder.
IMT of the bladder manifests prominent nucleoli, mitoses, chromosomal abnormalities, necrosis, and muscularis propria invasion, resembling
malignant spindle cell tumors, including pure RMS, leiomyosarcoma, and SC [3, 4]. Clinically, proper differential diagnosis of adult
rhabdomyosarcomatous tumors of the urinary bladder, including pure RMS, SC, and IMT, can be a challenge. In this report, we present a case
of recurrent low-grade UC with extensive rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation in an elderly man. The lesion presented as a large mass due to
a rhabdomyosarcomatous component at the first medical examination. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of low-
grade UC as the epithelial component of SC. A 52-year-old Asian man underwent transurethral resection (TUR) of stage I (T1N0M0) low-grade UC
(transitional cell carcinoma ) in the anterior wall of the bladder at a nearby hospital. He was referred to our hospital 4 months after
undergoing TUR. Cytoscopic examination performed at our division showed scar formation after TUR with negative biopsies, and he did not wish
to undergo further treatment. Although we planned follow-up studies, he stopped visiting our hospital just after the cytoscopic examination.
At the age of 64, 12 years after undergoing TUR, he visited our department with complaints of frequent urination and macroscopic hematuria
without painful micturition. During his physical examination, a pelvic mass and superficial lymph nodes were not palpable, but computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large mass (3.8cm×2.9cm) with infiltration into the muscle layer (T2b),
which was located in the anterior wall of the urinary bladder. The mass intensity was the same as in the rest of the bladder wall on
T1-weighted images and slightly greater than in the bladder wall on T2-weighted ones (Fig. 1a, b). Urinary cytology was positive and
suggestive of UC (TCC). Cytoscopic examination revealed a large pedunculated polyp with a surrounding papillary appearance. The patient
subsequently underwent a transurethral biopsy of the tumor. The pathological diagnosis was low-grade, non-invasive papillary UC (Ta), and
there was no evidence of metastasis on CT or MRI. Although muscularis propria invasion was not observed in the transurethral biopsy
specimens, the patient was diagnosed with stage II (T2bN0M0) UC on the basis of MRI findings of tumor infiltration into the muscle layer.
Therefore, tumor tissue was removed by total cystectomy (Fig. 1c), and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection of external iliac and
obturator regions with ileal conduit urinary diversion was performed. In total, eight lymph nodes were dissected. No post-operative
complications were observed.Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging scans obtained at presentation (a and b) and of the resected urinary bladder
(c). Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a large mass (3.8cm×2.9cm) with fragmentation of muscularis propria (arrows), which was located
in the anterior wall of the urinary bladder. The mass intensity was the same as in the rest of the bladder wall on T1-weighted images (a)
and slightly greater than in the bladder wall on T2-weighted ones (b). The resected urinary bladder showed a large pedunculated polyp with a
surrounding papillary appearance Magnetic resonance imaging scans obtained at presentation (a and b) and of the resected urinary bladder
(c). Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a large mass (3.8cm×2.9cm) with fragmentation of muscularis propria (arrows), which was located
in the anterior wall of the urinary bladder. The mass intensity was the same as in the rest of the bladder wall on T1-weighted images (a)
and slightly greater than in the bladder wall on T2-weighted ones (b). The resected urinary bladder showed a large pedunculated polyp with a
surrounding papillary appearance The final diagnosis of low-grade UC (TCC) with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation (INFa, pTa [epithelial
component]/pT2b [mesenchymal component], LVI0, RM0, u-rt0, u-lt0, ur0, N0, M0) was established on the basis of immunohistochemical studies
and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay of the resected neoplastic tissue. The pedunculated polyp was made up mainly of a
sarcomatous component with a spindle cell–like appearance, which was characterized by severe nuclear pleomorphism and mitotic activity
(Fig. 2a), and scattered areas of necrosis. Some strap- and racket-shaped cells with eosinophilic elongated cytoplasm were present in a
dispersed manner (Fig. 2a). Spindle-like cells were positive for vimentin (Fig. 2b), myogenin, and desmin, suggesting rhabdomyosarcomatous
differentiation. In contrast, these cells were negative for cytokeratins recognized by AE1/AE3 (Fig. 2c), chromogranin, synaptophysin,
α-smooth muscle actin, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) (Fig. 2d). Rearrangements and copy number gain of the ALK gene were not detected
by FISH (Fig. 2e). Muscularis propria invasion (T2b) was observed in the sarcomatous lesion without lymph node metastasis. The epithelial
component of the tumor, which was consistent with a papillary lesion surrounding the pedunculated polyp, was low-grade, non-invasive UC
(TCC) without necrosis (Fig. 2f). The rate of positivity of urinary cytology in patients with low-grade UC (TCC) is about 25% at our
institute. The status of X chromosome inactivation and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in both the carcinomatous and sarcomatous components was
not analyzed. No evidence of recurrence was detected by whole-body CT during a 2-year follow-up period without further treatment.Fig.
2Pathological specimens of the resected neoplastic tissue. a–e Pedunculated polyp. f Papillary lesion. a, f Hematoxylin and eosin staining.
b–d Immunohistochemical staining. e Fluorescence in situ hybridization using a dual-color break-apart probe for anaplastic lymphoma kinase.
The 5′ end of the ALK gene was labeled with Vysis SpectrumGreen, and its 3′ end was labeled with Vysis SpectrumOrange (Abbott Molecular, Des
Plaines, IL, USA). The pedunculated polyp consisted mainly of a sarcomatous component with a spindle cell–like appearance, which was
characterized by severe nuclear pleomorphism and mitotic activity. Some strap- and racket-shaped cells with eosinophilic elongated cytoplasm
were present in a dispersed manner (a). Spindle-like cells were positive for vimentin (b) but negative for cytokeratins recognized by
AE1/AE3 (c) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (d). Rearrangements and copy number gain of the ALK gene were not detected by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. A total of 94% of tumor cells showed pseudo-color signals (yellow color, arrowheads) without deletion of red signals
(e). The papillary lesion was a low-grade, non-invasive urothelial carcinoma without necrosis (f) Pathological specimens of the resected
neoplastic tissue. a–e Pedunculated polyp. f Papillary lesion. a, f Hematoxylin and eosin staining. b–d Immunohistochemical staining. e
Fluorescence in situ hybridization using a dual-color break-apart probe for anaplastic lymphoma kinase. The 5′ end of the ALK gene was
labeled with Vysis SpectrumGreen, and its 3′ end was labeled with Vysis SpectrumOrange (Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, USA). The
pedunculated polyp consisted mainly of a sarcomatous component with a spindle cell–like appearance, which was characterized by severe
nuclear pleomorphism and mitotic activity. Some strap- and racket-shaped cells with eosinophilic elongated cytoplasm were present in a
dispersed manner (a). Spindle-like cells were positive for vimentin (b) but negative for cytokeratins recognized by AE1/AE3 (c) and
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (d). Rearrangements and copy number gain of the ALK gene were not detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
A total of 94% of tumor cells showed pseudo-color signals (yellow color, arrowheads) without deletion of red signals (e). The papillary
lesion was a low-grade, non-invasive urothelial carcinoma without necrosis (f) In our patient, transurethral biopsy revealed UC but not a
sarcomatous component, owing to inadequate sampling. However, the reverse situation has been reported by others. Depending on the
circumstances, a small focus of carcinomatous component may be detectable only by extensive, multiple sampling. Therefore, in the case of
adult rhabdomyosarcomatous tumor, the diagnosis of pure RMS should be made very carefully . The other difficulty is differentiating this
case from IMT. Although both epithelial and myogenic markers can be expressed in IMT, a morphologically typical epithelial component is not
interwoven with IMT [4, 6]. Moreover, recent studies have shown that the majority of IMT express ALK protein, and FISH analysis has
identified ALK gene alterations within myofibroblastic spindle cells of IMT, suggesting an etiology of a low-grade mesenchymal neoplasm
other than primary inflammatory reaction [3, 4, 6]. However, our patient’s tumor was a typical epithelial carcinoma, and ALK protein
expression and ALK alterations of the rhabdomyosarcomatous component were both negative. The accurate histogenesis of SC has not been
clarified in detail. Although multiclonal theory and monoclonal theory have been discussed, molecular and genetic research using LOH,
comparative genomic hybridization, and X chromosome inactivation analysis substantiate a common origin with divergent differentiation .
Previous studies have suggested that the epithelial component of SC of the bladder precedes the mesenchymal component . The tumor in our
patient may initially have exhibited epithelial differentiation as UC and then mesenchymal differentiation with the appearance of RMS.
However, it is not clear whether the origin of the tumor was residual cancer cells after TUR or de novo generation. In most reported cases,
the epithelial component of SC of the bladder is high-grade UC [9, 10]. To the best of our knowledge, low-grade UC as the epithelial
component of SC has not been reported before for the present case. At times, SC occurs in patients who have undergone chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, or a situation in which cell replication error was induced. However, our patient had not received any anti-cancer treatment
except for TUR of low-grade UC. It has been reported that past history of non-invasive cancer correlates with the malignant grade in
secondary UC . In addition, the role of inflammation in urothelial cell carcinogenesis has lately been receiving considerable attention .
Inflammation caused by TUR for low-grade UC might have influenced the mesenchymal differentiation in UC of our patient. Indeed, others
reported two cases of SC with a history of recurrent bladder cancer and subsequent TUR , although their report and the case of our patient
do not refute the safety of TUR. Owing to the extreme rarity of SC of the bladder and the absence of randomized controlled studies, the
standard treatment for SC of the bladder has not been defined. SC usually presents at a higher T stage with more frequent regional
metastases than UC . Therefore, radical cystectomy seems to be preferable even in superficial disease. Although total cystectomy followed by
radiotherapy or chemotherapy has been recommended by some groups [14, 15], the therapeutic efficacy of these treatments is still
controversial owing to the varying results. Because muscularis propria invasion was observed in the sarcomatous lesion in our patient, we
considered systemic chemotherapy (e.g., cisplatin plus gemcitabine regimen) as a treatment option. However, our patient did not wish to
undergo adjuvant treatments after the total cystectomy. Nevertheless, no evidence of recurrence was detected during a 2-year follow-up
period. UC of the urinary bladder with extensive rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation is rare, but it should be considered in the
differential diagnosis even when UC coexisting with a rhabdomyosarcomatous component is of low grade, especially in cases of a tumor that is
unexpectedly large for low-grade UC. More molecular biological research is needed to obtain insight into the pathogenic factors involved in
rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation in UC to improve the management of this disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent form is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase Computed tomography Fluorescence in situ hybridization Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor
Loss of heterozygosity Magnetic resonance imaging Rhabdomyosarcoma Sarcomatoid carcinoma Transitional cell carcinoma Transurethral resection
Urothelial carcinoma Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MK drafted the
initial manuscript. TS edited and submitted the manuscript for publication. KK and TK were involved in diagnosing and treating the patient.
KN performed pathological studies. HW was the attending physician throughout the patient’s disease course. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. We thank Yukihisa Komatsu (Division of Radiology, National Hospital Organization National Kochi Hospital, Kochi, Japan)
for his contribution to this article.
