Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) occurs frequently in the humeral capitellum of the upper extremity, whereas OCD involving the trochlear
groove (trochlear groove OCD) is rarely reported. A standard treatment for trochlear groove OCD has therefore not been determined, although
several methods have been tried. The case of a 14-year-old male gymnast with bilateral trochlear groove OCD is presented. Retrograde
drilling from the lateral condyle of the humerus was applied for the OCD lesion of the left elbow, since it was larger in size than that in
the right elbow and was symptomatic. Conversely, since the right lesion was small and asymptomatic, it was managed conservatively. After
treatment, consolidation of the OCD lesions was observed in both elbows. However, the time to healing was shorter in the left elbow treated
surgically than in the right elbow managed conservatively. In conclusion, retrograde drilling is a very simple and minimally invasive
treatment. This case suggests that retrograde drilling for trochlear groove OCD may be a useful procedure that may accelerate the healing
process for OCD lesions. Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) occurs frequently in the humeral capitellum in the upper extremity, whereas only a
few cases of OCD involving the trochlear groove (trochlear groove OCD) have been reported.1–6 A patient with bilateral trochlear groove OCD
who underwent retrograde drilling for one elbow and conservative treatment for the other elbow is reported. This case provides an
opportunity to compare the efficacy of retrograde drilling with the efficacy of conservative treatment for trochlear groove OCD. A 14-year-
old male gymnast presented for evaluation of left elbow pain for a duration of about 1 month. There was no history of trauma to the region.
He had been involved in artistic gymnastics for 11 years. Physical examination revealed mild motion pain of the left elbow, while his right
elbow was asymptomatic. Ranges of motions of both elbows were normal, and both elbows had no tenderness, swelling, or joint instability.
Roentgenograms of both elbows revealed radiolucent lesions with condensed borders in the trochlear groove (Figures 1A and 2A). The size of
the radiolucent lesion of the left elbow was bigger than that of the right elbow. Computed tomography demonstrated a concave defect in the
trochlear groove (Figures 1B and 2B). In the left elbow, a small osseous fragment was observed in the defect (Figure 1B). Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) revealed subchondral defects involving the central aspect of the trochlea in both elbows. Joint fluid invasion into the
defects was also observed. However, the joint cartilage layer was preserved (Figures 1C and 2C). (A) Preoperative anteroposterior radiograph
of the left elbow with a radiolucent lesion in the trochlear groove. (B) Computed tomography scan of the left elbow showing a concave defect
with a small osseous fragment. (C) Magnetic resonance image of the left elbow showing the defect in the trochlear groove. Continuity of
articular cartilage is preserved. (A) Preoperative anteroposterior radiograph of the right elbow, (B) computed tomography scan, and (C)
magnetic resonance image of the right elbow. Almost the same findings as those of the left elbow are seen. However, the size of the defect
is smaller than that in the left elbow. For the symptomatic left elbow, retrograde drilling into the radiolucent lesion from the lateral
condyle of the humerus was performed. At the time of drilling, the lateral condyle was exposed via a small longitudinal skin incision, and
under an image intensifier, a 1.8-mm pilot Kirschner wire was advanced to the center of the OCD lesion. Correct aiming was verified in
anteroposterior and lateral views of the image intensifier. This wire was then used as a guide for subsequent drilling. Additional drilling
was performed using another 1.8-mm Kirschner wire. Drilling was performed about 5 times for both lateral and medial aspects of the
subchondral sclerotic zones, and penetration of the sclerotic zone was evaluated by the loss of resistance technique (Figure 3A). (A)
Fluoroscopy-guided retrograde drilling from the lateral condyle of the humerus. (B) Anteroposterior radiograph of the left elbow at 3 months
after surgery. Evidence of consolidation of the trochlear lesion is observed. After the surgery, the left elbow was immobilized with a long
arm plaster splint at 70° of elbow flexion for 3 weeks. After removal of the splint, active assistive range of motion exercises for the
elbow joint combined with thermotherapy were administered by a therapist twice a week, and daily active range of motion exercises were also
performed by the patient himself. The exercises were performed once a day. Within 3 weeks, full range of motion of the left elbow was
obtained, and the exercises were stopped. The size of the radiolucent area was gradually reduced after the surgery, and evidence of
consolidation of the trochlear lesion was observed 3 months after surgery (Figure 3B). For the right elbow, conservative management by
prohibiting heavy use of the right elbow was undertaken because the size of the radiolucent lesion was smaller than that of the left elbow,
and the lesion was asymptomatic. The size of this lesion also gradually decreased after the initiation of conservative treatment, and the
lesion disappeared within 5 months (Figure 4). However, the duration of healing was longer compared with the left elbow that had surgery.
Anteroposterior radiograph of the right elbow 5 months after surgery. Evidence of consolidation of the trochlear lesion is observed. At the
2-year follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic. Informed consent was obtained from the patient and his parents for publication of this
case report and accompanying images. OCD is a subchondral bone lesion resulting in separation of the articular cartilage and subchondral
bone, and it is well known that OCD commonly affects the knee, ankle, and elbow joints. In the elbow joint, OCD primarily involves the
capitellum of the humerus, and it is common with activities such as baseball or gymnastics.7–10 In these activities, repeated valgus stress
is believed to cause microtrauma to the capitellum.8,10 On the other hand, trochlear groove OCD has rarely been reported. There are several
reports of trochlear groove OCD in the elbows of athletes such as gymnasts, tennis players, baseball pitchers, and basketball players.3,5,6
However, the mechanism that causes the trochlear groove OCD is still unclear, because the number of clinical reports of this disease is
insufficient to clarify the mechanism. However, Marshall et al3 hypothesized that trochlear groove (lateral trochlea) OCD lesions occur in a
characteristic vascular watershed zone resulting from the unique blood supply of the trochlea. Treatment of trochlear groove OCD is guided
by the clinical and radiographic findings, but there is no standard treatment, and several kinds of treatments have been suggested. Patel
and Weiner4 reported a case of trochlear groove OCD treated conservatively, and 2 years later the patient showed some radiographic evidence
of consolidation of the lesion. They also reported a case that was treated with curettage of the trochlear groove OCD lesion.4 In that
report, the patient regained full range of motion of the elbow and was asymptomatic for 3 years, but they did not show whether consolidation
of the lesion was obtained. Iwasaki et al2 reported an adult case of trochlear groove OCD that was treated with transplantation of tissue-
engineered cartilage. In this case, the OCD lesion was covered with cartilage-like tissue 12 months after surgery. This method is expected
to be a useful option for treatment, especially for adult cases whose bone remodeling potential has already decreased. However, to apply
this method, osteotomy of the olecranon is required to approach the OCD lesion, and the very complicated technique of cell culture is also
required. Horiuchi et al1 reported a case of bilateral trochlear groove OCD in the Japanese literature that underwent retrograde drilling
from the lateral humeral condyle, and consolidation of the OCD lesions was observed after surgery in this patient. Antegrade drilling
(transarticular drilling) is another option for trochlear groove OCD treatment, but there is no report of antegrade drilling for trochlear
groove OCD. Antegrade drilling is a common treatment option for OCD lesions, and the aim of the drilling is decompression to allow for
revascularization of the defect. There are many reports of antegrade drilling for the treatment of OCD in the humeral capitellum and
knee.11–13 In most of these reports, the drilling is performed in a minimally invasive manner using arthroscopy. However, antegrade drilling
cannot avoid articular surface violation, and it is difficult to visualize and drill a deeply placed OCD lesion. On the other hand, there
are several reports in which retrograde drilling was used for OCD lesions of the knee and ankle, 14–17 and recent studies demonstrated
favorable results for retrograde drilling of stable OCD lesions.18–20 Kono et al21 also reported that the clinical results of retrograde
drilling for OCD of the talar dome were superior to those of antegrade transmalleolar drilling. The advantages of retrograde drilling are
that it avoids articular surface violation,22 and it can be combined with retrograde autologous cancellous bone-grafting if it is needed.23
Furthermore, to perform antegrade drilling, curettage, or transplantation of cartilage for OCD lesions of the talus and trochlea,
osteotomies of overlying bone, such as the medial malleolus or olecranon, are sometimes needed to approach the lesions.10,24,25 For OCD
lesion of these sites, retrograde drilling is a useful treatment option. In many reports of ante- and retrograde drilling, a 1.5- to 2.0-mm
Kirschner wire is usually used for drilling of the OCD lesion.1,11,13,19,20,26–28 In accordance with these reports, a 1.8-mm Kirschner wire
was used for drilling the OCD lesion in the present case. However, if the patients are younger or the size of the OCD lesions is smaller, a
thinner wire may be used. In the reports of knee and ankle OCD lesions, the authors have used retrograde drilling for stable OCD
lesions.13,17–20 We think that, for the treatment of elbow OCD lesions, it is also appropriate to use this technique for stable OCD lesions.
The treatment will fail if we use this technique for unstable OCD lesions in which the osteochondral fragments have already floated. In
addition, the most important advantage of retrograde drilling is that we can avoid articular surface violation. Thus, we should be very
careful not to drill the articular surface. To avoid articular surface violation, it is very important to visualize the OCD lesion clearly.
In the present case, an image intensifier was used to visualize the OCD lesion and the tip of the Kirschner wire. In the reports of OCD
lesions of the talus, open MRI scanners and navigation systems tend to be used for the retrograde drilling.14,15,18,22,29 However, for
drilling the OCD lesion of the femoral condyle, an image intensifier is often used even now.20,30–32 The reason for this is that it is
thought that a clear lateral view of the femoral condyle is more easily obtained compared to the talus, because the femoral condyle is not
surrounded by other bones, unlike the talus. The humeral trochlea is also not surrounded by other bones like the femoral condyle. Horiuchi
et al1 used an image intensifier for retrograde drilling of trochlear groove OCD, and they could visualize the OCD lesion. In the present
case, it was possible to visualize the OCD lesion and the tip of the Kirschner wire using the image intensifier. Retrograde drilling was
tried for the present trochlear groove OCD patient, and a good result was obtained. Although consolidation of the OCD lesion was also
observed in the contralateral elbow (right elbow) that was treated conservatively, in the OCD lesion of the left elbow, which was bigger in
size than the lesion of the right elbow, the period for obtaining consolidation was shorter with retrograde drilling (3 months) than in the
right elbow (5 months). This fact suggests that there is a possibility that the retrograde drilling accelerated the healing process of the
OCD lesion. There are several limitations to this report. Since this was a single case report, more cases need to be treated before one can
assert that retrograde drilling accelerates the healing process of trochlear groove OCD. In addition, a long-arm plaster splint was used
after the surgery because of concern that fragility of the bone around the OCD lesion was caused by drilling. Therefore, one cannot exclude
the effect of the plaster splint for the healing process, and one cannot claim that this was a simple comparison of retrograde drilling and
conservative treatment; in the strict sense, this was a comparison of retrograde drilling plus a long-arm plaster splint and conservative
treatment. However, the duration of using the plaster splint was only 3 weeks, and at the time of removal of the splint, the size of the OCD
lesion had not changed. Thus, the effect of the splint on healing of the OCD lesion was thought to be minimal. In conclusion, this case
provided an opportunity to compare retrograde drilling and conservative treatment of trochlear groove OCD. Retrograde drilling is a very
simple and minimally invasive treatment, and it may accelerate the healing process. Thus, retrograde drilling may be considered one of the
first choices of treatment for trochlear groove OCD. Abbreviations: MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, OCD = osteochondritis dissecans,
trochlear groove OCD = OCD involving the trochlear groove. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
