This article reports orthodontic treatment of a case of hypodontia of five premolars in an 11-year-old female patient with a positive tooth
size-arch length discrepancy in both dental arches. The patient had a straight profile with balanced facial growth. Setup manufacture
revealed the possibility of achieving ideal occlusion by mesializing permanent molars up to 15 mm, in addition to keeping a primary molar in
the dental arch. With the aid of absolute anchorage, the proposed mechanics was performed and the occlusion predicted in the setup was
achieved, while profile and facial growth pattern were maintained. The use of miniscrews for extensive orthodontic movements was successful.
Furthermore, one primary molar was extensively mesialized. The indication of gingivoplasty to correct gingival smile proved effective. This
is considered a useful technique for orthodontists. Este artigo apresenta o tratamento ortodôntico de um caso com hipodontia de cinco pré-
molares, em uma paciente, de 11 anos de idade, com discrepância positiva de modelo em ambas as arcadas. A paciente apresentava perfil reto,
com crescimento facial equilibrado. Por meio da confecção de set-up, verificou-se a possibilidade de se estabelecer uma oclusão ideal por
meio da mesialização, de até 15mm, dos molares permanentes e manutenção de um molar decíduo no arco. Com o auxílio de ancoragem absoluta,
foi realizada a mecânica proposta, alcançando-se a oclusão prevista em set-up, além da manutenção do perfil e do padrão de crescimento
facial. A utilização de mini-implantes para grandes movimentos ortodônticos foi favorável, incluindo a extensa mesialização de um molar
decíduo. A indicação da gengivoplastia para correção do sorriso gengival se mostrou acertada, sendo essa uma técnica de grande auxílio à
Ortodontia. Tooth agenesis is the most common developmental anomaly in humans, often representing a major clinical problem.1 Congenitally
missing teeth are classified according to the number of missing teeth, except for third molars. Hypodontia is the term used to describe
patients with agenesis of one to five teeth; however, when six or more teeth are missing, the condition is classified as oligodontia,
whereas anodontia means all teeth are missing.2,3 The incidence of hypodontia of permanent teeth varies widely, and can be found in 2.6% to
11.3% in the overall population, while the incidence in primary teeth is considerably lower.1 Once congenital absence of one primary tooth
occurs, that tooth successor is bound to be missing, given that the germ of the permanent tooth is formed from the germ of the primary
tooth. Oligodontia is a rather rare condition, affecting about 0.1% to 0.2% of the population. It can occur as the manifestation of a
syndrome or as an isolated condition linked to mutations in the MSX1 and PAX9 genes.2,3 Hypodontia features a wide range of manifestations.
Depending on the number and location of missing teeth, it can affect esthetics, masticatory function, speech and occlusion balance, either
through unwanted occlusal contacts, extrusion of antagonists, or inclination of teeth adjacent to the sites of missing teeth.4 Changes in
size and shape are also commonly observed in teeth of patients with hypodontia.5 Complexity of hypodontia treatment varies widely, and it is
more critical among young, growing patients whose psychological aspects and facial development are often compromised, thereby requiring a
multidisciplinary approach.5 The aim of this article is to report the treatment of a growing patient presenting gingival smile and five
premolars missing, and whose chief complaint was her unfavorable esthetics due to the size and diastemata of her anterior teeth. This
clinical case involves a female Caucasian 11-year-old patient who presented for treatment at private practice. She was referred to
orthodontic treatment by a pediatric dentist who noted hypodontia involving five missing teeth. The patient reported as chief complaint
generalized diastemata; and as secondary complaint, the small size of teeth (Fig 1). Figure 1.Initial orthodontic records. The patient was
at the beginning of pubertal growth spurt and in mixed dentition. She still had primary second molars and tooth #14 was missing.
Radiographic examination confirmed that teeth #14, 15, 25, 35 and 45 were also missing, and in primary second molars, root resorption was
not noticeable (Fig 2). No family history of hypodontia was reported, nor any signs or symptoms suggesting temporomandibular disorders.
Figure 2.Panoramic radiograph confirms hypodontia of teeth #14, 15, 25, 35 and 45. Lateral cephalogram and cephalometric tracing reveal good
axial inclination of maxillary and mandibular incisors, and balanced facial growth pattern. Facial analysis revealed a relatively favorable
growth pattern with balanced lower face dimension, normal nasolabial angle and lip competence, although both upper and lower lips were
retrusive. At smiling, the patient presented with 6 mm of gingival smile, and reduced cervicoincisal dimension of maxillary canine and
incisor crowns (Fig 1 and Table 1). Table 1.Initial and final cephalometric measures. InitialFinalSNA84o 81o SNB81.3o 79o ANB2.7o 2o
1/./1137o 165o 1/.NA15o 5o 1/-NA1 mm1.3 mm/1.NB24o 6.9o /1-NB3 mm1.3 mmIMPA87o 71o SN.Go-Gn32o 35o Line H4 mm9 mm Examination of lateral
cephalogram and cephalometric tracing showed that upper and lower incisors were upright, there was balanced anteroposterior growth of the
maxilla and mandible, with 2 degrees of ANB, as well as balanced vertical growth with 32 degrees of mandibular plane (Fig 2). The patient
also presented with deep overbite, coincident midlines and permanent molars in Class I relationship (Fig 1). Treatment goal was to enhance
esthetics and achieve appropriate occlusal function by eliminating generalized diastemata in both arches; extracting primary second molars,
except for tooth #55; mesializing permanent molars and tooth #55; establishing normal overbite and Angle Class I relationship with tooth #55
taking the position of tooth #14. Furthermore, the therapeutic goals were to reduce gingival smile and increase the cervico-occlusal
dimension of maxillary incisors and canines while keeping the axial inclination of incisors and preserving facial growth pattern and facial
profile. To close the diastemata of incisors and canines, one alternative would be to increase the size of teeth by means of direct or
indirect restorations, considering extensive oral rehabilitation without the aid of orthodontic treatment. One way to correct the congenital
absence of teeth #14, 15, 25, 35 and 45 would be to keep primary second molars in the dental arch, maintain the space left by tooth #14,
wait for the patient to stop growing, and then place an implant in the region of tooth #14. Finally, one should monitor primary second
molars in case four more implants were needed in the region of second maxillary and mandibular premolars. Closing the spaces left by missing
teeth without the aid of absolute anchorage was not an option, given that incisor retraction was contraindicated, since incisors exhibited
good axial inclination. Patient's legal guardians opted for treatment with extraction of teeth #65, 75 and 85, and space closure by molars
mesialization. Treatment plan included preadjusted orthodontic appliance placement followed by alignment and leveling, closure of diastemata
between incisors and canines, four miniscrews placement, molar mesialization and referral for gingivoplasty. Initially, composite resin
stops were fabricated and placed on the occlusal surface of teeth #36 and 46 to correct overbite and obtain disocclusion, thereby allowing a
fixed orthodontic appliance to be bonded to the lower arch. Roth prescription 0.022 x 0.028-in brackets were bonded to incisors, whereas MBT
prescription brackets were bonded to canines, premolars and molars. Molars were banded, with the exception of tooth #55 which received a
standard attachment; and teeth #65, 75 and 85 which did not receive any attachments. After bonding the appliance, alignment and leveling
were performed with 0.014-in nickel-titanium archwires, followed by 0.016-in, then 0.018-in and 0.020-in stainless steel archwires. When
0.020-in stainless steel archwires were used, the diastemata between incisors and canines were closed with the aid of elastomeric chains, so
as to allow placement of miniscrews on the distal surface of canines. The periodontist was shown the sites of choice for placement of four
miniscrews (Fig 4) which were installed concurrently with the extraction of teeth #65, 75 and 85. Figure 3.Setup used to measure the amount
of mesialization required and to assess occlusal balance required for orthodontic treatment finishing. Figure 4.Photograph depicting four
miniscrew placement sites chosen after closure of diastemata between incisors and canines was achieved. A 15-mm mesialization of molars was
carried out using elastomeric chains supported on the miniscrews and by means of applying 200 g of force on each side, with molars sliding
along a 0.020-in stainless steel archwire (Fig 5). The elastics were replaced every four weeks, on average. After closing the remaining
spaces, a pair of 0.019 x 0.025-in rectangular archwires was placed to establish the correct torques, and dental intercuspation was achieved
using intermaxillary elastics with a vertical component. It took seven months to align and level both dental arches and close the diastemata
between incisors and canines, whereas molar mesialization spanned 25 months. Moreover, it took four months to finish treatment and establish
balanced occlusal contacts, thereby totaling three years of orthodontic treatment. Gingivoplasty was performed after total closure of
spaces, and before the case was finished (Fig 6). Figure 5.Placement of four miniscrews and mechanics carried out by means of elastomeric
chains supported by a 0.020-in stainless steel archwire. Figure 6.Post-treatment orthodontic records and gingivoplasty of teeth #13 to 24. A
0.018-in retainer was bonded to the lingual surface of all teeth from #34 to 44. On the upper dental arch, a retainer of the same gauge was
bonded from tooth #11 to 21. Furthermore, a wraparound removable retainer was installed. After treatment completion, an excellent cosmetic
effect was achieved thanks to correction of gingival smile, increased cervico-occlusal dimension of maxillary incisors and canines, and
closure of diastemata. A good functional result was achieved with deep overbite correction, closure of remaining spaces in the dental arch,
molars in Angle Class I relationship, canines in ideal type I occlusion and coincident midlines. However, incisor axial inclination was not
achieved (Fig 6). Diagnosis of dental anomalies is usually performed by pediatric dentists, as these professionals are the first to interact
with children and adolescents.6 In the case presented herein, the patient was enrolled in a half-year prevention program in the private
practice of a pediatric dentist. Tooth agenesis was detected when she was seven years old, after preventive analysis of panoramic
radiograph, and her parents were informed accordingly. The patient was referred to orthodontic assessment and decided to wait until the
final phase of mixed dentition before allowing orthodontic intervention. During diagnosis and planning, patient's chief complaints were
addressed. In assessing patient's vertical growth pattern, it was found that her gingival smile did not stem from excessive vertical growth
of the maxilla. Therefore, she was referred to periodontal plastic surgery. Studies on smile esthetics show that a gingival smile not
greater than 3 mm is perceived as esthetic by laypeople and dentists alike, whereas a 4-mm gingival smile is not considered esthetic by
these groups, which underscores the need to address this condition in the case presented herein.7,8 One of the therapeutic options to close
anterior diastemata would be to augment mesiodistal crowns with composite resin on anterior teeth by means of oral rehabilitation without
resorting to orthodontic treatment, which had been proposed by another professional. However, patient's legal guardians only allowed closure
to be effected orthodontically. The decision to close spaces by means of orthodontic therapy and not by increasing the size of teeth is more
favorable biologically, since it eliminates the need for periodic replacement of restorations, avoids the risk of fractures in restorations,
while also reducing financial costs. In evaluating the alternatives to address congenital missing teeth, the authors chose to close spaces
by means of molar mesialization instead of installing four dental implants. Such choice was based on the possibility of establishing a
balanced occlusion without the need for implants, which entails a higher relative biological cost; increased financial costs, given the
surgical costs and fabrication of crowns; the need for periodic replacement of crowns, and mainly because the patient was still growing,
which might hinder a prompt resolution of the case. Auto-transplantation of third molars to the sites of second premolars was not an option,
given that the stage of development of third molars was not sufficient. Additionally, a mandibular third molar was missing, and there was
the risk of third molar resorption after auto-transplantation.9 A diagnostic setup was developed to measure the amount of mesialization
required, in addition to checking the feasibility of attaining occlusal balance by keeping the maxillary primary second molar in the arch,
as both premolars in the right upper quadrant were missing. Patient's parents were informed about the risk of root resorption of this
primary molar due to the extensive orthodontic movement planned for the case. This could have eventually resulted in the loss of this tooth
and the need to replace it with an implant after the patient stopped growing. Orthodontic diagnostic setups are extremely useful tools which
aid in planning and performing orthodontic treatment. In this particular case, the end result was quite similar to the result predicted on
the setup.10 As regards the unusual occlusal relationship of maxillary primary second molar which occluded with mandibular first permanent
molar and mandibular first premolar, the setup showed that this relationship would allow a balanced occlusion. This was confirmed after
treatment was completed, when a favorable occlusion with balanced distribution of forces in the vertical, lateral and anteroposterior
directions became apparent.11 Roth prescription was used on incisors with a view to facilitating the incorporation of palatal and lingual
torque in incisors, while the use of MBT prescription on canines and premolars is justified by the constant need for offsets in mandibular
canines when Roth prescription is used.12,13 The use of MBT brackets on incisors would also be indicated for this clinical case.12 , 13 It
should be noted that the use of preadjusted appliances is a personal choice and does not directly influence the success of the mechanics
applied, given the constant need for individualization of cases during treatment finishing, as in the case described herein. Palatal and
lingual torque were applied to upper and lower 0.019 x 0.025-in stainless steel archwires in order to reduce excessive incisor uprighting,
but the results failed to meet expectations. The use of rectangular archwires, when closing the diastemata between canines and incisors
prior to placing the miniscrews, could have reduced retroclination of maxillary and mandibular incisors. Taking into account patient's good
facial profile and good buccopalatal and buccolingual inclination of incisors, closing spaces by means of incisor retraction was ruled out,
as it could have resulted in loss of lip support, thereby hindering facial esthetics. Thus, the use of absolute anchorage for molar
mesialization was indicated. This absolute anchorage could be provided either by miniscrews or Bollard miniplates. The choice for miniscrews
prevailed, given that they are easier to install and more affordable.14,15 According to Marassi and Marassi,16 mass retraction requires a
force of 150-300 cN on each side (1 Newton = 100 cN = 102 g) which is equivalent to 150 to 300 g. This level of force is sufficient to close
0.5 to 1 mm space per month, considering normal alveolar bone height.15,16 Therefore, a 36-month treatment period was regarded as quite
satisfactory, considering that it took 25 months for permanent molars to mesialize 15 mm. When miniscrews are used as anchorage during
sliding mechanics, super-elastic nickel-titanium springs, conventional nickel-titanium springs, elastomeric modules and elastomeric chains
can be used.16 Although nickel-titanium springs are recommended due to their lower force variation, the patient complained of discomfort in
the gingiva when the springs were being adapted; thus, the use of elastomeric chains was preferred. Molar mesialization with the aid of
elastic chains was preferred, as these afford continuous force for at least 21 days.17 Molar sliding was achieved by round 0.020-in
archwires, since there was no need for torque control of incisors. Moreover, this archwire produces less friction than a 0.019 x 0.025-in
rectangular archwire. After treatment, panoramic radiograph revealed good root parallelism of all teeth (Fig 7). Excessive uprighting of
maxillary and mandibular incisors was observed in the final cephalometric tracing (Fig 7). This unfavorable situation may have been due to
closure of anterior diastemata when determining miniscrew sites. The degree of esthetic commitment caused by the axial inclination of
incisors on the face is debatable, especially considering that patient's chin was significantly augmented (Fig 7 and Table 1). Figure
7.Panoramic radiograph reveals satisfactory root parallelism and total space closure. Lateral cephalogram and cephalometric tracing reveal
good axial inclination of maxillary and mandibular incisors, maintenance of facial growth pattern and significant development of the chin. A
0.018-in retainer was bonded to the lingual surface of all teeth from #34 to 44 due to a greater potential for open spaces to relapse, given
the vast amount of spaces remaining in the lower arch. A 0.018-in retainer was bonded to teeth from #11 to 21, and a removable wraparound
plate was installed to maintain the transverse dimension as well as to close spaces. It is recommended that the lower retainer remain bonded
indefinitely, both to avoid opening spaces and to prevent a decrease in intercanine width, which results from aging of the occlusion and may
cause esthetic impairment. The patient was instructed to wear the plate for a period of 24 months, during which time the periodontal
ligament could replace its fibers.18 , 19 Twelve months after removal of appliances, occlusal adjustment was performed by removing occlusal
interference and verifying the absence of fremitus in incisors, thereby allowing removal of the upper retainer. Treatment of hypodontia
often requires that osseointegrated dental implants be used to replace missing teeth. In this clinical case, a conservative proposal was
presented for correction of five missing teeth without the need for implants, with satisfactory esthetic and functional results. The use of
miniscrews for extensive orthodontic movement was effective. Furthermore, a primary molar was satisfactorily mesialized. The indication of
gingivoplasty to correct gingival smile proved effective, and considered a useful technique for orthodontists. » The authors report no
commercial, proprietary or financial interest in the products or companies described in this article. » Patients displayed in this article
previously approved the use of their facial and intraoral photographs.
