A case of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in the setting of chronic kidney disease that exhibited complete reattachment of the retina
after routine serial hemodialysis. The purpose of this report is to describe a case of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in the setting of
chronic kidney disease that exhibited complete retinal reattachment after serial hemodialysis. Retrospective case report. A 58-year-old
woman with acute vision loss was found to have a macula-involving rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Due to chronic kidney disease, she
continued with routinely scheduled hemodialysis for 1 week until surgical clearance was obtained. Preoperative examination revealed complete
reattachment of the retina with a persistent retinal tear. Barrier laser was applied to the tear and the retina remained attached until the
most recent follow-up 8 months later. The workup of alternate etiologies was unrevealing. This case describes a temporal association between
hemodialysis and resolution of subretinal fluid due to rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. A potential causal linkage is suggested based on
shifting fluid dynamics associated with hemodialysis. A shift in treatment paradigm is not advised. A 58-year-old woman with insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease undergoing long-term dialysis presented with acute painless decreased
vision and visual field loss in the right eye. She described floaters and increasing inferonasal visual field loss. Her past ocular history
was unremarkable. Visual acuity was counting fingers in the affected eye and 20/25 in the left eye. Intraocular pressures were normal and no
afferent pupillary defect was noted. Anterior segment examination was notable for mixed nuclear and cortical cataract in both eyes. Dilated
examination of the right eye revealed vitreous pigment, posterior vitreous separation, and retinal detachment involving the macula extending
from the 9 to 1 o'clock position with a single horseshoe tear at the 11 o'clock position. Dilated examination of the left eye revealed mild
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, neovascularization, or vitreous hemorrhage. Blood pressure was within the normal range. Macular
spectral domain optical coherence tomography was inadvertently obtained and demonstrated detachment of the macula with subretinal fluid
(Figure 1). Macular spectral domain optical coherence tomography demonstrating subretinal fluid at the time of presentation. After
consideration of the treatment options, the patient was unable to undergo the in-office pneumatic retinopexy procedure and surgical
intervention was arranged. While awaiting preoperative anesthesia clearance, regularly scheduled hemodialysis sessions were performed (three
sessions). The patient returned reporting of improved vision and was found to have complete reattachment of the retina with near-complete
resolution of subretinal fluid and visual acuity improved to 20/50. The horseshoe retinal tear persisted with vitreous traction lifting the
flap. No other tears were discovered. Laser retinopexy was applied to surround the tear. At the 1 week follow-up, small isolated pockets of
subretinal fluid remained with subfoveal fluid, which was noted on spectral domain optical coherence tomography (Figure 2) and the visual
acuity was 20/50. After a 2-week course of topical dorzolamide 3 times daily, subretinal fluid resolved and vision acuity improved to 20/25
(Figure 3). Macular spectral domain optical coherence tomography demonstrating residual subretinal fluid after reattachment of the bullous
retinal detachment. Macular spectral domain optical coherence tomography after a course of dorzolamide shows resolution of subretinal fluid.
Follow-up fluorescein angiography demonstrated pinpoint hyperfluorescence corresponding to diabetic microaneurysms in both eyes with
nonspecific late staining of the posterior pole in the right eye. The workup for nonrhegmatogenous etiologies of retinal detachment was
unrevealing, including normal blood pressure, inflammatory markers, negative rapid plasma reagin (RPR), chest x-ray, and absent T-sign on
B-scan. In reviewing the current literature, no reports describe an association between rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and hemodialysis.
However, bilateral exudative detachments with associated pigment epithelial detachments and exudates during hemodialysis are described.1,2
In this report, the patient presented with a unilateral retinal tear and associated detachment of the retina that reattached without ocular
intervention as she continued to undergo routine hemodialysis. Although a curative link is difficult to prove, a theoretical basis for
resolution of subretinal fluid can be proposed. The possible explanations for this occurrence include 1) exudative detachment with the
coexisting retinal tear and 2) rhegmatogenous retinal detachment that resolved because of fluid shifts associated with hemodialysis. The
former is unlikely because no supportive evidence was discovered. Hemodialysis is used to achieve extracorporeal removal of waste products
such as creatinine and free water from the blood when the kidneys are in a state of failure. Rapid or excessive change in fluid balance can
result in low blood pressure, fatigue, chest pains, leg cramps, nausea, and headaches. Ocular manifestations of hemodialysis include
reduction of intraocular pressure and choroidal thickness.3,4 Because the fluid in the subretinal space is actively transported by the
retinal pigment epithelium toward the choroid, this continuity supports the possibility of hemodialysis-associated shifts in choroidal fluid
dynamics affecting subretinal fluid clearance. Although a curative relationship is alluded here, hemodialysis is not suggested as a
practical treatment option for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Primarily, intravenous access required for hemodialysis is not available
to majority of patients who develop rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Furthermore, the associated systemic risks, including blood-borne
infection, do not justify the risk of an unproven method. However, it is important to raise awareness of such occurrences from here onward.
The patient will continue to be followed up as an alternate etiology may declare itself in the future. The author thanks Kenneth Huff, the
ophthalmic photographer. Presented at the Pacific Retina Club meeting in Los Angeles, CA, March 27, 2015. The author has no
financial/conflicting interests to disclose.
