Subcutaneous emphysema or pneumomediastinum can occur as a complication of illicit drug use although this is rare. When occurring without a
pneumothorax and spontaneously, it is usually treated conservatively, but can have serious consequences. Here, we present the case of an
otherwise healthy 23-year-old Caucasian man who presented to the Emergency Department at our institution and was found to have both
subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum as a result of cocaine use. His only presenting symptom was mild chest pain and he had palpable
subcutaneous crepitations. He underwent a series of investigations including a chest radiograph and computed tomography as well as a barium
fluoroscopy study to rule out secondary pneumomediastinum, which can be fatal. There were no other pulmonary features of illicit drug use,
such as granulomas or fibrosis, seen on radiological imaging. He was subsequently managed with a period of observation and supportive care.
We report a rare case of subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum likely due to the nasal insufflation of cocaine. We discuss the
necessary investigations to rule out any serious underlying pathology. These should be considered in patients who present with chest pain
after cocaine use. Subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum are usually a consequence of esophageal or chest trauma, or are iatrogenic
in nature. Causes include assisted ventilation and medical or dental procedures as well as several diseases. It can also spontaneously occur
due to coughing, vomiting, and forceful straining, such as in childbirth or strenuous exercise . However, subcutaneous emphysema and
pneumomediastinum as a consequence of recreational drug use is very rare with only a few reported cases [2, 3]. Most of the previously
reported cases of pneumomediastinum have occurred after cocaine was smoked; the fact that our patient developed pneumomediastinum after
nasal insufflation of cocaine makes our case unusual [2, 3]. An otherwise healthy 23-year-old Caucasian man presented to our Emergency
Department reporting a sensation of “bubbles” under the skin of his neck and mild chest pain. He denied any dyspnea, neck pain, dysphagia,
odynophagia, or dysphonia. He reported that he had “snorted” a small amount of cocaine two nights prior to his Emergency Department
presentation. He did not have a history of chronic or regular drug use. There was no history of any trauma or vigorous physical exercise. He
had mild rhinorrhea but no coughing or vomiting. He did not take any regular medication, but reported the occasional use of illicit drugs
such as cocaine and ecstasy. On examination, he was alert and responsive without any airway compromise or respiratory distress. His pulse
rate was 96 beats per minute with a blood pressure of 120/73mmHg. He had a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute with oxygen saturation
of 97% on room air and he was apyrexial. Subcutaneous crepitations were palpable across his neck and the superior part of his chest. The
rest of his physical examination was unremarkable. Results from baseline blood tests, including arterial blood gases, were unremarkable and
an electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm with no arrhythmias or segmental changes. A plain posterioranterior chest radiograph
revealed subtle pneumomediastinum and soft tissue emphysema at the base of his neck with no associated pneumothorax (Fig. 1). A plain
radiograph of his neck demonstrated extensive subcutaneous emphysema (Fig. 2). Computed tomography of his neck and chest was performed, and
confirmed the above radiographic findings (Figs. 3 and 4). No additional sequelae of cocaine use, such as granulomas, emphysema, or bullae,
were seen on pulmonary imaging. In order to rule out any esophageal involvement, our patient was transferred to a tertiary center for a
barium swallow fluoroscopy study, which was normal (Fig. 5).Fig. 1Plain posterioranterior chest radiograph showing pneumomediastinum and
subcutaneous emphysema (bottom arrow and top arrow respectively)Fig. 2Plain radiograph of the neck showing extensive subcutaneous
emphysemaFig. 3Axial computed tomography showing subcutaneous emphysema in the neckFig. 4Axial chest computed tomography demonstrating
multiple locules of gas within the mediastinum (both arrows)Fig. 5Barium swallow fluoroscopy test showing no esophageal rupture Plain
posterioranterior chest radiograph showing pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema (bottom arrow and top arrow respectively) Plain
radiograph of the neck showing extensive subcutaneous emphysema Axial computed tomography showing subcutaneous emphysema in the neck Axial
chest computed tomography demonstrating multiple locules of gas within the mediastinum (both arrows) Barium swallow fluoroscopy test showing
no esophageal rupture He was admitted under the care of the cardiothoracic surgery team at the tertiary center. He was managed
conservatively and observed for a further 24 hours, during which the subcutaneous emphysema gradually improved although did not resolve
completely. He was discharged home after a total of 48 hours in hospital. He was followed-up in the community by his general practitioner
and was found to be well 3 months later. Subcutaneous emphysema is a very rare condition that is easily identified clinically by palpable
crepitations. Whilst it can occur in any part of the body, it is more common in the head and neck because of the proximity of the airway.
The etiology is normally iatrogenic or traumatic but there are reported cases of spontaneous subcutaneous emphysema [2, 3]. In our case, the
spontaneous subcutaneous emphysema was associated with pneumomediastinum, which is also known as Hamman’s syndrome, a rare condition named
after Louis Virgil Hamman (1877–1946), who first described it in 1939 [4, 5]. Pneumomediastinum, which is free air in the mediastinum, is a
rare complication of cocaine use and there are a number of reported cases of pneumomediastinum in patients who smoke cocaine, particularly
in patient’s who do so on a regular basis [1, 6, 7]. However, there are only a few reported cases of pneumomediastinum after nasal
insufflation of cocaine, which makes our case unusual [2, 3]. The pathogenesis of subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum following
cocaine inhalation is thought to be primarily a result of barotrauma [7, 8]. It is caused by increased intra-alveolar pressure and the
development of a pressure gradient between the alveoli and vasculature surrounding them . Negative pressure is formed during forced
inspiration with a closed mouth and nose (Müller’s manoeuver) and a positive pressure gradient is formed with breath holding (Valsalva
manoeuver) . The deliberate production of these maneuvers is thought to maximize the absorption and effect of cocaine by increasing the
intrathoracic pressure, thereby increasing the diffusion of the drug across the alveolar membrane into the bloodstream. However, this may
lead to alveolar rupture, resulting in air escaping into the mediastinum and fascial planes of the neck [5, 7, 8]. This is presumed to be
the mechanism causing subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum after nasal insufflation of cocaine as well, although data to support
this are insufficient [2, 3]. There is also a suggestion that cocaine has direct toxic effects on lung tissue, which cause alveolar damage
and hemorrhage that make rupture more likely . This is thought to be more likely in individuals who smoke large quantities of cocaine and/or
smoke more frequently: neither scenario applied to our patient . This could explain why there were no other pulmonary features of illicit
drug use such as granulomas or fibrosis seen on radiological imaging. Other clinical symptoms and signs of spontaneous emphysema or
pneumomediastinum include chest pain, cough, dyspnea, dysphonia, and throat or jaw pain . In practice, spontaneous emphysema and
pneumomediastinum are generally benign and self-limiting, requiring only conservative management with careful observation for respiratory
compromise. However, it is crucial to consider the potential serious complications and to distinguish this from secondary pneumomediastinum
and subcutaneous emphysema. Complications and underlying etiologies associated with these conditions include airway compression,
pneumopericardium, esophageal tear, and tracheobronchial rupture. Hence, investigations to rule these out should be undertaken. Spontaneous
subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum can usually be managed conservatively without any surgical intervention. However, appropriate
investigations are recommended to exclude serious pathology such as esophageal perforation or pneumopericardium. Although rare, the presence
of pneumomediastinum should be considered in patients who present with chest pain after cocaine use. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DSS
was part of the team that managed this patient and was the main author of the report. AF and RA were major contributors to the writing of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
