Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis is a fulminant demyelinating disease and commonly considered as a rare and severe variant of acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis. Here, we report the clinical, magnetic resonance imaging, and brain biopsy findings of a 35-year-old female
with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, who developed acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed
symmetrical hemorrhagic lesions in the basal ganglia including the thalami. Disease progression was consistent with acute hemorrhagic
leukoencephalitis with rapid deterioration of consciousness and seizures. Besides hemorrhage, infiltration of neutrophils was detected in
brain biopsy. Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis, also known as Weston-Hurst syndrome, is an excessive immunological response of unknown
etiology. So far, an association with multiple sclerosis has not been reported. The present case raises the question, whether acute
hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis is a specific hyperacute form of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, a severe and unspecific form of an
immune response in the central nervous system, or belongs to the spectrum of tumefactive multiple sclerosis. Acute hemorrhagic
leukoencephalitis (AHLE) was first described by Weston Hurst in 1941. It is commonly considered as a rare and severe variant of acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) and represents a rather fulminant course of this disease . AHLE is characterized by an acute onset and
rapidly progressive inflammation with symmetrical, multifocal brain lesions associated with acute edematous necrosis and hemorrhage. This
rare disease typically affects young adults and is often associated with preceding (1–4 weeks) respiratory tract infections [1, 2]. Multiple
sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease of the central nervous system (CNS) whose neuropathological hallmarks are inflammation and demyelination
leading to axonal degeneration . The evolution of MS lesions depends upon whether the course of the disease is relapsing-remitting or
chronic . Four different neuropathological patterns of demyelinating lesions have been reported, but in none of these lesions, hemorrhage
due to microvascular damage or necrosis can be found [3, 4]. A then 21-year-old woman was diagnosed with relapsing-remitting MS in December
1993 according to the MS criteria of Poser et al. . In 1996, she was enrolled in a clinical trial with glatiramer acetate and continued
injecting this substance after the trial. After suffering relapses in 1997, 2001, 2004, and 2007, treatment was changed to interferon β-1a
(Rebif® 44 μg three times a week) in April 2007. One month later, she developed numbness on the left side of her face. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) revealed a small contrast enhancing lesion in the right paracentral lobule (left-outermost column in Fig. 1a, b). Overall, the
MRI depicted 23 supratentorial and one infratentorial lesion on T2-weighted scans underlining high lesion burden (Fig. 1b). A relapse was
supposed and treatment with prednisolone 100 mg daily was initiated. High dose i.v. steroid treatment was not desired by the patient due to
travel abroad. In preparation for her travel (Palma de Mallorca, Spain), she has not undergone any vaccination. After 4 days of treatment,
the patient was admitted to the hospital while traveling because of progressive disturbance of consciousness.Fig. 1Chronological order of
MRI scans from May 4th 2007 until August 15th 2014. a Images show normal deep nuclei and some unspecific small T2-weighted (T2w)
hyperintensities. b The cranial T2w sequence depicts the high lesion load accompanied by several black holes in T1-weighted (T1w) sequences.
Left-outermost column a–b. The boxes indicate a small nodular enhancement in the right precentral gyrus underlining disease progression. c
The 2nd exam on May 18th, 2007 reveals the onset of space occupying haemorrhagic changes in the deep nuclei as well as hemorrhagic
subcortical foci; hemorrhages are indicated by unenhanced T1w-hyperintensities. d–e The examinations from May 23rd und June 8th show a slow
regression of the oedema and the size of the hemorrhagic areas. At both time points and in addition to the T1w signal hyperintensities
caused by hemorrhagic residua, contrast enhancements can be found at the outer rim of the lesions. f By August 15th, 2014, only parenchymal
defects are remaining together with distinctive brain volume loss leading to enlargement of ventricles. g Axial fluid attenuated inversion
recovery imaging (FLAIR) shows an increase in lesions load. Both in the FLAIR and T1w image, confluent and mainly periventricular located
lesions are found. Left-outermost column f–g. Boxes indicate a small enhancing focus in the left frontal hemisphere evidencing disease
activity in multiple sclerosis. Images from May 5th, 2007 are with courtesy of Röntgenpraxis Georgstrasse, Hannover; images from August
15th, 2014 are with courtesy of Röntgenpraxis Marstall, Hannover. N/A not available Chronological order of MRI scans from May 4th 2007 until
August 15th 2014. a Images show normal deep nuclei and some unspecific small T2-weighted (T2w) hyperintensities. b The cranial T2w sequence
depicts the high lesion load accompanied by several black holes in T1-weighted (T1w) sequences. Left-outermost column a–b. The boxes
indicate a small nodular enhancement in the right precentral gyrus underlining disease progression. c The 2nd exam on May 18th, 2007 reveals
the onset of space occupying haemorrhagic changes in the deep nuclei as well as hemorrhagic subcortical foci; hemorrhages are indicated by
unenhanced T1w-hyperintensities. d–e The examinations from May 23rd und June 8th show a slow regression of the oedema and the size of the
hemorrhagic areas. At both time points and in addition to the T1w signal hyperintensities caused by hemorrhagic residua, contrast
enhancements can be found at the outer rim of the lesions. f By August 15th, 2014, only parenchymal defects are remaining together with
distinctive brain volume loss leading to enlargement of ventricles. g Axial fluid attenuated inversion recovery imaging (FLAIR) shows an
increase in lesions load. Both in the FLAIR and T1w image, confluent and mainly periventricular located lesions are found. Left-outermost
column f–g. Boxes indicate a small enhancing focus in the left frontal hemisphere evidencing disease activity in multiple sclerosis. Images
from May 5th, 2007 are with courtesy of Röntgenpraxis Georgstrasse, Hannover; images from August 15th, 2014 are with courtesy of
Röntgenpraxis Marstall, Hannover. N/A not available Following intubation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. The
computed tomography (CT) showed hypodensities in the basal ganglia, frontal lobe, and mesencephalon. Internal venous thrombosis was ruled
out by CT venous angiography; MRI revealed symmetrical hyperintense lesions in the basal ganglia on T1-weighted and punctate hemorrhages on
T2-weighted images (Fig. 1c). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a normal cell count with 1 cell/μL and lactate levels within the
normal range. There was an elevated protein indicating a severe dysfunction of the blood-CSF barrier (total protein 1.2 g/L). Initially,
ceftriaxone, metronidazole, and cotrimoxazole were given i.v. on suspicion of meningoencephalitis. The patient developed seizures although
MRI re-examination revealed a slight regression of the lesions in the basal ganglia (Fig. 1d). EEG showed generalized delta activity that
was consistent with diffuse, severe encephalopathy. Chest X-ray and CT scans of the thorax and abdomen were normal. Serum and hematological
laboratory examinations as well as blood cultures yielded unremarkable findings. Immunological parameters (ANA titer, rheumatoid factor,
cyroglobulins) and toxicological screening of the blood and urine led to inconspicuous findings. Additional CSF analyses did not reveal
evidence for infection with viruses (HSV, VZV, EBV, and CMV), Borrelia burgdorferi, syphilis, tuberculosis, Cryptococcus, and toxoplasmosis.
There was no infection with HIV or hepatitis B and C. Thus, MRI-guided diagnostic brain biopsy of the parenchyma was performed. The
predominant findings in the biopsy specimen were perivascular hemorrhagic necrosis and severe edema of the CNS tissue with an inflammatory
infiltrate principally composed of neutrophils. Some of the vessels were partially thrombosed (Fig. 2). However, we did not observe a
lymphocytic infiltration, macrophages, or astrocytic gliosis. Immunohistochemistry was negative for toxoplasma, HSV-1, HSV-2, EBV (LMP), and
CMV. Therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g daily over 4 days, and then tapering of the dose) followed by intravenous
immunoglobulins (30 g daily over 5 days) was initiated but without any effect. After 1 month, MRI showed a decline of lesion size and edema
(Fig. 1e).Fig. 2Hematoxylin and eosin staining. a Severe edema and various fresh bleedings predominately surround capillaries and small
arterial vessels. b Neutrophilic infiltrates were found in some areas. The CNS tissue itself appeared necrotic. c Some smaller vessels
exhibited a partial thrombosis Hematoxylin and eosin staining. a Severe edema and various fresh bleedings predominately surround capillaries
and small arterial vessels. b Neutrophilic infiltrates were found in some areas. The CNS tissue itself appeared necrotic. c Some smaller
vessels exhibited a partial thrombosis Clinically, the subject exhibited a severe spastic tetraparesis and was not able to speak. Thus,
communication was only possibly using eye blinks or movements. Moreover, she experienced aching and rigidity in the extremities precipitated
by tactile stimulation suggesting an abnormality in the long-latency stretch reflexes. The patient remained in this clinical state and had a
stable clinical course on this poor level without a MS-specific therapy the following 7 years. In August 2014, the patient experienced a
relapse that led to internuclear ophthalmoplegia. The most recent MRI examination displayed a new lesion located paramedian in the medulla
oblongata explaining the disorder of conjugate lateral gaze. Moreover, we detected in the left frontal hemisphere a juxtacortically located
small lesion with contrast uptake as well as a further one in the area of the middle cerebellar pedicle affecting both sides but without
contrast uptake (left-outermost column in Fig. 1f, g; images that display the cerebellar pedicles are not shown). Intravenous
methylprednisolone therapy (1 g daily over 5 days) led to a considerable improvement of the lateral gaze already at day 4 of administration.
Taking the high EDSS of 9.5 into consideration, disease-modifying therapy was not initiated. The present case demonstrates an unusual
presentation during a classical course of MS leading to the diagnosis of AHLE. Diagnosis was provided by MRI findings showing symmetrical
lesions of the basal ganglia and thalamus, histopathological analyses of affected tissue, and the rapid clinical deterioration. AHLE, also
known as Weston-Hurst disease, is characterized by acute and rapidly progressive inflammatory hemorrhagic demyelination of the white matter.
The etiology remains unknown, but cross-reactivity between human myelin antigens and viral or bacterial antigens is supposed to induce an
excessive immunological response which causes demyelination . Recently, Pirko et al. demonstrated the first murine model of AHLE by
injecting the VP2121–130 viral capsid of the Theiler’s murine encephalomyelitis virus that induces a strong in vivo activation of CD8+ T
cells in C57BL/6 mice leading to the development of hemorrhagic demyelination within 24 h . Acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) might be
another differential diagnosis in this case. It is a new disease entity proposed by Mizuguchi et al. in 1997 and is characterized by
symmetrical, multifocal lesions, usually associated with edematous necrosis and hemorrhage, without inflammatory cells . ANE always affects
the thalami and, thus, causes a rapid disturbance of consciousness . The etiology remains unknown, but a triggering viral infection is
supposed. Point mutations in the RAN binding protein 2 and ephrin typ-B receptor 2 as a novel autoantigen are reported to be involved in
disease mechanism . The clinical differentiation between AHLE and ANE is a challenge because both diseases present similar findings on MRI
and CSF. In this regard, the diagnostic criteria of ANE, proposed by Neilson et al. in 2010, might help to discern the appropriate diagnosis
. The crucial difference between ANE and AHLE is the invasion of inflammatory cells. In ANE, the pathologic hallmark is the absence of
inflammatory cells, while in AHLE, neutrophilic infiltrates are detected almost regularly . A literature search for similar cases was
performed. We found a case of a 28-year-old woman who participated in a placebo-controlled trial of oral fingolimod in relapsing MS
(FREEDOMS trial). She developed hemorrhaging focal encephalitis in the left temporoparietal white matter 7 months after commencing
fingolimod . A markedly increased disease activity was noticed since this patient developed several new T2 hyperintense lesions in the
short-term disease course, one of which emerged in the left pulvinar thalami. This patient was diagnosed with tumefactive MS, but a brain
biopsy was not performed . In another case, a 40-year-old woman sustained a hemorrhagic lesion in the left frontal lobe during natalizumab
treatment. The authors considered this as a secondary hemorrhage in a tumefactive lesion due to an increased vascular fragility. A biopsy of
the lesion was not performed . The term tumefactive MS refers to demyelinating lesions that are larger than those seen in “typical” MS, have
an accompanying edema, and have mass effect resulting in symptoms and signs that are atypical for MS. Involvement of basal ganglia have been
reported [11, 12]. In a biopsy series of 168 cases, Lucchinetti et al. observed hypercellular lesions with confluent demyelination, abundant
foamy macrophages containing myelin debris, reactive astrogliosis, “relative” axonal preservation, and variable perivascular and parenchymal
lymphocytic inflammation . Moreover, astrocytic pleomorphism, astrocytes with fragmented nuclear inclusions (Creutzfelt–Peters cells),
variable nuclear atypia, a rare mitotic figure, and occasional necrosis or cystic changes may histologically mimic a tumor . However,
Lucchinetti et al. did not report about hemorrhage in those lesions. According to the hypothesis forwarded by Kepes, such tumefactive
lesions occupy an intermediate position between MS and ADEM, suggesting that the occurrence of AHLE in the present case would support this
concept . However, it is important to mention that before and after the AHLE episode, the subject had/has a rather “ordinary” MS course
without any tumefactive or hemorrhagic lesions. We believe that the occurrence of AHLE was a separate event unrelated to MS. AHLE and ADEM
share many features since both are commonly preceded by upper respiratory infections or by HSV, EBV, rubella, measles, mumps, or influenza
virus infection or vaccination even though overt symptoms of a preceding infection could not be found in the present case . It remains
elusive whether ADEM and AHLE may be part of a spectrum of disease with the same fundamental process resulting from an autoimmune process
triggered by the prodromal infection, rather than distinct entities. However, different type of CNS infiltrates, i.e., lymphocytes in ADEM
and neutrophils in AHLE, do not really support this idea of spectrum diseases. In conclusion, the present case illustrates the uncommon
presentation of AHLE in a MS patient. The diagnostic work-up is challenging, and brain biopsy offers guidance in the diagnosis of AHLE. The
present case raises the question whether AHLE belongs to the spectrum of ADEM or displays a severe and discrete form of an immune response
in the CNS. Written informed consent was obtained from the legal guardian of the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor in chief of this journal. Özlem Yildiz and Refik
Pul contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
ÖY, RP, PR, CH, TS, and MS wrote the manuscript. PR and CH prepared the figures. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
