The external auditory canal is an unusual presenting site for lymphomas, with only a few case reports in the literature . Malignant
lymphomas arising from the salivary glands are also uncommon, accounting for approximately 5% of extranodal lymphomas, and the majority of
them are of B-cell lineage. Primary salivary gland T-cell lymphomas are extremely rare . A 63-year-old man was admitted with swelling of the
left side of his face and left auricle. Considered as an infection, it was empirically treated with systemic and topical antibiotics.
Examination by an otorhinolaryngologist revealed a suppurative lesion that consisted of ulcerated areas and granulation tissue in the
external auditory canal and preauricular region in addition to edema (Figure 1A). A lobulated mass lesion of 47x39 mm arising from the left
parotid and extending to the left auditory canal was detected in computed tomography (CT) with accompanying lymph nodes in the left
subauricular and cervical localization. Fine-needle biopsy was nondiagnostic and incisional biopsy found only severely active chronic
inflammation. Finally, deep excisional biopsy revealed CD3-, CD5-, and CD30-positive and S100-negative lymphoid cells diffusely infiltrating
the dermis. The case was considered as stage 2 peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified peripheral T-cell lymphoma-not otherwise
specified (PTCL-NOS) and CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) protocol was started. Despite clinical improvement in
the lesions (Figure 1B), CT revealed progression after the fourth cycle. The second-line treatment is ongoing with DHAP (dexamethasone,
high-dose ara-C, cisplatin) at the 8th month of follow-up. The auricula, external auditory canal, and parotid glands are unusual locations
for T-cell lymphoma. Presentations of lymphomas are indistinguishable from other swellings of the auricle or parotid gland and therefore a
high index of suspicion should be maintained in patients who present with presumptive cutaneous infections that do not respond to antibiotic
therapy in these locations. A suppurative auricular lesion suggests an infectious disease rather than a lymphoma, but primary cutaneous
lymphomas and cutaneous manifestations of lymphomas must be kept in mind. Early excisional biopsy may prevent excessive waste of time with
unnecessary antibiotherapies. Parotid lymphomas are most likely to be B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but non-B-cell lymphomas have a more
aggressive course in all salivary gland lymphomas. Both B-cell and T-cell lymphomas share many morphological similarities; therefore,
immunohistochemical analysis is required for proper assignment of lineage of salivary gland lymphomas . Reactive lymphoid infiltrate located
in the periphery of the lymphoma may contribute to the delay of diagnosis and larger biopsy samples are needed. Concept: Birgül Öneç,
Design: Birgül Öneç, Alper Koç, Data Collection or Processing: Birgül Öneç, Alper Koç, Analysis or Interpretation: Birgül Öneç, Durdu Mehmet
Köş, Elif Nisa Ünlü, Literature Search: Birgül Öneç, Hüseyin Yaman, İlhan Ünlü, Writing: Birgül Öneç, Alper Koç. Conflict of Interest: The
authors of this paper have no conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to
the subject matter or materials included.
