A 48-year-old female presented with intermittent high-grade fever, chills, and severe myalgia for 4 days. There was no lymphadenopathy or
hepatosplenomegaly. Investigations revealed hemoglobin concentration of 142 g/L; leucocyte count of 3.5x109/L with 54% neutrophils, 40%
lymphocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 5% monocytes; and thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 55x109/L). Peripheral smear revealed numerous
plasmacytoid lymphocytes and occasional cells with eccentrically placed nucleipacked with multiple prominent cytoplasmic vacuoles,
morphologically consistent with Mott cells (Figure 1). Meanwhile, Dengue NS1 antigen assay turned out to be positive. The patient was
managed conservatively and discharged after 4 days with a platelet count of 150x109/L. Peripheral smear revealed only occasional reactive
lymphocytes and the Mott cells had disappeared. Three weeks after discharge, platelet and leucocyte counts had improved further.
Nonmalignant reactive peripheral blood plasmacytosis can occur in tumors, autoimmune conditions, and infections . Polyclonal peripheral
blood plasmacytosis also occurs in Dengue virus infections and is prominent during the first week of the disease . However, the transient
occurrence of Mott cells in the peripheral blood of Dengue fever patients has not been reported previously. Our patient was not suffering
from lymphoma or multiple myeloma, which are potential causes of peripherally circulating Mott cells. Concept: Aniya Antony, Marie Ambroise,
Anita Ramdas, Design: Aniya Antony, Marie Ambroise, Mookkappan Sudhagar, Data Collection or Processing: Aniya Antony, Marie Ambroise,
Mookkappan Sudhagar, Anita Ramdas, Analysis or Interpretation: Aniya Antony, Marie Ambroise, Chokka Kiran, Anita Ramdas, Literature Search:
Aniya Antony, Marie Ambroise, Chokka Kiran, Writing: Aniya Antony, Marie Ambroise, Chokka Kiran, Mookkappan Sudhagar. Conflict of Interest:
The authors of this paper have no conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant
to the subject matter or materials included.
