Atypical fibroxanthoma is an uncommon mesenchymal tumor that manifests clinically as a reddish papule or nodule in sun-exposed areas of the
body. The clinical presentation is not specific and histology and immunohistochemistry are both necessary for a correct diagnosis. Surgery
is the gold standard of therapy. Recurrence and metastasis should be excluded with a follow-up at 6 months, since this tumor should nowadays
be considered a medium-grade neoplasm, rather than low-grade as previously believed. We report the case of two friends who came to our
hospital during the same period, complaining of very similar lesions. After biopsy and immunohistochemical examination, a diagnosis of
atypical fibroxanthoma in both cases was formulated. AFX, also termed pseudosarcoma, paradoxical fibrosarcoma or pseudosarcomatous
reticulohistiocytoma, is an uncommon superficial fibrohistiocytic tumor. It occurs mainly on sun-exposed skin of elderly individuals and
shows a male predominance. The lesion usually presents as an asymptomatic, solitary, often dome-shaped nodule, which may be ulcerated.
Histologically, AFX consists of an admixture of highly pleomorphic spindle, epithelioid and multinucleated giant cells in the dermis.1 The
growth pattern of AFX has a propensity of local invasion beyond the involved skin, thereby presenting the risk of local recurrence after
surgical excision, which is the gold standard of treatment.2 A 78-year-old healthy man was referred to our clinic due to the presence of a
juicy-red, dome-shaped nodule. The nodule, 1cm in diameter, appeared on the left antihelix appeared approximately one year before (Figure
1). Physical examination revealed sun-damaged skin and a surgical scar due to previous excision of a basal cell carcinoma. A reddish nodule
on the left antihelix (first patient) One week later, a friend of his (a 75-year-old man) came to our department with a similar skin lesion.
The nodule was oval-shaped, exophytic and bleeding (Figure 2). It was located on the right helix and had a diameter of 1.5cm. According to
the patient, the lesion appeared about 2 months beforehand and had been increasing in size. An exophytic nodule on the right helix (second
patient) In both patients, we performed surgical removal of the lesions, suspecting basal cell carcinomas. Histological examination showed
similar findings in both samples such as central erosion associated with pleomorphic spindle and epithelioid cell infiltration in the
context of a thickened vascularized stroma (Figure 3 and 4). The proliferating cells were CD68+ (Figure 5), CD163+, FXIII+ and smooth muscle
actin+, while melanocytic markers (S100, melan-A, HMB45) were negative and melanoma was therefore excluded. A final diagnosis of atypical
fibroxanthoma (AFX) was made in both cases, which was subsequently treated via surgical excision. The 6-month follow-up did not reveal any
new lesions in our patients. An erosed nodule composed of pleomorphic cells (H.E. - 4x) Close-up view of Figure 3 (H.E. - 20x) Proliferating
cells are CD68-positive CD68 - 20x) AFX is a rare, rapidly growing neoplasm of intermediate malignant potential. First described by Helwig3
in 1961 as a low-grade dermal tumor with atypical spindle cells, AFX is now generally considered an intermediate malignant potential tumor
with a low metastasize-grade2. The tumor usually presents as a pink or red papule/nodule, associated or not with erythema and desquamation.
Ulceration and bleeding may be present. The tumor is usually skin-colored or brown-red, painless, firm and frequently ulcerated4. Lesions
are smaller than 2cm in diameter, although the range may vary between 0.3-10 cm. No characteristic dermatoscopic features have been
described. Since clinical presentation is not specific, histopathologic examination is essential for diagnosis. AFX is typically
asymptomatic, unilesional and localized in sun-exposed areas (nose, ears and lips) of elderly patients with a higher incidence in the
seventh and eighth decade of life4. The pathogenesis is commonly related to ultraviolet exposure. Several studies have assessed a link to
p53 protein and demonstrated signature mutations in the p53 gene, occurring from UV radiation5. Moreover x-ray exposure also seems to induce
AFX development. A study conducted on 140 AFX cases revealed that 4.2% of lesions had been developing on previous radiation sites1. In
comparison with typical fibroxanthoma, AFX usually occurs in older individuals (mean age 69) with sun-damaged or radiation-damaged skin on
the head, neck or scalp. Men are distinctly more affected, representing between 2/3 and 3/4 of cases6. Differential diagnoses include
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, spindle cell squamous carcinoma and spindle cell malignant melanoma2. Histopathologic examination
characteristically reveals a well-circumscribed, exophytic, uncapsulated tumor located in the dermis. No extension to subcutaneous fat is
usually observed. The tumor consists of many atypical spindle and epithelioid cells with pleomorphic vesicular or hyperchromatic nuclei.
Atypical multinucleated giant cells and mitoses are often seen. Histological characteristics associated with aggressive behavior include
involvement of larger portions of subcutis or deep soft tissues, vascular or perineural invasion and the presence of necrosis. The main
histological differential diagnoses include spindle cell squamous carcinoma, melanoma and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. The
histological diagnosis of AFX is an exclusion diagnosis. Immunohistochemistry is fundamental to properly diagnose AFX. CD68 and smooth
muscle actin are highly positive, while HMB45 and S100 protein are negative4. AFX tumors usually have a benign clinical course. Surgical
excision is the therapy of choice. Wide excision with safety margins (1-2cm) is recommended as a first choice treatment5. In the rare
metastatic cases, treatment is patient individualized. Recurrence and metastasis occur rarely in incompletely excised tumors or when the
subcutis or deeper structures are involved and/or tumor necrosis or perineural-vascular invasion is present. Since recurrences usually
appear within months to 3 years after primary excision, a clinical follow-up should be performed every 3-6 months over a 2-3-year period.
Inspection and palpation of skin, lymph nodes and loco-regional skin, in addition to lymph node sonography, are crucial studies2. Conflict
of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Pesapane F, Nazzaro G, Lunardon L, Coggi A, Gianotti R. Two friends
with eroded nodules on the ears: atypical fibroxanthoma case report. An Bras Dermatol. 2015; 90(4):577-9. Work performed at the Dipartimento
di Fisiopatologia medico-chirurgica e dei trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico - Milano, Italy.
