On examination of a breast mass surgically excised in a 69-years-old woman, a pure invasive micropapillary carcinoma (MPC) was diagnosed
(Figure 1). At close examination, intensely eosinophilic syncytial-multinucleated giant cells (CD68+) percolating the stromal bands were
identified (Figure 1). The breast carcinoma illustrated here shows therefore a combination of 2 rarities, namely, an invasive micropapillary
growth pattern and an osteoclast-like giant cell (OGC) component. The World Health Organization blue book classifies the “carcinoma with
osteoclast-like stromal giant cells” among rare variants of invasive carcinomas of no special type (IC-NSTs)1; however, OGCs can also
accompany a variety of breast cancer special types (cribriform, tubular, mucinous, papillary, lobular, squamous and other metaplastic
patterns1,2). Identification of giant cells populating MPCs can be challenging as they feature the same size as the micropapillae and only
differ in staining (more eosinophilic cytoplasm) (Figure 1). Micropapillary carcinoma of the breast with an osteoclast-like giant cell
component. Pure invasive micropapillary carcinoma: neoplastic cells are arranged in small cell clusters immersed in a spongy stroma (A),
showing the so-called “inverted polarity” (MUC1 expression lining the stroma-facing border of the morulae) (B). Intensely eosinophilic
syncytial-multinucleated giant cells of histiocytic origin (CD68+, MUC1−) percolating the stromal bands (A, C). Following review of
cytological specimens of presurgical diagnosis, multinucleated giant cells scattered among small cell clusters of neoplastic cells were also
identified (D). Osteoclast-like giant cells are hypothesized to derive from macrophages by syncytial fusion but not by mitosis without cell
division3; however, the mechanism of OGC formation and accumulation in breast carcinoma is still largely unknown.2 An open question remains
about their prognostic significance: a study on metaplastic carcinomas with an OGC component reported a 5-year survival rate fairly similar
to that of patients affected by IC-NST.1 Further studies on large cohorts would be needed to definitely ascertain whether or not a diagnosis
of breast carcinoma with osteoclast-like stromal giant cells may affect patient clinical outcome.1 Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Funding:
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: We
would like to acknowledge AIRC grant support (MFAG 13310) to CM.
