Pressure ulceration is a common problem for long-term bedridden patients and individuals with traumatic paraplegia. Necrotizing fasciitis
can be a life-threatening complication caused by pressure ulcers, especially for debilitated elderly patients. In this report, we describe
the successful use of negative pressure wound therapy with instillation to treat severe complex pressure ulcers complicated with peri-anal
necrotizing fasciitis. A 58-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital with severe complex pressure ulcers on her bilateral ischial
tuberosities, left hip, perineum, and left sacrococcygeal region. The wounds had been present for nearly 2 years. Her seventh and eighth
thoracic vertebrae had been traumatically injured; she had been bedridden for 5 years. She was also diabetic. Her medical history and
laboratory investigations confirmed severe complex pressure ulcers complicated with necrotizing fasciitis. Antibiotic therapy was initiated.
Following negative pressure wound treatment with instillation, the topical infection subsided and final closure of the wound occurred after
130 days. Negative pressure wound treatment with instillation is an effective treatment protocol. It can reduce healing time, and promote
long-term functional and cosmetic outcomes in debilitated patients with severe complex pressure ulcers complicated with necrotizing
fasciitis. Necrotizing fasciitis (NF) is caused by serious bacterial infection, which spreads rapidly and destroys the body’s soft tissue
and fascia planes. In the elderly, it often occurs because of severe complex sacral pressure ulcers. Peri-anal NF generally involves the
crissum and perineum trigonum; this usually results in septicopyemia, shock and even death . The mortality rate can range from 25 to 45% .
The problematic wound presents major challenges in terms of reconstructive options and surgical management outcomes. Our case was a 58-year-
old Chinese woman who had presented with severe complex pressure ulcers 2 years earlier. She was an obese (body mass index, BMI, 30.05kg/m2)
paraplegic who presented with fever and anemia; she was admitted from home to the Chronic Wound Treatment Center in July 2014. Her past
medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus (managed with insulin), hypertension, and chronic gastrointestinal dysfunction. She had
developed paraplegia following a traumatic injury 40 years earlier. It was reported that a wound on her ischial tuberosities had started to
produce purulent secretions, together with labia majora redness 12 days earlier. It was observed that she had pyrexia and labia majora
ulceration 2 days before hospitalization. On admission, a physical examination revealed a high fever (39.2°C) and lower limb edema. Her
heart rate was 104 beats per minute (bpm) and blood pressure was 110/80mmHg (after medication). Her neurological examination was
unremarkable expect for hypermyotonia in her lower limbs. A continuous indwelling urethral catheter was used because of an absence of lower
limb sensations. Multiple ulcers covered with necrotic tissue were located on her bilateral ischial tuberosities, left hip, perineum, and
left sacrococcygeal region. Local skin examination of these sites revealed an absence of pain, and no exudates were observed. No regional
lymphadenopathy was noted. However, there were clear signs of infection and purulence with redness extending several centimeters from the
coxal wound margins to the genital region, which had weeping hemoserous fluids. A computed tomography scan of her hip at a previous
admission to another hospital 22 days later, showed a lesion with rarefaction areas in her sacral area, and an obvious gas shadow on her
left buttock, manifesting itself as a soft tissue infection on her left hip and ischium. Laboratory tests revealed a high leucocyte count
level (white blood cell, WBC =21×109/L), high C-reactive protein level (CRP=189.6mg/L), slight anemia (hemoglobin, HGB =96g/L), and low
serum potassium level (K=3.26mmol/L). Her urine culture confirmed infection with Citrobacter freundii. Swabs from the pressure ulcers were
cultured; Escherichia coli were isolated from the culture and were found to be sensitive to amikacin. The rest of the laboratory tests
(other electrolytes, blood culture) were within normal values. She was initially treated with mezlocillin sodium (6g per day) followed by
levofloxacin (0.6g daily) for 2 weeks, both via intravenous administration. She was also treated with oral montmorillonite powder (once
every 3 to 5 days) to control her bowel movements. Without anesthesia, a conservative sharp debridement of the wound bed was carried out. To
clean the wound with widely undermined areas, we inserted a sterile silicone tube (an irrigating tube of 6mm diameter) deep into the tunnels
and then applied the areas with 3% hydrogen peroxide, iodine, 0.5% metronidazole, 0.9% sodium chloride solution, one after another, using a
50ml syringe. An accurate assessment of the wound area was made by conducting a thorough evaluation of the size, depth, presence of
granulation tissue, wound edges, skin temperature, and exudates and/or necrosis. Large ulcers were present in the ischial tuberosities
(size: left, 6.0×7.0cm; right, 4.0×5.0cm, both with undermining), left hip (size: 5.0×6.0cm with undermining), left sacrococcygeal region
(size: 10.0×9.0cm with undermining) and genital region (with undermining). The tunnels ranged from 8.0 to 20cm in length. All of the open
wounds communicated with each other within the deep soft tissues and were close to the anus (see Fig. 1). All pressure ulcers were at stage
IV with eschar or slough.Fig. 1Severe complex pressure ulcers complicated by necrotizing fasciitis. (1)-(3) Initial clinical aspect of the
severe complex pressure ulcers; (4) Wound at 8 weeks; (5) Wound at 13 weeks Severe complex pressure ulcers complicated by necrotizing
fasciitis. (1)-(3) Initial clinical aspect of the severe complex pressure ulcers; (4) Wound at 8 weeks; (5) Wound at 13 weeks After
cleansing the wounds and preparing the peri-wound areas, the wound drain tubes were laid on top of foam; the irrigating tube (with lateral
perforations) was then inserted inside and deep into the tunnel. The negative pressure therapy used polyurethane foam and wall suction.
Negative pressure wound therapy with instillation (NPWTi; see Fig. 2-1) was initiated immediately: 5% povidone iodine (10ml) and normal
saline (500ml) was instilled twice a day. Instillation was repeated every 24 hours by continuous negative pressure at −80mmHg.Fig. 2(1)
Negative pressure wound therapy with instillation (the red arrows indicate irrigation tubes and the blue arrows indicate the drainage
tubes); (2) Wound healing (1) Negative pressure wound therapy with instillation (the red arrows indicate irrigation tubes and the blue
arrows indicate the drainage tubes); (2) Wound healing Proliferation of healthy granulation tissue was observed with a decrease in scores of
pressure ulcer severity, which was measured every 5 to 7 days; complete re-epithelialization was eventually achieved (see Fig. 2-2). The
wounds healed within 130 days of admission without any severe complications. No additional treatment for this patient is anticipated, except
for ​petroleum jelly, which will be applied to protect the restoring wound area. Three months after discharge, the patient was reviewed
using a one-to-one interview. She did not have any new occurrences or recurrence of pressure ulcers. In this case report, we have described
our experience and long-term follow-up results of applying NPWTi to pressure ulcers that were not suitable for conventional and/or surgical
treatments. It should be emphasized that negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) was effective and instillation achieved pleasing results.
Our findings show the granulation can be harvested from wound areas without any major complications or the need for aggressive procedures.
In addition, ideal cosmetic and functional results can also be achieved. The etiology of pressure ulcers includes pressure, friction,
shearing forces, nutritional status, social status, psychological status, and underlying disease. A classification system of pressure ulcers
has been developed previously, and the surgical management of these lesions has also been reviewed. Infections secondary to pressure ulcers
are usually limited to patients who are domiciled in their homes. In our study, the patient developed ulceration in her genital region,
which is not commonly affected by pressure ulcers. We concluded that these infections resulted from loose peri-anal connective tissue and
fasciae, which were worsened by the patient living at home. The current treatment options for pressure ulcers mainly include dressing,
negative pressure therapy, and surgical operations. Standard NF treatments involve surgical debridement, vascularized tissue, intravenous
antibiotic therapy, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, and wound care. However, dressing often results in poor tolerance and prolonged length of
stay. Operations are often not suitable for debilitated patients, such as the aged. Soft tissue reconstruction on the sacral, coccyx and
crissum is a challenging problem for reconstructive surgeons because of poor tolerance, challenging surgical debridement, and limited flap
alternatives. When accompanied with complex tissue damage following major injuries, local flap alternatives are not available and
reconstruction can be difficult. Wounds should always be approached as complex injuries that are contaminated with a large number of
microorganisms, which may delay wound healing and proliferation. Death from overwhelming systemic infection can occur. NPWT systems work by
inducing positive pressure at the wound bed. This creates a zone of hypoxic tissue local to the wound bed, which is surrounded by a zone of
hyperemia in the peri-wound tissue. Neumaier J reported NPWT to be the recommended approach for treating heavily exuding wounds because
negative pressure systems facilitate the removal of interstitial fluids. QU YS et al.noted NPWT prevents inflammation. Patmo AS et al.
reported vacuum-assisted closure usage can decrease bacterial load in wounds. In addition, following NPWT, granulation tissue is promoted
and an improved blood supply can be detected at the site. According to Gabriel et al. , NPWT accelerates debridement in a similar fashion to
autolyzed debridement and physical debridement. It can also stimulate biofactors that can further promote wound healing. Gabriel et al.
suggested (p. 405) that NPWT combined with topical irrigation after debridement is superior to standard NPWT treatment for infection
control; this may decrease would healing times, duration of hospital stay, and length of therapy. Irrigation solutions have several
alternatives. Matiasek et al. reported a case study that combined NPWT with instillation using an octenidine-based wound rinsing solution.
In this study, NPWT was combined with a povidone iodine-based wound irrigating solution. Moore and Cowman concluded that there was
insufficient trial evidence to support the use of any particular wound cleansing solution or technique for managing pressure ulcers. Normal
saline is favored as it is an isotonic solution and does not interfere with the normal healing process. New occurrences and the recurrence
of pressure ulcers within 2 years of treatment can be as high as 42.4% in our hospital. We have observed that healed wounds result in
positive cosmetic and functional outcomes. We believe that NPWTi can accelerate early closure of wounds and it can also play a role in
reducing recurrence rates post-discharge for up to several years. When not contraindicated, NPWTi is a safe and effective modality for
treating pressure ulcers with tunnels and undermines. It is also a promising therapeutic alternative for debilitated patients with severe
complex pressure ulcers complicated with NF. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Necrotizing fasciitis
Negative pressure wound therapy Negative pressure wound therapy with instillation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions GJT and LZ analyzed and interpreted the patient data and supervised the case. YG wrote the case
report and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. No funds were received in support of this study.
