Ingenol-mebutate has been used for the treatment of actinic keratosis. It has been shown that ingenol-mebutate inhibits the growth of cancer
cells or induces tumor cell death through pro-apoptotic effects. Keloids are benign skin tumours and are the effect of a deregulated wound-
healing process in genetically predisposed patients. Increased cell proliferation, which accounts for the progressive and hypertrophic
nature of keloids, correlates with the failure of apoptosis and plays a role in the process of pathological scarring. Keloid cells show a
mutated p53 gene resulting in functionally inactive p53 protein which cannot control genomic integrity. They tend to escape from apoptosis
which leads to keloid development by means of accumulation of continuously proliferating cells. Currently, the treatment of keloids remains
a challenge for high recurrence rates. However, the design and the development of pro-apoptotic therapeutic strategies would be beneficial
to keloids treatment. A 55-year-old caucasian woman presented recurrent keloids on a presternal scar. Standard surgical intervention was
used to treat the scar. However, this was unsuccessful and a year later the patient sought treatment again, but only by alternative means as
the patient refused further surgical intervention. Consequently, based on past research and experience, the authors attempted to treat these
lesions with ingenol mebutate gel, due to the pro-apoptotic effects. After 1 month, there was a clinical resolution of lesions, with a
slightly squamous, post-inflammatory erythema. A cutaneous biopsy proved the absence of residual keloids and deregulated expression of
molecular markers. The last follow-up of the patient, 1 year after treatment, showed that the patient was still free of keloids recurrence.
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13104-015-1429-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Ingenol-mebutate has been used in recent treatments of actinic keratosis (also called solar keratosis or dyskeratosis). Ingenol mebutate is
a diterpene ester, hydrophobic, isolated from the plant Euphorbia peplum, which at concentrations higher than 200 μmol/L, diffuses through
the skin within a few hours after application, concentrating mainly in the epidermis and into the dermis to a lesser extent. The exact
mechanism of action is unknown. It is believed that the active ingredient has pleiotropic effects inhibiting the growth of cancer cells or
induces tumor cell death through multiple mechanisms. ‘In vivo and in vitro’ models have shown a dual mechanism of action : direct cell
death is quickly expressed in tumoral keratinocytes and performs its function with the entry of the molecule into the cell by lysis of
pinosomi. Studies with immuno-fluorescence have shown, within the cell, in response to ingenol-3-angelate, PKC-δ (protein kinase C-delta)
translocation from the cytosol to the peri-nuclear membrane, . The disruption of the plasma membrane, as demonstrated by electron
microscopy, leads to an increase in the intracellular concentration of calcium ions, which, for the gradient, penetrate into the
mitochondria causing mitochondrial swelling and lysis . The lack of production of ATP, following the destruction of mitochondria, determines
cell necrosis. Beside the pro-apoptotic effects, immuno-stimulant effects are documented due to an increased release of chemokines by
activated T cells, local infiltration of neutrophils with increased antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, and finally, the development of
specific autoimmune responses of CD8 (+) T cells. The inflammatory reaction determined in the dermis, induces an activation and infiltration
of immuno-competent cells as neutrophils, with primary necrosis of tumor cells. It has been demonstrated, in fact, that the exposure of
human keratinocytes in vitro to ingenol mebutate, causes the release of chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α (Tumor necrosis
factor-alpha), leading to neutrophil activation mediated by PKC . Direct pro-apoptotic effects of this drug have been demonstrated in
several malignant cells, including melanoma cell lines . Topical application of ingenol mebutate was revealed as being effective for human
and murine melanoma in mouse models. Further preclinical murine modeling has demonstrated that, through P-glycoprotein-mediated absorptive
drug transport, ingenol mebutate can pass the stratum corneum barrier and penetrate to exert its pharmacological effects in the dermis and
hypodermis . Ingenol mebutate treatment also reduced the number of mutant p53 keratinocyte patches by about 70 %. No published data are
available on a potential effect of ingenol mebutate on keloids . Keloids are benign skin tumours and are the effect of a deregulated wound-
healing process in genetically predisposed patients. They are characterized by formation of excess scar tissue beyond the boundaries of the
wound. Keloids are often confused with hypertrophic scars because of an apparent lack of morphologic differences. We already found the
extent of apoptosis by DNA fragmentation and MTT assays, propidium iodide staining, p53 expression, and subcellular distribution . We also
found that selenocystine, a nutritionally available seleno-amino acid, was identified for the first time as a novel agent with anti
proliferative activity on human keloids. The 20 μM concentration after 48 h treatment used here was the most effective to reduce keloid
fibroblast growth . In a previous research , we addressed the mechanisms by which keloids, in contrast to hypertrophic scars, escape from
apoptosis. Our data demonstrated that p53 under-expression, due to the sequence mutations, in concert with ΔNp63 activation is the central
mechanism involved in keloid proliferation and explains the aberrant growth. ΔNp63 works as a dominant-negative protein upon p53 preventing
the latter from activating its target genes in apoptosis process suppression of apoptosis contribute to keloid development by means of
accumulation of continuously proliferating cells whereas the disruption or elimination of genetically altered cells might decrease tumor
potential. We also showed that p53 and ΔΝp63 deregulated expression can present prognostic relevance as differential apoptosis markers in
human keloids. Here, we describe a case report of a woman with a large keloid on a presternal scar (Additional file 1). The original
treatment was unsuccessful the patient categorically refused further surgical intervention. Consequently, based on past research, we decided
the best option was to treat such keloid lesions, for the first time, with ingenol mebutate gel. We also assessed ΔΝp63 and p53 altered
expression in a cutaneous biopsy from the patient before and 1 month after treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal We obtained ethics approval for our study from the ethics committee of the University of Naples II, Italy. All
procedures used in the study were in accordance with the current international guidelines, with the standards on human experimentation of
the Ethics Committee of the University of Naples II, Italy, and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, revised in 1983. A 55-year-old
caucasian woman presented with biopsy proven recurrent keloids on a presternal scar, subsequent to intervention of sternotomy, located from
manubrio-sternal joint to xiphoid appendix. The patient had been subjected to sternotomy to treat a severe form of heart valve insufficiency
in the year before the treatment. The wounds caused by this surgery, for no apparent underlying cause, evolved spontaneously in a tissue
hypertrophy with a violent inflammation and with symptoms of itching and burning. Within 2 months the scar markedly increased, overflowing
from the edges of the wound. As the patient refused to undergo further surgery, we carried out three intralesional fortnightly injections of
triamcinolone acetonide 40 mg/ml, which led initial atrophy and telangiectasia, without reducing the symptoms. Before starting treatment,
the clinical appearance was confirmed by taking a skin biopsy punch with 4 mm to presternal region. The diagnosis of a keloid was rather
simple and consisted of a simple examination of the lesion and a histological examination, which confirmed the diagnosis of keloid. We also
assessed ΔΝp63 and p53 altered expression which confirmed the diagnosis of keloids (data not shown). Since the previous treatment was
unsuccessful and the patient refused any further surgical intervention, the authors decided to attempt to treat the lesions with 500 µg/g
gel of ingenol mebutate (everyday applications for 2 days), based on in vitro data on keloids cell lines . The exact mechanism of action of
ingenol mebutate is not clear yet, but it has proven to be effective in removing actinic keratosis. After the application of ingenol
mebutate, the majority of patients (over 95 %) reported one or more skin reactions at the local level such as itching and burning caused by
a large inflammation, which is resolved within 30 days with a frequent resolution of the underlying disease. Treatment with ingenol mebutate
has no contraindications except hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients. Here, ingenol mebutate gel was applied
the first and the second day. The patient was examined at o, 10, 15, 20, 30 and 50 days after the application performed on the lesion area
(Fig. 1a–f). On the day 10 of the application, a moderately crusting and oozing reaction was observed. According to the severity scale of
local skin responses, which are the most common adverse effects of ingenol mebutate therapy , the composite score was 14/24: erythema: 4,
flaking or scaling: 2, crusting: 4, swelling: 3, vesiculation or postulation: 1, erosion or ulceration: 0. In contrast, before treatment,
the composite score was 12/24: erythema: 6, flaking or scaling: 0, crusting: 0, swelling: 6, vesiculation or postulation: 0, erosion or
ulceration: 0. One month later, there was a clinical resolution of lesions, with a slightly squamous, post-inflammatory erythema
(Fig. 1f).Fig. 1Patient‘s examination at 0 (a), 10 (b), 15 (c), 20 (d) 30 (e) and 50 (f) days after the ingenol-mebutate application
performed on the lesion area Patient‘s examination at 0 (a), 10 (b), 15 (c), 20 (d) 30 (e) and 50 (f) days after the ingenol-mebutate
application performed on the lesion area A second cutaneous biopsy, 1 month after treatment, proved the absence of residual keloids
molecular markers. Real time assay was performed on the biopsy after treatment showing that ΔΝp63 and p53 was expressed almost as well as in
hypertrophic scar and normal fibroblasts (Fig. 2). Control patient was a sex and age matched healthy patient. Usually, in keloid
fibroblasts, ΔNp63 is overexpressed while p53 is under-expressed compared to normal fibroblasts .Fig. 2p53 and Δp63 expression level from a
cutaneous biopsy, in the keloid case patient one month after treatment with ingenol-mebutate and in a control case p53 and Δp63 expression
level from a cutaneous biopsy, in the keloid case patient one month after treatment with ingenol-mebutate and in a control case All results
shown are mean ± SD of at least three separate experiments, measuring each parameter by triplicate (n = 3). Statistical significant
differences were tested by one way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and, when the F value was significant, by Student-Newman-Keul’s test. P
value less than 0.05 (*) was considered statistically significant. The local tolerance of the treatment was acceptable for the patient and
no systemic signs were observed. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient was still free from recidivant keloid scar. The last follow-up of
the patient, one year after treatment has not shown any clinical element that would suggest a flare up of the keloid disease. We have not
taken a further skin biopsy for lack of clinical expression of keloid. At the present, the patient doesn’t display any keloid scar. Future
follow-up will be mainly clinical, but we plan also to perform more biopsies to confirm the absence of keloid. Keloids are a grave
psychological and physical dermatological condition for patients. Keloid scarring is a raised scar which forms by expanding beyond the
boundaries of the original lesion . The most important histological manifestation of keloids is the overgrowth of atypical fibroblasts with
excessive amassing of extra-cellular matrix components, particularly collagen, proteoglycans fibronectin and elastin, . Keloid scar
formation, differing from normal wound healing, starts with abnormal tissue growth in the dermal lesion extending beyond the borders of the
original wound . Suppression of apoptosis contributes to keloid development by means of accumulation of continuously proliferating cells,
which account for the progressive and hypertrophic nature of keloids. Despite the several studies performed on molecular mechanisms and
treatment of keloids, the exact pathogenesis of such disease remains unknown and this makes therapies more problematic. Current common
treatments for keloids are often a combination of excision followed by a reconstructive surgical procedure . Glucocorticoids or
5-fluorouracil injections followed by compression therapy such as silicone sheets are frequently employed. Nonetheless, recurrence remains
between 45 and 100 %. Therefore, treatment of keloids is still a challenge. Surgery is the gold standard to treat any size of keloid, as it
reduces the mass of the lesion. More strategies to prevent post-excision recurrence of keloids have been mentioned including silicone
occlusive dressing, mechanical compression, radiation, cryosurgery, topical imiquimod application, bleomycin, intra-lesional injections of
steroids, 5-fluorouracil as well as interferon alpha, -beta and -gamma . In general, there is adequate evidence that several therapies have
a synergistic effect when used together. Even if with limitations, significant improvement is possible with the available treatments.
However, management of keloids remains difficult for high recurrence rates. Lately, pro-apoptotic effects of ingenol-mebutate have been
demonstrated . Due to such effects, topical application of ingenol mebutate was revealed as being effective in humans for the treatment of
precancerous skin; therefore we attempted to treat with ingenol mebutate the lesions from a patient showing recurrent keloids. Our case
report suggests that in some selected patients with keloids, ingenol mebutate could be considered as an alternative treatment. It could
present the advantage, over usual treatment, that does not display potential recurrence or side effects, indeed, cutaneous adverse effects
are shorter in duration with ingenol mebutate. The local tolerance of the treatment was acceptable for the patient, which after 1 year is
still free of keloids. Additionally, the cutaneous biopsy proved the absence of residual keloids molecular markers as ΔΝp63 and p53. Ingenol
mebutate could be considered as an alternative treatment option for keloids in patients, after other therapies have failed. Future studies
and large number of samples are warranted to assess if ingenol mebutate is a suitable treatment for patients with keloids and to clarify the
molecular mechanisms underlying the positive outcome of such treatment. Additional file 1: Care check list. Additional file 1: Care check
list. Tumor suppressor p53 Isoform of the p53 homologue p63, which lacks an amino-terminal transactivation domain and antagonizes the
induction of the gene expression by Deltap63 Protein kinase C-delta Adenosine triphosphate, coenzyme used as an energy carrier in the cells
of all known organisms T cell with CD8 receptor that recognizes antigens on the surface of a virus-infected cell and binds to the infected
cell and kill it Tumor necrosis factor-alpha Protein kinase C Colorimetric assay for assessing cell metabolic activity. NAD(P)H-dependent
cellular oxidoreductase enzymes may, under defined conditions, reflect the number of viable cells present. These enzymes are capable of
reducing the tetrazolium dye MTT 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide to its insoluble formazan, which has a purple
color BDF conceived the research, drafted and wrote the manuscript, and performed molecular assays. MG participated in the molecular data
analysis and was responsible for reviewing the manuscript. MN and conducted all follow-up examinations of the patient and documented the
data to determine the final diagnosis. LB was responsible for informed consent of the patient and treated the patient. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
