Two calves were referred because of ptyalism and difficulty opening the mouth (Calf 1) and for elective umbilical hernia surgery under
inhalation anaesthesia (Calf 2). Additional clinical signs were increased breath sounds and swelling in the region of the mandibular angle
in Calf 1. Ultrasonography and endoscopy revealed oral inflammation and abscessation in the area of the base of the tongue in both calves.
Infection of the hyoid apparatus was suspected based on ultrasonographic findings and confirmed by means of computed tomography. In Calf 1,
there was no response to treatment with systemic antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and local lavage, and Calf 2 was not
treated. Both calves were euthanized because of a poor prognosis and the diagnoses confirmed during postmortem examination. In Calf 1, the
abscess was associated with complete destruction of the left epihyoid bone and partial destruction of the left stylohyoid and ceratohyoid
bones. In Calf 2, the abscess was located at the distal end of the right stylohyoid bone near the epihyoid bone. Stomatitis or laryngeal and
pharyngeal abscessation caused by sharp feed particles are common in cattle and infection of the hyoid apparatus should be included in the
differential diagnosis. Mechanical dysphagia in calves is predominantly caused by diffuse inflammatory processes or abscesses that result
from foreign bodies or injuries from rough feed particles; the tongue and larynx are most commonly affected . Injuries of the oropharynx and
larynx are associated with considerable inflammation of the upper neck region, swelling, and abnormal respiratory noises [2, 3]. Clinical,
ultrasonographic, radiographic, or endoscopic examinations may identify the nature of the swelling [1, 4, 5] and in some cases allow
targeted treatment. To our knowledge, involvement of the stylohyoid bone in infectious inflammatory conditions of the oral cavity in cattle
has not been described but osteopathies or fractures of the stylohyoid bone are common in horses . The hyoid apparatus plays a crucial role
in the swallowing process by moving the food bolus over the larynx. The hyoid body, which is seated between the larynx and the tongue,
consists of the basihyoid and the paired thyrohyoid and ceratohyoid bones. Two branches of the hyoid apparatus function as suspension for
the body and consist, from distal to proximal, of the paired epihyoid, stylohyoid and tympanohyoid bones . Diseases of the stylohyoid bones
in adult horses are referred to as temporohyoid osteoarthropathy because of their typical localization and nature. This condition may
involve the middle ear, the temporohyoid joint, the stylohyoid bone and the petrous portion of the temporal bone. Possible aetiologies
discussed in the literature include extension of infection from otitis media or interna, guttural pouch infection, strangles, trauma and
osteoarthritis . Clinical signs include chronic weight loss, nasal discharge when the guttural pouch is affected, paralysis of the tongue
and locked jaw, and the prognosis is unfavourable. Temporohyoid osteoarthropathy is accompanied by bony proliferation and fusion of the
temporohyoid joint. The restriction of mobility is believed to lead to stress fractures of the petrous temporal and/or stylohyoid bones.
Calf 1 was a 6-month-old Brown Swiss heifer calf with a 3-week history of anorexia, ptyalism and swelling of the throat region. Examination
of the oral cavity by the referring veterinarian revealed an injury in the region of the left mandibular angle. The calf was treated with an
analgesic (meloxicam) and an antibiotic (spiramycin), but did not respond to treatment and was referred to the Department of Farm Animals,
Vetsuisse Faculty. Calf 2 was a 3-month-old Holstein–Friesian heifer calf referred for elective umbilical hernia surgery. No other
abnormalities were reported and the calf appeared healthy on clinical examination except for increased breath sounds. Clinical examination
revealed that Calf 1 was depressed, had a poor body condition and a starry hair coat. There was ptyalism, bilateral mucoid nasal discharge
and increased breath sounds in addition to a non-painful oedematous swelling in the region of the left mandibular angle and inability to
fully open the mouth. No lesions were seen on lateral radiographic views. Ultrasonography with a 10–5 MHz linear probe showed an abscess
between the left mandible and the base of the tongue. The calf was sedated [xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg bodyweight (bw) intramuscularly (IM)] for
endoscopy, which revealed a fistulating abscess in the region of the left mandibular angle that extended from the base of the tongue to the
third molar of the upper jaw. Pus and necrotic tissue were removed through the fistula using a curette. Crystalline sodium penicillin
(22,000 IU/kg bw, four times a day) was administered intravenously (IV) for 2 days followed by the same dose of procaine penicillin
administered daily IM for another 10 days. Flunixin (2.2 mg/kg bw/day IV) was given postoperatively for 3 days. The abscess was flushed
every other day for 8 days with the calf sedated. The demeanour and appetite of the calf improved transiently, and there was mild
improvement in its ability to open the mouth but the abscess did not regress clinically or ultrasonographically. Ultrasonographic re-
examination showed that a part of the hyoid apparatus was osteolytic and involved in the abscess (Fig. 1). The calf was placed under general
anaesthesia and computed tomography (CT) was carried out using a 40 slice CT unit. Transverse images and three-dimensional reconstruction
revealed extensive destruction of the left hyoid apparatus (Fig. 2). Based on all the findings, a diagnosis of hyoid osteomyelitis was made
and the calf was euthanized while still under anaesthesia because of a poor prognosis. Postmortem examination showed a firm fistulated
swelling on the left side of the caudal aspect of the tongue, which partially occluded the larynx (Fig. 3a). Irregular tracts extended
toward the ventral aspect of the tongue medial to the stylohyoid bone, forming a cavity with a smooth dark red to black lining and a thick
creamy to friable content. The tracts ran through salivary and tonsillar tissues but tissue destruction was severe and the origin of the
tracts obscured by inflammation. The left mandible was approximately three times thicker than normal and its size increased gradually from
rostral to caudal. The maximum thickness of the left stylohyoid bone was 24 mm compared with the normal right stylohyoid bone, which was
4 mm, at its junction with the epihyoid bone. Bacteriological culture of material from the oral lesions yielded moderate numbers of
Trueperella pyogenes and small numbers of Fusobacterium necrophorum and Clostridium sporogenes.Fig. 1Ultrasonogram of the throat area in a
6-month-old Brown Swiss heifer calf (Calf 1). Ultrasonogram of the throat area at the level of the base of the tongue showing an abscess
associated with the left hyoid bones. Ventral is at the top. rMd right mandible, rh right hyoid, abscess in the area of the left hyoid
delineated by black arrow heads, asterisk lingual arteriesFig. 2CT transverse image and 3D reconstruction of a 6-month-old Brown Swiss
heifer calf with stylohyoid osteomyelitis (Calf 1). a Transverse CT image at the level of the stylohyoid bone. The distal left stylohyoid
bone is partly distended and osteolytic (asterisk), there is an irregular gas inclusion within the abscess (white arrow head), moderate
smooth and solid periosteal new bone formation ventromedially at the left mandible (black arrow head) and mild periosteal new bone formation
at the pterygoid bone (black arrow). b 3D reconstruction of the hyoid apparatus viewed from the left. The distal left stylohyoid bone is
partially expanded and osteolytic (asterisk) and the left epihyoid bone is missing. Bones of the right hyoid apparatus are numbered, 1
stylohyoid, 2 epihyoid, 3 ceratohyoid, 4 basihyoid, 5 thyrohyoid; not identified: tympanohyoidFig. 3Postmortem views of oral abscesses
associated with the hyoid apparatus in two calves. a The abscess in Calf 1 contained inspissated necrotic and purulent material and involved
the epihyoid bone and the distal part of the left stylohyoid bone. The entire pharyngeal area was inflamed (S Stylohyoid, E Epiglottis). b
In Calf 2, the abscess was located on the right at the base of the tongue in the region of the tonsillar fossa (probe) and palatine tonsil
(TP) and involved the distal end of the stylohyoid bone Ultrasonogram of the throat area in a 6-month-old Brown Swiss heifer calf (Calf 1).
Ultrasonogram of the throat area at the level of the base of the tongue showing an abscess associated with the left hyoid bones. Ventral is
at the top. rMd right mandible, rh right hyoid, abscess in the area of the left hyoid delineated by black arrow heads, asterisk lingual
arteries CT transverse image and 3D reconstruction of a 6-month-old Brown Swiss heifer calf with stylohyoid osteomyelitis (Calf 1). a
Transverse CT image at the level of the stylohyoid bone. The distal left stylohyoid bone is partly distended and osteolytic (asterisk),
there is an irregular gas inclusion within the abscess (white arrow head), moderate smooth and solid periosteal new bone formation
ventromedially at the left mandible (black arrow head) and mild periosteal new bone formation at the pterygoid bone (black arrow). b 3D
reconstruction of the hyoid apparatus viewed from the left. The distal left stylohyoid bone is partially expanded and osteolytic (asterisk)
and the left epihyoid bone is missing. Bones of the right hyoid apparatus are numbered, 1 stylohyoid, 2 epihyoid, 3 ceratohyoid, 4
basihyoid, 5 thyrohyoid; not identified: tympanohyoid Postmortem views of oral abscesses associated with the hyoid apparatus in two calves.
a The abscess in Calf 1 contained inspissated necrotic and purulent material and involved the epihyoid bone and the distal part of the left
stylohyoid bone. The entire pharyngeal area was inflamed (S Stylohyoid, E Epiglottis). b In Calf 2, the abscess was located on the right at
the base of the tongue in the region of the tonsillar fossa (probe) and palatine tonsil (TP) and involved the distal end of the stylohyoid
bone In Calf 2, a swelling was detected between the lower right third molar and the base of the tongue during endotracheal intubation for
general anaesthesia. Inhalation anaesthesia was carried out but instead of umbilical surgery, the oral cavity was examined using a variety
of imaging modalities. Endoscopy showed a 5 × 5 cm fistulated dark red swelling on the right side of the base of the tongue.
Ultrasonographic examination showed an abscess at the base of the tongue under the tongue musculature involving the hyoid apparatus. CT
examination with the calf in dorsal recumbency showed bony proliferation and osteolysis of the distal part of the right stylohyoid bone near
the articulation with the epihyoid bone, and a large abscess with gaseous content in this region (Fig. 4). This calf was diagnosed with
hyoid osteomyelitis and euthanized because of a poor prognosis. Postmortem examination showed a 5 cm swelling dorsolateral to the base of
the tongue on the right side caudal to the torus linguae with a fistula at the rostral aspect (Fig. 3b). The fistula and the swelling were
connected to the hyoid apparatus at the articulation between the right stylohyoid and epihyoid bones. The fistulous tract led to an
irregular cavity with a 2 cm wall of firm granulation tissue and multiple masses consisting of homogeneous, yellow, inspissated pus at the
centre. Most of these agglomerates could be easily detached from the abscess cavity except for the ones that were connected to the necrotic
cartilage of the articulation between the stylohyoid and epihyoid bones. Bacteriological culture of material from the oral lesions yielded
moderate numbers of Streptococcus mutans, Bacteroides sp., and F. necrophorum and small numbers of Lactobacillus salivarius.Fig. 4CT
transverse image and 3D reconstruction showing stylohyoid osteomyelitis in a 3-month-old Holstein–Friesian heifer calf (Calf 2). a
Transverse CT image at the level of the stylohyoid bone showing inflammation with multiple small gas inclusions (white arrow head) in the
region of the base of the tongue on the right side and osteolytic changes of the right stylohyoid bone (asterisk). b 3D reconstruction of
the hyoid apparatus viewed from the right. There is marked remodelling and early osteolysis of the distal part of the right stylohyoid bone
(white arrow) CT transverse image and 3D reconstruction showing stylohyoid osteomyelitis in a 3-month-old Holstein–Friesian heifer calf
(Calf 2). a Transverse CT image at the level of the stylohyoid bone showing inflammation with multiple small gas inclusions (white arrow
head) in the region of the base of the tongue on the right side and osteolytic changes of the right stylohyoid bone (asterisk). b 3D
reconstruction of the hyoid apparatus viewed from the right. There is marked remodelling and early osteolysis of the distal part of the
right stylohyoid bone (white arrow) Among the clinical signs observed in Calf 1, difficulty opening the mouth was of particular interest
because this was a characteristic finding in horses with infected stylohyoid bone fracture . It is likely that the bony proliferations of
the mandibular and stylohyoid bones and the inflammation contributed to the inability of the calf to open its mouth completely. Infection of
the hyoid apparatus in both calves was probably caused by feed particles that were forced caudally during swallowing and perforated the
pharyngeal mucosa. The organisms isolated are oral commensals and colonise lesions following traumatic damage of the overlying mucosa.
Trueperella pyogenes in particular is a common opportunistic pathogen in cattle, and F. necrophorum and Bacteroides spp. are recognised as
important primary pathogens, causing oral and laryngeal necrobacillosis . The distal portion of the stylohyoid bones and the epihyoid bones
are the structures of the hyoid apparatus closest to the oro-pharyngeal mucosa and thus the most likely bones to be involved in an oro-
pharyngeal infection. Another possibility is the spread of an infection from the palatine tonsil since the inflammation was located in this
area in Calf 2. In the calves reported here, it is conceivable that the infection started at the cartilaginous articulations and then spread
to the epihyoid and stylohyoid bones. Osteolytic changes of the ceratohyoid bone have also been described in horses although usually the
articulation between the stylohyoid and temporal bones is affected [7, 10], occasionally accompanied by middle ear infection . However,
there was no evidence of otitis externa in the calves reported here and CT scans did not show inner or middle ear abnormalities. Surgical
treatment of osteomyelitis of the hyoid bones was not considered feasible because of the location of the lesion and the destructive changes
seen in CT image reconstruction. Furthermore, functional impairment of the hyoid apparatus would be expected after any form of treatment and
therefore both calves were euthanized. One report of successful surgical treatment of a stylohyoid bone fracture associated with an abscess
in a horse has been published but a description of the surgical technique was not provided . In summary, in calves with swellings in the
throat and mandibular area, particularly in association with difficulty opening the mouth, disorders of the hyoid apparatus should be
included as a differential. The diagnosis can be confirmed by means of ultrasonography and CT. Although the latter is not an absolute
prerequisite for a definitive diagnosis, it allows precise characterization of the disease process and the involvement of bony structures.
KN prepared the manuscript, UB and KN supervised the clinical examination, EM examined the calves and performed the ultrasonographic
examination. Radiography and CT were evaluated by FW, supervised by PK. Anaesthesia was provided by SR and post-mortem examination by AJM.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Dr. M. Bachmann, Schlieren, and Dr. Giuliani-Rupp, Tscherlach for
referring the calves. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
