In the antibiotic era, purulent pericarditis is a rare entity. However, there are still reports of cases of the disease, which is associated
with high mortality, and most such cases are attributed to delayed diagnosis. Approximately 40-50% of all cases of purulent pericarditis are
caused by Gram-positive bacteria, Streptococcus pneumoniae in particular. We report four cases of pneumococcal pneumonia complicated by
pericarditis, with different clinical features and levels of severity. In three of the four cases, the main complication was cardiac
tamponade. Microbiological screening (urinary antigen testing and pleural fluid culture) confirmed the diagnosis of severe pneumococcal
pneumonia complicated by purulent pericarditis. In cases of pneumococcal pneumonia complicated by pericarditis, early diagnosis is of
paramount importance to avoid severe hemodynamic compromise. The complications of acute pericarditis appear early in the clinical course of
the infection. The most serious complications are cardiac tamponade and its consequences. Antibiotic therapy combined with
pericardiocentesis drastically reduces the mortality associated with purulent pericarditis. Community-acquired pneumonia is associated with
high morbidity and mortality worldwide. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the main causative agent of such pneumonia,(1,2) being responsible for
20-40% of cases. Albeit rare, purulent pericarditis can arise as a complication of pneumococcal pneumonia, significantly increasing
morbidity and mortality, especially in patients with predisposing factors such as pre-existing pericardial effusion, immunosuppression,
poorly-controlled diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, and chronic autoimmune diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis), as well as in those with a
history of cardiac surgery or chest trauma. (3-6) Purulent pericarditis is an acute syndrome with a rapid course and a mortality rate
approaching 100%. Even when the syndrome is diagnosed and treated promptly, the mortality rate is nearly 40%; death is most often from
cardiac tamponade, with or without septic shock and constrictive pericarditis. 6Here, we present a case series of pneumococcal pneumonia
complicated by pericarditis, together with a brief review of the literature. Neither the case reports nor the accompanying images contain
any information that could be used in order to identify the patients. Surviving patients gave written informed consent. A 48-year-old male
presented to the emergency room with a one-week history of mild dyspnea, dry cough, and chest pain. In the last 48 h, the symptoms had
worsened, with tachycardia (140 bpm) and increasing dyspnea. The physical examination revealed hypotension (blood pressure, 90/60 mmHg) and
tachypnea (26 breaths/min). Auscultation of the thorax revealed signs of right-sided pleural effusion. Laboratory data revealed marked
elevation of inflammatory and infectious parameters: white blood cell count, 29.10 × 109 cells/L (94.3% neutrophils, 2.9% lymphocytes, and
2.6% basophils); serum C-reactive protein, 57.3 mg/dL; serum sodium, 120 mEq/L; and serum potassium, 4.7 mEq/L. Arterial blood gas analysis
demonstrated severe hypoxemia (PaO2, 39.4 mmHg; PaCO2, 25.2 mmHg; and pH, 7.47). A chest X-ray revealed opacities in the middle and lower
fields of the right lobe, accompanied by enlargement of the cardiac silhouette ( Figure 1). Empirical antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone
and levofloxacin was started. An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with diffuse ST segment elevation. Thoracentesis showed exudative
pleural effusion (pH, 7.17; glucose, 45 mg/dL; protein, 38 g/dL; and lactate dehydrogenase , 1,425 IU/L). Staining of the pleural fluid
revealed gram-positive diplococci. A chest tube was inserted in order to drain the empyema. The patient reported some relief after the
drainage; however, because of worsening of respiratory failure and the need to maintain a high FiO2 (80%), he was admitted to the ICU.
Microbiological studies, including urinary antigen testing, sputum culture, and culture of the pleural fluid, were positive for S.
pneumoniae that was penicillin- and erythromycin-susceptible at minimum inhibitory concentrations &lt; 0.25 µg/ml and &lt; 0.03 µg/mL,
respectively). Echocardiography showed severe pericardial effusion (without signs of compression or hemodynamic impairment) and mild
pulmonary hypertension with tricuspid regurgitation, although the other valves were functioning normally. A chest X-ray performed on the
second day of hospitalization showed increased heart size and new pulmonary infiltrate. On the fourth day, tracheal intubation was required
because the patient showed worsening of his clinical condition and deterioration of blood gas analysis. The patient was hemodynamically
unstable, which called for aggressive measures. A second pericardiocentesis was performed and yielded 480 ml of seropurulent fluid. The
condition of the patient improved after an infusion of norepinephrine (0.8 µg/kg per min). Unfortunately, he could not be stabilized. On the
sixth day, thoracic ultrasound showed volume loss of the right hemithorax with minimal pleural effusion. On the seventh day, an exploratory
thoracotomy was performed and the findings were as follows: massive hepatization of the right lung; right pleural effusion and fibrosis;
fibropurulent pericarditis with diffuse areas of pericardial thickening; and cardiac tamponade (500 cm3 of purulent fluid). In addition, the
vena cava, pulmonary veins, pulmonary arteries, aorta, and pericardium were engulfed by a fibrin layer; the pulmonary arteries were stiff
and dilated. The patient died during the procedure. Death was the consequence of complicated sepsis caused by S. pneumoniae, serotype 1. A
53-year-old male with severe pneumonia was transferred from another hospital. He had a four-day history of flu with cough and fever
(39.4°C), having recently complained of dyspnea and progressive edema of the lower extremities. Physical examination revealed hypotension
(blood pressure, 80/50 mmHg) and tachycardia (140 bpm). Auscultation of the thorax showed decreased breath sounds in the right lung and
crackles in the left lung base. At admission, a chest X-ray revealed right pleural effusion and a CT scan showed right pleural effusion with
collapse of the right lower and middle lobes associated with extensive effusion. Laboratory tests at admission revealed a white blood cell
count of 30.2 × 109 cells/L (92% neutrophils and 3.6% lymphocytes), a platelet count of 956 × 109/L, a serum C-reactive protein level of
15.84 mg/dL, a serum creatinine concentration of 1.32 mg/dL, a serum sodium level of 135 mEq/L, and a serum potassium level of 5.6 mEq/L.
Figure 1Chest X-ray showing an opacity in the middle and lower fields of the right lung lobe, together with enlargement of the cardiac
silhouette, in posteroanterior and lateral views (upper and lower images, respectively). A chest X-ray performed on the second day of
hospitalization showed progression of the disease process: an opacity involving nearly all of the right lung and further enlargement of
cardiopericardial silhouette ( Figure 2A). Echocardiography showed severe pericardial effusion affecting the entire cardiac silhouette.
Pericardiocentesis yielded 640 mL of exudative fluid, the culture of which was negative. Pericardial and thoracic drainage was performed;
purulent fluid was obtained in a sterile manner from the chest drain. Examination of the pleural fluid showed a pH of 6.95, a glucose level
of 5 mg/dL, proteins at 47.4 g/L, and an LDH content of 5,347 U/L. A second chest X-ray showed consolidation in the right lung, minimal
pleural fluid, and a normal cardiac silhouette ( Figure 2B). A urinary pneumococcal antigen test was negative. Pleural fluid culture was
positive for S. pneumoniae that was susceptible to erythromycin, levofloxacin, and penicillin. The isolate was S. pneumoniae serotype 1. The
patient received empirical antibiotic treatment with the piperacillin-tazobactam combination (4.5 g/8 h) and levofloxacin (500 mg twice a
day for 5 days). The latter was continued because the pneumococcus was susceptible to it. The patient was discharged on the twelfth day,
after withdrawal of the pericardial and pleural drains. A 26-year-old female from Bahrain, with no relevant medical history, was brought to
the emergency room. At presentation, the patient had cough with purulent expectoration, fever, and chest pain. She presented with tachypnea
(34 breaths/min), hypotension (blood pressure, 85/55 mmHg), and tachycardia (144 bpm). Physical examination revealed bilateral crackles in
the lower lung fields. Laboratory data were remarkable for elevation of inflammatory and infectious parameters: white blood cell count, 11 ×
109 cells/L (68.2% neutrophils and 22.3% lymphocytes); platelet count, 573 × 109/L; serum C-reactive protein, 6 mg/dL; serum sodium, 142
mEq/L; serum potassium, 3.7 mEq/L; and serum creatinine, 0.83 mg/dL. A chest X-ray showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette and bilateral
pulmonary opacities ( Figure 3A). An echocardiogram revealed massive pericardial effusion with signs of cardiac tamponade.
Pericardiocentesis was performed, yielding 600 cm3 of exudative pericardial effusion. A CT scan showed bilateral pleural effusion, abundant
pericardial effusion, and bilateral alveolar opacities ( Figure 3B). The patient was admitted to the ICU. Supportive treatment was started,
as was empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone (2 g/24 h) plus levofloxacin (500 mg twice per day), as well as a nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug (ibuprofen). It was necessary to drain the pericardial effusion multiple times. Various tests were performed: pleural
fluid culture; blood culture; serological tests for atypical bacteria; and RT-PCR for respiratory viruses. In addition, we screened for
tuberculosis (with a PPD test and enzyme-linked immunospot assay). A urinary pneumococcal antigen test was positive. Cytological studies of
the pericardial effusion were negative for malignancy. Figure 2Chest X-ray showing an opacity involving nearly the entire right lung,
together with enlargement of the cardiac silhouette, before and after pericardial and thoracic drainage (A and B, respectively). Note
consolidation in the right lower lobe with mild pleural effusion and normal cardiac silhouette after drainage. On the third day after
admission, the clinical condition of the patient worsened and treatment was therefore started with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg per day),
which initially produced a promising response (decrease in the serum C-reactive protein level, a decrease in heart rate, and improvement of
general status). On the fifth day, the condition of the patient deteriorated, with increasing pericardial effusion. The patient showed
worsening respiratory distress, with an increase in the FiO2 requirement (from 0.24 to 0.60). Drainage of the pleural effusion resulted in
no improvement. At that time, she required intubation and mechanical ventilation. On the seventh day, she showed impaired ventilation,
caused by decreased lung compliance and difficulties in maintaining oxygenation. Consequently, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was
started. However, because there was no subsequent improvement in the respiratory parameters, the extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was
stopped and the patient died. A 57-year-old male presented with fever (38.9°C), chest pain, cough, and progressive dyspnea. The patient
exhibited tachypnea (34 breaths/min) and tachycardia (134 bpm). Auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds in both lung bases, with
crackles on the left. A chest X-ray revealed bilateral pleural opacities and enlargement of the cardiac silhouette ( Figure 4A).
Echocardiography showed moderate pericardial effusion affecting the entire cardiac silhouette. Pericardiocentesis yielded 250 mL of
exudative fluid. A CT scan of the chest showed pneumonia in the left lower lobe, bilateral pleural effusion, and moderate pericardial
effusion ( Figure 4B). Thoracentesis was performed and yielded 1,050 mL of exudative fluid. Laboratory tests yielded the following data:
white blood cell count, 11.78 × 109 cells/L (84.3% neutrophils, 4.3% lymphocytes, and 9.1% monocytes); platelet count, 512 × 109/L; serum
C-reactive protein, 31.27 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 0.94 mg/dL; serum sodium, 133 mEq/L; and serum potassium, 3.72 mEq/L. Examination of the
pleural fluid showed a pH of 7.16, a glucose level of 4.5 mg/dL, proteins at 49.1 g/L, and an LDH content of 1,385 U/L. A urinary
pneumococcal antigen test was positive. Pleural fluid culture was positive for S. pneumoniae. The patient was treated for four weeks with
amoxicillin-clavulanate (2.2 g/8 h, i.v.) plus levofloxacin (500 mg twice a day), together with a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(ibuprofen, 800 mg/day), after which there was nearly complete resolution of the alterations seen on the chest X-ray and CT scan. Figure 3In
A, chest X-ray showing enlarged cardiac silhouette and bilateral pulmonary opacities; in B, chest CT scan showing bilateral pleural
effusion, abundant pericardial effusion, and bilateral alveolar opacities. Figure 4In A, chest X-ray showing bilateral pleural opacities and
enlargement of the cardiac silhouette; in B, chest CT scan showing an opacity in the left lower lobe, accompanied by moderate bilateral
pleural effusion. Infectious etiologies are the cause of only 5% of all cases of pericardial effusion. 6In most cases, S. pneumoniae
infection spreads from an intrathoracic site, whereas the dissemination of Staphylococcus aureus is most often hematogenous. (6-8)
Pneumococcal pericarditis is a rare syndrome. To our knowledge, only 20 cases were reported between 1980 and 2010, the prevalence of the
syndrome being similar across all age groups. (8-10) Prior to the advent of antibiotic therapy, pneumococcal infection was the most common
cause of purulent pericarditis. The fact that this is no longer the case might reflect the efficacy of penicillin therapy. 11Mortality
remains high in cases of pneumococcal pericarditis, even when patients receive aggressive, long-term therapy. (11,12) Pericarditis must be
considered a possible complication in pneumococcal infections. 13Cardiac tamponade is the most dangerous and common complication of
pneumococcal pericarditis; it can be fatal, especially when its diagnosis is delayed.(14-18) When there are signs of infection and a chest
X-ray shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette, echocardiography is mandatory. Aspiration of the purulent fluid by pericardiocentesis
facilitates the diagnosis. 15Recurrent pericardial effusion or constrictive pericarditis call for pericardial drainage or
pericardiectomy.(14-18) In patients with pericarditis, urinary pneumococcal antigen tests can be successfully used in order to identify the
causative agent.(19,20) Recent studies have employed molecular analysis of pericardial fluid for that purpose. 19The management of
pneumococcal pericarditis involves prolonged (at least 4 weeks of) antimicrobial therapy, 14in conjunction with pericardiocentesis. 15When
antibiotic therapy is used in combination with pericardiocentesis, mortality can be reduced to 20% or less. The complications of acute
pericarditis typically appear early in its clinical course. 16 Each case in our series showed different clinical features and levels of
severity. In three of the four cases, the main complication was cardiac tamponade. The low specificity of the symptoms makes early clinical
diagnosis difficult. Too often, the diagnosis is made after the disease has already resulted in severe hemodynamic compromise.(12,13,16)
Using pericardiocentesis to remove excess fluid from the pericardial sac and administering the appropriate antibiotic therapy are of
paramount importance in reducing the mortality associated with purulent pericarditis.(11,15,21,22) In conclusion, our case series
demonstrates that, despite advances in diagnostic and treatment modalities, purulent pericarditis continues to be a serious complication of
infection with S. pneumoniae. 23Therefore, a diagnosis of S. pneumoniae-associated purulent pericarditis should be considered and
investigated early in patients presenting with clinical deterioration and showing unsatisfactory improvement during conventional therapy.
Financial support: None. Study carried out in the Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Ciber de Enfermedades Respiratorias
- CIBERES - Instituto de Investigación Biomédica Agustí Pi i Sunyer, Universidad de Barcelona, España; at the Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Nayarit, Tepic, México; and at the Ospedale Generale di Sestri Levante, Sestri Levante, Italia. Na era dos
antibióticos, a pericardite purulenta é uma entidade rara. Entretanto, ainda há relatos de casos da doença, associados a alta mortalidade,
muitos deles atribuídos ao diagnóstico tardio. Aproximadamente 40-50% de todos os casos de pericardite purulenta são causados por bactérias
gram-positivas, particularmente Streptococcus pneumoniae. Relatamos quatro casos de pneumonia pneumocócica complicada por pericardite, com
diferentes características clínicas e níveis de gravidade. Em três dos quatro casos, a principal complicação foi tamponamento cardíaco. A
pesquisa microbiológica (teste de antígeno urinário e cultura de líquido pleural) confirmou o diagnóstico de pneumonia pneumocócica grave
complicada por pericardite purulenta. Em casos de pneumonia pneumocócica complicada por pericardite, o pronto diagnóstico é de extrema
importância para evitar comprometimento hemodinâmico grave. As complicações da pericardite aguda aparecem no início do curso clínico da
infecção. As complicações mais graves são tamponamento cardíaco e suas consequências. A antibioticoterapia com pericardiocentese reduz
sobremaneira a mortalidade associada à pericardite purulenta. A pneumonia adquirida na comunidade associa-se a elevada morbidade e
mortalidade em todo o mundo. Streptococcus pneumoniae é o principal agente causador desse tipo de pneumonia,(1,2)sendo responsável por
20-40% dos casos. Embora rara, a pericardite purulenta pode surgir como uma complicação da pneumonia pneumocócica, aumentando
significativamente a morbidade e mortalidade, especialmente em pacientes com fatores predisponentes como derrame pericárdico pré-existente,
imunossupressão, diabetes mellitus mal controlado, alcoolismo e doenças autoimunes crônicas (artrite reumatoide, por exemplo) e em pacientes
com história de cirurgia cardíaca ou trauma torácico.(3-6)A pericardite purulenta é uma síndrome aguda cujo curso é rápido e cuja taxa de
mortalidade é de aproximadamente 100%. Mesmo quando a síndrome é prontamente diagnosticada e tratada, a taxa de mortalidade é de quase 40%;
a morte ocorre na maioria das vezes em virtude de tamponamento cardíaco, com ou sem choque séptico e pericardite constritiva. 6Apresentamos
aqui uma série de casos de pneumonia pneumocócica complicada por pericardite, além de uma breve revisão da literatura. Nem os relatos de
casos nem as imagens que os acompanham contêm qualquer informação que possa ser usada para identificar os pacientes. Os pacientes
sobreviventes assinaram um termo de consentimento livre e esclarecido. Um homem de 48 anos apresentou-se no pronto-socorro com dispneia
leve, tosse seca e dor torácica desde a semana anterior. Nas últimas 48 horas, os sintomas haviam piorado, com taquicardia (140 bpm) e
aumento da dispneia. O exame físico revelou hipotensão (pressão arterial: 90/60 mmHg) e taquipneia (26 ciclos/min). A ausculta do tórax
revelou sinais de derrame pleural à direita. Os dados laboratoriais revelaram elevação acentuada de parâmetros inflamatórios e infecciosos:
contagem de leucócitos, 29,10 × 109células/l (94,3% de neutrófilos, 2,9% de linfócitos e 2,6% de basófilos); proteína C reativa sérica, 57,3
mg/dl; sódio sérico, 120 mEq/l; potássio sérico, 4,7 mEq/l. A gasometria arterial revelou hipoxemia grave (PaO2: 39,4 mmHg; PaCO2: 25,2
mmHg; pH: 7,47). A radiografia de tórax revelou opacidades no campo médio e no campo inferior do lobo direito, com aumento da área cardíaca
( Figura 1). Iniciou-se antibioticoterapia empírica com ceftriaxona e levofloxacina. O eletrocardiograma revelou ritmo sinusal com elevação
difusa do segmento ST. A toracocentese revelou derrame pleural exsudativo [pH: 7,17; glicose: 45 mg/dl; proteína: 38 g/dl; lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH, desidrogenase lática): 1.425 UI/l]. A coloração do líquido pleural revelou diplococos gram-positivos. Um dreno torácico
foi inserido a fim de drenar o empiema. O paciente relatou algum alívio após a drenagem; no entanto, em virtude do agravamento da
insuficiência respiratória e da necessidade de manter uma FiO2elevada (80%), foi internado na UTI. Estudos microbiológicos, incluindo
antígeno urinário, cultura de escarro e cultura do líquido pleural, apresentaram resultados positivos para S. pneumoniae suscetível a
penicilina e eritromicina em concentrações inibitórias mínimas (&lt; 0,25 µg/ml e &lt; 0,03 µg/ml, respectivamente). O ecocardiograma
revelou derrame pericárdico grave (sem sinais de compressão ou prejuízo hemodinâmico) e hipertensão pulmonar leve com regurgitação
tricúspide, embora as demais válvulas estivessem funcionando normalmente. A radiografia de tórax realizada no segundo dia de hospitalização
revelou um aumento do tamanho do coração e novo infiltrado pulmonar. No quarto dia, foi necessário realizar intubação traqueal, pois houve
piora do estado clínico e deterioração da gasometria. O paciente estava hemodinamicamente instável, o que exigiu medidas agressivas. Foi
realizada nova pericardiocentese, por meio da qual foram retirados 480 ml de líquido seropurulento. O estado do paciente melhorou após uma
infusão de norepinefrina (0,8 µg/kg por min). Infelizmente, não foi possível estabilizá-lo. No sexto dia, a ultrassonografia torácica
revelou perda de volume do hemitórax direito com derrame pleural mínimo. No sétimo dia, foi realizada uma toracotomia exploradora e os
achados foram os seguintes: imensa hepatização do pulmão direito; derrame pleural à direita e fibrose; pericardite fibropurulenta com áreas
difusas de espessamento pericárdico; tamponamento cardíaco (500 cm3de líquido purulento). Além disso, a veia cava, veias pulmonares,
artérias pulmonares, aorta e pericárdio foram encobertos por uma camada de fibrina; as artérias pulmonares estavam rígidas e dilatadas. O
paciente morreu durante o procedimento. A morte ocorreu em consequência de sepse complicada causada por S. pneumoniae, sorotipo 1. Figura
1Radiografia de tórax mostrando uma opacidade no campo médio e no campo inferior do lobo pulmonar direito, além de aumento da área cardíaca,
em incidência posteroanterior (imagem superior) e em perfil (imagem inferior). Um homem de 53 anos com pneumonia grave veio transferido de
outro hospital. Apresentava gripe com tosse e febre (39,4°C) havia quatro dias, com queixa recente de dispneia e edema progressivo dos
membros inferiores. O exame físico revelou hipotensão (pressão arterial: 80/50 mmHg) e taquicardia (140 bpm). A ausculta do tórax revelou
murmúrio vesicular diminuído no pulmão direito e crepitações na base pulmonar esquerda. No momento da internação, a radiografia de tórax
revelou derrame pleural à direita e a TC revelou derrame pleural à direita com colapso do lobo inferior direito e do lobo médio associado a
derrame extenso. Os exames laboratoriais realizados no momento da internação revelaram contagem de leucócitos de 30,2 × 109células/l (92% de
neutrófilos e 3,6% de linfócitos), contagem de plaquetas de 956 × 109/l, nível sérico de proteína C reativa de 15,84 mg/dl, concentração de
creatinina sérica de 1,32 mg/dl, nível sérico de sódio de 135 mEq/l e nível sérico de potássio de 5,6 mEq/l. A radiografia de tórax
realizada no segundo dia de hospitalização revelou progressão do processo da doença: uma opacidade envolvendo quase todo o pulmão direito e
novo aumento da área cardiopericárdica ( Figura 2A). O ecocardiograma revelou derrame pericárdico grave que afetava toda a área cardíaca.
Por meio de pericardiocentese, foram removidos 640 ml de líquido exsudativo, cuja cultura foi negativa. Realizou-se drenagem pericárdica e
torácica; do dreno torácico obteve-se, de maneira estéril, líquido purulento. O exame do líquido pleural revelou pH de 6,95, nível de
glicose de 5 mg/dl, proteínas a 47,4 g/l e teor de LDH de 5.347 U/l. Uma nova radiografia de tórax revelou consolidação no pulmão direito,
líquido pleural mínimo e área cardíaca normal ( Figura 2B). O teste de antígeno pneumocócico urinário foi negativo. A cultura do líquido
pleural apresentou resultado positivo para S. pneumoniae suscetível a eritromicina, levofloxacina e penicilina. O isolado foi de S.
pneumoniae sorotipo 1. O paciente recebeu antibioticoterapia empírica com a associação piperacilina-tazobactam (4,5 g/8 h) e levofloxacina
(500 mg duas vezes por dia durante 5 dias). Como o pneumococo era suscetível a esta última, o paciente continuou a recebê-la. O paciente
recebeu alta no décimo segundo dia, após a retirada do dreno pericárdico e do dreno pleural. Uma mulher de 26 anos, do Bahrein, sem história
médica relevante, foi levada ao pronto-socorro. A paciente apresentava tosse com expectoração purulenta, febre e dor torácica. Apresentava
também taquipneia (34 ciclos/min), hipotensão (pressão arterial: 85/55 mmHg) e taquicardia (144 bpm). O exame físico revelou crepitações
bilaterais nos campos pulmonares inferiores. Os dados laboratoriais foram notáveis em virtude da elevação de parâmetros inflamatórios e
infecciosos: contagem de leucócitos, 11 × 109células/l (68,2% de neutrófilos e 22,3% de linfócitos); contagem de plaquetas, 573 × 109/l;
proteína C reativa sérica, 6 mg/dl; sódio sérico, 142 mEq/l; potássio sérico, 3,7 mEq/l; creatinina sérica, 0,83 mg/dl. Figura 2Radiografia
de tórax mostrando uma opacidade envolvendo quase todo o pulmão direito, além de aumento da área cardíaca, antes e depois de drenagem
pericárdica e torácica (A e B, respectivamente). Nota-se consolidação no lobo inferior direito, com derrame pleural leve e área cardíaca
normal após a drenagem. A radiografia de tórax revelou aumento da área cardíaca e opacidades pulmonares bilaterais ( Figura 3A). O
ecocardiograma revelou derrame pericárdico extenso com sinais de tamponamento cardíaco. Realizou-se pericardiocentese, por meio da qual
foram retirados 600 cm3de derrame pericárdico exsudativo. A TC revelou derrame pleural bilateral, derrame pericárdico abundante e opacidades
alveolares bilaterais ( Figura 3B). A paciente foi internada na UTI. Iniciou-se tratamento de suporte, bem como antibioticoterapia empírica
com ceftriaxona (2 g/24 h) e levofloxacina (500 mg duas vezes por dia), além de um anti-inflamatório não esteroide (ibuprofeno). Foi
necessário drenar o derrame pericárdico múltiplas vezes. Foram realizados vários testes: cultura do líquido pleural; hemocultura; testes
sorológicos para bactérias atípicas e RT-PCR para vírus respiratórios. Além disso, investigou-se a presença de tuberculose (por meio de
teste com PPD e de ensaio enzyme-linked immunospot). O teste de antígeno pneumocócico urinário foi positivo. Estudos citológicos do derrame
pericárdico apresentaram resultados negativos para malignidade. No terceiro dia após a internação, o estado clínico da paciente piorou e,
por conseguinte, iniciou-se tratamento com metilprednisolona (1 mg/kg por dia), que inicialmente suscitou uma resposta promissora
(diminuição do nível sérico de proteína C reativa, diminuição da frequência cardíaca e melhora do estado geral). No quinto dia, o estado da
paciente deteriorou-se, com aumento do derrame pericárdico. A paciente apresentou agravamento do desconforto respiratório, com aumento da
FiO2necessária (de 0,24 para 0,60). A drenagem do derrame pleural não resultou em melhora. A paciente necessitou então de intubação e
ventilação mecânica. No sétimo dia, apresentou ventilação prejudicada em virtude da diminuição da complacência pulmonar e de dificuldades em
manter a oxigenação. Consequentemente, iniciou-se oxigenação por membrana extracorpórea. No entanto, como não houve melhora subsequente nos
parâmetros respiratórios, a oxigenação por membrana extracorpórea foi interrompida e a paciente morreu. Um homem de 57 anos apresentou-se
com febre (38,9°C), dor torácica, tosse e dispneia progressiva. O paciente apresentava taquipneia (34 ciclos/min) e taquicardia (134 bpm). A
ausculta revelou murmúrio vesicular diminuído em ambas as bases pulmonares, com crepitações à esquerda. A radiografia de tórax revelou
opacidades pleurais bilaterais e aumento da área cardíaca ( Figura 4A). O ecocardiograma revelou derrame pericárdico moderado que afetava
toda a área cardíaca. Por meio de pericardiocentese, foram retirados 250 ml de líquido exsudativo. A TC de tórax revelou pneumonia no lobo
inferior esquerdo, derrame pleural bilateral e derrame pericárdico moderado ( Figura 4B). Realizou-se toracocentese, por meio da qual foram
retirados 1.050 ml de líquido exsudativo. Testes laboratoriais apresentaram os seguintes resultados: contagem de leucócitos, 11,78 ×
109células/l (84,3% de neutrófilos, 4,3% de linfócitos e 9,1% de monócitos); contagem de plaquetas, 512 × 109/l; proteína C reativa sérica,
31,27 mg/dl; creatinina sérica, 0,94 mg/dl; sódio sérico, 133 mEq/l; potássio sérico, 3,72 mEq/l. O exame do líquido pleural revelou pH de
7,16, nível de glicose de 4,5 mg/dl, proteínas a 49,1 g/l e teor de LDH de 1.385 U/l. O teste de antígeno pneumocócico urinário foi
positivo. A cultura do líquido pleural apresentou resultado positivo para S. pneumoniae. O paciente foi tratado durante quatro semanas com
amoxicilina-clavulanato (2,2 g/8 h, i.v.) e levofloxacina (500 mg duas vezes por dia), além de um anti-inflamatório não esteroide
(ibuprofeno, 800 mg/dia); após o tratamento, houve resolução quase completa das alterações observadas na radiografia e na TC de tórax.
Figura 3Em A, radiografia de tórax mostrando aumento da área cardíaca e opacidades pulmonares bilaterais; em B, TC de tórax mostrando
derrame pleural bilateral, derrame pericárdico abundante e opacidades alveolares bilaterais. Etiologias infecciosas são a causa de apenas 5%
de todos os casos de derrame pericárdico. 6Na maioria dos casos, a infecção por S. pneumoniae se espalha a partir de um sítio intratorácico,
ao passo que a disseminação de Staphylococcus aureus é mais frequentemente hematogênica.(6-8)A pericardite pneumocócica é uma síndrome rara.
Até onde sabemos, foram relatados apenas 20 casos entre 1980 e 2010, e a prevalência da síndrome é semelhante em todas as faixas
etárias.(8-10)Antes do advento da antibioticoterapia, a infecção pneumocócica era a causa mais comum de pericardite purulenta. O fato de que
não mais o seja é possivelmente reflexo da eficácia do tratamento com penicilina. 11A mortalidade permanece elevada em casos de pericardite
pneumocócica, mesmo quando os pacientes recebem terapia agressiva de longa duração.(11,12)A pericardite deve ser considerada uma complicação
possível em infecções pneumocócicas. 13O tamponamento cardíaco é a mais perigosa e comum complicação da pericardite pneumocócica; pode ser
fatal, especialmente quando seu diagnóstico é tardio.(14-18)Quando há sinais de infecção e a radiografia de tórax mostra um aumento da área
cardíaca, a ecocardiografia é obrigatória. A aspiração do líquido purulento por meio de pericardiocentese facilita o diagnóstico. 15Derrame
pericárdico recorrente ou pericardite constritiva exigem drenagem pericárdica ou pericardiectomia.(14-18)Em pacientes com pericardite, é
possível identificar o agente causador por meio de testes de antígeno pneumocócico urinário.(19,20)Em estudos recentes, tem-se empregado a
análise molecular do líquido pericárdico para esse fim. 19O tratamento da pericardite pneumocócica consiste em terapia antimicrobiana
prolongada (durante pelo menos 4 semanas) 14e pericardiocentese. 15Quando se usa a antibioticoterapia associada à pericardiocentese, pode-se
reduzir a mortalidade para 20% ou menos. As complicações da pericardite aguda aparecem tipicamente no início de seu curso clínico. 16 Figura
4Em A, radiografia de tórax mostrando opacidades pleurais bilaterais e aumento da área cardíaca; em B, TC de tórax mostrando uma opacidade
no lobo inferior esquerdo, com derrame pleural bilateral moderado. Cada um dos casos em nossa série apresentou características clínicas e
níveis de gravidade diferentes. Em três dos quatro casos, a principal complicação foi tamponamento cardíaco. A baixa especificidade dos
sintomas dificulta o diagnóstico clínico precoce. Infelizmente, o diagnóstico é muitas vezes feito depois que a doença já resultou em grave
prejuízo hemodinâmico.(12,13,16)O uso da pericardiocentese para remover o excesso de líquido do saco pericárdico e a administração da
antibioticoterapia adequada são de suma importância para reduzir a mortalidade associada à pericardite purulenta.(11,15,21,22) Em suma,
nossa série de casos demonstra que, apesar dos avanços no diagnóstico e no tratamento, a pericardite purulenta continua a ser uma
complicação grave da infecção por S. pneumoniae. 23Portanto, o diagnóstico de pericardite purulenta por S. pneumoniae deve ser prontamente
considerado e investigado em pacientes com deterioração clínica e melhora insatisfatória durante a terapia convencional. Apoio financeiro:
Nenhum. Trabalho realizado no Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Ciber de Enfermedades Respiratorias - CIBERES -
Instituto de Investigación Biomédica Agustí Pi i Sunyer, Universidad de Barcelona, España; na Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Nayarit, Tepic, México; e no Ospedale Generale di Sestri Levante, Sestri Levante, Italia.
