Disclosure: Dr. Sandoval receives royalties from the Web-based clinical decision support resource UptoDate and is a speaker on behalf of
Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Dublin, Ireland, and Novo Nordisk, Bagsvaerd, Denmark. All other authors report no conflicts of interest. Abdominal
pain during cancer chemotherapy may be caused by medical or surgical conditions. A retrospective review of 5 children with cancer who had
appendicitis while receiving chemotherapy was performed. Three had acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and 1 each had T-cell lymphoblastic
lymphoma and rhabdomyosarcoma. Two of the patients had a Pediatric Appendectomy Score of 6, and 1 each had a score of 7, 5, and 2. All had
evidence of appendicitis on computed tomography. Laparoscopic appendectomy was performed without any perioperative complication.
Appendicitis is an important diagnosis in children with cancer, and laparoscopic appendectomy is safe and the procedure of choice.
Appendicitis is the most common condition that necessitates emergent abdominal surgery in children.1 Anorexia, abdominal pain, fever, and
emesis are classic clinical manifestations. However, younger children may present with nonspecific symptoms, making a diagnosis of
appendicitis challenging. Moreover, in children with leukemia, the incidence of appendicitis is low (0.5–1.5%), and most patients may
present with vague, nonspecific symptoms, resulting in delay of diagnosis, which may result in perioperative complications and death.2,3 A
blunted immune response may occur because of myelosuppression and/or immunosuppression. Computed tomography has a high sensitivity and
specificity in the evaluation of immunocompetent children with suspected appendicitis.4 Despite the use of improved diagnostic imaging, the
rates of negative appendectomy and perforation have not been lower,5,6 although one study found a sustained decrease in the rates of false-
positive diagnoses of appendicitis and appendiceal perforation.7 Moreover, early use of computed tomography may assist in distinguishing
appendicitis from typhlitis, because the management of the former is surgery and of the latter is total parenteral nutrition and broad-
spectrum antibiotics.8 As in the general pediatric population, laparoscopic appendectomy is the preferred surgical approach. A 12-year-old
girl with T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), who was receiving maintenance chemotherapy, presented with intermittent periumbilical
pain that migrated to the right lower quadrant. She was afebrile and eating and denied constipation, diarrhea, and nausea. The physical
examination indicated diffuse abdominal pain with guarding. The leukocyte count was 2600, and the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was 1700.
The Pediatric Appendicitis Score (PAS) of Alvarado and of Samuel was 6 (2 each for pain with cough, percussion, or hopping and right lower
quadrant tenderness and 1 each for migration of pain and fever). Abdominal computed tomography demonstrated an enlarged appendix with
significant periappendiceal and pericecal fat stranding, consistent with appendicitis. The patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy and
partial omentectomy. Histopathology was consistent with acute appendicitis and periappendicitis. Postoperative recovery and wound healing
were uneventful. An 8-year-old boy with T-cell ALL, who was receiving maintenance chemotherapy, presented with a sudden onset of severe
right lower quadrant abdominal pain. His temperature was 101.5. The physical examination indicated a soft abdomen with tenderness on deep
palpation of the right lower quadrant. The leukocyte count was 4700 and the ANC was 3700. The PAS was 6 (2 each for pain with cough,
percussion, or hopping and right lower quadrant tenderness and 1 each for nausea or vomiting and fever). Abdominal computed tomography
demonstrated a dilated appendix with thickening and hyperemia of the distal appendiceal wall. The patient underwent laparoscopic
appendectomy. Histopathology was consistent with appendicitis and periappendicitis. Postoperative recovery and wound healing were
uneventful. A 12-year-old boy with ALL, who was receiving consolidation chemotherapy, presented with a 1-day history of abdominal pain,
located in the periumbilical region and right lower quadrant. The physical examination indicated diffuse abdominal pain with guarding in the
right lower quadrant. The leukocyte count was 3600, and the ANC was 1900. The PAS was 7 (2 each for pain with cough, percussion, or hopping
and right lower quadrant tenderness and 1 each for anorexia, nausea or vomiting, and fever). Abdominal computed tomography demonstrated that
the appendiceal wall was thickened and enlarged. The patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy. Histology was consistent with appendicitis
and periappendicitis. Postoperative recovery and wound healing were uneventful. A 6-year-old boy with metastatic (lung) prostatic embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma developed fever and abdominal pain. The physical examination indicated severe oral mucositis and right lower quadrant pain
on deep palpation. The leukocyte count was 0.1 and the ANC was 0. The PAS was 5 (1 each for anorexia, nausea or vomiting, and fever, and 2
for right lower quadrant tenderness). Abdominal computed tomography demonstrated inflammatory changes in the right lower quadrant adjacent
to the cecum, corresponding to the site of the appendix. A normal air- and contrast-filled appendix was not demonstrated. The patient
underwent laparoscopic appendectomy. Histopathology demonstrated appendicitis. Postoperative recovery and wound healing were uneventful. A
17-year-old boy with refractory T-cell mediastinal lymphoblastic lymphoma developed fever. The physical examination showed signs of
peripheral neuropathy. The leukocyte count was 0.1 and the ANC was 0. The PAS was 2 (1 each for anorexia and fever). Abdominal computed
tomography, obtained to evaluate neutropenic fever, showed a hyperemic appendix with periappendiceal inflammation. The patient underwent
laparoscopic appendectomy. Histopathology demonstrated acute appendicitis. Postoperative recovery and healing were uneventful.
Gastrointestinal complications and acute surgical abdomen can become life-threatening conditions in immunocompromised/myelosuppressed
children with cancer. The differential diagnosis comprises infections, colitis, typhlitis, and appendicitis. Differentiating appendicitis
from typhlitis is challenging. Indeed, appendiceal thickening is observed in association with typhlitis. McCarville et al9 identified
typhlitis and appendiceal thickening in 4 of 90 pediatric oncology patients. Two of 4 patients with appendiceal thickening needed surgical
intervention, whereas only 1 of 86 without this finding underwent surgery. The authors concluded that appendiceal thickening does not
prolong the course of typhlitis, but may indicate an increased need for surgical intervention. Hobson et al3 reported that children with
typhlitis present with fever, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and typical computed tomography findings, whereas those with appendicitis present
atypically. However, Angel et al2 described 16 children with cancer and appendicitis. Six diagnoses were delayed, and 3 of the 6 patients
presented with nonlocalized pain, abdominal distention, and lack of abdominal guarding, fever, dehydration, diarrhea, and upper
gastrointestinal bleeding. Indeed, Skibber et al10 stated that laparotomy may be the only effective method of differentiating typhlitis from
appendicitis. There are 2 pediatric appendicitis scoring systems that use history, physical examination, and leukocyte count. Samuel11 found
that the mean PAS score was significantly higher in children with appendicitis (9.1 ± 0.1) than in children without appendicitis (3.1 ± 1.1;
P = .001). A score of ≥6 indicated a high probability of appendicitis. Alvarado12 found that a score of 5 or 6 is compatible with a
diagnosis of appendicitis, 7 or 8 indicates probable appendicitis, and 9 or 10 very probable appendicitis. A prediction rule for identifying
children at low risk for appendicitis based on presenting ANC may not be appropriate in immunocompromised/myelosuppressed children.13,14 In
our series of 5 immunocompromised children, 3 were categorized as having a high probability of appendicitis, 1 had symptoms compatible with
appendicitis, and 1 had a low probability of appendicitis. Diagnostic imaging plays a critical role in the evaluation of children for
appendicitis. The American College of Radiology recommends beginning with ultrasonography and then proceeding to computed tomography if the
appendix is not visualized or the study is nondiagnostic. In two recent studies, the authors concluded that increased use of
ultrasonography, with or without computed tomography, is associated with a negative appendectomy rate and that ultrasonography has
universally high sensitivity and specificity when the appendix is visualized.15,16 Although the trend toward the use of ultrasonography may
apply to immunocompetent patients, this current clinical wisdom may not apply to patients with both immunocompromise and myelosuppression,
and physicians must exercise caution and maintain a high index of suspicion when evaluating patients who are so affected. Magnetic resonance
imaging is a valuable technique for the evaluation of children with nonperforated acute appendicitis. Hörmann et al17 used ultrasonography
and magnetic resonance imaging in 45 immunocompetent children during an evaluation of clinically suspected acute appendicitis. Acute
appendicitis was diagnosed by ultrasonography in 40% of the children and by magnetic resonance imaging in 100%. On T2-weighted ultra-fast
turbo spin–echo images, the appendix appeared with a markedly hyperintense center, a slightly hyperintense thickened wall, and markedly
hyperintense periappendiceal tissue. Moreover, in a study comparing imaging strategies with conditional contrast-enhanced computed
tomography and unenhanced magnetic resonance imaging in patients with suspected appendicitis, the authors concluded that the accuracy of
conditional or immediate magnetic resonance imaging is similar to that of conditioned computed tomography.18 In our patients, computed
tomography was indispensable in differentiating appendicitis from other intra-abdominal conditions that might have been present in patients
with cancer. Laparoscopic appendectomy has emerged as the operation of choice for appendicitis. U. S.19 and Canadian20 trends and outcomes
studies from 2004 through 2011 have indicated that the frequency of laparoscopic appendectomy has doubled and hospital stays are shorter. A
prospective randomized study of laparoscopic versus open appendectomy for complicated appendicitis concluded that the laparoscopic approach
is safe and that operation time, hospital stay, and rates of wound sepsis, reoperations, and readmissions did not differ between the 2
approaches.21 Kim et al22 reviewed their experience with acute appendicitis in 7 Korean children with acute leukemia. Five of the 7
underwent laparoscopic appendectomy, and 2 underwent an open procedure. All experienced an uneventful recovery, but 1 in the laparoscopic
group had an umbilical wound infection. Moreover, 2 patients had ANC of 0 at the operation. Forghieri et al23 described their experience
with 2 adult patients with hematologic malignancies (1 with multiple myeloma, the other with acute myeloid leukemia; French–American
–British classification, M2) who developed acute appendicitis while neutropenic. Both surgical procedures started laparoscopically (1 was
converted to a minilaparotomy because of a gangrenous appendix) and each recovered uneventfully. In our cohort, laparoscopic appendectomy
was performed safely, and no perioperative complications were observed. Notably, our patients in cases 4 and 5 had prolonged
myelosuppression (lasting 3 and 4 wk after surgery, respectively) and severe mucositis. Because of the fear of perforation and sepsis, we
proceeded with appendectomy. European randomized trials have suggested that an antibiotics-first strategy is not associated with an
increased risk of perforation or higher rate of perioperative complication; however, there are early treatment failures in those patients so
treated and all have a risk of recurrent appendicitis that may ultimately require appendectomy.24 Wiegering et al25 described 5 children
with lymphoid malignancy that was managed with broad-spectrum antimicrobial coverage, which resulted in complete resolution in clinically
stable patients with neutropenic cancer. Clinicians and surgeons should not overlook the possibility of appendicitis in children with
cancer. The application of appendicitis scores and early use of diagnostic imaging may facilitate the diagnosis of appendicitis and
differentiate it from typhlitis. Diagnostic imaging recommendations (ultrasonography followed by either computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging, if ultrasonography is not diagnostic) for immunocompetent patients may not be adequate for
immunocompromised/myelosuppressed patients. We recommend abdominal computed tomography with a pediatric protocol to assist in diagnosis and
reduce radiation exposure.
