Congenital clasped thumb is a progressive flexion and adduction deformity presenting with heterogeneous congenital anomalies. Although the
disease is rare, diagnosis is usually delayed due to natural location of thumb within the palm in first 3 months of life. A 4-year-old girl
with congenital clasped thumb deformity due to absence of extensor pollicis brevis tendon whose treatment consisted of extensor indicis
proprius (EIP) transfer and z-plasty reconstruction to first web space. The patient was so happy with both cosmetic appearance and
functional status. There was not any limitation at interphalangeal or metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints of the thumb and the result was.
Stability of MCP joint was full and power for grasping any object was much better than the original status. In cases of isolated clasped
thumb deformity associated with absence of tendon whose treatment attempts with splinting and physical treatment have failed, EIP tendon
transfer and reconstruction of contracture in first web space with z-plasty is an easy and successful method to obtain functional
improvement. Congenital clasped thumb is a progressive flexion and adduction deformity presenting with heterogenous congenital
abnormalities.1 In this rare syndrome, main problem is the deficient extensor tendon mechanism of thumb due to functional and structural
causes.2–4 It is confused with trigger finger deformity due to fixated flexion deformity of the thumb In congenital trigger finger
entrapment is present at A1 pulley level due to fusiform enlargement of flexor pollicis longus tendon,2,5,6 although in congenital clasp
finger deformity there are thumb extension deformity due to extensor tendon insufficiency and muscle and skin contractions at flexor and
thenar regions.3,4,7 In congenital clasped thumb success of treatment depends on lesion type. Although successful results have been obtained
with splinting and conservative treatment several reconstruction methods are used due to secondarily developed contractures in neglected
cases. Tendon transfers are useful in hypermobile thumb cases who have both extensor and opponents tendon deficiency.8,9 Aim of this study
was to discuss a case with congenitally clasped thumb deformity who did not have extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) tendon and had contracture
in first web space under the light of literature. A 4-year-old female presented to our clinic with limitation of movement at right-hand
first finger. Physical examination revealed adduction and flexion deformity at right-hand first finger. When she was asked to make abduction
and extension with right thumb range of motion for flexion and extension at interphalangeal (IP) joint was full but extension and abduction
at metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint was limited (Figure 1). There was not any sign of general instability at MCP joint like laxity of ulnar
collateral ligament and passive finger extension was limited due to contraction at first web interval. Her other skeletal system
examinations were normal. Family history revealed arthrogryposis and clasped thumb deformity in both hands in his 14-year-old brother. Due
to absence of EPB tendon we performed extensor indicis proprius (EIP) tendon transfer and simple z-plasty reconstruction to first web space.
We entered with a mini incision at second MCP joint from the dorsum of the hand. EIP tendon was found and tenotomized, pulled to wrist
level, and then transferred to thumb with a subcutaneous tunnel. Then a bone tunnel was opened to proximal phalanx that fits to the original
insertion place of EPB tendon and transferred EIP tendon was embedded to this tunnel and fixated (Figure 2). To protect the transferred
tendon, fixation with a K wire for 6 weeks and a splint were applied. At 6th week after the surgery the K-wire was removed and a splint
which holds thumb at extension and abduction position for 6 months after the surgery was applied. Daytime active exercises to achieve
extension power of the thumb were prescribed. At her last control 2 years after the surgery thumb range of motion was full (Figure 3). The
patient was so happy with both cosmetic appearance and functional status. There was not any limitation at IP or MCP joints of the thumb and
the result was excellent according to Weckesser et al8 staging. Stability of MCP joint was full and power for grasping any object was much
better than the original status. According to Gilbert classification abduction was 40° to 45°, rotation was 110° to 120°, and opposition of
thumb with all other fingers was full.10 We informed both the patient and patient's parents about this study and obtained written informed
consent. Adducted and flexed thumb before surgery. During surgery, construction of a tunnel in proximal phalanx, passage of extensor indicis
tendon from this tunnel, and z-plasty reconstruction to first web interval. Appearance of hand and thumb 2 years after surgery. Congenital
clasped finger is a syndrome characterized by loss of extension function of thumb due to absence of 1 or both of EPB and longus tendons.2–4
Several classification systems exist to categorize several spectrums of congenital clasped thumb. McCarroll11 and Tsuyuguchi's12
classification is among the most commonly used ones. Tsuyuguchi et al12 separated this syndrome into 3 groups. Type 1 is the flexible type
in which thumb can be passively extended with no other abnormality. In type II thumb cannot be passively abducted or extended, and skin
contracture, and there are comorbid collateral ligament or thenar muscle abnormalities. Type III occurs together with arthrogryposis.
Weckesser et al8 proposed a staging system which resembles Tsuyuguchi classification and classified into 4 groups according to the severity
of deformity. In group 1, there is only limitation in extension of thumb; in group 2, flexion contractures are present in addition to
deformity in group 1. Group 3 is hypoplastic thumb in which there are diffuse changes in all structures of thumb and flexor and thenar
muscles are hypoplastic. Group 4 includes more complicated cases that do not fit into any of the groups. Our case was type II according to
Tsuyuguchi classification and type III according to Weckesser et al classification. This condition is usually confused with trigger finger
due to fixated flexion deformity. Whether trigger thumb is congenital or not is controversial and generally there is no accompanying
additional pathology.13 On the other hand, congenital clasped thumb deformity is generally bilateral, characterized by familial tendency and
congenital lack of extensor mechanism, and is much rare than trigger finger.6 In congenital trigger, finger nodularity (Notta's node) is
palpated at MCP joint level and it is difficult to passively extend IP joint. Although real triggering cannot be observed, forced extension
of thumb may produce pain and a click sound. On the other hand, flexion deformity can be corrected passively but not actively in congenital
clasped thumb deformity.2,5,6 Ruland and Slake7 reported that flexion deformity in clasped thumb syndrome may be confused with trigger
finger and this may lead to unnecessary releasing surgeries. This approach aggravates symptoms instead of relieving them. Diagnosis is
difficult in first 3 to 4 months because a newborn naturally holds his thumb inside his palm in first 3 to 4 months. But when his
cooperation with surroundings increase flexion posture starts to be prominent.7,13 At first evaluation, thumb is seen at flexion position,
it cannot be extended, and after forced extension it returns to original flexion position. This deformity is generally together with other
generalized musculoskeletal malformations.13 Treatment of congenitally clasped thumb depends on disease stage, age at presentation, and
comorbid pathologies.10,12 Tsuyuguchi et al12 reported that good results were achieved with type I and type II cases with conservative
methods. In type II and type III, cases in whom conservative treatment is ineffective surgical treatment produces good results. To give a
chance to relatively weak extensor muscle, splinting and casting should be performed before surgery. Nonsurgical methods are not recommended
for patients who have agenesis or severe hypoplasia of EPB.14,15 Ghani et al10 reported that conservative treatment was effective for
patients under 1 year of age but then, and in type II and type III patients who do not respond to conservative treatment surgery gives
better results. Lin et al9 suggested that application of a splint will give successful results in patients under 1 year of age, who have
neither skin contracture at first evaluation nor absence or severe weakness of EPB. However, conservative treatment is not recommended in
patients with severe hypoplasia or agenesis in whom conservative treatment is generally not successful. In cases where delaying surgery is
mandatory, splinting should be performed in order to decrease severity of contractions which can cause progression of deformity. Medina et
al2 recommended surgical treatment for patients who present after 2 years of age and who do not respond to conservative treatment.
McCarroll11 simply categorized this deformity into flexible and complex types. Flexible type can be treated by splinting but when skin
contracture and/or ligament laxity is present surgery is necessary. The aim of splinting and conservative management is to regain extension
function of thumb. Therefore, splint should be applied for 6 months in order to keep thumb at extension and then, after active thumb
extension is achieved night splints should be used for another 6 months.10,12 The aim of surgical treatment is to achieve near full thumb
function by correcting accompanying deformities in patients who did not respond to conservative treatment. For this purpose tendon transfer
in cases with absent or insufficient tendons, appropriate reconstruction in cases with tendon subluxations, several z-plasty reconstructions
for first web space contraction, and thenar and adductor muscle release procedures may be performed.10 In conclusion, congenital clasped
thumb syndrome may be confused with trigger finger. This condition should be kept in mind in cases with flexion and adduction deformity.
Splinting with physical treatment is a very successful method in flexible cases or in patients who only have extensor tendon weakness. But
in cases who have tendon hypoplasia or absence, who presented late, and who have contracture at first web space, it should be kept in mind
that management with only splinting will generally yield unsuccessful results. As in our case, EIP tendon transfer and z-plasty of
contracture in first web interval is a simple, reliable, and successful method in order to achieve functional result. Abbreviations: EIP =
extensor indicis proprius, EPB = extensor pollicis brevis, FPL = flexor pollicis longus, IP = interphalangeal, MCP = metacarpophalangeal.
Patient consent: We informed both the patient and patient's parents about this study and obtained written informed consent. Authors’
contributions: Idea—SS, HBT; design—SS, HBT; proofreading—SS; materials—SS, HBT; data collection and/or processing—SS, AU, SG; analysis
and/or interpretation—SS, UT, SAG; literature search—AU, UT, SAG; manuscript writing—SS, HBT; critical evaluation—SS, HBT, AU, SAG, UT. The
authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
