Congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens (CBAVD) is a non-treatable cause of obstructive azoospermia (OA). However, the affected men can
father children by undergoing sperm retrieval (SR) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). This video describes percutaneous epididymal
sperm aspiration (PESA), performed on a 36 year-old male with CBAVD. In PESA the goal is to obtain epididymal fluid. A hypodermic needle
attached to a 1 cc syringe is inserted through the skin into the corpus or caput epididymis. Gentle negative pressure is applied to aspirate
the epididymal fluid, which is sent to the laboratory for examination. Total number of spermatozoa retrieved after a single puncture was 3.5
million sperm, of which 29% were motile. Motile spermatozoa with normal morphology were selected and injected into the oocyte cytoplasm,
while excess retrieved sperm were cryopreserved. The operative time was 10 minutes. The patient recovered his normal activities within the
next day and no complications were recorded. In a series involving 32 men with CBAVD, success rate at obtaining motile sperm by PESA was
96.8%, with a complication rate of 3.1%. ICSI carried out with spermatozoa retrieved by PESA resulted in a live birth rate of 34.4% per
attempt. The short-term outcome of resulting offspring was comparable with those obtained in other categories of OA. PESA is a simple,
quick, and successful procedure to retrieve sperm from men with OA due to CBAVD. Retrieved sperm can be successfully used to generate
healthy offspring with the aid of ICSI. ARTICLE INFO Available at: www.brazjurol.com.br/videos/july_august_2015/Esteves_817_818video.htm Int
Braz J Urol. 2015; 41 (Video #6): 817-8 In this very nice video, the authors highlight the clinical merit of percutaneous epididymal sperm
aspiration (PESA) in the management of obstructive azoospermia. The video highlights not only the key features of this technique but depict
within a consecutive cohort of 32 male patients that excellent outcomes can be achieved, with a very acceptable low complication rate. It
clearly validates PESA as a reliable and excellent choice in the management of obstructive azoospermia. There are clearly many factors which
must be considered in deciding which therapeutic intervention is selected in the management of obstructive azoospermia such as the success
in achieving high concentrations of motile sperm while imparting minimal to no risk. Clearly, PESA achieves these endpoints quite
successfully and hence constitutes an excellent choice in fertility management provided intracytoplasmic sperm injection is readily
available to couples thereafter and hopefully resulting in a successful conception. Sperm can be obtained by microepididymal sperm
aspiration (MESA), percutaneous sperm aspiration (PESA), and testicular sperm extraction (TESE), from patients with congenital absence of
the vas deferens (CBAVD). The authors of the video on PESA as a method for sperm retrieval in obstructive azoospermia nicely demonstrate
this technique in men with CBAVD. These patients have an abnormal epididymis from this condition making the retrieval more challenging (1).
In their case series of 32 men with CBAVD, success rate at obtaining motile sperm by PESA was 96.8%, with a live birth rate of 34.4% per
attempt. The short-term outcome of resulting offspring was comparable with those obtained in other types of obstructive azoospermia.
Percutaneous aspiration of sperm is an effective, safe, and reproducible means of obtaining adequate sperm in men who have obstructive
azoospermia due to CBAVD.
