The most common malignancy to cause gastric outlet obstruction is primary gastric adenocarcinoma and it is followed by carcinoma of the
pancreas and gallbladder. Herein, we report a case of gastric outlet obstruction secondary to metastatic lobular breast carcinoma. Fifty-
seven year old Caucasian female with recently diagnosed metastatic lobular breast carcinoma to skin was referred to gastroenterology for
evaluation of dyspepsia and dysphagia. She has past medical history significant for acid reflux and Clostridium difficile colitis. Computed
tomography of her abdomen showed diffused bowel wall thickening without evidence of bowel obstruction. Due to persistent abdominal pain, an
upper endoscopy was performed. The upper endoscopy showed gastritis and gastric stenosis in the gastric antrum. These lesions were biopsied
and dilated with a balloon dilator. The biopsy of the gastric antrum later showed a metastatic carcinoma of breast origin with typical tumor
morphology and immune-phenotype. Differentiating metastatic breast carcinoma from primary gastric adenocarcinoma cannot be done using
histological examination alone. Immunohistochemistry is needed to differentiate the two based on staining for estrogen and progesterone
receptors. The presence of gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 is also suggestive of metastatic breast carcinoma. The stomach has a
significant capacity to distend (up to 2–4 L of food) and malignant gastric outlet obstruction is often undetected clinically until a high-
grade obstruction develops. Our case demonstrates valuable teaching point in terms of broadening our differentials for gastric outlet
obstruction. When patients present with gastric outlet obstruction, both non-malignant and malignant causes of gastric outlet obstruction
should be considered. Once adenocarcinoma has been determined to be the cause of gastric outlet obstruction, further immunohistochemistry is
needed to differentiate breast carcinoma from other carcinomas. Gastric outlet obstruction (GOO) can be a complication of malignancy,
gastric polyps, peptic ulcer disease, or gallstone obstruction. Since the advent of histamine-2 blocker in the late 1970s, the incidence of
GOO from duodenal ulcer has declined dramatically and the malignancy accounts for as many as 61 % of GOO . The most common malignancy to
cause GOO is primary gastric adenocarcinoma and it is followed by carcinoma of the pancreas and gallbladder [1, 2]. Herein, we report a case
of gastric outlet obstruction secondary to metastatic lobular breast carcinoma. There are several case reports regarding GOO secondary to
metastatic breast cancer and it is an extremely rare cause of obstructions per literature review from 1995 to date.Fig. 1EGD.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy images showing gastric outlet obstruction at the gastric antrumFig. 2CT scan. CT scan of abdomen without IV or PO
contrast showing thickening of the gastric antrumFig. 3Lower power field. Lower power shows relatively bland looking tumor cells expanding
the lamina propria of the mucosaFig. 4Estrogen receptor. The tumor cells are positive for nuclear staining of estrogen receptorFig.
5Cytokeratin 7. The tumor cells in the lamina propria are positive for cytokeratin 7 immunostainingFig. 6GATA-3. The tumor cells show
positive nuclear stain for GATA-3 (a marker for breast cancer) EGD. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy images showing gastric outlet obstruction at
the gastric antrum CT scan. CT scan of abdomen without IV or PO contrast showing thickening of the gastric antrum Lower power field. Lower
power shows relatively bland looking tumor cells expanding the lamina propria of the mucosa Estrogen receptor. The tumor cells are positive
for nuclear staining of estrogen receptor Cytokeratin 7. The tumor cells in the lamina propria are positive for cytokeratin 7 immunostaining
GATA-3. The tumor cells show positive nuclear stain for GATA-3 (a marker for breast cancer) Fifty-seven year old female with recently
diagnosed metastatic lobular breast carcinoma to skin was referred to gastroenterology team for evaluation of dyspepsia and dysphagia. She
has past medical history significant for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and Clostridium difficile colitis. She was previously
evaluated in the emergency department for abdominal pain. CT scan of her abdomen showed diffused bowel wall thickening without evidence of
bowel obstruction (Fig 1). Her CBC was unremarkable without leukocytosis. LFT’s were not elevated and lipase level was normal at 30 U/L. Due
to absence of acute medical issue, she was discharged to home from the emergency department. The patient was seen by oncology team as
outpatient soon after her recent ED visit for further evaluation of the recently diagnosed breast cancer by skin biopsy under the right
breast. The biopsy showed a metastatic lobular carcinoma and the estrogen receptor on these cells was strongly positive in 100 % of the
cells. The progesterone receptor was negative and the Her-2/neu expression was negative by the FISH assay. She continued to complain of
abdominal pain and difficulty with swallowing to her oncologist. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed subsequently to evaluate
her dyspepsia and dysphagia. The EGD showed gastritis and gastric stenosis in the gastric antrum (Fig 2). These lesions were biopsied and
dilated with a balloon dilator. The biopsy of the gastric antrum later showed a tumor with morphology of relatively uniform cells growing in
single files in the lamina propria (Fig 3). The immune-reactivity was positive for cytokeratin 7, gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP)
15, estrogen receptor (ER) and GATA-3 (Figs 4, 5 and 6). The immunostaining profile and tumor morphology were consistent with a metastatic
carcinoma of breast origin. Differentiating metastatic breast carcinoma from primary gastric adenocarcinoma cannot be safely done using
histological examination alone. However, less pleomorphic tumor morphology and single file pattern are commonly seen in lobular carcinoma of
breast. Immunohistochemistry is required to differentiate the two based on staining for a panel of immnohistochemical markers including
GATA-3, CDX-2, GCDFP-15, and estrogen receptors. While GATA-3 is currently considered as a better marker for breast cancer, diffuse strong
ER positivity and presence of GCDFP 15 are also suggestive of metastatic breast carcinoma . GATA3 is a sensitive and specific marker for
diagnosis of breast carcinomas . The stomach has a significant capacity to distend (up to 2–4 L of food) and malignant GOO is often
undetected clinically until a high-grade obstruction develops . Gastrointestinal (GI) metastasis from breast cancer is extremely rare and
accounts for less than one percentage of metastatic breast cancers . The most common sites of GI track metastasis from breast cancer are
colon and rectum . Metastasis to stomach only accounts for a small fraction of GI track metastasis from breast cancer . Gastrointestinal
metastasis from breast is associated with poor prognosis . Our case demonstrates valuable teaching point in terms of broadening our
differentials for GOO. When patients present with GOO, both non-malignant and malignant causes of GOO should be considered. Once
adenocarcinoma has been determined to be the cause of GOO, further immunohistochemistry is needed to differentiate breast carcinoma from
other carcinomas. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Gastric outlet obstruction Gastroesophageal reflux
disease Computed tomography Complete blood count Liver function test Emergency department Fluorescence in situ hybridization
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Estrogen receptor Gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 M. Joshua Shellenberger, Zong Ming Chen and Jinhong Li
contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AHK
was involved in drafting the manuscript and revising critically important intellectual content. MJS was involved in revising critically
important intellectual content and in patient care. ZMC was involved in revising critically important intellectual content of this
manuscript. JL was involved in revising critically important intellectual content of this manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. Authors’ information Alexander H Kim Current gastroenterology fellow at Geisinger Medical Center M. Joshua Shellenberger
Current faculty in Gastroenterology department at Geisinger Medical Center Zong Ming Chen Current faculty in Pathology department at
Geisinger Medical Center Jinhong Li Current faculty in Pathology department at Geisinger Medical Center Availability of data and materials
Not applicable. We thank Gastroenterology department at Geisinger Medical Center who provided support for our patient care and funding for
this manuscript publication.
