Potocki–Lupski syndrome is a microduplication syndrome associated with duplication at 17p11.2. Features include facial dysmorphism, moderate
to mild cognitive impairment and behavioural abnormalities including autism spectrum disorders. We describe a patient from Sri Lanka that
was referred for genetic assessment at 4 years of age due to subtle facial dysmorphism and expressive language impairment. She was diagnosed
with Potocki–Lupski syndrome through multiplex ligation probe amplification. She carried two duplications; one in 17p11.2 consistent with
Potocki–Lupski, and one in Xq including the region for X-linked intellectual disability. Despite the absence of expected behavioural
symptoms, many features of this patient are in accordance with Potocki–Lupski syndrome. This is the first diagnosed patient in Sri Lanka.
Potocki–Lupski syndrome (PTLS) is associated with a microduplication of chromosome 17p11.2 . The clinical features of PTLS typically include
infantile hypotonia, poor feeding, failure to thrive, developmental delay, intellectual disability, speech and language impairment,
behavioural abnormalities and autistic spectrum disorder . The phenotypic spectrum in adults with PTLS has not been determined. The genetic
mechanism underlying PTLS has been recognised as Non Allelic Homologous Recombination (NAHR) at the 17p11.2 chromosomal region . This region
is known to be rich in low copy repeats which is a major cause for DNA rearrangements and associated genomic disorders. Genetic diagnosis of
PTLS has been based on chromosome banding, fluorescent in situ hybridisation, multiplex ligation probe amplification and recently genomewide
microarray. This is the first case report describing the diagnosis of PTLS through the use of multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA)
in Sri Lanka. We report a 4 year old female with PTLS (OMIM 610883) from Sri Lanka who was diagnosed with duplication 17p11.2 by multiplex
ligation probe amplification performed due to severe expressive speech impairment. She was a product of non-consanguineous parents, born at
37 weeks gestation by lower segment caesarean section due to maternal gestational diabetes, with a birth weight of 2.885 kg. There was no
history of infantile hypotonia. Developmental milestones were delayed with walking achieved at 2 years of age. Speech delay was noted and at
presentation she was capable of speaking a maximum of two words together with inability to construct sentences. Receptive language skills
were not impaired. Hearing showed no clinically apparent deficit. Vision was impaired with hypermetropia, and she used spectacles. She was
cheerful and engaged well socially. Common symptoms of autism including avoidance of eye contact, repetitive behaviour, fixations and lack
of interest in social interaction were not present. She had borderline to mild intellectual disability based on clinical evaluation and was
schooling with peers. There was no history of cardiac defects or sleeping problems. On examination she had distinctive facial features
including triangular face, wide forehead, slightly downslanting palpebral fissures, prominent tip of nose, smooth philtrum, and dental
malocclusion. Hands showed clinodactyly of the 5th finger bilaterally and an increased gap between the first and second toe of the right
foot. Genetic analysis was performed using multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA). The SALSA® MLPA® P245 Microdeletion Syndromes-1
probemix (MRC Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) that has been developed to screen patients presenting with unexplained developmental
delay and/or mental retardation for multiple microdeletion syndromes was used. This revealed a duplication of 17p11.2. The region included
the retinoic acid inducible 1 gene (RAI1) gene which is compatible with PTLS. Apart from the RAI1 gene leucine rich repeat containing 48
(LRRC48) and lethal giant larvae homolog 1 (LLGL1) genes in the 17p11.2 chromosomal region were duplicated. In addition the Xq28 chromosomal
region which includes methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene showed duplication (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Multiplex ligation probe amplification
output showing duplication at 17p11.2 and Xq28 regions Multiplex ligation probe amplification output showing duplication at 17p11.2 and Xq28
regions All procedures adhered to institutional guidelines (Ethics Review Committee, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo) and to the
Helsinki Declaration. This is the first report of PTLS diagnosis in Sri Lanka. Clinically the patient presented with speech impairment and
mild facial dysmorphism. However unlike the majority of previously reported cases of PTLS behavioural symptoms including autism spectrum
disorders were not present. Genetic diagnosis of PTLS was made using MLPA, which showed 17p11.2 duplication. In addition she also carried
duplication in the Xq28 chromosomal region. Genetic disorder assessment previously limited to microscopic chromosomal anomalies and single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) detected by traditional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based sequencing has expanded following the detection
of copy number variations (CNV). Many sporadic microdeletions, microduplication syndromes have been recognised to occur due to CNV. Disease
occurrence is either due to altered copy number of genes susceptible to dosage effect or changes in the regulatory sequences. Detection of
such CNV requires locus specific testing either through fluorescent in situ hybridisation, multiplex ligation probe amplification or high
resolution screening of the entire genome through microarray technology. In resource limited settings such as Sri Lanka, MLPA techniques
provide an opportunity to arrive at a genetic diagnosis. However, genome wide screening through microarray technology should be the next
step in diagnostics. The low copy repeats found in the proximal short arm of chromosome 17 region has been identified as a major cause of
DNA rearrangements associated with many genomic disorders . PTLS which is due to duplication 17p11.2, is associated with duplication of the
retinoic acid inducible 1 gene (RAI1), which was seen in our patient . The MLPA mix used in the microduplication, microdeletion testing
included probes for 22 syndromes, including Smith Magenis syndrome (SMS). As the reciprocal microduplication syndrome of SMS, detection of
PTLS was possible through RAI1 gene dosage. The phenotype of this patient was relatively mild and had the possibility of being unrecognized
despite the varied medical symptoms. Therefore referral for genetic evaluation in the presence of delay in global or selected milestones is
useful to obtain an etiological diagnosis despite the limitations in sensitivity and specificity of methods used at present. MECP2
duplication syndrome is a condition that occurs almost exclusively in males and manifest as developmental delay, infantile hypotonia, absent
speech and lack of ambulation . This is thought to be due to skewed X chromosome inactivation with the resulting inactivation of the
duplication containing X chromosome in females. Therefore despite similar clinical features in PTLS and MECP2 duplication syndromes, the
clinical features noted in the patient were assumed to be associated with PTLS syndrome. However recently females with MECP2 duplication
have been found to manifest neurobehavioral and psychiatric symptoms . Therefore further investigation is ideal to confirm skewed X
chromosome inactivation. The patient lacked significant behavioural or psychiatric symptoms which are of additional significance to discount
the clinical effect possibly caused by duplication of MECP2. However the dual duplication of the two chromosomal regions of the genome in
this patient was interesting to note. This case report describes the clinical features and genetic findings of a 4 year old girl diagnosed
with Potocki–Lupski syndrome. Symptoms and signs are in accordance with reported clinical features of PTLS. Genetic diagnosis through MLPA
has revealed duplications in 17p11.2 and Xq28. This includes the critical RAI1 gene which has been shown to be associated with PTLS. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patients’ parents for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Potocki–Lupski syndrome non allelic homologous recombination
multiplex ligation probe amplification retinoic acid inducible 1 gene leucine rich repeat containing 48 gene lethal giant larvae homolog 1
gene methyl CpG binding protein 2 gene single nucleotide polymorphisms polymerase chain reaction copy number variations Smith Magenis
syndrome DS and VHWD participated in the design of the study. EM carried out the molecular genetic studies. DS drafted the initial
manuscript. SS was the paediatrician in charge of the childs’ care and referred the child for genetic studies. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. The authors thank Ms Dilum Nisansala for technical assistance. Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests.
