Systemic sclerosis is a systemic connective tissue disease with variable cutaneous presentations. Although pigmentary disturbances have been
described in systemic sclerosis, a reticulate hyperpigmentation has only been reported in one case of systemic sclerosis to date. We
describe a previously healthy 51-year-old Thai woman who presented with a reticulate hyperpigmentation affecting her trunk and extremities,
together with sclerodactyly and proximal sclerosis, resulting in a new diagnosis of systemic sclerosis. To date, the pathogenesis of
reticulate hyperpigmentation in systemic sclerosis remains unclear. Increased melanin synthesis and altered thermoregulatory mechanism are
proposed to be involved in the pathogenesis of this presentation. This case represents an unusual cutaneous feature of reticulate
hyperpigmentation in the setting of systemic sclerosis. Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem rheumatic disease with a variable clinical
presentation. Clinical diagnosis is mainly based on the presence of skin thickening and variable involvement of internal organs. Various
cutaneous pigmentary alterations have been described in SSc , including a diffuse, generalized hyperpigmentation with accentuation in sun-
exposed areas, a vitiligo-like depigmentation with perifollicular hyperpigmentation, and a combined hyper- and hypopigmentation in the areas
of sclerosis . The pattern of reticulate hyperpigmentation in SSc has been rarely reported in the literature, and has an unclear
pathogenesis. We report an unrecognized pigmentary abnormality in a 51-year-old patient with SSc who presented with a reticulate
hyperpigmentation affecting the trunk and all extremities. To date, there have been only a few cases of reticulate hyperpigmented
scleroderma reported in the English literature. Our patient, a 51-year-old Thai woman, presented with a 1-year history of progressively
evolving skin pigmentation over her body, which had become accentuated over her trunk and extremities during the past few months. She also
complained of appetite loss resulting in an unintentional weight loss of 8kg (17.6lbs) in 1 year, joint pain in her wrists and ankles, and
bilateral hand swelling. Our patient also reported the presence of Raynaud’s phenomenon (RP) during the wintertime that had occurred about 5
years prior to the skin change of the hands. There were no other remarkable systemic symptoms. Our patient had been previously healthy and
did not take any medications. There was no familial history of a similar skin condition or history of chemical exposure in this case. A
physical examination revealed a generalized, reticulate hyperpigmentation and indurated erythematous plaques over her trunk and extremities.
Additionally, there was sclerosis of her proximal fingers, sclerodactyly with pitted scars on some fingertips, and Raynaud’s phenomenon
(Fig. 1a-c). Nailfold capillaroscopy was performed and showed few capillary loops dilatation without significant tortuosity. Telangiectasia
and calcinosis cutis were absent in this patient. There was no evidence of additional systemic involvement. Laboratory investigations
revealed normal white blood cell count, creatinine, electrolytes, fasting blood sugar, thyroid function, and liver function. An elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 40mm/hour (reference range 0–20mm/hour), a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1:640
(coarse-speckled pattern), and a positive rheumatoid factor (RF) >130IU/mL (reference range; <12.5IU/mL = negative,
12.5–20.5IU/mL = borderline, >20.5IU/mL = positive) were detected. Anti-centromere antibody (ACA), anti-topoisomerase I antibody (anti-
Scl-70 Ab), anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-RNP antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody (immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgM), lupus anticoagulant,
anti-β2-glycoprotein 1 antibody (anti-β2-GP1 Ab), and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP Ab) tests revealed negative
results. Urinalysis, chest X-ray, pulmonary function test, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy results were normal. A skin biopsy specimen
from her right calf corresponding to the hyperpigmented induration showed hyperpigmentation of basal keratinocytes and broad sclerotic
collagen bundles involving full thickness of the dermis, replacing adventitious fat, and extending into the subcutis with mild septal
thickening (Fig. 2). Some ectatic capillary blood vessels were found in the superficial and deep reticular dermis without evidence of
vasculitis or vasculopathy. A superficial and deep perivascular infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and some eosinophils was
noted. Based upon the clinical combination of sclerodactyly with sclerosis of the proximal fingers, generalized reticulate
hyperpigmentation, and histopathological finding of pan-dermal sclerosis, reticulate hyperpigmented systemic sclerosis was diagnosed.Fig.
1Clinical presentation. a, b Widespread reticulate hyperpigmentation over the trunk and extremities with discrete erythematous indurated
plaques over the chest wall and anterior abdomen, c Sclerodactyly with cool periphery of all fingersFig. 2Histopathological findings. A
biopsy from the hyperpigmented induration on the right thigh showed increased basal pigmentation with pan-dermal sclerosis. Mild superficial
and deep perivascular and perieccrine lymphocytic infiltrate was observed with some dilated dermal blood vessels and decreased adventitious
fat surrounding sweat glands. (Hematoxylin and eosin, ×10 objective) Clinical presentation. a, b Widespread reticulate hyperpigmentation
over the trunk and extremities with discrete erythematous indurated plaques over the chest wall and anterior abdomen, c Sclerodactyly with
cool periphery of all fingers Histopathological findings. A biopsy from the hyperpigmented induration on the right thigh showed increased
basal pigmentation with pan-dermal sclerosis. Mild superficial and deep perivascular and perieccrine lymphocytic infiltrate was observed
with some dilated dermal blood vessels and decreased adventitious fat surrounding sweat glands. (Hematoxylin and eosin, ×10 objective)
Reticulate hyperpigmentation is characterized by mottled patterns of cutaneous hyperpigmentation. The etiology is varied from congenital to
acquired conditions. An initial approach to identify the causes of reticulate hyperpigmentation depends on the characteristic onset of the
disease, the distribution of lesion, and the associated clinical findings. Further investigations including a skin biopsy may be helpful for
the definitive diagnosis . There are several patterns of pigmentary alteration previously described in sclerodermic patients, which are: i)
diffuse generalized hyperpigmentation, similar to Addison’s disease; ii) focal depigmentation with perifollicular hyperpigmentation,
resembling vitiligo; iii) localized hypo- and hyperpigmentation in localized sclerotic skin; iv) streaky hyperpigmentation over blood
vessels on a background of depigmentation on the legs and temporal scalp; and v) the most recent condition termed “reticulate hyperpigmented
scleroderma” . The pathogenesis of these hyperpigmentation abnormalities remains unclear, but some proposed hypotheses include increased
keratinocyte-derived endothelin-1 (ET-1), increased melanin synthesis; increased secretion of melanocytic growth factors by fibroblasts and
endothelial cells; and a thermoregulatory mechanism which results in a hyperpigmentation over vessels (“streaky hyperpigmentation”) on a
background of depigmented patches [4, 7–9]. Histopathological findings to explain hyperpigmentation in SSc have been previously reported as
increased epidermal melanin and pigmentary incontinence with an increased number of dermal melanophages in the superficial dermis . However,
in this present case, the lesional skin biopsy showed prominent basal hyperpigmentation without evidence of melanin incontinence or
increased dermal melanophages. The presence of some indurated erythematous plaques over the trunk and extremities is quite uncommon
regarding sclerotic skin change in SSc, and therefore the differential diagnosis with generalized morphea or other scleroderma-mimic
conditions such as eosinophilic fasciitis, sclerodermiform genodermatoses, scleroderma-like syndromes induced by environmental factors,
scleroderma diabeticorum, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, graft-versus-host disease, and scleroderma-like lesions in malignancies also is
concerned. Thus, the absent history of underlying systemic diseases including diabetes, chronic kidney disease, malignancy or substance
exposures and the recent onset of cutaneous symptoms would render the diagnosis of SSc regardless of other etiology. Moreover, the presence
of sclerodactyly, RP and abnormal nailfold capillaroscopy support the diagnosis of SSc in our case. To date, there have been only three
reported cases of reticulate hyperpigmented scleroderma. Of these reports, two cases were the result of melphalan-induced localized
reticulate scleroderma, which occurred secondary to isolated limb perfusion for treatment of malignancies in patients who did not have a
history of SSc or other connective tissue diseases [2, 3]. These patients presented with localized porcelain-white sclerotic bands in a
fishnet pattern, which was due to melphalan-induced endothelial injury. Ee et al. reported the only other known case to date of reticulate
hyperpigmented scleroderma arising in the setting of SSc, and was that of a 48-year-old woman . The pathogenesis remains unclear and further
study is required to identify the mechanism of reticulate pigmentary change in SSc. The thermovascular influence, as suggested by Jawitz et
al., is one of the possible mechanisms ; however, the skin biopsy in our patient did not reveal the presence of vasculitis or vasculopathy.
The only vascular-related changes seen in the biopsy was the dilation of dermal vasculature, which was surrounded by sclerotic collagen
within the dermis. In summary, our patient is the second reported case of reticulate hyperpigmented scleroderma, and the first case to
provide outcome information. Our patient has been treated and responded well to a combination therapy of topical potent corticosteroids,
ultraviolet A1 (UVA1) phototherapy, and daily oral medication with colchicine 1.2mg, aspirin 80mg, nifedipine 30mg, vitamin E 400mg, and
hydroxychloroquin 200mg. Improvement of the skin hardening and RP were observed after 3 months of treatment. However, our patient reported
occasional exacerbation of RP during the winter. The comparative case information between the previous case reports and our case is shown in
Table 1.Table 1Clinicopathological presentation and management of reticulate hyperpigmented sclerodermaPrevious case Previous case Previous
case Present caseAge (year) , sex48, female47, male43, male51, femaleSigns and symptomsRaynaud’s phenomenon, dsyphagia, sclerodactyly,
periungual telangiectasias, mask-like facies with perioral radial furrows; new diagnosis of systemic sclerosisPorcelain-white, sclerotic
bands in a reticulate pattern and painful ulcerations; associated with melphalanWhite reticular sclerotic bands with painful ulcerations;
associated with melphalanRaynaud’s phenomenon, sclerodactylyArea of scleroderma involvedTrunk, thighs, upper and lower limbsLeft thigh and
upper calfRight thighProximal sclerosis involving trunk and extremitiesArea of reticulate hyperpigmentationChest, abdomen and backMedial
aspect of the left thigh and upper calfMedio-popliteal aspect of the right thighTrunk and extremitiesANANegativen/an/aPositive, titer 1:640
(speckled pattern)Anti-centromere AbNegativen/an/aNegativeAnti-Scl-70 AbNegativen/an/aNegativeAnti-cardiolipin
AbNegativen/an/aNegativeHistological findingsEpidermisEpidermal atrophy and basal pigmentationEpidermal atrophyn/aBasal
hyperpigmentationDermis and subcutisThickened sclerotic collagen, marked pigmentary incontinence with numerous melanophages in the upper
dermis, septal thickeningThickened, intensely eosinophilic and closely packed collagen bundlesn/aBroad sclerotic collagen bundles in dermis
replacing adventitious fat, superficial and deep perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with few eosinophils, mild septal
thickeningTreatmentn/aTopical corticosteroids and antibiotics under a hydrocolloid dressingHydrocolloid dressing and topical
antibioticsTopical corticosteroid, colchicine, aspirin, nifedipine, vitamin E, hydroxychloroquin UVA1 phototherapyFollow-upn/aRecovery of
the ulcersn/aImprovement of thickened skin and Raynaud’ s phenomenon ANA antinuclear antibody, n/a not available, Ab antibody, anti-Scl-70
Ab anti-topoisomerase I antibody, UVA1 ultraviolet A1 Clinicopathological presentation and management of reticulate hyperpigmented
scleroderma ANA antinuclear antibody, n/a not available, Ab antibody, anti-Scl-70 Ab anti-topoisomerase I antibody, UVA1 ultraviolet A1
Reticulate hyperpigmented scleroderma is a distinctly rare cutaneous presentation in association with systemic sclerosis. The pathogenesis
is uncertain. Unlike the previously reported case of reticulate hyperpigmentation in association with systemic sclerosis, our patient failed
to demonstrate the presence of vascular alterations or melanin incontinence in the skin biopsy. Further studies are necessary to evaluate
the mechanism of this peculiar pigmentary change in systemic sclerosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MC was the dermatologist
who was in charge of the patient’s care and helped to draft the manuscript. ALH analyzed and interpreted the patient data with
histopathological evaluation. PP was the attending physician and responsible for providing all the clinical information. All authors
participated in the design of the manuscript. ALH and PP made the final revisions to the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. None of the authors were funded for this particular case presentation.
