To the Editor: A 49-year-old man presented with a cough and short of breathing for 3 months’ duration. He went to different hospitals and
received treatment of antibiotics for pneumonia in the left low lobe. On physical examination, cyanosis of lips and auscultation of the
chest showed the left-side breath sounds decreased. Computed tomographic (CT) scan, coronal CT and imaging of virtual bronchoscopy of the
chest demonstrated a round lesion in the left main bronchus and the left main bronchus was almost completely obstructed by the mass [Figure
1a]. Bronchoscopy showed a round pinkish polypoid tumor obstructing the distal portion of the left main bronchus [Figure 1b]. We initially
considered the lesion might be a carcinoid, liomyoma, or solitary fibrous tumor (SFT). And CT enhancement of this lesion was not
significant. Hence, we obtained some tissue by bronchoscopic biopsy. And biopsy revealed fibrous tumor. After this, we talked with the
patient and his family members of treatments of this disease and the benefits and risk. The patient chose surgery. Eventually, we obtained a
2 cm × 2 cm mass by surgical resection and the histological examination affirmed a SFT with a positive response for CD34, CD100 and CD99,
and negative for actin, CK and anaplastic lymphoma kinase by immunohistochemical study. Computed tomographic scan showed a round lesion in
the left main bronchus and the left main bronchus was almost completely obstructed by the mass (a). And bronchoscopy showed a round pinkish
polypoid tumor obstructing the distal portion of the left main bronchus (b). SFT was first reported in 1931 originating from the pleura.
SFTs most often grow in the pleura. The endobronchial SFT is extremely rare. More than 50% of the patients are asymptomatic, while SFTs
growth in the airway may cause bronchial obstruction, obstructive pneumonia, and dyspnea. Many treatment ways, ranging from endobronchial
techniques (yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) laser, argon plasma coagulation, etc.) to surgical resection, are available. In cases of
endobronchial SFT, sleeve-resection of the airway with preservation of lung parenchyma is a feasible surgical option. Patients can get good
prognosis treated by complete sleeve-resection of the tumor. After surgery, adjuvant therapy is generally not recommended in the
histologically benign lesion. Because these tumors may have high recurrence rates, regular follow-up with radiographic even bronchoscopic
studies is advised. This study was supported by Science and Technology Program for Public Wellbeing of Yunnan Province (No. 2014RA020).
There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Xiu-Yuan Hao
