In this brief communication we describe the occurrence of a KPC-producing Serratia marcescensisolate in a home-care patient from Recife,
Brazil. The bla KPC, bla SPM, bla IMP, bla VIM bla OXA, bla CTX-M, bla SHV, bla TEM and bla GES genes were investigated by Polymerase Chain
Reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing. The isolate was positive for bla KPC-2 and bla TEM-1 and was resistant to aztreonam, cefepime,
cefotaxime, imipenem, meropenem, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin and cefazidime, and susceptible only to amikacin, tigecycline and gatifloxacin.
This is the first report in Brazil of KPC-producing S. marcescens clinical isolate outside of a hospital environment. Caregivers should be
alert for the presence of this isolate in the community setting. Nesse estudo descrevemos a ocorrência de um isolado de Serratia
marcescensprodutor de KPC em um paciente sob assistência médica domiciliar em Recife, Brazil. Os genes bla KPC, bla SPM, bla IMP, bla VIM
bla OXA, bla CTX-M, bla SHV, bla TEM and bla GES foram investigados pela Reação em Cadeia da Polimerase (PCR) e sequenciamento de DNA. O
isolado foi positivo para os genes bla KPC-2 and bla TEM-1 e foi resistente a aztreonam, cefepime, cefotaxima, imipenem, meropenem,
gentamicina, ciprofloxacina e ceftazidima, e susceptível apenas a amicacina, tigeciclina e gatifloxacina. Este é o primeiro relato no Brasil
de um isolado clínico de S. marcescensprodutor de KPC fora de ambiente hospitalar. Os profissionais de saúde devem estar atentos à presença
desse isolado na comunidade. The emergence of Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC)producing gram-negative bacteria is worrisome due to
inter or intraspecies plasmid-mediated transfer of the bla KPC gene14. Furthermore, KPC-producing isolates are commonly multidrug-resistant,
reducing therapeutic options. Since the first occurrence of KPC-producing K. pneumoniae in the United States18, this enzyme has been
described in several countries and in different species, mostly from nosocomial infections2 , 3 , 8 , 11 , 13 , 16. Nevertheless, the spread
of KPC-producing multidrug-resistant isolates in the community can also be a cause for great concern. In this study, we describe the
emergence of the bla KPC-2 gene in Serratia marcescens isolated outside of a hospital environment in Brazil. One isolate of Serratia
marcescens from the tracheal aspirate of a sixty-three-year-old male with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, diagnosed at a private laboratory
in Recife, Brazil, in September, 2010, was analyzed. The patient had been receiving medical attention at home since his last hospitalization
in a private hospital, in July, 2010. The isolate was initially identified by biochemical tests and confirmed using MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry methodology (Bruker Daltonics, Germanny). Susceptibility testing was performed by the Etest (BioMérieux, Marcy l'Étoile,
France) for aztreonam, cefepime, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, imipenem and meropenem, and the disk diffusion method6
for amikacin and gatifloxacin. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were interpreted according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards
Institute (CLSI) guidelines. The modified Hodge test (MHT) with ertapenem disks (10 µg) was used for phenotypic detection of carbapenemase
activity12. Specific primers were used under standard PCR conditions to detect carbapenemase and ESBL encoding genes such as bla SPM, bla
IMP, bla VIM, blaKPC, blaCTX-M, blaSHV, blaTEM, blaGES, blaOXA-4815, blaOXA-23, blaOXA-24, and bla OXA-58 17, followed by DNA sequencing
(ABI 337 sequencer, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The nucleotide sequences were analyzed with software available at the National
Center for Biotechnology Information website (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cg). The Serratia marcescens isolate was resistant to
aztreonam (MIC, 128 µg/mL), cefepime (MIC, 64 µg/mL), cefotaxime (MIC, 128 µg/mL), ceftriaxone (MIC, > 32 µg/mL), imipenem and meropenem
(MIC, > 32 µg/mL), gentamicin (MIC, >32 µg/mL) and ciprofloxacin (MIC, 4 µg/mL) and showed positive MHT results. On the other hand, the
isolate was susceptible to amikacin and gatifloxacin, exhibiting reduced susceptibility to cefazidime (MIC, 8 µg/mL). S. marcescens carried
bla KPC-2 (GenBank accession number JX131687) and bla TEM-1 genes (GenBank accession number JX293719). The spread of KPC has been frequently
reported in Enterobacteriaceae, mainly in K. pneumoniae. In Brazil, the occurrence of KPC-producing S. marcescens isolates was reported by
DEL PELOSO et al.7 in intensive care unit (ICU) patients with urinary sepsis. Although the occurrence of bla KPC-2 in S. marcescens isolates
has been described in nosocomial strains4 , 16, ICU patients may continue to be colonized by carbapenemase-producing isolates for long
periods after hospital discharge, allowing its potential spread to households and the community9 , 10. In a study conducted by CHEN et al.5
at a hospital in Virginia, USA, 58 patients with a mean age of 70 years were identified with infection or colonization by KPC-producing K.
pneumoniae, 36% of whom were admitted from nursing homes or longterm care facilities (LTCF). The mean time to isolate a KPC-producing
organism was 1.5 days after admission, suggesting that KPC-producing organisms were acquired in the community and that person-to-person
transmission of KPC-producing organisms in the community is possible. GOTTESMAN et al.9 described extra-hospital dissemination of a
KPCproducing K. pneumoniae isolate in Israel, where a patient likely acquired the isolate from his wife, who had been previously
hospitalized. In the present study, the patient probably acquired the KPC-producing S. marcescens isolate during his previous
hospitalization, since he received homecare after discharge. However, we want to emphasize the occurrence of the bla KPC gene outside the
hospital environment, given that this resistance mechanism can easily spread among different species inside hospitals as well as in the
community, as previously described9. The occurrence of KPC in community isolates of K. pneumoniae has only been reported in Brazil by ABBOUD
et al.1, in an outpatient from São Paulo. The epidemiology of KPC-producing and multidrug-resistant organisms in a community setting remains
poorly understood in Brazil. Thus, caregivers should be alert for the presence of this isolate, and prevention and control measures should
be implemented not only in hospitals, but also in the community. The phenotypic and molecular characterization of community isolates can
provide the essential data required to avoid the spread of this emerging resistance mechanism in the community.
