Adenosquamous carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater is extremely rare, and its clinicopathological features are limited and described in few
previous case reports. Here, we report curative resection of adenosquamous carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater at an early stage. An 81-year-
old woman was referred to our hospital for investigation of the frequent elevation of hepatic and biliary enzymes and dilatation of the
intrahepatic bile ducts. Preoperative examinations revealed an exposed reddish tumor in the ampulla of Vater, which was diagnosed on biopsy
to be adenocarcinoma with squamous cell carcinoma component. Pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with regional lymph node dissection
was performed. Pathological examinations revealed the presence of two malignant components in the lesion, including poorly differentiated
tubular adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, without invasion beyond the sphincter of Oddi or into the duodenal submucosa. These
squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma components in the tumor comprised approximately 30 and 70 % of the lesion, respectively. No
metastasis into regional lymph nodes was observed, and the patient experienced no tumor recurrence or metastasis until 20 months after
surgery. We identified only six reported cases of adenosquamous carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater in the English literature, and all of
these patients died of recurrence within 14 months after surgery. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of adenosquamous
carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater that was curatively resected at an early stage. Although more number of studies on clinicopathological
findings are required to determine the appropriate surgical indication, we suggest that surgery remains the mainstay therapy for
adenosquamous carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater detected at an early stage. Adenosquamous carcinoma (ASC) is characterized by variable
combinations of two malignant components, including adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Adenocarcinomas account for most
malignancies of the ampulla of Vater; however, ASC is a rare condition. Although the proportion of the aforementioned two components varies,
adenocarcinoma usually predominates. According to the WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system, ASC is shown to comprise at
least 25 % of the SCC component in the tumor . ASCs in other primary sites that normally have glandular epithelium, such as the pancreas,
stomach, colon and rectum, breast, and prostate, are also rare and are considered to be clinically more aggressive, with worse prognosis
than their adenocarcinoma counterparts . Most studies on ASC in the ampulla of Vater have been small series or single case reports because
of its rarity. Therefore, clinicopathological features and outcomes of this entity remain unclear and no therapeutic strategies have been
established. Here, we report a case of ASC of the ampulla of Vater that was curatively resected at an early stage, and review the reported
cases of this unusual entity. An 81-year-old Japanese woman with a medical history of type II diabetes mellitus and arteriosclerosis
obliterans was referred to our hospital for investigation of the frequent elevation of hepatic and biliary enzymes and dilatation of the
intrahepatic bile ducts, which were identified by her family doctor during abdominal ultrasonography. The patient did not complain of
abdominal pain or decreased appetite. Laboratory examinations revealed slightly elevated biliary enzymes, including 413 IU/L alkaline
phosphatase (normal, 104–338 IU/L) and 184 IU/L \documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$
\gamma $$\end{document}γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (normal, 9–28 IU/L); however, other serum chemistry data were within normal limits. Levels
of the serum tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were also within normal limits. Contrast-enhanced
abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed dilatation of the intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts
and the main pancreatic duct without any strictures (Fig. 1a), suggesting the presence of an ampullary tumor. Neither lymph node enlargement
nor metastasis was observed. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass of 9 × 9 mm in the ampulla of Vater (Fig. 1b). The tumor
was located on the inside of the duodenal wall and had not invaded the duodenal muscularis propria, pancreas, common bile duct terminal, or
main pancreatic duct. Duodenoscopy revealed a bulging oral protrusion because of the dilated distal bile duct and an exposed reddish tumor
at the ampulla of Vater (Fig. 1c), which was diagnosed on biopsy to be adenocarcinoma with the SCC component. Endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed dilatation of the upstream bile duct and main pancreatic duct, and ERCP followed by transpapillary
biliary intraductal ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic tumor confined within the ampullary portion of the duodenum, the common channel of
the ampulla, and the ampullary portion of the bile duct area. However, no extension into the ampullary portion of the pancreatic duct or the
distal bile duct was observed. Because the patient showed the onset of acute cholangitis secondary to ERCP, endoscopic retrograde biliary
drainage was performed using a plastic stent on the day after ERCP. Based on these findings, the lesion was diagnosed as early-stage
carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater with the SCC component without extension along the distal bile duct or main pancreatic duct. Subsequently,
pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) with regional lymph node dissection was performed. Macroscopic examinations revealed a
whitish and solid exposed-type tumor, 11 × 8 mm in size in the ampulla of Vater (Fig. 2). Pathological examinations showed the presence of
two malignant components, including poorly differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and SCC without invasion beyond the sphincter of Oddi or
into the duodenal submucosa (Fig. 3a). SCC and adenocarcinoma components in the tumor comprised approximately 30 and 70 % of the tumor mass,
respectively. No regional lymph node metastases or lymphovascular or perineural infiltrations were observed. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
analyses of the squamous marker cytokeratin (CK)-5/6 showed strong positive expression in the SCC component and slight expression in the
adenocarcinoma component (Fig. 3b). In contrast, the adenocarcinoma marker CK-7 was strongly detected in the adenocarcinoma component and
weakly detected in the SCC component (Fig. 3c). The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient experienced no tumor recurrence or
metastasis until 20 months following surgery.Fig. 1 a Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed dilatation of the intra- and
extrahepatic bile ducts and the main pancreatic duct without any stricture. b Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass in the
ampulla of Vater located on the inside of the duodenal wall without invasion of the duodenal muscularis propria. c Duodenoscopy revealed an
exposed reddish tumor at the ampulla of VaterFig. 2Macroscopic findings. A whitish and solid exposed-type tumor, 11 × 8 mm in size, was
observed in the ampulla of VaterFig. 3Histopathological and immunohistochemical findings. a Hematoxylin and eosin staining. b CK5/6 was
strongly expressed in the squamous cell carcinoma component. c CK7 was expressed in the adenocarcinoma component (original magnification
×15) a Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed dilatation of the intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts and the main pancreatic duct
without any stricture. b Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass in the ampulla of Vater located on the inside of the duodenal
wall without invasion of the duodenal muscularis propria. c Duodenoscopy revealed an exposed reddish tumor at the ampulla of Vater
Macroscopic findings. A whitish and solid exposed-type tumor, 11 × 8 mm in size, was observed in the ampulla of Vater Histopathological and
immunohistochemical findings. a Hematoxylin and eosin staining. b CK5/6 was strongly expressed in the squamous cell carcinoma component. c
CK7 was expressed in the adenocarcinoma component (original magnification ×15) Although the histogenesis of ASC remains unclear, the four
prevailing hypotheses describe (1) pluripotent stem cells capable of inducing the malignant transformation of both cell types, (2) squamous
metaplasia in the intestinal mucosa, (3) malignant squamous metaplastic transformation of the adenocarcinoma, and (4) collision of the two
malignant tumors . It is currently accepted that adenosquamous carcinomas may occur through metaplastic malignant squamous transformation of
adenocarcinomas . Accordingly, in the present pathological examination, the SCC component was heterogeneously distributed and IHC staining
for squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma markers clearly separated discrete SCC and adenocarcinoma components, with no bidirectional
differentiation of individual tumor cells. Moreover, neither squamous metaplasia in the uninvolved adjacent epithelium nor a transition from
squamous metaplasia to squamous cell carcinoma could be identified. These observations are consistent with the theory of metaplastic
malignant squamous transformation of an adenocarcinoma. PubMed was searched using the terms “ampulla,” “papilla,” or “Vater,” and
“adenosquamous carcinoma” and six reported cases of ASC of the ampulla of Vater were retrieved from the English literatures [9, 11, 12].
Demographic and clinical characteristics of all studied patients, including the present patient, are summarized in Table 1. The average age
at diagnosis was 62.0 ± 17.4 years (range, 47–82), and five of seven patients (71 %) were men. In the present case, carcinoma of the ampulla
of Vater was diagnosed during the work-up for elevations of serum hepatobiliary enzymes. All other patients presented with symptoms such as
abdominal pain and jaundice, which were similar to the symptoms of conventional adenocarcinomas of the ampulla of Vater. Preoperative
endoscopic biopsy identified the SCC components in four cases (57 %), whereas the diagnosis of ASC was made after surgical resection in
three cases (43 %). Surgical procedures performed were pancreaticoduodenectomy, including PPPD, in six cases (86 %) and ampullectomy in one
case (14 %). The mean tumor size in the four cases with relevant data was 26.8 ± 12.9 mm (range, 11–40), and lymph node metastases were
identified in three of six cases with relevant data (50 %). Overall survival in all seven cases ranged from 6 to 20 months, and six of seven
patients survived within 14 months after surgical resection. In contrast, the present case survived for 20 months without any evidence of
recurrence.Table 1Reported cases of adenosquamous carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater in the English literatureYearAuthorAgeGenderSymptomSize
(mm)BiopsyTreatmentLN metsUICC stageProportion of SCCPrognosis (months)2002Ueno47MJaundice, general
fatigue22SCCPD(+)III75 %10Dead2013Yang64MJaundice, abdominal pain34ADCPD(+)IIBSCC>>ADC6Dead2013Yang82MJaundiceNMSCC
(−)Ampullectomy(−)IBNM14Dead2013Yang68MJaundice, abdominal painNMSCC (−)PD(+)IIINM7Dead2013Yang34FJaundice, abdominal painNMSCC
(−)PD(−)IIINM10Dead2014Kshirsagar58MJaundice, abdominal pain40SCCPDNMNMNMNMPresent case81FNo symptoms11ADC + SCCPPPD(−)IA30 %20Alive SCC
squamous cell carcinoma, ADC adenocarcinoma, PD pancreaticoduodenectomy, PPPD pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, NM not mentioned
Reported cases of adenosquamous carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater in the English literature SCC squamous cell carcinoma, ADC adenocarcinoma,
PD pancreaticoduodenectomy, PPPD pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, NM not mentioned ASC is regarded as a more clinically
aggressive tumor with less favorable prognosis than adenocarcinomas of other origins . Imaoka et al. reported that the median overall
survival of patients with ASC of the pancreas was nearly half that of patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. Prognosis of the
reported cases of ASC of the ampulla of Vater except the present case was poor; however, because of the limited number of cases, more
studies on clinicopathological findings are necessary to analyze whether the prognosis of ASC was less favorable than that of the
conventional adenocarcinomas of the ampulla of Vater as well as other origins. Few reports describe associations between the proportion of
SCC components and tumor progression . However, SCC components grow more aggressively than adenocarcinoma components in animal models .
Moreover, several studies report significantly shorter doubling times of SCCs than adenocarcinomas [16, 17], suggesting that the proportion
of SCC components in ASC increases with tumor progression and may be associated with prognosis. Accordingly, two reported cases of ASC of
the ampulla of Vater with predominant SCC component died of recurrence within 10 months after surgery [9, 12]. However, the Ki-67 index of
poorly differentiated SCC and adenocarcinoma components in the present case were 33 and 34 %, respectively, indicating a similar
proliferative potential of SCC and adenocarcinoma components. Yang et al. demonstrated no survival benefits of surgical interventions and
promoted chemoradiation as the first choice of treatment for ASC of the ampulla of Vater if the diagnosis of ASC could be made before
surgery. However, pathological observations of the present case showed limited tumor invasion within the sphincter of Oddi and no evidence
of regional lymph node metastasis or perineural or angiolymphatic invasions. Moreover, the SCC component comprised only 30 % of the tumor,
presumably resulting in continued survival until 20 months after surgery without evidence of recurrence. Therefore, we suggest that surgery
remains the mainstay therapy for ASC of the ampulla of Vater, although diagnosis of the condition during the early stages when the
adenocarcinoma component predominates over the SCC component is critical. Here, we report an unusual case of ASC of the ampulla of Vater.
The subsequent literature review revealed that all the reported cases of ASC of the ampulla of Vater carried poor prognosis. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report of ASC of the ampulla of Vater that was curatively resected at an early stage. Because of its
rarity, more number of studies on clinicopathological findings are required to determine the association between the proportion of the tumor
comprising SCC and progression, clinical outcome, and appropriate surgical indication. Nonetheless, the present case supports early
detection and the use of surgery as the only curative treatment option for this rare entity. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient to allow publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Adenosquamous carcinoma Cytokeratin Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography Immunohistochemistry
Pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy Squamous cell carcinoma Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions SH drafted the manuscript. SH and KA were in charge of the treatment of the patient and performed the
operation. MS participated in the treatment of the patient, and contributed to the collection of the clinical data. KA and TK reviewed and
edited the manuscript. HS prepared pathological images. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the patient and her
family who agreed to publish the clinical data.
