Dear Editor, A 48-year-old female with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus (DM) presented herself with a five-day history of fever, chills,
left flank pain and dysuria. On admission, her abdomen was mildly distended and tender over the left lumbar region. Laboratory data showed
white blood cell count of 18.6×109/L with 91.7% neutrophils, serum creatinine at 223 μmol/L, C-reactive protein at 168 mg/L and glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c) at 14.1%. Urine analysis showed turbid appearance with obvious pyuria, hematuria and proteinuria. A renal ultrasound scan
revealed potential signs of gas in the parenchyma of the left kidney. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen
demonstrated swelling of the left kidney with visible gas in the renal parenchyma (Fig. 1), radiologically associated with emphysematous
pyelonephritis (EPN, Class 2). The patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous catheter drainage (PCD) and was treated with broad-spectrum
intravenous antibiotics and rigorous blood sugar control. The urine and pus cultures showed significant growth of Escherichia coli (E.
coli). From the above medical procedures, the patient improved significantly and was discharged with an excellent prognosis. EPN is an
uncommon, but acutely severe and life-threatening necrotizing kidney infection, which is characterized by gas accumulation in the renal
parenchyma, collecting system, or perinephric tissue1 , 2 , 4. The disease usually occurs in female patients with poorly controlled DM, with
or without urinary tract obstruction1 , 2 , 4. E. coli is the most common pathogen, which has been extracted from urine or pus cultures in
almost 70% of the patients4. EPN is a radiological diagnosis, with CT scan currently being the imaging procedure of choice for early
diagnosis and assessment of the disease1 , 2 , 4. Importantly, PCD is now the most appropriate strategy and the gold standard in management
of EPN2 , 3. Over the last two decades, improvements in management techniques have drastically reduced the mortality rate of EPN to 21%3 ,
4. Fig. 1Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showing a mottled gas collection within the parenchyma of the swelling left kidney
This work was partly supported by the Medical Education Research Project of Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (No. YB130910).
