Apatinib is a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2, which shows good efficacy and safety
in clinical trials for chemotherapy-refractory gastric cancer patients. Till now, there is no case report after apatinib came in the market.
We presented a 55-year-old Chinese woman with advanced gastric cancer, who received apatinib after failure of second-line chemotherapy. On
the 19th day of apatinib administration, she suffered from gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Then, her condition rapidly deteriorated to
gastrointestinal perforation. Although the patient received timely medical and surgical treatment, she finally died of septic shock.
Although apatinib shows exciting efficacy and good tolerance in phase II and III clinical trials, this novel targeted drug should be
prescribed carefully and close clinical monitoring is needed when using it. Gastric cancer is the fifth most common malignancy in the world
and ranks as the third leading cause of cancer-related death.1 According to the statistics of World Health Organization (WHO), more than 40%
of cases occur in China.1 Despite rapid progress in cancer diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, there is no standard third-line treatment
for advanced gastric cancer so far. Apatinib is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) targeting vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-2 (VEGFR-2), which shows efficacy as third-line treatment in gastric cancer patients.2 In December 2014, China State Food and Drug
Administration (SFDA) approved apatinib for the treatment of chemotherapy-refractory gastric cancer patients. Herein we reported a case of a
55-year-old Chinese woman with advanced gastric cancer, who received apatinib after failure of second-line chemotherapy. During apatinib
administration, the patient suffered from gastrointestinal hemorrhage and perforation that led to septic shock. A 55-year-old Chinese woman,
diagnosed with gastric adenocarcinoma, was referred to the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Hangzhou,
China) in March 2013 (Figures 1 and 2). Neither abdominal mass nor superficial lymph node was palpable. Moreover, the rest of the physical
examination was unremarkable. Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans did not reveal any obvious distant metastasis. Surgery was
performed on March 12, 2013, after preoperative evaluation. Many white nodules were distributed in the abdominal cavity, which were
confirmed to be poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma by intraoperative frozen-section examination. Since there were extensive abdominal
metastases, the surgery was stopped without gastrectomy. Postoperative pathology showed signet-ring cell carcinoma of peritoneal nodule
(Figure 3). The result of immunohistochemistry (IHC) was CerbB-2 2+, Ki67+, Syn−, CgA−. Moreover, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
examination indicated negative of CerbB-2 gene amplification. Enhanced abdominal CT scan, gastric endoscopy. (A, B) On March 4, 2013,
enhanced abdominal CT scan revealed extensive thickening of gastric body and antrum wall (arrows). (C, D) Gastric endoscopy showed mural
thickening and stiffness with multiple erosions in the gastric body (arrows), indicating linitis plastica. CT, computed tomography.
Pathology of gastric biopsy. In March 2013, gastric biopsy pathology indicated gastric signet-ring cell carcinoma (hematoxylin and eosin,
magnification 100×). Postoperative pathology of peritoneal nodule. In March 2013, postoperative pathology revealed signet-ring cell
carcinoma of peritoneal nodule (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 100×). Immunohistochemistry result was CerbB-2 2+, Ki67+, Syn−, CgA−.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis indicated negative of CerbB-2 gene mutation. Diagnosed with gastric cancer with extensive
abdominal metastases, the patient received 6 cycles of first-line palliative chemotherapy (oxaliplatin 100 mg/m2 on day 1 and S-1 60 mg bid
on day 1 to day 14), repeated every 3 weeks. Imaging examination after the second, fourth, and sixth cycle showed slight shrink of gastric
tumor, which indicated stable disease (SD) according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST). The patient tolerated
chemotherapy very well. After first-line chemotherapy, the patient was administered oral S-1 as a maintenance treatment. In June 2014, 10
months after the end of first-line chemotherapy, the patient suffered from cardiac obstruction. Endoscopically nasojujunal feeding tube
placement (ENFTP) was performed by the gastroenterologist. Moreover, the patient received 5 cycles of second-line chemotherapy consisting of
albumin-bounded paclitaxel 130 mg/m2 on day 1 and 8, and oxaliplatin 100 mg/m2 on day 2, repeated every 3 weeks. Obstructive symptoms were
significantly relieved after 2 cycles of chemotherapy, and the feeding tube was removed. The patient obtained SD on CT scans after 6 cycles
of chemotherapy. Grade 4 neutropenia occurred and treated with recombinant human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (rh-GCSF) (Table 1).
Medical Information About the Patient In November 2014, 2 months after termination of second-line chemotherapy, the disease progressed
again. Best supportive care was given. But incomplete gastrointestinal obstruction occurred repeatedly. On December 13, 2014, a new oral-
targeted drug for gastric cancer, apatinib, was approved by China SFDA. On December 20, 2014, we prescribed apatinib 850 mg once a day for
the patient. However, the drug could not relieve the obstruction symptoms including nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. The patient's
blood pressure rose mildly after taking apatinib. On the 19th day of apatinib administration, the patient started to spit blood streak and
clot, and fecal occult blood test was positive, whereas blood coagulation spectrum was normal. Hematemesis was not relieved after 4 days of
standard medical treatment, including fasting, parenteral nutrition, and proton pump inhibitor (PPI) prescription. On January 13, 2015, we
had to stop apatinib administration. In the night of January 13, 2015, the patient complained of sudden severe abdominal pain with nausea
and vomiting, and emergency erect abdominal plain radiograph indicated gastrointestinal obstruction without subphrenic free air. Regular
analgesic and spasmolytic therapy was administrated, which unfortunately showed little effect. And 47 minutes later, the patient presented
with unstable hemodynamics. Antishock treatment was given immediately. Meanwhile, enhanced abdominal CT scan showed a large amount of
ascites and gastric mass with peritoneal metastatic lesions (Figure 4A). Acute surgical consultation was held, and the patient was diagnosed
with gastrointestinal perforation, acute diffuse peritonitis, and septic shock. Then, she was transferred to the Department of General
Surgery promptly. Emergency operation was carried out. There was approximately 3000 mL of purulent ascites with excrement stink in the
abdomen. A perforated ulcer about 1 cm in diameter existed on the anterior gastric wall. Apart from this, there were many miliary nodules
distributing in the abdominal cavity and a large tumor in the ileal lumen, the pathological diagnosis of which was metastatic signet-ring
cell carcinoma (Figure 4B). Surgeons irrigated her abdomen with normal saline, performed enterolysis, repaired perforated gastric wall, and
resected the ileal tumor. The patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (ICU) after operation. But shock symptoms
continued and developed to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). The patient finally died on February 23, 2015. Enhanced abdominal CT
scan and postoperative pathology of intestinal mass. (A) On January 13, 2015, enhanced abdominal CT scan showed a large amount of ascites
and gastric mass with peritoneal metastatic lesions. (B) Postoperative pathology of ileal mass revealed metastatic signet-ring cell
carcinoma, without any area of necrosis (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 100×). CT, computed tomography. Apatinib is a novel, oral
small-molecule VEGFR-2 inhibitor, which can suppress tumor angiogenesis.2,3 Phase II and III studies of apatinib have shown exciting
efficacy and good safety in Chinese gastric patients who have failed at least 2 chemotherapeutic regimens.4,5 In the phase III study of
apatinib,5 273 patients were randomly assigned to oral apatinib group or placebo group at a ratio of 2 : 1. Patients with bleeding tendency
were excluded. The results showed that patients receiving apatinib had significantly longer median overall survival (195 vs 140 days;
P < 0.016) and longer median progression-free survival (PFS) (78, vs 53 days; P < 0.0001) compared with those receiving placebo. Both in the
phase II and III studies of apatinib,4,5 the 3 most common adverse events (AEs) were hypertension, hand-foot syndrome, and proteinuria. But
there was no significant difference in severe AEs (such as gastrointestinal massive hemorrhage and perforation) between the 2 groups.
According to current studies of apatinib in gastric cancer patients, AEs were manageable and reversible.2,4,5 Patients with bleeding
tendency were excluded in the 2 clinical trails. The patient in our study had mildly raised blood pressure after taking apatinib. Moreover,
she did not experience other common AEs such as hand-foot syndrome, proteinuria, and coagulation disorder. However, upper gastrointestinal
bleeding occurred on the 19th day of apatinib administration. Also, the patient's condition rapidly deteriorated to gastrointestinal
perforation. Despite timely medical and surgical treatment, she finally died of septic shock. The common causes of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding are peptic ulcer, acute gastritis, esophageal varices, gastrointestinal malignancy, etc.6 Additionally, the main causes of upper
gastrointestinal perforation are peptic ulcer, necrotic or ulcerated malignancy, iatrogenic, and traumatic injuries.7 Considering our
patient's disease and history of drug use, we thought that the most possible causes of her upper gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation
included drug resistance and cancer progression, adverse effect of apatinib, and combined results of the former 2 reasons. First of all, the
patient's clinical symptoms were not relieved after 19 days of apatinib use. Later, abdominal CT scan and emergency surgery proved apatinib
resistance and cancer progression, which could lead to tumor bleeding. A retrospective study conducted by Maluf-Filho et al8 showed that
cancer was the main cause of gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with upper gastrointestinal tract cancer, accounting for 84.4% of all
causes. In our case, cancer-related bleeding could probably be part of the reason for gastrointestinal bleeding. But, considering the sudden
occurrence and rapid deterioration of hemorrhage, cancer progression would be unlikely the only cause. Furthermore, as a VEGFR-2 inhibitor,
the adverse effects of apatinib possibly include gastrointestinal hemorrhage and perforation. Vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs)
and their receptors (VEGFRs) are critical factors of VEGF pathway, which plays a vital role in tumor angiogenesis. Both VEGF antibodies and
VEGFR inhibitors can suppress the VEGF pathway and show clinical efficacy in cancer treatment.9 Studies have indicated that VEGF antibodies
such as bevacizumab and aflibercept had a higher risk of hemorrhage and perforation events than control drugs.10–12 A meta-analysis
including 17 clinical trials observed a significantly increased risk of gastrointestinal perforation in patients treated with bevacizumab
compared with control medications (relative risk 2.14, 95% confidence interval 1.19–3.85, P = 0.011).11 Similarly, another meta-analysis
including 8 clinical trials demonstrated that patients treated with aflibercept had a significantly higher risk of gastrointestinal
perforation than controls (odds ratio 3.76, 95% CI 1.94–7.25, P < 0.001).12 Taking VEGFR inhibitors into consideration, a meta-analysis
conducted by Qi et al, including 27 clinical trials, did observe that VEGFR-TKIs (not including apatinib) were associated with a
significantly increased risk of all-grade hemorrhagic events (RR 1.67, 95% CI 1.19–2.33, P = 0.003), but not related with gastrointestinal
hemorrhage (RR 0.54, 95% CI 0.12–2.42, P = 0.42).13 Moreover, another recent meta-analysis including 20 clinical trials did not observe
increased risk of gastrointestinal perforation in patients using VEGFR-TKIs (OR 2.99, 95% CI 0.85–10.53, P = 0.089).14 But these analyses
did not investigate apatinib, which is a novel VEGFR-TKI. Phase II and III clinical trials of apatinib in gastric cancer excluded patients
with bleeding tendency, and neither of them reported gastrointestinal bleeding or perforation events associated with apatinib.4,5 Apart from
this, there has been no report on severe AEs of apatinib since it came into the market. Therefore, we can see that there is some evidence
proving the association between VEGF pathway inhibitors and severe gastrointestinal AEs (hemorrhage and perforation), but the risk of VEGFR-
TKI including apatinib is not clear. In another word, apatinib might be the cause of our patient's gastrointestinal hemorrhage and
perforation, but this opinion lacks adequate evidence. Further studies and reports of apatinib are warranted. In summary, drug resistance
and cancer progression, as well as adverse effect of apatinib, could probably be the reasons for our patient's bleeding and perforation, but
we cannot determine the direct and real reason according to existing studies and experience. But at least, we have learned that apatinib
should be administrated with caution, whose risk of gastrointestinal hemorrhage and perforation needs further investigation. We wrote this
report to share experience with oncologists, since apatinib has been seldom used in clinical practice so far. It is worth mentioning that
this patient obtained a relatively long PFS time of first-line chemotherapy (141/2 months), which may in part attribute to S-1 maintenance
therapy. S-1, which is available for advanced gastric caner in European and Asian countries, is an oral anticancer drug that combines
tegafur with gimeracil and oteracil.15 A randomized phase III clinical trial conducted by Boku et al16 indicated that S-1 was noninferior to
5-fluorouracil as first-line treatment in metastatic gastric cancer. Chen et al17 performed a case-control study to investigate the efficacy
of S-1 maintenance chemotherapy in advanced gastric cancer. The results showed that S-1 group had significantly higher disease control rate
than optimal supportive care group (73.3% vs 46.7%; P < 0.05, n = 60), but the 2 groups’ PFS and overall survival were not significantly
different. To date, there have not been large-scale clinical trials evaluating efficacy of S-1 as maintenance treatment in advanced gastric
cancer. In addition, there is no standard maintenance strategy worldwide for metastatic gastric cancer. Thus, we present this case to share
clinical experience in maintenance treatment of gastric cancer. There are some limitations of this case report. First of all, the intrinsic
methodological limitations of case reports exist in our study as well, including lack of sampling, low level of clinical evidence, etc.
Second, as discussed above, we cannot determine the real reason for the patient's gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation. Moreover, this
case lacks a literature review, because there is no similar study so far. Apatinib is a novel TKI targeting VEGFR-2, which shows good
efficacy and tolerance in clinical trails as third-line treatment for metastatic gastric cancer. But oncologists should administer this drug
carefully, and strengthen the clinical monitoring when using it. Moreover, S-1 may be a good choice for maintenance treatment of advanced
gastric cancer, which needs further randomized case-control studies. Consent: Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's
family for publication of this case report and accompanying images. Abbreviations: AEs = adverse events, CT = computed tomography, ENFTP =
endoscopically nasojujunal feeding tube placement, FISH = fluorescence in situ hybridization, ICU = intensive care unit, IHC =
immunohistochemistry, MODS = multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, OR = odds ratio, PFS = progression-free survival, PPI = proton pump
inhibitor, RECIST = Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, rh-GCSF = recombinant human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, RR =
relative risk, SD = stable disease, SFDA = State Food and Drug Administration, TKI = tyrosine kinase inhibitor, VEGF = vascular endothelial
growth factor, VEGFR-2 = vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2, WHO = World Health Organization. The authors declare no competing
interests.
