An obturator hernia accompanied with a femoral abscess is rare, and leads to severe infection. Repeated draining is often required due to
remnant abscess. We herein reported a case of a perforated obturator hernia with a femoral abscess that was successfully treated via repair
using the pectineus muscle. An 84-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with appetite loss and right femoral pain. Abdominal
computed tomography (CT) revealed a right obturator hernia and abscess spreading to the right thigh. Emergency surgery was performed.
Intraoperative findings revealed that the abscess had formed because of a perforation in the small intestine by an incarcerated obturator
hernia. We performed partial resection of the small intestine, repaired the hernial orifice, drained the right femoral abscess, and filled
the cavity using the pectineus muscle. A residual abscess was not detectable following surgery, and the patient was discharged on
postoperative day 63. Some patients with a perforated obturator hernia and femoral abscess have a residual abscess following surgery that
requires redrainage. Nevertheless, we consider it possible to successfully treat a perforated obturator hernia with a femoral abscess via
repair using the pectineus muscle. Obturator hernias are rare in acute surgical wards, accounting for only 0.07 % of all hernias, and
typically occur in elderly emaciated women as a result of a widened pelvic and enlarged obturator canal . Patients commonly present with
symptoms of intestinal obstruction and, occasionally, pain along the distribution of the obturator nerve on the ipsilateral side (Howship-
Romberg sign). However, difficulties are associated with an accurate diagnosis, with delays in its diagnosis or surgical interventions
contributing directly to the high morbidity and mortality rates that are characteristic of the perforation of gangrenous bowels . An
obturator hernia accompanied by a femoral abscess followed by perforation is a very rare combination, but may lead to severe infection and
takes time to completely heal. We herein reported a case of a perforated obturator hernia with a femoral abscess that was successfully
treated via repair using the pectineus muscle. An 84-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with appetite loss and vomiting.
She saw her family doctor three weeks previously, but was only diagnosed with appetite loss. A physical examination showed that her vitals
were stable, but that she was dehydrated. Abdominal distention was observed, and palpation revealed a hard mass in the medial side of the
right thigh that was tender. Her white blood cell count was 13,060/ml, C-reactive protein level was 11.5 mg/dl, and temperature was 38 °C.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a proximal small bowel obstruction secondary to the right obturator hernia as well as an abscess
spreading to the right thigh (Fig. 1). We determined that the abscess had formed because of a perforation in the small intestine by an
incarcerated obturator hernia; therefore, emergency surgery was performed. During laparotomy of the lower median, the small intestine was
revealed to be herniated into the right obturator canal. The proximal intestine was severely dilated and the distal intestine had collapsed.
The incarcerated intestine was reduced, and the abscess had formed due to a perforation in the small intestine by the incarcerated obturator
hernia. We performed partial resection of the small intestine and simple closure of the obturator foramen. A large amount of pus was drained
at incision of the right femoral below the inguinal ligament and on the inside of the femoral artery, and sufficient irrigation was
performed. We repaired this site by filling the drained femoral abscess with the pectineus muscle, which had been incised from part of the
attachment to the pubis bone, and fixed it to the adductor longus muscle in order to reduce the residual abscess and risk of recurrence
after surgery (Fig. 2). Two 15 French continuous suction drains (J-VAC®) were placed in the thigh (Fig. 3), and the skin was closed. A
residual abscess was not detectable following surgery, and the drains were removed on postoperative day 12.Fig. 1Computed tomography (CT)
revealed a right obturator hernia (thin arrow) and abscess spreading to the right thigh (bold arrow)Fig. 2Schema of the pectineus muscle
flapFig. 3Intra-operative image of the femoral abscess after incision and drainage (thin arrow) Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right
obturator hernia (thin arrow) and abscess spreading to the right thigh (bold arrow) Schema of the pectineus muscle flap Intra-operative
image of the femoral abscess after incision and drainage (thin arrow) Although the patient had previously been reliant, she had become
bedridden prior to emergency surgery until approximately two weeks after surgery. She subsequently underwent rehabilitation and was
gradually ambulatory one month after surgery. She was discharged on postoperative day 63. Hernial orifices in obturator hernias are small
and inflexible; therefore, incarcerated Richter’s hernias commonly occur. Thus, any delay in a diagnosis may lead to necrosis and
perforation of the small bowel or a concomitant femoral abscess, as was observed in the patient in the present case, and peritonitis.
However, recent advances in diagnostic imaging have led to improvements in the diagnosis rate of obturator hernias using computed tomography
(CT) and other imaging techniques . The only treatment for obturator hernias is surgery. Various surgical approaches include abdominal,
inguinal, retropubic, and transperitoneal and, more recently, laparoscopic approaches. Simple closure of the hernia defect with interrupted
sutures or placement of a synthetic mesh are the preferred method of herniorrhaphy because they are associated with the lowest complication
rates [3, 4]. An obturator hernia with a concomitant femoral abscess is extremely rare, with only 16 cases (including the present case)
being reported to date in Japan . The average age of patients in these reports was 83.7 years, and all patients, except for one, were
female. Since the average number of days between disease onset and surgery was approximately 19, delays in diagnoses were implicated in the
formation of abscesses. The treatment of an obturator hernia with a concomitant femoral abscess requires resection of the perforated section
of the small bowel and drainage of the femoral abscess. In some cases, the femoral abscess is opened first and laparotomy and resection of
the perforated section of the small bowel are performed at a later date in a second surgical procedure. However, in other cases, resection
of the perforated section of the small bowel and drainage of the femoral abscess are both performed in a single surgical procedure. In cases
reported in Japan, four patients were treated with the two-stage surgical approach and 12 patients were treated with the single-stage
surgical approach. It was previously impossible to diagnose an obturator hernia as the cause of a femoral abscess prior to surgery, which
led to treatments using the two-stage surgical approach, because, after incisional drainage of the femoral abscess was performed, the
leakage of intestinal fluid and findings of a subsequent fistulogram finally led to the diagnosis of an obturator hernia. Recent advances in
the use of CT and other imaging methods have led to an increase in the early diagnosis of obturator hernias; therefore, most patients now
undergo single-stage surgery. Two-stage surgery is performed in serious cases; the femoral abscess is first drained and inflammation is
reduced to minimize risk, and this is followed by intestinal resection. On the other hand, in most cases (7 out of 10) in which the thigh
wound was closed during a single-stage procedure, the wound had to be reopened later to allow drainage. In spite of this drainage,
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), necrotizing fasciitis, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection were
detected after surgery in four cases in which the thigh wound was closed, and two of these patients died. The treatment of a femoral abscess
requires adjustments to the surgical technique used in order to allow sufficient drainage from the narrow obturator canal and small
intermuscular gaps and also to avoid leaving a remnant abscess. In some cases, the wound is not closed after drainage, which is an option
that requires consideration of the patient’s general condition. However, wounds left open require more time to heal, which may decrease
activities of daily living (ADL) in elderly patients. In order to avoid this, muscle flaps are sometimes used to close refractory abscesses.
Previous studies in the field of gastrointestinal surgery reported relatively good wound healing when using a surgical procedure that
involved filling abscess cavities in the pelvis with the gluteus maximus muscle after rectal amputation [7, 8]. In the present case, we
prevented the recurrence of the abscess by filling the cavity with the pectineus muscle, which was easily accessible from the same surgical
field. No remnant abscess was detected after surgery, and we were able to remove the drain relatively soon after surgery, which allowed us
to recommend that the patient mobilize as soon as possible. Using the pectineus muscle as a filler is a method that is useful in cases of an
obturator hernia with a concomitant femoral abscess. A delay in the diagnosis of an obturator hernia may lead to intestinal necrosis and a
femoral abscess. Although a femoral abscess is a rare complication in obturator hernia cases, insufficient drainage has been reported to
lead to necrotizing fasciitis and other serious infections . Since repeated draining is often required due to remnant abscesses, adjustments
to drainage methods and measures to prevent remnant abscesses are required. We herein reported a case in which a satisfactory outcome was
achieved by using the pectineus muscle as a filler in the treatment of an obturator hernia that caused a femoral abscess. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors have no conflicts of interests. Authors’
contributions NK, TH and KN participated in the surgery of this case and KN proposed the technique of repair using the pectineus. NK and JY
treated the patient after surgery. NK drafted the manuscript and all authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors' information
Not applicable. Thanks are due to our general surgery colleagues.
