Present address: Innovation Lab, Telemedicine and Clinical Genomics, Exprivia S.p.A, Molfetta (BA), Italy. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is
a myeloproliferative neoplasm underlain by the formation of BCR-ABL1 – an aberrant tyrosine kinase – in the leukaemic blasts. Long-term
survival rates in CML prior to the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) were dismal, albeit the incidence of secondary malignancies
was higher than that of age-matched population. Current figures confirm the safety of TKIs with conflicting data concerning the increased
risk of secondary tumours. We postulate that care has to be taken when distinguishing between coexisting, secondary-to-treatment and second
in sequence, but independent tumourigenic events, in order to achieve an unbiased picture of the adverse effects of novel treatments. To
illustrate this point, we present a case of a patient in which CML and peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) coexisted, although the clinical
presentation of the latter followed the achievement of major molecular response of CML to TKIs. Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is clonal
stem cell disorder driven by the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene resulting from a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 (the
Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome) that gives rise to an aberrant chimeric tyrosine kinase (TK) (reviewed in1). Most patients are diagnosed in
the chronic phase (CP) characterised by hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytosis, and increased white blood count (WBC) made up of mature
granulocytes and their precursors (reviewed in1). Until relatively recently, the natural disease history evolved from the CP – usually
lasting several years – to the ultimately fatal accelerated (AP) and blast (BP) phases. The development of the TK inhibitors (TKIs) has
allowed for the achievement of major molecular response (MMR) and long-term disease control2. A small percentage (<5%) of cases treated with
TKIs for CML develops second cancer3. These include mostly skin comprising melanoma, prostate and gut tumours34. Second haematological
tumours in these series of patients are rare albeit exist34. On the other hand, cases of concurrent CML plus another haematological disorder
(or even two5), such as myeloma or B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), have been reported67 (and references therein). An exact distinction
between a secondary and coexisting malignancy may prove problematic. Here we report a case of CML diagnosed in CP, in which the treatment
with imatinib led to the disclosure of lymphocytosis, later identified as peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL). Molecular analyses showed the
presence of the lymphoma cells in the diagnostic sample taken at the time of CML onset arguing for the coexistence of the two disorders. A
55-year-old man presented with leucocytosis (Hb 12.2 g/dL, Plt 292 × 109/L, WBC 75.5 × 109/L) and splenomegaly. A peripheral blood (PB) and
bone marrow (BM) morphological examination were consistent with the chronic phase of a myeloproliferative disorder. Conventional cytogenetic
analysis of BM revealed a normal male karyotype with the presence of Ph chromosome in 21/21 metaphases. Quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) using the ipsogen BCR-ABL1 Mbcr IS-MMR Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) detected existence of the p210
fusion transcript and the BCR-ABL1/ABL1 ratio of 106.25% was determined. The diagnosis of low-risk (according to Sokal score) Ph+ CML in
chronic phase (CML-CP) was thus made. After an initial cytoreduction using hydroxyurea for two weeks, standard dose imatinib treatment was
initiated. Within 3 months of treatment, complete haematological response anti-CML (CHR, Fig. 1A) and >2log reduction of BCR-ABL1/ABL1 ratio
(down to 0.73%) were achieved albeit persistent lymphocytosis occurred (PB lymphocyte count >5.0 × 109/L, Fig. 1A). At 10 months,
lymphocytosis worsened despite the achievement of major molecular response (MMR; PB BCR-ABL1/ABL1 ratio 0.02%; Fig. 1A) and further
investigations revealed clonal expansion of karyotypically (Fig. 1B) and phenotypically (Fig. 1C) aberrant T-cells in PB and, later, in BM.
Furthermore, monoclonal gamma-T-cell receptor gene rearrangement was detected in BM-derived DNA by PCR and low-level (10%) CD34-negative
T-cell infiltration was found in BM whilst total body CT scan showed generalised lymphadenopathy. These findings together with histological
examination of lymph node biopsy prompted the diagnosis of PTCL, not otherwise specified (NOS), and appropriate treatment commenced. First
(CHOP-like chemotherapy) and second (IGEV poly-chemotherapy) line therapies failed. Instead, complete haematological and cytogenetic
response of lymphoma was reached following the third line approach i.e. immunochemotherapy (Campath monoclonal antibody plus gemcitabine).
During lymphoma treatment, imatinib was put on hold due to therapy/lymphoma-related myelosuppression without a negative effect on MMR of the
CML. Considering the availability of a familial donor and refractory PTCL, the patient underwent a PB stem cell transplant (PBSCT). Donor
granulocyte engraftment and complete remission of both haematological diseases lasted for six months after the procedure. Thereafter,
progressive engraftment failure and the expansion of recipient haematopoiesis followed. The patient died at 11 months from PBSCT due to
respiratory failure. Figure 1A summarises the clinical and treatment history of the patient. The BCR-ABL1 protein found in the patient was
of the p210 type and the breakpoints were ascertained by PCR with primers BCR-b1-A and ABL-a3-B (all primer sequences are given in Table 1).
The finding of an amplicon of 417bp identified the transcript as b3-a2. Conventional cytogenetic analysis, performed at presentation of the
second malignancy, has disclosed the presence of a t(X;14)(q28;q11) in the lymphoma cells. This translocation has been previously described
to result in the breakage of the BRCC3 gene and its fusion to the T-cell receptor alpha or delta (TCRA/D) locus on chromosome 14. We
confirmed by PCR amplification and subsequent sequencing the involvement of the two loci. Next, in order to track the origins of the
lymphoma, we designed primers (primers X;14_F1, X;14_R1) mapping up and down-stream of the fusion junction and applied them to cDNA
retrotranscribed from mRNA sample extracted at the time of CML diagnosis. The end point-qualitative PCR experiments showed that the
transcript deriving from the t(X;14) translocation fusion was present at the time of the first diagnosis (Fig. 2A, top panel). In parallel,
we have looked for the BCR-ABL1 fusion in mRNA deriving from PB sample taken at the time of PTLC diagnosis and found BCR-ABL1 transcript in
it (Fig. 2A, bottom panel) although at very low levels (primers BCR-b1-A and ABL-a3-B). The specificity of the faint band seen in the lane
corresponding to the PTCL diagnostic sample was confirmed in a nested PCR protocol (primers BCR-b2-C and ABL-a3-D). Thus, we quantified the
transcripts of the two translocations by qRT-PCR using two primer pairs for each fusion (qBCR_F1, qABL_R1, qBCR_F2, qABL_R2, X;14_F1,
X;14_R1, X;14_F2, X;14_R2) and the SybrGreen methodology on both diagnostic samples and found that the expression level of the t(X;14)
product in the diagnostic CML sample was about 4% of the expression of the BCR-ABL1 fusion transcript in the same sample, whereas the
expression of BCR-ABL1 in the diagnostic PTCL sample was more than 10 times less (Fig. 2B). Next, we enumerated the reciprocal tumour burden
in the two diagnostic samples by performing interphase FISH on archival methanol/acetic acid-fixed bone marrow samples taken at the times of
CML and PTCL diagnoses. We used commercial probes designed to detect the presence of BCR/ABL fusion or TCRA/D locus breakage on the
chromosome 14 caused by the t(X;14) formation. The experiments with the Vysis LSI BCR/ABL DC/DF probe (Abbott Molecular Inc., Des Plaines,
IL, USA) disclosed the presence of an atypical hybridisation pattern consisting of one fusion signal, two green and one red signal (Fig.
3a). Such pattern has previously been reported and corresponds to a microdeletion of the reciprocal ABL locus. Cells with BCR/ABL fusion
signal constituted 82% of the nuclei scored in the diagnostic CML sample. Not a single BCR/ABL+ cell was seen in the diagnostic PCTL sample
when scoring a 1000 cells. FISH experiments with the use of TCRA/D Break-apart probe (Cytocell, Cambridge, UK) showed that the diagnostic
CML sample contained about 4.6% (48/1028) of cells with the rearrangement in the TCRA/D locus (Fig. 3B), whilst at the time of PTCL
diagnosis the percentage of such cells increased to 83%. We next applied the two probes together taking advantage of the fact that there is
a substantial difference in size between the two, with probes for BCR and ABL being four times bigger than the TCRA/D Break-apart ones
(600 kb vs ~150 kb). Cells with BCR/ABL fusion and no TCRA/D rearrangement as well as cells with TCRA/D split and no BCR/ABL fusion were
identified in percentages equal to the ones seen for single-probe experiments. No cells with both abnormalities were encountered in the
diagnostic CML sample (Fig. 3C). Second malignancies diagnosed in patients previously treated for cancer can represent de novo unrelated
oncogenic processes or be related/induced by the treatment received. Advances in diagnostics as well as in curative and supportive therapy
have increased the number of long-term cancer survivors that may be prone to the development of secondary tumours arising from normal tissue
exposure to the damaging effects of ionizing radiation or genotoxic stress of chemotherapy891011. Recently, reports are emerging of
additional secondary premalignant and malignant events, including RAS-mutant leukaemia, in melanoma patients on BRAF-inhibitors12. In
particular, the patterns of incidence and latency of secondary lymphomas are distinct from that of myeloid malignancies and solid cancers.
Indeed, the risk of secondary lymphomas increases after the first 5 years of completion of chemotherapy or radiotherapy and persists for
more than three decades13. The lymphocytosis observed in our patient as soon as 3 months since the beginning of treatment with imatinib did
not follow this pattern and prompted us to study the temporal relationship between the two malignancies. Interestingly, the occurrence of
mono-/oligoclonal T-cell- or NK-cell- large granular lymphocyte lymphocytosis has been reported in a proportion of patients treated with
dasatinib and to a lesser extent in those treated with imatinib14. In order to answer the question of whether the two diseases manifested in
the case presented here were genetically related or a coincidence, we took advantage of the presence of disease-specific translocations as
clonal markers and looked for the presence of sequences derived from the respective fusions in the reciprocal diagnostic samples. The end
point-qualitative PCR experiments showed that the transcript deriving from the t(X;14)(q28;q11) translocation fusion was already present at
the time of the first diagnosis suggesting that a small clone of lymphoma cells existed 10 months before the finding of an overt lymphoma or
that a small subclone of BCR-ABL1 bearing cells existed in which t(X;14) was also present. However, FISH experiments confirmed that there
were no cells in which the two translocations co-existed, i.e. PTCL cells are BCR/ABL negative. This is inconsistent with the theory of a
subclone of CML evolving into PTCL as one would expect that such clonal evolution resulted in a cell that continued to bear t(9;22) and
express BCR-ABL1. There is a slight discrepancy between the results of qPCR and FISH data when it comes to the evaluation of the CML burden
at the time of PTCL diagnosis. The explanation for it includes several issues – the transcript levels/cell and the efficiency of PCR for the
two primer pairs may be different in the two clones, the Cts were high and therefore outside of the range of accurate quantification.
Nonetheless, there is no doubt as to the presence of residual BCR-ABL1 transcript at the time of PTCL diagnosis, as diagnostic and nested
protocols showed its presence. The novelty of the case described here lies also in the finding of the t(X;14)(q28;q11) translocation in
PTCL. This translocation, together with the more frequent inversion of the chromosome 14, has been previously described in T-cell
prolymphocytic leukaemia15, admittedly, a disease from within the same spectrum of lymphoproliferations. PTCL NOS constitutes a rare and
aggressive tumour whose molecular pathogenesis is still challenging16, albeit shedding light on the tumourigenesis of this disease entity is
beyond the scope of this report. Although secondary tumours have been described after imatinib therapy, the analyses of their frequency with
respect to the age-adjusted general population yielded conflicting results34171819. Differences in cohort size, follow-up time and the
interpretation of the term “secondary cancer” may have been responsible for this difference. Moreover, many of the above mentioned studies
analysed historical data from cancer registries selecting patients treated with diverse modalities over variable periods of time. Clearly,
working with historical data, especially if old, gives no opportunity of reviewing and confirming the diagnosis, anamnesis and so on. In the
most recent article on the incidence of second malignancies following treatment with TKIs, Gunnarsson et al.19 reported an increased risk of
a second cancer for the population of CML sufferers, indicating that such risk may more likely be related to the CML itself and not to the
therapy with imatinib or other inhibitors. Without doubt, TKIs have dramatically changed the prognosis of patients with CML and are
considered safe, well tolerated and non-mutagenic2. Our study suggests that in some cases the second malignancy is not secondary to TKIs
treatment but instead was present at the time of diagnosis of CML. In such cases, the eradication of CML with the use of TKIs may create an
opportunity for the lymphoma to develop overtly. We underline the importance of investigating the possibility that the second cancer in the
context of a previous CML diagnosis was pre- or co-existent. We obtained informed consent from the patient prior to sample collection. The
ipsogen BCR-ABL1 Mbcr IS-MMR Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions. Immunophenotypic/cytogenetic
analyses of CML and PTCL were performed following standard diagnostic procedures and were carried out in accordance with the guidelines
approved by Ethics Committee of the Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Milan, Italy. Primers listed in Table 1 were used for molecular
characterisation of breakpoints and specific transcript detection. Standard PCR reactions were performed with Taq polymerase obtained from
New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA, USA). qPCR was done utilising the SybrGreen (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) technology on the
7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) machine. Vysis LSI BCR/ABL Dual Color/Dual Fusion probe (Abbott Molecular Inc., Des
Plaines, IL, USA) and TCRA/D Locus Break-apart probe (Cytocell, Cambridge, UK) were used according to manufactures’ instructions on
methanol/acetic acid-fixed material previously used for conventional cytogenetic analysis. For infrequent cells (<10%) a total of 1000 cells
were scored, whilst for frequent ones the scoring stopped at 200 nuclei. Slides hybridised with single probes were scored on the Olympus
BX51 microscope (Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with the UPlanSApo 100X/1.40 oil, ∞/0.17/FN26.5 and a FITC/Texas Red double-
band pass filter (Chroma Technology Corp®, Bellows Falls, VT, USA). Slides hybridised with the two probes together were analysed by capture
on the Olympus BX61 fitted with the UPlanApo 100x/1.35 oil Iris, ∞/0.17, separate DAPI, FITC and wide-band red fluorescence (U-WMIY2)
filters and CoolSNAP EZ CCD Camera (Photometrics, Tucson, AZ, USA). The capture was driven by the MetaMorph Microscopy Automation and Image
Analysis Software (Molecular Devices, LLC, USA). Representative single colour images were saved as TIFF files and processed with the ImageJ
tool devised by Wayne Rasband (wayne@codon.nih.gov, Research Services Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). How
to cite this article: Gruszka, A. M. et al. Molecular investigation of coexistent chronic myeloid leukaemia and peripheral T-cell lymphoma -
a case report. Sci. Rep. 5, 14829; doi: 10.1038/srep14829 (2015). This work is supported by the Italian Ministry of Health (GR-2009-1580090
granted to AMG), the Fondazione Umberto Veronesi (Postdoctoral Fellowship 2014 granted to AMG, Project Grant given to MA) and Associazione
Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (IG13092 granted to MA, IG14188 granted to FB). We thank Dr. Elena Belloni for help with FISH
experiments. The authors are grateful to Prof. Daniel Catovsky and Dr. Immacolata Attolico for critical reading of the manuscript. Author
Contributions A.M.G., F.B. and M.A. – conceived and/or designed the work; A.M.G., C.R., L.C., S.S., G.A., M.A., G.G., A.C., R.D.M. and G.P.
– acquired data; A.M.G., L.C., G.A., G.G. and A.C. – prepared the figures; A.M.G., C.R., L.C., G.P., F.B. and M.A. – played an important
role in interpreting the results; A.M.G., L.C. and M.A. – wrote the paper. (A) Clinical and treatment history of the patient. Hb –
haemoglobin, PLT – platelets, WBC – white blood count, HU – hydroxyurea, CHOP - cyclophosmamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin (vincristine),
prednisone, IGEV - ifosfamide, gemcitabine, vinorelbine, CHR (complete haematological response), PCgR – partial cytogenetic response, CCgR –
complete cytogenetic response, MMR – major molecular response, SD – stable disease, PTCL NOS – peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise
specified. (B) A representative karyotype obtained by culturing peripheral blood T-cells and staining the resulting metaphases with the
standard Q-banding technique. (C) Immunophenotype of the peripheral blood T-cells showing the presence of an aberrant clone. (A) End-point
qualitative PCR for the translocation product fusions using primers that map up and down stream of the breakpoints. For t(9;22) also nested
PCR was performed. Sample legend: 1 – CML (diagnostic PB sample), 2 – T-NHL (diagnostic PB sample), 3 – H2O, * – 1st round PCR product
diluted 1:100 before being used as template in nested PCR. The bands visible in the no-template control lanes are due to primer dimer. (B)
Quantitative PCR for the fusion gene transcripts. A graph of relative expression and tables of average Cts are shown. The relative quantity
was calculated considering the amount of BCR-ABL1, normalised to ubiquitin, as 100% in the diagnostic CML sample and t(X;14) translocation
product 100% in the diagnostic lymphoma sample. (A) Ideogram and a typical example of the pattern observed in pathological nuclei hybridised
with the Vysis LSI BCR/ABL DC/DF probe showing one fusion, two green and one red signals corresponding to the loss of the reciprocal ABL
locus. (B) Ideogram and a typical example of the pattern seen in lymphoma cells the bear the t(X;14) detected as split in the TCRA/D locus.
A normal cell with intact 14q locus as testified by the vicinity of the red and green signals and an abnormal cell in which one of the two
red/green pairs is separated due to the 14q break are shown. (C) Experiments performed combining the two probes. Big red signal corresponds
to the ABL locus, the big green one to the BCR locus, whist the little red and green hybridisation spots correspond to the TCRA/D locus.
Ideograms and examples of hybridisation are shown as well as an ideogram of an inexistent cell bearing both translocations. *Primer sequence
published in20.
