The ovarian cellular fibrous tumor with mitotic figure >4 per 10 high power field without moderate to severe atypia is defined as
mitotically active cellular fibroma according to the 2014 World Health Organization classification. As this category is new and rare now, we
described here a case of MACF and reviewed the literature. We present a case of mitotically active cellular fibroma of the ovary with
10-year history that was treated with laparoscopic surgery. We reviewed the relevant literature using PubMed search system and analyzed the
previous cases. To date, only 5 cases of mitotically active cellular fibroma have been reported. Our patient is the first case of
mitotically active cellular fibroma of the ovary treated with laparoscopic surgery. MACF of the ovary is a newly defined category and few
cases have been reported, while prognostic factors have also not yet been fully characterized. Long-term clinical follow-up is necessary.
The ovarian cellular fibrous tumors with mitotic figures >4 per 10 high-power fields (HPF) had been defined as fibrosarcoma . In 2014 World
Health Organization (WHO) histological classification, mitotic activity of >4 per 10 HPF in an ovarian cellular fibromatous neoplasm in the
absence of moderate to severe atypia is defined as mitotically active cellular fibroma (MACF). As this category is new and rare now, we
described here a case of MACF and reviewed systematically the literature for the appropriate treatment. We treated a case of MACF, a new
diagnostic category, with a long term history. And we searched previous cases using PubMed search system from 1966 to July 2015 with the
terms “mitotically active cellular fibroma”, “ovary”, and “fibrosarcoma”. Then we analyzed and clarified that data of the cases have been
recorded for finding important factors. A 36-year-old woman (gravida 3, para 3) consulted a doctor for further examination of an ovarian
tumor. She had been diagnosed with a right-sided 6-cm ovarian tumor 10 years previously, since her first pregnancy at another hospital.
Pelvic examination showed an adnexal hard mass without tenderness on the right side. Vaginal echography and pelvic computed tomography (CT)
showed a 6-cm ovarian solid tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 61-mm solid tumor with heterogeneous low signal intensity in
the pelvis. As such, a benign tumor such as a fibroma/fibrothecoma or malignant tumor such as a germ cell tumor or lymphoma was suspected
(Fig. 1). Serum levels of tumor markers were negative for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA125, CA19–9, squamous cell carcinoma (SCC),
human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP). Laparoscopic surgery was performed to confirm diagnosis and direct treatment
after 8 months from the third delivery. Laparoscopic observation revealed that the tumor in the Douglas pouch protruded from the right ovary
without adhesion (Fig. 2). Subsequently, right salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The tumor was cut into small pieces in the bag, which
was then extracted from the laparoscopic wound at the umbilicus without scattering in the abdominal cavity. The sectioned surface of the
tumor was solid, light-yellow and without hemorrhagic necrosis (Fig. 3). Intraoperative cytology of ascitic fluid was negative, and
intraoperative diagnosis of a frozen section revealed benign fibrous tumor as atypical cells were not observed.Fig. 1MRI appearance of the
tumor. Axial T2-weighted MR image showed a well-circumscribed mass (white arrows) including cystic component (arrowhead) adjacent to the
right ovary (black arrow) as having inhomogeneous low signal intensity. Small amount of ascites was noted (*)Fig. 2Laparoscopic findings of
the tumor. The tumor (white arrows) in the Douglas pouch protruded from right ovary (black arrow) without adhesionFig. 3Macroscopic
appearance of resected right oophorosalpinx. The sectioned surface of the tumor was solid and light-yellow without hemorrhagic necrosis.
(right ovary: black arrow) MRI appearance of the tumor. Axial T2-weighted MR image showed a well-circumscribed mass (white arrows) including
cystic component (arrowhead) adjacent to the right ovary (black arrow) as having inhomogeneous low signal intensity. Small amount of ascites
was noted (*) Laparoscopic findings of the tumor. The tumor (white arrows) in the Douglas pouch protruded from right ovary (black arrow)
without adhesion Macroscopic appearance of resected right oophorosalpinx. The sectioned surface of the tumor was solid and light-yellow
without hemorrhagic necrosis. (right ovary: black arrow) In paraffin sections, the tumor cells were spindle shaped and arranged in
intersecting bundles (Fig. 4). They had ill-defined cytoplasmic borders and spindled to ovoid hyperchromatic nuclei with a moderate mitotic
rate (10 per 10 HPF) but without significant nuclear atypia (Fig. 5). The cystic lesion was unclear. On immunohistochemistry, vimentin,
progesterone receptor (PR), CD10, CD56 and Wilms tumor gene (WT-1) were positive, alpha-inhibin was focally positive, and pan cytokeratin
(AE1/AE3), estrogen receptor (ER), calretinin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) were negative. Ki-67 index was 8.7 %. Pathologic
findings and the case’s long-term clinical history led to the diagnosis of MACF of the ovary. She had a good clinical course after surgery
for 6 months.Fig. 4Macroscopic appearance of the tumor. The cells are spindle shaped and arranged in intersecting bandles.
(bar = 200 μm)Fig. 5Macroscopic appearance of the tumor. The cells having spindled to ovoid shaped nuclei with moderate mitotic rate
(mitoses: white arrows) but without significant nuclear atypia. (bar = 50 μm) Macroscopic appearance of the tumor. The cells are spindle
shaped and arranged in intersecting bandles. (bar = 200 μm) Macroscopic appearance of the tumor. The cells having spindled to ovoid shaped
nuclei with moderate mitotic rate (mitoses: white arrows) but without significant nuclear atypia. (bar = 50 μm) In connection with ovarian
tumor, five cases were found by a PubMed search system and shown in Table 1 . Laparotomy was selected in all cases. Long-term local
recurrence has also been seen in one case but all cases were alive at time of publication. However, there was no specific tumor marker or
immunochemical staining.Table 1Cases of mitotically active cellular fibroma of the ovaryAuthorYearCase no.Age (y)SideSize(cm)Tumor
markerMitoses (MF/10HPF)SurgeryAdditional therapyPositiveWeak, focallyNegativeki-67 indexFollow-up time (mo)Status at last follow-upKaku et
al. 2007132Left6.6 × 6,0 × 4.4CA 125(-), CEA(-)17LSO-SMA, HHF35, vimentin, PR, ki-67ERdesminND12NEDBucella et al. 2009265ND10(1st),
12 × 10 × 9 (2nd), 8 (3rd)-4TAH, BSO, reduction twiceTamoxifenvimentinα-inhibin, actin, CD99desmin, h-caldesmon, CD10, HMB-45,
c-kit960 + 6 + 6Recurrence twice, NEDMonterio et al. 2012313Right19 × 15 × 12CA125(453), AFP(-), HCG(-), CEA(-), CA199(-), CA153(-)5–7RSO,
OMT-NDNDNDND36NEDWu et al. 2014476Right9 × 6 × 5CA125(-), CA153(-), CA199 (-),AFP (-), CEA(-), SCC(-)5–9TAH, BSO-vimentin, α-inhibin, ER,
PRCD56, CD99cytokeratin, EMA, CD10, HMB45, S-100, calretinin, CD34, CD117, Dog-110NDNDZong et al. 2014539Left10 × 7 × 4CA125(41),
HCG(-)3–5TAH, LSO, OMT, LD-CD99, CK, SMA, vimentin, ER, PR, S-100-CD10, CK7, EMA, desmin1066NEDThis case2015636Right6CEA(-), CA125(-),
CA199(-), SCC(-), HCG(-), AFP(-)10RSO-vimentin, PR, CD10, CD56, WT1α-inhibinAE1/AE3, ER, calretinin, EMA8.76NEDND, not described; CEA,
carcinoembryonic antigen; (-), within normal range; AFP, α-feto protein; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma;
TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; OMT, omentectomy; LD, lymphadenectomy; SMA, smooth muscle actin;
HHF35, anti-muscle-specific actin (clone; HHF35); PR, progresterone receptor; ER, estrogen receptor; CK, cytokeratin; WT, Wilms tumor; HMB,
human melanoma black; EMA, epithelial membrane antigen; NED, no evidence of the diseade Cases of mitotically active cellular fibroma of the
ovary ND, not described; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; (-), within normal range; AFP, α-feto protein; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin;
SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; OMT, omentectomy; LD,
lymphadenectomy; SMA, smooth muscle actin; HHF35, anti-muscle-specific actin (clone; HHF35); PR, progresterone receptor; ER, estrogen
receptor; CK, cytokeratin; WT, Wilms tumor; HMB, human melanoma black; EMA, epithelial membrane antigen; NED, no evidence of the diseade In
the 2003 WHO histological classification, ovarian cellular fibrous tumors with mitotic figures 3 or less per 10 HPF and no severe nuclear
atypia were defined as cellular fibroma, while the fibrous tumors with mitotic figures >4 per 10 HPF and severe nuclear atypia were defined
as fibrosarcoma. However, ovarian tumors with mitotic figures >4 per 10 HPF but no severe nuclear atypia were not categorized. These kinds
of tumors were mostly diagnosed as ovarian fibrosarcoma. However, the clinicopathologic characteristic of this tumor is that it is
significantly different from the malignant behaviors of ovarian fibrosarcoma. In 2006, Irving et al. first defined these kind of ovarian
tumors as ‘MACF’ . In the 2014 WHO histological classification, a new definition was described: “mitotic activity of 4 per 10 HPFs in an
ovarian cellular fibromatous neoplasm in the absence of moderate to severe atypia does not signify a fibrosarcoma. In such cases, a
diagnosis of MACF is made.” To date, only five cases of MACF of the ovary have been reported in the literature. All cases were alive at time
of publication. However, there were no specific diagnostic or prognostic factors. Our patient is the first case of MACF of the ovary treated
with laparoscopic surgery. Ovarian benign fibrous tumors such as fibroma/fibrothecomas are often misdiagnosed as uterine myomas and
malignant ovarian tumors preoperatively. However, laparoscopic surgery has been used for the management of ovarian fibroma/fibrothecomas [8,
9] and uterine myomas . Histological diagnosis should be very important and include intraoperative consultation. Even if many mitoses are
observed, it is imperative that we do not misdiagnose fibrosarcoma, in order to avoid excessive treatment. In our case, the tumor was benign
both historically and histologically. We report a case of MACF with a long term history treated by laparoscopic surgery. MACF of the ovary
is a newly defined category and few cases have been reported, while prognostic factors have also not yet been fully characterized. Treatment
is still not well established therefore long-term clinical follow-up including image processing, such as echography, CT, MRI etc., is
necessary. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. high-power fields World Health Organization mitotically
active cellular fibroma computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging carcinoembryonic antigen squamous cell carcinoma human chorionic
gonadotropin alpha fetoprotein progesterone receptor Wilms tumor gene pan cytokeratin estrogen receptor epithelial membrane antigen
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AD and AH collected clinical data and
drafted the manuscript. TY participated in drafting the manuscript and performed literature review. GN provided clinical and radiological
information. KH and HS helped with manuscript drafts and edited for language and grammar. YT and MO revised the final version of the
manuscript. YH supervised and participated in pathological evaluation. MF provided pathological evaluation of the specimen and helped with
editing the pathology section. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
