Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are myeloid malignancies characterized by stem cell-derived clonal myeloproliferation. There are seven
designated conditions under the category of MPNs including chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and polycythemia vera (PV).1 CML is
characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), a translocation involving chromosomes 9 and 22 that results in the
formation of the BCR-ABL fusion gene. PV is a Ph-negative MPN characterized by erythrocytosis and the presence of an activating JAK2
mutation in >95% of cases. PV and CML are considered to be mutually exclusive; however, rare cases of concurrent Ph-positive CML and a JAK2
V617F-positive PV have been described in the literature.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Previous reports have suggested that the two disorders may
arise independently,2, 3, 4 or from within the same clone,5, 6, 7, 8, 9 but definitive clonal analysis has never been documented. We report
a case of a patient with JAK2 V617F-positive PV who subsequently developed chronic phase Ph-positive CML. The patient was successfully
treated with the combination of dasatinib and ruxolitinib. Cytogenetic and molecular responses suggested that the two disorders arose
independently, which was corroborated by genotyping analyses of single-cell-derived colonies. A 55-year-old woman was first diagnosed with
PV in 2001 when she presented with a hemoglobin (Hgb) of 20.0 g/dl. Over the ensuing 10 years, the patient was treated with aspirin and
intermittent hydroxyurea and anagrelide, with poor compliance. In May 2011 (10 years after initial PV diagnosis), she presented with
worsening fatigue, weight loss and splenomegaly. Laboratory studies revealed an elevated white blood cell count (WBC) of 45 × 109/l and a
Hgb of 9.5 g/dl. Examination of the peripheral smear demonstrated leukoerythroblastic changes with few circulating blasts. A bone marrow
biopsy showed hypercellularity with granulocytic and megakaryocytic hyperplasia, no excess blasts, and moderate fibrosis on reticulin
staining. A diagnosis of post-PV myelofibrosis was initially suspected; however, cytogenetics showed t(9;22) in 20 out of 20 metaphase cells
and fluorescence in situ hybridization for BCR-ABL was positive (92.5%). Quantitative PCR for JAK2 V617F revealed an allele burden of 6%.
Therefore, it appeared that the patient had developed CML with relative clonal dominance over PV. Treatment with dasatinib 100 mg daily was
initiated in July 2011, resulting in dramatic improvement in the patient's leukocytosis and anemia within 1 month (Figure 1a). Shortly
thereafter, however, her WBC and platelet count began to rise. Three months after starting dasatinib, the patient's complete blood count
(CBC) showed a WBC of 42 × 109/l, Hgb 12.3 g/dl and platelet count of 799 × 109/l. BCR-ABL by fluorescence in situ hybridization had
decreased to 4.0% however, the JAK2 V617F allele burden had increased to 83% (Figure 1b). Therefore, recrudescence of leukocytosis and
thrombocytosis in this patient appeared to be due to re-emergence of the JAK2-mutant clone in the setting of suppression of the BCR-ABL-
positive CML clone by dasatinib. The patient was treated with hydroxyurea without significant improvement in leukocytosis or thrombocytosis,
and there was also no response when hydroxyurea was changed to anagrelide. A repeat bone marrow biopsy performed in May 2012 (300 days after
initiation of dasatinib) revealed a hypercellular marrow, no increased blasts and severe fibrosis on reticulin staining. Cytogenetic
analysis demonstrated a complete cytogenetic response with BCR-ABL by qRT-PCR detected at 0.001% (normalized to β-2 microglobulin). Despite
minimal residual clonal burden from CML, the patient continued to report fatigue and poor appetite, progressive weight loss of 15 pounds and
persistent splenomegaly. Owing to the progressive increase in counts, ongoing constitutional symptoms and poor tolerance of hydroxyurea,
treatment with ruxolitinib 10 mg twice daily was commenced (in addition to continuation of dasatinib) in June 2012. Within 6 weeks, there
was significant improvement in the patient's blood counts (WBC 11.9 × 109/l, Hgb 11.9 g/dl, platelets 297 × 109/l), as well as improvement
in constitutional symptoms and splenomegaly. The patient tolerated treatment with the combination of ruxolitinib and dasatinib well, but was
noted to have worsening anemia in September 2012, approximately 4 months after starting treatment with both therapies. She was advised to
hold ruxolitinib but accidentally held dasatinib for 1 month. Subsequently, dasatinib was resumed and ruxolitinib was held in October 2012
for a month, following which the patient's Hgb improved, and she was restarted on ruxolitinib at a decreased dose of 5 mg twice daily. Two
months later, the dose of ruxolitinib was increased to 10 mg alternating with 5 mg twice daily. Three years after starting treatment with
dasatinib and ruxolitinib, the patient's symptoms and CBC remain stable and she has continued on combination therapy with dasatinib and
ruxolitinib. The patient has maintained a complete cytogenetic response with low level BCR-ABL detectable by qRT-PCR, while the JAK2 V617F
allele burden has fluctuated between 43 and 96%. Serial quantitative measurements of BCR-ABL and JAK2 V617F following treatment with
dasatinib demonstrated a marked decrease in BCR-ABL levels with a concomitant increase in the JAK2 V617F allele burden, suggesting that the
two disorders arose from independent clones. To further address this issue, single cell-derived progenitor colonies were isolated and
genotyped for BCR-ABL and JAK2 V617F (Figure 2). The majority of the colonies demonstrated only the presence of JAK2 V617F or BCR-ABL, but
not both, confirming that the two disorders arose within distinct clones. Several other case reports observed a similar increase in the JAK2
V617F allele burden following successful treatment with an ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI),5, 6, 7, 8 including a recently published
report of two patients with PV/CML who were treated with the combination of imatinib and ruxolitinib.9 Similar to our case, treatment with
imatinib did not lead to improvement in constitutional symptoms or splenomegaly in either patient, although they both achieved complete
cytogenetic and major molecular responses of their CML. The addition of ruxolitinib to imatinib in both cases produced an improvement in
constitutional symptoms and splenomegaly; however, both patients required dose reductions of ruxolitinib and imatinib owing to hematologic
toxicity. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of a patient with concurrent PV and CML treated with a JAK inhibitor and a second
generation ABL TKI that definitively demonstrates that the two neoplasms arose from separate clones. None of the prior case reports included
correlative clonal analysis of patients treated with this combination of therapy. Genotyping of individual progenitor colonies suggests that
the two disorders arose from independent clones, which is consistent with the findings from serial quantitative measurements of BCR-ABL and
JAK2 V617F during treatment; however, it is still possible that these two clones originated from a shared ancestral clone. The combination
of ruxolitinib and dasatinib was safe and effective in the treatment of concomitant PV and CML in this patient. The optimal schedule of
treatment (for example, simultaneous, sequential or syncopated TKI regimens) for treatment of patients with concomitant PV/CML is still
unclear, but can potentially be guided by molecular monitoring and biologic correlative analyses. Ultimately, the best treatment approach
will be determined by the kinetic dynamics of each clone and the tolerability of combining TKIs. This work was supported by NIH grants
K08HL106576 (Oh), K12HL087107 (Oh) and T32HL007088 (Engle, Fisher). Technical support was provided by the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center
Tissue Procurement and Flow Cytometry Cores, which are supported by NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30CA91842. We thank D. Moore for
assistance with tissue banking, and L. He, G. Rippberger and M. Fulbright for assistance with JAK2 and BCR-ABL genotyping experiments. The
authors declare no conflict of interest. Hematologic, cytogenetic and molecular data. (a) CBC parameters over time are shown in relationship
to treatment with dasatinib and ruxolitinib. (b) Cytogenetic and molecular analyses of BCR-ABL and JAK2 V617F over time are shown in
relationship to treatment with dasatinib and ruxolitinib. Genotyping of individual progenitor colonies. Informed consent was obtained from
the patient, and samples were collected under a protocol approved by the Washington University Human Studies Committee (#01-1014). Colonies
were isolated from the peripheral blood at time of CML diagnosis and were genotyped for BCR-ABL and JAK2 V617F. The number of colonies with
each genotype is shown.
