J.R.M. and C.K.O. contributed equally to this work. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a genetic disorder characterized by the development of
multiple neurofibromas, cafe‐au‐lait spots, and Lisch nodules. Individuals with NF1 are at increased risk of developing various tumors, such
as malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), pheochromocytoma, leukemia, glioma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and breast cancer. Here, we
describe the exome sequencing of breast cancer, MPNST, and neurofibroma from a patient with NF1. We identified a germline mutation in the
NF1 gene which resulted in conversion of leucine to proline at amino acid position 847. In addition, we showed independent somatic NF1
mutations in all the three tumors (frameshift insertion in breast cancer (p.A985fs), missense mutation in MPNST (p.G23R), and inframe
deletion in dermal neurofibroma (p.L1876del‐Inf)), indicating that a second hit in NF1 resulting in the loss of function could be important
for tumor formation. Each tumor had a distinct genomic profile with mutually exclusive mutations in different genes. Copy number analysis
revealed multiple copy number alterations in the breast cancer and the MPNST, but not the benign neurofibroma. Germline loss of chromosome
6q22.33, which harbors two potential tumor suppressor genes, PTPRK and LAMA2, was also identified; this may increase tumor predisposition
further. In the background of NF1 syndrome, although second‐hit NF1 mutation is critical in tumorigenesis, different additional mutations
are required to drive the formation of different tumors. Cancer Medicine 2015; 4(12): 1871–1878 26432421 Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a
relatively common genetic disorder characterized by the development of multiple neurofibromas, cafe‐au‐lait spots, and Lisch nodules, with
estimated incidence of 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 5,000 individuals worldwide 1. The NF1 gene on chromosome 17q11.2 is a classic tumor suppressor
gene. Its product, neurofibromin is an important negative regulator of the Ras cellular proliferation pathway 2, 3. Individuals with NF1 are
at increased risk of developing various tumors, including MPNST, pheochromocytoma, leukemia, glioma, and rhabdomyosarcoma 4. More recently,
an increased risk of breast cancer has also been reported 5, 6. The mechanism of pathogenesis of NF1‐associated breast cancer remains
unknown; limited data suggest an aggressive biology of breast cancer in NF1 patients 7, 8. Previously, studies on genetic aberrations in
MPNST focused on only a limited set of genes, reporting mutations in TP53 and second hit NF1, multiple copy number alterations, and deletion
of CDKN2A 4, 9, 10, 11. Recently published studies now report frequent somatic aberrations in EED and SUZ12 as well, both of which are
chromatin‐modifying genes 12, 13, 14. In this study, we sequenced the exomes of breast cancer, MPNST, dermal neurofibroma, and matched
whole‐blood from a single NF1 patient. The objectives were to unravel the genomic complexity of different neoplastic manifestations of NF1
and to identify somatic mutations that potentially drive these tumors. The subject of this study fulfilled NIH Consensus Development
Conference diagnostic criteria for NF1; family history was also positive for NF1. At the age of 39 years, she was diagnosed with right
breast cancer. Histopathological examination revealed a 40 mm grade 3 invasive ductal carcinoma with metastasis to 1 of 17 lymph nodes.
Estrogen‐ and progesterone‐receptor status was positive. HER2 was 2+ in 30% of the cells by immunohistochemistry, and borderline positive on
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) testing with a ratio of HER2 to chromosome 17 signals from 60 nuclei scored as 2.2, and an average
of 4.7 HER2 signals per nucleus. Adjuvant chemotherapy as well as trastuzumab and tamoxifen were administered postoperatively, in addition
to radiotherapy. Three years later, she presented with a rapidly growing soft tissue mass beneath the right buttock. Excision of this mass
and a separate dermal neurofibroma on the right buttock was performed; the pathological diagnosis for the mass was malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor arising from a plexiform neurofibroma. Sections showed a hypercellular spindle cell tumor with large areas of necrosis
and hemorrhage and high mitotic activity. Blood and fresh frozen tumor specimens (breast cancer, MPNST, dermal neurofibroma) were obtained
from this patient. The study was approved by the local Institutional Review Board. All the tumor specimens contained at least 70% tumor by
routine histologic review with hematoxylin and eosin staining. Three micrograms of DNA per sample were sheared using a Covaris S1
Ultrasonicator (Covaris, MA). Adaptor‐ligated libraries were constructed using Paired‐End DNA kits (Illumina, CA). Exome capture was
performed using SureSelect Human All Exon Kit v3 (Agilent Technology, CA). Each sample was sequenced on two lanes of an Illumina GA‐IIx
sequencer using 76‐bp paired‐end reads. The image analysis and base calling were performed using the Illumina pipeline (v1.6) with default
settings. Alignment of the sequenced reads was to human reference genome hg19, using the Burrows‐Wheeler Aligner software 15. PCR duplicates
were removed using SAMTools. Variants were called using a pipeline based on the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) software (Broad Institute,
Massachusetts). Base quality scores were recalibrated and the sequences near microindels were realigned. Consensus calling for SNVs and
microindels was done with the GATK Unified Genotyper. Only well‐mapped reads and reads with fewer than four mismatches in a 40 base‐pair
window were considered. The putative SNVs and microindels were annotated against dbSNP 135 and 1000 Genomes to remove common polymorphisms,
excluding cancer‐associated positions (based on presence in the COSMIC database [Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United
Kingdom]). Using transcripts from the CCDS, RefSeq, Ensembl, and UCSC databases, we identified nonsynonymous mutations and classified them
as tumor‐somatic if the matched normal sample had sufficient coverage to show that the variant was not present in the germline. Putative
mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing. Analysis of copy number and regions of loss‐of‐heterozygosity was performed on the exome
sequencing data using the ASCAT algorithm 2.0 (Allele‐Specific Copy number Analysis of Tumors)
(http://heim.ifi.uio.no/bioinf/Projects/ASCAT/). For higher resolution, the blood, dermal neurofibroma and primary breast tumor samples were
assayed using the Affymetrix CytoScan HD platform (Affymetrix, Inc, Santa Clara, CA). There was insufficient DNA from the frozen specimen of
MPNST for the Cytoscan copy number analysis. Analysis of the array data was performed with the Chromosome Analysis Suite software (version
2.0.1) from Affymetrix. Our target enrichment and sequencing achieved a mean coverage of 75, with an average of 83% of bases covered by at
least 20 reads in each sample (Table S1). To identify the possible NF1 germline mutations in this patient, we inspected all variants
detected in the patient's blood DNA, and identified a heterozygous missense mutation of thymidine to cytosine (g.chr17:29,556,173). This
mutation resulted in a conversion of leucine to proline at amino acid position 847, which is also present in all the tumor samples confirmed
by Sanger sequencing, indicating germline mutation (Fig. S1). All reported mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing in the four samples
(blood, breast cancer, MPNST, and dermal neurofibroma; Fig. 1, Table S2), except the insertion of cytosine in the NF1 gene
(g.chr17:29,553,477) in the breast cancer, most probably due to repetitive sequences in that region leading to slippages in Sanger
sequencing. However, close inspection using the Integrated Genome Viewer software suggests a true insertion event (Fig. 2). The somatic
mutations identified in each sample were unique to the tumor, suggesting that each different type of tumor arose independently in the
patient. Somatic mutations in the three sequenced tumors. Analysis of copy number alterations in breast cancer (A), malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) (B) and dermal neurofibroma (C), based on paired tumor and nontumor DNA analysis of exome sequencing data. Each
red dot represents a genomic coordinate that was heterozygous in the germline sample. The breast cancer shows the most chromosomal
rearrangements while the dermal neurofibroma shows none. Regions of allelic imbalance that also show a decrease in Log R typically represent
Loss‐of‐heterozygosity (LOH); regions of allelic imbalance with no change in Log R show Copy‐Number Neutral LOH, and regions of allelic
imbalance that correspond with increased Log R correspond to either focal amplifications (for example, several loci in chromosome 2 of the
breast cancer) or large‐scale amplifications. The changes in Log R and allele frequency observed across multiple chromosomes in breast
cancer and MPNST indicate allelic imbalance or copy number alterations in these samples, but not in the dermal neurofibroma. Consistent with
the fact that malignant tumors harbor more somatic mutations, the breast cancer and MPNST harbored 15 and 6 somatic mutations respectively
(Fig. 1, Table S2). In contrast, only one somatic mutation was detected in the dermal neurofibroma, a benign tumor (Fig. 1). Interestingly,
this in‐frame deletion of three nucleotides resulted in a loss of leucine at amino acid position 1876 in the NF1 gene (Table S2). Different
somatic NF1 mutations (frameshift insertion in breast cancer (p.A985fs), missense mutation in MPNST (p.G23R), and inframe deletion in dermal
neurofibroma (p.L1876del‐Inf)) were detected in all three tumors investigated; suggesting the importance of second‐hit aberration in NF1 for
tumorigenesis. Several important and interesting mutations were identified in the two malignant tumors. The breast tumor harbored somatic
mutations in TP53, GATA3, and ARID1A, which are commonly mutated or lost in breast cancer (Fig. 1). Mutations in other cancer‐associated
genes such as MAGI3, TSC1, PTPN4, RAB3IP, and RYR1 were also identified. Aberrant protein degradation may be important in this cancer, as
three of the 14 mutated genes (USP4, USP31, and ZNRF4) in the breast cancer are involved in the ubiquitin–proteasome pathway. In the MPNST,
aside from the NF1 mutation, other mutations in cancer‐associated genes such as EHBP1 and WNK3 were identified. To determine the extent of
chromosomal aberrations in the breast cancer, the MPNST, and the dermal neurofibroma, we subjected the sequence data to our in‐house
modified ASCAT analysis. Extensive chromosomal aberrations were observed in the breast cancer and the MPNST samples. Unlike the profiles
seen in the breast cancer and MPNST, the benign dermal neurofibroma genome is “silent”, indicating that the neurofibroma genome is highly
stable (Fig. 2). Gains and losses in several cancer‐related genes were identified in the breast cancer and MPNST samples through ASCAT
analysis (Table S3). Consistent with a previous report on chromosomal aberrations in MPNST, losses were more common than gains in the MPNST
on ASCAT analysis 16. Homozygous losses were found in CDKN2A and CDKN2B, which play important roles in cell cycle control, and in ARID4B, a
chromatin remodeling gene. Heterozygous losses were observed in TP53 and EED, a component of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which
is reported to be frequently altered in a recent exome sequencing study on MPNSTs 12. Potential oncogenes amplified in the breast cancer
include GREB1, NRXN1, MGAT5, PKP4, DAPL1, ITGB6, and RBMS1, which may be implicated in carcinogenesis, proliferation, and invasion. A focal
amplification of around 3 Mb in chromosome 2, containing the FXBO11 and MSH6 genes, was estimated to contain over 20 copies of the affected
genes. We observed heterozygous loss of several cancer‐associated genes, including the CTNNA1 (catenin (cadherin‐associated protein), alpha
1) and APC tumor suppressor genes in the breast cancer. With the available DNA, we further confirmed our findings in the breast cancer and
dermal neurofibroma using the Cytoscan platform from Affymetrix. Using Cytoscan, copies gained were observed in a large region of chromosome
2 (p25.1, p24.2, p21, q14.2, q21.2, q23.3, q24.3, q33.1, q36.1, q36.2, q36.3, and q37.2), chromosome 4 (p15.2), chromosome 15 (q22.2 and
24.2), and chromosome 17 (q12 and q21.32), whereas loss of heterozygosity was observed in chromosomes 2, 4, 5, 10, 14, 17, and 18 in the
breast cancer genome (Fig. 3 and Table S4). Cytoscan HD SNP Array analysis reveals a germline Loss‐of‐heterozygosity event of around 3.3
Mbases at chr6q22.33 (indicated by dotted line) which harbor PTPRK and LAMA2, in blood, breast cancer, and dermal neurofibroma.
Interestingly, we have identified loss of chromosome 6q22.33 (Fig. 3) and gain of chromosome 14q32.33 in the DNA from the patient's blood,
breast cancer, and dermal neurofibroma suggesting germline chromosomal aberrations. Two putative tumor suppressor genes, PTPRK and LAMA2,
are among the 10 genes identified in the loss region of chromosome 6; these germline chromosomal alterations might predispose the patient to
cancer. Neurofibromatosis type 1 is a common genetic disorder, but until recently there has been a lack of data on the comprehensive
mutation landscape of NF1‐associated tumors. This is set to change with the increasing availability of next generation sequencing. In fact,
there is revival of interest in the NF1 gene as somatic NF1 aberrations are increasingly detected in sporadic tumors from individuals
without neurofibromatosis type 1 syndrome 8. Whole‐exome sequencing of the blood, breast cancer, MPNST, and dermal neurofibroma from this
patient has provided invaluable insight into the somatic anomalies in this tumor predisposition syndrome. A striking feature is the finding
of second‐hit NF1 mutation at different sites of this gene in all the tumors sequenced, indicating that second‐hit mutation of this tumor
suppressor gene may be a critical event in pathogenesis. NF1 aberrations can potentially lead to activation of the Ras, MAP kinase, and
PI3K‐mTOR pathways, resulting in proliferation of tumor cells 3, 17. This is consistent with the findings of a previous study which reported
different somatic NF1 alterations in multiple benign neurofibromas and a MPNST obtained postmortem from an NF1 patient 18. Denaturing
high‐performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC), microsatellite analysis using RFLP markers and multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA)
for the NF1 gene were performed in that study 18. With whole‐exome sequencing, we have found that each tumor from the same individual also
has a distinct set of genes mutated. The different clonal origins indicate that each tumor arises from independent somatic events in the
background of germline NF1 mutation. Incidentally, we have also discovered germline loss of two potential tumor suppressor genes—PTPRK and
LAMA2—on chromosome 6 (q22.33). PTPRK appears to be a negative regulator of adhesion, invasion, migration, and proliferation in various
tumor types, including breast and colorectal cancers, gliomas, lymphoma, and melanoma cells. It may play a role in inhibition of Akt, EGFR,
and beta‐catenin signaling 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. LAMA2 encodes an extracellular matrix protein. Reduced LAMA2 expression in hepatocellular
carcinomas has been linked to a proliferative signature with poorer survival outcomes; hypermethylation of LAMA2 has also been reported in
colorectal carcinomas 24, 25. To our knowledge, germline loss of PTPRK and LAMA2 has not been reported; this may increase the tumor
predisposition further. The mutation landscape of breast cancer is highly heterogeneous. In this case of NF1‐associated breast cancer,
mutations in the TP53, TSC1, and MAGI3 (PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway) tumor suppressors are likely to cooperate with NF1 in carcinogenesis. In
addition, alterations of genes critical in other pathways, such as ARID1A (SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling), GATA3 (differentiation of luminal
breast cells), PTPN4 (antiapoptosis), RYR1 (control of cellular proliferation), and USP4, USP31, ZNRF4 (ubiquitin–proteasome pathway) may be
implicated in pathogenesis. The multiple copy number alterations detected also result in genomic instability. Gains in some of the genes
involved in invasive/migratory properties (MGAT5, PKP4, ITGB6), cell cycle progression and regulation of apoptosis (RBMS1), and angiogenesis
(NRXN1) may be involved in tumor development and progression. Amplification of GREB1, an early response gene in the estrogen
receptor‐regulated pathway, may play a role in this estrogen receptor positive tumor. The mechanism of pathogenesis for the MPNST is likely
related to second‐hit inactivation of NF1, together with mutations in other genes, such as WNK3 which plays a role in the increase of cell
survival in a caspase‐3‐dependent pathway, and EHBP1 which has been implicated in endocytic trafficking. A single‐nucleotide polymorphism in
EHBP1 has been associated with an aggressive form of prostate cancer; it may be implicated in carcinogenesis or cell survival 26. Somatic
loss of critical tumor suppressors including CDKN2A, CDKN2B, TP53, and EED are also likely to contribute to tumorigenesis. Aberrations in
EED and SUZ12 occur frequently in sporadic, NF1‐associated and radiotherapy‐associated MPNSTs 12, 13, 14. EED and SUZ12 are core subunits of
PRC2; the resulting PRC2 inactivation can lead to loss of trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3), and increased H3K27
acetylation which recruits bromodomain proteins and transcription factors to promote tumor growth 12, 14. The low mutation burden and lack
of copy number changes in the dermal neurofibroma is consistent with the benign nature of this tumor. Each neurofibroma consists of a
heterogeneous collection of hyperproliferative Schwann cells, as well as fibroblasts, perineural cells, and mast cells 18. Although the
second‐hit somatic NF1 mutation in the Schwann cells may trigger the formation of a neurofibroma in an NF1‐haploinsufficient
microenvironment, the precise molecular interactions among the different cells in the development of neurofibromas remain poorly understood.
Challenges remain in the detection of aberrations in the NF1 gene. NF1 is one of the largest human genes, with 60 exons and 350kB of genomic
DNA. While next generation sequencing platforms may facilitate the simultaneous sequencing of the various exons, it may not capture intronic
splicing mutations; analysis to detect aberrations and validation of mutations can pose a major challenge. Design of primers to validate the
mutations detected with next generation sequencing can be complicated and not feasible at certain sites along the large gene, due to the
presence of multiple pseudogenes in the human genome 8. In summary, second‐hit inactivation of NF1 appears to be a common feature of various
tumors in the NF1 syndrome. However, the complexity of the pathogenesis of various tumors remains to be elucidated. Besides loss of NF1
function, additional aberrations in other important cancer‐related genes involving various pathways lead to the development of specific
tumors. Further investigations on additional tumor specimens from more NF1 patients will improve our understanding of the mechanisms of
pathogenesis in this tumor predisposition syndrome. None declared. Figure S1. Sanger sequencing confirms germline NF1 variant present in all
samples. Click here for additional data file. Figure S2. The sequencing reads as shown in the Integrated Genome Viewer software shows an
insertion present (denoted with pink ‡ mark) in the breast cancer that is not present in the germline (blood) sample. Click here for
additional data file. Figure S3. Both exome sequencing and Cytoscan HD SNP Array show LOH in chr17p for the breast cancer (both platforms)
and the MPNST (only exome sequencing available). Click here for additional data file. Table S1. Summary of exome sequencing of the four
samples. Click here for additional data file. Table S2. Details of the mutations detected in the exome sequencing. Click here for additional
data file. Table S3. The estimated copy number for various cancer‐related genes, based on comparing the read‐depth coverage of the tumor
sample to the matched nonmalignant sample. Click here for additional data file. Table S4. The estimated copy number for genes with gains or
losses as detected by the Chromosome Analysis Suite software from Affymetrix for Cytoscan HD Array data. Click here for additional data
file. We thank the patient for her participation, the SingHealth Tissue Repository for providing the tissue samples, and Mr Evan Hock‐Tat
Lim from SingHealth Academy for the medical illustration. This work was supported by SingHealth Foundation Research Grant, Singapore
(SHF/FG426S/2009).
