Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is a noninvasive technique used to assess regional gas distribution in the lung. We experienced a
patient with acute cor pulmonale during high positive-pressure ventilation for the treatment of severe acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Prone positioning was beneficial for unloading the right ventricle for treatment of acute cor pulmonale. EIT played a role in detecting lung
derecruitment at the patient’s bedside. Impedance distribution in ventral, mid-ventral, mid-dorsal, and dorsal layers before and 20 min
after the start of prone positioning was 9, 48, 44, and 0 %, and 10, 25, 48, and 16 %, respectively. Lung recruitment monitored by EIT
paralleled the improvement of PaO2/FIO2 from 123 to 239 mmHg. Timing of termination of prone positioning and ventilator settings such as
lowering positive end-expiration pressure was determined to maintain dorsal recruitment as seen by EIT. The patient was weaned from
mechanical ventilation on day 32 and discharged on day 200. EIT assessed the effects of prone positioning with real-time dynamic imaging and
guided less injurious mechanical ventilation in a patient with acute cor pulmonale with dorsal lung derecruitment. Acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) is characterized by deleterious hypoxemia. Although high positive airway pressure is required to provide adequate
gas exchange in patients with severe ARDS , it stresses pulmonary capillaries and increases pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). It
therefore creates right ventricular (RV) afterload and can cause RV failure. Acute cor pulmonale (ACP) is a severe form of RV failure caused
by increased PVR or high pulmonary arterial pressure, signifying a poor prognosis for patients with ARDS . Although prone positioning can be
used to unload the RV in patients with ACP associated with ARDS , its application is not included in the standard care for ARDS patients
because the indication is still controversial. Furthermore, it requires human resources and clinical experience to carry it out safely.
Serious adverse effects, including pressure ulcers and accidental tube removal prevent caregivers from using it routinely. Additionally, the
timing of initiation and termination of prone positioning is unclear. Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is a clinically available
noninvasive technique that can be used to address the application and the timing of prone positioning. Its measurement principle is the
creation of two-dimensional transverse single-slice images based on changes in impedance distribution originating from mechanical
ventilation . EIT can be used to assess the recruitment and homogeneity of gas distribution at the patient’s bedside. We report a case in
which EIT was beneficial for understanding lung derecruitment and assessing the effects of mechanical ventilation and prone positioning in a
patient with ACP associated with severe ARDS. A 77-year-old female was transferred from the general ward to the cardiac intensive care unit
because of loss of consciousness, severe hypoxemia, and oliguria. She had undergone elective surgery for Y-graft replacement for an
abdominal aortic aneurysm 1 month previously and emergency surgery for postoperative hemorrhage and necrosis of the sigmoid colon the next
day. She had been treated with meropenem and vancomycin. She was immediately intubated and mechanically ventilated. On day 2, chest
radiography demonstrated diffuse bilateral infiltration and her PaO2/FIO2 (P/F) was 123 mmHg without signs of cardiac failure, and she was
diagnosed as having ARDS. Conventional mechanical ventilation (pressure controlled assist/control) with plateau pressure up to 28 cmH2O in
combination with positive end-expiration pressure (PEEP) up to 15 cmH2O was applied in the first 20 h. However, SpO2 kept decreasing over
time and the patient’s condition became more critical. The attending doctors decided to use airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) as a
rescue mode. High PEEP levels were incrementally increased from 26 cmH2O. After APRV with FIO2 of 0.9 and high PEEP of 28 cmH2O was applied,
gas exchange could be maintained for the next 2 days. The cardiac surgeons consulted the intensive care doctors on day 4 regarding
mechanical ventilation. The patient was in septic shock and was treated with a continuous infusion of epinephrine 0.15 μg/kg/min and
norepinephrine 0.2 μg/kg/min (Fig. 1). As her hypoxemia and progressive hypercapnia had reached critical levels, we switched to inverse-
ratio ventilation with an inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio of 2:1, inspiratory pressure of 34 cmH2O, PEEP of 18 cmH2O, and a ventilatory
frequency of 31/min in order to increase minute ventilation without decreasing plateau pressure. Although the P/F ratio had stabilized (not
worsened), the respiratory acidosis remained as indicated with PaCO2 at 62.9 mmHg and pH 7.209, respectively. Transthoracic echocardiography
revealed severe RV dilatation (ratio between the RV and left ventricle end-diastolic areas was >1:1) in a four-chamber view, a paradoxical
septal shift to the LV in the short-axis view, and severe tricuspid regurgitation, which were compatible with ACP . The RV systolic pressure
was estimated at >60 mmHg. The use of extracorporeal life support was excluded by the cardiac surgeons based on their expert
opinion.Fig. 1Chest radiograph on day 4, taken immediately after tracheal intubation Chest radiograph on day 4, taken immediately after
tracheal intubation We proposed prone positioning for RV unloading. The doctors in charge hesitated because of lack of experience and
reliable information concerning derecruitment of dependent lung regions. We then suggested using EIT (Pulmovista 500; Draeger Medical,
Lübeck, Germany) to identify areas of lung derecruitment before prone positioning. Impedance values in each of the four layers (ventral,
mid-ventral, mid-dorsal, dorsal) in the supine position were 9, 48, 44, and 0 %, respectively (Fig. 2, left). At 20 min after the start of
prone positioning, 13 % of the total intrapulmonary gas had shifted from the mid-ventral to the dorsal layer with no changes in ventilator
settings (Fig. 3); the change seemed to be occurring predominantly in the right lung (Fig. 2, center). The P/F, PaCO2, and pH improved an
hour later to 239 mmHg, 36 mmHg, and 7.266, respectively. The first trial of prone positioning was discontinued at 3 h because of high doses
of catecholamines and no change in the EIT images during the final 30 min. The RV systolic pressure according to transthoracic
echocardiography was estimated at 47 mmHg. Blood cultures prepared on day 2 showed the presence of Candida albicans later on the same day as
prone positioning was started, and micafungin 100 mg daily was started.Fig. 2Images of electrical impedance tomography (EIT) at the end of
inspiration before and after prone positioning. An image was divided into four layers from ventral to dorsal.The right lung is presented at
the left side of the image. Regions with impedance changes of <10 % and >10 % of the determined maximum regional impedance change are
represented in black and blue, respectively. As the impedance values increase, the blue turns lighter blue. A white color indicates the
regions of maximum regional impedance change (i.e., 100 %) within the image. Left; before prone positioning trial, center; 20 min after the
start of first trial, right; 20 min after the start of second trialFig. 3Intrapulmonary gas distribution at end-inspiration measured by
electrical impedance tomography. The gas was shifted from the ventral to the dorsal area without changes in ventilatory settings Images of
electrical impedance tomography (EIT) at the end of inspiration before and after prone positioning. An image was divided into four layers
from ventral to dorsal.The right lung is presented at the left side of the image. Regions with impedance changes of <10 % and >10 % of the
determined maximum regional impedance change are represented in black and blue, respectively. As the impedance values increase, the blue
turns lighter blue. A white color indicates the regions of maximum regional impedance change (i.e., 100 %) within the image. Left; before
prone positioning trial, center; 20 min after the start of first trial, right; 20 min after the start of second trial Intrapulmonary gas
distribution at end-inspiration measured by electrical impedance tomography. The gas was shifted from the ventral to the dorsal area without
changes in ventilatory settings The following day, the patient’s gas distribution had completely returned to baseline level. At 4 h after
prone positioning was started, EIT imaging confirmed the presence of homogeneous gas distribution in almost all areas. Approximately 64 % of
the gas was distributed in the mid-dorsal and dorsal layers (Fig. 2, right), in accordance with the increase in the P/F to 334 mmHg. The RV
systolic pressure was estimated at 41 mmHg at 7 h after the end of prone positioning. Although the hemodynamics remained stabilized until
day 9, airway pressures could not be reduced because of instability while the patient remained supine. Alveolar instability was observed as
dorsal derecruitment on EIT with a PaO2 reduction from 434 to 195 mmHg. We switched to APRV with a P high of 26 cmH2O on day 10 to decrease
the plateau pressure but maintain mean airway pressure. P high was determined at the lowest PEEP to maintain dorsal recruitment as seen by
EIT. Prone positioning was continued for 14 days for periods of <7 h at each session (Fig. 4). No adverse effects associated with prone
positioning or EIT imaging were observed. The patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation on day 32 and was discharged on day
200.Fig. 4Time course of PaO2/FIO2 ratio, PaCO2, and ventilator settings at specific events and interventions. A/C assist/control mode, APRV
airway pressure release ventilation, IRV inverse-ratio ventilation, Paw airway pressure (peak/PEEP in A/C and IRV, Phigh/Plow in APRV), TTE
transthoracic echocardiography, CHDF continuous hemodiafiltration Time course of PaO2/FIO2 ratio, PaCO2, and ventilator settings at specific
events and interventions. A/C assist/control mode, APRV airway pressure release ventilation, IRV inverse-ratio ventilation, Paw airway
pressure (peak/PEEP in A/C and IRV, Phigh/Plow in APRV), TTE transthoracic echocardiography, CHDF continuous hemodiafiltration In our
patient, candidemia caused septic shock, resulting in secondary ARDS. It has been reported that the incidence of ACP in ARDS varies from
22−50 % . Additionally, ARDS patients with ACP showed a significantly higher mortality rate than ARDS patients without ACP (60 vs. 36 %,
respectively) [2, 3]. We have been evaluating RV function in ARDS patients using echocardiography since 2007. The actual incidence of ACP is
unknown, but intensivists should remember the impact of ACP and monitor RV function to protect against ACP. It has been reported that an
elevated plateau pressure (≥27 cmH2O) , a driving pressure of ≥17 cmH2O , hypercapnia (PaCO2 ≥60 mmHg) , the severity of ARDS , and
infectious causes are related to the development of ACP. All of these factors, except the driving pressure, were found in our patient at the
time of our initial examination. The application of prone positioning played a role in this case. It augments lung recruitment and prevents
overinflation . ACP is prevented by decreasing the plateau and/or driving pressure and improving gas exchange, especially CO2 elimination .
Although the plateau and driving pressures could not be changed in our patient, the CO2 level dropped significantly after a 1-h trial of
prone positioning. EIT showed the dorsal shift of intrapulmonary gas (Fig. 3) after prone positioning, and finally achieving homogeneous
ventilation. It is suggested that prone positioning reduces dead-space ventilation, resolves vasoconstriction, and decreases RV afterload.
RV dilation was not observed in cases of successful high-frequency ventilation-recruited lungs but was observed if high-frequency
ventilation failed . During the first APRV trial, PEEP probably stressed the pulmonary circulation, but it could not be confirmed without
serial echocardiographic RV monitoring. In the second APRV trial, EIT guided the lowest level of PEEP. It effectively kept the lungs open
without deteriorating RV function. Longer prone positioning has been recommended , although each trial has been <7 h. This timing could be
the reason for insufficient effects and the need for ventilator assistance. In our case, however, minimizing iatrogenic adverse events
related to prone positioning was considered more important. EIT played an important role in allowing prone positioning in the current case.
Although computed tomography (CT) has been used to evaluate ventilation distribution , its clinical use is limited because of frequent
radiation exposure, risk of transporting the patient, and lack of dynamic information. EIT, however, provides dynamic tidal images of gas
distribution at the patient’s bedside. Furthermore, its radiation-free nature is advantageous. In addition, it enables frequent adjustment
of the ventilator settings. As recruitment parallels gas exchange improvement, as seen on EIT images, we were able to determine the correct
ventilator settings and initiate and terminate prone positioning based on EIT data. Studies have reported that EIT provides useful
information. A significant correlation between EIT and CT analyses of end-expiratory lung volume (EELV) during incremental and decremental
PEEP trials was reported in pig saline lavage-induced acute lung injury models . The authors also found EIT showed earlier derecruitment in
dependent lung areas during the decremental trial, whereas the global tidal volume still continued to increase. Inspiratory-expiratory tidal
volume changes after PEEP change estimated by EIT closely correlated with those measured by spirometry . Good agreement was found between
repeated EELV measurements and a simulated nitrogen washout technique to calculate lung volume . EIT-guided mechanical ventilation preserved
the alveolar architecture and maintained oxygenation and lung mechanics better than lower tidal volume ventilation in the saline lavage
model . In conclusion, EIT was used for detecting areas of derecruitment and assessing the effects of mechanical ventilation and prone
positioning in a patient with severe ARDS and ACP. The authors acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Ryoichi Ochiai, Department of
Anesthesiology, Toho University, Tokyo, Japan. All authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
