Small cell lung carcinoma frequently metastasizes to lymph nodes, liver, adrenal glands, bone, brain and pleura. Metastasis of small cell
lung cancer to the thyroid gland is extremely rare. A 55-year-old Turkish man presented with a mediastinal mass intermingled with
mediastinal lymphadenopathy, measuring 11cm in total, and encasing superior vena cava and deviating his trachea, esophagus and vascular
structures. He had superior vena cava syndrome. His thyroid appeared normal on computed tomography of his chest. A bronchoscopic biopsy
showed small cell lung carcinoma. Chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide and external radiotherapy was given. Six months after the
presentation, multiple brain metastases were detected on magnetic resonance imaging. Chemotherapy was changed to topotecan and cranial
irradiation was performed. At the same time, a right thyroid nodule was detected on computed tomography of his chest and showed growth in
size in the following 4 months. A palpable right thyroid nodule came to our attention at that time, the 10th month of presentation. Free
thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, thyroid-stimulating hormone, antithyroglobulin and antithyroid peroxidase antibodies were within normal
limits. Thyroid ultrasonography showed a right thyroid lobe 26.2×16.8×15.7mm hypoechoic solid nodule with irregular borders.
Ultrasonography-guided thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy showed metastasis from small cell lung carcinoma. His cranial metastases
worsened. He developed right cervical lymph node, hepatic, pancreatic and meningeal metastases and died 15 months after the initial
presentation and 9 months after the detection of thyroid metastasis by computed tomography of his chest. Our case and two previously
reported cases were male, 55-years old or older and had history of more than 40 pack-years of cigarette smoking. All had metastatic disease
elsewhere, when the thyroid metastasis was diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration biopsy. All had poor survival, between 9 and 18 months, after
thyroid metastasis was diagnosed. We conclude that in a patient with a known history of malignant disease, the finding of a new thyroid mass
should be promptly evaluated with a thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy to search for metastatic disease. The clinical features of our and
two previously reported cases were summarized. Although the thyroid gland has a rich vascular supply, carcinomas rarely metastasize to the
thyroid . The primary carcinomas that metastasize to the thyroid are renal cell (48.1%), colorectal (10.4%), lung (8.3%) and breast (7.8%)
carcinomas, melanoma (4%), sarcoma (4%) and other types (17.4%) . Among the lung carcinomas metastasizing to the thyroid, adenocarcinomas
are the commonest followed by squamous cell carcinomas . Small cell and large cell carcinomas rarely metastasize to the thyroid gland .
Small cell lung cancer is a rapidly progressive malignancy with a poor survival rate. Small cell lung cancers frequently metastasize to
lymph nodes, liver, adrenal glands, bone, brain and pleura. Metastasis of small cell lung cancer to the thyroid is a very rare clinical
encounter [6, 7]. We report a case of small cell lung carcinoma that metastasized to the thyroid gland and review the clinical literature. A
55-year-old Turkish man presented with swelling in the anterior of his neck and dyspnea for 3 to 4 days. His past medical history was
significant for hypertension, hyperlipidemia and a hip prosthesis. He was treated with atenolol, quinapril-hydrochlorothiazide combination
and atorvastatin tablets. He had a 50-pack year history of cigarette smoking. His blood pressure was 140/88mmHg, pulse 96 beats per minute
and respiratory rate 16 per minute. A chest X-ray showed a mediastinal mass. Computed tomography (CT) of his thorax showed a 10.6×9.7×10.8cm
mediastinal mass encasing superior vena cava, causing stenosis of the lumen and deviation of his trachea, esophagus and vascular structures.
The mass also reached to the right pulmonary hilus. The presence of lymph node metastasis was not clearly discernible from the images,
because the mass appeared somewhat homogeneous (Fig. 1). Subcarinal lymphadenopathy was evident (Fig. 2). In retrospect, we think that the
mass was intermingled with multiple lymph node metastases, because they regressed with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The thyroid appeared
normal on CT of his chest. He exhibited clinical features of superior vena cava syndrome. The staging was done by CT of his chest and
abdomen. Positron emission tomography-CT and endobronchial ultrasound were not performed. There was no evidence of liver or pancreatic
metastases on the initial CT of his abdomen. He had a 15mm hypodense nodule in his left adrenal gland that was not biopsied and remained
stable in size during follow-up. A bronchoscopic biopsy showed small cell carcinoma of the lung (Fig. 3). Immunohistochemical staining with
synaptophysin, pan cytokeratin and chromogranin (Fig. 4) were positive. A diagnosis of limited stage small cell lung carcinoma was made and
he was started on chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide. When his tumor diminished in size and fitted to the radiotherapy field,
external radiotherapy was instituted. The clinical course showed refractoriness to treatment. He developed radiation pneumonitis and later
fibrosis in his right lung. Six months after the presentation, a right thyroid nodule was detected on CT of his chest and multiple brain
metastases were detected on magnetic resonance imaging of his brain. Chemotherapy was changed to topotecan. Cranial irradiation was given.
He developed pancytopenia. Ten months after the presentation, the patient’s oncologist (second author Gülistan Köksal, MD) was alerted by
the finding of the size progression of the right thyroid nodule on a CT scan of the patient’s chest (Fig. 5). On physical examination, a
right thyroid nodule was palpable. Thyroid function tests were within normal limits at that time, as well as antithyroglobulin and
antithyroid peroxidase antibodies, which were performed at a later date. Tests revealed: free thyroxine (T4) 1.32ng/ml (normal range 0.8 to
1.81), free triiodothyronine (T3) 2.35pg/ml (normal range 2.30 to 4.40), thyroid-stimulating hormone 0.313μIU/ml (normal range 0.27 to
4.20), antithyroid peroxidase antibody 1.1IU/ml (normal range <12), and antithyroglobulin antibody 5.9IU/ml (normal range <34). Thyroid
ultrasonography showed a 26.2×16.8×15.7mm hypoechoic solid nodule with irregular borders in his right thyroid lobe (Fig. 6). An
ultrasonography-guided thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy showed metastasis from small cell lung carcinoma (Fig. 7). His cranial
metastases worsened. There was no size reduction of the initially detected metastatic thyroid nodule and two new hypoechoic nodules of
4.2×4.7×2.5mm and 4.2×3.4×3.4mm with blurred borders were detected by thyroid ultrasonography performed 4.5 months after the diagnosis of
the thyroid metastasis by fine-needle aspiration biopsy. He developed right cervical lymph node, hepatic, pancreatic and meningeal
metastases and expired 15 months after the initial presentation and 9 months after the detection of thyroid metastasis on CT of his
chest.Fig. 1Computed tomography image of the mediastinal mass intermingled with mediastinal lymphadenopathyFig. 2Computed tomography image
of subcarinal lymphadenopathyFig. 3Oil immersion, high power (×1000 magnification) hematoxylin and eosin staining of bronchial biopsy. Small
cell carcinoma cells are seen in the lamina propria juxtaposed to red blood cells. Small cell carcinoma cells are characterized by
hyperchromatic nuclei, high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and nuclear moldingFig. 4Immunohistochemical (×400 magnification) chromogranin
staining (brown) as a marker for neuroendocrine differentiation in bronchial biopsyFig. 5Computed tomography image of the thyroid gland and
right thyroid noduleFig. 6Thyroid ultrasonography image of right thyroid lobeFig. 7Oil immersion, high power (×1000 magnification) Diff-
Quick staining of thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Small cell carcinoma cells are characterized by hyperchromatic nuclei, coarse
chromatin, salt and pepper appearance, high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and nuclear membrane irregularities. No thyroid follicular cells
are seen. Small cell carcinoma cells are much larger than thyroid follicular cells Computed tomography image of the mediastinal mass
intermingled with mediastinal lymphadenopathy Computed tomography image of subcarinal lymphadenopathy Oil immersion, high power (×1000
magnification) hematoxylin and eosin staining of bronchial biopsy. Small cell carcinoma cells are seen in the lamina propria juxtaposed to
red blood cells. Small cell carcinoma cells are characterized by hyperchromatic nuclei, high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and nuclear
molding Immunohistochemical (×400 magnification) chromogranin staining (brown) as a marker for neuroendocrine differentiation in bronchial
biopsy Computed tomography image of the thyroid gland and right thyroid nodule Thyroid ultrasonography image of right thyroid lobe Oil
immersion, high power (×1000 magnification) Diff-Quick staining of thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Small cell carcinoma cells are
characterized by hyperchromatic nuclei, coarse chromatin, salt and pepper appearance, high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and nuclear membrane
irregularities. No thyroid follicular cells are seen. Small cell carcinoma cells are much larger than thyroid follicular cells The clinical
detection of thyroid metastasis from nonthyroid primary tumors is an extremely rare event, but autopsy series report somewhat higher rates.
In a postmortem study performed on patients who died of advanced cancer, the rate of metastasis to the thyroid gland was 8.6% . A meticulous
autopsy study (Reference could not be located in PubMed, Scopus, Science Direct and Turkish Academic Network and Information Center and was
cross-referred from reference ) that microscopically examined at least one slice of thyroid for every 5 gram of tissue in patients who died
of metastatic cancer reported the rate of thyroid metastasis as 24.2% [10, 11]. The clinical finding of thyroid metastasis from a nonthyroid
primary tumor is much less common, although the incidence depends on how vigorously this is sought. Thyroid metastasis of nonthyroid primary
cancers represented 0.16% of all thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsies and 1.9% of all thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsies that were
categorized as malignant in a multicenter study from the USA and Europe . In an analysis of thyroidectomy specimens performed on patients
with a solitary thyroid metastasis (patients with multiple metastases to other sites were excluded), Calzolari et al. reported the
prevalence of intrathyroid metastasis as 0.15% . Chung et al. reviewed secondary thyroid tumors reported between 2000 and 2010, and
concluded that among the 293 patients with adequate data, 60% of cases had extrathyroid metastases, either diagnosed previously or
concomitantly with thyroid metastasis . Up to 40% of metastases were solitary to the thyroid gland and presented as isolated thyroid
metastasis . In only 20% of the cases were the diagnosis of nonthyroid primary cancer and the detection of thyroid metastases concurrent .
There are only a few reported cases of thyroid metastasis from small cell lung cancer [6, 7]. Therefore, we decided to report this
particular case and review similar cases in the clinical literature. Our literature review focused on articles published in the English
language and excluded autopsy series and a case reported earlier in another language . We only found two previous reports of small cell lung
cancer metastasis to the thyroid [6, 7]. The clinical features of those and our case are summarized in Table 1. All the patients with
thyroid metastasis of small cell lung cancer were male and were 55-years old or older. All had a history of heavy cigarette smoking. All had
extensive stage disease when thyroid metastasis was diagnosed. The two previously reported patients had synchronous metastasis to the
thyroid gland. Our case had metachronous detection of thyroid metastasis. In patients with metachronous metastases, the mean interval for
detection of thyroid metastasis from primary tumors was 68 months for renal cell cancer, 48 months for breast cancer, 42 months for
colorectal cancer and 21 months for malignant melanoma . The time period between the diagnosis of primary tumor and the discovery of thyroid
metastasis was shortest in patients with lung cancer, with a mean of 4.5 months . In our patient, thyroid metastasis appeared 6 months after
the presentation.Table 1Clinical features of the current and previously reported* cases of small cell lung carcinoma with thyroid
metastasisAuthor, year, referenceOzgu et al. 2012 Katsenos et al. 2013 Can and Köksal 2015 (this report)GenderMaleMaleMaleAge
(years)665555ComorbiditiesCAD, CABGCAD, PTCA, DMHTN, HL, hip prosthesisSmoking history75 pack-year40 pack-year50 pack-yearThyroid
statusHyperthyroid due to toxic MNGEuthyroid†EuthyroidOther sites of metastasis‡Adrenal metsCervical and mediastinal LN, cerebellar
metsCerebral metsSynchronicitySynchronousSynchronousMetachronousTime to detection of metastasisNANA6 monthsDiagnosis of thyroid
metastasisFNAFNAFNAThyroidectomyNoNoNoTreatmentChemotherapyChemotherapy, cranial irradiationChemotherapy, lung and cranial
irradiationSurvival after diagnosis of thyroid metastasis11 months18 months†9 months CABG coronary artery bypass grafting, CAD coronary
artery disease, DM diabetes mellitus, FNA fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid, HL hyperlipidemia, HTN hypertension, LN lymph nodes,
mets metastasis, MNG multinodular goiter, NA nonapplicable because of synchronous diagnosis of the small cell lung cancer and thyroid
metastasis, PTCA percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, *Literature review was based on clinical cases (not autopsies) and to
articles published in the English language †personal e-mail communication with Stamatis Katsenos, MD, PhD on 16 November 2014, ‡represents
other sites of metastasis when thyroid metastasis was diagnosed Clinical features of the current and previously reported* cases of small
cell lung carcinoma with thyroid metastasis CABG coronary artery bypass grafting, CAD coronary artery disease, DM diabetes mellitus, FNA
fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid, HL hyperlipidemia, HTN hypertension, LN lymph nodes, mets metastasis, MNG multinodular goiter,
NA nonapplicable because of synchronous diagnosis of the small cell lung cancer and thyroid metastasis, PTCA percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty, *Literature review was based on clinical cases (not autopsies) and to articles published in the English language
†personal e-mail communication with Stamatis Katsenos, MD, PhD on 16 November 2014, ‡represents other sites of metastasis when thyroid
metastasis was diagnosed Our patient was euthyroid without evidence of autoimmune thyroid disease. Ozgu et al. reported the coexistence of
toxic multinodular goiter and thyroid metastasis from small cell lung cancer in a patient with thyrotoxicosis . Primary nonthyroid tumors
may also cause thyrotoxicosis due to massive metastasis causing destructive thyroiditis . In all three reported patients with thyroid
metastasis of small cell lung cancer, the diagnosis was established by thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy (Table 1). In their recent
review of thyroid metastases from nonthyroid malignancies, Chung et al. estimated that thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy provided the
correct diagnosis in 73.7% of patients . Pusztaszeri et al. reported that thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy categorized 87% of thyroid
metastasis of nonthyroid primary carcinomas to malignant or to the suspicious for follicular neoplasm group, the categories that call for
surgical intervention as the treatment approach . These sensitivity rates for secondary carcinomas are similar to the sensitivity rate of
83% (range 65 to 98%) for thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy for detection of primary carcinomas in thyroid nodules . The difficulty of
distinguishing primary thyroid anaplastic carcinoma or poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma from metastatic high-grade malignancy is
reported to be a source of error for accurate cytological interpretation in the evaluation of secondary thyroid tumors [1, 5]. None of the
cases of thyroid metastasis from small cell lung carcinoma underwent thyroidectomy (Table 1). All were treated with chemotherapy consisting
of cisplatin and etoposide or chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Surgery was not considered in our case, because there were cerebral metastases
and surgical excision is not a recommended modality in the management of small cell lung carcinoma. Osawa et al. reported the case of a
67-year-old man diagnosed with stage IIIA (T2N2M0) small cell lung cancer who was treated with cisplatin and etoposide followed by cranial
irradiation . Four years later, an isolated thyroid metastasis was diagnosed. A thyroid metastasectomy showed large cell carcinoma. Review
of the initial lung material showed both small and large cells in the tumor. The authors concluded that the patient had a combined small and
large cell carcinoma in his lung as the primary, and the large cell component metastasized to the thyroid gland . As the large cell
carcinoma component metastasized to the thyroid, we did not include this case in Table 1. The appearance of thyroid metastasis is thought to
indicate a poor prognosis. Earlier case reports or series presented the average survival from diagnosis to death as 2 months in lung
carcinomas with thyroid metastasis [4, 11]. The survival of the recently reported patients in 2012 and 2013 and our patient ranged between 9
and 18 months (Table 1 and personal e-mail communication with Stamatis Katsenos, MD, PhD on 16 November 2014) and probably reflects the
effect of improved treatment modalities in the last few years compared to previous decades. From a case series of 25 patients with solitary
intrathyroid metastasis, Calzolari et al. reported that patients with a single metastatic lesion on the thyroid from a nonthyroid primary
carcinoma had better survival than those with multiple metastases to the thyroid . The incidence of primary thyroid cancer is on the rise ,
but it is not known if the incidence of thyroid metastases from nonthyroid malignancies is also on the rise. There is an increase in the
number of case reports of nonthyroid primary cancer metastasis to the thyroid gland. From the Mayo Clinic, only two cases of thyroid
metastasis from nonthyroid primary cancers were observed in thyroid surgeries performed between 1892 and 1932 , 14 cases were reported from
the preceding 55-year period in 1964 , 12 cases during the preceding 21-year period in 1982 , 15 cases during the preceding 6-year period in
1987 , and 39 cases in the preceding 10-year period in 1997 . The upper limit of the preceding years ended a few years earlier than the
publication dates of the Mayo Clinic reports. In 2010, Chung et al. reported 372 cases of thyroid metastases of nonthyroid malignancies and
pointed out that there is an apparent increase in the number of reported cases of thyroid metastasis from nonthyroid primary tumors . This
observed increase can be attributed to the growth of the population resulting in an increasing number of cases of cancer and thus
metastasis, an increase in the number of journals facilitating publication or an increase in the incidence of nonthyroid cancer . Increasing
use of imaging technologies, such as positron emission tomography, more frequent use of thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy and improved
survival of patients with disseminated cancer probably contributed to the increased number of case reports of thyroid metastasis from
nonthyroid primary carcinomas [1, 2]. Primary small cell carcinomas originating from the urinary bladder and uterine cervix have also been
reported to metastasize to the thyroid gland. Primary small cell carcinoma of the thyroid is a very rare entity . After the introduction of
immunohistochemistry, some of the previously diagnosed primary small cell carcinomas of the thyroid were diagnosed as primary lymphomas,
poorly differentiated insular carcinomas of the thyroid or small cell variants of medullary carcinomas . A variety of neuroendocrine tumors
have also been reported to metastasize to the thyroid . In view of our clinical experience of this reported case, we suggest that the
finding of a new thyroid nodule in a patient with a known malignancy should trigger a search for metastasis. Secondary thyroid tumors after
a nonthyroid primary tumor are rare. Ultrasonography-guided thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy aids in the diagnosis and helps to
differentiate whether the nodule in question is a benign thyroid nodule, a primary thyroid carcinoma or metastatic thyroid carcinoma. We
report a rare case of thyroid metastasis from small cell lung carcinoma. After reviewing previously reported cases [6, 7] and our case, we
conclude that the appearance of a thyroid nodule during follow-up of patients with a prior history of malignancy should be promptly
evaluated with a thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy to search for metastatic disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of a case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Clinical care
of the patient: GK, ASC. Review of the pertinent literature: ASC. Manuscript preparation: ASC. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Authors’ information GK was the oncologist and ASC was the endocrinology consultant of the reported case. ASC and GK are former
employees of the private Gayrettepe Florence Nightingale Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey where the clinical care was provided to the patient. We
thank Kemal Şarman, MD from Istanbul Pathology Group, Istanbul, Turkey for evaluation of biopsy specimens. This case was presented as a
poster in the combined 15th International Congress of Endocrinology and 14th European Congress of Endocrinology (ICE-ECE 2012) between 5 and
9 May 2012 in Florence, Italy.
