Kimura’s disease is a rare, chronic inflammatory condition of unknown etiology; with a predilection in the head and neck region. However,
the involvement of the lip and epiglottis is extremely rare, and poses a diagnostic challenge. Here, we report a case of a 32-year-old Saudi
male presenting with lip mass and epiglottic swelling without any history of hoarse voice or airway compromise. Serology showed elevated
immunoglobulin E levels, and histopathological examination of biopsied lesions revealed well-developed lymphoid follicles with eosinophilic
infiltration confirming Kimura’s disease. At the time of last follow-up, his condition was satisfactory without any signs of recurrence.
Kimura’s disease (KD) is a rare, chronic non-neoplastic inflammatory disease, that is predominantly seen in Asian males during the third
decade of life.1 The common manifestation is slowly enlarging subcutaneous masses often found in the head and neck region along with raised
serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels, and peripheral blood eosinophilia. Kimura’s disease affecting lips and larynx is an extremely rare
entity, and only few case reports have been published.2 Here, we report a rare case of KD affecting lip and epiglottis and its related
review of literature. A 32-year old Saudi male presented with an 8-year history of upper lip swelling without any hoarseness of voice, and
airway compromise. His previous medical and surgical history was unremarkable. On physical examination, a diffuse, solitary hard upper lip
mass of size 2×1.5 cm was noticed without any significant cervical lymphadenopathy. The rest of the examination was unremarkable. The
complete blood count showed eosinophilia (eosinophils; 11%), and serological examination showed elevated serum IgE with a value of 1064
IU/mL. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck exhibited a 2×2 cm upper lip mass (Figure 1A), and CT scan of the neck showed a
polypoid mass measuring 2.5×2 cm attached to the epiglottis (Figure 1B). He underwent excision of the lip and epiglottic lesions.
Histopathological examination showed multiple hyperplastic lymphoid follicles with reactive germinal centers beneath the intact stratified
squamous epithelium of the epiglottis (Figure 2), and adjacent to the minor salivary gland of the lip (Figure 3). The lymphoid follicles
were separated by mixed chronic inflammatory infiltrate with a large number of eosinophils along with plasma cells, small mature
lymphocytes, as well as histiocytes (Figures 4 & 5). His condition was satisfactory without any signs of recurrence. An image showing: A)
the sagittal view of MRI of the head showing upper lip mass; and B) CT scan of the neck showing epiglottic mass. An image showing
hyperplastic lymph follicles beneath the squamous epithelium of the epiglottis (Hematoxylin & Eosin, original magnification ×100). An image
showing lymph follicles adjacent to the minor salivary gland of the lip (Hematoxylin & Eosin, original magnification ×100). An image showing
interfollicular area infiltrated by mixed inflammatory cells and thin walled blood vessels (Hematoxylin & Eosin, original magnification
×400) An image showing interfollicular area infiltrated by mixed inflammatory cells and eosinophils (Hematoxylin & Eosin, original
magnification ×400) Kimura’s disease was initially described in 19373 as “eosinophilic hyperplastic lymphogranuloma”. In 1948, Kimura et al4
reported it with a title ‘‘On the unusual granulation combined with hyperplastic changes of lymphatic tissue’’ after which this entity
became widely known as KD.4 Kimura’s disease tends to affect predominantly young adults, and shows a striking male predilection (male to
female ratio was 5:1).5 The diagnosis of KD is challenging. The main differential diagnosis of KD is angiolymphoid hyperplasia with
eosinophilia (ALHE). Kimura’s disease invariably is associated with peripheral eosinophilia, and elevated serum IgE levels. The solitary
lesions are usually in the deep subcutaneous tissues, frequently associated with regional lymphadenopathy, and salivary glands involvement.
By contrast, ALHE occurs mainly in females, and patients present with small, superficial dermal papulo-nodules, frequently erythematous,
accompanied by bleeding, pruritus, and tumor growth, without regional lymphadenopathy, serum eosinophilia, and elevated IgE levels.5 Also in
contrast to KD, the vascular proliferation is most commonly seen in ALHE.5,6 Kimura’s disease of the lips was reported in 16 cases.7
Similarly, KD of the epiglottis is also extremely uncommon; only 11 cases have been reported in the literature.8 Symptoms were mostly
related to airway narrowing, and only 2 patients were found asymptomatic, which is similar to our case.7 Further, the co-existence of the
lip and epiglottic KD is not previously reported. The pathogenesis of KD is not well known; however, allergic reaction or an alteration of
immune regulation can be the possible cause.8 Surgical resection is the standard treatment option for KD. Adjuvant therapy in the form of
steroids, cytotoxic therapy, and radiation therapy also have been used in some cases.9 Kimura’s disease is associated with excellent
prognosis; only few local and distal recurrences also have been reported.10 In conclusion, KD of the lip and epiglottis is extremely a rare
manifestation and poses a diagnostic challenge. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice. The authors gratefully acknowledge Mohammad
U. Manzoor, Consultant Radiologist, for reviewing the images and providing excellent feedback. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of
interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was
not supported or funded by any drug company. Case reports will only be considered for unusual topics that add something new to the
literature. All Case Reports should include at least one figure. Written informed consent for publication must accompany any photograph in
which the subject can be identified. Figures should be submitted with a 300 dpi resolution when submitting electronically or printed on
high-contrast glossy paper when submitting print copies. The abstract should be unstructured, and the introductory section should always
include the objective and reason why the author is presenting this particular case. References should be up to date, preferably not
exceeding 15.
