The indication of pacemaker/AICD removal are numerous. Serious complication can occur during their removal, severe tricuspid regurgitation
is one of the complication. The occurrence of PFO is not uncommon among adult population. Shunting across PFO in most circumstance is
negligible, but in some necessitates closure due to hypoxemia. We report a case of 62 year old man, while undergoing AICD removal, had an
emergency sternotomy for cardiac tamponade. Postoperatively, he experienced profound hypoxemia refractory to oxygen therapy. Transthoracic
Echocardiogram was performed to rule out intracardiac shunts at an early stage, but it was difficult to obtain an good imaging windows
poststernotomy. A small pulmonary emboli was noted on CTPA, but was not sufficient to account for the level of hypoxemia and did not resolve
with anticoagulation. Transesophageal echocardiogram showed flail septal tricuspid valve with severe TR and bidirectional shunt through
large PFO. Patient was posted for surgery, tricuspid valve was replaced and PFO surgically closed. Subsequently, patient recovered well ad
was discharged to home. Cause of hypoxemia might be due to respiratory or cardiac dysfunction. But for hypoxemia refractory to oxygen
therapy, transoesophageal echocardiogram should be always considered and performed early as an diagnostic tool in post cardiac surgical
patients. The indications for pacemaker and automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (AICD) removal are numerous, but mainly include
infection or lead malfunction. The treatment of choice is the extraction of the pacemaker/AICD generator and/or the leads. The frequently
used technique for lead extraction is a transvenous laser assisted approach. Although the risk of this approach is low, the risk of removal
of AICD leads far exceeds that for pacemaker leads. Serious complications can occur, the majority of which are immediate. There are reports
of severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) after lead removal needing surgery. The occurrence of a large patent foramen ovale (PFO) with a
bidirectional shunt is not uncommon in adult patients undergoing cardiac operations and at times necessitates closure due to severe
hypoxemia. Transesophageal echocardiogram is a highly sensitive investigation in diagnosing a PFO perioperatively in the Intensive Care Unit
(ICU). We present a case report of severe hypoxemia after AICD lead extraction. A 62-year-old man with a history of hypertension, smoking,
and AICD implant for out of hospital ventricular fibrillation arrest 13 years earlier was scheduled for AICD generator box change under
general anesthesia (GA). Anesthetic pre assessment was unremarkable with a good ventricular function on echocardiogram. During the attempted
removal of the AICD generator box, the cardiologist noted a break in the insulation of the AICD lead component. Because the patient was not
consented for leads removal, the generator box was removed, and leads were left in situ with a plan for laser extraction at a later date.
Two days later, laser extraction of leads was attempted under GA. Monitoring included standard and invasive arterial pressures. The lead
extraction was complicated with pericardial tamponade due to a linear tear in the free wall of the the right ventricle, which was managed
successfully by emergency surgery, and the patient was extubated later that day in the ICU. Intraoperatively, central venous pressure was
noted to be around 18–22 cm of water. The following day he became intermittently hypoxemic with a PaO2 of 6.8–13.3 kPa despite being on high
inspired oxygen via continuous positive airway pressure mask. Central venous pressure was around 13–15 cm of water. Clinical examination and
chest X-ray which showed some left basal collapse did not correlate with his level of hypoxemia. Transthoracic echocardiogram was not
conclusive because of the poor window. Although, he remained hypoxemic, his hemodynamics and metabolic parameters were normal. So, he
underwent computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA), which showed a small right solitary pulmonary embolism, a small left pleural
effusion and atelectasis. He was then started on heparin infusion. Despite a sufficient duration of anticoagulation and 100% oxygen he
remained hypoxemic. A review of his CTPA scan suggested an aneurysmal interatrial septum. Transesophageal echocardiography was performed
under GA. It demonstrated a flail tricuspid valve with severe eccentric TR, an aneurismal interatrial septum, and a large PFO with a
bidirectional shunt. There was dilatation of right atrial (RA) and right ventricular (RV) with mild RV dysfunction and preserved left
ventricular function. Patient was extubated, discussed with consultant cardiothoracic surgeon, and consented for surgical closure of PFO and
tricuspid valve replacement [Figures 1–3]. The next day, he underwent tricuspid valve replacement and bovine pericardial patch closure of
PFO. He made a good postoperative recovery and was discharged home in few days’ time. At follow-up, 6 weeks later, he had returned to normal
activity and had an echocardiogram which showed a well seated functioning tricuspid prosthesis and no residual shunt across the interatrial
septum. Mid esophageal four chamber view showing flail tricuspid valve Mid esophageal four chamber view showing severe tricuspid
regurgitation Mid esophageal bi-caval view showing shunt across large patent foramen ovale Lead extraction is not without complications;
though much reduced with effective current techniques. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) lead replacement complications were
8.1%, of which 5.8% were major complications. Many reports favor lead extraction for infective complications to reduce systemic sepsis. Risk
factors for complications include younger patients, implantation site, female gender, physician experience, and the duration of lead
implantation. Lead extraction can be difficult due to the encasement of the leads in fibrotic tissue. The process of fibrotic encapsulation
is by activation of different cellular and humoral mechanisms. Because fibrous attachments to surrounding structures may involve the
tricuspid valve, valvular damage may be provoked by lead removal. Methods to extract leads range from a transvenous approach to open
procedures. Of the many transvenous approaches the laser assisted technique has been shown to have least complications. Laser sheaths reduce
the duration and magnitude of the force applied and aids in disrupting fibrous tissues, although the possibility of serious complications
still exists. The incidence of PFO ranges from 14.6% to 35% in postmortem examinations. Morphologically findings of hypermobility of septum
primum and enlargement of fossa ovalis can occur in the presence of PFO. Transient right to left shunting through a PFO causing refractory
hypoxemia is less recognized and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of severe hypoxemia. This kind of shunting can also
occur in pulmonary embolism, RV infarction, heart failure with left ventricular assist device, pneumonectomy, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and application of positive end-expired pressure during intermittent positive pressure ventilation. Detection of the interatrial
shunt is essential for the diagnosis of PFO in the absence of atrial septal defect. Among the various modern methods of PFO detection,
transesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) is generally considered to be the “gold standard.” This report describes a middle aged man presenting
with refractory hypoxemia after ICD leads removal. Transthoracic echocardiogram was performed to rule out intracardiac shunts at an early
stage, but it was inconclusive because of poor window poststernotomy. A small pulmonary embolism was noted on CTPA, which did not account
for the level of hypoxemia and did not resolve with anticoagulation. Transesophageal echocardiogram was performed under GA and patient was
woken up immediately after the procedure, primarily to obtain consent. Accentuation of the shunt across PFO results when RA pressure exceeds
more than left atrial pressure or when the anatomic relationship of the interatrial septum to the inferior vena cava is altered. In this
case, although the RV perforation had been dealt with immediately, the injury to the tricuspid valve and ensuing severe TR went
unrecognized. In our opinion, the raised RA pressures and severe TR jet toward the septum may have opened the PFO significantly accounting
for the shunt. PFO is not uncommon in the adult population. In situations where right sided pressure exceeds the left sided pressure, the
right to left intracardiac shunt may result in hypoxemia. Hypoxemia is common in post cardiac surgical/cardiology patients and is either due
to respiratory dysfunction or congestive heart failure. We conclude that TOE is a vital investigating tool, which should be considered early
for the diagnosis of suspected postoperative hypoxemia refractory to oxygen therapy. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
