This is the first case that describes bilateral, multifocal central serous retinopathy appearing 2 days after starting pimasertib for
ovarian cancer and rapidly resolving 3 days after stopping pimasertib. Pimasertib is an orally bioavailable MEK 1 and 2 inhibitor with
potential antineoplastic activity, that is, currently used in clinical trials for ovarian cancer. Multifocal serous retinal detachments have
been reported with the use of MEK 1 and 2 inhibitors. The authors report the development of multifocal serous retinal detachments with the
use of pimasertib in a 26-year-old woman with metastatic low-grade serous ovarian cancer that was initially treated in 2010, with
laparoscopic right oophorectomy. The tumor showed evidence of progression in 2011 for which a hysterectomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy,
omentectomy, and removal of the metastatic disease from the diaphragm was performed. This was followed by six cycles of carboplatin and
taxol, along with one cycle of maintenance bevacizumab. There was no other medical history. The pathophysiology of this complication is
still poorly understood. To report a case of multifocal serous retinal detachments associated with pimasertib. The authors report a 26-year-
old patient who developed bilateral multifocal serous retinal detachments appearing 2 days after starting pimasertib (as part of a clinical
trial investigating its use in low-grade metastatic ovarian cancer) and rapidly resolving 3 days after stopping it. The mechanism of MEK
inhibitor induced visual toxicity remains unclear. The pathophysiology of multifocal serous retinal detachments as a complication of
pimasertib is still poorly understood. This unique case demonstrates bilateral serous retinal detachments as a side effect of pimasertib.
Pimasertib is an orally bioavailable MEK 1 and 2 inhibitor with potential antineoplastic activity, that is, currently used in clinical
trials for ovarian cancer. A 26-year-old woman, known to have metastatic low-grade serous ovarian cancer, started complaining of blurred
vision 2 days after starting pimasertib. This was prescribed as part of a clinical trial, investigating the use of pimasertib versus placebo
in the treatment of low-grade metastatic ovarian cancer. Pimasertib is given as a 60-mg tablet daily for 21 days followed by 7 days break
and then the cycle is restarted. Snellen visual acuity at presentation was 20/25+2 in each eye, intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg, and the
anterior segment was unremarkable. Fundoscopy showed multifocal serous retinal detachment in both eyes (Figure 1). Optical coherence
tomography demonstrated striking bilateral, multifocal serous retinal detachments (Figure 2, A and B). There was no history of steroid use.
Fundoscopic exam showing multi-foci serous retinal detachments. A. Optical coherence tomography of the right eye showing multifocal serous
retinal detachments. B. Optical coherence tomography of the left eye showing multifocal serous retinal detachments. Three days after
emergently stopping the pimasertib due to her ocular complaint, her vision rapidly returned to normal. Snellen visual acuity had improved to
20/20 in each eye and fundoscopy revealed resolution of the serous retinal detachments (Figure 3). Optical coherence tomography showed near
complete resolution of the serous retinal detachments (Figure 4, A and B). Intravenous fluorescein fundus angiography was normal after
stopping the medication (Figure 5). Fundoscopic examination showing resolution of serous retinal detachments. A. Optical coherence
tomography of the right eye showing complete resolution of serous retinal detachments after completing pimasertib course. B. Optical
coherence tomography of the left eye showing almost complete resolution of serous retinal detachments after completing pimasertib course.
Intravenous fundus fluorescein angiogram of both eyes was normal 3 days after stopping pimasertib. Pimasertib is a MEK 1 and 2 inhibitor
that modulates mitogen-activated protein kinases, which are a family of ubiquitous eukaryotic signal transduction enzymes that link
extracellular stimuli to intracellular gene expression pathways allowing for various cellular responses, including adaptation and survival.1
The classic mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK cascade, is initiated by the binding of a ligand such as a growth
factor, mitogen, or cytokine to its receptor at the cell surface. This cascade is now identified as a target opportunity for the treatment
of low-grade ovarian carcinoma. Pimasertib has been used in clinical trials for the treatment of various types of cancer. Most common
adverse events observed include diarrhea, rash, asthenia, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, peripheral edema, anemia, and visual disturbances
including retinal vein occlusion, serous retinal detachment, and macular edema (Table 1). The underlying pathology for central serous
retinopathy is reversible after drug interruption followed by dose reduction.2,3 Current MEK Inhibitors Clinical Trials and Associated
Percentages of Ocular Toxicity as Well as the Most Common Side Effects The mechanism of MEK inhibitor induced ocular toxicity remains
unclear. Many of the molecules targeted by anticancer agents are also expressed in ocular tissues, which can explain the ocular toxicity
causes by such medications. There is evidence that the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway regulates tight junctions between retinal
pigment epithelial cells so that MEK inhibitors may interfere with fluid transport, resulting in the accumulation of fluid beneath the
retina.4 To our knowledge, this is the first case that describes bilateral, multifocal central serous retinopathy appearing 2 days after
starting pimasertib for ovarian cancer and rapidly resolving 3 days after stopping pimasertib. Multifocal serous retinal detachments have
been reported with the use of other MEK 1 and 2 inhibitors.4 The pathophysiology of this complication is still poorly understood. None of
the authors have any financial/conflicting interests to disclose.
