The Editor, The advent of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgeries (VATS) has greatly decreased the number of thoracotomies that are being
done. Though this procedure decreases morbidity, it has its own drawbacks such as capnothorax induced respiratory acidosis, mechanical
compression of the major airway leading to ventilation difficulty, and vascular injuries. We report a case of capnothorax induced subclavian
artery compression causing unilateral limb ischemia and its successful management. A 25-year-old American Society of Anesthesiologists 1 man
(weight – 55 kg, height – 158 cm) was diagnosed to have a large (13 cm × 8 cm × 5 cm) proximal and mid esophageal tumor abutting the
trachea, bronchi, and the adjacent major blood vessels. He was planned for a McKeown's esophagectomy using VATS. As per our institutional
protocol, induction was carried out with the standard monitoring, such as an electrocardiogram, noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP), pulse
oximeter (right hand), and a radial arterial line (left hand). A 37F right sided double lumen tube (DLT) was placed and confirmed with the
fiberoptic bronchoscope. The patient was positioned in left lateral position; there was a good correlation between the NIBP and the invasive
blood pressure (BP) recordings. After instituting one-lung ventilation (OLV), capnothorax was induced, and the intrapleural pressure was
maintained between 9 and 10 mmHg. Ten minutes later, there was a wide discrepancy between NIBP and the invasive BP reading. While the NIBP
was 60/30/40 mmHg, the arterial line BP was 110/60/75 mmHg (systolic/diastolic/mean). On palpation of the right radial pulse, it was found
to be feeble, and the pulse oximeter trace looked damped while the left radial pulse was normal. On shifting the pulse oximeter to the left
hand, the pattern of the trace was normal. The position of the right upper limb was rechecked to rule out axillary artery compression. The
surgeons were informed about this discrepancy and the possibility of subclavian artery compression was thought due to the combined pressure
effects of capnothorax and the tumor. The intrapleural pressure was reduced from 10 mm of Hg to 6–7 mm of Hg. Soon after, the pulse oximetry
trace normalized, pulse volume on the right side improved, and the NIBP readings correlated well with the invasive BP readings. The
thoracoscopic resection continued uneventfully for the next 2 h with a total surgical time of 4 h. Thoracoscopic surgery is most often done
with the institution of OLV using a DLT. Capnothorax facilitates surgery by providing adequate space thereby, better visualization of
structures and better dissecting conditions. Studies have shown that a pleural pressure of up to 10 mmHg can be safely used without
compromising hemodynamics. Pinto and Galketiya demonstrated that, insufflation pressures of 6–8 mm of Hg is associated with no adverse
respiratory or cardiovascular effects and minimal hemodynamic changes. It has been found that the mean BP measured invasively and
noninvasively correspond, while there can be differences in the systolic BP especially in the setting of hypotension (systolic blood
pressure <95 mmHg). In our case, the discrepancy in both mean and systolic BP with other supportive clinical findings led us to realize that
the vessel was probably being compressed. The disappearance of the discrepancy and the normalization of pulse oximetry waveform soon after
releasing the capnothorax confirmed our clinical diagnosis. The importance of monitoring the BP in both upper limbs to prevent limb ischemia
is highlighted here. In the presence of a large esophageal tumor, maintaining lower intrapleural pressure may be advisable. As always
eternal vigilance and lateral thinking are the key factors to prevent morbidity. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
