Abdominal pregnancy is a rare form of ectopic pregnancy with a high rate of maternal and fetal complications. Most of the reported cases are
diagnosed in early trimesters, usually after presenting with complications. Advanced abdominal pregnancy poses a huge diagnostic and
management challenge, particularly in low-income countries. A term abdominal pregnancy diagnosed pre-operatively and resulting in a
surviving neonate is quite rare. A 35-year-old, para 2, unbooked, Ethiopian Somali woman presented with amenorrhea of 9 months’ duration,
abdominal pain, and painful fetal movements of 4 months’ duration. Her physical examination revealed a uterus sized 36 weeks’ gestation with
easily palpable fetal parts. Her laboratory test results were unremarkable except for mild anemia. Her ultrasound findings were suggestive
of abdominal pregnancy. Laparotomy was done to salvage an alive healthy neonate from the peritoneum with removal of placenta implanted on
the right broad ligament. The mother had a smooth post-operative course. An advanced abdominal pregnancy diagnosed pre-operatively with
delivery of a surviving neonate is rare. A high index of suspicion and thorough clinical and ultrasound evaluation are crucial to making an
early diagnosis. This is particularly important in areas where advanced imaging technologies are not readily available. Timely surgical
intervention is imperative to avert maternal and fetal complications. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13256-015-0712-7)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Advanced abdominal pregnancy (AAP) is defined as a pregnancy of
over 20 weeks’ gestation with a fetus living, or showing signs of having once lived and developed, in the mother’s abdominal cavity [1, 2].
Abdominal pregnancy has an incidence of about 1 in 400 to 1 in 50,000 deliveries, and the variable incidence depends on the characteristics
of a particular geographic region . It is associated with a high rate of maternal and fetal complications. The clinical presentation is
variable, and the optimal approach to the evaluation and management of abdominal pregnancy is not well determined [2, 3]. A high index of
suspicion and thorough clinical and ultrasound examinations are crucial to diagnosing abdominal pregnancy. Computed tomography (CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may help in making the diagnosis and planning intra-operative care . Timely surgical intervention is
imperative to preventing maternal and fetal catastrophe. In this report, we describe a rare case of advanced secondary abdominal pregnancy
diagnosed pre-operatively and salvaged by laparotomy with excellent maternal and neonatal outcomes. A 35-year-old, married, para 2 (both
stillbirths), Ethiopian Somali woman presented to Karamara Regional Hospital on 16 August 2014 with diffuse abdominal pain and recurrent
vaginal spotting of 4 months’ duration associated with nausea, anorexia, and occasional vomiting. She had been amenorrheic for 9 months and
had noticed painful fetal movements during the previous 2 months. She had never attended antenatal care. Both her previous deliveries had
been spontaneous vaginal deliveries that ended in stillbirths. Her physical examination revealed stable vital signs, mild pallor, distended
abdomen with a uterus sized at 36 weeks’ gestation, easily palpable fetal parts, fetus in transverse position, and diffuse abdominal
tenderness but no guarding or rigidity. There was no sign of fluid in her peritoneum. The fetal heart beat was positive. The cervix was
firm, smooth, and closed. The laboratory findings were all unremarkable, except for mild anemia (hemoglobin of 10g/dl). Ultrasound scanning
revealed an enlarged, otherwise empty uterus with a thick endometrial echo and a 37 weeks’ gestation singleton, viable pregnancy in
transverse lie with no intervening myometrial tissue (echo) between fetal parts and the abdominal wall (Fig. 1). There was an ill-defined,
echo-complex mass in the right adnexa measuring 12cm×10cm with high Doppler flow. No amniotic fluid pool could be seen, but there was a
small amount of free peritoneal fluid in the left paracolic gutter. The sonographic diagnosis was viable third-trimester abdominal
pregnancy.Fig. 1Ultrasound images of abdominal pregnancy. a The fetal spine (lower arrow) can be seen just under abdominal wall echo (upper
arrow) without intervening myometrial tissue. b An empty uterus Ultrasound images of abdominal pregnancy. a The fetal spine (lower arrow)
can be seen just under abdominal wall echo (upper arrow) without intervening myometrial tissue. b An empty uterus The woman was counseled on
the diagnosis, and informed consent was obtained for surgery. After securing 4 U of whole blood, laparotomy was done through a subumbilical
midline incision that revealed the following findings: an alive, meconium-stained male neonate retrieved free from the peritoneum, weighing
2600g, and having Apgar scores of 7 and 9 in the first and fifth minutes, respectively. The baby had no gross congenital anomalies. The
movie file in Additional file 1 shows the surgical procedure in detail. Fine adhesions involving the placental membranes, the omentum, and
part of ileum obscured access to the pelvic cavity. Adhesiolysis revealed a fragile placenta localized in the right adnexa with a network of
engorged vascular communications with the right ovarian, fallopian tube, and broad ligament vessels. The fimbrial end of the right tube was
distorted and embedded in the base of the placenta (Fig. 2). The uterus was enlarged but otherwise normal-looking and intact (Fig. 3). Both
ovaries and the left fallopian tube were normal. Right salpingectomy and ligation and transfixion of the vessels at the base of the placenta
were done to remove the placenta completely without causing significant bleeding. An abdominal drain was left in situ. The patient was
transfused with 2 U of whole blood. Both the woman and the neonate had smooth post-operative courses and were discharged on the fifth post-
operative day.Fig. 2Photograph showing the implantation of the placenta on the right broad ligamentFig. 3Photographs showing intact uterus
(a) and the uterus, placenta, and the neonate after laparotomy (b) Photograph showing the implantation of the placenta on the right broad
ligament Photographs showing intact uterus (a) and the uterus, placenta, and the neonate after laparotomy (b) Ectopic pregnancy is estimated
to occur in 1–2% of pregnancies . Over 90% are located in the fallopian tube, and the remainder implant in locations such as the abdomen,
cesarean (hysterotomy) scar, cervix, and ovary . Abdominal pregnancy accounts for 1.4% of ectopic pregnancies [2, 3]. Most cases of
abdominal pregnancies are secondary to aborted or ruptured tubal pregnancy . This was evident in our patient as the pregnancy was implanted
in the right broad ligament, which most likely resulted from tubal abortion because the right tube was distorted and embedded in the
placental bed. The clinical presentation of abdominal pregnancy is variable, based on the location and the gestational age at diagnosis .
Similarly to other previous reports of AAPs, our patient presented with suspicious symptoms and/or signs, including painful fetal movement,
abdominal pain, easily palpable fetal parts, and transverse lie [2, 5–7]. She had also recurrent vaginal bleeding that could be ascribed to
endometrial response to high estrogen levels in pregnancy . Very rarely reported presentations are acute abdomen and shock due to severe
intra-abdominal hemorrhage and as a case of failed induction [2, 3]. A high index of suspicion is vital in making the diagnosis of AAP. The
classic ultrasound finding of absence of myometrial tissue between maternal bladder and fetal parts was evident in our patient, along with
an empty uterus and other suggestive findings, including poor definition of the placenta, oligohydramnios, and transverse lie [3, 8]. An AAP
may be missed even after repeated ultrasound scanning if a thorough evaluation is not done, which was evident in many previous case reports.
CT and MRI are useful for confirming the diagnosis, distinguishing anatomic relationships and potential vascular connections, and assessing
placental adherence . Our patient presented late, neglecting all the unusual symptoms in pregnancy, and she lives in an area where advanced
imaging technologies are lacking. It is to be noted, however, that, unlike most previous reports of AAPs diagnosed intra-operatively, in our
patient the diagnosis was made pre-operatively upon her initial presentation. It is widely accepted that the treatment of AAP is immediate
surgery once fetal viability is achieved. But the management of the placenta is controversial. In our patient, laparotomy was done
immediately upon the diagnosis of AAP, and the fetus was delivered easily. Fortunately, the placenta was also retrieved relatively easily
without significant bleeding, as the vessels supplying the placental bed were easily ligated and there were no major adhesions. An
alternative management of the placenta suggested by most authors is ligating the umbilical cord and leaving the placenta in situ with or
without administration of methotrexate. This is preferred, especially if the placenta is implanted on vital abdominal organs or major
vessels [2, 8, 9]. More recently, expectant management of AAP to gain fetal maturity has been reported with some success in a few cases .
Maternal and fetal prognoses are generally grave in AAP. Maternal death in these cases is usually the result of uncontrollable hemorrhage
and has been reported in as many as 20% of cases . Perinatal mortality is also high (40–95%), and congenital malformations and deformations
are reported in 21.4% of fetuses . In our patient, both maternal and fetal outcomes were excellent. The mother did not have any significant
intra-operative bleeding, as the removal of the placenta was technically easy. Despite the lack of surrounding amniotic sac and fluid, the
neonate did not have any of the reported anomalies and/or deformities. The fetus appeared that it could survive until term because of a rich
placental vascular supply from tubo-ovarian and broad ligament vessels. Importantly, the early diagnosis and timely management of the case
were crucial in ensuring successful maternal and fetal outcomes. An AAP diagnosed pre-operatively and resulting in the delivery of a
surviving neonate is rare. A high index of suspicion, a thorough clinical evaluation, and comprehensive ultrasound scanning are crucial to
making an early diagnosis, particularly in areas where advanced imaging technologies are not readily available. Timely surgical intervention
is imperative to avert maternal and fetal complications. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor - in - Chief of this journal.
Additional file 1 Laparotomy for delivery of the baby. An alive neonate delivered free from peritoneum after opening of the abdomen. (MP4
19227 kb) Laparotomy for delivery of the baby. An alive neonate delivered free from peritoneum after opening of the abdomen. (MP4 19227 kb)
advanced abdominal pregnancy computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions WG was directly involved in the diagnosis and management of the case and was also responsible
for the collection of clinical information (including the photographs and the movie) and drafting of the manuscript. DB was responsible for
rigorous revision of the draft manuscript and collection of relevant references. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
authors thank Dr. Adissu for taking the published video and pictures during the surgical procedure.
