After mitral valve replacement with a prosthetic valve, the valve should be competent and there should not be any residual prosthetic valve
regurgitation. Transvalvular residual prosthetic valve regurgitation are difficult to diagnose and quantify. we are reporting interesting
TEE images as a diagnostic dilemma in a case of transvalvular mitral regurgitation following mitral valve replacement secondary to
entrapment of sub-valvular apparatus in a Chitra mechanical heart valve. Following mitral valve replacement with a prosthetic valve, the
valve should be competent, and there should be minimal prosthetic valve regurgitation. Signature jets or washing jets specific for each
prosthetic valve are described. They are small jets, which arise between the sewing ring and disc or leaflet. Each mechanical valve will
have a characteristic washing jets, and they wash out thrombus formed on the mechanical valve. We are describing a case of prosthetic valve
regurgitation due to entrapment of subvalvular mitral tissue following mitral valve replacement using Chitra mechanical heart valve in the
immediate postbypass period which was diagnosed using transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Transvalvular regurgitation has to be
differentiated from paravalvular regurgitation. The severity has to be evaluated and appropriately treated. Agostini et al. have published
an article where entrapment of the subvalvular apparatus resulted in intermittent heart failure. We are reporting Interesting TEE images of
prosthetic valve regurgitation following mitral valve replacement. A 31-year-old male patient presented with dyspnea on exertion NYHA Class
II and palpitations since 6 months. He was diagnosed to have rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral stenosis, severe aortic stenosis
with mild aortic regurgitation and moderate pulmonary hypertension in atrial fibrillation posted for double valve replacement. Preoperative
transthoracic echocardiography revealed rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral stenosis, (mitral valve area - 0.8 cm2) severe aortic
stenosis (mean gradient - 48 mm of Hg) with mild aortic regurgitation and moderate pulmonary hypertension (right ventricular systolic
pressure - 50 mm of Hg) with left atrial size 54 mm, good bi-ventricular function and no left atrial clot. The patient underwent double
valve replacement with a mechanical Chitra heart valve (TTK Company, India) 27 size in the mitral position (placed anti anatomically) and 21
size in the aortic position. Mitral valve anterior and posterior leaflets were resected, and chordae of the posterior leaflet were partially
preserved. After weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass TEE revealed residual mitral regurgitation through the prosthetic valve. It was an
eccentric wall hugging jet directed posteriorly arising within the sewing ring. The vena contracta width was 3.7 mm, peak velocity 6.1 m/s
and it was dense parabolic jet on continuous wave Doppler with the effective regurgitant orifice area 0.3 cm2 (using proximal isovelocity
area method) suggestive of moderate mitral regurgitation. The hemodynamic parameters were heart rate around 90/min and systolic blood
pressure was between 130 and 140 mm of Hg. In zoomed mid-esophageal four chamber view [Video 1, Figures 1 and 2] a mobile structure was
moving from left ventricle into the left atrium across the prosthetic valve and preventing the closure of the disc completely resulting in
moderate mitral regurgitation. On the second run of bypass, surgeon opened the left atrium and found the preserved chordae of the posterior
leaflet was interfering with the complete closure of the disc. It was resected, and the valve was rotated. Then the patient was weaned off
bypass with minimal inotropes. Postbypass TEE revealed a competent prosthetic valve without residual mitral regurgitation [Video 2 and
Figure 3]. He had an uneventful postoperative recovery. Mid-esophageal four chamber view end systolic frame, arrow in the image is pointing
towards the residual posterior leaflet chordae prolapsing through the valve into the left atrium Mid-esophageal four chamber view with color
compare end systolic frame, arrow in the right sided image is pointing at transvalvular mitral regurgitation due to incomplete disc closure
Mid-esophageal four chamber view with color Doppler postresection of the prolapsing chordae showing only closing jet and transvalvular
mitral regurgitation has resolved Mitral valve replacement with total or partial chordal preservation is often desirable to preserve the
left ventricular function ventricular function and for improved long-term survival. Mitral valve replacement with chordal and papillary
muscle preservation permits more rapid recovery of ventricular function, improves ventricular performance and may prevent progressive
dilatation of the left ventricle (remodeling). Mitral valve replacement has inherent risks, like thromboembolism, endocarditis, and
prosthesis failure or dysfunction. Postmitral valve replacement the differential diagnosis for residual mitral regurgitation are
physiological washing or closing jet, paravalvular leak and transvalvular leak. Each mechanical valve will have a characteristic washing or
closing jet also called as signature jets. As the occluder comes in contact with the sewing ring small amount of blood escapes between the
two resulting in closing jets, which wash away the thrombus formed on the disc. Physiological regurgitant jets are short, narrow, flame-
like, laminar and of low velocity. Chitra TTK mechanical valve (TTK Company, India) normally has three closing jets, one central and two
peripheral, small and divergent. Paravalvular leak is between the sewing ring and the annulus. On color flow Doppler, the jet is seen
originating outside the sewing ring and is typically eccentric. Trivial paravalvular leaks resolve following protamine or within a few weeks
as the sewing ring becomes endothelized. Significant paravalvular regurgitation at the time of implantation is usually the result of valve
sutures tearing out from the endocardium, inadequately tightened sutures or large annular calcification. Delayed paravalvular regurgitation
may be due to dehiscence of the sewing ring, suture disruption and endocarditis. Acute transvalvular regurgitation may be due to incomplete
disc closure in a mechanical valve or leaflet prolapse or coaptation defect in a bioprosthetic valve. Acute transvalvular regurgitation can
also be due to mitral subvalvular Chordae or a suture interfering with the occluder mechanism. Delayed transvalvular regurgitation may be
due to thrombus, pannus and infective endocarditis. Pathological jets are longer, wall hugging and broader. They are usually eccentric and
difficult to quantify. They can be quantified using vena contracta width, density and contour of continuous wave signal, PISA on the
ventricular side of the regurgitant orifice, the effective regurgitant orifice area, regurgitant volume, and a regurgitant fraction. If
pathological transvalvular regurgitation is left untreated, it may lead to intravascular hemolysis, increased the risk of endocarditis,
congestive cardiac failure, stuck valve and if chordae gets detached and embolized it may result in stroke. The treatment options are
rotation of the prosthetic valve if a rotatable valve is implanted or resection of the tissue or suture interfering with valve closure.
Transvalvular regurgitation through a prosthetic valve is rare and it is very difficult to quantify this regurgitant jets, but they have to
be appropriately treated if it is severe. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
