Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a pathogen associated with cystic fibrosis that has potential to decrease lung function and cause respiratory
failure. Paranasal sinuses are increasingly recognised as potential reservoirs for intermittent colonisation by P. aeruginosa. This case
documents investigation and outcome of P. aeruginosa recurrence in a male paediatric patient over an eight year period. A 12 year old Irish
male paediatric cystic fibrosis patient experienced intermittent culturing of P. aeruginosa from the oropharyngeal region, indicating
chronic infection of the sinuses despite absence of symptoms, retaining good lung function, and normal bronchoscopy and bronchoalveloar
lavage. However, P. aeruginosa was isolated from a sinus wash-out and was identified as a unique strain of P. aeruginosa that was also
cultured from cough swabs. Despite treatment, successful eradication from the paranasal sinuses was not achieved. Few reports have addressed
the paranasal sinuses as a reservoir for lung infection in cystic fibrosis patients despite increased recognition of the need to investigate
this niche. In this case, attempts at eradication of P. aeruginosa present in paranasal sinuses including oral and nebulised antimicrobials
proved unsuccessful. However, detection of P. aeruginosa in the paranasal sinuses instigated antimicrobial treatment which may have
contributed to prevention of migration to the lower airways. Our outcome provides additional insight and may indicate utility of nasal
lavage or nasal endoscopy in paediatric cystic fibrosis patients’ annual review clinic visits. The Cystic Fibrosis (CF) patient airway is
defective in ciliary function; resulting, due to ineffective removal, in a mucus-rich environment favouring growth of bacteria , including
potential pathogens, such as, but not limited to, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenza and Pseudomonas aeruginosa associated with
chronic infection , decreased lung function and accelerated respiratory disease . Consequently, risk of mortality for paediatric CF patients
with lower airway infection by P. aeruginosa has been reported as almost three times higher than for those without . There has been limited
study of the paranasal sinuses as reservoirs for P. aeruginosa . However, it is believed that due to poor mucociliary clearance in the
paranasal sinuses and the lower airways, and physiological similarities between the membranes of the sinuses and the conductive bronchi,
that P. aeruginosa migration from the sinuses to the lower airways may occur [6, 12]. Chronic P. aeruginosa infection is often preceded by a
period of intermittent colonisation of the airways [8, 13], sometimes in the absence of symptoms of infection or immunological responses .
Adding additional complexity, in the context of managing CF patients successfully, the colonising P. aeruginosa may undergo substantial
genetic adaptation and diversification into subpopulations with varying phenotypic traits (including nutient utilisation, growth rates,
exopolysaccharide production and antimicrobial resistances) and, with regard to microbiological analysis, differing colony morphologies [1,
8, 15, 16]. The paranasal sinuses may become a focus for regular examination or antimicrobial treatment in CF patients, such as functional
endoscopic sinus surgery promoted by Danish clincians [13, 17]. Similarly, the oral cavity has been identified as a potential reservoir for
pathogenic bacteria in CF patients [18, 19], with failure to determine presence of pathogens potentially detrimental to CF patients. In this
case, we focus on and describe intermittent P. aeruginosa colonisation of the oropharyngeal region of a paediatric patient and, supporting
the rationale of the Danish group, the role of the paranasal sinuses specifically as reservoirs that contributed to our failure to eradicate
the pathogen despite successive antimicrobial administration. Ethical approval and informed consent for this study was approved by the HSE
Mid-Western Regional Hospital Research Ethics Committee. A 12 year old asymptomatic patient (homozygous for Phe508del) with good lung
function (mean forced expiratory volume -FEV1) from March 2009 to June 2014: 91.6 % ± 1.46 %) and normal bronchoscopy with no bacterial
growth from two bronchoalveloar lavages (BAL) (considered the ‘gold standard’ method for collection of samples from the lower airways [20,
21]), displayed intermittent chronic P. aeruginosa infection of the oropharyngeal region (or at least detection using the oropharyngeal
swab) between September 2006 to September 2014. This caused the patient’s parents to persistently submit elevated numbers of cough swabs for
microbiological investigation. Eradication regimens comprised nebulised (via both mouth and nose) and oral antimicrobials, which appeared to
clear the oropharyngeal region of P. aeruginosa, albeit transiently, but ultimately proved ineffective. P. aeruginosa was first isolated in
August 2006 from a cough swab, when the patient was four years of age and, thereafter, isolated once each year for three subsequent years.
Microbiological assessment was in accordance with Health Protection Agency Standard Operating Procedure (HPA SOP) 57 guidelines. On each
occasion that P. aeruginosa was identified, the patient underwent eradication regimens until three follow up monthly cough swabs were
negative for growth. Samples obtained from the patient remained clear of P. aeruginosa from September 2008 until May 2010, when the annual
recurrence pattern was re-established for three subsequent years. In December 2010, the detection of P. aeruginosa resulted in
administration of ciprofloxacin (oral – 500 mg) and tobramycin (nebulised – 300 mg), both b.i.d. for 28 days. However, the frequency of P.
aeruginosa colonisation increased from March 2013, evident approximately every three months until January 2014. Although the patient never
exhibited symptoms of sinusitis, and although no general anaesthesia and involvement of an ear, nose and throat (ENT) surgeon (JF) was
necessary, nevertheless, a bilateral antral washout was performed in Dec 2012 and Sept 2014 as the patient was unable to expectorate and the
concept of the paranasal sinuses acting as a reservoir for P. aeruginosa was considered. P. aeruginosa was isolated from the right antral
washing; therefore, the patient underwent the same eradication regimen as before, supplemented by maintenance therapy of tobramycin (300 mg
per 5 mL nebulised solution) and colistin (2 M IU) administered via a face mask that allowed the antimicrobials to pass through the nasal
cavity. The patient was encouraged to breathe predominantly through the nose during the nebulisation sessions to ensure maximum
administration to the nasal cavity. Following this extended treatment, between February and September 2014 cough swabs remained P.
aeruginosa-free. In September 2014, the patient underwent repeat antral sinus washing, bronchoscopy and cough swab collection. P. aeruginosa
was again isolated from the right antral washing. The lower airways remained clear of Pseudomonas. P. aeruginosa isolates underwent
molecular (Variable Number Tandem Repeat) and phenotypic characterisation (Table 1). Antimicrobial sensitivity profiles were generated for
each isolate (from August 2006 until September 2014) based on CLSI and EUCAST guidelines [22, 23] (Table 2). VNTR analysis demonstrated that
all isolates represented the same unique P. aeruginosa strain. Phenotypic analysis classified all except two isolates (September 2013 and
2014) as mucoid, a characteristic not seen in the majority (6 out of 7) of isolates previously. Isolates were proteolytic and siderophore
producing (Table 1). All isolates were susceptible to tobramycin, ciprofloxacin and meropenem, while the majority (all but antral washing
Sept 2014) were also susceptible to pipercillin/tazobactum (Table 2).Table 1Phenotypic profile of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from a
paediatric patient over n 8 year periodPhenotypic classificationDate specimen takenSpecimen cultured from (Location)Gram staining + ve or
-veMucoid (+ or -)Proteolytic (+/++/+++)Siderophore producing (+/++/+++)11/08/06a Cough Swab--23/08/07c Cough Swab--07/08/08c,d Cough Swab--
05/05/10b Cough Swab--14/12/10Cough Swab-+22/04/11b Cough Swab--10/04/12b,c,d Cough Swab--23/03/13Cough Swab-+++++++06/06/13c Cough
Swab-++++30/09/13Cough Swab--+++++20/12/13Cough Swab-+++23/01/14e Antral Washing-++++++11/09/14Antral Washing--++ aFirst identification of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. b P. aeruginosa growth described as “scanty” by University Hospital Limerick microbiology laboratory. c
Staphylococcus aureus also identified in addition to P. aeruginosa d Haemophilus parainfluenzae also identified in addition to P.
aeruginosa. e Pseudomonas fluorescens also identified in addition to P. aeruginosa Where + = low, ++ = intermediate, +++ = highTable
2Antimicrobial sensitivity profile for Pseudomonas aeruginosa from a paediatric patient over an 8 year periodCLSI GuidelinesEUCAST
GuidelinesDisk content (μg)200620072008201020112012Disk content (μg)2013201411/823/86/85/514/1222/410/426/36/630/920/1223/123/1a 11/9a
Drug Ofloxacin5SSNTNTNTNTNT0NTNTNTNTNTNTNT Pipercillin/ Tazobactum100/10SSSSSSS36SSSSSRS Ceftazidime30SSSSSSS10SSSSSSS Tobramycin10SSSSSSS10SSSSSSS Ciprofloxacin5NTSNTSSSS5SSSSSSS Amikacin30NTSNTNTNTNTNT30NTNTNTNTNTNTNT Aztreoman30NTSNTNTNTNTS30SIIIIII Colistin
(E-Test)10NTSNTNTNTNTNT10NTNTSSSSS Imipenem10NTSNTNTNTNTNT10NTNTNTNTNTNTNT Meropenem10NTSSSSSS10SSSSSSS S Susceptible, I Intermediate, R
Resistant and NT Not Tested a P. aeruginosa isolated from antral washing Phenotypic profile of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from a
paediatric patient over n 8 year period aFirst identification of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. b P. aeruginosa growth described as “scanty” by
University Hospital Limerick microbiology laboratory. c Staphylococcus aureus also identified in addition to P. aeruginosa d Haemophilus
parainfluenzae also identified in addition to P. aeruginosa. e Pseudomonas fluorescens also identified in addition to P. aeruginosa
Where + = low, ++ = intermediate, +++ = high Antimicrobial sensitivity profile for Pseudomonas aeruginosa from a paediatric patient over an
8 year period S Susceptible, I Intermediate, R Resistant and NT Not Tested a P. aeruginosa isolated from antral washing Our findings
demonstrate that the paranasal sinuses acted as protected reservoirs for P. aeruginosa as verified by VNTR profiling, supporting previous
(albeit few) reports [13, 17]. As with other researchers [16, 24, 25], we found indications of adaptation of the P. aeruginosa strain,
whereby prior to March 2013, all but one P. aeruginosa isolate from our patient were classified (based on colony morphology) as non-mucoid,
whereas on and after this date, four of six isolates were phenotypically mucoid (Table 1). Such mucoidy is due to an overproduction of
polysaccharide alginate, which contributes to biofilm formation and increased resistance to antimicrobials . It is believed that a non-
mucoid phenotype is most often associated with isolates from early infection while mucoid strains are more frequently associated with
established infection and, indeed, poorer patient prognosis . In our study, the same isolates were identified as proteolytic (associated
with damage to tissue ) and siderophore producing (linked to bacterial virulence [30, 31]) producing (Table 1), although no pattern of
changing protease or siderophore activity was discernible. Antimicrobials are used commonly in treatment of initial colonisation of P.
aeruginosa to postpone chronic infection and respiratory dysfunction, often delivered orally (e.g., ciprofloxacin) or nebulised (e.g.,
tobramycin) [13, 32, 33]. In this case, analogous to the approach adopted successfully elsewhere [34, 35], additional maintenance therapy
comprised nebulised tobramycin and colomycin on alternate months, for six months. However, in our case, this ultimately proved unsuccessful.
Other groups have recognised the challenge of eradicating P. aeruginosa from the paranasal sinuses using existing approaches and have have
begun to evaluate novel strategies such as inhalation of tobramycin using vibrating or pulsating aerosols or addition of hyaluronate to
nasal sprays . In our case, although the eradication regimen proved unsuccessful in decolonising the paranasal sinuses of P. aeruginosa, we
believe that detection of the pathogen instigated antimicrobial treatment that may have contributed to prevention of migration to the lower
airways and, therefore, preventing chronic infection of the lower airways. Our case supports the rationale for assessment of the paranasal
sinuses as potential P. aeruginosa reservoirs in CF patients displaying intermittent colonisation patterns albeit that the currently
available techniques are invasive, require general anaesthesia and prudent antimicrobial use as they may themselves, due to physical
disruption, cause migration of bacteria to other airways. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and his parents for
publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Cystic fibrosis Forced
expiratory volume Bronchoalveolar lavage Health Protection Agency Standard operating procedure Ear, nose, throat Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing Variable number tandem repeat Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions BL, NO’C and JF were responsible for treatment of the patient. BL,
NO’C and CD recognized the novelty of the Case and drafted the manuscript. LK and MK completed the microbiology analyses and drafted the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Not applicable. Availability of data and materials Not
applicable. The authors acknowledge staff in the microbiology and CF units at UHL, in particular James Powell. The authors are grateful for
funding provided by the Irish National Children’s Research Centre (NCRC), Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland. Funding
to support this project was received by authors CD, BL and LK and was granted by the National Children's Research Centre, Crumlin, Dublin,
Ireland and the University of Limerick, Graduate Entry Medical School Strategic Research Fund.
