Stickler syndrome is a well-described but uncommon clinical entity. It is a hereditary connective tissue disorder of fibrillar collagen with
autosomal dominant inheritance. Phenotype manifests as four different features that is, ocular, orofacial, auditory, and musculoskeletal. A
17-year-old male reported with gradual, progressive, painless diminution of vision in both eyes since 3 months. Family history was
unremarkable. The best corrected visual acuity was the perception of light+ in right eye and 20/400 in the left eye. The anterior segment
showed dense cataract in the right and posterior chamber intraocular lens in the left eye [Fig. 1]. Intraocular pressure was 4 mmHg in the
right and 16 mmHg in the left eye. Left eye fundus revealed multiple radial perivascular lattices, vitreous condensation, tessellations, and
posterior staphyloma [Fig. 2], and an axial length of 26.3 mm. The left eye was amblyopic. Ultrasound B-scan of the right eye revealed
closed funnel retinal detachment (RD) and reduced axial length (21.2 mm) [Fig. 3]. Electroretinogram showed normal responses in the left and
expected nonrecordable responses in the right eye [Fig. 4]. Systemic examination revealed speech abnormality (nasal twang), large cleft
palate [Fig. 5], and mild hearing defect. External (slit-lamp) photo reveals cataract in the right eye (right arrow) and posterior chamber
intraocular lens implant in the left eye (left arrow) Left eye color fundus montage showing multiple radial, perivascular lattices (arrows),
tessellated fundus, and posterior staphyloma Ultrasonography B-scan showing closed funnel retinal detachment with axial length of 21.2 mm
(a) in right eye and axial length of 26.3 mm in left eye (b) Electroretinogram showing nonrecordable photopic and scotopic responses in
oculus dexter and normal responses in left eye Oral examination reveals large cleft palate Stickler syndrome was first reported in 1965 by
Stickler et al. as hereditary arthro-ophthalmopathy. It is now divided into subgroups depending on the clinical manifestations. Vitreous
assessment is the diagnostic criteria and guides to molecular genetic analysis. Complications such as RD (70%), cataract (49%), and ocular
hypertension (10%) are progressive and can lead to blindness. A multidisciplinary approach is required. Ocular rehabilitation includes
spectacles/contact lenses, frequent retinal examinations, cataract surgery, and prophylactic retinal laser photocoagulation. Meticulous
systemic examination and genetic counseling help in identifying the disorder in newborns and preventing complications. Mutations in the
COL2A1, COL11A1, COL11A2, COL9A1, and COL9A2 genes can cause Stickler syndrome, Types I to V. Our patient had characteristic features of
Type I Stickler syndrome, such as cleft palate and hearing deficit, except a positive family history. Genetic testing was offered but
declined by the patient. Differentials include multiple epiphyseal dysgenesis, Kniest dysplasia (musculoskeletal involvement), Knobloch
(encephalocele), and Wagner syndrome (ocular involvement only). Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
