Based on a case report, the authors reviewed the data about involuntary emotional expression disorder (IEED). IEED includes the syndromes of
pathological laughing and crying (PLC) and emotional lability (EL). PLC is a rare disorder of emotional expression characterized by
relatively uncontrollable episodes of laughter and crying or both that do not have an apparent motivating stimulus. Authors report the case
of a 59-year-old man who presented with recurrent episodes of PLC of approximately 2 min duration, consisting of accelerated breathing,
emission of guttural, snoring sounds, frowning of the eyebrows, followed by laughter accompanied by motor restlessness of all four limbs.
PLC episodes preceded left carotid transient ischemic attacks (TIA’s) manifested by reversible aphasia and right hemiparesis.
Electroencephalography performed during PLC episodes revealed no spike-wave activity. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed lacunar
infarcts in the left lenticulo-capsulo-thalamic area and multiple round lesions in the cortical-subcortical and in the deep white matter of
frontal-parietal-occipital lobes bilaterally, with T2 hyperintensity, T1 isointensity and no diffusion changes. The episodes were
interpreted as transient ischemic attacks although gelastic seizures could not be excluded. The etiological investigations revealed unstable
plaques on the left carotid artery bulb and the aortic arch and a degenerative mitral valve stenosis. The patient was treated first with
antiplatelet therapy and antiepileptic drugs but PLC stopped only after anticoagulation was started. During follow-up the patient continued
to have left carotid and vertebrobasilar TIA’s being on oral anticoagulation. The patient became asymptomatic only after mitral valve
replacement was performed. This case illustrates the difficulty distinguishing between gelastic epilepsy and TIA’s in cases of PLC episodes
and discuss the neuroanatomic bases and pathophysiology of this rare condition. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12883-015-0457-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Involuntary emotional expression
disorder (IEED) includes the syndromes of pathological laughing and crying (PLC) and emotional lability (EL) . PLC is an exaggerated,
uncontrollable and inappropriate laughter or crying usually unrelated to a true emotion or a congruent mood. An extremely rare form is the
“fou rire prodromique” (prodrome of crazy laughter), a pathological manifestation reported in association to carotid or vertebrobasilar
brain ischemia. Cases of PLC were described in association with cerebrovascular disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple system
atrophy-cerebellar type, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, traumatic brain injury, dementia, migraine, progressive supranuclear palsy
and mass lesions especially in the cerebellopontine junction. PLC must be differentiated from emotional instability characteristic to
pseudobulbar syndrome, from gelastic epilepsy and psychiatric disorders. We report the case of a man presenting recurrent pathological
laughter episodes preceding transient ischemic attacks. A fifty-nine-year-old right-handed man, former smoker, with history of chronic
alcohol intake, arterial hypertension, mixed hyperlipidemia, two recent left middle cerebral artery ischemic strokes (left temporo-insular
and left frontal lacunar infarcts) manifested as right hemiparesis and aphasia, right focal motor seizures, gastric ulcer secondary to
excessive use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for occipital headache was admitted for episodes of PLC started 6 h before admission.
The episodes lasted approximately 2 min, consisting of accelerated breathing, emission of guttural, snoring sounds, frowning of the
eyebrows, followed by laughter accompanied by motor restlessness of all four limbs; the patient was able to walk with assistance but was
unresponsive during these episodes. An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file 1]. The patient denied any
automatisms, loss of consciousness, loss of memory, or altered mental status. He also denies any sense of mirth during these episodes. On
admission the patient’s home medication were clopidogrel, carbamazepin, gabapentin, pantoprazole, and quinapril. Initial examination was
notable for confusion, right upper motor neuron facial weakness, 4/5 right hemiparesis, and a mixed aphasia. Between episodes of PLC there
were pauses of about 10 min. The differential diagnosis was made between gelastic seizures and episodes of pathological laughter as
manifestation of repeated transient ischemic attacks (TIA’s). The pseudobulbar laughter was excluded because the patient didn’t present any
emotional incontinence outside the pathological laughter episodes. Brain scan showed left temporo-insular and left frontal chronic lacunar
infarcts. Electroencephalography (EEG) performed during and after laughter episodes revealed no spike-wave activity (Fig. 1). Analysis of
the cerebrospinal fluid specimen revealed a protein level of 0.3 g per liter, a glucose concentration of 72.8 mg per deciliter, a white
blood cells count of 5 per cubic millimeter, polymorphonuclears of 2 per cubic millimeter, monocytes of 3 per cubic millimeter, no red blood
cells. Routine laboratory blood test showed elevated uric acid of 8 mg per deciliter, slightly elevated gamma-glutamyl transferase of 57 U
per liter, increased glucose level of 136 mmol per liter, increased lactate dehydrogenase of 236 mmol per liter, increased triglycerides of
152.3 mg per deciliter, increase white blood cells count of 10 790 per cubic millimeter with increased neutrophils blood count of 8 150 per
cubic millimeter, all the other blood tests were normal. The patient was treated initially with clopidogrel, atorvastatin, diazepam and
phenytoin during acute PLC episodes and clopidogrel, atorvastatin, carbamazepine 600 mg/day and levetiracetam 1000 mg/day as maintenance
treatment, but the PLC episodes continued for 3 days with a shorter duration and a longer period between them. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), performed 5 days after symptoms onset, showed lacunar infarcts localized in the left lenticular-capsular-thalamic area
associated with gliotic changes; multiple round lesions in the cortical-subcortical and in the deep white matter bilateral frontal-parietal-
occipital, with T2 hyperintensity, T1 isointensity and no diffusion changes (Figs. 2 and 3). Based on symptoms, neurological examination and
investigations the diagnosis of PLC as prodromal manifestation of TIA’s was made, heparin treatment was started and subsequently PLC
episodes disappeared. However the gelastic seizures hypothesis could not be ruled out since EEG may not show spike-wave activity if the
lesion is subcortical. Therefore the authors decided that antiepileptic treatment should be continued. The patient underwent a cognitive and
psychological examination that did not reveal a cognitive dysfunction or a mood disorder. Carotid ultrasound showed non-hemodynamically
significant plaque in the left carotid bulb. Transthoracic echocardiography showed moderate degenerative mitral stenosis (mitral valve
area = 1.3 cm2, mean gradient 8 mmHg), mild mitral regurgitation, dilated left atrium, mild pulmonary hypertension and normal systolic left
ventricular function and dimensions. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed, in addition to transthoracic echocardiography, left atrial
spontaneous echo contrast (grade 3+), but no thrombus in left atrial appendage. Intra-cardiac defects with right-to-left shunt were also
excluded. Some mobile atherosclerotic plaques on ascending aorta and initial part of the aortic arch were present, but no clear arguments
for potential embolisation could be sustained. Given the degree of mitral stenosis, anticoagulation with acenocumarol was started, and
clopidogrel was continued. Some concerns about this association were raised related to history of superior digestive hemorrhage of the
patient, so clopidogrel 75 mg daily was preferred to low dose aspirin. The patient continued treatment with acenocumarol (INR = 2-3),
clopidogrel 75 mg/day, atorvastatin 20 mg/day, carbamazepin 600 mg/day, gabapentin 900 mg/day and was discharged fully recovered. A video
EEG was performed that showed no spike-waves only slow waves on the right side derivations (Fig. 4). A month later the patient started to
present multiple left carotid and vertebrobasilar TIA’s despite correct anticoagulant treatment (INR in the therapeutic range). These
ongoing embolic events led to treatment with mechanical valve replacement, afterwards the patient was completely asymptomatic.Fig. 1EEG
performed during PLC episodes showed no spike wave activity only slow waves on the derivations on the right sideFig. 2 A, B Polygonal left
side area intra- and supranuclear hyperintense T2, hypointense with hyperintense periphery on FLAIR images, which interface pyramidal fibers
in the posterior arm of internal capsule leeding to Wallerian degeneration of them - left lateral pontine dots that apare hyperintense on T2
and FLAIR images, without restricted diffusion Fig. 3Paraventricular left temporal poligonal area with reduced dimensions between exams -
area of ischemia in the subacute stage - hyperintense on T2 and FLAIR, hypointense on T1 without restricted diffusionFig. 4 A, B Video EEG
during awake state and during sleep without spike-waves anomalies but with some slow waves especially on the right side during sleep EEG
performed during PLC episodes showed no spike wave activity only slow waves on the derivations on the right side A, B Polygonal left side
area intra- and supranuclear hyperintense T2, hypointense with hyperintense periphery on FLAIR images, which interface pyramidal fibers in
the posterior arm of internal capsule leeding to Wallerian degeneration of them - left lateral pontine dots that apare hyperintense on T2
and FLAIR images, without restricted diffusion Paraventricular left temporal poligonal area with reduced dimensions between exams - area of
ischemia in the subacute stage - hyperintense on T2 and FLAIR, hypointense on T1 without restricted diffusion A, B Video EEG during awake
state and during sleep without spike-waves anomalies but with some slow waves especially on the right side during sleep Emotional experience
is a subjective feeling during an emotional event. Emotional expression is the objective behavior that is expressed during such event,
including changes in autonomic functions as heart rate and skeletal movements such as facial expression. The experience and the expression
of an emotion depends on the cognitive appraisal of the emotional stimuli which are triggering it. While emotional experience is disturbed
in patients with psychiatric conditions (e.g. mood disorders), patients with neurological disorders suffer from dysregulation of emotional
expression, mostly the expressions of laughter or crying, in the absence of a congruent feeling. Unlike mood disorders, inappropriate
emotional expression in these patients is not a sustained phenomenon but a paroxysmal and episodic one. According to Poeck’s criteria , PLC
is laughter that arises: (1) in response to non-specific stimuli; (2) in the absence of a corresponding change in affect; (3) in the absence
of voluntary control of the extent or duration of the episode; and (4) in the absence of a corresponding change in mood lasting beyond the
actual laughing. PLC is a disorder of emotional expression, not a disturbance of feelings, and can be distinguished from mood disorders . To
summarize the results of many studies investigating the neural correlates of laughter and humor, the expression of laughter seems to depend
on two partially independent neuronal pathways . The first of these, excitatory, “involuntary” or “emotionally driven” system, involves the
amygdala, temporal cortex, thalamic/hypo- and subthalamic areas and the dorsal/tegmental brainstem. The second, inhibitory, “voluntary”
system originates in the premotor/frontal opercular areas and leads through the motor cortex and pyramidal tract to the ventral brainstem .
These systems appear to be coordinated by a laughter-coordinating center in the dorsal upper pons, central coordinator of the nuclei that
innervate the muscles involved in expression of emotion, phonation, rhythmic clonic expiration and facial expression. The mesencephalic
central gray matter acts as relay station between descending limbic diencephalic tracts and bulbar effector nuclei and via the annulo-
olivary tract to the cerebellum that exercises a modulating effect on all these expressions . Parvizi et al. suggested that cerebellum plays
an important role in modulating laughter and crying to specific context; it also sets the threshold at which the induction – effector
apparatus responds to a stimulus. These modulatory cerebellar actions would occur automatically as a result of learning. The causes of PLC
syndrome can be classified in two groups: altered behavior with unmotivated happiness (Angelman syndrome, schizophrenia, manias, dementia)
and interference with the inhibitory/excitatory mechanisms (gelastic epilepsy, fou rire prodromique in strokes, multiple sclerosis,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson-plus, traumatic injuries, tumours) . Gelastic epilepsy (from the Greek
“gelos” meaning laughter) refers to those relatively rare seizures in which laughter is the cardinal symptom. These seizures can consist
exclusively of laughing but often occur in association with general autonomic arousal and automatisms of movement and/or disturbed states of
consciousness . Several papers reported other symptoms accompanying less frequent this ictal laughter, such as perambulation and micturition
. Some patients report pleasant feeling which include exhilaration or mirth , other patients experience the attacks of laughter as
inappropriate and feel no positive emotions during their laughter . The lesions incriminated in gelastic seizures are located in the
hypothalamus especially hypothalamic hamartomas [14, 15, 24, 26–28], the frontal poles [21, 29] and the temporal poles . Sethi and Rao
reported a patient with episodes of epileptic laughter, crying and running occurring alone or in combination. The patient was found to have
a discrete, well circumscribed tumour of the left temporal lobe. Fou rire prodromique is a very rare condition in which unmotivated,
inappropriate laughter occurs as the first symptom of cerebral ischemia. This uncontrollable laughter may be followed by giggling or crying
and typical symptoms of stroke in the territory of carotid or basilar artery. Lesions associated with “fou rire prodromique” have been found
in: (i) base of the pons bilaterally with no involvement of the tegmentum ; ii) left parahippocampal gyrus, the left posterolateral thalamus
and adjacent parts of the internal capsule, with no involvement of the hypothalamus, the hippocampus or the amygdala ; (iii) left lenticular
and caudate nuclei, with involvement of the anterior insula ; (iv) the area supplied by the right middle cerebral artery (non-dominant
cerebral hemisphere) , (v) simultaneous bilateral capsular genu infarction , (vi) midbrain infarction , (vii) left middle cerebral artery
territory (dominant cerebral hemisphere) , left pontine infarction due to basilar artery stenosis . Parvizi J et al. (2007) described a case
of pathological laughter in the absence of congruent changes of mood in a patient with cerebellar type of multiple system atrophy (MSA-C).
Nine patients out of 27 other patients with MSA-C revealed episode of pathological laughter, crying, or both. Authors finding of about 36 %
occurrence suggests that the problem of dysregulation of emotional expression is more prevalent in MSA-C than the paucity of reports in the
literature suggests and it is consistent with the view that the cerebellum and its interconnected structures may be involved in the
regulation of emotional expression. Olney N.T. et al. (2011) compared amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients that presented episodes
of PLC with ALS patients who did not have such episodes. The episodes were induced by contextually appropriate stimuli and associated with
strong experiences of emotion that produced greater facial and physiological activation. The authors concluded that PLC represents
activation of all channels of emotional responding (i.e. behavioural, physiological and subjective). Furthermore, they support previously
advanced theories that, rather than being associated with general emotional hyperreactivity, this disorder may be due to dysfunction in
frontal neural systems that support voluntary regulation of emotion. Gallagher J.P. (1989) examined 73 ALS patients of whom 36 had
experienced episodes of PLC and nearly all of these developed bulbar involvement with the illness. Cavanna A.E. et al. (2010) described 8
patients with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome presenting PLC as part of their tic repertoire. All patients experienced PLC as a simple phonic
tic, accompanied by characteristic premonitory urges and significant impairment in social interactions. The authors suggest that the
pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the expression of PLC as a tic could involve a dissociation between fronto-striatal and limbic
networks. PLC is a component of global behavior pattern in Angelman syndrome. It has been suggested that the speech/language deficit in
Angelman syndrome cannot be accounted for solely by mental retardation and that oral-motor dyspraxia and deficits in social interactions are
quite characteristic of the syndrome. Peters S.U. et al. (2011) showed that, in this syndrome, there is a decreased/delayed myelination,
decreased axonal density diameter or aberrant axonal organization suggesting a generalized white matter alteration throughout the brain
especially in temporal pathways and left arcuate fasciculus. PLC was also described in Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, traumatic
brain injuries, dementia, migraine, progressive supranuclear palsy , acute disseminated encephalomyelitis or mass lesions (abscess in the
anterior paramedian pons , cerebellar tumour , trigeminal schwannoma , frontal glioblastoma , pontine glioma ). PLC in multiple sclerosis is
the result either of isolated lesions to specific areas of the brain (in medulla oblongata and the mesencephalon , clinically isolated
syndrome with pontine lesion ) or the consequence of an extensive diffuse involvement of the brain especially of the prefrontal cortex
producing a complex neuropsychological impairment . This case illustrates the difficulty of distinguishing between TIA’s and gelastic
seizures in cases of PLC. The absence of automatisms and spike-wave activity on EEG during episodes, the lack of efficacy of the
antiepileptic treatment and the remission of episodes after anticoagulation and mitral valve replacement were arguments that supported the
diagnosis of TIA’s. However a plausible assumption could be also that PLC episodes were generated by gelastic seizures caused by repeated
ischemic episodes due to multiple TIA’s. In our patient the identification of multiple lacunar infarcts in the capsular area and cortical-
subcortical frontal-parietal areas bilaterally as well as in the left pontine region is in concordance with the hypothesis of a complex
system of emotion control which involves bilateral frontal and temporal lobes, the internal capsule, thalamic and subthalamic areas, upper
brainstem, pons and cerebellum. PLC episodes have been reported in association with very diverse brain disorders. This case report showed
that PLC is a rare clinical presentation of cardioembolic strokes. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal.
Additional file 1: Episode of pathological laughter that preceded transient ischemic attacks in the territory of the left carotid artery.
(MP4 11.3 MB) Episode of pathological laughter that preceded transient ischemic attacks in the territory of the left carotid artery. (MP4
11.3 MB) Pathological laughing and crying Involuntary emotional expression disorder Emotional lability Transient ischemic attacks Magnetic
resonance imaging Electroencephalography Cerebellar type of multiple system atrophy Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AOD, CM, IM, VI contributed to data acquisition. AOD drafted
and reviewed the manuscript. All authors approved the version to be published. We thank to dr. Emil Tufanoiu and dr. Claudia Pavel who
participated to the diagnosis and treatment of this patient. We thank to Ms. Monica Marinescu who provided the English version revision of
the text.
