Primary congenital glaucoma usually presents as enlarged and hazy cornea at birth or early childhood. The diagnosis is based on a thorough
clinical examination under anesthesia. Most cases require surgical intervention as the definitive treatment. In very rare instances, primary
congenital glaucoma may arrest and resolve spontaneously. We describe a case of spontaneously arrested and resolved primary congenital
glaucoma in a 37-year-old male presenting with large cornea, Haab's striae, and normal intraocular pressure in one eye. Such a case has not
been previously described from the Indian subcontinent. Primary congenital glaucoma is a rare cause of childhood blindness. The disease is
usually manifested at birth or early childhood (before 3 years of age). Only a few cases of spontaneously resolved primary congenital have
been reported previously. Herein, we report a rare case of spontaneously arrested primary congenital diagnosed in an adult. A 37-year-old
male visited our center for a routine eye examination. His chief complaint was decreased vision in the right eye for which he was using
spectacles. He gave a history of a larger right eye since early childhood. On examination, his best corrected visual acuity was 6/9
(+1.00Dx160) OD and 6/6 OS. The intraocular pressures on Goldman applanation tonometer were 11 mmHg OD and 13 mmHg OS. The right eye cornea
was larger with a diameter of 13.5 mm when compared with 11.75 mm for the left eye [Fig. 1]. Anterior segment examination revealed the
presence of Haab's striae in the nasal half of the right eye cornea, which was otherwise clear [Fig. 2]. Gonioscopy revealed prominent iris
processes in the right eye [Fig. 3]. The anterior segment examination of the left eye was normal. The cup disc ratio was 0.3 for the right
eye optic disc and 0.2 for the left eye optic disc. The posterior segment examination was normal. Anterior segment optical coherence
tomography was done which also demonstrated the Haab's striae [Fig. 4]. The central corneal thickness was thinner in the right eye at 449
microns, than 500 microns in the left eye. Visual field testing [Fig. 5] and optical coherence tomography - retinal nerve fiber layer [Fig.
6] demonstrated defects in the right eye. On further examination of history, the patient revealed that the color of the right eye was
initially whitish in early childhood which got restored to normal on its own. A diagnosis of right eye spontaneously resolved primary
congenital glaucoma was made, and further follow-up advised. Face photograph shows a larger right eye cornea Anterior segment photograph
right eye shows the presence of Haab's striae in the nasal half of the cornea and along the nasal limbus Gonioscopy right eye demonstrates
open angle and prominent iris processes (block arrow) Optical coherence tomography of cornea in the region of Haab's striae Visual fields
shows minimal and early defects in the right eye and a normal visual field in the left eye Disc photographs and corresponding optical
coherence tomography - retinal nerve fiber layer scans both eyes. Reduced retinal nerve fiber thickness is observed in the right eye supero-
temporal and infero-temporal quadrant Only a few cases of spontaneously resolved primary congenital glaucoma have been reported previously.
Nagao et al. reported a series of 14 eyes with spontaneously resolved primary congenital glaucoma. At the time of diagnosis, large corneas
were observed in all affected eyes and Haab's striae in 10 of 14 eyes. Intraocular pressures were normal in all 14 eyes. Mastropasqua et al.
reported novel confocal microscopic changes in an adult eye with megalocornea and regressed congenital glaucoma. These findings included
reduction of keratocyte density in the mid- and rear-stroma, an abnormal “clew-shaped” morphology of stromal nerves, and the presence of
hyperreflective structures overhanging the endothelial layer at the level of the Descemet membrane. Severe polymegathism, pleomorphism, and
a markedly decreased cell density were observed in the endothelium. The present case had enlarged cornea, Haab's striae, and normal
intraocular pressure. Continued postnatal development and maturation of the drainage angle might be a mechanism for spontaneous resolution.
Reversal of optic disc cupping with normalization of intraocular pressure is a well-known phenomenon in primary congenital glaucoma. Long-
term follow-up is important for these eyes, due to subtle angle abnormalities and the possibility of later development of glaucoma. Nil.
There are no conflicts of interest.
