Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a clinical syndrome with both genetic and acquired causes characterized by elevated cytokine
levels, hyperinflammation, and overactivation of lymphocytes and macrophages. It is typically a systemic disease with variable degrees of
CNS involvement. Cases with predominantly central nervous system (CNS) involvement are very rare, with the vast majority of these occurring
in infants and young children. This report documents a case of adult-onset CNS-HLH involving a middle-aged man. A 55 year-old man developed
progressive left hemiparesis and aphasia over the course of several months. Brain MRI showed multifocal, mass-like enhancing lesions with
increased susceptibility consistent with blood products. An extensive workup for infectious, autoimmune, and neoplastic etiologies was
significant only for a markedly elevated serum ferritin at 1456 ng/mL. Two brain biopsies showed a non-specific inflammatory process. The
patient was treated empirically with steroids and plasmapheresis, but he continued to suffer a progressive neurological decline and died one
year after onset of neurological symptoms. Autopsy revealed profound histiocytic infiltration, perivascular lymphocytosis, and
emperipolesis, compatible with CNS-HLH. This case report describes an exceedingly rare presentation of an adult patient with CNS predominant
HLH. This diagnosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of adults presenting with progressive brain lesions, even in the
absence of typical systemic signs of HLH. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a clinical syndrome characterized by elevated cytokine
levels, hyperinflammation, and overactivation of lymphocytes and macrophages . In infants and young children, the disease is primarily
caused by a genetic mutation in one of the genes responsible for cytotoxic function of natural killer cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In
older children, adolescents, and adults, acquired causes predominate and include infectious, neoplastic, autoinflammatory, autoimmune, and
immunodeficiency etiologies. While HLH is more frequently a systemic disease with variable degrees of central nervous system (CNS)
involvement, cases with predominantly CNS involvement can occur with resulting meningitis, seizures, and optic neuritis . In such cases, the
vast majority of patients are infants and young children. This report documents a case of adult-onset CNS-HLH involving a middle-aged man,
which is an exceedingly rare presentation of which physicians should be aware. A 55 year-old healthy male business owner presented to a
local community hospital after two months of painless left calf swelling that developed in January 2012. An ultrasound ruled out deep vein
thrombosis, but an MRI suggested diffuse myositis of his left soleus muscle. Initially he was treated for cellulitis, but after failing to
improve with antibiotics, the diagnosis of autoimmune myositis was entertained. A muscle biopsy showed nonspecific endomysial inflammation,
and prednisone was started. His left calf swelling improved partially over the next several weeks. In May 2012 the patient developed
disequilibrium and gait unsteadiness over a period of a few days. This was followed a week later by a left foot drop, and then two weeks
later by right hand parasthesias. He denied any fevers, weight loss, night sweats, or unusual rashes. He was referred to a local
rheumatologist who, being concerned about the progressive symptoms, admitted him to our hospital for an expedited workup. The patient was
relatively healthy prior to onset. He was an avid runner and owned a successful business. Intriguingly, he had episode of right hand
clumsiness in 2003 at age 46 that developed gradually and resolved slowly over months without clear etiology or any specific treatment. At
the time he was found to have lesions in his right cerebellum and right frontal lobe with hemosiderin deposition deemed to be sub-acute
infarcts (Fig. 1). By 2004, though, he was completely functional with no symptoms or deficits.Fig. 1Magnetic resonance images from May 2003.
Coronal fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences through the posterior cerebellum (a) and the frontal lobe (b) Magnetic
resonance images from May 2003. Coronal fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences through the posterior cerebellum (a) and the
frontal lobe (b) He had a daughter with AML and both a maternal grandmother and maternal cousin with strokes in their 40s. He was married
with two children. Other than the prednisone that he had started for possible myositis, he was taking no other medications. He was not
allergic to any medications. On examination at the time of admission in June 2012, he was afebrile without rash, lymphadenopathy, or
hepatosplenomegaly. He did have left lower extremity swelling. He was alert, fully oriented, with fluent speech and normal language. He had
normal attention (digits forward of 6), but had poor short-term recall (0/3 at 5 min even with cues). On cranial nerve testing he was found
to have a right facial droop. He had diffuse left lower extremity weakness that was worse distally in a pyramidal distribution. His deep
tendon reflexes were brisk on the left compared to the right, and he had a Babinski response on the left. He had decreased sensation to
pinprick over the right fifth finger. Finger-to-nose was on-target bilaterally. He had a positive Romberg test, and had a steppage gait on
his left. Labs upon admission revealed unremarkable complete blood count, chemistry panel, coagulation panel, and liver function tests.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody was negative, rapid plasma reagin (RPR) was nonreactive, and hepatitis B and C virus serologies
were negative. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 6 before starting prednisone in March, and was 3 upon admission. Anti-nuclear
antibody (ANA) titer was weakly positive at 1:40 and speckled, anti-double stranded DNA was negative, rheumatoid factor was negative,
complement levels were normal, and both cytoplasmic and perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA and p-ANCA) were
negative. Creatine kinase was elevated to 511. Ferritin was very elevated at 1456. A lumbar puncture was performed which showed 1 white
blood cell; 43 red blood cells; protein of 69; glucose of 47 (serum glucose of 122); an immunoglobulin (Ig) G index of 0.6; and multiple
oligoclonal bands present in both the serum and CSF (Table 1).Table 1Initial admission laboratory tests from early June 2012Serum
TestResultSodium140 mmol/LPotassium3.6 mmol/LBlood urea nitrogen (BUN)14 mg/dLCreatinine0.9 mg/dLGlucose (non-fasting)122 mg/dLWhite blood
cell count3.7 X 10^9/LHemoglobin13.9 g/dLHematocrit40.9 %Platelet count204 X 10^9/LMean corpuscular volume88 fLActivated partial
thromboplastin time26.4 sProthrombin time13.7 sInternational normalized ratio1.0Total bilirubin0.7 mg/dLAspartate aminotransferase (AST)52
U/LAlanine aminotransferase (ALT)43 U/LAlkaline Phosphatase75 U/LFerritin1456 ng/mLCreatine Kinase511 U/LHIV antibodyNegativeRapid plasma
reagin (RPR)NonreactiveHepatitis B Core AntibodyNegativeHepatitis B Surface AntigenNegativeHepatitis C AntibodyNegativeErythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR)3 mm/hrAnti-nuclear antibodyPositive 1:40Anti-double stranded DNA antibodyNegativeAnti-myeloperoxidaseNegativeAnti-
proteinase 3NegativeRheumatoid factorNegativeComplement C3107 mg/dLComplement C420.7 mg/dLComplement CH5034.6 mg/dLAngiotensin converting
enzyme73 U/LCSF TestResultRed blood cells43 X 10^6/LWhite blood cells1 X 10^6/LGlucose47 mg/dLProtein69 mg/dLColorClearGram stainNo
organismsBacterial cultureNo growthM. Tuberculosis Complex PCRNegativeIgG Index0.6Oligoclonal bandsMultiple bands in CSF and serum Initial
admission laboratory tests from early June 2012 Initial MRI brain showed multiple supra- and infratentorial areas of mass-like T2
hyperintensity with regional mass-effect involving cortex and juxtacortical white matter and increased susceptibility in the largest lesions
consistent with blood products (Fig. 2). There was patchy, predominantly cortical enhancement within most of the lesions. The radiologic
differential diagnosis at the time was sub-acute infarctions secondary to vasculopathy/vasculitis, embolic disease, or hypercoaguability; an
underlying metabolic or mitochondrial disorder such as MELAS; a hemorrhagic encephalitis; or less likely a demyelinating pseudotumor.Fig.
2Magnetic resonance images from 2012. a-d Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), axial 3D gradient recalled, susceptibility-
weighted image, axial pre-contrast T1, and axial post-contrast T1-weighted images on June 12, 2012. e-h same sequences on June 19, 2012. i-l
same sequences on August 12, 2012 Magnetic resonance images from 2012. a-d Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), axial 3D
gradient recalled, susceptibility-weighted image, axial pre-contrast T1, and axial post-contrast T1-weighted images on June 12, 2012. e-h
same sequences on June 19, 2012. i-l same sequences on August 12, 2012 Given these MRI findings, a broader laboratory workup was initiated
to look for infectious, autoimmune, metabolic, paraneoplastic, or neoplastic processes (Table 2). This was still non-diagnostic, including
normal triglycerides, fibrinogen, natural killer cell function, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor level. An MRI of the spine; MRA of the
brain; CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; FDG-PET whole body scan; and a transesophageal echocardiogram were also all unremarkable.Table
2Subsequent laboratory tests June-December 2013Serum TestResultLyme antibodyNegativeTriglycerides111 mg/dLFibrinogen338 mg/dLRussel viper
venom test34.4 sAnti beta-2 glycoprotein antibodiesNegativeAnti cardiolipin antibodiesNegativeSerum protein electrophoresisNo paraprotein
spikeVitamin B12580 pg/mLLactate dehydrogenase135 IU/LThyroid stimulating hormone2.4 mIU/LAnti thyroperoxidase antibodyNegativeAnti
thyroglobluin antibodyNegativeAnti SSA antibodyNegativeAnti SSB antibodyNegativeNatural killer cell function63 LUsSoluble interleukin 2
receptor713 U/mL16 s rDNA primer setNegative28 s rDNA primer setNegativeMELAS A3243G mutation: bloodNegativeUrine protein
electrophoresisNegativeKappa/Lambda light chain ratio0.71CSF TestResultFungal cultureNo growthVenereal disease research laboratory
testNegativeGalactomannanNegativeBeta-D-glucanNegativeVaricella zoster virus polymerase chain reactionNegativeWhipple polymerase chain
reactionNegativeCytologyHeterogeneous lymphocytes Subsequent laboratory tests June-December 2013 Shortly after admission, the patient
suffered a focal seizure with secondary generalization and was started on levetiracetam. He declined neurologically throughout June 2012
with worsening confusion, aphasia, and left-sided weakness. He developed occasional fevers as high as 39.9 during this month without ever
having a confirmed infection. Two brain biopsies were performed in late June 2012. The first, from a right parietal lobe lesion, showed a
macrophage-rich process associated with areas of necrosis and a mild-moderate chronic inflammatory infiltrate. The second, from a right
temporal lobe lesion, showed a similar macrophage-rich process involving both the cerebral cortex and white matter. No evidence of
vasculitis was present in either specimen. A bone marrow biopsy was also unrevealing. Despite this extensive workup, no clear diagnosis
could be made. Suspecting an autoimmune process, IV solumedrol was administered, followed by plasmapheresis and a 5-month steroid taper. He
was discharged to a skilled nursing facility in August 2012. Despite immunosuppression, the patient continued to decline. By September 2012,
he was wheelchair-bound with spastic quadriparesis, mute, and unable to maintain proper nutrition by mouth. A percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy tube was placed in the fall of 2012. He died of aspiration pneumonia in the spring of 2013. An autopsy was performed. Evaluation
of the fresh brain showed multifocal areas of yellow discoloration and parenchymal softening at the surface, involving the bilateral frontal
lobes, right parietal, right occipital, and left temporal lobes, and the right cerebellum. The fixed brain weighed 1160 g. Coronal sections
of the cerebrum demonstrated multifocal parenchymal involvement with marked discoloration, cavitation, softening, and focal hemorrhage. The
largest area extended from the anteriormost aspect of right frontal lobe to the posterior right occipital lobe and measured 16.5 × 8 ×
4.5 cm. The disease process involved primarily the white matter and relatively spared the cortex. Similar lesions were found in the left
lateral temporal lobe, right frontal gyrus, and right temporal lobe (Fig. 3a). In addition, an area of hemorrhage measuring 2.5 × 2 × 2 cm
was found in the left basal ganglia, involving the putamen and white matter of the insula, and there was expansion of the left hippocampus
with associated cortical thinning and tissue loss in the entorhinal cortex. A right cerebellar infarct was also identified. The spinal cord
showed left lateral column atrophy spreading throughout the entire spinal column without evidence of anterior or posterior spinal root
atrophy. On microscopic hematoxylin and eosin sections, the cortical sections showed profound histiocytic infiltration, perivascular
lymphocytosis, and emperipolesis, compatible with CNS-HLH (Fig. 3b-c). The CD68 immunohistochemical stain demonstrated abundant macrophage
infiltration and emperipolesis (Fig. 3d). Additional neuropathologic microscopic findings included a histiocytic infiltrate involving the
midbrain and pons. The deltoid and quadriceps skeletal muscle showed diffuse type 2 atrophy and mild neurogenic changes, but no
lymphohistiocytic infiltrate was present. Findings in other organ systems included acute and chronic aspiration pneumonia in the right lower
lobe and left upper lobe of the lungs, mild atherosclerosis of the circumflex and left anterior descending coronary arteries, mild chronic
cystitis with numerous friable yellow calculi, and testicular atrophy. No evidence of systemic HLH was found, including splenomegaly,
hepatitis-like changes, or jaundice.Fig. 3Autopsy neuropathologic findings. a Representative coronal section illustrating destructive
lesions involving the bilateral frontal lobes and right temporal lobe. There was significant destruction of white matter parenchyma with
relative preservation of the cortex. b-c Hematoxylin and eosin sections demonstrating astrogliosis and parenchymal inflammation with
numerous macrophages and emperipolesis. The arrow points to a macrophage containing a red blood cell within its cytoplasm
(hemophagocytosis). d CD68 immunohistochemistry highlighting numerous macrophages with cytoplasmic punched out spaces representing
emperipolesis Autopsy neuropathologic findings. a Representative coronal section illustrating destructive lesions involving the bilateral
frontal lobes and right temporal lobe. There was significant destruction of white matter parenchyma with relative preservation of the
cortex. b-c Hematoxylin and eosin sections demonstrating astrogliosis and parenchymal inflammation with numerous macrophages and
emperipolesis. The arrow points to a macrophage containing a red blood cell within its cytoplasm (hemophagocytosis). d CD68
immunohistochemistry highlighting numerous macrophages with cytoplasmic punched out spaces representing emperipolesis Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a hyperinflammatory syndrome characterized by overactivation of lymphocytes and macrophages in association with
high levels of cytokines . In children, the disease is relatively uncommon, with an estimated prevalence of approximately 1/100,000 and
incidence of 1.2/1,000,000 per year . Clinically, it can be associated with fevers, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pancytopenia,
hypertriglyceridemia, hyperferritinemia, and various neurologic manifestations. The hallmark of disease is the finding of hemophagocytosis
on pathologic examination of tissues. Treatment options include immunosuppression and stem cell transplantation [1, 3–5]. The disease has
primary and acquired causes. Primary HLH usually manifests as a result of defects in genes that encode proteins involved in the exocytosis
of cytotoxic granules in natural killer (NK) cells, which leads to hyperactivation of the immune system. Genes encoding for perforin,
syntaxin 11, Munc 13-4, and Munc 18-2 proteins have been implicated . Primary HLH typically manifests in childhood. Acquired HLH is
associated with various conditions, including infectious and neoplastic etiologies, which are thought to trigger the syndrome. Acquired HLH
manifests predominantly in adulthood [1, 3–5]. Most cases of HLH present first with systemic involvement, [1, 3–5] though cases of central
nervous system HLH (CNS-HLH) have been reported where the disease presents first with destructive lesions of the brain and spinal cord with
associated meningitis, seizures, or optic neuritis . The majority of such cases occur in the pediatric population and represent primary CNS-
HLH. In this case, the pathologic findings at autopsy are diagnostic of CNS-HLH. In retrospect, the patient’s presentation of progressive
right hand clumsiness with associated brain lesions ten years earlier likely represents the earliest manifestation of this disease rather
than sub-acute infarcts as it was deemed at the time. The time course and radiological similarity with subsequent lesions are also
compatible with acute-on-chronic manifestations of CNS-HLH. HLH is diagnosed clinically by either 1) having a proven genetic mutation known
to be associated with HLH or 2) fulfilling 5 out of 8 clinical criteria (fever, splenomegaly, cytopenias of at least 2 cell lines,
hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia, hyperferritinemia, abnormally low NK cell activity, high levels of soluble IL-2 receptor,
and pathologic evidence of hemophagocytosis in tissues) [1, 3, 5, 14]. Our patient had 3 of the 8 clinical criteria: fever,
hyperferritinemia, and hemophagocystosis at the time of brain biopsy. He had a transient decrease in absolute neutrophil count to 1.25
×109/L and platelets to 119 ×109/L during his initial hospitalization but these values do not meet the diagnostic criteria for cytopenia in
HLH. According to the HLH-94 protocol, therapy includes corticosteroids, etoposide, and cyclosporine A, with intrathecal methotrexate for
those with progressive neurologic symptoms. In genetic or refractory cases, a stem cell transplant may be considered [1, 3, 5, 14, 16]. Our
patient was treated empirically with corticosteroids and plasmapheresis for a presumed autoimmune condition since he did not meet clinical
criteria for HLH. The frequency of CNS involvement in HLH is unclear, especially in adults. In one small series CNS involvement was
identified in up to 73 % of patients at the time of diagnosis . In another, CNS involvement was present in 30 % of patients who had both HLH
and an underlying autoimmune disorder . In the pediatric population, neurologic symptoms are variably seen at presentation (between 13–63 %
of patients), and patients may also show neuroimaging as well as CSF abnormalities [7, 9, 19–21]. Compared to patients who only have
systemic symptoms, neurologic symptoms tend to occur in older patients and are associated with higher sodium levels, lower ferritin, lower
levels of liver enzymes, and a worse prognosis [9, 22]. MRI findings include global volume loss, calcifications, enhancing lesions of the
gray and white matter, delayed myelination, and MR spectroscopy changes (lower N-acetyl aspartate to creatinine ratios) . CSF involvement
may manifest as lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein [19, 23, 24] and may indicate a worse prognosis with increased mortality . Of
importance to neurologists, isolated neurologic symptoms as the presenting sign of HLH have been observed in several pediatric reports but
are not particularly common [7, 9]. It is unknown whether our patient had primary or acquired HLH. While genetic causes are thought to occur
mainly in children and infants, hypomorphic mutations can result in manifestation of the disease in adulthood . Furthermore, defects in the
gene encoding for the syntaxin-11 protein have been shown to cause both HLH and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) . Intriguingly, the patient’s
daughter has a history of AML, which raises consideration for a syntaxin-11 mutation and predisposition to the development of HLH.
Alternatively, our patient could have been exposed to an environmental trigger (such as a virus) that could have precipitated CNS-HLH. How
the therapy with solumedrol altered the inflammatory milieu prior to the autopsy is unclear; the lack of significant inflammation in the
liver and other systemic organs could be due to the corticosteroid therapy. However, since the patient’s laboratories were obtained prior to
initiation on solumedrol, the therapy is not a confounder in the lack of clinical/laboratory evidence necessary for a diagnosis of systemic
HLH. Furthermore, the autopsy clearly demonstrates that corticosteroid therapy was not sufficient to prevent the severe destruction of brain
parenchyma. Therefore, the evidence in this case is most consistent with a case of CNS-HLH presenting in adulthood. In conclusion, HLH
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of adults presenting with progressive brain lesions alone or in association with
recurrent fevers, splenomegaly, pancytopenia, hypertriglyceridemia, hypofibrinogenemia, and/or hyperferritinemia. Further work is needed to
identify diagnostic markers of CNS-HLH and to determine the role of environmental factors in the development of HLH. The patient’s widow,
who was his medical decision-maker in life, read this manuscript and provided consent for its publication and any accompanying images.
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DP cared for the patient, collected
clinical and laboratory data, and assisted in drafting and revising the manuscript. MB collected clinical and laboratory data and assisted
in drafting and revising the manuscript. GR interpreted and summarized the findings at autopsy and assisted in drafting and revising the
manuscript. AB interpreted and summarized the findings at autopsy and assisted in drafting and revising the manuscript. SC acquired and
interpreted the radiological images and assisted in revising the manuscript. JR cared for the patient and assisted in drafting and revising
the manuscript. VCD cared for the patient, acquired the clinical and laboratory data, assisted in drafting and revising the manuscript, and
coordinated compilation of the case report. All authors gave final approval of the version being published, and agrees to be accountable for
all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately
investigated and resolved. There are no additional acknowledgements. This manuscript was prepared without funding. Publication of the
manuscript for open access, if accepted, will be funded through a combination of institutional support through an open access agreement
between the University of California, San Francisco and BioMed Central and Dr. Douglas’s Sara & Evan Williams Foundation Endowed
Neurohospitalist Chair. The funding sources had no role in the preparation of this manuscript.
