Patients with advanced or recurrent ovarian cancer often have metastatic disease in the upper abdominal region, especially to the right
hemidiaphragm, which requires diaphragmatic resection in order to achieve optimal cytoreduction. The aim of this surgical video is to
demonstrate repair of a diaphragmatic injury and placement of tube thoracostomy during right upper quadrant peritonectomy in a patient with
recurrent ovarian cancer. This is the case of a 45-year-old woman presented with platinum sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer. Abdomen
computed tomography also confirmed peritoneal carcinomatosis and pelvic recurrent mass. HIPEC was administered after complete cytoreduction
including bilateral upper quadrant peritonectomy, during which diaphragmatic injury occurred near the central tendon and pleural cavity was
entered. We inserted a chest tube through the 6th intercostal space in the anterior axillary line in order to prevent postoperative massive
pleural effusion. Diaphragmatic defect was closed primarily after the tube placement. The chest tube was withdrawn on the third
postoperative day and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 25 without any complications. The central tendon of diaphragm is the
most vulnerable part for lacerations. Diaphragmatic repairs could be performed by various techniques; interrupted or continuous, locking or
non-locking sutures, with either permanent or absorbable materials. In our view, all of the techniques provide similar results and surgeons
can choose any of them as long as they are comfortable with the procedure. In most cases, these lacerations can be repaired primarily
without necessitating tube thoracostomy. However, performance of HIPEC can cause massive pleural effusions which can lead to significant
pulmonary morbidity. Therefore, retrograde placement of the chest tube under direct vision is quite straightforward when the diaphragm is
opened. Repair of diaphragmatic injury and intraoperative placement of a tube thoracostomy during right upper quadrant peritonectomy. Video
can be found with this article online at http://ejgo.org/src/sm/jgo-27-e6-s001.mp4. Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of interest
relevant to this article was reported.
