Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) were previously the standard first-line treatments for lung
cancers with activating EGFR mutations. The first-generation reversible EGFR TKIs, gefitinib and erlotinib, demonstrated substantial
efficacy in the treatment of brain metastases from EGFR-mutated lung adenocarcinoma. However, the efficacy of afatinib, the second-
generation irreversible EGFR TKI, as the first-line treatment in lung adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastasis has yet to be evaluated.
Here, we report cases of 3 patients who received afatinib alone as the first-line treatment in combination with whole-brain radiotherapy or
following surgical resection of brain metastases. All 3 patients had EGFR L858R mutation. The first patient had lung adenocarcinoma with
brain metastasis and no neurologic symptoms. After consultation, she received afatinib as a first-line treatment. Chest computed tomography
and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed partial response. The second patient had lung adenocarcinoma accompanied with a metastatic
brain lesion associated with seizures. This patient received whole-brain radiotherapy and afatinib treatment following brain MRI and
subsequently showed significant regression of the brain metastasis. The third patient had strabismus of the right eye, and brain MRI showed
a single tumor at the cerebellar pontine angle. This patient underwent surgical resection of the tumor followed by afatinib treatment. He
refused adjuvant radiotherapy after surgery for brain metastasis. The brain MRI showed no recurrent brain metastasis, and the patient had
relatively less neurologic deficiency. This series of 3 cases indicate that afatinib may be an appropriate first-line treatment alternative
in patients having lung adenocarcinoma with EGFR mutations. Further retrospective analyses and prospective clinical trials are required to
substantiate the efficacy of afatinib in the treatment of brain metastases of lung adenocarcinoma. Lung adenocarcinoma patients with
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations generally respond well to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).1 A proportion of these
patients are found to have brain metastases at the time of lung adenocarcinoma diagnosis. Before the introduction of EGFR TKIs, only few
cases of lung cancer were suitable for surgical resection and most patients needed brain radiotherapy before EGFR TKIs were used in lung
cancer patients.2 Early relapse or dementia happened in the patients who received local intent or whole-brain radiotherapy. In the past 10
years, the first-generation EGFR TKIs have demonstrated impressive efficacy in the treatment of brain metastases originating from lung
adenocarcinomas with EGFR mutations.3–5 EGFR TKIs can be used as first-line treatment without the need for immediate brain radiotherapy.
Furthermore, brain radiotherapy can be performed later in patients resistant to EGFR TKIs. Afatinib, the second-generation EGFR TKI, is an
irreversible pan-human epidermal growth receptor TKI approved for the treatment of lung adenocarcinoma with EGFR mutations. LUX-LUNG 3 and
LUX-LUNG 6 studies demonstrated increased progression free survival (PFS) with afatinib treatment. Hoffknecht et al,6 as part of the
Afatinib Compassionate Use Consortium (ACUC), reported cerebral responses to afatinib treatment in 35% (11 of 31) of patients who were
followed up with at least one cycle of chemotherapy and an EGFR TKI. To date, there have been no reports of clinical trials or case series
demonstrating the efficacy of afatinib as a first-line treatment of lung adenocarcinoma with activating EGFR mutations and active brain
metastases. Substantial disease control has been observing in this case series concerning patients with varying clinical presentations
indicating that afatinib may have efficacy as a first-line treatment for brain metastases resulting from lung adenocarcinoma with EGFR
mutations. A 61-year-old female with pleural effusion underwent computed tomography (CT) on March 29, 2015. CT revealed a number of lung
nodules in addition to pleural effusion. Cellblock cytology confirmed the pulmonary lesions to be adenocarcinoma, and EGFR L858R
(substitution at position 858 from a leucine to arginine) mutation was identified. PET-MRI (positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance
imaging) revealed multiple lung, brain, bone, and liver metastases. The patient had no neurological symptoms despite multiple brain
metastases observed on MRI (Figure 1A–D). After discussions with the patient and family, treatment with afatinib, instead of erlotinib or
gefitinib, was initiated. Whole-brain radiotherapy was not performed because of the absence of neurological symptoms and its potential side
effects. The patient received afatinib (40 mg/d) from April 23, 2015. Brain MRI (Figure 1E–H) and whole body CT showed marked regression of
the brain metastatic lesions, metastatic liver nodules, and primary lung tumor on June 27, 2015, representing a partial response following
afatinib treatment for 2 months. A good cerebral response to afatinib was observed in this case. Brain MRI showing multiple metastatic brain
lesions in case A (panels 1A to 1D). Regression of multiple brain metastases was observed after treatment with afatinib for >2 months
(panels 1E to 1H). MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. The findings of this case indicate the efficacy of afatinib as a first-line treatment in
selected lung adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastases and no neurological symptoms. A 52-year-old male was found to have a 2 cm nodule
in the left upper lung and a brain lesion at the left periventricular region superior to left thalamus (Figure 2A and B). Histological
examination of a CT-guided biopsy of the left lung nodule showed adenocarcinoma in February 2015. An L858R mutation was identified by EGFR
genotype analysis. Bone scanning revealed no evidence of bone metastasis. The patient had a seizure attack for the first time during this
admission. Whole-brain radiotherapy was performed with a total 30 Gray delivered in 10 fractions and afatinib 40 mg/d initiated following
the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma with brain and mediastinal lymph node metastases. Following treatment with afatinib for 3 months, chest
CT on May 16, 2015, showed regression of the lung tumor and metastatic mediastinal lymph nodes. Brain MRI on June 24, 2015, showed
regression of brain metastases following afatinib treatment and whole-brain radiotherapy (Figure 2C and D). A significant cerebral response
to combined systemic treatment with afatinib and whole-brain radiotherapy was observed in this case. Brain MRI in case B showing brain
metastases with mass effect (panels 2A and 2B). Marked regression of metastatic brain lesion on brain MRI following brain radiotherapy and
afatinib treatment for 4 months (panels 2C and 2D). MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. The findings of this case indicate the efficacy of
afatinib treatment and brain radiotherapy in lung adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastases and neurological symptoms. A 55-year-old
male smoker with no previous history of systemic disease was diagnosed with lung cancer. The patient reported back pain for several weeks
before the development of strabismus in November 2014. Brain MRI identified a right petroclival tumor (Figure 3A). Angiography revealed the
presence of a suspected meningioma in the right petroclival region. The strabismus was found to be due to abducens nerve palsy. The patient
underwent surgical resection with pathological examination showing a TFF-1-positive metastatic adenocarcinoma. Chest CT (Figure 3B and C)
and bone scanning showed the presence of a tumor in the left lower lung with multiple bone and lung-to-lung metastases. Genotyping
identified L858R EGFR mutation of the metastatic brain tumor. Brain radiotherapy and afatinib therapy were arranged following discussions
with the patient and his family. The patient received afatinib treatment at our outpatient clinic. Brain radiotherapy was refused. Brain CT
found no evidence of brain metastasis recurrence on January 23, 2015. Chest CT showed a partial response of the lung cancer to treatment on
May 15, 2015 (Figure 3E and F). Brain MRI found no evidence of brain metastasis recurrence on May 23, 2015 (Figure 3D). Strabismus
persisted, but the patient reported improvement of his visual field. The patient initially required bed rest, but was able to walk unaided
following afatinib treatment for 3 months. Meningeal metastases in the cerebropontin area in case C (panel 3A). Chest CT revealed a tumor
located in the left lower lung and multiple interstitial infiltrations (panels 3B and 3C). Chest CT showed a partial response after afatinib
treatment for 7 months. Brain MRI found no evidence of recurrence following afatinib treatment for 9 months. CT, computed tomography; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging. The findings of this case indicate the efficacy of 6 months afatinib treatment in a lung adenocarcinoma patient
with a single meningeal metastasis without the development of recurrence. This was a retrospective study of reviewed medical charts.
Additional informed consent was not required for a retrospective review of medical charts. Patient information, including names and chart
numbers, were deleted for de-identification before data analyses. Patient confidentiality was ensured at all times. The design of this study
was approved by the institutional Review Board of the Chang Gung Medical Foundation (IRB No. 103-2502B). Our case series provides
information regarding the efficacy of afatinib as a first-line treatment for lung adenocarcinoma with brain metastases and EGFR mutations.
The 3 cases presented herein had different clinical presentations that were largely representative of the majority of lung adenocarcinoma
patients with brain metastases. The first case of a patient having a lung adenocarcinoma with multiple brain metastases, but no neurological
symptoms demonstrated an excellent response to first-line afatinib treatment. The second case demonstrated a good response of primary and
metastatic lesions to combined systemic afatinib treatment and brain radiotherapy in a patient with neurological symptoms. The third case
demonstrated the use of first-line afatinib treatment following surgical resection of meningeal metastasis. To date, there have been no
reported retrospective studies or prospective clinical trials of first-line afatinib treatment in cases of lung adenocarcinoma with brain
metastases. Our case series provides information regarding the efficacy of first-line afatinib in selected cases of lung adenocarcinoma with
brain metastases. Herein, as we report only 3 cases, further studies are required to fully demonstrate the efficacy of first-line afatinib
in achieving cerebral responses. Hoffknecht et al6 from the ACUC reported a 31% cerebral response rate in patients who had received at least
one cycle of chemotherapy and at least one EGFR TKI, providing further evidence of the efficiency of afatinib treatment in patients with
brain metastases.6 Patients received afatinib as the third-line treatment or greater. The cerebral response rate reported by Hoffknecht et
al may have been higher if afatinib had been used as the first-line treatment before the development of resistance to chemotherapy and prior
EGFR TKI therapy.3,7,8 The ACUC study reported good cerebral responses to afatinib, although the included patients had been treated with
EGFR TKI and chemotherapybefore afatinib treatment.6 Our case series provides evidence of the efficacy of first-line afatinib in lung
adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastases. Further studies including greater numbers of patients are required to confirm our findings
and provide a rationale for future prospective studies. The low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentration of reversible first-generation EGFR
TKIs may be responsible for the high rates or recurrence and progression observed with these pharmacological agents.4,9,10 The higher CSF
concentration obtained with erlotinib led to its consideration as a treatment for brain metastases in patients with EGFR-mutated lung
cancer.3,4,9,10 Pulsed high doses of EGFR TKIs are recommended in lung adenocarcinoma patients with resistance to previous EGFR TKI therapy,
although there is a lack of clinical trials providing evidence to support this recommendation.4,10,11 Afatinib has been shown to have a
lower IC50 than the reversible first-generation EGFR TKI in in vitro studies.6 Hoffknecht et al reported 2 cases from the ACUC study. The
first patient had a CSF afatinib concentration of approximately 1 nM. A concentration of 1 nM is higher than the IC50 for lung cancer cell
lines with EGFR L858R mutation or deletion of EGFR exon 19. The second patient received afatinib 50 mg/d as a third-line treatment. The dose
was increased to 60 mg/d at 9 months and then 70 mg/d at 12 months. The patient had rapid progression following 6 months of afatinib 70 mg/d
and received afatinib treatment for a total of 16 months. The subgroup analyses of patients with brain metastases in the ACUC study provided
evidence of the efficacy of afatinib in the treatment of brain metastases from lung adenocarcinoma. The LUX-LUNG 3 and LUX-LUNG 6 studies
reported increased PFS compared with previous clinical trials of first-generation reversible EGFR TKIs. A lack of studies of afatinib, a
newly approved EGFR TKI for lung cancer, in lung cancer patient with brain metastases has limited the clinical application of afatinib in
these patients. The ACUC study and a small number of case reports have demonstrated the efficacy of afatinib in lung cancer patients with
resistance to reversible EGFR TKIs. Afatinib may have similar or greater efficacy in the treatment of metastatic brain lesions in patients
with lung adenocarcinoma. The findings of the 3 clinical cases presented herein indicate afatinib may represent an efficacious first-line
treatment for patients with brain metastases from lung adenocarcinoma. The combination of afatinib with radiotherapy or surgery may provide
better control of brain metastases from lung adenocarcinoma.8,12–14 Metastasectomy of solitary brain metastases resulted in better or the
same survival in a number of studies of erlotinib. The third case in this series had no recurrence of meningeal metastasis following surgery
and afatinib treatment. Combination of surgery and afatinib may represent a valid option in select patients with solitary brain metastasis.
The addition of erlotinib to whole-brain radiotherapy has been shown to result in similar response rates but reduced recurrence of brain
metastases. A proportion of patients with brain metastases and no neurological symptoms receive EGFR TKI alone due to the side effects of
whole-brain radiotherapy. The first case in this series had no neurological symptoms from multiple brain metastases and had a good cerebral
response to afatinib alone. The second case in the present series had developed seizures and received whole-brain radiotherapy and afatinib
treatment accordingly. Brain MRI in these cases showed a good response to combination of afatinib and radiotherapy. Depending on the results
of clinical trials or case reports of the use of erlotinib and afatinib, afatinib plus brain radiotherapy or surgery may represent a
reasonable choice in the treatment of EGFR-mutated lung cancer with brain metastases. Afatinib has efficacy in the treatment of EGFR-mutated
lung adenocarcinoma with brain metastases. The ACUC study proved a role for afatinib in the treatment of brain metastases from lung
adenocarcinoma in patients with resistance to prior EGFR TKI therapy and chemotherapy. The findings of this case series indicate the use of
afatinib alone or in combination with radiotherapy or surgery has efficacy in a range of clinical presentations of EGFR-mutated lung
adenocarcinoma with brain metastases. The authors thank the research grant from Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan (CMRPG 3D1911) for
funding. Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, CT = computed tomography, EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor, L858R = substitution
at position 858 from a leucine to arginine, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PFS = progression free survival, TKI = tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. S-HL and M-HH contributed equally to this work as first authors. This project was supported by the research grant from Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Taiwan (CMRPG 3D1911). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
