A 53-year-old female, submitted to surgical correction of endomyocardial fibrosis (EMF) 12 years before, sought medical care with
hypotension and bradycardia. She complained of palpitations since the age of 29 years. Her symptoms aggravated 5 years later, with the
appearance of dyspnea on moderate exertion. After 5 more years, the dyspnea intensified, being triggered on mild exertion and in the dorsal
decubitus position. The patient was then referred to a hospital. In 1994, the physical examination revealed irregular pulse, heart rate of
88 bpm, blood pressure of 104/80 mm Hg, and increased jugular venous pressure. The pulmonary exam was normal, and the heart auscultation
showed arrhythmic heart sounds and mitral systolic murmur (+/4). The exam of the abdomen and limbs was within the normal range. In February
1994, the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation, left bundle-branch block and left ventricular hypertrophy (Figure 1). ECG:
Atrial fibrillation, left bundle-branch block and left ventricular hypertrophy. In 1996, on echocardiogram, the dimensions of the cardiac
chambers were: left atrium, 57 mm; left ventricle, 51 mm (diastole) and 33 mm (systole). Obliteration of the apical region of both
ventricles was observed, with suggestive signs of calcification. The morphological aspect was considered suggestive of EMF. In 1996, a
ventriculography showed obliteration of the apical region of left and right ventricles, in addition to mild mitral regurgitation. On
coronary cineangiography, the circumflex branch of the left coronary artery originated from the right coronary artery. No obstruction of the
coronary arteries was identified. The ventriculography findings were suggestive of EMF. Surgical treatment was indicated. In September 1996
the surgery was performed with incision in the apical region of the left ventricle and resection of a fibrous and calcified mass. Then,
through the interatrial septum, annuloplasty with bovine pericardium was performed in the posterior portion of the mitral ring and in the
anterior portion of the tricuspid ring. The control ventriculography one month after surgery showed mild left ventricular hypokinesia and
competent valves. According to the patient, the dyspnea improved, but the palpitations remained. She reported a transient episode of speech
difficulty and right hemiparesis in 2002. The dyspnea reappeared, initially on moderate exertion and then on mild exertion. A new
echocardiographic assessment detected marked tricuspid regurgitation. The medication was adjusted, with the prescription of the following
drugs: warfarin, 5 mg; losartan, 50 mg; furosemide, 80 mg; digoxin, 0.25 mg; and diltiazem, 180 mg. The symptoms improved, although episodes
of aggravation occurred. In 2005, a new hemodynamic study revealed hypertension of the right chambers. Left ventricular hypokinesia of
moderate intensity in the inferior and apical walls, and of mild intensity in the anterior wall, was identified. The pharmacological
treatment was maintained, with adjustments according to symptoms. The patient was brought to the hospital after 24 hours of vertigo, malaise
and dyspnea. The physical examination on November 13, 2008, revealed pulse of 30 bpm, inaudible blood pressure, crepitant rales in pulmonary
bases, bradycardia, liver palpable 7 cm from the costal margin, ascitis, and mild lower limb edema. The ECG revealed atrial fibrillation,
high atrioventricular block and ventricular rate of 30 bpm. Chest X-ray showed enlarged cardiac area (+++/4+) and no signs of pulmonary
congestion. The laboratory findings on that occasion were as follows: potassium, 4.4 mEq/L; sodium, 134 mEq/L; urea, 100 mg/dL; creatinine,
1.45 mg/L (glomerular filtration rate, 40 mL/min/1.73m2); INR, 2.6; BNP, 250 pg/mL; hemoglobin, 12.6 g/dL; hematocrit, 40%; leukocytes/mm3,
7900 (78% neutrophils, 10% lymphocytes, and 12% monocytes); platelets/mm3, 183000; arterial lactate, 11 mg/dL; and blood digoxin level, 1.13
ng/mL. Atropine and dopamine were administered and blood volume, replaced, but with no heart rate increase. Dobutamine was then
administered, but unsuccessfully. A temporary transvenous external pacemaker was implanted, after which, blood pressure increased to 106/60
mmHg. Permanent pacemaker was implanted on November, 19, 2008. The underlying disease posed technical difficulty, and a reserve electrode
was implanted in the coronary sinus for an occasional capture loss of the right ventricular electrode. The laboratory findings on that
occasion were as follows: hemoglobin, 9 g/dL; leukocytes, 4700/mm3; platelets, 114000/mm3; urea, 47 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.76 mg/dL;
potassium, 4.6 mEq/L; sodium, 133 mEq/L; blood glucose, 122 mg/dL; hemoglobin, 11.8 g/dl; hematocrit, 36%; and lactate; 7 mg/dL. Oliguria
and renal failure followed. On December 4, 2008, the laboratory findings were as follows: creatinine, 2.4 mg/dL; urea, 105 mg/dL; potassium,
5.3 mEq/L; sodium, 130 mEq/L; hemoglobin, 8.8 g/dL; hematocrit, 30%; leukocytes, 6200/mm3 (neutrophils 86%, lymphocytes 4%, and monocytes
10%); platelets, 99000/mm3. The patient had ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest, which did not respond to the resuscitation
maneuvers, dying on December 5, 2008. At the age of 29 years, the patient developed palpitations, which, after 5 years, associated with
dyspnea on exertion, which progressed slowly until the age of 39 years. In young patients, the major causes of heart failure (HF) are
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, myocarditis, Chagas disease, alcoholic cardiomyopathy, and, more rarely, ischemic heart disease. In
addition, rarer causes of HF in patients of tropical and subtropical regions, such as EMF, are worthy of note. When the patient first sought
the hospital, she was diagnosed with EMF, which is an uncommon restrictive cardiomyopathy, accounting for 1.6% of the deaths due to cardiac
disease in Brazil1. It is more common in the eastern and central regions of Africa. Several cases have been reported in South America and
India, and sporadic ones have been reported worldwide. In some places, EMF has an endemic distribution. Its etiology has not been completely
clarified. Its pathogenesis is believed to involve several factors, such as environmental exposure, nutritional and immune abnormalities, in
addition to genetic factors. One of the most accepted hypotheses is that of a more advanced spectrum of Loeffler's disease, caused by
eosinophilic infiltration of the heart layers, with chronic inflammation and posterior fibrosis2-4. That pathogenic process favors
thrombosis, usually in the ventricular apex. The disease is characterized by deposition of fibrous tissue in the endocardium and, to a
lesser extent, in the myocardium, usually affecting the apical region of the right or left ventricle, or both. A previous study has shown
biventricular impairment in 50% of the cases, of the left ventricle in 30%, and of the right ventricle in 27%2. In addition, EMF usually
affects the ventricular inlet, the papillary muscles and the valvular apparatus, mainly the mitral valve3. In most patients, similarly to
ours, the symptoms begin during adolescence, in the second or third decades of life. The initial symptoms relate to diastolic dysfunction,
the systolic dysfunction being uncommon, except for the advanced stages of EMF5. Ascitis can occur in 50% of the patients, usually
associated with important right ventricular fibrosis, worsening the prognosis6. Our patient had ascitis only in final stage of disease.
Supraventricular arrhythmias can be observed in 60% of the patients, atrial fibrillation, as seen in our patient, being the most common7.
The diagnosis of EMF is established based on echocardiographic findings, which do not correlate with the severity of symptoms. The most
common echocardiographic findings are changes in relaxation and compliance of the affected chamber, but usually without enlargement of the
ventricular volumes. The atria are often enlarged and dysfunctional. Regurgitation of the atrioventricular valves is common. Pericardial
effusion is usually present, and can be important. Our patient's echocardiogram was compatible with the diagnosis of EMF, with marked
enlargement of the left atrium (57 mm) and preservation of the ventricular diameters. Biventricular impairment with suggestive signs of
calcification was observed. In addition, our patient underwent ventriculography, which confirmed the biventricular involvement with mild
mitral regurgitation. The hemodynamic study of patients with EMF usually reveals elevation of the end-diastolic pressure of the ventricle
affected, restrictive pattern in the ventricular pressure recordings and obliteration of the ventricular apex8,9. The prognosis of EMF
depends mainly on its clinical presentation. The following factors are considered to worsen the prognosis: right ventricular impairment,
ascitis, atrial fibrillation, mitral insufficiency, and increased atrial, end-diastolic ventricular and pulmonary pressures (> 40 mm Hg).
The major factor determining the prognosis, however, is functional class (FC). A study has assessed survival according to the FC. Of the
patients with FC I and II, 85% survive two years8, while less than 30% of those with FC IV survive two years10. Thus, the treatment of EMF
is based on symptoms. The recommendation for patients with few symptoms (FC I and II) is clinical treatment11, while that for more
symptomatic ones [congestive HF (CHF) FC III and IV] is surgical treatment12,13. In the presence of worse prognostic factors, some experts
recommend surgery already for FC II. Clinical treatment is extrapolated from the clinical treatment for diastolic HF, being based on the
following: diuretics to control blood volume; beta-blockers or calcium channel blockers to control heart rate in patients with AF or atrial
tachycardia; and vitamin K antagonists for patients with intracardiac thrombi. Our patient had indication for those drugs, including
anticoagulation, because she already had had a thromboembolic event in 2002. The surgical treatment consists in resecting the area of
endocardial fibrosis and in correcting mitral or tricuspid regurgitation, when present, with valvular replacement or repair. The initial
surgical technique consists in replacing the impaired valves with prostheses. Later studies have shown that valvoplasty with native valve
preservation related to lower morbidity and mortality. The mortality related to classical surgery is extremely high, ranging from 20% to
30%12,13; thus, whenever possible, the native valve should be preserved. Surgery determines an important improvement in symptoms and
survival in symptomatic patients, and should always be performed in such patients. In 1999, Moraes et al14 published a study, assessing 83
patients submitted to surgery for EMF, 45% of whom had CHF, FC I and II, and found a 55% survival in 17 years. Recurrence of valvular
regurgitation after surgery is not rare, and many patients might require a new surgery to fix the problem14. Moraes et al15, assessing 107
patients undergoing surgery, have found a 4.5% incidence of fibrosis recurrence. The surgical mortality related to reoperation in such cases
was extremely high, reaching 50%15. Considering the high mortality associated with reoperation, the best treatment for that group remains
uncertain. The heart transplantation team of the Instituto do Coração of the Hospital das Clínicas of FMUSP has reported the good outcome
and survival of one patient with EMF previously submitted to surgery, but with recurrence of disease and important symptoms of HF. The
possibility that, for that group of patients, cardiac transplantation can be more beneficial than reoperation has been raised16. In 1996,
our patient underwent surgery for the resection of the endomyocardial fibrosis, as well as mitral and tricuspid valvoplasty, because of
important HF symptoms (FC III). Initially, her symptoms improved, which was confirmed on the ventriculography performed one month after
surgery, showing competent valves and mild ventricular hypokinesia. A few years after surgery, the HF symptoms recurred and a new
echocardiogram showed important tricuspid regurgitation. A new hemodynamic study was performed in 2005, showing hypertension of the right
chambers and moderate left ventricular hypokinesia, raising the suspicion of disease relapse. On the occasion, clinical treatment was
chosen, but performing some tests, such as cardiac magnetic resonance, could have helped to establish the diagnosis of disease relapse. The
presence of hypertension of the right chambers could be related to HF itself, pulmonary thromboembolism, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease or other causes, requiring further investigation. The patient's symptoms worsened and, on November 13, 2008, she sought the hospital
with cardiogenic shock and important bradycardia, requiring transvenous pacemaker implantation. That bradycardia could have been caused by
the use of medications to control heart rate, diltiazem and digoxin, because the fibrotic impairment of the cardiac conduction system is not
common in EMF. Despite all hemodynamic support and initial improvement, the patient's renal function worsened, raising the suspicion that
her most likely cause of death was cardiogenic shock secondary to EMF relapse with valvular impairment. The retrospective analysis of this
case raised doubt whether a new surgery or heart transplantation in 2005, when the patient's CHF symptoms recurred, would have changed the
disease course. Further studies are required to help deciding on the best treatment for EMF relapse. (Michel Abi Kalansky Ponczek, MD, and
Fernanda Seligmann Feitosa, MD) Diagnostic hypothesis: Endomyocardial fibrosis (Michel Abi Kalansky Ponczek, MD, and Fernanda Seligmann
Feitosa, MD) The heart weighed 652 g (normal: 200-300 g) and had multiple adherences between the visceral and parietal pericardium. Its
volume was enlarged, especially because of the atria, whose volume was proportionally greater than that of the ventricles (Figure 2A).
Opening of the heart revealed marked atrial dilatation and bilateral moderate endocardial thickening. The rings of the mitral and tricuspid
valves showed surgical sutures of older valvoplasties, close to the insertion of the posterior cusps (Figure 2B). The right atrial roof also
showed an old surgical suture. Endocardial thickening with areas of calcification was more intense in the ventricular inlet and apices, but
partial in the left ventricular outflow tract, sparing the right ventricular outflow tract (Figure 3). The myocardial trabeculae were bound
together due to endocardial thickening, which also involved the papillary muscles of the mitral and tricuspid valves, with marked reduction
of the ventricular cavities and amputation of the ventricular tips (Figure 3). The chordae tendineae and cusps of the atrioventricular
valves were not affected by endocardial thickening; however, there was moderate retraction of the free margins of the cusps and bilateral
dilatation of the valvular ring. The right ventricular endocardium showed implanted electrodes of permanent biventricular cardiac pacemaker:
one in the middle third of the interventricular septum and another in the anterolateral wall. There was thrombus on neither the pacemaker
leads nor their implantation sites. On gross examination, no thrombi were found in the cardiac cavities, and the ventriculoarterial valves
showed no abnormalities. The epicardial coronary arteries had no important obstructive changes. The microscopic examination revealed intense
endocardial fibrosis and calcification, neovascularization areas and sparse lymphomononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, with expansion of
irregular fibrous bands to the subjacent myocardium (Figure 4). Eosinophils were present in neither the endocardial inflammatory infiltrate
nor other organs. The kidneys showed multiple and extensive healed cortical infarctions. In addition, morphological changes due to CHF, such
as diffuse edema of the subcutaneous tissue, ascitis (1500 mL of yellow hyaline fluid) and chronic passive congestion in the lungs, liver
and spleen, were observed. The cause of death was low cardiac output secondary to CHF, histologically represented by acute tubular necrosis
and centrilobular necrosis of the liver. A - Heart, diaphragmatic surface: atrial volumes are proportionally greater than the ventricular
ones. The right coronary artery is found in the atrioventricular sulcus (**), and the posterior interventricular branch of the right
coronary artery, in the posterior ventricular sulcus (*). B - Left and right atria: bilateral endocardial thickening and surgical sutures of
the old valvoplasty (arrows) in the posterior cusps (arrows) of the mitral (M) and tricuspid (T) valves. A and B - Right ventricular inlet
and outflow tract: endocardial fibrosis affecting the ventricular inlet (arrows), with amputation of the ventricular apex (yellow dotted
line), but sparing the outflow tract. C and D - Left ventricular inlet and outflow tract: endocardial fibrosis affecting the ventricular
inlet and the papillary muscles of the mitral valve (arrows), amputation of the left ventricular apex (yellow dotted line) and extension to
the ventricular outflow tract, but sparing the aortic valve (Ao). Endomyocardial photomicrograph: A - Organizing thrombus (tr) on the
endocardium with intense fibrosis (f) (Hematoxylin-Eosin, 25x). B - Neovascularization and lymphoplasmacytic and mononuclear inflammatory
infiltrate (between arrows) amid endomyocardial fibrosis, with calcified area (ca); m- myocardium (Hematoxylin Eosin, 25x). C - Irregular
fibrosis bands (blue) surrounding cardiomyocytes (red) in the subendocardial region (Masson trichrome, 50x). (Léa Maria Macruz Ferrreira
Demarchi, MD) Anatomopathological diagnoses: 1) Biventricular endomyocardial fibrosis, operated on; 2) Congestive heart failure; 3) Low
cardiac output. (Léa Maria Macruz Ferrreira Demarchi, MD) The cardiac lesions revealed on the postmortem examination describe the morphology
of biventricular EMF. The major characteristic of EMF is the focal or diffuse thick endocardial fibrosis, which affects mainly the inlet and
apical region of one or both ventricles17. The myocardial trabeculae can be bound together due to endocardial thickening, which can involve
the papillary muscle, chordae tendineae and the cusps of the atrioventricular valves, causing valvular insufficiency. Although our patient
had already undergone mitral and tricuspid valvoplasty, such valves still had morphological changes of insufficiency, such as valvular ring
dilatation and retraction of the free margin of the cusps. Microscopically, EMF is represented by dense and collagen endocardial fibrosis,
with fragmented and irregularly arranged elastic fibers, which affect the subjacent myocardium, whose close regions have vascular
neoformation and a variable amount of lymphoplasmacytic and mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, with or without eosinophils18. Although not
always present, eosinophils in endocardial lesions and peripheral eosinophilia, observed in different studies of individuals with EMF, have
been reported as one of the probable causes of that disease19, whose etiopathogenesis remains to be clarified20. Several authors have
proposed that the eosinophilic form, also known as Loeffler's endocarditis, and EMF without eosinophils represent different stages of the
same disease, because the morphological endocardial changes in the chronic stage cannot be differentiated in the patients with and without
eosinophilia21,22. This can be seen in our patient, who had eosinophils in neither the endocardial inflammatory infiltrate nor other organs.
As EMF progresses, the formation and organization of endocardial thrombosis contribute to the obliteration and reduction of the ventricular
cavity, and advanced cases frequently show calcification amid the fibrosis18. Usually, atrial dilatation results from the ventricular
restriction caused by the endomyocardial fibrosis and the mitral and tricuspid valvular insufficiency, as well as from the pulmonary
vascular changes secondary to passive pulmonary congestion, as reported in our patient. The healed renal infarctions were very likely caused
by embolism from the previous thrombosis in the left ventricle. It is worth noting the post-surgery 12-year survival of our patient,
considering the extension of the EMF lesions found on the postmortem examination. The survival likelihood of patients with EMF submitted to
surgery is approximately 70% ten years after surgery23,24. Such lesions very likely represent disease relapse, but the possibility that not
all the tissue affected by EMF had been removed in the previous surgery should be kept in mind. (Léa Maria Macruz Ferrreira Demarchi, MD)
Section editor: Alfredo José Mansur (ajmansur@incor.usp.br) Associated editors: Desidério Favarato (dclfavarato@incor.usp.br) Vera Demarchi
Aiello (anpvera@incor.usp.br)
