This case study features a woman who presented with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic non-ketotic
syndrome (HHNS), systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), and non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTIS) who was noted to have a transient
decrease in myocardial function. To our knowledge, this is the first case discussing the overlapping pathophysiological mechanisms could
increase susceptibility to SIRS-induced cardiomyopathy. It is imperative that this clinical question be investigated further as such a
relationship may have significant clinical implications for prevention and future treatments, particularly in patients similar to the one
presented in this clinical case. A 53-year old Caucasian female presented to the Emergency Department for cough, nausea, vomiting and
“feeling sick for 3 weeks.” Labs were indicative of diabetic ketoacidosis. Initial electrocardiograms were suggestive of possible myocardial
infarction and follow-up echocardiogram showed severely depressed left ventricular systolic function which resolved upon treatment of
ketoacidosis. We suggest that her cardiomyopathy could have three synergistic sources: SIRS, HHNS and NTIS. Overlapping mechanisms suggest
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus and NTIS could increase susceptibility to SIRS-induced cardiomyopathy as seen in this case. HHNS and SIRS
cause cardiac tissue injury through mechanisms including impairment of fatty acid oxidation and formation of reactive oxygen species, as
well as modifying the function of membrane calcium channels. As a result, it is conceivable that diabetes may amplify the deleterious
effects of inflammatory stressors on cardiac myocytes. This novel case report offers a path for future research into prevention and
treatment of SIRS-induced cardiomyopathy in, but not exclusive to, the setting of diabetes. This case study features a woman who presented
with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic non-ketotic syndrome (HHNS), systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS), and non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTIS) who was noted to have a transient decrease in myocardial function. We suggest
that her cardiomyopathy could have three synergistic sources: SIRS, HHNS and NTIS. Overlapping mechanisms suggest uncontrolled diabetes
mellitus and NTIS could increase susceptibility to SIRS-induced cardiomyopathy as seen in this case. A 53-year old female presented to the
Emergency Department for cough, nausea, vomiting and “feeling sick for 3 weeks.” She reported an allergy to penicillin but no other
significant past medical history. On initial assessment, patient was afebrile, tachycardic (125 beats/minute), tachypneic (22
breaths/minute), with blood pressure of 109/74 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 72 % on room air. Physical exam showed no other abnormalities.
Initial laboratories showed leukocytosis (WBC 22,000 k/mcgl), hyperglycemia (glucose 796 mg/dl), hyponatremia (Na 120 mEq/L; corrected
131 mEq/L), a hemoglobin A1c of 17.2 %, and an elevated troponin T (0.19 ng/mL) and BNP (2137 pg/mL). Measured osmolarity was 349 mOsm/L
with only small ketones in the blood and an arterial lactate of 5.62 mmol/L. Arterial blood gas suggested metabolic acidosis (pH = 7.264 |
PCO2 = 25.9 mmHg | Bicarbonate = 13 mmol/L). Calculated anion gap was 30 mEq/l. Chest X-ray showed bilateral reticular opacities without
cardiomegaly (Fig. 1). The patient was also found to have an abnormal thyroid hormone profile suggesting NTIS: TSH 1.35 mcgUI/mL (nr:
0.27–4.20), free T4 0.88 ng/dL (nr: 0.93–1.70), free T3 0.95 pg/ml (nr:2.30–4.20), mixed hyperlipidemia, mild elevation of lipase and
amylase, and transaminitis.Fig. 1Chest X-ray, Portable film notable for bilateral, patchy hilar infiltrates consistent with pulmonary edema
in the setting of depressed ejection fraction Chest X-ray, Portable film notable for bilateral, patchy hilar infiltrates consistent with
pulmonary edema in the setting of depressed ejection fraction Intravenous fluids, insulin and levofloxacin were started; the patient’s
clinical condition improved in 24 hours, although she continued to complain of shortness of breath and remained hypotensive. Blood and urine
cultures were ultimately negative. Initial EKG changes suggested previous myocardial infarction (Fig. 2). A transthoracic echocardiogram
demonstrated a severely depressed LV systolic function (ejection fraction = 26 %), grade 2 diastolic dysfunction, and multiple regional wall
motion abnormalities (Fig. 3a-3b). However, on Day 4 after admission, a Myoview stress test showed no stress-induced ischemia, normal LV
function, no regional wall motion abnormalities, and an estimated ejection fraction of 50 %. A repeat transthoracic echocardiogram performed
on Day 7 demonstrated an ejection fraction of 50–55 % (Fig. 3c-3d). A follow-up EKG on Day 4 showed no significant changes (Fig. 4).Fig.
2Initial EKG, EKG taken at admission notable for q-waves in the septal leads consistent with prior myocardial infarction. There are no
findings concerning for acute ischemiaFig. 3Transthoracic echocardiogram at Day 1 and Day 7, Apical four chamber view from day 1
transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) with IV contrast at end-diastole a and end-systole b demonstrates depressed left ventricular (LV)
ejection fraction estimated at 26 %. Apical four chamber view from day 7 TTE at end-diastole c and end-systole d demonstrates normalized LV
ejection fractionFig. 4Follow-up EKG on Day 4 of hospitalization Initial EKG, EKG taken at admission notable for q-waves in the septal leads
consistent with prior myocardial infarction. There are no findings concerning for acute ischemia Transthoracic echocardiogram at Day 1 and
Day 7, Apical four chamber view from day 1 transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) with IV contrast at end-diastole a and end-systole b
demonstrates depressed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction estimated at 26 %. Apical four chamber view from day 7 TTE at end-diastole c
and end-systole d demonstrates normalized LV ejection fraction Follow-up EKG on Day 4 of hospitalization On 6-month follow-up, the patient’s
A1c remained elevated but the NTIS and cardiomyopathy had resolved. Her HgA1c was 9.4 %, TSH 1.86 mcgUI/mL (nr: 0.27–4.20), free T4
1.01 ng/dl (nr: 0.93–1.70), free T3 2.89 pg/ml (nr:2.30–4.20). BNP was 42 pg/ml (normal). Our patient presented a case of severe reversible
myocardial dysfunction with HHNS as debut of diabetes mellitus, NTIS, and meeting SIRS criteria. Although sepsis of pulmonary origin was
initially suspected, the clinical course (normal body temperature, normalization in blood leukocytes count in less than 24 and negative
cultures) suggest that SIRS was secondary to HHNS . The observed NTIS was also likely secondary to HHNS and SIRS. Myocardial dysfunction is
a common complication in patients with SIRS secondary to sepsis and is associated with an increased risk of mortality of up to 70–90 % [2,
3]. Systolic and diastolic myocardial dysfunction has been described in other situations of SIRS such as severe trauma and burns . A common
mechanism among these clinical situations is a high level of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin 6 (IL-6). Bacterial products and pro-inflammatory cytokines increase production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species
(ROS) [8, 9] that inhibit the function of proteins involved in myocardial contraction and relaxation [9, 10]. The sarcoendoplasmic reticulum
adenosine triphosphatase 2a (SERCA2a) and sarcolemmal voltage-gated L-type calcium channels are often affected. As a consequence, Ca2+ entry
into cells and release from sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) decreases and sarcomere shortening is reduced [11, 12]. Bacterial products and pro-
inflammatory cytokines also inhibit SERCA2a gene expression , reduce myofilament sensitivity to Ca2+ , and downregulate and desensitize
beta-adrenergic receptors [15, 16]. SIRS can cause myocardial energy deficiency. Low ATP levels and a decrease in the phosphocreatine/ATP
ratio have been found in deadly cases of septic shock . Both glucose oxidation and fatty acid oxidation (FAO), the main sources of
myocardial ATP, decrease in non-surviving humans with septic shock . Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and phosphofructokinase activities
decrease during septic shock leading to dissociation of glycolysis from glucose oxidation. Factors responsible for FAO inhibition during
septic shock are a decrease in mitochondrial membrane carnitine shuttle activity and a decrease in peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator-1α gene expression [23, 24]. Also, mitochondrial complexes
I, II and III activities decrease in cases of prolonged septic shock [25, 26]. Multiple reviews have been published to discuss these and
other possible mechanisms of sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy [8, 27–30]. Acute hyperglycemic crisis can cause SIRS, and both hyperosmolar
hyperglycemic non-ketotic syndrome and diabetic ketoacidosis are associated with a severe inflammatory state . However, other features of
hyperglycemic crisis, such as dehydration and electrolyte imbalance, likely exacerbated the patient’s cardiomyopathy. Diabetic
cardiomyopathy refers to ventricular dysfunction in the absence of coronary artery disease and hypertension . Diastolic and systolic
dysfunction can be seen as early functional alteration of diabetic cardiomyopathy . The pathogenic mechanisms involved are complex,
interrelated and not all well characterized, although inflammation seems to play a significant role . Under normal circumstances, the heart
obtains energy mostly from FAO. In diabetic hearts, glucose uptake, glycolysis and glucose oxidation are reduced and FA uptake increased. An
increase in FA uptake is associated with increased triglycerides synthesis that causes myocardial lipotoxicity and cell death. Also, higher
FAO rates increase oxygen consumption at the expense of mitochondrial uncoupling and increased oxidative stress. Our patient had elevated
troponin T levels indicating cellular death or myocardial cell membrane alterations. Additionally, the hyperosmolar state may cause
dehydration, which would decrease preload and further lower left ventricular systolic function. Our patient also presented with low thyroid
hormone levels with normal TSH, a condition known as NTIS or sick euthyroid syndrome. Although NTIS is probably the most common cause of
hypothyroidism, the current consensus advises against the administration of thyroid hormones to patients with NTIS as thyroid hormones
increase respiratory rate, oxygen consumption, energy expenditure and heat production, NTIS is considered an adaptive response to counteract
catabolism during illness , and this is the primary reasoning against administration of thyroid hormone to patients with NTIS . However,
SIRS is associated with myocardial hypothyroidism in large animal models of septic shock and hypothyroidism can cause systolic and diastolic
myocardial dysfunction. In this context, thyroid hormone administration, in attempt to normalize thyroid hormone levels inside the
myocardium, could have been beneficial and devoid of harmful effects. In fact, hypothyroidism increases serum levels of troponin T and
creatine kinase CK-MB isoenzymes that are markers of myocardial damage. Patients with heart failure and low serum T3 have poor hemodynamics
and a higher probability of death . Finally, thyroid hormone administration to patients with advanced congestive heart failure was well
tolerated and increased cardiac output without an appreciable increase in ischemia or arrhythmias . As we have explained, both HHNS and SIRS
cause cardiac tissue injury through similar mechanisms including impairment of fatty acid oxidation and formation of reactive oxygen
species, as well as modifying the function of membrane calcium channels. As a result, it is conceivable that diabetes may amplify the
deleterious effects of inflammatory stressors on cardiac myocytes. It is imperative that this clinical question be investigated further as
such a relationship may have significant clinical implications for prevention and future treatments, particularly in patients similar to the
one presented in this clinical case. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images through standard institutional protocol. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Non-Ketotic Syndrome Non-thyroidal Illness Syndrome Fatty
Acid Oxidation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests, financial or non-financial. Author’s
contributions JB and RW drafted the manuscript and performed initial literature review. HB provided cardiology consultation, interpreted
cardiology images, and edited the manuscript. JL conceived the study, participated in the design and coordination of the manuscript,
provided resources for literature review, and conducted final edits of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information Not applicable. Substantial contributions were made by all attributed authors. We gratefully acknowledge the providers
and ancillary staff that provided compassionate care to the patient.
