Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 68 Final Diagnosis: Non-small cell lung cancer Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: TBLB • PET • OCT • fluorescence angiography Specialty: Oncology Challenging differential diagnosis Visual disturbance
caused by cancer metastasis from other organs is one of the largest challenges to cancer patients’ quality of life (QOL). Lung cancer is the
most frequent primary site of choroidal metastasis in men, but improvement of visual disturbance has not always been emphasized in lung
cancers. Recently intravitreal bevacizumab is a newer modality being tried for local control of choroidal metastases. A 68-year-old man was
admitted the hospital with complaint of visual disturbance in his left eye. He was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma cT2N0M1b (OSS, OTH)
stage IV. The ophthalmologic evaluation showed exudative fluid, which caused retinal detachment under the retina. Fluorescence angiography
showed granular hyperfluorescence with leakage consistent with a tumor. He received radiotherapy for bone metastasis and systematic
chemotherapy with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab, as well as intravitreal injection of bevacizumab 1.25 mg to improve the visual
disturbance. His visual symptom and retinal detachment improved until he died. An autopsy revealed that the metastatic lesion in his left
eye was totally cured macroscopically and microscopically. We report a case of exudative retinal detachment secondary to a metastatic
choroidal tumor from lung adenocarcinoma, which was treated with chemotherapy and intravitreal injection of bevacizumab. Although he finally
died of lung cancer, he maintained his visual QOL and autopsy revealed complete cure of the choroidal metastasis. Choroidal metastasis is
the most common type of intraocular malignancy. The most common primary sites associated with choroidal metastasis are breast cancer in
women and lung cancer in men . Recent improvements in cancer therapy have lengthened patient survival times and improved the detection rate
. Although symptomatic choroidal metastasis is less common than asymptomatic choroidal metastasis, visual disturbance due to cancer
metastasis from other organs is one of the most important limits to cancer patients’ quality of life (QOL) . Therefore, further improvement
of the therapy for visual disturbance is needed. Clinically available therapies for choroidal metastasis are currently very limited and
include systemic chemotherapy, external beam radiotherapy (ERBT), radioactive plaque therapy, and enucleation. In addition, transpupillary
thermotherapy and photodynamic therapy (PDT) have been done . For tumor lesions that are larger than 4-disc diameter with retinal
detachment, radiotherapy or chemotherapy is used . Chemotherapy causes systemic adverse effects and is not always effective . Radiotherapy
enables local therapy, but has several complications, including cataract, exposure keratopathy, iris neovascularization, radiation
retinopathy, and radiation papillopathy . Moreover, these therapies are usually long-term. Intravitreal bevacizumab is a newer modality
being tried for local control of choroidal metastasis. Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting vascular epithelial growth factor (anti-
VEGF), has recently been used in the treatment of cancer to inhibit tumor growth by blocking angiogenesis . Since metastasis occurs through
blood circulation and colonization to distant sites, cancer angiogenesis plays an important role. Thus, anti-cancer angiogenesis therapy is
suitable for metastatic lesions . Additionally, if it is used with intravitreal injection, high-dose bevacizumab can cure the metastasis
lesions . To date, 9 reports involving 11 cases have been published on intravitreal bevacizumab as a primary treatment modality for
choroidal metastasis from lung cancer . Herein, we report a case of effective treatment with intravitreal injection of Bevacizumab for
exudative retinal detachment secondary to choroidal metastasis of non-small cell carcinoma (NSCLC). A 68-year-old man attended an eye clinic
with complaint of visual disturbance in the left eye for a few days. He did not have any relevant past medical history or smoking history.
His ECOG performance status (PS) was 1 due to visual disturbance. Funduscopy and fluorescence angiography (FA) showed retinal detachment and
choroidal tumor. A 5-cm diameter tumor was found in the right lower lung on X-ray. He was referred to our hospital with the suspicion of
lung cancer with choroidal metastasis. A CT scan showed a 36×23 mm tumor in the right lower lung (S9 region); CT and MRI of orbit with
contrast showed it was intact. 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated FDG accumulation in the right lung tumor, entire bone marrow, mesentery, and the
dorsal side of the left eye (Figure 1A–1C). His complete blood count (CBC) and blood chemistry revealed leukocytosis (WBC 11 630 /uL) and
high alkaline phosphatase (ALP 2215 U/L), suggesting bone marrow metastasis. Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and sialyl
Lewis-x antigen (SLX) were 282.7 ng/mL and 176.2 U/mL, respectively. A transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) revealed the lung tumor as
adenocarcinoma; the staging was cT2N0M1b (OSS, OTH) stage IV. On the ophthalmology examination, his visual acuity was 1.2 OD and 0.4 OS.
Funduscopic examination showed an elevated lesion with a 6-disc diameter in the left superior of the optic nerve. Spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (OCT) showed exudative fluid, which caused retinal detachment under the retina. FA showed granular hyperfluorescence
with the leakage consistent with a tumor (Figure 1D–1G). For palliative therapy for bone metastasis, radiotherapy targeting the cervical
spine and pelvis was carried out, with a total dose of 37.5 Gy, given as 2.5 Gy/fraction per day. Systemic chemotherapy; carboplatin (AUC 6)
+ pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) + bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) was performed. The choroidal metastasis and exudative retinal detachment improved on
fundus examination. He received additional local therapy. Intravitreal injection of bevacizumab 1.25 mg was also performed 20 days after the
systemic therapy, with his informed consent. The choroidal metastasis was no longer visible and exudative retinal detachment improved on
fundus examination after 27 days of systemic chemotherapy (Figure 1H, 1I). After 1 cycle of the systemic chemotherapy and local therapy, he
developed from stomatitis and his PS decreased gradually. Thus, no further chemotherapy was given. He died of lung cancer 60 days after the
systemic chemotherapy was begun. His autopsy showed that the primary site was well-differentiated lung adenocarcinoma at the right lower
lung, with a size of 40×30×25 mm. We also observed multiple pulmonary and bone metastasis, mild pancreatitis, and severe pseudomembranous
enterocolitis. His left eye was intact macroscopically and microscopically, suggesting the complete cure of the choroidal metastasis (Figure
2A–2G). Intraocular metastasis is commonly located in the posterior uvea because of its rich blood supply. Prevalence figures calculated
from screening studies in patients with metastatic cancer suggest that choroidal metastasis is the most frequent intra-ocular tumor . The
most common intraocular tumor is choroidal metastasis from lung cancer in men and breast cancer in women . Prognosis of the choroidal
metastasis depends on its primary site. The mean survival time (MST) of patients with choroidal tumor from lung cancer is 7.9±1.8 months and
for patients with clinical stage IV non-small cell lung cancer mean survival time is 6 months. In addition, the MST of choroidal metastasis
from breast cancer is 21.8±4.2 months and that of stage IV breast cancer is 18–24 months . Treatment options include: 1) observation if the
patient is pre-terminal or the metastases appears regressed; 2) chemotherapy, immunotherapy, hormone therapy, or whole-eye radiotherapy if
the metastases are multifocal, bilateral, or associated with extensive subretinal fluid; 3) plaque radiotherapy for solitary metastasis; and
4) enucleation is considered in very limited cases such as choroidal metastasis that is progressive and causes refractory pain .
Bevacizumab, a recombinant anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody, inhibits new blood vessel formation and growth. It is used alone or in combination
with other anticancer drugs in patients with advanced colon, lung, breast, renal, and ovarian cancer . In our case, the patient was treated
with the regimen of carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab, which is often used as an initial treatment of advanced nonsquamous NSCLC .
Intravitreal bevacizumab is a newer modality being tried for local control of choroidal metastases . Currently, its use in this indication
is off-label. Intravitreal bevacizumab has been used to treat choroidal metastases from breast cancer, colorectal carcinoma, and lung cancer
. Successful metastasis is dependent on angiogenesis at the metastatic site. Thus, inhibition of tumor-induced angiogenesis is very suitable
for metastasis treatment via blood circulation . Intravitreal bevacizumab for choroidal metastases from lung cancer has recently been
reported, and 11 cases of choroidal metastasis from lung cancer have been reported. In 2 cases of SCLC, intravitreal bevacizumab was not
effective, but it improved choroidal metastasis in 7 of 9 NSCLC cases. Intravitreal bevacizumab is a promising alternative to ocular
radiation, especially for treatment of non-small non-squamous lung cancer . In our case, systemic chemotherapy was performed before the
intravitreal bevacizumab and improved choroidal metastasis. The left choroidal metastasis at the time of local therapy had disappeared by
the time of death, but the primary tumor size showed slight progression at autopsy. The additional effect of local treatment is actually
unclear; however, it is considered that local therapy contributed to the further effect. Finally, systemic chemotherapy and additional
intravitreal bevacizumab definitely cured the choroidal metastases, which was confirmed by autopsy. Although several case reports have been
published on intravitreal bevacizumab as a therapy for choroidal metastasis from lung cancer, this is the first report to assess choroidal
metastasis treated with intravitreal bevacizumab with results confirmed by autopsy. Although the benefits of intravitreal bevacizumab may
need to be evaluated in trials, this may not be feasible because of the rarity of the choroidal metastasis. In conclusion, we report a case
of exudative retinal detachment secondary to metastatic choroidal tumor from lung adenocarcinoma, treated with chemotherapy and intravitreal
injection of bevacizumab. Our patient eventually died of lung cancer but his visual symptom had improved and the choroidal metastasis was in
complete remission. We thanked to Dr. Hara for research advice. We are grateful to Drs Suganuma, Mashimo, and Mitake for writing advice.
Source of support: This work was supported by CJLSG (Central Japan Lung Study Group) Disclosure statement The authors have no conflicts of
interest. Chest CT, PET, and ophthalmic examination. (A) CT showed a tumor in the right lower lung. (B) Although the eyes were intact in
MRI, (C) FDR accumulated at the dorsal of the left eye (arrow). (D) Funduscopic findings; an elevated lesion is present in the left superior
fundus of the optic nerve, 6 discs in size. (E) Fluorescein angiography indicated multiple hyperfluorescent spots. (F, G) OCT showed retinal
detachment by the subretinal fluid. (H, I) The retinal detachment improved after the chemotherapy. Pathological analysis. (A) Lung cancer in
the right lower lung. (B, C) Histopathologic examination demonstrated adenocarcinoma of the lung. (D, E) Macroscopic findings of left eye
intact. (F) Choroid membrane was also intact. (G, H) Microscopic findings showed no tumor cells or retinal detachment.
