Here we report the rare case of an intraoperative bronchial artery aneurysm (BAA) rupture. An asymptomatic 52-year-old woman was found to
have bilateral, multiple dilated bronchial arteries feeding the BAA that was further connected to the pulmonary artery on computed
tomography and angiography. Transcatheter arterial embolization was thought not to be succeed. During a thoracoscopic procedure, the BAA
ruptured suddenly and was treated with a thoracotomy under percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS). For anatomical complex BAA like the
present case, the use of an open procedure and the preparation of PCPS are strongly recommended. It is recommended that bronchial artery
aneurysm (BAA) be immediately treated to avoid risk of rupture. Generally, rupture will occur either before or after the surgical procedure
and treatment aims to prevent or cease potentially fatal hemorrhage. Here, we present a rare case of a bronchial artery aneurysm (BAA) that
ruptured intraoperatively. A 52-year-old female patient, an ex-smoker, underwent a chest computed tomography (CT) scan before the surgical
treatment of a right ovarian cyst and was found to have a mass shadow. Contrast-enhanced chest CT revealed a BAA of 17 mm in diameter,
located between the middle and lower lobes of the lung and connected to the basal pulmonary artery, A8 (Fig. 1a). Angiography showed four
bronchial arteries, bilateral and dilated, which were feeding the aneurysm (Fig. 1b, c). Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was
performed and we attempted to insert the smallest micro-coil catheter available (Excelsior™ SL-10 Microcatheter, Boston Scientific Co, USA)
into the feeding bronchial arteries. However, the catheter advanced only slightly, approximately 6 cm and 2 cm into the left and right
bronchial arteries respectively. It was therefore concluded that there were four interconnected dilated bronchial arteries feeding the BAA
and that the aneurysm was in fact distant from the aorta. Thus, arterial embolization was considered too challenging and expensive, and an
alternative surgical approach was indicated.Fig. 1Preoperative CT scan showing the bronchial arterial aneurysm connected to the basal
pulmonary artery (a), 3-D CT (b), and selective bronchial arteriography (c) revealing four tortuous feeding bronchial arteries and the
saccular bronchial arterial aneurysm of the basal bronchus Preoperative CT scan showing the bronchial arterial aneurysm connected to the
basal pulmonary artery (a), 3-D CT (b), and selective bronchial arteriography (c) revealing four tortuous feeding bronchial arteries and the
saccular bronchial arterial aneurysm of the basal bronchus The patient initially underwent video-assisted bronchial artery ligation in the
left lateral position. The bronchial arteries at the bifurcation of the trachea and below the azygous arch were ligated and incised. An
inflamed lymph node was situated on the BAA, which was on the major fissure and was connected to the basal pulmonary artery A8 (Fig. 2). The
lymph node on the BAA was resected and removed and the connecting artery was ligated with a 1-0 suture. During dissection of the connective
tissue surrounding the BAA, the aneurysm ruptured and systolic blood pressure suddenly decreased to 60 mmHg. Therefore, a lateral
thoracotomy was performed, compressing the BAA at the point of hemorrhage. The patient was placed in the hemi-lateral position , a 19 F and
17 F heparin-coated cannula (Bio-Medicus, Medtronic, Eden Prairie, MN, U.S.A) were inserted through the right femoral artery and vein. Under
percutaneous cardiopulmonary (PCPS) support, the minor fissure – including the intermediate bronchus and central pulmonary artery – was
partly closed using a large DeBakey pair of forceps. Our PCPS system consisted of a centrifugal pump (Mixflow pump, JMS, Japan), a membrane
oxygenator (BIOCUBE-C 6000P, Nipro, Japan), and a reservoir. The aneurysm itself was sutured using continuous ‘over and over’ 4-0 non-
absorbable polypropylene sutures. The total volume of blood loss was 1480 ml. The patient was discharged on the eighth postoperative day and
there were no adverse events, recurrence of BAA, or complications at the 1-year follow-up. The CT scan showed that the aneurysm had
decreased in size and undergone thrombotic change (Fig. 3).Fig. 2An intraoperative aspect view showing the bronchial arterial aneurysm
connected to the pulmonary artery, (A8 , arrow)Fig. 3Postoperative CT scan showing the aneurysm decrease in size and thrombotic change An
intraoperative aspect view showing the bronchial arterial aneurysm connected to the pulmonary artery, (A8 , arrow) Postoperative CT scan
showing the aneurysm decrease in size and thrombotic change BAA is a rare occurrence observed in less than 1 % of all cases of selective
bronchial arteriography . BAA development can be congenital (due to pulmonary sequestration or pulmonary agenesis) or acquired (due to lung
disease, trauma, sepsis, inflammation, bronchiectasis, vasculitis, Behcet’s disease, or Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome) . Increased blood flow,
high internal pressure, and degeneration and weakness of the vascular wall all play a contributing role towards the formation and
progression of an aneurysm. The processes that lead to an aneurysmal rupture are unknown and diameter is not the sole incremental risk
factor . Surgical treatment comprises bronchial artery aneurysm excision, bronchial artery ligation, or lung resection . BAA is classified
on the basis of its location as one of two types: intrapulmonary or mediastinal. If an intrapulmonary BAA forms in the lung tissue, a
pulmonary segmentectomy, lobectomy, or pneumonectomy can be performed. In particular, if a BAA exists concomitantly with bronchiectasis or
pulmonary inflammation causing hemoptysis, a lung resection is the first surgical choice. In general, a TAE is indicated as the first choice
of treatment for many BAA cases as it is a less invasive procedure when gelatin sponges, detachable coils, occlusion balloons, or
cyanoacrylate are employed . A mediastinal BAA is particularly suitable for treatment with a TAE as the BAA is distal to the aorta and the
feeding arteries are easily discernible. However, it is often challenging to perform a TAE if multiple feeding arteries form a complex
network and the BAA is distant from the aorta. Moreover, a TAE should be performed to occlude not only the afferent artery but also the
efferent artery, as collateral vessels may be a cause of revascularization . Indeed, the present case is anatomically very rare with four
responsible bronchial arteries interconnected to each other as well as to the pulmonary artery. As a result, it was endovascularly and
surgically challenging, primarily due to the location of the BAA in an interlobar fissure distant from the aorta. Furthermore, the inflamed
interlobar lymph node was obscured by the BAA. Due to the complex anatomy described above, a surgical procedure was indicated in this case.
First, we ligated and incised the mediastinal bronchial arteries and the BAA remained taut, indicating additional arteries may have been
responsible for feeding the aneurysm. The enclosed lymph node was then dissected from the aneurysm and the communicating vessel between the
pulmonary artery and the aneurysm itself was successfully ligated. However, the internal pressure of the thin-walled aneurysm increased,
resulting in rupture. Thus, it was necessary to clamp the central arteries flowing into the BAA to stop and prevent further hemorrhage. As
it was not possible to clamp all the arteries, we chose to suture the aneurysmal wall. For aneurysms located in the left thorax, ligation of
the bronchial arteries at the base is an effective treatment option. However, for aneurysms in the right thorax, collateral arteries should
always be considered. Even if the BAA is not located near the aorta or does not rupture before surgery, an extracorporeal circulation system
should be prepared in the event of an intraoperative BAA rupture. In a complex case such as that presented here, there is the potential for
abrupt intraoperative BAA rupture. The use of an open procedure and the preparation of an extracorporeal circulation system are strongly
recommended. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report and any accompanying images.
Bronchial artery aneurysm Percutaneous cardiopulmonary support Computed tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions YT carried out the surgery as the first operator, NT and HF participated in the operation as
assistant operators. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Dr. Takeshi Kobayashi, Department of Radiology, Ishikawa
Prefectural Central Hospital, for the advices of indications and techniques of bronchial arterial embolization.
