Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 24 Final Diagnosis: Pinworms infection Symptoms: Abdominal pain • bloating
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Colonoscopy and biopsy Specialty: Gastroenterology and Hepatology Rare disease Inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) is well recognized in developed countries and is generally among the differential diagnoses of young patients presenting with
refractory diarrhea once other more common etiologies have been excluded. Pinworm infections, on the other hand, are not as common among
adults in the United States. Based on computed tomography features, a 24-year-old female patient with a history of multiple autoimmune
disorders presented with abdominal pain and was diagnosed recently with Crohn’s disease. Colonoscopy was significant for pinworms seen
throughout the colon. Colonic biopsy was negative for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-related changes. The diagnosis of IBD is a serious
label that requires biopsy confirmation before committing to possibly lifelong treatment and possible adverse effects. Even in the most
typical patient and when the presentation and imaging are classical, uncommon conditions (like Enterobius infection in this case) may
preclude appropriate diagnosis and management. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is well recognized in developed countries and is generally
among the differential diagnoses of young patients presenting with refractory diarrhea once other more common etiologies have been excluded.
IBD includes 2 entities: ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD). CD has a prevalence of 201 per 100 000 population while UC has a
prevalence of 238 per 100 000 population in the United States . In contrast, Enterobius vermicularis infections are not commonly seen in
everyday practice and are not considered in the differential of common gastrointestinal complaints. This diagnosis is only considered when
travel to endemic areas is involved. However, Enterobiasis (also known as pinworm) is the most common helminthic infection in the US and
Western Europe. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that about 40 million persons are infected in the United
States. While patients are commonly asymptomatic, gastrointestinal manifestations, such as abdominal pain and diarrhea, may occur. Diagnosis
is usually made by microscopic visualization of Enterobius eggs and treatment consists of a course of an anti-helminthic agent, such as
Albendazole . We present the case of a patient with persistent diarrhea, who was presumed to have IBD without consideration of Enterobiasis,
given the rarity of this diagnosis in everyday practice. CD was high on the differential because a previous CT abdomen showed inflammatory
changes confined to the distal ileum. We wish to bring awareness to such an under-recognized but prevalent diagnosis here in the US. A
24-year-old white woman female was admitted for the evaluation of intolerable abdominal pain and bloating for the past 10 days prior to
admission, associated with nausea, but no vomiting, fever, or diarrhea. She had a past medical history significant for juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis A, chronic pericarditis, pulmonary arterial hypertension, and past surgical history of cholecystectomy. She had similar episodes
before and was told she had Crohn’s disease at another facility, based on a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen but she never had a
colonoscopy. The patient denied sick contacts or history of recent travel. A CT abdomen showed wall thickening with submucosal fat at the
terminal ileum (Figure 1), which is nonspecific but can be seen with chronic inflammatory processes such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s
disease. She underwent colonoscopy, which showed parasites in the transverse colon, the ascending colon, and in the cecum (Figure 2). Fluid
aspiration was performed through the scope suction channel. Sample(s) were sent for ova and parasites and was positive for Enterobius
vermicularis (pinworms). Ilial biopsy was negative for IBD-related changes. On subsequent questioning, she endorsed living in a wooded area
where it had been rainy, with muddy grounds around her house. She also said she and her family usually consume private well water that
occasionally dries out. This can be the route of infection (contaminated drinking water) given the lack of pertinent travel history or sick
contacts to indicate the classic fecal-oral transmission. The patient received 1 dose of Albendazole with subsequent improvement of her pain
and she was discharged with a prescription for Albendazole to be taken for 2 weeks and instructions to have her children and partner
treated. This is a case where a patient had a history of autoimmune disease, was not an immigrant/traveler from a helminthes-endemic area,
and had radiological features of Crohn’s disease. In this case endoscopy and histopathology yielded a radically different diagnosis of
colonic pinworm, with the subsequently appropriate treatment with anti-helminthic medications. We seek to delineate that even in an
apparently typical patient, inflammatory bowel disease should always be endoscopically confirmed and biopsy proven. While it was intuitive
to proceed with the management of inflammatory bowel disease in our case, clinicians must keep in mind that colonoscopy is the cornerstone
in such cases to exclude other causes of the patient’s presentation. Inflammatory bowel diseases are serious diagnoses that require long-
term treatment with immune-suppressive therapies. Colonic biopsies should always be performed before committing to these treatment
modalities, and other etiologies, regardless how rare they may be, can also be ruled out this way. Computed tomography of the abdomen
showing wall thickening with submucosal fat at the terminal ileum. The radiological features are suggestive of an inflammatory process.
Colonoscopy images showing helminthic organisms throughout the colon. Those were sampled and histopathologically examined and confirmed as
Enterobius vermicularis.
