Mild hypothermia and fever control have been shown to improve neurological outcomes post cardiac arrest. Common methods to induce
hypothermia include body surface cooling and intravascular cooling; however, a new approach using an esophageal cooling catheter has
recently become available. We report the first three cases of temperature control using an esophageal cooling device (ECD). The ECD was
placed in a similar fashion to orogastric tubes. Temperature reduction was achieved by connecting the ECD to a commercially available
external heat exchange unit (Blanketrol Hyperthermia – Hypothermia System). The first patient, a 54 year-old woman (86 kg) was admitted
after resuscitation from an out-of-hospital non-shockable cardiac arrest. Shortly after admission, she mounted a fever peaking at 38.3 °C
despite administration of cold intravenous saline and application of cooling blankets. ECD utilization resulted in a temperature reduction
to 35.7 °C over a period of 4 h. She subsequently recovered and was discharged home at day 23. The second patient, a 59 year-old man
(73 kg), was admitted after successful resuscitation from a protracted out-of hospital cardiac arrest. His initial temperature was 35 °C,
but slowly increased to 35.8 °C despite applying a cooling blanket and ice packs. The ECD was inserted and a temperature reduction to
34.8 °C was achieved within 3 h. The patient expired on day 3. The third patient, a 47 year-old man (95 kg) presented with a refractory
fever secondary to necrotizing pneumonia in the postoperative period after coronary artery bypass grafting. His fever persisted despite
empiric antibiotics, antipyretics, cooling blankets, and ice packs. ECD insertion resulted in a decrease in temperature from 39.5 to 36.5 °C
in less than 5 h. He eventually made a favorable recovery and was discharged home after 59 days. In all 3 patients, device placement
occurred in under 3 min and ease-of-use was reported as excellent by nursing staff and physicians. The esophageal cooling device was found
to be an effective temperature control modality in this small case series of critically ill patients. Preliminary data presented in this
report needs to be confirmed in large randomized controlled trials comparing its efficacy and safety to standard temperature control
modalities. Uncontrolled fevers have been associated with poor neurological outcomes in various critically ill patient populations. Post
arrest anoxic brain injury, ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes, and traumatic brain injury patients all appear to be particularly sensitive to
the detrimental effects of high body temperature [1, 2]. Most authorities would therefore recommend tight control of body temperature in
these settings . Hypothermia is commonly induced using a combination of internal and external cooling modalities. Internal cooling
modalities include intravenous administration of cold crystalloids and intravascular cooling catheters . External or body surface cooling
can be achieved using cooling blankets, adhesive pads, and ice packs . Each of these methods however, has its limitations [11, 12].
Administration of intravenous refrigerated crystalloid (4 °C) boluses is a simple, effective and widely available method of hypothermia
induction . Lack of precise temperature control and the potential for pulmonary edema however, make this modality unsuitable for the
maintenance phase of hypothermia [14, 15]. Surface cooling methods, such as cooling blankets and ice packs, often cause shivering, skin
breakdown, and in obese patients may be ineffective . Intravascular cooling catheters require the time of a physician for insertion and bear
the potential risks of line infection and deep venous thrombosis [11, 12]. Searching for a temperature control modality that overcomes the
limitations, inefficiencies and inconveniences of the existing methods is therefore strongly desired. The ideal temperature control modality
should be effective, safe, and easy to use. An esophageal cooling device has recently become available which may theoretically possess some
of these attributes. We hereby report the first use of this novel temperature control device in a series of three critically ill patients.
The Esophageal Cooling Device® (Advanced Cooling Therapy, Chicago, IL) is a cooling/warming device that connects to standard heat exchange
units. By design, it is a multi-lumen, disposable, silicone tube (Fig. 1), placed in the esophagus with its tip situated in the stomach. A
central inner lumen allows gastric drainage, while cold or warm water circulate within an outer circumferential cavity. Esophageal Cooling
Device (ECD) models compatible with the Blanketrol Hyper-Hypothermia System® (Cincinnati Sub-Zero, Cincinatti, OH) and the Medi-Therm
Hyper/Hypothermia System® (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) are commercially available.Fig. 1Esophageal cooling device. Esophageal cooling device
showing water inflow/outflow tubes and central (gastric) port Esophageal cooling device. Esophageal cooling device showing water
inflow/outflow tubes and central (gastric) port Prior to ECD utilization, written informed consent was obtained from the patients’
substitute decision makers. Consent was also obtained to use patient information for publication. Communication with the Health Sciences
Research Ethics Board of Western University revealed that a board review prior to consent and publication is not required. ECD’s are
approved for clinical use by Health Canada in addition to our local institutional regulatory bodies. ECD placement technique was similar to
that of standard orogastric tubes. After the appropriate depth of placement was determined externally, the tip and proximal shaft were
lubricated with a water-soluble lubricant. The ECD was then connected to the water-circulating heat exchange unit, which was turned “on”
allowing water to flow through the device. This made the ECD stiffer facilitating subsequent esophageal advancement [16, 17]. Correct
placement was then confirmed by chest X-ray. As per the manufacturer’s recommendations, the central (gastric) port was connected to a low
level of intermittent suction after initial ECD placement. The ECD product monograph currently states that the gastric port is to be used
for suction only and should not be used for enteral feeding. Communication with the manufacturer revealed that the reason for this
restriction was that an application for approval was not sought to use this port for feeds. After confirming adequate placement in a gastric
location, the authors felt that the benefits of using the gastric port for enteral access outweigh the potential risks. The central port was
therefore subsequently used for enteral medication administration and trophic feeds in all three patients off-label, uneventfully. All
patients were monitored with temperature-sensing urinary catheters. The heat exchange unit (Blanketrol Hyper-Hypothermia System) was set on
“Auto Control” mode. With this modality, the temperature of water circulating through the system is automatically adjusted by the heat
exchange unit in order to match a chosen setpoint. The operator in charge of regulating the target temperature was the ICU nurse. Both
bladder and target temperatures were recorded hourly. Our current institutional protocol for comatose post cardiac arrest survivors aims at
maintaining patient temperatures in a range of 34 to 36 °C for a period of 24 h. The induction protocol comprises the administration of 1
litre boluses of refrigerated normal saline (at 4 °C), up to a maximum total of 4 litres. Additionally, our protocol allows for the
application of ice packs to the groin and axilla, and a cooling blanket (Maxi-Therm® Lite Blankets, Cincinnati Sub-Zero, Cincinatti, OH)
directly to the patients skin during the induction and maintenance phases of hypothermia. All patients receive intravenous infusions of an
opioid (fentanyl or hydromorphone) and a hypnotic (midazolam or popofol) during the 24 h of hypothermia. Use of neuromuscular blocking
agents is left at the discretion of the treating physician who may choose to reserve it’s use for shivering treatment only. After 24 h of
hypothermia, passive rewarming is initially attempted. Active rewarming with a warming blanket is only used if the patient does not rewarm
passively within 6 h. Use of the ECD enabled induction, maintenance and rewarming of our first two patients. In our third patient, the ECD
was used primarily as a fever control modality. A 54 year-old woman (86 kg, BMI 30.1) was transferred to the critical care unit after
successful resuscitation from an out-of-hospital pulseless electrical activity (PEA) cardiac arrest. Her past medical history was
significant for severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease requiring home oxygen. Post resuscitation, she remained comatose and a seizure
episode was witnessed in the ICU. Her temperature rapidly increased to 38.3 °C one hour after admission, upon which a cooling blanket was
applied and 2 litres of intravenous cold saline were administered. These interventions resulted in only a mild reduction of temperature,
reaching 37.6 °C after 4 h (Fig. 2 a). At that point, an ECD was placed to aid in temperature reduction.Fig. 2Patient temperatures after
esophageal cooling device insertion in comparison to set targets. Top: Patient A. Middle: Patient B. Bottom: Patient C Patient temperatures
after esophageal cooling device insertion in comparison to set targets. Top: Patient A. Middle: Patient B. Bottom: Patient C After
confirming adequate connection of the ECD to the external heat exchange unit, we were able to induce hypothermia despite the patient’s
ongoing febrile response. Patient temperature was reduced, from 37.6 to 35 °C, within 6 h. During hypothermia induction, the cooling blanket
was kept on. After induction, the cooling blanket was removed and hypothermia was maintained with the ECD alone. The bedside nurse adjusted
the external unit’s temperature targets on more than one occasion. This was noted to quickly reflect on the patient’s body temperature
(Fig. 2 a). After 26 h of ECD use, the device was removed. Over the next few days, the patient showed signs of neurological recovery. Due to
her pre-existing respiratory disease however, weaning from mechanical ventilation was prolonged. Extubation was achieved on day 16, after
which she made a full recovery and was discharged home on day 23. A 59 year-old man (73 kg, BMI 23.8) was admitted to the critical care unit
after successful resuscitation from an out-of-hospital PEA cardiac arrest. Return of spontaneous circulation was obtained after 1 h from
initiation of CPR. Post resuscitation, the patient exhibited signs of cardiogenic shock and pulmonary edema. ST elevation in the lateral
leads of his ECG led to an urgent coronary angiogram. This revealed no significant coronary artery disease but severe mitral regurgitation
was found. An intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted and he was transferred to the critical care unit on both epinephrine and norepinephrine
infusions. His initial temperature on intensive care admission was 35 °C. No temperature interventions at that time were therefore required.
Approximately 7 h later, his temperature slowly began to rise, despite the use of a cooling blanket and the application of ice packs to his
axilla and groin. At that time, the patient's severe hypoxia due to acute pulmonary edema, precluded the use of intravenous refrigerated
crystalloids for temperature reduction. The ECD was therefore inserted for temperature modulation for the remaining 17 h. Despite the
patient’s rising temperature trajectory, a reduction of temperature from 35.8 to 34.8 °C was achieved within 3 h using the ECD (Fig. 2 b).
Shivering was observed and an intravenous bolus of cisatracurium was given. The bedside nurse was allowed to adjust the external unit’s
temperature targets at her discretion to achieve the desired patient temperature. On multiple occasions however, the nurse turned the unit
off after the patient had reached target temperature assuming it was no longer needed. After completing 24 h of hypothermia, rewarming from
34.9 to 36.2 °C was achieved within 2 h using the ECD. The unit was then turned off. Over the next few hours the patient spiked a fever
peaking at 39.1 °C, upon which the heat exchange unit was turned on again and set to a target of 36.5 °C. Over the next 3 h, the patient’s
temperature steadily approached target, coming down to 36.8 °C (Fig. 2 b). Unfortunately, the patient continued to show signs of poor
neurological prognosis during his critical care stay. A clinical diagnosis of post-anoxic brain death was made on day 3. A 47 year-old man
(95 kg, BMI 34.9) was admitted to the intensive care unit for postoperative care after an emergent coronary artery bypass grafting
procedure. Preoperatively, he had experienced symptoms suggestive of a respiratory tract infection with dyspnea, high-grade fevers and
leukocytosis. In the postoperative period, gradual deterioration of his respiratory status was observed despite empiric antibiotic therapy.
On postoperative day 6, he developed an acute respiratory distress syndrome and a CT scan of the thorax revealed evidence of multifocal
necrotizing pneumonia. An increasing temperature refractory to broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, regular acetaminophen administration,
cooling blankets, and application of ice-packs to the groin and axilla triggered the insertion of the ECD for fever control. His temperature
at the time was uncontrolled, peaking at 39.3 °C. After insertion of the ECD, a temperature reduction from 39.3 to 36.9 °C was achieved
within 4 h. Over the next few hours, the patient’s temperature fluctuated (Fig. 2 c), leading the nurse to change the set target
accordingly. During the whole time the ECD was in place, a cisatracurium infusion was ongoing for optimization of mechanical ventilation. No
evaluation of the device as a potential trigger of shivering is therefore available for this patient. His hospital stay was remarkable for
sepsis-induced multi-organ failure in addition to atrial and ventricular arrhythmias that were observed since his admission. After a long
stay in hospital, he eventually recovered and was discharged home on postoperative day 59. No complications directly attributable to the ECD
were observed for the three reported cases. The ECD required less than three minutes for its placement to be successfully completed. Ease-
of-use was described as excellent by both nurses and physicians. Our report is the first to describe the successful use of an esophageal
cooling device in humans. Insertion of this device was found to reliably decrease body temperature of critically ill patients refractory to
standard cooling modalities. On average, temperature reduction occurred at a rate of 0.52 °C/hr. This rate was significantly lower than that
reported in previous animal studies utilizing the ECD . Kulstad et al. were the first to report esophageal cooling in an animal study
involving swine as large as 70 kg in weight . All swine were anesthetized with isoflurane and endotracheally intubated. ECD utilization
resulted in an average cooling rate of 1.2 °C/hr. After 36 h of continuous use, no histologic evidence of esophageal mucosal damage was
found. In addition, no shivering was observed in any of their anesthetized swine during ECD use. In our series however, shivering was
observed in one patient (patient B) in the absence of a cooling blanket. Shivering is a very common side effect of surface cooling
techniques and its avoidance is highly desirable. Morbid effects of shivering include an increase in myocardial oxygen consumption, lactic
acidosis, and a resistance to cooling, all of which can be deleterious in the post cardiac arrest patient . Anatomically, the esophagus is
situated posterior to the heart and major vessels. The ECD’s ability to modulate body temperature is therefore likely secondary to heat
transfer with the central circulation. The slower cooling rate in our patients compared to previous animal reports, might be due to multiple
factors. Interspecies differences are likely implicated. In addition, our patients appeared to be actively mounting a fever at the time of
ECD utilization. Lastly, postcardiac arrest patients commonly have myocardial stunning and a low cardiac output. This would likely result in
a slower circulation impairing systemic cooling. The average cooling rate observed with the ECD in this series was however, comparable to
recently published cooling rates of other more commonly used cooling devices. Endovascular cooling devices have been recently reported to
have an average cooling rate of 0.39 °C/hr, while surface cooling devices were reported to have an average cooling rate of 0.27 °C/hr . This
method of cooling offers several advantages over the currently available modalities. The esophageal-cooling device can be easily and quickly
inserted upon patient arrival to the ICU. Its small size does not interfere with bedside interventions (e.g. line insertions, coronary
angiograms) and diagnostic studies. This is sharply contrasted to the use of intravascular cooling catheters and cooling blankets.
Intravascular cooling catheters offer precise temperature control but their insertion may be a source of time delay . Cooling blankets are
generally patient-encompassing appliances that can obstruct access to the patient for provision of care. Consequently their application is
frequently delayed until other necessary interventions have been completed. Rapid infusion of ice-cold saline is another alternative
modality that is frequently effective, but lacks precise temperature control . In addition, administration of large amounts of fluids may be
necessary to lower body temperature. This bears the potential of inducing fluid overload and pulmonary edema in certain at-risk patients.
And lastly, the central mechanism of cooling provided by the ECD may prove useful for cooling of obese patients whose body habitus makes
conventional surface cooling techniques less effective . Utilization of the esophageal environment for heat transfer comes with significant
limitations. The ECD is currently approved for use for up to 36 h only, which limits the duration of temperature control this technique can
provide. In addition, esophageal exposure to intraluminal cold temperatures has been known to cause a reduction in esophageal motility .
Further studies would be required to evaluate if this reduction in esophageal motility is associated with morbidity (such as aspiration
and/or infection). Contraindications to ECD use include patients with known esophageal deformity, evidence of esophageal trauma, known
ingestion of acidic or caustic poisons within the prior 24 h and patients less than 40 kg in weight. Although a potentially very useful
tool, further data is needed to characterize the patients that would benefit most from ECD use, compare it with other temperature control
modalities and delineate the possible associated adverse events. The esophageal cooling device was found to be an effective temperature
control modality in this small case series of critically ill patients. Preliminary data presented in this report needs to be confirmed in
large randomized controlled trials comparing its efficacy and safety to standard temperature control modalities. The esophageal cooling
device (ECD) appears to be an effective temperature control modality that can be used for both cooling and rewarming. The average rate of
cooling in this case series was 0.52 °C/hr. Shivering was observed in one out of the three patients that were cooled with the ECD. Insertion
of the device required less than 3 min and ease-of-use was described as excellent by nursing staff and physicians alike. The esophageal
cooling device (ECD) appears to be an effective temperature control modality that can be used for both cooling and rewarming. The average
rate of cooling in this case series was 0.52 °C/hr. Shivering was observed in one out of the three patients that were cooled with the ECD.
Insertion of the device required less than 3 min and ease-of-use was described as excellent by nursing staff and physicians alike. body mass
index computerized tomography esophageal cooling device electrocardiogram hour intensive care unit kilogram pulseless electrical activity
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The contribution of Advanced Cooling Therapy was limited to
(1) provision of the Esophageal Cooling Devices used in this report free-of-charge. (2) paying the article-processing fee. Authors’
contributions AH performed most of the interventions reported in this series (patient consents, ECD insertion, bedside nurses orientation),
collected the photos, and wrote most of the final manuscript. DL obtained records of most of the patients’ clinical data, drafted a
preliminary manuscript and plotted the temperature graphs. EA followed up the patients and provided important insights on the abstract and
manuscript. RB had significant intellectual contributions to the manuscript, in particular to the discussion portion. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We thank Erik Kulstad, cofounder of Advanced Cooling Therapy, for his continued support and advice throughout
the preparation of this manuscript.
