Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) is an ocular emergency and most of the cases present with painless sudden persistent loss of vision
in the range of counting fingers to perception of light. The presentation of CRAO is associated with a variety of medical conditions. We
report a rare case of CRAO associated with persistent truncus arteriosus (PTA) and single atrium in a female patient. A 23-year-old woman
was admitted due to sudden painless visual loss in the left eye. On examination visual acuity of light-perception was noted in the left eye
with a left relative afferent pupillary defect. Fundoscopic examination revealed retinal ischemic whitening, constriction of the arteriole
and venule with segmentation and typical “cherry-red spot” suggesting CRAO. The patient was treated with ocular massage and anterior chamber
paracentesis. She was commenced on 150 mg of aspirin and also received hyperbaric oxygen therapy. An echocardiogram revealed PTA and single
atrium. A diagnosis of CRAO associated with PTA and single atrium was made. The ophthalmologist should enquire about congenital and acquired
cardiac abnormalities in patients with CRAO and consider such abnormalities to be possible sources of emboli. Persistent truncus arteriosus
(PTA) and single atrium are both rare congenital cardiac syndromes, and their occurrence together is extremely rare. PTA accounts for under
1% of all congenital heart diseases, and over 80% of patients succumb to heart failure in infancy . Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO)
is an ocular emergency, and the etiology of it is usually associated with atherosclerotic risk factors and the presence of intravascular
(carotid artery, aortic arch) or intracardiac embolic material. At young age, CRAO may be a manifestation of inherited or acquired
thrombophilia . However, CRAO associated with congenital cardiac anomaly is uncommon. According to a literature review, a CRAO case with PTA
and single atrium has not been described previously. Herein we first report a rare case of CRAO in a Chinese female patient who had both PTA
and single atrium with survival to age 23. A 23-year-old woman presented with sudden painless visual loss in the left eye of 100 min. She
had been diagnosed with PTA at the age of 1 month. In medical history, she had no ophthalmic problem and had maintained good visual acuity.
There was no history of vascular occlusion affecting other organs. On examination visual acuity of 20/20 in the right and light-perception
was noted in the left eye with a left relative afferent pupillary defect. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable with normal
intraocular pressures. Fundoscopic examination revealed retinal ischemic whitening, constriction of the arteriole and venule with
segmentation and typical “cherry-red spot” suggesting CRAO (Fig. 1). The patient was treated with ocular massage and anterior chamber
paracentesis. She was commenced on 150 mg of aspirin and also received hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Her visual acuity returned to hand motion
in the temporal direction. Fluorescein angiography of the right eye carried out on the second day was normal, whereas the left eye showed a
delay in arterial filling and large areas of nonperfusion. An echocardiogram was performed (Figs. 2 and 3) and revealed a single and dilated
truncal artery overriding both ventricles, a subtruncal ventricular septal defect (VSD) and absence of pulmonary valve and arteries. A
diagnosis of persistent truncus arteriosus was established. The annulus size of common truncus was 41 mm. A single atrium, normal function
of the left ventricle, and a hypertrophied right ventricle with severe tricuspid regurgitation were shown. Ultrasonography of the carotid
arteries was unremarkable. Further evaluation for an underlying cause was unrevealing, with a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
C-reactive protein level, blood count, renal function and ionogram, liver tests, glycosylated hemoglobin and hemostasis. A head computed
tomography scan at this time demonstrated no abnormalities.Fig. 1Fundus photography of the affected eye. Fundus examination revealed retinal
chemic whitening, and a cherry-red spot in the foveal areaFig. 2The image of echocardiogram. An echocardiogram revealed PTA overriding both
ventriclesFig. 3Echocardiographic image. An echocardiogram revealed single atrium and tricuspid valve prolapse (arrow) Fundus photography of
the affected eye. Fundus examination revealed retinal chemic whitening, and a cherry-red spot in the foveal area The image of
echocardiogram. An echocardiogram revealed PTA overriding both ventricles Echocardiographic image. An echocardiogram revealed single atrium
and tricuspid valve prolapse (arrow) CRAO is an ocular emergency and the incidence is estimated to be 1 in 100,000 people . In 1859, von
Graefes first described CRAO as an embolic event to the central retina artery in a patient with endocarditis. Most of the cases present with
painless sudden persistent loss of vision in the range of counting fingers to perception of light. Anterior segment evaluation is usually
normal except for the presence of an afferent pupillary defect. Initially, fundus may appear relatively normal. Eventually, hypoxia results
in ischemic whitening of the retina, most pronounced at the posterior pole. A cherry red spot is typical and found in about 90 % of cases.
The presentation of CRAO in a young individual is associated with a variety of medical conditions, including hyperhomocysteinemia, temporal
arteritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, sickle cell disease, platelet aggregation abnormalities, and migraine. But Cardiogenic emboli are a
very rare cause of CRAO. While atrial fibrillation and left ventricular dysfunction were shown to be the most common cardiac sources,
extracardiac sources (mainly aortic and carotid plaques) are associated with CRAO in the large majority of patients . Unfortunately, the
source of embolism remains unclear in about 45 % of the patients . Other proposed mechanisms include infective endocarditis, left atrial
thrombosis and myxoma, aortic arch atheroma, mitral annulus calcification, left atrial appendage thrombus, valvular abnormalities, papillary
fibroelastoma, and patent foramen ovale . In the present cases, no other source of embolism could be found except for the described
exceedingly rare congenital heart disease. However, association of CRAO with PTA and single atrium, to our knowledge, has not been reported.
We first present a patient with CRAO who was born with the simultaneous occurrence of two congenital cardiac defects, which are individually
uncommon. PTA is usually termed as a single great artery arising from the base of the heart that supplies systemic, coronary and pulmonary
blood flow (Fig. 4). Almost all cases are associated with VSD. The natural history of PTA is poor. Although this patient did not have well-
developed pulmonary arteries (PAs), sufficient circulation to the PAs by means of collateral vessels and balanced systemic circulation may
have been present. This probably resulted from protection of the pulmonary circulation induced by the brachial artery or hypoplastic branch
PAs in this PTA patient. Single atrium is a failure of development of the embryologic components that contribute to the atrial septal
complex. Both PTA and single atrium can lead to lower-than-normal oxygen levels in the arterial blood, pulmonary hypertension, and secondary
tricuspid valve prolapse.Fig. 4A diagram illustrating the nature of PTA. PTA (black long arrow) overrided both ventricles and received blood
flow from both ventricles (red and blue arrows). Pulmonary artery arose from the PTA and VSD (black short arrow) was present A diagram
illustrating the nature of PTA. PTA (black long arrow) overrided both ventricles and received blood flow from both ventricles (red and blue
arrows). Pulmonary artery arose from the PTA and VSD (black short arrow) was present Therapy for CRAO remains highly uncertain and
controversial. It is thought that removal of the embolus within 90 min gives the best chance at recovery, but irreversible damage occurs
after 4 h . Treatment measures include increasing blood oxygen content and dilation of retinal arteries, reducing intraocular pressure
immediately through medications (acetazolamide 500 mg i.v or orally, topical beta blocker), ocular massage, and anterior chamber
paracentesis, and the use of thrombolytics . Hayreh and Zimmerman described that visual outcomes differed between types of CRAO. Vision
improves in 22 % of eyes with nonarteritic CRAO, whereas it improves in 67 % of eyes with nonarteritic CRAO with cilioretinal artery
sparing. In the present case of nonarteritic CRAO including cilioretinal artery, visual improvement appeared to be poor. These findings
suggested that earlier intervention is necessary for the management of CRAO to preserve visual function. In summary, we first describe an
extremely rare case of CRAO associated with PTA and single atrium. When we encounter acute painless visual impairment, CRAO should be
considered and treated as soon as possible, and the ophthalmologist should enquire about congenital and acquired cardiac abnormalities in
patients with CRAO and consider such abnormalities to be possible sources of emboli. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Central retinal artery occlusion Persistent truncus arteriosus Pulmonary arteries Ventricular septal defect Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CWL and DDZ drafted the manuscript. JW, LL, XHL and PH
reviewed the literature. JLH revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors don’t have any
acknowledgement regarding this case report.
