To the Editor: Although rare, multiple adverse events associated with anti-tuberculosis (TB) medication can occur simultaneously in patients
with underlying diseases. Here, we describe a 76-year-old man with several preexisting disorders in whom anti-TB medication caused multiple,
simultaneous adverse events, including Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), hypothermia, and lactic acidosis. He was admitted with a 2-month
history of dyspnea and leg edema. He was diagnosed with congestive heart failure with atrial fibrillation and pleural effusion. Despite
anticoagulant and diuretic use, pleural effusion remained, and chest computed tomography revealed necrotic mediastinal lymphadenopathy and
multiple infiltrative lesions, suggesting pulmonary TB or metastasis [Figure 1a and 1b]. Pleural effusion was transudate and the sputum
acid-fast bacillus (AFB) stain and TB polymerase chain reaction assay were negative. The patient was prescribed heart failure medication and
discharged. (a) Chest radiograph demonstrated cardiomegaly and right pleural effusion; (b) Chest computed tomography revealed pericardial
effusion and necrotic conglomerated lymphadenopathies; (c) Chest radiograph after 5 weeks of anti-tuberculosis medication showed decreased
pleural effusion; (d) Chest radiograph showed increased pleural effusion; (e) Generalized cutaneous exanthema consisting of crusts and
erythematous plaques on patient's trunk; (f) After 15 days of treatment, the skin lesions had markedly healed; (g) Graph showing the changes
in body temperature and lactic acid. Hypothermia continued for 3 days. H.D.: Hospitalization day. Dobutamine and digoxin means the period of
inotropics treatment. Dobutamine and digoxin were used from H.D.6 to H.D. 15. Five weeks later, sputum AFB culture showed positive result.
The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary TB with mediastinal lymphadenopathy and constrictive pericarditis, and anti-TB medications were
administered. After 5 weeks of medication, a chest radiograph showed reduced pleural effusion with unchanged cardiomegaly [Figure 1c]. And
then 3 weeks later, he was admitted with orthopnea and skin lesions including generalized cutaneous exanthema and erythematous plaques
[Figure 1e]. Dermatologist diagnosed the skin lesions as SJS with xerosis cutis. Chest radiography showed increased pleural effusion, and
echocardiography revealed markedly reduced ejection fraction (37%), with worsening pericardial constriction [Figure 1d]. Because diuretics
were not effective against the pleural effusion, we inserted a chest catheter. On hospitalization day 6, his body temperature and blood
pressure decreased to <35°C and 80/60 mmHg, respectively, and the lactic acidosis worsened (lactate, 6.7 mmol/L). To correct the circulatory
deficit, we initiated more aggressive treatment using albumin and inotropes. His hypothermia and severe lactic acidosis continued for 3
days; thereafter, his body temperature began to increase, and the lactic acidosis gradually improved [Figure 1g]. With active topical
medication, the skin lesions markedly improved by hospitalization day 15 [Figure 1f]. After overcoming hypothermia and lactic acidosis, his
general condition remained stable. SJS and toxic epidermal necrolysis are life-threatening cutaneous drug reactions in which the epidermis
is separated from the dermis. There are no universal diagnostic criteria for SJS, and the histologic findings are not diagnostic. The
diagnosis of SJS is considered appropriate in patients with the following clinical features: Drug exposure 1–4 weeks prior to symptom onset;
acute onset febrile illness and malaise; erythematous macules, targetoid lesions, or diffuse erythema; and necrosis of the epidermis.
Hypothermia is defined as a core body temperature <35°C and results from prolonged exposure to a cold environment, drug use, underlying
pathological conditions such as diabetes or thyroid abnormalities, severe trauma. Improving the cardiac function and normalizing the
circulatory system are crucial to overcome hypothermia and lactic acidosis in severe heart failure patients. In conclusion, SJS,
hypothermia, lactic acidosis, and aggravated constrictive pericarditis are possible adverse events of anti-TB therapy. Because treating TB
in patients with underlying diseases can cause multiple problems or aggravate underlying diseases, attention is required to promptly
identify and treat these adverse events. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Peng Lyu
