Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 17 Final Diagnosis: Chronic total uterine inversion Symptoms: Abdominal pain
• vaginal bleeding Medication: — Clinical Procedure: After manual vaginal procedure to turn the uterus into normal position had failed,
surgery was done Specialty: Obstetrics and Gynecology Rare disease Chronic uterine inversion is a very rare and life-threatening disease. It
requires emergent treatment. We present the case of a 17-year-old patient with chronic uterine inversion. A fragile, bleeding, and soft
mass, which filled the entire vagina, was seen during vaginal inspection. There was also a hard and tight cervical ring palpated behind the
mass. She was operated on with Haultain technique. She was treated in the first post-partum year. She had normal menstrual bleeding and
normal sexual intercourse after 1 month of outpatient control. Immediate diagnosis and treatment of isolated chronic inversion decreases
maternal morbidity and mortality. Uterine inversion is the folding of the fundus into the uterine cavity. It is a serious complication,
which generally occurs in the third part of the delivery. Incidences have been reported as 1/25 000 and 1/20 000 and Watson et al. reported
the incidence as 1/200 . Uterine inversion is classified into 2 categories: complete uterine inversion (it passes through the cervix) and
incomplete uterine inversion (it does not pass through the cervix) . Uterine inversion observed within the first 24 h of delivery is called
acute uterine inversion. Uterine inversion observed at between 24 h and 4 weeks is called sub-acute uterine inversion. Chronic uterine
inversion is very rare and is usually observed at least 4 weeks after delivery. Symptoms are usually acute and clinically significant in
acute uterine inversion. The patients usually feel a downwards move in the vagina. The uterus can be seen from the outside of the vagina or
fundus and cannot be palpated through the abdomen. The patients may also have sudden shock in acute uterine inversion. In incomplete uterine
inversion, the fundus moves down through the cervix without completely passing it. The seriousness of hypovolemic shock is determined by the
amount of bleeding. Any intervention for taking the placenta out before repairing the uterus can lead to heavy bleeding . Births guided by
midwives in developing countries might also be at especially high risk. Acute uterine inversion is an emergent obstetric situation . It may
cause serious postpartum bleeding. A resuscitation team should be ready when dealing with these patients. The uterus could be folded into
the uterine cavity and might be seen through the vagina in chronic uterine inversion. Edematous fragile superficial ulcerations can also be
seen from the vagina in chronic uterine inversion. In chronic uterine inversion, columnar epithelium could transform into squamous
epithelium. Chronic uterine inversion is very difficult to treat because of the edema and weakness in the tissues. The treatments used for
acute uterine inversion are not always the same as with chronic uterine inversion. Maintaining the uterine anatomy is not urgent in chronic
uterine inversion; it has to be done with an elective surgery. Bed resting, antibiotic treatment, raising the legs up, and cleaning the
vagina can help to treat the accompanying infections, but patients with uterine inversion might finally need hysterectomy. Lastly, if the
cause of the chronic uterine inversion is a fibroid or a placental polyp, the best treatment is to surgically remove the fibroid or the
polyp. A 17-year-old female presented with complaints of low abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding that increased, especially after coitus.
Her last birth was1 year ago at home and it was a normal vaginal birth. Physical examination revealed a fragile, bleeding mass. The entrance
of the cervix was not seen. Ovaries and uterus could not be observed clearly by ultrasonography (Figure 1). The patient was diagnosed as
having chronic uterine inversion and was operated on under general anesthesia. During the examination under general anesthesia, a fragile,
bleeding, and soft mass, which filled the entire vagina, was seen during vaginal inspection. A hard and tight cervical ring was also
palpated behind the mass (Figure 2). On the other side, no myomas or polyps were observed. After a manual vaginal procedure to turn the
uterus into normal position had failed, surgery was done. The abdomen was opened by making a Pfannenstiel incision. The uterus was held at
the level of the bilateral round ligaments and a vertical incision was made to the posterior wall (Figure 3). Finally, the normal anatomy of
the pelvic organs was restored by Haultain technique. General anesthesia was used during the operation, because these procedures would be
painful. The uterine anatomy was found to be normal and the patient had no clinical complaints after the first month of outpatient control.
Lastly, the patient reported that she had normal menstrual bleeding and normal sexual intercourse after the operation. Chronic uterine
inversion refers to descent of the uterine fundus to or through the cervix, so that the uterus is turned inside out. Uterine inversion is a
medical emergency condition that can occur spontaneously (15–50%), but it most frequently develops in the post-partum period. It is an
obstetric emergency and a diagnostic challenge in gynecology . Chronic uterine inversion is a very rare condition, with diagnostic and
treatment difficulties. Chronic uterine inversion must be kept in mind in cases of periodical vaginal bleeding and/or fragile bleeding
tissues in the vagina. Uterine leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, endometrial polyps, endometrial carcinoma, cervical carcinoma,
and total uterovaginal prolapse has been described as possible preceding factors . Placental and endometrial fibroids are also detected,
especially in the early postpartum period in patients with chronic uterine inversion . There was not a gynecological mass causing uterine
inversion in our case. We suspected giving vaginal birth at a young age in poor conditions was a predisposing factor for uterine inversion
in our case. Uterine inversion can be classified into 4 stages. Stage 1: Inverted uterus remains in the uterine cavity. Stage2: Complete
inversion of the fundus through the cervix is seen. Stage 3: Inverted fundus protrudes through vulva. Stage 4: Inversion of the uterus and
vaginal wall through the vulva are seen together . Prolapsing out from the vagina was also reported in chronic uterine inversion cases that
were caused by large endometrial or cervical masses . All cases of nonpuerperal inversions are usually chronic but 8.6% presented in acute
fashion . Symptoms that may be associated with non-puerperal uterine inversion are vaginal bleeding, vaginal tumor, lower abdominal pain,
foul-smelling vaginal discharge, and urinary disturbance. Our patient was also admitted to an outpatient clinic for progressive pain and
bleeding during sexual intercourse, with inguinal pain over the last 6 months. The clinical diagnosis of chronic inversion mostly depends on
the finding of a mass coming through the cervix, accompanying the absence of the uterine body during bimanual or rectal examinations.
Ultrasonographic evaluation has a major role in the initial investigation. Indentation of the fundal area with a depressed longitudinal
grove extending from the uterus to the center of the inverted uterus are the 2 signs described in relation to chronic uterine inversion .
The mass in the vagina firstly seemed like uterine stalked leiomyoma in our case. But further physical evaluation, ultrasonography, and a
detailed history revealed the uterine inversion diagnosis. Early diagnosis and treatment of uterine inversion is very important. Acute
uterine inversion may transform into chronic uterine inversion because of diagnostic delays . It has been reported that maternal mortality
and morbidity increases in patients who are diagnosed late . Some surgical methods are available to treat chronic non-puerperal uterine
inversion. The efficacy of non-surgical methods is not clear. Huntington and Haultain techniques are commonly-used abdominal operation
procedures. Huntington procedure involves grasping the round ligaments and the uterus below the area of inversion and slowly pulling up
repeatedly until the uterus is reinverted. Haultain procedure is incising posterior of the vaginal-cervical ring and carrying up the
posterior wall of the uterus until it is reinverted to its normal anatomy. The Kustner and Spinelli vaginal approach procedures could also
be used. The Kustner procedure is to enter the pouch of Douglas vaginally and to split the posterior aspect of the uterus and the cervix for
reinverting the uterus. In Spinelli operation, an incision is made on the anterior aspect of the cervix and then the uterus is reinverted.
Robotic and laparoscopic surgeries have been recently used for chronic uterine inversion . Abdominal cerclage operations have also been
performed to prevent the nux of uterine inversion . In our case we corrected the uterine anatomy by using Haultain technique. The morbidity
and mortality associated with uterine inversion correlate with the degree of hemorrhage, rapidity of diagnosis, and the effectiveness of the
treatment. In acute uterine inversion, massive blood loss with hemorrhage could be seen and hypovolemia should be vigorously treated with
fluid and blood replacement . Non-puerperal uterine inversion is a very unusual condition that most gynecologists will never encounter, and
thus has to be managed based upon little or no previous experience. Our patient had delivered her first baby under poor conditions, and the
development of uterine inversion seemed to arise from giving vaginal birth at young age in such poor conditions. Chronic uterine inversion
mostly occurs secondary to postpartum pathologies of pelvic organs. It may also be concluded that rapid diagnosis and effective treatment
under appropriate conditions could decrease maternal morbidity and mortality. Statement We declare that there is no conflict of interest in
our study. We received no financial support in this study. The uterus was not clearly observed in transvaginal ultrasonography, but
bilateral ovaries and tubes were closely observed. Bleeding uterus under preoperative examination. Kissing ovaries and tubes under
intraopeative observation (flowerwave apperance).
