Nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia (NICTH) is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by persistent, severe hypoglycemia in different tumor
types of mesochymal or epithelial origin; however, NICTH is infrequently induced by sarcomatoid carcinoma (SC). Despite some sarcomatoid and
epithelioid characteristics in few cases of malignancies from epithelium, NICTH induced by recurrent SC in pelvic cavity in this report is
extremely rare. We report a case in which NICTH caused by recurrence and pulmonary metastases from SC in the pelvic cavity, and the computed
tomography scan revealed multiple pelvic masses and multiple large masses in the pulmonary fields. During the treatment of intestinal
obstruction, the patient presented paroxysmal loss of consciousness and sweating. Her glucose even reached 1.22 mmol/L while the serum
glycosylated hemoglobin was normal and previous history of diabetes or use of oral hypoglycemic agents and insulin denied. The laboratory
examination showed that the low level of insulin, C-peptide, and growth hormone levels in the course of hypoglycemic episodes suggesting to
the diagnosis of hypoglycemia induced by nonislet cell tumor, and the decreased levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and IGFBP3 and
the high expression of big IGF-II in the serum further confirmed the diagnosis of NICTH. Because of the widely pelvic recurrence and
pulmonary metastases were unresected, the patient was discharged from the hospital after 2 weeks treatment with dexamethasone and glucose
and unfortunately died 1 week later. NICTH caused by SC in the pelvic cavity is extremely rare case in clinical. The aim of this report was
to present the importance to examine big IGF-II expression in patient's serum in order to reach the diagnosis of NICTH in cases of
intractable cancer-associated hypoglycemia. Nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia (NICTH) is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by recurrent
fasting hypoglycemia, which is thought to be caused by the excessive secretion of incompletely processed precursors of insulin-like growth
factor (IGF)-II (high molecular weight IGF-II or big IGF-II) by the tumor into the circulation.1–3 IGF-II-induced NICTH typically occurs in
patients with large slow-growing neoplasm. In particular, it has been rarely reported in tumors of epithelial origin, while mesochymal
tumors account for more than 50% of such cases.4 Sarcomatoid carcinoma (SC) is an uncommon malignant neoplasm of primitive epithelial cell
origin that displays both malignant epithelial and mesochymal characteristics.5 Clinically, they are usually aggressive tumors with early
occurrence of distant metastasis. To our knowledge, SCs rarely occur in the pelvic cavity, with only 1 case reported in literature.6 Here,
we report an extremely rare case in which NICTH caused by recurrence and pulmonary metastases from SC in the pelvic cavity. We also
confirmed that the big IGF-II was associated with the hypoglycemia. A 69-year-old woman received resection of pelvic mass at West China
Hospital, Sichuan University in August 2013, following admission with difficult defecation and numbness of lower limb for 3 months. MRI scan
at the time was showed in Figure 1A left and right. Postoperative histological examination revealed SC/undifferentiated carcinoma without
invasion of rectum. The diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemical results (Figure 1B). Diagnosis of PCSC. A: Abdominal MRI scan
revealed a large (30 × 25 × 15 cm) heterogeneous pelvic mass and seemed to be widely adherent to rectum, posterior vaginal wall, and partial
pelvic wall. B: Immunohistochemical results identified the diagnosis of sarcomatoid carcinoma/undifferentiated carcinoma (positive for PCK,
weakly positive for EMA and CK7 and negative for CD125, WT1, D2-40, HMB-45, Caldesmon, Desmin, S100, DOG1, and CD117). MRI = magnetic
resonance imaging; PCSC = SC in the pelvic cavity. Postoperatively, the patient first received 2 cycles of TP regimen chemotherapy
(cisplatin + paclitaxel); however, imaging assessment gave hints of disease progression with pelvic recurrence and pulmonary metastases.
Thus, 2 cycles of second line MAID regimen (mesna + ifosfamidum + epirubicin hydrochloride for injection + dacarbazine) was given which also
resulted in disease progression. At this point, the patient and family refused further chemotherapy and discharged. Twelve months later, the
patient was admitted into the emergency because of intestinal obstruction. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple pelvic masses and
multiple large masses in the pulmonary fields (Figure 2A left and right). This was treated by gastrointestinal decompression and parenteral
nutrition. During this course, the patient presented paroxysmal loss of consciousness and sweating. Her glucose even reached 1.22 mmol/L
while the serum glycosylated hemoglobin was normal (Table 1) and previous history of diabetes or use of oral hypoglycemic agents and insulin
denied. Successive synchronous blood measurements during hypoglycemic episodes showed low insulin, C-peptide, growth hormone (GH), IGF-I,
and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP3) levels in favor of NICTH (Table 1). Diagnosis of NICTH. A: Abdominal CT scan revealed the pelvic
recurrence and pulmonary metastases. B: Lane 3 showed that IGF-II was mainly detected as high molecular weight band in the sample from the
patient, and lanes 2 and 3 showed the concentration of total IGF-II (ie, mature and big) of the patient's serum was higher than that in the
control subject. CT = computed tomography; IGF-II = insulin-like growth factor II; NICTH = nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia. Laboratory
Examination for the Patient Later on, western blot of serum sample was conducted with an anti-IGF-II antibody which detected a high
percentage of high molecular weight band IGF-II. Moreover, compared with control, the concentration of total IGF-II (ie, mature and big) was
higher (Figure 2B, lanes 2 and 3). Because of the widely pelvic recurrence and pulmonary metastases were unresected, treatment with oral
dexamethasone (2 mg/day) and continuous intravenous infusion of glucose (150 g/day) were conducted. Dexamethasone and glucose doses were
administrated to 1 mg/day and 200 g/day, respectively, to prevent recurrent hypoglycemia. The patient was discharged from the hospital and
unfortunately died 1 week later. Hypoglycemia not associated with diabetes and/or its therapy is an uncommon clinical disorder, and tumor-
induced hypoglycemia (TIH) caused by different mechanisms is a rare clinical entity.7–9 TIH usually appears as a result of insulin
hypersecretion by pancreatic islet β-cell tumor (insulinoma), and can also be developed by other nonpancreatic tumors (NICTH).9 The serum
glycemia, insulin, C-peptide levels could be used for the diagnosis of insulinoma, and the serum GH, IGF-I, IGFBP3, and IGF-II, especially
big IGF-II levels could be used for the diagnosis of NICTH.3,7–10 NICTH is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by persistent, severe
hypoglycemia with various tumor types of mesochymal or epithelial origin.1,7 It can result in an emergent and life-threatening condition,
which should be suspected when a patient with various solid tumors suffered from hypoglycemia.8 Although few cases of malignancies with both
sarcomatoid and epithelioid characteristics were reported, such as renal cell carcinoma1 and thyroid carcinoma,4 a case of NICTH with
recurrent PCSC in the present report is extremely rare. Moreover, further laboratory examination showed normalized serum glycosylated
hemoglobin and low insulin, C-peptide, GH, IGF-I, and IGFBP3 levels which were in accordance with NICTH. Nevertheless, the crucial event in
the development of NICTH has been linked to the aberrant secretion of big IGF-II, the alterations in the somatotroph axis and the levels of
circulating IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs).10,11 Detection of a high percentage of IGF-II as big IGF-II would guarantee the diagnosis of
NICTH.8 Here in this report, the expression of big IGF-II was significantly more than the mature isoform. Theoretically, both IGF-I and IGF-
II are capable of decreasing glucose levels, but, they fail to do so because they are normally trapped within the vascular vessel in a high
molecular weight protein complex with IGFBP3 and acid-labile subunit (ALS).12–14 The big IGF-II reside in the binary complex with IGFBP3
which was considered to be capable of crossing the endothelial barrier, resulting in a persistent insulin-like activity and leading to
severe hypoglycemia.15,16 It is well known that NICTH often occurs in patient with large tumors and it might be necessary for big IGF-II to
reach a certain level in causing hypoglycemia.9,10 In this case, hypoglycemia never occurred when the primary PCSC was >30 cm in diameter.
Instead, the recurrence and pulmonary metastases with a diameter of <11 cm led to NICTH. Interestingly, such phenomenon was also observed in
renal cell carcinoma1 and thyroid carcinoma,4 which was caused by the over-expressed big IGF-II in both recurrent tumor and the primary
tumor. In conclusion, this is an extremely rare case of SC in the pelvic cavity with the NICTH syndrome caused by inhibition of the
somatotroph axis resulting from excessive secretion of big IGF-II. It is important to examine big IGF-II expression in patient's serum in
order to reach the diagnosis of NICTH in cases of intractable cancer-associated hypoglycemia. We thank the participant and her families for
their kind cooperation, generosity, and patience. The authors appreciate Guiling Tian (Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, China) for
diligent language checking of the manuscript. Abbreviations: ALS = acid-labile subunit, CT = computed tomography, IGF = insulin-like growth
factor, IGFBP3 = IGF-binding protein-3, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, NICTH = nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia, PCSC = SC in the pelvic
cavity, SCs = arcomatoid carcinoma, TIH = tumor-induced hypoglycemia. CF and CWF have contributed equally to this work. The relevant
institutional ethics committees approved this study. This study was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81402446, to CWF).
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
