Although the human bocavirus (HBoV) is known since a decade, limited information about its pathogenesis is available due to the lack of an
animal model. Thus, clinical cases and studies are the major source of novel information about the course of infection and the related
pathophysiology. In this context, a clinical case of an adult patient suffering from severe HBoV-pneumonia is described that was associated
with loss of consciousness followed by acute rib fracture and subsequent neurological disorder. Following initial global respiratory
dysfunction the clinical respiratory symptoms recovered but the neurological symptoms maintained after weaning and intensive care in the
stroke unit. During the initial phase, an acute active HBoV infection was confirmed by positive polymerase chain reactions from
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and serum. The case further demonstrates that HBoV can cause severe pneumonia, induce secondary disease also in
adults, and may be associated with neurological symptoms as previously assumed. The human bocavirus (HBoV) was described in 2005 as a
respiratory pathogen.1 Since then, several clinical studies and reports have shown that the virus is indeed associated with respiratory
infections of the upper and lower airways, may persist and be associated with long-term diseases like lung fibrosis and cancer.1–11 The
virus appears to bear a narrow host and tissue range, thus hitherto, no animal model has been identified and only a spare number of cell
types have been found to be permissive for the virus. Consequently, all available information about the pathogenesis of the HBoV infection
is based on clinical observations from single case reports or cohort studies. In this context, the presented case contributes with a piece
to the general puzzle of the HBoV infection. The patient was a 74-year-old Caucasian male. He was admitted to the hospital by emergency
service; 3 hr before admission, the patient had called his wife to report respiratory symptoms and a slump, but when she arrived at home the
patient was unconscious and not responsive. The first aid team reported that the patient was nonresponsive and showed a cranial hematoma. In
the emergency room, the patient was responsive, an occipital hematoma was diagnosed, and the patient was mechanically ventilated because of
the global respiratory insufficiency. On admission to the hospital and during the course the patient was sub-febrile. The electrocardiogram
revealed a sinus-bradycardia, accompanied by regular pupils and light reaction and a pleural effusion. No further acute findings were
observed. During bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) sapling the bronchial mucosa showed nonpurulent signs of inflammation with low amounts of
secretions. Detailed diagnostics revealed that the patient suffered from a spastic tetraparesis of unknown etiology, a severe pneumonia
caused by HBoV, a cardiac decompensation, and a fresh rip fracture likely derived from the initial slump. On laboratory investigations no
further facultative or obligate respiratory pathogens (including virus, fungi, and bacteria) were detected by Respifinder Smart 22 and
Meningofinder Custom Assays (Pathofinder, Maastricht, The Netherlands), Pneumocystis jirovecii polymerase chain reaction (PCR), nor by
conventional microbiological screening methods. In detail, the patient's BAL was negative for influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses 1 to
4, respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, coronaviruses NL63, OC43, 229E, and HKU-1, adenoviruses, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
Mycobacteria, mumps, measles, humans herpesviruses 1 to 8, parechoviruses, rhinoviruses, enteroviruses, Legionella pneumoniae, Chlamydia
pneumoniae, P jirovecii, Aspergillus, and Bordetella pertussis by molecular assays and also negative by culturing. The sole pathogen
detected in the BAL was HBoV and the active and acute infection was confirmed by a positive PCR against HBoV from a serum sample that was
taken 2 days after the BAL was sampled. Unfortunately, it was not possible to isolate the virus from clinical specimen as cell culture
maintenance was inhibited. Besides the pneumonia, the patient developed massive pleural effusions and suffered from neurological disorders
such as spastic tetraparesis of unclear origin. The cranial computed tomography (CT) revealed no acute traumatic injuries, especially no
bleedings or cranial fractures. However, a minor extension of the subarachnoid spaces in concert with involution was observed. The thoracic
CT revealed extended pleural effusions and infiltrates in the left upper lope. Moreover, the above-mentioned rib fracture was observed.
After respiratory stabilization CT scans of skull, thorax and abdomen was performed. While CT did not show any abnormalities, there were
large pleural effusions on both sides with dystelectases. The left ventricle appeared moderately dilated. The patient was treated initially
with empiric antibiotic treatment, diuretics, and heart failure medication. Antibiotic treatment was initially escalated to Imipeneme, but
terminated when several samples failed to show any bacterial growth. Maximal C-reactive protein before transfer was 162 mg/L and PCT peaked
at 0.41 ng/mL. There was no fever. After 2 weeks, sedation was terminated and subsequently the patient woke up but now showed spastic
tetraparesis of unknown reason. The patient was transferred to the neurological intensive care unit. Due to the dominant neurological
symptoms revealing a suspected spastic tetraparesis brainstem stroke and cervical spinal origin were ruled out by radiological diagnostics.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed no abnormal finding concerning cell count, bacterial culture, protein, and glucose. Due to renewed clinical
examination strong rigor and akinesis seemed a possible alternative interpretation of the neurological symptoms. There was no diagnosis of
Parkinson's syndrome in the patient's history. We treated with Parkinson's medication (L-Dopa, Dopamine agonists) with an adequate response
and definite improvement concerning neurological symptoms. Physiotherapy was performed regularly documenting the progress. So far, no
specific treatment is available for the management of HBoV infections, thus no antiviral treatment was initiated. The HBoV is an ubiquitous
pathogens with worldwide distribution that affects all age groups.12–17 Although it mainly is associated with respiratory infections in
children, severe clinical courses have been described also in adults, but have not yet been systematically investigated.12–17 A rare side
effect of the HBoV infection could be neurological symptoms that were previously reported in cases of childhood meningitis but also in
adults.18–20 However, in those earlier studies, no clear association between an active HBoV replication as observed in our patient and the
detection of HBoV compartments in the CSF was found, and prognosis of such cases is unclear due to the lack of an appropriate number of
reported studies and cases. No typical signs of meningitis were observed in our patient in CSF, clinically and by radiological diagnostics,
yet this is not obligatory. Thus, it could also be that the acute injuries resulted from the fact that the patient was weakened by the HBoV
associated pneumonia rather than a direct involvement of HBoV in the neurological disorder. Nevertheless, there is a high chance that the
active and serious pneumonia that in fact was deduced to the HBoV mono-infection was linked to the neurological symptoms directly or
indirectly, and thus the case strongly supports the request for further cohort studies that systematically and controlled address the
question if a correlation between the HBoV infection and neurological disorders exists.20 Especially the fact that the patient had an
underlying neurological disease gives raise to the hypothesis that those patients are more likely affected of injuries as the HBoV infection
could weaken the patient and lead to a loss of body control. Most recently, a further atypical case of HBoV infection was observed that was
associated with encephalopathy,21 thus further confirming that at the present stage neurological side effects of respiratory HBoV infections
cannot be excluded, although the causative relation has to be further investigated. Unfortunately, no CSF fluid was left for further
analyses, and that is exactly why this case is extremely important. Especially in adult patients, several rare but possible etiologies are
not routinely tested such as HBoV and human metapneumovirus, although these pathogens were previously shown to be associated with a distinct
clinical entity. Thus, this case is an alarm signal and reminder to test also for HBoV in case of unclear neurological symptoms. In view of
the recent literature and taking into account the fact that HBoV was detected in BAL and serum, it is the most likely explanation for the
acute neurological exacerbation, although it could also be a simple co-incidence. Anyway, in the present case it can be assumed that the
HBoV pneumonia led to the collateral damage in form of a fresh rib fracture when the emergency situation had risen. This injury could have
been avoided if the HBoV infection would have been recognized earlier, symptomatically treated and screened until symptoms would have
vanished in this elderly patient. According to a vote from the Ethical Committee of the University of Witten/Herdecke (vote 75/2013) it was
permitted to refrain from the informed consent as the case was reported retrospectively, it was impossible to contact the patient or its
relatives, and as the case is presented in double pseudonymized form. Abbreviations: BAL = bronchoalveolar lavage, CRP = C-reactive protein,
CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, CT = computed tomography, HBoV = human bocavirus, HMPV = human metapneumovirus, PCR = polymerase chain reaction,
RSV = respiratory syncytial virus. MK and KG have contributed equally to this report. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest
to disclose.
