Peters anomaly is a rare developmental abnormality of the anterior segment of the eye and is one of the main causes of congenital corneal
opacities. Typically, histopathology of Peters anomaly shows immature or absent Descemet’s membrane and attenuated endothelial cells in the
area of the corneal opacity, in addition to thinning or absence of Bowman’s membrane and defects in the posterior stroma. In this report, we
present a novel histopathological finding, which has not been previously reported, in the Descemet's membrane of a patient who is clinically
diagnosed with Peters anomaly. A 7-years old female child with developmentally delayed was born of a normal pregnancy, labor, and delivery.
Apparent bilateral corneal opacifications were present at birth. On ophthalmologic examination, the child had a visual acuity of FC/20 cm in
the right eye and that of FC/10 cm in the left one. Horizontal nystagmus and congenital cataract were found in both eyes. Slit-lamp
examination revealed bilateral central corneal opacities which covered the iris and pupils. High-frequency UBM and AS-OCT both showed a
shallow anterior chamber with multiple areas of iridocorneal adhesions and no corneal lenticular touch in each eye. A corneal specialist
performed a penetrating keratoplasty with extra-capsular cataract extraction and intraocular lens implantation. Histopathologic procedures
were conducted on the host corneal button, including Hematoxylin-Eosin stain and Periodic Acid-Schiff stain. All the sections were examined
by light microscopy. The “multiple-layer” structure of the Descemet’s membrane described in our case has not been reported before as in
association with abnormalities of the cornea tissues in Peters anomaly. Such pathological finding need to be reported to enhance further
understanding of the special structure of Descemet's membrane as an abnormality during embryogenesis and neural crest cell differentiations.
Peters anomaly is a rare developmental abnormality of the anterior segment of the eye, either sporadic or inherited. It is one of the main
causes of congenital corneal opacities . Typically, histopathology in Peters anomaly shows immature or absent Descemet’s membrane and
attenuated endothelial cells in the area of the corneal opacity, in addition to thinning or absence of Bowman’s membrane and defects in the
posterior stroma . Corneal opacification is bilateral in approximately 80 % of cases . The opacity is caused by a defect in the underlying
corneal endothelium and the Descemet membrane. In this case, we present a novel histopathological finding, which has not been previously
reported, in the Descemet's membrane of a patient who is clinically diagnosed with Peters anomaly. A 7-years old female child with
developmentally delayed was born of a normal pregnancy, labor, and delivery. There were no maternal infections and other illnesses detected
during the pregnancy as well as the perinatal period, respectively. Ocular anomalies (apparent bilateral corneal opacifications) were
present at birth. The infant did not show evidence of tearing, blepharospasm, photophobia, drainage, or ocular redness. On ophthalmologic
examination, the child had a visual acuity of FC/20 cm in the right eye and that of FC/10 cm in the left one. The intraocular pressure was
normal in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed bilateral central corneal opacities which covered the iris and pupils (Fig. 1a, b). The
anterior segments appeared abnormal with corectopia and iris cornea-peripheral anterior synechiae. Horizontal nystagmus and congenital
cataract were found in both eyes. The central retina could not be examined clearly because of the severe corneal opacity. High-frequency UBM
(Fig. 2a) and AS-OCT (Fig. 2b) both showed a shallow anterior chamber with multiple areas of iridocorneal adhesions and no corneal
lenticular touch in each eye. The B-type ultrasound scan performed on the patient revealed no masses, vitreous debris, or retinal detachment
in either eye.Fig. 1Slit-lamp photographs of the anterior segment of the patient. a In the left eye, central corneal opacity, corectopia,
anterior synechiae and whitish lens were observed. b In the right eye, central corneal opacity, corectopia, anterior synechiae and whitish
lens were observedFig. 2Images by AS-OCT (a) and UBM (b) of the left eye. A1, 2, AS-OCT showed a shallow anterior chamber with anterior
synechiae in the left eye. B1, 2, High-frequency UBM showed a shallow anterior chamber with anterior synechiae and there was no corneal
lenticular touch in the left eye Slit-lamp photographs of the anterior segment of the patient. a In the left eye, central corneal opacity,
corectopia, anterior synechiae and whitish lens were observed. b In the right eye, central corneal opacity, corectopia, anterior synechiae
and whitish lens were observed Images by AS-OCT (a) and UBM (b) of the left eye. A1, 2, AS-OCT showed a shallow anterior chamber with
anterior synechiae in the left eye. B1, 2, High-frequency UBM showed a shallow anterior chamber with anterior synechiae and there was no
corneal lenticular touch in the left eye Clinically, a pediatric ophthalmologist confirmed the Peters Anomaly diagnosis of the patient, who
was then referred to a pediatrician for an examination of associated systemic anomalies. However, none was detected. Under this situation, a
penetrating keratoplasty with extra-capsular cataract extraction and IOL implantation was performed by a corneal specialist. The cornea
tissue underwent histopathological examination. The patient’s visual acuity improved to 20/100 in the left eye and intraocular pressure was
8 mmHg after the surgical procedures. In addition, the parents of this child were also examined and corneal opacity in the left eye was
found in her father. Histopathologic Procedures were performed on the host corneal button, including Hematoxylin-Eosin stain and Periodic
Acid-Schiff stain, to obtain the pathologic features of the cornea sections. All the sections were examined by light microscopy. On gross
examination, the cornea (7 mm × 8 mm) was densely opacified centrally. Histological section showed considerable cornea thinning centrally
(Fig. 3a), besides which the defects in the endothelium, Descemet's membrane, cornea stroma and Bowman’s membrane were also observed at the
corneal defect. Bowman’s membrane was completely absent in the middle area of the corneal button and no vessels were found in the anterior
stroma (Fig. 3a). The central internal stroma was hypoplastic and the fibers were extremely disarranged. (Fig. 3a). Most importantly, an
abnormal thickness of Descemet’s membrane was present with the “multiple-layer” structure in the peripheral part of the cornea (Fig. 3b, c).
Pigmented tissues could be discovered inside these “layers” of Descemet’s membrane (Fig. 3c). Furthermore, the pigmented cells situated
within the cornea stroma and inserted anteriorly with adhesion to the posterior part of the cornea (Fig. 3d). Histopathologic examination
also detected a large absence of the Descemet's membrane in the synechiae area (Fig. 3d) and the endothelium membrane was completely absent
from the cornea (Fig. 3a).Fig. 3Histological photographs of the cornea. a Bowman’s membrane was completely absent in the middle area of the
cornea. The central internal stroma was hypoplastic and the fibers were extremely disarranged without vessels. The endothelium membrane was
entirely absent from the cornea. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original magnification × 10). b An abnormal thickness of Descemet’s membrane
was present with the “multiple-layer” structures at the peripheral part of the defect. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original
magnification × 40). c The “multiple-layer” structures were found in the Descemet’s membrane and pigmented tissues could be found inside the
“layers”. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original magnification × 100). d The pigmented cells situated within the cornea stroma and inserted
anteriorly with adhesion to the posterior part of the cornea. Absence in Descemet's membrane in the peripheral synechiae area were shown.
(Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original magnification × 100) Histological photographs of the cornea. a Bowman’s membrane was completely absent
in the middle area of the cornea. The central internal stroma was hypoplastic and the fibers were extremely disarranged without vessels. The
endothelium membrane was entirely absent from the cornea. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original magnification × 10). b An abnormal thickness
of Descemet’s membrane was present with the “multiple-layer” structures at the peripheral part of the defect. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain,
original magnification × 40). c The “multiple-layer” structures were found in the Descemet’s membrane and pigmented tissues could be found
inside the “layers”. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original magnification × 100). d The pigmented cells situated within the cornea stroma and
inserted anteriorly with adhesion to the posterior part of the cornea. Absence in Descemet's membrane in the peripheral synechiae area were
shown. (Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, original magnification × 100) Taken together, the major histopathological findings in the patient
include “multiple-layer” structure of the Descemet's membrane in the peripheral area, the absence of cornea endothelium, hypoplasia of the
cornea stroma, absence of Bowman’s membrane, and the attachment of iris to the cornea. The incidence of ocular malformation in newborns
ranges from 3.3 to 6.0 per 10,000 births and Peters anomaly acounts for the largest proportion of the anterior segment dysgenesis. An
estimate of 44-60 cases of Peters anomaly is reported in the United States annually . One of the essential features of Peters anomaly is
congenital central corneal opacity with defects in the posterior stroma, Descemet’s membrane, and endothelium. These conditions are
characterised by both autosomal dominant and recessive patterns of inheritance with variable expressivity . Clinical features of Peters
anomaly are diverse, from mild to severe. The most common ocular abnormalities associated with Peters anomaly were glaucoma (20 %),
microphthalmia (18 %), and colobomas (6 %) . A study by Traboulsi at al discovered that 25 % of their patients had microphthalmia and/or
chorioretinal colobomas and 48 % had associated congenital systemic malformations. More recently, Peters anomaly was subdivided into 2 types
. Type I is characterized by the central corneal opacity with iridocorneal adhesions, in which the lens may or may not be cataractous,
whereas type II is characterized by the central corneal opacity with cataracts or corneorlenticular adhesions. Peters Plus Syndrome (PPS)
comprises anterior chamber defects along with other systemic anomalies. To prevent amblyopia, the earlier treatment is performed, the better
the results are. There are a variety of surgical options available for treating Peters anomaly. Peripheral optical iridectomy may be carried
out for patients with a clear peripheral cornea. As for patients with bilateral visually disabling corneal opacity, penetrating keratoplasty
is recommended. It has been suggested that early keratoplasty for congenital corneal opacities might improve the visual outcome . However,
some studies showed a wide range of graft failure rates at 1 year ranging from 22 to 67 % . Due to the high prevalence of PKP graft failure,
some doctors chose to use the Boston Type I Keratoprosthesis (KPro-1) in these patients . In Peters anomaly, the corneal opacity is either
central or paracentral and it usually does not exhibit vascularization . Histopathology is often diagnostic. Previous histopathologic
findings of Peters anomaly described the defects and absence in the endothelium, Descemet’s membrane, posterior stroma and the Bowman’s
membrane of the cornea, which are consistent with our pathologic findings of this patient. However, the “multiple-layer” structure of the
Descemet’s membrane has not been reported as in association with abnormalities of the cornea tissues in Peters anomaly. The cause of this
unusual structure, which may be due to genetic factors, environmental factors, or both, has not been clearly identified in pathologic
studies so far. Peters anomaly is a genetic disease affecting multiple anterior segments, which is known to be sporadic, but sometimes
inherited . Several genetic mutations [1, 2, 9] act in concert to specify a population of mesenchymal progenitor cells, as they migrate
anteriorly around the embryonic optic cup [1, 2, 9]. Waring demonstrated various developmental mechanisms for Peters anomaly, including
faulty separation of the lens vesicle from the surface ectoderm, primary abnormal migration of neural crest cells into the cornea, and
intrauterine corneal inflammation. Development of the ocular anterior segment depends largely on periocular mesenchyme cells, which are
derived predominantly from neural crest cells (NCC) . Specific and differential cell adhesion is expected to be instrumental in induction,
migration, and differentiation of NCC. Tian et al demonstrated that NCC-specific inactivation of p120 catenin mice perturbs the proper
development of certain eye structures and causes anterior segment dysgenesis, including adhesion of the iris to the cornea, hypoplasia of
iris and ciliary body, and dysgenesis of cornea, trabecular meshwork, and Schlemm’s canal. Peters anomaly shows diverse clinical/pathologic
features and visual outcomes. Consistent with previous findings, our case has discovered diverse histopathologic features of the cornea
layers, especially in the Descemet's membrane. However, little is known of the development of the abnormal Descemet's membrane in patients
with Peters anomaly. Although this observation does not imply causation and there still are many “unknown areas” in the pathological
diagnosis of this special structure, such pathological findings need to be reported to enhance further characterization and it may be of
interest to others who have observed similar associations. Further study of the disease may be required. The “multiple-layer” structure of
the Descemet’s membrane described in our case has not been reported as associated with abnormalities of the cornea tissues in Peters
anomaly. Such pathological findings need to be reported to enhance further understanding of the special structure of Descemet's membrane as
an abnormality during embryogenesis and neural crest cell differentiations. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and her
father for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor
of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions WN drafted the
manuscript, collected the data, and reviewed the literature. WW and WN were involved in the design of the study, interpretation of the data,
drafting of the manuscript, and review of the literature. JH was the corneal specialist who performed the penetrating keratoplasty for this
patient. CL and PZ participated in the histopathologic procedures, collection of the data, interpretation of the data and critically
reviewed the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the patient and her father who
generously agreed to participate in this medical report. The authors also thank Dr. Wei Zhang for his excellent assistance in the
histopathologic procedures. National Natural Science Foundation of China (Number: 81170888)
