Ingestion of a foreign body is a common cause of esophageal injury, but hemoptysis is a rare manifestation of the esophageal penetration by
a swallowed foreign body. The swallowing of a fishbone is hard to diagnose and the definite diagnosis is usually made during surgery. We
describe the case of a 50-year-old man with direct injury to the lung parenchyma, the azygos vein, and the subclavian artery pseudoaneurysm
due to a fishbone penetration from the upper esophagus into the lung. To our knowledge, this is the first case report that we know of in
which a swallowed foreign body that penetrated from the upper esophagus into the lung caused vascular injuries and lung damage and it was
solved by minimally invasive surgery and an endovascular stent. We successfully diagnosed and treated a case with the migration of the
fishbone from the upper esophagus into the lung. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan is recommended to clarify the fact of
vascular injury before surgery. Thoracoscopic operation (VATS) combined with endovascular treatment could be a safer and a more feasible
treatment option in this rare condition. Ingestion of a foreign body, such as a fishbone, a chicken bone, or a toothpick, is a common cause
of esophageal injury. But hemoptysis is a rare manifestation of esophageal penetration by a swallowed foreign body. We diagnosed and treated
a case with the migration of a fishbone from the upper esophagus into the lung. The swallowing of a fishbone is hard to be diagnosed and the
definite diagnosis is usually made during surgery. Also, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan is recommended to check if there
are suspected vascular complications. To our knowledge, this is the first report in which a swallowed foreign body penetrated from the upper
esophagus into the lung caused vascular injuries and lung damage. This is also the first case report in which it was solved by minimally
invasive surgery and an endovascular stent. A 50-year-old man visited the local ear, nose, and throat clinic to receive treatment. He ate
monkfish and felt a fishbone get stuck in his throat, but his upper esophagoscopic evaluation was normal. Two weeks later, he consulted the
emergency department of his regional hospital because of chest pain and dyspnea. His chest x-ray revealed pneumothorax, and he was admitted
for drainage for 3 days with closed thoracostomy and was discharged following treatment. Two weeks later, he experienced a hemoptysis and
was transferred to Ulsan University Hospital and admitted to the Pulmonary Medicine. The patient had no fever or chills at that time.
Because in his recent history there was an event of a fishbone getting stuck in his throat, we performed the esophagoscopic evaluation. No
abnormalities were found during the examination. A CT scan of the chest showed a linear high attenuated structure, associated with lung
parenchymal hematoma. It was located within the apical segment of the right upper lobe (Fig. 1). Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed old blood
clots and bloody secretion from the right upper lobe. Laboratory data were as follows: white blood cells, 9180/mm3, hemoglobin, 13.3 g/dL,
and C-reactive protein, 0.12 mg/dL. High-resolution CT of chest showed a linear radio-opaque foreign body (arrow) at the right upper lobe
apical segment and hematoma around the right subclavian artery. CT = computed tomography. We decided to perform a video-assisted thoracic
surgery (VATS) to treat the lung parenchymal consolidation and remove the foreign body. At the time of the surgery, the apex of the right
lung was adherent to the mediastinum. After dissection of the pleural adhesion, a rigid foreign body that had penetrated the azygos vein was
found (Fig. 2A). We performed a wedge resection on the apical segment of the right lung because there was lung parenchymal laceration. The
penetrated azygos vein was repaired with pledgetted nonabsorbable sutures, the successful removal of the fishbone (Fig. 2B), and the tying
of the injured azygos vein. The fishbone measured 3.5 cm (1.4 inches) in length (Fig. 3). (A) Operative findings revealed the azygos vein is
pricked with the foreign body. (B) After wedge resection on the apex of right lung, the penetrated azygos vein was repaired with pledgetted
nonabsorbable sutures. The fishbone measured 3.5 cm in length. After the operation, his hemoptysis had disappeared, but just in case, we
performed a contrast-enhanced CT scan to make sure there were no vascular complications. We discovered a pseudoaneurysm in the right
subclavian artery, about 7 mm in length. An endovascular covered stent graft was placed with a transfemoral access in the right subclavian
artery to exclude the pseudoaneurysm by an interventional radiologist (Fig. 4). The patient recovered and was discharged uneventfully, given
the medication of antithrombotic drugs aspirin (100 mg) and clopidogrel (75 mg) to be eaten once a day. (A) The aortogram showed
pseudoaneurysm (arrow head) at the right subclavian artery. (B) It was treated with the endovascular covered stent graft. Shapes of the
foreign body play an important role in determining the probability of perforation.1 In general, long, slender, sharp-ended objects are more
likely to lodge in the gastrointestinal tract and penetrate it than objects of other shapes. Swallowed foreign bodies tend to get stock in
the upper and lower esophageal sphincter in the esophagus.2 Most foreign bodies lodge in the oropharynx and do not develop major
complications. However, major complications such as periesophageal abscess, mediastinitis, thyroid abscess, and vascular problems such as
aortoesophageal fistula were found in the esophagus 7.4% of the time.3,4 In a systematic review of ingested toothpicks, only 12% of the
patients remembered the event of swallowing the foreign object and only 14% of cases of radiologic study detected toothpicks.5,6 Therefore,
the definitive diagnosis is difficult and usually made during surgery (53%) and endoscopy (19%).5,6 We described rare foreign body injury of
the lung parenchyma, the azygos vein, and the subclavian artery. The swallowed fishbone penetrated the upper esophagus and injured the upper
lobe of the right lung, the right subclavian artery, and the azygos vein, but the upper esophagus healed by itself. The reason why the
endoscopy was negative could be explained by a fast migration of the fishbone through the wall of the upper esophagus. Although diagnosis is
made by routine CT scanning, a contrast-enhanced CT scan is recommended to clarify the fact of vascular injury.7 In this case, vessel injury
was defined with a contrast-enhanced CT scan after operation. Zamora et al and Stringari et al both reported that vascular complications
such as aortoesophageal fistula were successfully treated by the endovascular stent graft.8,9 So we decided to exclude the injured
pseudoaneurysm at the right subclavian artery with the covered stent graft. Lung injuries caused by ingested fishbones are very rare. Tan et
al reported about treatment of an ingested fish bone in the lung with VATS, but there was no vessel involvement.7 This is the first case
report that we know of in which a swallowed fishbone in the lung and caused vascular injuries without mediastinitis or empyema.
Conclusively, we successfully diagnosed and treated a case with the migration of the fishbone from the upper esophagus into the lung. A
contrast-enhanced CT scan is recommended to clarify the fact of vascular injury before surgery. Thoracoscopic operation (VATS) combined with
endovascular treatment could be a safer and a more feasible treatment option in this rare condition. Abbreviations: CT = computed
tomography, VATS = video-assisted thoracic surgery. ETHICS STATEMENTS: Ethical approval was not necessary for this report as it was focused
on the patient hospital course and did in no way alter his treatment. However, the patient provided informed consent for the publication of
this case report. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
