Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant form of the glial tumors. Advanced and treated GBM is rarely associated with
pregnancy for many reasons. Glioblastoma multiforme presenting during pregnancy carries unique challenges to the patient, baby, family, and
health care providers. We describe an unusual case of advanced GBM that was treated with maximum doses of chemotherapy and radiations, and
she became pregnant and presented at eighteenth weeks of gestation. Her medical management was associated with a significant ethical
dilemma. We managed to deliver the baby safely through cesarean section at week 28 despite the critical condition of the mother.
Unfortunately, the mother died 2 weeks post delivery. We concluded that although recurrent and treated GBM is rarely associated with
pregnancy and carries dismal prognosis, but if it occurs, it can still be carried, and a multidisciplinary team work is the key for
successful outcome. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant form of the glial tumors. The etiology of GBM is unknown
in most cases. However, suggested causes included genetic susceptibility with single nucleotide polymorphisms in DNA repair genes, ionizing
radiation, N-nitroso compounds exposure, head injury, occupational hazards, electromagnetic field exposure, possibly race, and cell-phone
use (though it is still controversial).1-3 Advanced and treated GBM is rarely associated with pregnancy for many reasons. Exposure to the
standard therapy of glioblastoma usually adversely affects fertility.4 Radiotherapy at a dose exceeding 45 Gy usually impairs the synthesis
of gonadotropins, whereas the newer chemotherapy with alkylating agents, such as, temozolomide (TMZ) is associated with impaired ovarian
function leading to premature menopause.4,5 Glioblastoma multiforme presenting during pregnancy carries unique challenges to the patient,
baby, family, and health care providers.6 Additionally, evidence relating to timing of surgery and the use of radiotherapy and chemotherapy
in pregnancy are still limited. The potential benefits to the mother must be balanced against the risks to the fetus.7 We describe an
unusual case of advanced GBM that was treated with maximum doses of chemotherapy and radiations, yet she managed to conceive. Her medical
management was associated with a significant ethical dilemma, and we managed to deliver the baby safely through cesarean section at week 28
despite the critical condition of the mother. Unfortunately, the mother died 2 weeks post-delivery and the husband officially gave us the
consent. We used the best available evidence in the literature to manage this patient and her baby.4,7,8 The objective in presenting this
particular case is to highlight on the possibility of delivering a baby of a pregnant patient with advanced GBM. A 36-year-old lady gravida
10, para 7, (G10P7+2) who is known to have advanced and non-operable right parital GBM was diagnosed with brain MRI (Figure 1) and brain
biopsy (Figures 2 & 3) on October 2012. She received concurrent chemo-radiation with 60 Gyr/30 fraction treatment with oral temozolomide
(TMZ) (75 mg/m2 a total dose of 6 grams), and the treatment ended in December, 2012. This was followed by adjuvant TMZ for another 5 cycles
(the total dose 8.750 grams) and the course was completed in May 2013. Three months after completing her adjuvant chemotherapy, she started
to experience a deterioration in her vision that began on the left side then the right side followed. A follow-up brain MRI showed minimal
interval changes in the surrounding edema with no significant tumor progression (Figure 4). She was seen by the ophthalmology and
neurosurgery services, and they recommended a ventriculo-perotineum (VP) shunt, which was carried out on the 2nd of September 2013, and she
was discharged from neurosurgery ward after that. On 15th of September 2013, she presented to the emergency department with fever and a
decreased level of consciousness. On examination, her BP was 114/86 mm Hg, pulse of 135 beats per minute, and body temperature 38.6 °C. Her
oxygen saturation on room air was 98% with normal glasgow coma scale (GCS), but neurologically she had left sided hemiplegia. Chest and
cardiovascular examinations were unremarkable. Abdominal examination showed fullness in the lower abdomen. Pelvis ultra sound (US) revealed
a viable fetus at 18 weeks of gestation with no obvious congenital anomaly. Brain MRI shows large right posterior parietal lesion (ring
enhancing lesion) (arrows). Brain biopsy of right posterior parietal lobe of glioblastoma multiforme shows diffuse infiltration by a
variably cellular glial tumors. Tumor cells of glioblastoma multiforme showed large pleomorphic nuclei with eosinophilic cytoplasmic
processes and prominent multinucleated giant cell (arrow). Brain MRI showed minimal interval progression in the tumor component (wide
arrows) and progression of the surrounding edema (narrow arrows). Accordingly, she was hospitalized and treated with the appropriate
antibiotics. Her husband and her family were informed with her pregnancy as well as the risk and anticipated complications that might happen
during pregnancy. It was clearly stated by the patient and her husband that they would like to carry on with the current pregnancy.
Initially, her family was in favor of terminating the pregnancy, but after the family counseling, their decision was to support the couples’
choice. The case was referred to the high-risk pregnancy services and the religious committee; the situation was discussed in details, and
the final decision was to carry on the pregnancy with closely monitoring the mother. Shortly after admission, she developed a decrease in
her level of consciousness for which she was intubated, mechanically ventilated, and admitted in the ICU for further management. The
repeated brain MRI in October 2013 showed significant brain edema with intra tumor bleeding (Figure 5). The neurosurgery recommendation was
no surgical intervention, close observation, and conservative management. A follow-up US showed a normal female fetus with no congenital
anomaly. The husband and the family were updated regarding the patient condition, and they still insisted to carry on with the pregnancy. In
the ICU, she continued on mechanical ventilation and required tracheostomy; however, she remained in a coma with GCS of 3-4, but
hemodynamically stable. A multidisciplinary meeting was held by the team, which included an ICU consultant, a medical oncologist, a high-
risk obstetrician, and a neonatologist to discuss the situation of the patient and the expected outcome. Based on the limited evidence in
the literature and the family’s choice, the final plan was to: 1) Provide full support to the mother and render chemotherapy as directed by
the medical oncology team. 2) Have an elective cesarean section (C/S) at the 28th week. 3) Have an emergency C/S at the 24th week if the
mother got cardiac arrest. 4) No intervention before the 24th week. Brain MRI showed significant increase in the size of the right posterior
parietal glioblastoma multiforme (wide arrows) with increase in the right to left subfalcine (narrow arrow), and uncal herniation (not
shown). At week 28, she had elective C/S, and the female baby was normal for gestational age with birth weight of 890 grams, Apgar scores
were 8/1, 9/10; her post-delivery period was complicated with acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, and jaundice, but ultimately, she
recovered and was discharged home on stable condition. The mother was transferred back to the ICU, and 2 weeks later she was assessed for
chemotherapy after a baseline brain MRI (Figure 6). She was started on palliative TMZ 5/28 day cycle, 2 days after she developed cardiac
arrest, for which she was resuscitated but not revived, and pronounced dead on 18th of December 2013. Brain MRI (10 days post-partum);
showed more necrotic component in the tumor (wide arrows), midline shift to the left (narrow arrow), and tonsillar herniation (not shown).
Glioblastoma multiforme is the most aggressive primary brain tumor and usually carries a poor prognosis. Recurrent disease also has a worse
outcome, and pregnancy makes the situation more challenging.3 Glioblastoma multiforme in pregnancy can present with wide spectrum of
symptoms and signs ranging from mild to severe. The symptoms can be generalized symptoms, such as headache, nausea and vomiting, syncope,
and seizure disorders, or more common focal symptoms include visual, language, motor, and sensory disturbances. There is no clear guideline
on how to manage a pregnant woman with GBM, and the management depends only on case reports and small series in the literature.9,10 The
administration of chemotherapy during pregnancy, especially during the first trimester is risky, and can induce harmful effects on both the
mother and the fetus; in fact, the current recommendations are based on animal and epidemiological studies.11 For the fetus, expected
problems include congenital anomaly, organ toxicity, growth retardation, and developmental delay as well as potential carcinogenesis. The
mother risk would include still birth, spontaneous abortion, and maternal sterility.5-8 The common chemotherapy drugs used included TMZ,
procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine. Alkylating agents are known to cross the placenta and therefore, fetal toxicity can happen. The
magnitude of the damage usually depends on the gestational age and the duration of exposure to these medications. Bevacizumab, which is an
angiogenesis inhibitor is used as first-line therapy for recurrent GBM. It is considered pregnancy risk category C. Although radiotherapy is
an important part of GBM treatment, it was not possible to give as she had her radiation in less than a year as directed by the radiation
oncology team. Surgery is always an option for recurrent GBM and craniotomy can be safely performed during pregnancy, particularly early
trimester. Following the result of pregnancy and knowing the patient and husband wishes, the risk of pregnancy versus benefit were fully
explained to them by the managing team, high risk pregnancy services and the religious committee. In view of very limited data and only
reported cases in the literature, we used the best available medical evidences to manage this patient. The multidisciplinary team which
included the ICU consultant, medical oncologist, high risk obstetrician and neonatologist discussed with the family all the risks and
benefits of the pregnancy, the natural history of the disease and the possible outcome as well as the available treatment options. It was
decided to fully support the mother during her pregnancy and do elective Cesarean Section (C/S) on the week of 28th. However, in case she
arrested between weeks 24th to 28th an emergency C/S will be immediately carried out, and no intervention to be carried out before the week
24th. Eventually, she underwent elective C/S on the week of 28th and delivered a normal female baby. Unfortunately, the mother died 2 weeks
later due to cardiopulmonary arrest. The multidisciplinary management approach as well as the frequent family meetings were the key factors
in managing this patient and her baby.8,11 In conclusion, advanced GBM in pregnancy is a medical and ethical dilemma and generally carries a
variable prognosis. Continuous family counseling and multidisciplinary teamwork approach are the fundamental factors for a successful
outcome. The authors would like to thank Dr. Abdulrahman Shamy from the Department of Radiology, King Abdulaziz Medical City for reviewing
the MRI, and Dr. Alaa Samkari from the Department of Pathology, King Abdulaziz Medical City for reviewing the pathology slides.
DisclosureAuthors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. Authors have no conflict of
interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company.
