In this paper, we present the successful therapeutic approach of unresectable liver metastases in a patient with rectal cancer. A 63-year-
old male underwent endoscopic polypectomy followed by rectosigmoid resection for an adenocarcinoma of the rectum diagnosed in pT2N0 stage.
The angio-computed tomography (CT) revealed four metastatic hepatic nodules ranging from 12 to 130 mm in diameter. After one cure of trans-
arterial chemoembolization (TACE) with lipiodol and 5-fluorouracil, combined with FOLFOX4 + capecitabine systemic chemotherapy, the diameter
of all hepatic nodules decreased to half size, at 6 months after TACE. Further curative surgical hepatic metastasectomy was done and
complete pathologic response was obtained. The patient is free of recurrences and metastases after 26 months of follow-up. This
representative case shows that an efficient trans-disciplinary approach could lead to successful therapeutic management even in patients
with advanced-staged colorectal carcinomas. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third commonest cancer worldwide and about 15% to 30% of patients
show liver metastases at the time of diagnosis.1 In previous reports, it was shown that curative liver resection can be practiced in only
10% to 15% of the patients with synchronous or metachronous CRC-related liver metastases.2 In patients with unresectable hepatic metastases
from CRC (more than 4 metastases or metastatic nodules larger than 50 mm, bilobar character, invasion of pedicle lymph nodes, serum level of
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) higher than 200 ng/mL), oxaliplatin-based systemic chemotherapy is mostly used but metastatic shrinkage is
obtained in fewer than 10% to 15% of the patients.3,4 Trans-arterial chemoembolization (TACE) currently represents the standard loco-
regional therapy, but its real efficacy is not yet known.2,5 It consists of an angiographic insertion, in the selected branches of the
hepatic artery, of a catheter loaded with an embolizing emulsion consisting of lipiodol and a chemotherapic agent (oxaliplatin, irinotecan,
5-fluorouracil, etc.).2,5,6 Drug eluting bead chemoembolization (DEB-TACE) is a variant of the conventional TACE procedure in which lipiodol
is replaced by polymer-based microparticles that are considered having a better ability for tumor penetration and a lower systemic
toxicity,6 but few data are reported in this field. In this report, we present a complete liver resectability, 6 months after TACE, in a
patient with initial diagnosis of rectal carcinoma with unresectable liver metastases. Signed informed consent was preoperatively obtained
to perform surgery and publish the case details. This is a case report and institutional review board approval was not necessary. A 63-year-
old male was hospitalized with long-time history of fecal occult bleeding. The flexible sigmoidoscopy showed a polypoid lesion in the
proximal rectum that was endoscopically resected. The tumor was diagnosed as a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma developed on the
background of an adenomatous polyp, with tumor infiltration of the pedicle (Fig. 1), and no possibility of evaluation of the basis of
implantation. The abdominal angio-computed tomography (CT) examination showed four large hepatic metastases, from 12 to 130 mm (Fig. 2 and
Table 1). In a patient with rectal adenocarcinoma (A) and liver metastases (B) marked by keratin 20 (B-frame), at 6 months after TACE (C),
large hyalinized areas (D), and necrosis (E) can be seen in the hepatic metastasectomy specimen. The chemotherapic blue crystals can be
observed inside the glandular lumen (E) and intravascular (F). Compared to the preoperative aspect of the liver (A), the angio-CT shows
shrinkage of the hepatic metastatic nodules at 3 months (B) and capsular contracture at 6 months after TACE (C), also noted on the surgical
specimen (C-frame). No metastases are noted at 26 months after surgery (D). Angio-CT Evaluated Shrinkage of the Hepatic Metastatic Nodules
and Progressively Normalization of the Serum Parameters in a Patient With Rectal Cancer Treated With TACE Combined With Systemic
Chemotherapy Rectosigmoid resection was done and the intraoperative exploration confirmed the multifocal unresectable hepatic metastases.
Metastatic biopsy form the VIth segment of the liver was performed. Histological examination of the rectosigmoid showed no remnant tumor
cells in the surgical specimen and absence of lymph node metastases. Based on the endoscopic specimen aspect, and keratin 20 positivity
within the glandular structures from the liver nodule (Fig. 1), the tumor was finally diagnosed as “moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma
of the rectum, pT2N0M1 stage.” One month after surgery, the oncologic protocol started with 1 session of TACE, which was trans-femorally
performed and consisted of infusion of 10 mL of lipiodol and 5-fluorouracil (1000 mg/24 hours) in the right branch of the hepatic artery
(Fig. 1). No side effects were noticed except for a transient increase of serum level of transaminases. One month after TACE, 6 cycles of 14
days of systemic chemotherapy with oxaliplatin combined with 5-fluorouracil (FOLFOX4 protocol) and capecitabine (2500 mg/m2/day) were
performed, according to the international guidelines.7 The control angio-CT performed at 3 and 6 months after TACE (Fig. 2) showed
progressive shrinkage of the hepatic metastases volume, from 1.8 to 2.4 times, compared to the initial nodules and disappearance of the
smallest metastatic nodule, as shown in Table 1. Because the patient clinical status was not modified, hepatic metastasectomy was decided.
Atypical surgical resection of the hepatic segments IVB, V, and VI was performed (Fig. 2). Gross findings of the resected hepatic specimen
confirmed the peripheral fibrotic retraction in the area corresponding to the IVth segment. Under the microscope, malignant glandular
structures with large necrotic areas surrounded by small round chemotherapic blue crystals, intra- and perivascular located, were noted
(Fig. 1). The hepatic resection margins were negative. The 6 cycles of systemic chemotherapy (FOLFOX4 + capecitabine), using the same
therapeutic protocol, were repeated. The patient is alive at 26 months after first surgical intervention, with no signs of tumor recurrence
or other metastases at control-CT (Fig. 2) and normal serum levels of CEA and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, as shown in Table 1. Despite
progresses in oncology therapy, the 5-year survival rate of patients with unresectable liver metastases does not exceed 10% of the cases.
However, in cases where shrinkage of the metastatic nodules can be obtained, with subsequent curative liver resection, the overall survival
rate was reported to increase up to 25% to 40%.2,8 The most recent clinical trials using TACE combined with systemic therapy, as a
therapeutic option for patients with unresectable hepatic metastases from CRC, reported encouraging results, compared with systemic therapy
only, but data in the field are controversial.2 Compared to systemic therapy, not only was TACE seen to assure a high intratumor
concentration of chemotherapy agent and subsequently intratumor hypoxia and necrosis, but also the chemotherapy-related systemic effects
were reduced.2 Moreover, the rate of curative resectability significantly increases after TACE, compared with systemic therapy only,
independent of the chemotherapic drugs used.9 Lipiodol is combined with the chemotherapic agent for its well-proved embolic effect but it
was also proved that it can prolong the intratumor passage of the drug.10 The pathomechanism of TACE-related shrinkage of the tumor volume
is mainly related to intratumor hypoxia and subsequently tumor necrosis with further hyalinization and contraction of the fibrotic tissue.11
Currently in the literature, there is only 1 randomized trial that evaluated the usefulness of TACE compared to systemic chemotherapy in
patients with liver metastases after CRC, which shows no significant increased survival in the patients.12 However, this study took into
accounts only 22 randomly selected patients, all of them presenting huge metastases (over 75% of the liver parenchyma was infiltrated).12 In
other trials, significant TACE-related shrinkage of the metastatic nodules was reported in 42% to 62% of the patients, compared with 9% to
21% of the cases in which only systemic chemotherapy was used.13,14 The most recent report in the field was published by Pernot et al,5 the
authors presenting the first case of complete pathologic response (CPR) obtained in a patient with a pT3N0 stage sigmoid carcinoma, with 6
unresectable hepatic metastases, similar to our case. In Pernot et al's patient, concomitant systemic FOLFOX4 combined with two sessions of
drug-eluting beads loaded with irinotecan (DEBIRI) was performed,5 whereas 5-fluorouracil and systemic FOLFOX4 + capecitabine was the
therapeutic regimen used in our case. After 2 sessions of embolization, they obtained CPR and proved under the microscope that no tumor
cells were present in the hepatic parenchyma.5 In our case, significant shrinkage (from 130 to 55 mm) was obtained at 6 months after 1
session of embolization but the tumor cells did not disappear. It is worth noticing that the CPR was microscopically appreciated by Pernot
et al based on the presence of fibrosis and acellular mucoid lakes in the liver specimens, without mentioning the immunoprofile of these
lakes (CEA and keratins). Moreover, they did not mention data about the CEA and CA 19-9 serum levels in the patient, before and after TACE.5
The same histological criteria were proposed by the College of American Pathologists to evaluate the CPR to preoperative chemoradiation in
resected specimens of rectal cancer patients.15 According to these criteria, the presence of fibrotic areas with acellular mucin pools, in
the specimens examined postradiochemotherapy, should be considered as a CPR, independent of the histological aspect of the primary tumor
(mucinous carcinomas vs. adenocarcinomas without mucinous component).15 However, this aspect is controversial because the acellular pools
can show CEA positivity correlated with a high serum CEA level.16 Moreover, in some rectal specimens with postchemoradiotherapy mucin lakes,
tumor cells can be seen after multisliced section. Based on this fact, it was previously suggested by our team that “the presence of
acellular mucin pools in surgical specimens of rectal cancers cannot be interpreted as an indicator of complete response at radiotherapy if
at least 10 multilevel sections are performed in at least 3 tumor blocks per case, and CEA negativity is not proved.”16 This case is the
first one reporting CPR based on the metastases’ complete resectability, without recurrences, and constant low serum levels of CEA and CA
19-9, at 24 months after TACE. The case confirms the promising TACE-related results, combined with neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy, in
patients with unresectable liver metastases after CRC, especially in cases without lymph node metastases. Limitations of the paper: This
paper was based on only 1 case with a follow-up time of 26 months. To prove the efficacy of TACE combined with neoadjuvant systemic
chemotherapy, in patients with multifocal unresectable liver metastases after CRC, a longer follow-up in several cases would be necessary.
The English language manuscript was polished by SPI Global Professional Editing Service. Abbreviations: CA = carbohydrate antigen, CEA =
carcinoembryonic antigen, CPR = complete pathologic response, CRC = colorectal cancer, CT = computed tomography, DEBIRI = drug-eluting beads
loaded with irinotecan, DEB-TACE = drug eluting bead chemoembolization, FOLFOX = folinic acid + 5-fluorouracil + oxaliplatin, TACE = trans-
arterial chemoembolization. This paper was partially supported by the University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures, Romania, and the
Threepharm S.A., team research projects frame no. 1699/2014. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
