Acute infarction of the cervical segment of the spinal cord is extremely uncommon. Patients may present with signs and symptoms mimicking
that of acute myelitis. On imaging, both conditions may present as a hyperintense area on T-2 weighted MRI. History of sudden onset is
essential in establishing the diagnosis. We report a case of cervical spinal cord infarction in a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed with
acute transverse myelitis, and was treated with high dose intravenous corticosteroids followed by 5 sessions of plasma exchange. An MRI of
the spine revealed abnormal high T2 signal intensity extending from the C2 to C7 level involving the anterior two-thirds of the cord with
more central involvement. The findings were consistent with anterior spinal artery territory cervical cord infarction. Infarction of the
spinal cord is rare.1,2 Presentation in the cervical region is unusual, especially at a young age. It mostly occurs in the territory of the
anterior spinal artery.1 Infarction of the cervical cord may present with pain, paralysis, dissociated sensory loss, and autonomic
deficits.1,2 The posterior columns are relatively spared.3,4 Acute myelitis, on the other hand, may lead to damage of the functional areas
at the affected segment of the cord.5,6 Like infarction, patients may present with pain, weakness or paralysis, sensory, and autonomic
deficits.3,4,6 The disease may be idiopathic or attributed to other CNS, or systemic etiologies.7 Magnetic resonance imaging is essential
for the diagnosis of both entities, and may reveal an area of hyperintensity on T-2 weighted imaging, suggesting infarction, or
inflammation.1,8,9 Therefore, both conditions may have similar appearance, and accurate diagnosis can be challenging. We report a case of
cervical spinal cord infarction (SCI) in a 40-year-old man who presented with a sudden onset of neck and back pain and paralysis. In
addition, a literature review on SCI is presented. Our objective in presenting this particular case is to highlight the rare occurrence of
acute medullary swelling in the first few hours following cord infarction simulating acute myelitis. A 40-year-old right-handed man with a
known history of hypertension suddenly developed severe neck and back pain while driving. He was fully paralyzed, unable to walk, and
developed numbness in all of his limbs. He was taken to the emergency room of a local hospital, where he was noted to have paralysis of all
4 limbs (quadriplegia), pain and temperature sensory loss below the neck, and urinary and bowel incontinence. Cranial nerves examination was
unremarkable. There was no history of recent infections or vaccination. An MRI at presentation to the local hospital revealed intense
swelling and high T2 signal in the cervical segment of the cord (Figure 1). He was transferred to our emergency department 7 days later. He
was diagnosed with acute transverse myelitis, and was treated with high dose intravenous corticosteroids, followed by 5 sessions of plasma
exchange with daily physiotherapy. Laboratory investigations including complete blood count, international normalized ratio, rapid plasma
regain, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, human immunodeficiency virus, enterovirus, coxsackie, arbovirus, mycoplasma, parvovirus, lyme,
lupus, anticardiolipin, and hemocytsteine were unremarkable. Screening studies for vasculitis were negative. He had a neurogenic bladder,
and a Foley catheter was placed. The CSF analysis revealed: glucose 4.34 mg/dL (normal range : 50-80 mg/dL), protein 291 mg/dL (NR: 15-60
mg/dL), 27 RBCs/mm3 (NR: 0 RBCs/mm3), <1 WBCs/mm3 (NR: 0-5 WBCs/mm3). A brain MRI was normal. After corticosteroids and plasma exchange, MRI
of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine revealed cervical spinal cord abnormal high T2 signal intensity extending from C2 to C7 level,
and predominantly involving the anterior two-thirds of the cord and tapering distally with more central involvement. The cord swelling had
receded, and minimal patchy enhancement could be seen after contrast administration (Figures 2 & 3). Mild degenerative disc disease with no
spinal cord compression was seen at multiple levels. The thoracic and lumbar spine was unremarkable. The findings were consistent with
anterior spinal artery territory cervical cord infarction, and the diagnosis of infarction in the anterior spinal artery was established. He
showed improvement in movement as indicated in Table 1. Reflexes were +1. Babinski response was negative. His sensations were as follows:
vibration was absent in the upper limbs and reduced in the lower limbs; proprioception was intact in all limbs; pinprick was absent in all
limbs; pinprick from the face to T2 level was intact; and pinprick and vibration below T2 level were absent. A follow up MRI 2 weeks later
revealed interval improvement of high signal intensity, as well as improvement of enhancement seen in T2-weighted imaging of the spinal
cord. He was advised to continue his rehabilitation and physiotherapy at an advanced center. Sagittal T2 MRI demonstrating intense swelling
and high T2 signal in the cervical segment of the cord. Sagittal T2 MRI demonstrating: A) cervical spinal cord abnormal high T2 signal
intensity extending from C2 to C7 level and predominantly involving the anterior two-thirds of the cord and tapering distally with more
central involvement (arrow); and B) sagittal T1 MRI with contrast depicting minimal patchy enhancement. Axial T2 MRI demonstrating abnormal
high T2 signal intensity of the anterior cervical cord horns “owl’s eyes” sign (arrow). Motor examination after treatment of the patient
with acute cervical cord infarction. Myelitis is an uncommon inflammatory disorder of the spinal cord.9 The inflammatory reaction may damage
areas of the spinal cord, leading to either temporary or permanent motor, sensory, or autonomic loss of function of variable extent.6 It may
affect any segment of the spinal cord.5 Patients commonly present with subacute back pain along with motor, sensory, and autonomic
deficits.3,5,6 Laboratory tests and CSF analysis may aid in establishing diagnosis and identification of the etiologic agent.5 Like
infarction, myelitis may present as cord swelling at the level of the lesion on MRI T2-weighted images with hyperintensity.9 There is no
definitive cure for acute transverse myelitis. Corticosteroids are usually administered to decrease inflammation and swelling, and to
improve symptoms.5 Plasma exchange has also been suggested in moderate to severe cases. Rehabilitation is of a great importance in such
patients.5 The cervical segment of the spinal cord receives its radicular vascularization from the V4 segment of the vertebral artery at the
C3 level, and from the ascending cervical arteries at the levels of C6-C7. These small arteries are of great importance to the blood supply
of the functional areas in the cord, especially through their connections with the anterior spinal artery.10,11 The spinal cord anterior
horns, ventral spinothalamic tracts, the anterior segment of the lateral spinothalamic tracts, and lateral corticospinal tracts bilaterally
obtain their vascular supply from the central branches of the anterior spinal artery.1,11 Unlike the cerebral arteries, the spinal arteries
are positioned over a mobile structure, predisposing them to increased risk of injury. The radicular arteries are usually involved in
movement injuries. Acute infarcts in the anterior spinal artery territory can be attributed to various causes. These include, but are not
limited to, radicular artery occlusion, cervical disc herniation compressing the vasculature, trauma, vasculitis, iatrogenic injury during
spinal surgery, spinal cord compression, epidural anesthesia, chronic arachnoiditis, vertebral artery dissection, vertebral artery stenosis
due to atherosclerosis, stroke, prothrombin mutation, embolism, global hypotension, and cocaine misusage.1 Half of the reported SCI cases
lack detectable etiology.2 Similarly, no identifiable etiology could be found in our case. Infarction of the spinal cord is extremely
uncommon.1,2 It occurs mostly in the anterior spinal artery territory. Unlike cerebral infarction, SCI lacks conclusive epidemiological
data.1 Infarction of the cervical segment of the spinal cord is unusual. The number of reported cases in the medical literature remains
small. This can be attributed to the abundance of collateral vessels supplying the spinal cord, making it relatively resistant to
infarction.1,10 Infarction of the spinal cord presents with a sudden onset. The initiating event can be in the form of mechanical tension or
sudden movement. When partial anterior spinal artery territory in the cervical segment is involved, patients may present with Horner
syndrome on the same side of the infarction. The preservation of light touch, proprioception, and deep sensations is attributed to the
dorsal column sparing along with the spinocerebellar tracts. The cervical and thoracolumbar segments of the spinal cord are very sensitive
to ischemia. This can be attributed to the high density of motor neurons at those levels.12 Infarction of the anterior horns appears as
“owl’s eyes” on MRI scan as seen in our patient (Figure 3). The MRI remains the modality of choice for diagnosis of spinal infarction.8 It
is important to rule out other causes, such as, tumors or cord compression. A hyperintense region on T2-weighted imaging demonstrating
infarction is the typical finding on MRI for medullary infarction. Its appearance has been described as “pencil-like” in longitudinal
sections by different authors. Such findings can only be demonstrated several hours after the onset of symptoms.8 In the cervical region,
the hyperintensity tends to appear in the medial and central parts of the cord. The T1-weighted images may demonstrate medullary enlargement
at the affected segment.1 Although only few studies described the role of diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) in detecting cord infarction, it
has been shown that DWI may increase the sensitivity in confirming SCI by depicting diffusion restriction in the acute settings.1,8 It has
been reported that MRI features of SCI have a predictable course. In the acute stage (<24 hours), the MRI findings are usually normal, with
no cord enlargement, gadolinium enhancement, or increased signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging. However, these features emerge and appear
clearly on MRI after 1-2 days. On the contrary, nearly all patients with acute myelitis have increased signal intensity on T2-weighted
imaging in the acute phase with 62-84% of them demonstrating gadolinium cord enhancement.13,14 This distinction in the acute phase may aid
in differentiating between the 2 conditions. Therefore, it is essential to obtain repeated imaging in such patients in order to document the
temporal profile of changes and facilitate accurate diagnosis. Diagnosing SCI from the anterior spinal artery territory is based on acute
onset of cord symptoms, neurological examination indicating dissociated sensations, MRI changes, and a high index of suspicion. The
management of SCI remains controversial. Corticosteroids and/or anticoagulation for secondary prevention can be used. However, studies have
failed to document that one of these treatments is superior to the other.15 The role of rehabilitation in these patients is essential.
Patients should be encouraged to participate in rehabilitation programs for improvement of their symptoms. In conclusion, acute medullary
swelling is not typical in the first few hours following cord infarction. This case illustrates an unusual presentation of cervical cord
infarction with acute swelling mimicking acute myelitis. Therefore, acute medullary infarction should be included in the differential
diagnosis of acute cord swelling. A history of sudden onset along with detailed neurological examination, and radiological images are
essential in establishing the diagnosis. DisclosureAuthors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any
drug company. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company.
