A 62-year-old man, with no vascular risk factors or prior history of myocardial infarction, presented to the emergency department after
experiencing a sudden collapse while driving. Neurological consultation was sought for a Glasgow coma scale of 9/15 and transient acute
right hemiparesis 6 hours after the onset of his initial symptom. He scored 13 points on National Institute of Health stroke scale (maximum
possible score of 42). His brachial systolic blood pressure was unequal: 90 mm Hg in the right arm and 120 mm Hg in the left arm. Imaging
scans of brain (Figure A & B) and blood vessels (Figure C) were obtained. What findings are observed in Figure A & B?What does the vascular
imaging scan show (Figure C)?What is the diagnosis? What findings are observed in Figure A & B? What does the vascular imaging scan show
(Figure C)? What is the diagnosis? Cranial diffusion weighted MRI (Figures A & B) and corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient map
(insets in answer Figures A & B) revealed multiple, acute infarctions (arrows) in the right frontal and parietal areas, and left basal
ganglia.Computed tomographic angiography showed the dissection of ascending, arch, and descending aorta (white arrows pointing to the true
lumen) extending into the brachiocephalic trunk and left common carotid artery (arrowheads) (Figure C)Type A aortic dissection, causing
bilateral carotid dissection, accounted for bilateral, multifocal acute infarctions in both cerebral hemispheres. Cranial diffusion weighted
MRI (Figures A & B) and corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient map (insets in answer Figures A & B) revealed multiple, acute
infarctions (arrows) in the right frontal and parietal areas, and left basal ganglia. Computed tomographic angiography showed the dissection
of ascending, arch, and descending aorta (white arrows pointing to the true lumen) extending into the brachiocephalic trunk and left common
carotid artery (arrowheads) (Figure C) Type A aortic dissection, causing bilateral carotid dissection, accounted for bilateral, multifocal
acute infarctions in both cerebral hemispheres. Aortic dissection that involves the ascending aorta is termed type A aortic dissection and
is a rare cause of acute ischemic stroke.1 Bedside monitoring of pulses and blood pressure in both arms could aid in suspecting aortic
dissection in stroke patients with altered mental status (especially in those who could not provide history of chest or abdominal pain). An
inter-arm pressure difference of more than 20 mm Hg is abnormal and suggests an underlying vascular disease such as aortic dissection or
subclavian stenosis.2 If aortic dissection is suspected or confirmed, thrombolytic therapy should be avoided in the case of hyperacute
presentation (within 4.5 hours of ischemic stroke onset). This patient presented beyond the thrombolytic time window and the extension of
the dissection into bilateral cervical carotid arteries accounted for multiple infarctions in the bilateral carotid distribution (Figure 1).
He was considered unsuitable for surgical (repair such as segmental resection and interposition of Dacron graft) or endovascular
intervention, as there was an extensive dissection involving the ascending, arch and descending aorta along with complications/poor
prognostic factors such as preoperative bilateral ischemic stroke and renal dysfunction as a result of ischemic nephropathy. He was managed
conservatively and died of a fatal cardiac arrest 7 days later. Beta-blockers are utilized for treating high blood pressure in aortic
dissection with a target systolic blood pressure of 100-120 mm Hg and heart rate of 60-80/minute.3 Axial diffusion weighted MRI (DWI, b=1000
sec/mm2) A & B) the brain and the corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient map (ADC map, insets in A & B) show restricted diffusion
(black and white arrows), suggestive of acute infarction, in the right frontal and parietal convexities and left basal ganglia. C)
Computerized tomographic angiography of the aorta showing dissection involving the whole length of aorta including the ascending segment
(termed type A aortic dissection), with the arrows pointing to the true lumen in the descending aorta. Note the extension of dissection into
brachiocephalic trunk (first white arrowhead) and left common carotid artery (second white arrowhead). Notice: Authors are encouraged to
submit quizzes for possible publication in the Journal. These may be in any specialty, and should approximately follow the format used here
(maximum of 2 figures). Please address any submissions to: Editor, Saudi Medical Journal, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, PO Box 7897,
Riyadh 11159, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Tel. +966 (11) 4777714 Ext. 42841. E-mail: info@smj.org.sa
