Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) lung disease presenting as a solitary pulmonary nodule (MAC-SPN) is often asymptomatic, is more common in
middle to old age, and mimics lung cancer or tuberculoma. We report herein a case of MAC-SPN in an immunocompetent young adult patient,
presenting with persistent chest pain and a subacutely progressive nodule with high intense 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake. Histological
examination of resected specimens revealed pleurisy, which is a rare finding of MAC-SPN. A 36-year-old Japanese male presented with chest
pain and a subacutely progressive pulmonary nodule. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography showed high intense
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the nodule. Owing to his continuous chest pain and subacutely progressive nodules, wedge resection was
performed using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. Histological examination revealed an epithelioid granuloma and pleurisy, and the lung
tissue culture was positive for mycobacteria identified as M. avium. This is the first report of MAC-SPN occurring with persistent chest
pain, suggesting that MAC should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a solitary pulmonary nodule, even for patients who
experience persistent chest pain. As in the present case, surgical resection with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery is a reasonable
approach to the diagnosis and treatment of MAC-SPN with possible malignancy, especially as MAC can be diagnosed using resected lung tissue
culture with histological confirmation. Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) lung disease commonly presents as upper lobe fibrocavitary or
nodular bronchiectatic forms of pulmonary disease and occasionally presents as a solitary pulmonary nodule (MAC-SPN) . MAC-SPN is often
asymptomatic, is more common in middle to old age, and mimics lung cancer or tuberculoma . We report a case of MAC-SPN in an immunocompetent
young adult patient, presenting with persistent chest pain and a subacutely progressive nodule with high intense 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) uptake. Histological examination of resected specimens revealed pleurisy, which is a rare finding of MAC-SPN. A 36-year-old Japanese
male was referred to our hospital because of persistent chest pain and a subacutely progressive pulmonary nodule. Four weeks prior to his
referral to our hospital, he began to experience chest pain that increased in severity on inspiration. He visited a private hospital the
following day. He had no family or personal history of nontuberculous or pulmonary disease. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed an
irregularly shaped solitary nodule in the periphery of the left lower lobe with microcalcifications and pleural indentation. On CT at a
follow-up appointment 2 weeks after the initial consultation, the nodule was enlarged (Fig. 1a, b). To diagnose the subacutely progressive
pulmonary nodule, a CT-guided lung biopsy was performed in the private hospital. The histological examination of the biopsy specimens
revealed granulomatous inflammation with atypical cells of various sizes. One week later, the patient was referred to our hospital. Although
we intended to clarify the origin of the atypical cells and rule out malignancy, the specimen volume was insufficient for further
investigation.Fig. 1Computed tomography scan of the chest. a Chest computed tomography showed an irregularly shaped solitary nodule in the
periphery of the left lower lobe, with microcalcifications (arrow) and pleural indentation. b After 2 weeks, the nodules became enlarged,
around which ground glass opacity appeared Computed tomography scan of the chest. a Chest computed tomography showed an irregularly shaped
solitary nodule in the periphery of the left lower lobe, with microcalcifications (arrow) and pleural indentation. b After 2 weeks, the
nodules became enlarged, around which ground glass opacity appeared He reported no history of smoking, foreign travel, eating crab or boar
or deer meat, or contact with patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis. The results of his physical examinations, including vital signs
and consciousness, were normal. The laboratory data, including lymphocyte count, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, gamma globulin, tumor
markers, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-HIV antibody, β-D-glucan, aspergillus antigen, cryptococcus antigen, Interferon-Gamma
Release Assay (T-SPOT.TB®), and antibody to Paragonimus westermani or P. miyazaki, were unremarkable. Two weeks after the referral, positron
emission tomography (PET)-CT showed intense FDG uptake in the nodules, with a maximum standard uptake value (SUV) of 13.94 (Fig. 2).Fig.
2Positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan of the chest. A positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan showed intense
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the nodular shadow with a maximum standard uptake value of 13.9 Positron emission tomography-computed
tomography scan of the chest. A positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan showed intense 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the
nodular shadow with a maximum standard uptake value of 13.9 Owing to his continuous chest pain and subacutely progressive nodules, which
could not be diagnosed using CT-guided lung biopsy, wedge resection via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed in the left lower
lobe. The histological examination revealed an epithelioid granuloma, with caseating necrosis and calcification, and pleurisy over the
visceral pleurae (Fig. 3a–d). Although a smear test of the resected lung tissue was negative, the patient was initially diagnosed with
tuberculosis based on the results of the histological examination. Antituberculous therapy was initiated with isoniazid, rifampicin,
ethambutol, and pyrazinamide. Because the patient presented with severe skin eruptions and high fever 2 weeks after initiation of the
antituberculous therapy, we paused the treatment. One week later, the lung tissue culture was positive for mycobacteria identified as
Mycobacterium avium via DNA-DNA hybridization. His chest pain disappeared almost simultaneously. Anti-interferon-γ autoantibodies were
negative. We plan to initiate anti-MAC chemotherapy (rifampicin, ethambutol, and clarithromycin) once these adverse effects have abated, for
which the patient is being closely monitored.Fig. 3Photograph and photomicrographs of the lung. a Photograph of a cross-sectional specimen
in the resected lung showing a granuloma with caseating necrosis (arrow) and pleurisy (arrowhead). b Photomicrograph showing pleurisy over
the visceral pleurae (circle; bar 500 μm), which revealed granulomatous infiltration. c-d Photomicrograph showing an epithelioid granuloma
with necrosis and calcification (arrows) (C; bar 250 μm, D; bar 25 μm) Photograph and photomicrographs of the lung. a Photograph of a cross-
sectional specimen in the resected lung showing a granuloma with caseating necrosis (arrow) and pleurisy (arrowhead). b Photomicrograph
showing pleurisy over the visceral pleurae (circle; bar 500 μm), which revealed granulomatous infiltration. c-d Photomicrograph showing an
epithelioid granuloma with necrosis and calcification (arrows) (C; bar 250 μm, D; bar 25 μm) To our knowledge, this is the first report
regarding MAC-SPN presenting with persistent chest pain and induced by histologically confirmed pleurisy. Since Gribetz et al. reported the
first case series in 1981 , 45 cases of MAC-SPN have been reported: 33 from East Asia and 12 from the USA . MAC-SPN generally affects
middle-aged to elderly (median = 63 years; range: 37–81 years) men and women equally. The majority of the cases were diagnosed via chest
imaging, and the patients were usually asymptomatic; however, respiratory symptoms, such as cough, sputum, and hemoptysis, were reported
occasionally. In contrast, our patient was younger and had no respiratory symptoms aside from persistent chest pain, which was induced by
histologically confirmed pleurisy without pleural effusion (so-called “dry pleurisy”) caused by M. avium. A report of MAC (not MAC-SPN)
pleurisy in 16 cases with pleural effusion included a patient who was younger than the patient in the present case . The factors for the
onset of MAC-SPN are unknown. In the literature, only 7 cases were associated with underlying pulmonary disease (4 with old tuberculosis, 2
with lung cancer, and 1 with emphysema), and none of the patients were immunocompromised or had a family history of MAC lung disease.
However, given that recent studies have suggested the importance of genetic or familial susceptibility to MAC lung disease [12, 13], further
studies are warranted to assess MAC-SPN host factors. In the present case, lung cancer and tuberculoma were included in the differential
diagnosis of SPN prior to the definitive diagnosis of MAC-SPN. Distinguishing MAC from tuberculoma in cases involving an SPN is very
difficult. In a report of 26 patients with tuberculoma and 15 patients with MAC-SPN , 10 of the patients with MAC-SPN were initially
diagnosed with tuberculoma and administered antituberculous medications. The patients with MAC-SPN were older and had higher maximum SUV in
PET than the patients with tuberculoma. In 9 cases of nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) presenting as an SPN , the mean maximum SUV on FDG-
PET was 8.6 (range: 4.4–13.2). Therefore, the maximum SUV in the present case (13.9) was higher than that observed in previous reports.
Ruling out lung cancer should be undertaken with great care, as the coexistence of lung cancer and MAC pulmonary disease has been reported
[2, 14]. FDG-PET is reportedly useful for evaluating disease activity and monitoring the therapeutic response in patients with NTM lung
disease , indicating that high activity of MAC-SPN could cause pleurisy, as observed in the present case. In the present case, surgical
resection of MAC-SPN was performed, and we plan to initiate anti-MAC chemotherapy once the adverse effects have abated, although the
significance of chemotherapy for MAC-SPN following surgical resection remains controversial. In the literature, of 45 patients with MAC lung
disease presenting as an SPN, surgical resection was performed in 16 patients. Of the 14 patients who were administered anti-MAC
chemotherapy after the surgical resection, none experienced recurrence; however, this was also true for the remaining 2 patients who were
not administered anti-MAC chemotherapy [1–5, 7]. Chemotherapy for MAC-SPN without surgical resection has also been reported as effective,
with the size of the SPN decreasing in 9 of 10 patients undergoing anti-MAC chemotherapy . In 15 patients with MAC-SPN, 5 did not undergo
any treatment, and the size of the SPN decreased spontaneously in 3 patients, was unchanged in 1 patient, and increased in 1 patient. Anti-
MAC chemotherapy was eventually initiated in 2 of these 5 patients . Therefore, anti-MAC chemotherapy can be withheld until the size of an
SPN increases, even without surgical therapy. We report a case with MAC-SPN with high-intensity FDG uptake and histologically confirmed
pleurisy. MAC should be considered in the differential diagnosis of an SPN, even for patients who experience persistent chest pain. Surgical
resection with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery is a reasonable approach to the diagnosis and treatment of MAC-SPN with possible
malignancy, as MAC can be diagnosed using resected lung tissue culture with histological confirmation. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Mycobacterium avium complex nontuberculous mycobacterium
positron emission tomography standard uptake value solitary pulmonary nodule Competing interests The author(s) declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions TA and MI drafted the manuscript. TA, MH, IK, MK, HS, KE, YH, HS, IK, and KS contributed to the
diagnosis and treatment. MI, HN, ST, NH, and TB reviewed the manuscript. All the authors approved the final version of the manuscript. The
authors thank Dr. Takuro Sakagami for testing the anti-interferon-γ autoantibodies.
