Pyoderma Gangrenosum (PG) is a cutaneous condition, its diagnosis suggested by the presence of a painful cutaneous ulcer showing rapid
progression. Pyoderma gangrenosum is associated with a concomitant systemic disease in 50 to 70 % of cases, including inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD), rheumatoid arthritis, and lymphoproliferative disorders. Although PG has also been reported with viral hepatitis, it is
rarely associated with autoimmune hepatitis. A 19-year-old Caucasian female, with a prior diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) in
remission, presented with bilateral lower limb ulcers 4 years after the diagnosis of AIH. She was diagnosed with PG and treated with high-
dose prednisolone, methotrexate and cyclosporine. One year later she was well, the ulcers completely healed, and with the autoimmune
hepatitis still in remission. We report a case of autoimmune hepatitis and the subsequent, rarely occurring, extra-hepatic onset of pyoderma
gangrenosum, with the AIH in remission, strengthening the association between the two conditions. Since both the AIH and the PG can present
serious diagnostic challenges, thus delaying vital therapy, it is important that the development of either prompts us to consider the
possibility of the other developing in the future or if already present facilitate its diagnosis, such considerations making the case for a
systematic follow up. Pyoderma Gangrenosum (PG), classified as a neutrophilic dermatosis, is an ulcerative cutaneous condition, first
described in 1930 by Brusting and colleagues [1, 2]. Commonly, the lesions present as tender pustules that evolve into enlarging suppurative
ulcers, with a tendency to last for months or years. Although of non-infectious etiology, the pathogenesis of the disease is unclear, but
evidence suggests an underlying defective neutrophilic function [1, 3]. After excluding more common causes of cutaneous ulcerations, the
diagnosis of PG is suggested by the presence of a painful, necrolytic cutaneous ulcer, with an irregular undermined border, showing rapid
progression . Histologically, there is lymphocytic infiltration in the early stages followed by neutrophilic infiltration and hemorrhage [4,
5]. Pyoderma gangrenosum is associated with a concomitant disease in 50 to 70 % of cases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in 10
to 15 % , rheumatoid arthritis , and lymphoproliferative disorders . Although PG has been encountered with viral hepatitis , only a small
number of cases have been reported with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) —one associated with concurrent primary sclerosing cholangitis and
ulcerative colitis . Treatment of PG is non-surgical and consists of a combination of local wound care and systemic therapy, the latter
centered on the use of high-dose corticosteroids . Other treatment agents include immunosuppressants, intravenous immunoglobulin, and
biologic agents—such as tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibitors . We report a 19-year-old patient, with a history of AIH in remission, who
presented with pyoderma gangrenosum of the lower extremities, and was treated successfully with cortisone, cyclosporine and methotrexate. A
19-year-old Caucasian female presented to us with bilateral lower limb ulcers. She reported a scratch on her left ankle 3 months earlier
that worsened over time into an ulcer, in spite of antibiotic treatment. A week later, new lesions appeared on the left leg and similar ones
were seen on her right leg. The patient denied fever, weight loss, or other signs or symptoms of systemic illness. Four years earlier she
had been admitted at another hospital with transaminasemia and jaundice and was diagnosed with autoimmune hepatitis based on serological
(ANA and ASMA) positivity and compatible histopathological features, in the absence of viral markers. Treatment with prednisolone and
azathioprine brought the disease into remission. The patient was on 5 mg prednisolone upon presentation. On admission, the patient was
afebrile, bearing purulent, painful ulcers in both legs (Fig. 1a). Lab results showed the inflammation markers just exceeding the upper
normal limits (Table 1). Transaminases were within a normal range, while anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were positive at a titer of 1/320 and
anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA) were positive at a low titer (1/80). Cryoglobulin test was negative. The lesions were cultured for
bacteria and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and empiric therapy was started with clindamycin and moxifloxacin. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
of the region of ulcers in both legs revealed diffuse subcutaneous oedema and subcutaneous nodular lesions on the dorsal surface of the
feet. With a working diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum, a skin biopsy was acquired, her previous medication of azathioprine was reintroduced
at 150 mg, while the steroids were increased from 5 to 20 mg prednisolone, daily. The patient was discharged pending the pathology and
bacteriology results.Fig. 1Images of ulcerated areas. a On admission. b A week later. The swelling and the inflammation are noted. c One
month later. Significant improvement of the ulcerating areas. d At 6 months. The inflammation has subsided, with further improvement of the
ulcerating areas. e At one year. No new ulcers and healed old onesTable 1Patient’s lab resultsLab testNormal valuesResultHgb
(g/dl)12,0–16,012,4Hct (%)38–4737,7WBC (K/μL)4,5–11,012,300Neut/Lymph/Mono/Eos (%)69/25/5/0PLT (K/μL)140–440357Glu (mg/dl)74–10675Urea
(mg/dl)15–4025Creatinine (mg/dl)0,6–1,10,7AST (U/L)5–3113ALT (U/L)5–3411γGT (U/L)7–3612ALP (U/L)48–14159INR0,9–1,151HBA1c (%)4,8–65,5TSH
(mU/L)0,3–43FT4 (pmol/L)10–2517Total Protein (g/dl)6,4–8,37Albumin (g/dl)3,5–5,24,1Total Bilirubin (mg/dl)0,3–1,20,47Direct Bilirubin
(mg/dl)0–0,30,14Sodium (mMol/L)136–145144Potassium (mMol/L)3,5–5,14,2CRP (mg/dl)0–515,3ESR (mm)0–2038 Images of ulcerated areas. a On
admission. b A week later. The swelling and the inflammation are noted. c One month later. Significant improvement of the ulcerating areas.
d At 6 months. The inflammation has subsided, with further improvement of the ulcerating areas. e At one year. No new ulcers and healed old
ones Patient’s lab results She returned a week later with arthritis of both ankles and worsening of the ulcers (Fig. 1b). Further cultures
were again negative. The biopsy was interpreted as being compatible with pyoderma gangrenosum (Fig. 2a, b), hence prednisolone 1 mg/kg was
started, azathioprine was switched to cyclosporine at 150 mg that was further increased to 250 mg daily, and methotrexate 10 mg/week was
added to the regimen. Given the rare combination of pyoderma gangrenosum with autoimmune hepatitis, upper and lower endoscopies, as well as
upper abdominal MRI and Magnetic Resonance Cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) were done to exclude more common associated diseases. All of the
investigations were negative. A review of the initial liver biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, showing dense portal
and periportal lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltrates, as well as mild periportal fibrosis. The patient was again discharged, with slow
tapering of the steroids.Fig. 2Images of skin biopsy. a Abscess formation in the epidermis (red arrow) with accumulation of neutrophils and
granuloma (green arrows) formation in the dermis. b The edge of an ulcer: deposits of eosinophilic material on the wall of the small blood
vessels (blue arrow) Images of skin biopsy. a Abscess formation in the epidermis (red arrow) with accumulation of neutrophils and granuloma
(green arrows) formation in the dermis. b The edge of an ulcer: deposits of eosinophilic material on the wall of the small blood vessels
(blue arrow) On follow up a month later she was feeling well, with no ankle swelling, and with all ulcers healing satisfactorily (Fig. 1c).
Six months hence she was on 4 mg methylprednisolone, 100 mg cyclosporine, and 7.5 mg methotrexate, with normal liver enzymes, and with the
ulcers nearly healed (Fig. 1d). Cyclosporine was discontinued at 8 months, and a year later the patients was on 4 mg methylprednisolone and
7.5 mg methotrexate, with further improvement and complete healing of the ulcers (Fig. 1e). Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic self-
perpetuating inflammatory disease occurring in all ages and races . Besides its diverse presentation and heterogeneity of the clinical
features, AIH is characterized biochemically by elevated transaminases, histologically by interface hepatitis, and serologically by
increased levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and autoantibodies, in the absence of viral markers . Based on the autoantibody profile, two
types of AIH are recognized: type 1 (AIH-1), positive for ANA and/or anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA), and occurring at any age, and type 2
(AIH-2), positive for anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibody (anti-LKM) or for anti-liver cytosol type-1 antibody (anti-LC-1), with a peak
incidence in children and adolescents . AIH generally responds to immunosuppressive treatment, but if left untreated usually progresses to
liver failure requiring transplantation . Extra-hepatic disorders, mainly autoimmune conditions, are common in autoimmune hepatitis and
occur in all stages of liver disease, including ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, vasculitis, arthritis, thyroiditis, diabetes mellitus,
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, glomerulonephritis, fibrosing alveolitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, coeliac disease, sicca syndrome,
vitiligo, or lymphoproliferative syndromes [20, 21]. On the other hand, PG is associated with a variety of mainly autoimmune diseases in
50–70 % of cases, with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) topping the list at 10–15 % . However, there is a dearth of data on the association
of PG with AIH, as a search of the English-language literature unearthed only fifteen other cases . Our patient had AIH-1, as the majority
of reported cases when the type of AIH was identified, although AIH-2 may be underestimated . Our patient’s gender, the age at diagnosis of
AIH, and the interval to the subsequent onset of PG concur with those of the other reported cases, as does the development of PG during a
quiescent stage of the AIH. Our patient remained in remission subsequently, even with the use of potentially hepatotoxic agents. Although a
fulminant presentation of AIH has been proposed as a possible risk factor for the subsequent development of PG , our patient’s hepatitis
course was not severe, emphasizing our poor understanding of the pathogenesis of PG in relation to AIH. Finally, pathergy, although rare ,
is a hallmark of PG, and our patient’s first appearance of an ulcer was at a previously “scratched” area, raising the distinct possibility
of such event. In summary, we report a patient with autoimmune hepatitis and pyoderma gangrenosum treated successfully with cortisone,
cyclosporine, and methotrexate. Thorough testing excluded concurrent autoimmune diseases, confirming the association of pyoderma gangrenosum
with autoimmune hepatitis, even when the latter is inactive. Clearly, the diagnosis of PG should raise the possibility of concomitant AIH,
since its diagnosis can be challenging and the results of failure to treat it devastating. On the other hand, AIH should sensitize us to the
possible future development of PG. Overall, our case adds to the pool of knowledge about the presentation and management of PG in
association with AIH. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Pyoderma gangrenosum Inflammatory bowel disease Autoimmune
hepatitis Anti-nuclear antibodies Anti-smooth muscle antibodies Magnetic resonance imaging Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography Anti-
liver kidney microsomal antibodies Anti-liver cytosol type 1 antibodies Immunoglobulin G Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution TA took care of the patient, collected all data and clinical images, and drafted the
manuscript. GH was the hepatologist in charge of the patient and contributed in the drafting of the manuscript. PS provided surgical
expertise about the patient’s ulcers and took the biopsies from the lesions. KA was the pathologist that examined the biopsy and provided
the biopsy pictures. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank our patient for her participation and her consent
to publish these data. We also wish to thank Professor Athanasios Tzioufas, Director of Department of Pathophysiology of Laiko General
Hospital, for his help in the diagnosis and treatment of the patient.
