Here we report a case of a right atrial mass that morphology mimicking myxoma, in a young patient with no past medical history. The mass was
pathologically confirmed to be symptomatic and surgical removal was successfully done. Atrial myxomas are the most common primary heart
tumors. Because of nonspecific symptoms, early diagnosis may be a challenge. The majority of myxomas are located in the left atrium and have
variable clinical presentation. We report a case of a large myxoma in the right atrium, which is an uncommon location for this type of
tumor. A 44-year-old woman was admitted to Habib Thameur Hospital because of progressive dyspnea and asthenia. No past medical history of
cardiovascular risk factors. Clinical examination showed awell-looking woman with a facial pigmentation. No signs of congestion was noticed.
Cardiac auscultation revealed normal heart sounds and a systolic murmurin Tricuspid Valve Area. Trans thoracic echocardiogram exam
demonstrated amobile right atrial mass enclosed in the right ventricle and mesures 7 cm of diameter (Figure 1). There was an important
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Magnetic Resonance Imaging reveals an intracardiac tumor between right atrium and ventricle (Figure 2). The
diagnosis of right atrial myxoma was made and the tumor resection surgery was indicated. Median sternotomy was performed. A dilated right
atrium was opened after cardio pulmonary by pass was initiated. When the right atrial was dissected, it was found a cardiac mass in the
right atrium measuring 7 cm of maximal diameter, appended to the interatrial septum that looks like a typical cardiac myxoma (Figure 3,
Figure 4), which is enclosing and occupying almost the whole right ventricle. The tumor was resected and then the residual septal defect was
repaired with a Dacronpatch. A tricuspid annuloplasty was done because the tricuspid annulus was dilated. After the operation, the patient
was transferred to the intensive care unit and was extubated. Trans thoracic echocardiogram exam reveals regression of pulmonary arterial
hypertension. The postoperative course was uneventful and he was dischargedsix days later. This patient was viewed three months later and
she was totally asymptomatic. Transthoracic echocardiogram: the four chambers and parasternal TM view showing the hyperechoic mass in the
right atrium which was wide based and apeended to the interatrial septum and prolapsing through the tricuspid valve Magnetic resonance
imaging: showing the mass in the right atrium Intraoperative photograph of the tumor projecting from the right atrium and attached to the
interatrial septum Explanted tumor, a lobulated mass Primary cardiac neoplasms are rare and occur with an estimated incidence of0.0017% to
0.19%, representing less than 5% of all heart tumors . Myxoma is the most prevalent primary heart tumor and are the most common benign
tumours of the heart . Cardiac myxomas usually develop in the atria. About 75% of myxomas arise in the left atrium. Right atrial myxomas are
rare as myxomas are estimated to occur in the right atrium in only 15-20% of the cases . Only 3 to 4 percent of myxomas are detected in the
left ventricle, and only 3 to 4 percent in the right . Myxomas occur in all age groups but are particularly frequent between the third and
sixth decades of life . Clinical presentation is varied and may mimic arterial embolism or symptoms of cardiac, infectious, malignant and
immune diseases, therefore making their diagnosis challenging . RA myxomas may remain asymptomatic or eventually cause constitutional signs
and symptoms, including fever, weight loss, arthralgias, Raynaud phenome non, anemia, hyper gamma globulinemia, and anincreased erythrocyte
sedimentation rate due to the production of interleukin-6 . These symptoms disappear after the tumoris removed. In this report, our patient
denied arthralgias, and anemia but complained offacial pigmentation as the only constitutional sign. However, the most common manifestation
is dyspnea (in 80% of patients), and right heart failure has been reported. Dyspnea on exertion wasfound inthis case . Echocardiography,
including the transesophageal approach, is the most important means of diagnosis (sensitivity of up to 100%); CT and MRI may also be
helpful. Resonance imaging and CT provide information regarding tissue characteristics and allow an excellent over view of cardiac and
paracardiac morphology. MRI, in this case, showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette with an expansive ovoid mass in the RA with a density
greater than that in the heart muscle . The treatment is Complete resection of the tumor an dits implantation . The RA should always be
considered in the differential diagnosis of a right-sided heart mass, especially when the patient shows signs and symptoms of heart failure
with uncertain etiology. We thank the colleagues and the personnel of Habib Thameur Hospital at who have been of invaluable assistance. The
authors declare no competing interests. IZ analyzed and interpreted the patient data regarding the cardiac mass and performed the final
review of the manuscript. JZ helped to conduct the review of the literature and made a major contribution to the writing of the manuscript.
MK and JZ prescribed treatment and follow up the patient. DM described the surgical aspects of the procedure. KS analyzed and interpreted
the patient imagining data. JZ translated and reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
