Intraocular tuberculosis is uncommon and has various clinical presentations. Lack of specific clinical clues can make the diagnosis
challenging. The purpose of this study is to report a clinical presentation of tuberculous iridocyclitis that mimics phacolytic glaucoma and
has a distinctive inflammatory deposit in the inner side of the cornea. This report is the first to describe the progression of tuberculous
iridocyclitis to nodular scleritis without evidence for extraocular tuberculous infection. A 78-year-old, immunocompetent woman presented
with subacute intraocular inflammation with high intraocular pressure, mimicking phacolytic glaucoma. Distinct pigment keratic precipitates
were noted on the first visit. Even though the cataract extraction was uneventful and adequate anti-inflammatory drugs were given, the
inflammation did not subside as expected. Seven weeks later, she developed two scleral abscesses, which were subsequently explored for
microbiological investigation. The smears of the pus revealed positive acid-fast bacilli stain and PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis
complex. Eventually, the pus culture grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Anti-tuberculosis medications were prescribed. After 1 month of
treatment, the abscesses were cured. However, her visual acuity did not improve at the last visit. This case revealed an unusual
presentation and untreated course of tuberculosis iridocyclitis. Pattern of keratic precipitates may indicate the presence of tuberculosis.
Most Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection involves the lungs which is known as pulmonary tuberculosis. However, tuberculosis can also occur
in other places of the body. For example, approximately 15–20 % of immunocompetent patients and 50 % of immunocompromised patients can
experience extrapulmonary tuberculosis which can affect the lymphatic system, bone, gastrointestinal system, central nervous system,
genitourinary system, cardiovascular system, and the skin. Another site in which tuberculosis can appear is in the eye but this is rare. The
incidence of ocular tuberculosis varies among series of cases. In endemic areas such as Southeast Asia, many immunocompromised HIV patients
have extrapulmonary tuberculosis . Usually, the ophthalmic involvement of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is secondary from hematogenous
spreading. Primary infection is seldomly reported but can occur at many sites such as the orbit, lacrimal gland, eyelid, conjunctiva,
sclera, iris, choroid, retina, and optic nerve, and have a broad range of clinical manifestations [4, 5]. Tuberculous infection of the eyes
can present with various clinical symptoms and frequently mimic other ophthalmic diseases. Thus, these patients are often misdiagnosed .
Many of the challenges of diagnosing tuberculosis in the eye are encountered such as limited amount of specimen available for testing, lack
of laboratory investigation, poor yield from intraocular specimen, and the absence of uniformity in its diagnostic criteria . Delayed
diagnosis can result in severe visual impairment as well as the loss of the globe. One of the most common ocular clinical manifestations is
the posterior uveitis with choroidal tubercles [5, 6] whereas only 0.6–7.9 % of anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis is caused by tuberculosis
[8, 9]. As a result of this, we report the clinical presentation of tuberculous iridocyclitis that mimics phacolytic glaucoma and have
distinct deposits in the inner side of the cornea known as keratic precipitates (KP). Moreover, we also describe the clinical progression
from uveitis to nodular scleritis in immunocompetent patient which has never been reported elsewhere. A 78-year-old Thai female presented
with a right painful ocular irritation and progressive blurring of the vision for 2 months. At the first visit, best-corrected visual acuity
was hand motion for the right eye and 20/70 for the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 40 mmHg for the right eye and 10 mmHg for the
left eye. On slit lamp examination, her right eye had marked ciliary injection, mild corneal edema with inferior heavily pigmented KP, cells
grade 3+, and flares grade 3+ in the anterior chamber. The pupil was mid-dilated, fixed, and did not react to light. The lens was swollen
and totally opaque (mature cataract) (Fig. 1). The left eye was unremarkable except for senile immature cataract. She was diagnosed with
phacolytic glaucoma of the right eye and underwent extracapsular cataract extraction and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation on the next day
without intra-operative complication. In early post-operative period, the intraocular pressure was well controlled without anti-glaucoma
medication and the visual acuity slightly improved to 20/200. Topical antibiotic and steroid eye drops were prescribed but the inflammation
in the anterior segment of the eye did not subside.Fig. 1Slit lamp examination of the right eye. (picture shown on the left side) Diffuse
illumination showed markedly ciliary injection, corneal edema, and swollen lens. (picture shown on the right side) The sclerotic scatter
technique could detect the inferiorly dispersed pigmented keratic precipitates. Slit lamp examination of the right eye. (picture shown on
the left side) Diffuse illumination showed markedly ciliary injection, corneal edema, and swollen lens. (picture shown on the right side)
The sclerotic scatter technique could detect the inferiorly dispersed pigmented keratic precipitates. Seven weeks later, her right eye
developed 2 yellowish scleral masses at 5 and 11 o’clock (Fig. 2). The inflammation continued to persist (cell and flare grade 3+) and
fundus could not be examined due to vitreous haze grade 3. Ultrasound of the right eye showed minimal retrolental vitreous opacity and the
vitreous echoes showed rapid after movements. The retinal-choroidal thickness was 0.68 mm. Post-operative endophthalmitis was suspected and
the patient was sent for vitreous tapping and intravitreous injection with vancomycin and ceftazidime. The culture for aerobic, anaerobic,
and fungus revealed all negative results. Topical fortified cefazolin and ceftazidime eye drops were given. When topical steroid was
discontinued, this resulted in worsening of the inflammation in the anterior chamber and scleral masses. Because the masses increased in
size and showed obvious abscess formation, exploration and debridement of the scleral abscesses were done. Specimen was sent for Gram stain,
KOH test, aerobic bacteria, anaerobic bacteria, and fungus cultures, all of which were negative.Fig. 2Two yellowish scleral abscesses
(indicated by an arrow). An abscess of 2.5 mm in diameter at 11 o’clock, superior to the wound of the extracapsular cataract extraction
where the sutures have been removed next to the abscess (in the picture shown on the left side). The other abscess of 2 mm in diameter
located at 5 o’clock (in the picture shown on the right side) Two yellowish scleral abscesses (indicated by an arrow). An abscess of 2.5 mm
in diameter at 11 o’clock, superior to the wound of the extracapsular cataract extraction where the sutures have been removed next to the
abscess (in the picture shown on the left side). The other abscess of 2 mm in diameter located at 5 o’clock (in the picture shown on the
right side) One week after scleral exploration, her eye was still severely inflamed with corneal edema, cell grade 4+, flare grade 3+, and
frank fibrin in front of the IOL. The anterior chamber became shallower and resulted in captured IOL. New scleral abscess was noted at 11
o’clock adjacent to the explored area. The clinical signs were getting worse and did not respond to broad-spectrum fortified antibiotic eye
drops. Scleral exploration with abscess debridement was performed for the second time. The authors then became highly suspicious that she
may have atypical pathogens so the specimen was also sent for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and modified AFB stain. The smear showed AFB positive
organisms (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Photomicrograph of the red, short curved, acid fast rod organisms in AFB stain Photomicrograph of the red, short
curved, acid fast rod organisms in AFB stain Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was done on
the scleral abscess, aqueous humor, and vitreous, which were positive in the abscess and aqueous. The tests of the vitreous samplings
yielded negative results. Later, the pus culture with a combination of liquid (Mycobacteria growth indicator tube) and solid media (Ogawa)
grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The patient was referred to an infectious disease specialist to investigate for systemic tuberculosis. She
reported a loss of 10 kg of body weight in the past 3 months. She denied fever, night sweats and chest symptoms. Physical examination
including her left eye was otherwise normal. The hematocrit was 35.3 % (reference range 36–45 % in women). The white blood cell count was
6500 cells/mm3 and the cells were predominantly neutrophils (70 %). The other routine laboratory test results were normal. A chest
radiograph revealed normal finding. Sputum AFB was also negative. Neither the evidence of extraocular tuberculosis nor history of
tuberculosis contact was identified. The patient was then started on systemic anti-tuberculosis medications with isoniazid 250 mg/d,
rifampicin 450 mg/d, ethambutal 1000 mg/d and pyrazinamide 1250 mg/d. Prednisolone acetate eyedrop was prescribed after starting anti-
tuberculosis for a week. A 4-drug anti-tuberculosis regimen was continued for the first 2 months, and for the next 4 months, only isoniazid
and rifampicin were used. Regular follow-ups were performed. After 1 month of treatment, no new abscess was found and the intraocular
inflammation subsided a bit even though her visual acuity was still hand motion. After 2 months of treatment, the inflammation had
completely subsided with no development of new abscess and the IOP was controlled but the vision did not perceive any light so the authors
speculated that this was due to the ischemia of the anterior segment. In our case, at the first visit, she was misdiagnosed as having
phacolytic glaucoma because she had a mature cataract and elevated intraocular pressure. However, the persistent post-operative inflammation
and progressive scleral abscesses made us reconsider the possibility that the origin of the disease may be infectious, especially an
atypical one. Apart from the chronic post-operative endophthalmitis, atypical infectious pathogens such as Nocardia spp. and Mycobacterium
spp. initially were included in our differential diagnosis. Endophthalmitis was later ruled out by negative bacteria and fungus culture
results. Moreover, the location of vitreous haze was localized only in the retrolental area instead of the vitreous chamber and the normal
retinal-choroidal thickness from ultrasonography suggested that the vitreous cells were the reaction to a marked anterior segment
inflammation rather than endophthalmitis, a vitreous infection in origin. Our initial differential diagnosis was Nontuberculous
mycobacterium because a prolonged steroid use and prior ocular surgery were identified as the risk factors for developing this group of
mycobacterium especially the rapid growers . However, when the culture results came back as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, her past clinical
course started to make sense. It should be noted that cataract can frequently develop in the eyes followed by chronic or recurrent uveitis .
Severe intraocular inflammation can raise the intraocular pressure due to either the blockage of the intertrabecular space by inflammatory
cells or edema of the trabecular meshwork which is the main route for aqueous drainage. The prolonged course of inflammation can permanently
damage these meshwork functions. In our case, the patient seemed to have the uveitis for a long period prior to visiting the ophthalmology
clinic. These two clinical manifestations, a consequence of a long-run untreated uveitis as aforementioned, misled us to diagnose the
patient with phacolytic glaucoma because she had a cataract with high intraocular pressure. In general phcolytic cases, after cataract
surgery, the inflammation should rapidly subside in the first month because the lens, which are the cause of the inflammation, have been
removed. Even though the inflammation persisted to 7–8 weeks, it should have been very low grade. However, for this patient, the
inflammation subsided a bit in the first week after the cataract surgery when compared to the pre-operative state, but continued to persist
at a moderate to high grade throughout the next 7 weeks. Thus, we believe that this inflammation was caused by a pre-existing infection
rather than the secondary one. There are a few cases of intraocular tuberculosis presented with anterior uveitis . Presentation usually
includes granuloma of the iris or inflammatory cells at the angle of the anterior chamber previously described as mutton fat KP. Its
characteristics are greasy clumps of inflammatory cells at the posterior cornea . This type of KP indicates that it is a granulomatous
inflammation, which can also be found in toxoplasmosis and sarcoidosis . However, for this patient, the characteristics of the typical
mutton fat KP were absent. Instead, the KPs were heavily pigmented and inferiorly located. The presence of KPs in this patient probably was
an important sign that was overlooked which indicated that the etiology was uveitis rather than phacolytic glaucoma. Therefore, we suggest
that differential diagnosis of tuberculous uveitis must be kept in mind despite of the absence of a typical mutton fat KP, especially when a
prominent pigment is observed. Mycobacterium tuberculosis can also cause scleritis but this is rare . The anterior part of the sclera is
affected more frequently than the posterior. Examination may reveal necrotizing nodular scleritis along with scleral ulceration . Kesen, et
al. reported, in 2009, a case of atypical drug-resistant tuberculous scleritis presented with masses at the anterior sclera. The masses
subsequently progressed to a large area of necrotic sclera. Damodaran, et al. also reported, in 2012, a case with severe intraocular
inflammation and a large mass lesion in the globe detected by ultrasonography. The patient did not respond to anti-inflammatory or
immunosuppressive agents resulting in perforation of the eye. In both cases, the diagnoses of tuberculous scleritis were confirmed afterward
by histopathology of the enucleated eyes. As far as we are aware, this is the first report that demonstrates the progression of untreated
Mycobacterium tuberculosis uveitis to scleral abscesses. The progression can be the course of the disease itself when there is a migration
of an increasing number of organisms into the adjacent structure, from the intraocular to sclera. It is also possible that the scleral
involvement may have been the consequence of a direct inoculation of the organisms during the cataract surgery which could have spread the
mycobacterium-filled aqueous to the sclera. Diagnostic tests for tuberculosis in endemic area are very different compared to non-endemic
areas. For example, the tuberculin skin tests and interferon-gamma release assays may be useful for diagnosing tuberculosis in non-endemic
area, but the use of these tests are limited and cannot differentiate between the latent tuberculous infection and disease in endemic area
such as Thailand [5, 6, 15]. Therefore, in order to diagnose tuberculosis disease in an endemic country, Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture,
the gold standard, is needed to detect ocular tuberculosis even though the sensitivity of the culture is low for the detection of
paucibacillary infection in which case a molecular technique may be helpful bearing in mind the limitation of false-positive results . In
conclusion, this case emphasizes the need to be aware of ocular tuberculosis in an endemic area especially with unusual presentations and
prolonged clinical course of ocular inflammation. A high index of suspicion of tuberculosis would require clinical examination aided by an
appropriate microbiological testing because it can help in early diagnosis and management of the infection. The pattern of KPs may indicate
the presence of tuberculous infection. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Keratic precipitate Intraocular
lens Acid-fast bacilli Polymerase chain reaction Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions UR was significantly involved in the patient’s treatment including operation and follow-up, supplied the clinical data,
contributed important intellectual content and revised the manuscript. SC had a major role in the laboratory investigation, data collection,
drafting, and revision of the manuscript. AM and PL contributed significantly to critically revising the manuscript for important
intellectual content. All authors participated in the review and final approval of the manuscript. We would like to thank Dr. Wimonrat
Prateepasen and Dr. Supawat Trepatchayakorn for their kind helps in providing important clinical data. We also thank Suthidee Petsong, our
faculty’s medical technologist for the information regarding mycobacterium laboratory investigation techniques.
