Angiomyofibroblastoma is a benign, rare mesenchymal tumor arising from the genital tract of both men and women and was first described by
Fletcher and colleagues in 1992. The tumor needs to be distinguished from other, similar lesions, such as deep and superficial aggressive
angiomyxoma and cellular angiofibroma, because aggressive angiomyxoma demands much more extensive treatment. The vast majority of
angiomyofibroblastomas arise from the vulva and appear as solid cystic masses on ultrasound images. We report a case of a 35-year-old
Caucasian woman with an angiomyofibroblastoma arising from the vagina. She presented with a painless mass of about 5cm in diameter that had
a rather homogeneous, hypoechoic appearance on ultrasound images. The patient underwent surgical resection of the mass, which was
subsequently diagnosed as angiomyofibroblastoma. We present sonographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings, intraoperative and
histologic images, and a thorough review of the literature. In our opinion, ultrasonography is the most valuable tool to establish a
preoperative diagnosis of this tumor entity, differentiate it from other lesions of the female genital tract, and plan surgery accordingly.
Even though it is a rare tumor, gynecologists should be able to recognize it and to differentiate it from other tumor entities that demand
more aggressive treatment. We describe a different sonographic appearance of this tumor than previously reported. The online version of this
article (doi:10.1186/s13256-015-0715-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Angiomyofibroblastoma
(AMFB) was first described by Fletcher and colleagues in 1992 as a distinct subgroup of mesenchymal tumors histologically similar to
aggressive angiomyoma (AA) that usually arise from the genital tract in both men and women . The vast majority of cases originate from the
vulva (Fig. 4a). One case of AMFB in the nasal cavity has been described recently . In contrast to AA, which is characterized by local
destructive growth and recurrence after clear margin resection in up to 47% of cases , AMFB has an excellent prognosis. Clinically, the
tumor has well-circumscribed margins, a size of usually about 5cm at the time of diagnosis, and virtually no tendency for local recurrence
after excision. Histologically, these tumors are characterized as being composed of plump, ovoid, or, less often, spindle-shaped cells, with
limited eosinophilic cytoplasm and ovoid nuclei [1, 6]. Characteristically, the stroma contains many capillary-sized blood vessels, around
which the characteristic cells aggregate . Together with cellular angiofibroma (CA) and myofibroblastoma (MFB), AMFB belongs to a group of
benign stromal tumors of the lower female genital tract. These tumors, along with AA, have significant overlap in their morphological and
immunohistochemical characteristics, which can pose serious diagnostic problems . Recent research, however, has shown that a common
cytogenetic aberration present in angiofibroma (AF) and MFB (loss of the 13q14 region) is not shared by AMFB, suggesting that AMFB is not
genetically related to AF and MFB . A 35-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our outpatient clinic for evaluation of a neoplastic
lesion located adjacent to the uterine cervix. She reported not having experienced any pain or discomfort with regard to the lesion and that
she had not noticed any changes in bladder or bowel function. The lesion had come to her gynecologist’s attention during a routine pelvic
examination 1 week earlier. Her history was remarkable for the excision of a melanoma from her right inner thigh about 4 years earlier. Two
inguinal lymph nodes that were excised for sentinel staging at the time were reportedly without metastasis. In her gynecological examination
at our clinic, no inguinal lymph node swelling was noted, and her vulva and proximal vagina appeared normal. The vaginal mucosa on the right
side of the posterior fornix was bulging inward, displacing the uterine cervix laterally to the left. Underlying the mucosa was a palpable,
semimobile mass of about 5cm in diameter that was of plump, elastic consistency. The vaginal mucosa overlying the tumor was smooth but not
mobile relative to the tumor. There were no signs of ulceration or retraction by the tumor. Sonographically, the mass appeared homogeneous
with medium echogenicity, few septations, and smooth edges (Fig. 1), and it had no papillary projections. Color Doppler imaging revealed
several vessels visible within the structure. Subsequently, we took a core biopsy specimen of the tumor while the patient was under general
anesthesia. A pathological examination revealed a mesenchymal tumor, most probably benign owing to the absence of any mitotic figures;
however, it was not possible to classify the tumor any further. We discussed the findings with the patient and recommended surgical excision
of the tumor. Owing to the unusual location of the tumor, we obtained additional magnetic resonance (MR) images of the pelvis (Fig. 2). T1-
and T2-weighted images showed a homogeneously hypointense lesion that led to deviation of the cervix and the rectum. For excision, we
performed a horizontal colpotomy about 1.5cm distant from the cervix, including the biopsy canal. The tumor appeared encapsulated and was
dissected from the surrounding tissue. Gross examination of the tumor showed a 9×6×1.5-cm pinkish gray mass weighing 65g. The tumor was
covered entirely with a frail, well-vascularized membrane (Fig. 3a).Fig. 1 a Transvaginal ultrasound image shows a well-demarcated,
homogeneous mass of medium echogenicity (sagittal view). Intralesional septations can be seen only in Additional file 1. b Color Doppler
imaging reveals intralesional vascularizationFig. 2Coronal (a) and sagittal (b) T2-weighted magnetic resonance images obtained
preoperatively show a homogeneous solid mass (T) displacing the cervix at left (seen best in coronal view)Fig. 3 a and b Intraoperative
appearance of the tumor. The tumor was covered entirely with a frail membrane of pinkish gray appearance. c Cellular mesenchymal lesion with
alternating cellularity intermingled with small blood vessels [hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain, original magnification ×109]. d Higher-
magnification image representing thin-walled blood vessels surrounded by ovoid to spindle-shaped cells with some epithelioid appearance and
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (H&E stain, original magnification ×241). e Immunohistochemical staining for desmin with weak positivity.
f Strong nuclear expression of estrogen receptor. a Transvaginal ultrasound image shows a well-demarcated, homogeneous mass of medium
echogenicity (sagittal view). Intralesional septations can be seen only in Additional file 1. b Color Doppler imaging reveals intralesional
vascularization Coronal (a) and sagittal (b) T2-weighted magnetic resonance images obtained preoperatively show a homogeneous solid mass (T)
displacing the cervix at left (seen best in coronal view) a and b Intraoperative appearance of the tumor. The tumor was covered entirely
with a frail membrane of pinkish gray appearance. c Cellular mesenchymal lesion with alternating cellularity intermingled with small blood
vessels [hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain, original magnification ×109]. d Higher-magnification image representing thin-walled blood
vessels surrounded by ovoid to spindle-shaped cells with some epithelioid appearance and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (H&E stain,
original magnification ×241). e Immunohistochemical staining for desmin with weak positivity. f Strong nuclear expression of estrogen
receptor. Histologically, the highly cellular lesion represented varying cellularity with vascularization by thin-walled blood vessels
surrounded by spindle-shaped epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and positive immunostaining for desmin and estrogen
receptor (Fig. 3c, d). The mesenchymal cells showed a diffusely positive reaction to CD34, and 70% stained positive for desmin. There was no
staining reaction to smooth muscle actin and S100. About 90% of the cells were estrogen receptor–positive. On the basis of these
characteristics, a diagnosis of AMFB was made. At her follow-up examination 17 months postoperatively, the patient was doing well and
without any evidence of recurrent disease or sexual or urinary dysfunction. Including our patient, 137 cases of AMFB have been reported to
date (for a detailed list, see Additional file 2). The median age of all patients at the time of presentation was 45 years (Fig. 4b), the
majority of the patients had been aware of their tumors for about 1 year. No recurrences have been reported after excision, although it has
to be pointed out that the median follow-up of all cases published thus far is only 12 months. (Information about follow-up was available
for only 64% of published case reports; see Additional file 2). Only one case of sarcomatous transformation has been reported; however,
there was no recurrence after resection in that patient . We found the female-to-male ratio to be 10:1. In women, the vast majority of
tumors are located in the vulva (Fig. 4a). Owing to their low frequency, AMFBs and other vaginal soft tissue tumors can easily be confused
clinically or sonographically with other, more common vaginal masses, such as Bartholin’s cyst, rectocele, or urethral diverticulum [6,
9–11]. However, soft tissue tumors can be differentiated from these masses by demonstrating intralesional vascularization using color
Doppler imaging. Once this has been accomplished, echogenicity and demarcation of the tumor can help to further establish the diagnosis.Fig.
4Analysis of all 125 cases of angiomyofibroblastoma in women reported to date (see also Additional file 2). a The number of cases of
angiomyofibroblastoma occurring at each given location out of a total of 125 cases is shown. *N/A denotes that no information regarding the
location was available. **Other locations include inguinal, urethral, fallopian tube, perianal, cul-de-sac, and retroperitoneal. b Histogram
showing the age distribution of 116 patients with angiomyofibroblastoma (including men). For 21 patients, no age information was available
for analysis. AMFB angiomyofibroblastoma Analysis of all 125 cases of angiomyofibroblastoma in women reported to date (see also Additional
file 2). a The number of cases of angiomyofibroblastoma occurring at each given location out of a total of 125 cases is shown. *N/A denotes
that no information regarding the location was available. **Other locations include inguinal, urethral, fallopian tube, perianal, cul-de-
sac, and retroperitoneal. b Histogram showing the age distribution of 116 patients with angiomyofibroblastoma (including men). For 21
patients, no age information was available for analysis. AMFB angiomyofibroblastoma Sonographically, AMFB has been reported to be well
demarcated with inhomogeneous echogenicity and multiple hypoechoic areas within an echogenic stroma . Wang and coworkers assessed 72
perineal tumors, two among which represented AMFB and were characterized as solid cystic masses on the basis of ultrasonography . In
contrast to these descriptions, we found the tumor in our patient to be of homogeneous, medium echogenicity without solid cystic features
(see Additional file 1). Retrospectively, the obtained MR images did not add much information to what was already known based on the
ultrasound studies. To date, the exact pathogenesis of AMFB is not clear. Because many tumors express estrogen and progesterone receptors,
it is likely that these hormones play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of AMFB. Indeed, these tumors almost exclusively occur in women of
reproductive age; two cases of postmenopausal women receiving tamoxifen therapy have been reported [14, 15]. Because many of the
histological and immunohistochemical features of AMFB, AA, and CA overlap, it has been suggested that these richly vascularized myxoid
tumors of the genital tract represent members of the same fibroblastic–myofibroblastic tumor spectrum . Sonography is a widely available,
relatively cheap, extremely valuable tool to characterize and distinguish these tumors preoperatively and to plan surgery accordingly. In
our opinion, MR imaging is not mandatory in the evaluation of soft tissue lesions of the lower genital tract such as AMFB in women.
Postoperative pathological examination of the surgical specimen remains the only way to definitively establish a diagnosis of AMFB. AMFB is
a rare, benign stromal tumor arising most commonly from the female lower reproductive tract, and ultrasonography is the most important
imaging modality in its preoperative diagnosis and management. AMFB appears as a homogeneous, well-defined, vascularized lesion of medium
echogenicity. AMFB needs to be distinguished from aggressive angiomyxoma because the latter demands more extensive treatment. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: Ultrasonographic appearance of AMFB. Collection
of short ultrasound clips showing the characteristics of AMFB. (WMV 11397 kb) Additional file 2: Published case reports of AMFB up to the
time of the writing of this report. (XLSX 21 kb) Ultrasonographic appearance of AMFB. Collection of short ultrasound clips showing the
characteristics of AMFB. (WMV 11397 kb) Published case reports of AMFB up to the time of the writing of this report. (XLSX 21 kb) aggressive
angiomyoma angiofibroma Angiomyofibroblastoma cellular angiofibroma hematoxylin and eosin myofibroblastoma magnetic resonance Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions BW wrote most of the manuscript, researched the
literature, and did the statistical analysis of the previously published cases. LCH performed the histological examination of the tumor and
provided the histological images. RH performed the ultrasound examinations. JE was the principal surgeon who cared for the patient and was
much involved in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the patient for her trust and
cooperation in our publishing this case report.
