Erdheim–Chester disease (ECD) is a rare, multiorgan, non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis of uncertain origin, characterized by systemic
xanthogranulomatous infiltration from CD68+CD1a- histiocytes. Skeletal involvement is present in up to 96% of cases with bilateral
osteosclerosis of meta-diaphysis of long bones. Furthermore, in more than 50% of cases there is 1 extraskeletal manifestation. In this case
report, we describe an interesting case of ECD with an extensive pan-cardiac and vascular involvement, in addition to skeletal, retro-
orbital, and retroperitoneum one. A 44-year-old woman with a long history of exophthalmos referred to our hospital for elective surgical
orbital decompression. At preoperative examinations a large pericardial effusion was discovered. Echocardiography, computed tomography (CT),
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) described an inhomogeneous mass involving pericardium and the right heart, abdominal aorta and its main
branches and the retroperitoneum, suggestive for a systemic inflammatory disorder. Histological examination on a biopsy sample confirmed the
diagnosis of ECD. Radiology showed the pathognomonic long-bone involvement. Surgical orbital decompression was performed and medical therapy
with interferon-α (INF-α) was started. Among extraskeletal manifestations of ECD, cardiovascular involvement is often asymptomatic and thus
under-diagnosed but linked to poor prognosis. This is why clinician should always look for it when a new case of ECD is diagnosed.
Erdheim–Chester Disease (ECD) is a rare, multiorgan, non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Approximately 550 cases have been described
worldwide in the literature, with an increased diagnosis in the last 10 years. The age of incidence is between the 4th and the 7th decade of
life, even if cases have been diagnosed between 7- and 84-year-old patients, with a slight male prevalence.1 Etiology is still unknown even
if evidence of BRAFV600E mutation in ECD histiocytes, observed in more than half of cases, suggests a clonal nature of the disease.2
Furthermore, an association with TH1 lymphocytes activation and proinflammatory interleukins production has been observed. Elevated serum
levels of interferon-α (IFN-α), interleukin (IL)-12, monocyte chemotactic protein-1 have been observed in ECD patients. These
proinflammatory interleukins are probably responsible of local recruitment and activation of histiocytes.3 ECD indeed is characterized by
tissue infiltration by foamy non-Langerhans histiocytes surrounded by fibrosis, which leads to a systemic xanthogranulomatous infiltration.
At immunohistochemical analysis the involved histiocytes are typically CD68+ but CD1a- and S100- with the lack of Birbeck granules, unlike
the Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis (LCH) where histiocytes are typically CD68+ and CD1a+.4 Skeletal involvement is present almost in all
patients with symmetrical and bilateral osteosclerosis of metaphysis and diaphysis of long bones. In more than half of cases there is 1
extraskeletal manifestation. Cardiac involvement is often underdiagnosed and linked to poor prognosis.5 In this case report, we describe an
interesting case of ECD with pan-cardiac and vascular involvement, in addition to skeletal, retro-orbital, and retroperitoneum one. A
44-year-old woman presented to our attention for a 4-year history of worsening bilateral exophthalmos. A biopsy of retro-orbital tissue
performed 2 years earlier showed an inflammatory infiltration with an important fibrotic component; thus she was treated for a long period
with corticosteroid and mycophenolate mofetil unsuccessfully. Therefore, she was referred to our institution for elective surgical
intervention of orbital decompression (Fig. 1). Axial cerebral computed tomography scan image of bilateral retro-orbital tissue causing
exophthalmos. Except for hypothyroidism well treated with replacement therapy, she had no other medical chronic illness. She complained
weakness but denied fever or any other significant symptom. Her past medical history was negative and she had no family history of
cardiovascular, neoplastic, or autoimmune diseases. At preoperative inspection vital signs were normal with blood pressure (BP) 110/60 mm
Hg, heart rate (HR) 97 beats per minute, oxygen saturation (SO2) 97%. Physical examination was also normal, except or exophthalmos and mild
peripheral edema. Blood tests showed slight normochromic–normocytic anemia, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and high serum
creatinine level. A chest radiograph revealed a large cardiac silhouette and bilateral pleural effusion, while the electrocardiogram (EKG)
showed sinus rhythm with low voltage. A transthoracic echocardiography revealed a large pericardial effusion with abnormal right heart
filling and suggested the presence of a round hyperechoic and inhomogeneous mass attached to right atrial wall, extending to involve
interatrial septum, atrioventricular groove, and right ventricle. Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was slightly reduced (Fig. 2). The
patient was subjected to diagnostic and therapeutic pericardiocentesis with drainage of about 1200 mL of serous fluid. Microbiological and
cytological examinations on pericardial fluid resulted negative. Transthoracic echocardiography: parasternal long axis view showing large
pericardial effusion. A contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan postpericardiocentesis showed residual pericardial effusion,
smaller pleural effusion and evidenced a contrast enhancing solid tissue involving right atrioventricular groove, on epicardial side,
surrounding right coronary artery without obstruction and extending to right atrial wall until superior vena cava entry (Fig. 3). Axial
contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan image of the chest showing pericardial effusion (∗) and soft tissue involving right
atrioventricular groove, extending to right ventricular free wall and right atria (arrow). Moreover, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) confirmed the presence of the tissue (39 × 32 mm on axial plane) with focus on the epicardial side of atrioventricular groove
extending caudally and cranially to contact aortic root and interesting right atrial wall and right ventricular free wall. Laterally the
mass extended until visceral pericardium. Considering both the retro-orbital and the cardiac involvement, a systemic disease was
hypothesized. Particularly, the typical cardiac involvement suggested a chronic inflammatory disorder. The patient was therefore subjected
to abdomen and pelvic contrast-enhanced CT scan with evidence of an extensive retroperitoneum tissue rounding abdominal aorta until iliac
bifurcation, renal, celiac and mesenteric arteries, inferior cava vein and portal vein. In addition, the tissue involved liver hilus, both
kidneys and adrenals with severe right hydronephrosis that needed percutaneous nephrostomy (Fig. 4). Axial contrast-enhanced abdominal
computed tomography scan image in a 44-year-old woman, showing bilateral and symmetrical infiltration of the adrenals and renal sinuses with
right hydronephrosis. Note also soft tissue rounding portal vein until liver hilus and intrahepatic branches. Periaortic concentric soft
tissue, also known as “coated aorta,” is visible (arrow). During the hospitalization a surgical intervention of orbital decompression was
performed and a retro-orbital tissue sample was collected. A new histological examination evidenced the presence of fibrosis and an
inflammatory infiltration of foamy histiocytes. Particularly, at immunohistochemical analysis they were CD68 positive and CD1a and S100
negative, as is described in ECD. BRAFV600E mutation was absent. To complete the diagnostic process, a long bone radiography and
scintigraphy showed a pathognomonic bilateral symmetrical osteosclerosis of dia-metaphysis of long bones of upper and lower limb (Fig. 5)
and of mandible. Cranial contrast-enhanced MRI excluded pituitary or cerebral involvement and confirmed the retro-orbital tissue. Femur (A),
tibia and fibulas (B) radiography showing bilateral and symmetrical osteosclerosis of metaphysis and diaphysis. A treatment with
interferon-α (INF-α) in association with corticosteroids and colchicines was started. At follow-up visits a substantial stability of
manifestations and reduction in disease progression was observed. ECD is a rare disease with very heterogeneous manifestations, from an
asymptomatic and limited organ involvement to a massive and life-threatening disease. Because of its systemic presentation, ECD can be
associated with general and unspecific symptoms such as weakness, fever, weight loss, sweats in addition to multiorgan affection. Skeletal
involvement is present in up to 96% of the patients with symmetrical and bilateral osteosclerosis of metaphysis and diaphysis of long bones,
sparing epiphysis, and axial skeleton. Despite these pathognomonic radiological features, only half of the patients complain about bone
pain. Moreover, more than 50% of patients have at least 1 extraskeletal manifestation, such as exophthalmos, xanthelasma, interstitial lung
disease, retroperitoneal fibrosis, renal failure, diabetes insipidus, central nervous system, or cardiovascular involvement.6–8 Radiological
features are often typical but histological examination is required for definitive diagnosis with evidence of CD68+ but CD1a- foamy
histiocytes with fibrosis. CD68 is a specific histiocyte marker and CD1a is a marker for Langerhans cells; this finding distinguishes ECD
from LCH.9 In our case report, we describe a case of multiorgan ECD with an extraordinary pan-cardiac and vascular involvement, involving
the pericardium with large pericardial effusion, myocardium, right atria and ventricle, abdominal aorta and its branches, superior and
inferior vena cava, and portal vein. Interestingly, our patient presented a long history of a misdiagnosed exophthalmos associated with
retro-orbital pseudotumor, in the absence of other relevant constitutional or cardiovascular symptoms. Further radiological examinations
evidenced the pathognomonic skeletal involvement, in the absence of bone pain, and an extensive retroperitoneum tissue. Cardiovascular
involvement in ECD is common but not always clinically evident, often asymptomatic and so underdiagnosed. As described by Haroche et al,
among all patients with cardiovascular involvement, cardiac one is present in about 75% of cases and is strictly linked with poor prognosis.
Death is due to cardiovascular involvement in more than one-third of cases and this is why physician should always look for it when a new
case of ECD is diagnosed.7,10 The most common cardiovascular manifestation in ECD is the presence of soft tissue rounding thoracic and
abdominal aorta and its branches, also known as “coated aorta,” as we have described in our patient.11 With regard to heart involvement, the
most frequent feature is pericardial infiltration that may lead to cardiac tamponade.12,13 Second, myocardial localized or diffuse
infiltration is often observed with frequent pseudotumoral infiltration of right atrium and involvement of the auricoloventricular
sulcus.14,15 Myocardial infiltration, in association with pericardial one, were both present in our patient. Moreover, coronary disease with
myocardial infarction, valvular dysfunction, and heart failure have been described in the literature.16–19 To date, several therapeutic
approaches to ECD have been proposed, but only few prospective therapeutic studies have been done. Actually, the most effective therapeutic
strategy is considered INF-α and Pegylated IFN-a (PEG-IFN-a).20 Although the optimal dosage has not been established yet, generally INF-α is
administered at dosages ranging from 3 to 9 million units 3 times per week while PEG-INF-α is administered at dosages ranging from 135 to
200 μg per week. Also the optimal duration of treatment is not clear but long-term therapy (up to 3 years) has been associated with greater
efficacy in terms of stabilization and improvement of the disease. Moreover, treatment with INF-α has been identified as a predictor of
survival in ECD patients.21,22 Recent advancements in the understanding of the molecular biology of ECD and on the proinflammatory role of
interleukins encouraged the use of cytokine antagonist therapies, which, however, resulted effective in a small number of reported
patients.23 Corticosteroids may be useful, in combined therapy, to reduce edema but they are not effective in reducing disease progression.
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy use has been reported but with no important results, while surgical approach is limited to resectable
masses.1,6 Today, a new treatment with Vemurafenib (an inhibitor of BRAF harboring the V600E mutation) has been proposed with interesting
results, but new prospective trials are needed.24 Abbreviations: BP = blood pressure, CT = computed tomography, ECD = Erdheim–Chester
disease, EF = ejection fraction, EKG = electrocardiogram, HR = heart rate, IL = interleukin, INF-α = interferon-α, LCH = Langerhans cell
histiocytosis, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PEG-IFN-α = pegylated interferon-α, SO2 = oxygen saturation. Informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report. This study was not conducted with research intervention thus ethics committee approval
was not necessary. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
