Disc haemorrhage (DH) is considered a characteristic sign of glaucoma, but its causative mechanism remains to be determined. We present a
case of DH that occurred in association with an enlarged peripapillary intrachoroidal cavitation in a non-glaucomatous eye. A 35-year-old
woman was evaluated for a DH that had been detected during a preoperative examination for myopic refractive surgery. Enhanced depth imaging
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography imaging of the optic nerve revealed a peripapillary intrachoroidal cavitation adjacent to the
DH. The DH was also present at the 1-year follow-up, but had been completely absorbed at the 2-year follow-up, respectively with an
enlargement and shrinkage of the intrachoroidal cavitation and prelaminar tissue schisis. Glaucomatous optic nerve change was not observed
during the entire follow-up. DH can be caused by mechanical damage to capillaries from microscopic changes in peripapillary tissues such as
enlargement of the intrachoroidal cavitation, regardless of the presence of glaucoma. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12886-015-0143-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Disc haemorrhage (DH) is a
characteristic of glaucomatous optic nerve damage, but it is reported to also occur in eyes without glaucoma . The mechanism and clinical
significance of DH in healthy subjects is not fully understood. Here we describe a case of DH in a non-glaucomatous eye that was associated
with an enlarged peripapillary intrachoroidal cavitation (PIC) [6, 7]. This case report adheres to CARE guidelines. A previously healthy
female aged 35 years was referred to our hospital for evaluation of a DH in her right eye that had been detected during a preoperative
examination for myopic refractive surgery. At her first visit, the patient’s best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 OU, the refractive error
was −4.75 diopters OD and −5.75 diopters OS, and the intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg OU. The anterior segment was unremarkable bilaterally,
while a dilated funduscopic examination of the right eye revealed a diffuse flame-shaped haemorrhage at the superotemporal optic disc border
(Fig. 1a, left). Enhanced depth imaging (EDI) spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) volume scanning of the optic disc
revealed an intrachoroidal cavitation in the superotemporal peripapillary area (Fig. 1b–e, left), adjacent to the DH. Localized prelaminar
tissue schisis was observed in connection with the PIC (Fig. 1b–e, left). A funduscopic examination and SD-OCT images of the optic disc did
not reveal any signs of vitreopapillary traction. Stereo disc photography, red-free fundus photography, and an SD-OCT evaluation of the
thickness of the peripapillary retinal nerve fibre layer showed no evidence of glaucomatous optic nerve damage in her right eye.Fig. 1Colour
disc photographs (a), en-face spectral-domain optical coherence tomography images at the level of the peripapillary choroidal cavitation and
prelaminar tissue schisis (b), and B-scan images at the location indicated by the orange dashed lines (c–e) obtained at the first visit
(left) and at the follow-up visits after 1 year (middle) and 2 years (right). a A flame-shaped haemorrhage was observed at the first two
visits (yellow arrows), which was absorbed at the final follow-up. b En-face images showed the enlarged fluid pockets within the prelaminar
tissue at the second visit (middle, black arrows), which again were smaller at the final visit (right, black arrows). c–e Both the
intrachoroidal cavitation (white arrows) and prelaminar tissue schisis (arrowheads) were larger at the second visit (middle) than at the
first visit (left), and then smaller at the final visit Colour disc photographs (a), en-face spectral-domain optical coherence tomography
images at the level of the peripapillary choroidal cavitation and prelaminar tissue schisis (b), and B-scan images at the location indicated
by the orange dashed lines (c–e) obtained at the first visit (left) and at the follow-up visits after 1 year (middle) and 2 years (right). a
A flame-shaped haemorrhage was observed at the first two visits (yellow arrows), which was absorbed at the final follow-up. b En-face images
showed the enlarged fluid pockets within the prelaminar tissue at the second visit (middle, black arrows), which again were smaller at the
final visit (right, black arrows). c–e Both the intrachoroidal cavitation (white arrows) and prelaminar tissue schisis (arrowheads) were
larger at the second visit (middle) than at the first visit (left), and then smaller at the final visit One year later a DH was observed at
the same location, although it was smaller (Fig. 1a, middle). EDI SD-OCT optic disc scanning revealed a slightly enlarged choroidal
cavitation, with an apparently enlarged schisis of the prelaminar tissue (Fig. 1b–e, middle). Two years later the DH was completely absorbed
(Fig. 1a, right), and both the choroidal cavitation and prelaminar tissue schisis were smaller (Fig. 1b–e, right; Additional file 1: Video
S1). There was no change in either the visual acuity or refractive error of the right eye. The intraocular pressure was 11 mmHg OD and the
findings of a glaucoma evaluation were still unremarkable. The pathogenesis of DH remains unclear. The mechanical hypothesis holds that DH
in glaucoma is caused by microvascular disruption from stretching of capillaries due to structural changes in the optic nerve head tissues
[8, 9] or atrophic changes in the retinal nerve fibre layer with glaucoma progression . In our case, the DH was associated with PIC and was
observed in a non-glaucomatous myopic eye. It is unclear whether the DH was caused by the enlarged PIC or prelaminar tissue schisis, or
whether the presence of these two features was coincidental. However, we speculate that the occurrence of DH was associated with the
enlarged PIC and prelaminar tissue schisis, because these features that presented with the DH were smaller after DH absorption. Although the
time required for a DH to be absorbed may vary according to its size, location and cause, it is generally acknowledged that a DH disappears
within several months . Our case exhibited DHs at both visits within a 1-year interval, which means that it is possible that the DH recurred
during that interval, with the DHs evident at the two visits occurring during the course of PIC and prelaminar tissue schisis formation or
enlargement. We hypothesize that the extra fluid within the PIC entered the prelaminar tissue and aggravated the prelaminar schisis so as to
stretch and damage the adjacent peripapillary vessels [12, 13]. On the other hand, it is also possible that the DH in our case was caused by
retinal vessels that were in an abnormal condition. An angiographic examination might have been useful in more clearly ruling out a retinal
vascular pathology for the cause of DH. The pathogenesis and clinical importance of PIC are poorly understood, and the relationship between
PIC and glaucoma is unclear . It is therefore uncertain whether DH associated with PIC indicates an increased susceptibility to glaucomatous
optic nerve damage. Although a longer term follow-up is required, the glaucomatous damage was unremarkable during the 2 years of follow-up
in the present case. DH can appear as a manifestation of peripapillary structural change. The mechanical damage to peripapillary capillaries
associated with PIC enlargement may be one of the causes of DH in eyes without glaucoma. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor
of this journal. Additional file 1: Video S1. Swept-source optical coherence tomography images of the optic nerve head obtained at the
second (upper) and final (lower) visits. The images were obtained using the DRI-OCT1 system (Atlantis, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) in a three-
dimensional raster-scan protocol acquiring 256 × 256 A-scans per data. Note the decreased size of both the intrachoroidal cavitation and
prelaminar tissue schisis at the final visit (lower) compared to the second visit (upper). (MPEG 1667 kb) Video S1. Swept-source optical
coherence tomography images of the optic nerve head obtained at the second (upper) and final (lower) visits. The images were obtained using
the DRI-OCT1 system (Atlantis, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) in a three-dimensional raster-scan protocol acquiring 256 × 256 A-scans per data. Note
the decreased size of both the intrachoroidal cavitation and prelaminar tissue schisis at the final visit (lower) compared to the second
visit (upper). (MPEG 1667 kb) disc hemorrhage enhanced depth imaging peripapillary intrachoroidal cavitation spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography Competing interests Financial Disclosure: The authors have no proprietary or commercial interest in any materials
discussed in this article. Conflict of interest: No conflicting relationships exist for any author. Authors’ contributions Dr. EJL had full
access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Study
concept and design: EJL. Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All authors. Drafting of the manuscript: KML, EJL. Critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors. Statistical analysis: n/a. Administrative, technical, or
material support: EJL. Study supervision: EJL. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
