Previous studies described cases of Ocriplasmin injections in patients with vitreo-macular traction and reduced central visual acuity. We
describe the first case of a patient with 20/20 visual acuity and vitreo-macular traction treated with Ocriplasmin, and, for the first time
in literature, we evaluated the functional changes of the macula in response to pharmacological treatment through multifocal-
electroretinogram. We report the case of a female Caucasian patient aged 67 years with vitreo-macular traction in the right eye, treated
with Ocriplasmin, at the Eye Clinic of the Second University of Naples. Visual acuity was 20/20 before treatment, associated with
metamorphopsia. Two weeks after injection, optical coherence tomography showed the release of vitreo-macular traction and multifocal
electroretinogram responses showed a significant increase of retinal density responses in all six rings (p < 0.03). Visual acuity remained
constant with resolution of symptoms and the appearance of vitreous floaters. Intravitreal injection of Ocriplasmin resulted to be a safe
and effective treatment in the case here reported. Our data show that the anatomical recovery with release of vitreo-macular traction was
associated with a full functional recovery. In fact, the electrical retinal density response of the macular area improved two weeks after
Ocriplasmin injection. Further studies with broader inclusion criteria for Ocriplasmin treatment (e.g. also with visual acuity higher than
20/25) on a larger study sample are needed to confirm our results. The treatment of vitreomacular interface disorders, in particular
vitreomacular adhesion (VMA), vitreomacular traction (VMT), and full-thickness macular hole, has traditionally been limited to either
surgical or observational management. Recently, Ocriplasmin (Jetrea; Thrombogenics), a recombinant truncated form of human serine protease
plasmin with activity against components of the vitreoretinal interface, including fibronectin and laminin, was approved for the treatment
of symptomatic VMA . When injected intravitreally, Ocriplasmin induces vitreous liquefaction and separation of vitreoretinal adhesions at
the macula and peripapillary retina . In pivotal phase 3 clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00781859 and NCT00798317, also
referred as MIVI-TRUST clinical trials), patients with a reduced visual acuity (i.e., 20/25 or worse in the eye to be injected) were
included and only optical coherence tomography and fluorescein angiography were adopted as outcome measurements . Recently, two case series
[3, 4] and two case report [5, 6] of patients treated with intravitreal injection of Ocriplasmin were published. All the patients showed a
reduced visual acuity (i.e., 20/25 or worse in the treated eye) and the treatment effects were evaluated by best corrected visual acuity
measurement and optical coherence tomography and, in some studies, by standard full-field electroretinography. We describe the case of a
67-year-old woman with VMT in the right eye, visual acuity of 20/20 and metamorphopsia, treated with intravitreal Ocriplasmin. This is the
first time that a patient with preserved visual acuity is treated with Ocriplasmin and that morphological and functional changes of the
macula are highlighted using both spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and multifocal electroretinogram (mf-ERG). We
present a clinical case of a 67-year-old-woman with VMT in the right eye. Two years previously, she underwent vitrectomy in the left eye for
macular hole at the Eye Clinic of the Second University of Naples. On examination, the patient referred metamorphopsia in the right eye. A
complete ophthalmic examination was performed, including best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) by Snellen visual chart, slit lamp
biomicroscopy, fundus examination, SD-OCT and mf-ERG before treatment, and at one and two weeks after intravitreal Ocriplasmin injection in
the right eye. BCVA was 20/20 in the right eye. Fundus examination and SD-OCT revealed VMT with distortion of the foveal contour and cystoid
changes within the retina in the right eye. The inner segment-outer segment (ellipsoid) photoreceptor layer was altered for morphology and
reflectivity in the central portion corresponding to the VMT in the right eye (Fig. 1a).Fig. 1Spectral domain OCT scans before treatment
(a), one week after treatment (b) and two weeks after treatment (c). OCT before treatment shows vitreo-macular traction with distortion of
the foveal contour and cystoid changes within the retina (a); OCT shows changes of retina with persistence of vitreo-macular traction one
week after treatment (b); OCT shows release of vitreo-macular with a small cystic alteration two weeks after treatment (c) Spectral domain
OCT scans before treatment (a), one week after treatment (b) and two weeks after treatment (c). OCT before treatment shows vitreo-macular
traction with distortion of the foveal contour and cystoid changes within the retina (a); OCT shows changes of retina with persistence of
vitreo-macular traction one week after treatment (b); OCT shows release of vitreo-macular with a small cystic alteration two weeks after
treatment (c) One week after intravitreal injection of Ocriplasmin (0.125 mg/0.1 mL) in the right eye, BCVA was stable to 20/20 in the
injected eye. SD-OCT demonstrated changes of retina with persistence of VMT and alteration of the ellipsoid layer (Fig. 1b) while mf-ERG
revealed an increased foveal peak density response in the treated eye (Fig. 2a, b).Fig. 2Multifocal electroretinogram responses before (a),
one week after treatment (b) and two weeks after treatment (c). Multifocal electroretinogram shows a significant increase of the foveal peak
density response of the treated eye one week and two weeks after pharmacological treatment Multifocal electroretinogram responses before
(a), one week after treatment (b) and two weeks after treatment (c). Multifocal electroretinogram shows a significant increase of the foveal
peak density response of the treated eye one week and two weeks after pharmacological treatment Two weeks after treatment, we observed VMT
release, stable visual acuity and a preserved foveal profile showing a small cystic alteration and a continuous ellipsoid layer in right eye
(Fig. 1c); mf-ERG revealed a further increase in foveal peak density response in the treated eye (Fig. 2). Visual acuity remained stable in
the treated eye. The patient had no metamorphopsia while vitreous floaters were observed in the right eye. Furthermore, we observed an
increase of P1 wave amplitude (Fig. 3a) in all six rings of mf-ERG responses compared to the pre-treatment examination in the treated eye.
We also noticed a reduction between pre- and post-treatment timepoints, shifting towards normal ranges, in the treated eye (Fig. 3b). The
longitudinal analysis (linear regression model fitted to log-transformed data, with ring as covariate) showed a significant increase of P1
wave at an estimated exponential rate of 4.2 % per week (p < 0.001) and a significant reduction of the latency at an estimated exponential
rate of 0.4 % per week (p = 0.009).Fig. 3Amplitude (a) and latency (b) of P1 wave amplitudes in the six rings of multifocal
electroretinogram before and after treatment. Multifocal electroretinogram shows a significant increase of P1 wave amplitude and a
significant reduction of latency in all six rings two weeks after intravitreal Ocriplasmin Amplitude (a) and latency (b) of P1 wave
amplitudes in the six rings of multifocal electroretinogram before and after treatment. Multifocal electroretinogram shows a significant
increase of P1 wave amplitude and a significant reduction of latency in all six rings two weeks after intravitreal Ocriplasmin Our study
analyzes the first case of Ocriplasmin treatment in a patient with VMT and 20/20 visual acuity. Our patient satisfied all inclusion and
exclusion criteria of MIVI-TRUST clinical trials , with the only exception of preserved visual acuity in the treated eye (i.e. BCVA of
20/20). The patient complained of metamorphopsia before Ocriplasmin injection. After pharmacological treatment her visual acuity remained
stable with the appearance of vitreous floaters. Recent case reports [5, 6] have described a transient decrease of visual acuity in treated
eyes. One case report described a 71-year-old woman with symptomatic VMT who experienced persistent darkening of vision for four months
after receiving intravitreal Ocriplasmin. The symptoms of darkened vision corresponded to the disruption of the inner segment-outer segment
(ellipsoid) photoreceptor layer and reduced a- and b-wave full-field ERG amplitudes. However, this worsening in visual function persisted in
spite of the immediate release of VMT. The other study reported a case of persistent visual loss associated with acute severe panretinal
dysfunction after Ocriplasmin injection for a small macular hole with VMA. This was associated with Goldmann visual field constriction,
anisocoria, attenuated retinal vessels, disruption of outer retinal signals on SD-OCT, and severely reduced full-field ERG responses. Our
patient maintains a visual acuity of 20/20 but refers vitreous floaters after treatment. The release of VMT is documented through OCT. The
morphological analysis showed an alteration of the ellipsoid layer only in the portion below the VMT with resolution following its release.
Above all, our work shows that the anatomical result coincides with the functional improvement recorded by mf-ERG. The density response
analysis demonstrated a significant increase in the foveal peak of the treated eye after injection compared to baseline testing. Moreover,
mf-ERG responses showed a significant increase of P1 wave amplitude and a reduction of latency in all six rings compared to baseline values.
mf-ERG reflects the electrophysiological response of cones, but also those of the inner retinal layers . VMT release induced by Ocriplasmin
injection probably leads to the restoration of the nerve fiber layer, the ganglion cell layer and the foveal Muller cells. In the case
report by Tibbetts et al. , mf-ERG was performed but the results obtained were not discussed. In particular we highlight that the release of
VMT leads not only to the recovery of macular morphology but also to the restoration of macular function. Intravitreal injection of
Ocriplasmin was a safe and effective treatment in our case, characterized by a preserved visual acuity. Our data show that the anatomical
recovery with release of VMT is associated with a full functional recovery, without visual acuity loss. In fact, the electrical retinal
density response of the macular area improved two weeks after Ocriplasmin injection. Appropriate attention to details is important in
patient selection as such selection of suitable candidates could determine good outcomes following treatment with Ocriplasmin. Since the
present study reports only one case, further studies on an adequate sample are needed in order to approve broader selection criteria
including subjects with higher visual acuity. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Competing interests The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions SR conceived the study and contributed to the surgical
procedure; AO performed the clinical examinations, interpreted the data and drafted the manuscript; PM performed the statistical analysis
and contributed to data interpretation; FT contributed to data interpretation; FS participated in study design and coordination; MDC
performed the surgical procedure. All authors read and approved the final manuscript The authors thanks Dr Carmela Acerra for text editing.
