The disorders of large granular lymphocytes include reactive proliferation as well as indolent or aggressive neoplasms of cytotoxic T cells,
γδ T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells. They are associated with autoimmune and infectious disorders and have varied immunophenotypic
features. We report a case, which highlights this complex association of autoimmune and infectious diseases with large granular
lymphocytosis, the overlapping spectrum of large granular lymphocyte leukemias, and γδ T cell lymphomas as well as the difficulties in the
diagnosis and management of these indolent T cell lymphomas in the usual clinical settings. Large granular lymphocytes (LGLs) are a distinct
subpopulation of lymphocytes, which constitute 10-15% of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (0.1-0.3 × 109 /l) and are derived from
cytotoxic T cells, γδ T cells, or natural killer (NK) cells. The disorders of LGLs include reactive proliferation, indolent neoplasms such
as T-cell LGL (T-LGL) leukemia, and a chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of NK cells as well as their aggressive variants. They are
associated with various autoimmune and infectious disorders. These disorders, especially the indolent ones being uncommon and having
overlapping features with reactive proliferations, lead to diagnostic dilemmas in routine clinical practice. Here, we report such a case of
complex association of large granular lymphocytosis with pure red cell aplasia (PRCA), celiac disease (CD), and chronic hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection. A 46-year-old male presented with severe transfusion dependent anemia. He was diagnosed with CD and was asymptomatic on a
gluten-free diet. One year back, he had an episode of fever and anemia during which he was found to have chronic HBV infection for which he
was treated with entecavir 0.5 mg daily. During the present admission, he had no significant physical examination findings except for severe
pallor and mild hepatomegaly. He was managed with blood transfusions and hematinics and evaluated for the cause of anemia. The investigation
results are summarized in Table 1. There was anemia with reticulocytopenia. Peripheral blood (PB) smear showed absolute lymphocytosis
(6993/μl) with >90% of them being LGLs [Figure 1a]. Bone marrow examination (BME) revealed normocellular bone marrow (BM) with erythroid
hypoplasia, the myeloid to erythroid ratio being 40:1 and without any dyserythropoiesis or any viral cytopathic change. BM trephine biopsy
showed multiple reactive lymphoid nodules composed of both B cells and T cells, as revealed by immunohistochemistry [Figure 1b–f]. A
multiparameter flow cytometric immunophenotyping (MFCI) performed from the PB using a limited panel of antibodies showed an excess of
CD8+CD16+ T cells. Serological tests for immunoglobulin M (IgM) Parvovirus antibodies were negative. Considering the possibility of PRCA,
the patient was treated with prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day, along with entecavir. The subsequent clinical course is summarized in Figure 2. A
repeat BME, 16 months after the initial BME showed PRCA, increased stainable iron (Perls stain), and multiple reactive lymphoid nodules.
MFCI of PB lymphocytes [Figure 3] showed that 92% of them were T cells. There was an increase in γδ T cells (CD2+ CD5- CD7+ CD4- CD8variable
CD16+ CD56- CD57variable), which constituted approximately 48% of T cells. The last follow-up (20 months after initial BME) revealed the
persistence of large granular lymphocytosis and refractory anemia being supported with blood transfusions and iron chelation. The patient
was asymptomatic of CD and HBV infection. Summary of investigations during initial workup of anemia Peripheral blood smear shows large
granular lymphocyte (a) [100x, May-Grünwald-Giemsa (MGG) stain]; Bone marrow aspirate shows erythroblastopenia and large granular
lymphocytes (b) (100x, MGG stain); trephine biopsy shows reactive lymphoid nodules (c) (20x, H&E stain) composed of CD20+ cells (d) (20x)
and CD3+ cells (e) (20x); CD8+ cells in the interstitium (f) (20x) Clinical course of the patient. (MMF - mycophenolate mofetil; CsA -
cyclosporine) Flow cytometry performed on peripheral blood. CD3+ cells (92% of lymphocytes) were gated. 48% of T cells were γδ TCR+ (3a),
which were CD2+CD7+ (not shown), CD8+ (variable) (3a), CD5− (3b), CD4− (3c), CD57+(variable), CD56− (3d), and CD16+ (not shown) The
association of PRCA with large granular lymphocytosis is reported in the literature, which could be either nonclonal as in idiopathic PRCA
or clonal as in LGL leukemias. There are isolated cases of PRCA associated with CD and HBV infection. Expansion of LGLs can be transient or
chronic reactive proliferation, neoplastic, or borderline between reactive and leukemic disorders. Reactive causes include various
autoimmune disorders, splenectomy, post allogenic stem cell or solid organ transplantation, HIV and other viral infections. LGL leukemias
are indolent disorders with a survival of more than 10 years in usual settings and characterized by persistent (>6 months), large granular
lymphocytosis in PB, usually of 2-20 × 109 /L without a clearly identifiable cause. They are often associated with infections, various
hematologic manifestations such as PRCA, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia as well as various autoimmune disorders and autoantibodies. BM
shows subtle interstitial infiltrate with intravascular or linear pattern highlighted by immunohistochemistry and often associated with
reactive nodular aggregates of B and T cells. Normal LGLs are either CD3+ CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (T LGL) or CD3- NK cells. Normal T LGLs are
CD3+ CD2+ CD4- CD5+ CD7+ CD8+αβTCR+γδTCR- while LGL leukemias show abnormal immunophenotype such as abnormal expression of CD2, CD5, and CD7
and coexpression of CD16, CD56, and CD57. Most of the LGL leukemias show CD3+ CD8+ CD4-αβTCR+ phenotype. Other phenotypes include CD3+ CD8-
CD4+αβTCR+, CD3+ CD8+ CD4-γδTCR+, and CD3+ CD8- CD4-γδTCR+ with CD16 and CD57 expression in a variable number of cases. Our patient had CD
and chronic HBV in the background, and had smooth muscle antibodies (SMAs). There have been previous reports of LGL leukemia associated with
CD and HBV; there has also been an occasional report of reactive expansion of LGLs in HBV infection. In our patient, autoimmune features
could be a manifestation of LGL leukemia or the expansion of LGLs might be secondary to CD or HBV or both. The differentiation of the clonal
process from reactive proliferation requires analysis of T cell receptor (TCR) rearrangement by flow cytometry or Southern blot analysis or
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). More commonly used PCR has a sensitivity of only 70-80%. Our patient showed a persistent LGL (>2000/μl) for
nearly 2 years and had an abnormal immunophenotype of CD2+ CD4- CD5- CD7+ CD8variable CD16+ CD56- CD57variable γδ TCR+. The BM involvement
was similar to that described in the literature [Figure 1] and was refractory to various modalities of treatment, all of which favor, though
does not prove an indolent leukemic process over a reactive condition. Compared to αβ T cell LGL leukemia, γδ type is rare with up to 50% of
them showing CD3+ CD8+ CD4− CD16+ CD57+ phenotype, slightly more common than CD4- CD8- phenotype. Both subtypes have a similar clinical
behavior. Both αβTCR+ and γδTCR+ LGL leukemias are included under LGL leukemia in the World Health Organization (WHO) 2008 classification
but γδ TCR+ LGL leukemias are a distinct class of γδ T cell lymphomas with indolent clinical course in contrast to most other γδ T cell
lymphomas. Various treatment options that are useful for LGL leukemias include steroids, low dose methotrexate, cycyclophosphamide, purine
analogs, alemtuzumab (anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody), and stem cell transplantation. In our case, large granular lymphocytosis probably
would have contributed significantly to the development of PRCA. However, the role of HBV and CD in the expansion of LGLs and the subsequent
development of PRCA are debatable. The clonality studies could not be performed in our case but it has to be highlighted that the
demonstration of clonality may not always support a malignant process as oligoclonal and sometimes clonal expansions can be seen in various
benign conditions including viral infections. The management of PRCA remains complicated by association with multiple diseases, especially
HBV infection. Our case highlights the uncommon and complex association of multiple immunologically related diseases and large granular
lymphocytosis; the overlapping spectrum of indolent LGL and γδ T cell proliferations, and the difficulties in the diagnosis of indolent T
cell lymphomas in the usual clinical settings as reflected in few case reports and a lack of any large series in the Indian literature. Nil.
Authors declare that they have no conflict of interests.
