The malignant form of atrophic papulosis (Köhlmeier-Degos disease) is a rare thrombo-occlusive vasculopathy that can affect multiple organ
systems. Patients typically present with distinctive skin lesions reflective of vascular drop out. The small bowel is the most common
internal organ involved, resulting in considerable morbidity and mortality attributable to ischemic microperforations. Determination of the
presence of gastrointestinal lesions is critical in distinguishing systemic from the benign, cutaneous only disease and in identifying
candidates for treatment. We describe an 18 year old male who first presented with cutaneous atrophic papulosis but became critically ill
from small bowel microperforations. He had an almost immediate and dramatic response to treatment. Prior to his presentation with acute
abdomen he had upper and lower endoscopy showing areas of nonspecific patchy erythema. At laparotomy, innumerable characteristic lesions
with central pearly hue and erythematous border were seen. PubMed was used for a literature search using the keywords malignant atrophic
papulosis, Degos disease, endoscopy, laparoscopy and laparotomy. This search yielded 200 articles which were further analyzed for diagnostic
procedures and findings. Among the 200 articles we identified only 11 cases in which endoscopy was performed. Results of endoscopy and
laparotomy in our patient with malignant atrophic papulosis were compared to those in the literature. Endoscopy of the gastrointestinal
tract has shown gastritis and non-specific inflammation whereas laparoscopy shows white plaques with red borders on the serosal surface of
the small bowel and the peritoneum. From personal communications with other physicians worldwide, we identified three additional unpublished
cases in which endoscopy revealed only minimal changes while laparoscopy showed dramatic lesions. From our experience the endoscopic
findings are often subtle and nonspecific, whereas laparascopy or laparotomy will reveal pathognomic lesions on the serosal surface of the
intestine. Our report contrasts the endoscopic and laparoscopic findings in malignant atrophic papulosis which suggest laparoscopy is the
more powerful means of detecting gastrointestinal involvement. Imaging studies may serve as a key indicator of systemic progression. Based
on our experience, laparoscopy should be performed when there is a high index of suspicion for gastrointestinal malignant atrophic
papulosis, even if endoscopic examination is non-diagnostic or normal. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12876-015-0387-y)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Atrophic papulosis (Köhlmeier-Degos disease) is a rare thrombo-
occlusive vasculopathy that can affect multiple organ systems. Patients primarily present with distinctive skin lesions reflective of
vascular drop out. The small bowel is the most common internal organ involved, resulting in considerable morbidity and mortality
attributable to ischemic microperforations . Skin lesions associated with atrophic papulosis appear as avascular, slightly depressed
porcelain-like lesions with a telangiectatic rim . The more common cutaneous manifestations of a primary vasculopathy, ulceration, livedo
and palpable purpura, are not seen. Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement develops approximately 60 % of the time, usually one to three years
after the skin lesions first appear . The skin and GI lesions show striking similarities on gross examination even though the caliber of the
affected vessels is different. In the skin, the targeted vessels are capillaries and venules of the dermis, whereas in the gastrointestinal
tract subserosal arteries and arterioles are the primary target. While both vascular lesions result in a similar depressed porcelain scar,
the nature of the vasculopathy histologically is different. In the skin the primary vascular pattern is a thrombogenic microangiopathy while
in the gut, an obliterative mucinous fibrointimal arteriopathy is seen [4, 5]. Until recently, reported cases of systemic disease have been
descriptions of an inexorable path to a fatal outcome . Reports of prominent C5b-9 deposits in skin and gastrointestinal tissue of patients
with the malignant form of atrophic papulosis (MAP) have led to the use of eculizumab, an inhibitor of C5 activation, with prolonged
survival in some cases . Additionally, a recent report suggests the efficacy of treprostinil as adjunctive therapy in patients with MAP .
New hypotheses to the pathogenesis of MAP suggests two forms of vasculopathy which are mechanistically distinctive and have helped identify
new treatment options. One aspect is a thrombotic microangiopathy attributable to endothelial cell injury. Prior studies have shown
extensive vascular deposits of C5b-9 as the basis of injury analogous to other catastrophic C5b-9 mediated microvascular injury syndromes
such as atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome . Eculizumab has an almost immediate effect, preventing further formation and deposition of the
membrane attack complex, thereby decreasing C5b-9 stimulated apoptosis. It also immediately inhibits formation of the anphylatoxin C5a .
This particular microangiopathy is also associated with a type I interferon rich microenvironment as revealed by extensive vascular
deposition of myxovirus protein, a surrogate marker of type I interferons [6, 7]. Deficiency of endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) is one
hypothesis in the pathogenesis of MAP. EPC exposed to interferon-alpha induce the up-regulation of IL-18 and caspase-1. IL-18 inhibits
vascular repair while caspase-1 contributes to EPC dysfunction. In essence there is an imbalance between vascular damage and vascular
repair. Eculizumab has no effect on the interferon-mediated injury. Recent data suggest treprostinil, a prostacyclin analog that facilitates
healing of ischemic tissue and inhibits platelet aggregation, could ameliorate symptoms and signs of MAP by virtue of its effect on
enhancing EPC repair [1, 2, 8]. Because of this, treprostinil has been employed as adjunctive therapy in patients with MAP . Determination
of the presence of gastrointestinal lesions is critical. Untreated, individuals with such lesions will have progressive disease culminating
in repeated bowel perforations and death. At present, there is no consensus on the best means of detecting gastrointestinal lesions in
patients with cutaneous atrophic papulosis. We describe an 18 year old male who presented with cutaneous atrophic papulosis but became
critically ill from small bowel microperforations. We also describe his sister, who developed similar skin lesions compatible with a
familial variant. PubMed was used for a literature search using the keywords malignant atrophic papulosis, Degos disease, endoscopy,
laparoscopy and laparotomy. The search yielded 200 articles which were further analyzed for diagnostic procedures and findings. Also
personal communications with other physicians caring for individuals with systemic MAP led to evaluation and comparison of gastrointestinal
imaging modalities. Patient One is an 18 year old male who presented with cutaneous disease, had rapidly proliferating skin lesions over a
course of a year, and then survived small bowel microperforations from MAP (Fig. 1). Two months prior to his presentation with acute
abdomen, lower endoscopy showed patchy erythematous mucosa with central clearing at the sigmoid, rectosigmoid colon and splenic flexure
(Fig. 2). Upper endoscopy demonstrated mild acute gastritis. At laparotomy, innumerable typical lesions of 0.3-0.5 cm papules with central
pearly hue and erythematous border were seen (Fig. 3). The patient had a very rapid and dramatic response to therapy with eculizumab . Later
on the patient required a second agent, treprostinil, for maintenance and suppression of other systemic manifestations. Five years have
passed and he has been doing well on double therapy of eculizumab and treprostinil.Fig. 1Patient one’s rapidly proliferating skin
lesionsFig. 2Patient one, lower endoscopy showed patchy erythematous mucosa with central clearing at the sigmoid, rectosigmoid colon and
splenic flexureFig. 3Patient one, at laparotomy, innumerable typical lesions of 0.3–0.5 cm papules with central pearly hue and erythematous
border were seen Patient one’s rapidly proliferating skin lesions Patient one, lower endoscopy showed patchy erythematous mucosa with
central clearing at the sigmoid, rectosigmoid colon and splenic flexure Patient one, at laparotomy, innumerable typical lesions of
0.3–0.5 cm papules with central pearly hue and erythematous border were seen Patient Two is the sister of Patient One. She slowly developed
a small number of cutaneous lesions that were biopsied and were consistent with atrophic papulosis. She had minor gastrointestinal
discomfort. For this reason and due to her brother's history a laparoscopy was performed with normal findings. Her abdominal discomfort
spontaneously resolved. Given the lack of GI findings and the highly limited nature of the cutaneous presentation she is less likely to
progress to systemic MAP. A 44 year old female with cutaneous lesions of atrophic papulosis developed sudden monocular vision loss and
severe eye pain requiring enucleation with pathologic findings of microvascular changes in the orbit consistent with MAP. Colonoscopy in
April 2012 showed normal findings but exploratory laparoscopy in October 2012 revealed innumerable MAP lesions (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Patient A,
colonoscopy was normal but exploratory laparoscopy revealed innumerable MAP lesions Patient A, colonoscopy was normal but exploratory
laparoscopy revealed innumerable MAP lesions A 36 year old male with MAP overlapping with dermatomyositis had a colonoscopy showing only
nonspecific ischemic colitis and a CT scan demonstrated colitis and enteritis but then developed microperforations with lesions typical of
MAP noted at time of surgery . A patient in Malaysia had nonspecific endoscopy and normal colonoscopy but striking laparoscopic changes. A
previously reported 43 year old male patient had a normal CT scan and repetitive endoscopic biopsies and a colonoscopy that were
unremarkable but after development of acute abdomen, a resected portion of bowel showed extensive subserosal fibrobliterative arteriopathic
and thrombotic microvascular disease diagnostic of MAP (Figs. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9).Fig. 5This low power view shows a relatively normal appearing
colonic mucosa however the subserosa appears very edematousFig. 6Higher power magnification demonstrates a normal appearing colonic mucosa
despite severe inflammatory and vascular pathology involving the serosal surface and subserosaFig. 7Within the subserosa and to a lesser
extent the submucosa, an arteriopathy exhibiting varying stages of inflammation and fibro-obliterative healing is identified. In this
photomicrograph, the endothelium appears activated and is detached from the intima compatible with primary endothelial cell injury. As part
of the acute response, there is an endoluminal influx of inflammatory cells especially macrophages. Note the red cell engulgment, a finding
indicative of macrophage activationFig. 8In this subserosal vessel, there is still the residuum of an inflammatory endothelialitis however
there is progressive intimal fibrosisFig. 9In this subserosal vessel the vascular lumen is now occluded by collagen defining the end stage
fibrous obliterative lesion of Degos disease. The subsequent ischemia leads to compromise of the bowel, eventuating in transmural
infarction. The latter reflects the upstream effects of the subserosal larger vessel arteriopathy to the microcirculation of the remainder
of the bowel This low power view shows a relatively normal appearing colonic mucosa however the subserosa appears very edematous Higher
power magnification demonstrates a normal appearing colonic mucosa despite severe inflammatory and vascular pathology involving the serosal
surface and subserosa Within the subserosa and to a lesser extent the submucosa, an arteriopathy exhibiting varying stages of inflammation
and fibro-obliterative healing is identified. In this photomicrograph, the endothelium appears activated and is detached from the intima
compatible with primary endothelial cell injury. As part of the acute response, there is an endoluminal influx of inflammatory cells
especially macrophages. Note the red cell engulgment, a finding indicative of macrophage activation In this subserosal vessel, there is
still the residuum of an inflammatory endothelialitis however there is progressive intimal fibrosis In this subserosal vessel the vascular
lumen is now occluded by collagen defining the end stage fibrous obliterative lesion of Degos disease. The subsequent ischemia leads to
compromise of the bowel, eventuating in transmural infarction. The latter reflects the upstream effects of the subserosal larger vessel
arteriopathy to the microcirculation of the remainder of the bowel This previously reported patient was 36 years old male with
dermatomyositis who presented with classic skin lesions of atrophic papulosis. He then developed severe gastrointestinal symptoms. While
endoscopy and CT scan were unremarkable, laparoscopy revealed classic lesions of MAP. The patient died of sepsis . Among the 200 cases that
were reviewed we found 11 in which endoscopy was performed. Results of endoscopy and laparotomy in our patients with MAP were analyzed and
compared to those in the literature. Based on the published cases, 9 out of the 11 endoscopies performed had non-specific endoscopic changes
either prior to or near-simultaneous to catastrophic bowel perforation [9, 10, 13]. Laparotomy findings are striking and predictably present
in those with acute abdomen. In the cases found in the literature and in our Patient One, endoscopic evaluation revealed pearly-rose patches
with a surrounding hyperemic rim in the mucosa which may be interpreted as general inflammation. Findings are most commonly seen in the
small bowel, especially jejunum, but can involve any part of the gastrointestinal lumen. More pathognomic findings are found at laparoscopy,
and are characterized by multiple white plaques with red borders involving the serosal surface of the small bowel and the peritoneum [14,
15]. Laparoscopic lesions are similar to the skin lesions seen in patients with MAP . The gross serosal porcelain plaques in concert with
the normal endoscopic findings are well exemplified by the pathology of resection specimens in patients with MAP. In particular in patients
with an acute abdomen necessitating bowel resection, the cardinal hallmarks are an intact mucosa with mild inflammation or no inflammation
in concert with striking obliterative arteriopathic changes most conspicuous in subserosal vessels but also showing variable involvement
within the submucosal. Concomitant subserosal inflammation and edema may be seen. The end sequelae is an ischemic one characterized by a
severe necrotizing serositis. Historically, death in patients with MAP has most commonly resulted from gastrointestinal microperforations
and subsequent sepsis. Our experience successfully treating Patient One led us to investigate means of early detection of gastrointestinal
involvement. Early intervention with effective therapy could prevent progression to bowel perforation. At present, available therapies are
most often initiated as an act of desperation in patients who are already critically ill with advanced multiorgan failure. Extensive and
rapidly progressive skin lesions are more likely to be associated with the early development of systemic disease. We believe any such
individual, even if asymptomatic, and any individual with cutaneous atrophic papulosis and unexplained abdominal pain should undergo
laparoscopy as the best means of detecting gastrointestinal involvement. Due to the rarity of MAP, diagnostic guidelines were only recently
presented , while therapeutic ones do not exist. When patients present with acute abdomen, findings at laparotomy or laparoscopy are always
striking. Previously published cases of MAP have reported time to death after detection of systemic disease to be one to two years [3, 16].
Patient One, however, is currently a 5 year survivor of severe systemic MAP. With the evolution of therapies that have altered the
previously grim prognosis, pursuing early detection of systemic disease is essential in more consistently improving disease outcome.
Endoscopic evaluation has been suggested for all patients with classic skin lesions of atrophic papulosis with specific or nonspecific
symptomatology on the central or peripheral nervous system, gastrointestinal tract or any other organ system . Unfortunately since the
jejunum is the most commonly involved section of the gastrointestinal tract and because the vascular lesion is primarily subserosal and not
mucosal , endoscopic evaluation can and has given false negative results. Capsule endoscopy can be added to the workup to provide additional
imaging of the jejunum but, again, the view is mucosal and the pathology is subserosal. Our experience suggests laparoscopy is a more
sensitive diagnostic tool that should be implemented on higher risk patients . High risk patients include those whose skin lesions are
proliferating rapidly and any with unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms [3, 17–19]. CT scanning of the abdomen is also an insensitive
method of detection of enteric involvement of MAP . Laparoscopy may uncover systemic involvement in an otherwise asymptomatic patient with
only cutaneous lesions . MAP like many autoinflammatory conditions is a targeted organ and site specific disease exhibiting a peculiar and
distinctive predilection to involve select small arteries and arterioles of the subserosa with relative sparing of the microvasculature of
the lamina propria. After 5 years of close observation of Patient One we believe we have identified strategies for early detection with
laparoscopy as a potential lifesaving tool. GI involvement with symptoms such as dyspepsia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and others
should be further investigated in MAP patients. While the gastrointestinal tract can be examined by endoscopy, to look for white, yellowish,
or pearly-rose patches with a hyperemic rim the changes may be subtle and can be easily missed using this method [13, 18]. Laparoscopy can
more effectively identify the diagnostic lesions of gastrointestinal MAP [13, 14]. Laparoscopic identification of white spots with hyperemic
borders on the serosal surface of the bowel and the peritoneum are diagnostic of MAP and do not require a biopsy. Their identification
should warrant immediate treatment [1, 2, 9, 13]. From our literature search we do not recommend serosal biopsy of the lesions since it can
lead to seromuscular breach [4, 22]. These findings can help patients obtain faster and easier access to treatments as they emerge. Since
clear diagnostic and treatment guidelines for MAP do not exist and untreated systemic MAP has a fatal prognosis, there is need to identify
patients at risk for GI microperforations, sepsis, and death. Our experience and the other cases we report such that visualization of the
serosa of the bowel and peritoneum by laparoscopy is superior to endoscopic evaluation. Prospective studies are necessary to clarify the
role of both endoscopy and laparoscopy in the detection of systemic disease in patients with cutaneous atrophic papulosis and to establish
the frequency with which such studies should be repeated in those in whom the findings are negative. Written informed consent was obtained
from all patients (and guardians) for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. Additional file 1: CARE Checklist (2013) of information to include when writing a case
report. (DOCX 1483 kb) CARE Checklist (2013) of information to include when writing a case report. (DOCX 1483 kb) Malignant atrophic
papulosis Gastrointestinal Endothelial progenitor cells Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contribution AT, LS, JF, and CM wrote the manuscript. AT, LS, JF, CM and JP read, revised and approved the final manuscript. The
authors have received no funding for this manuscript. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Harry McCoy, Dr. Howard Goldin, Dr. Eli
Miloslavsky and Dr. Henry Foong for sharing information related to their patients and photos included in this manuscript.
