Coexisting of Graves’ disease and functioning struma ovarii is a rare condition. Although the histology of struma ovarii predominantly
composed of thyrocytes, the majority of the patients did not have thyrotoxicosis. The mechanism underlying the functioning status of the
tumor is still unclear but the presence of thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) is thought to play a role. Here we describe the
patient presentation and report the TSHR expression of the tumor. A 56-year old Asian woman presented with long standing thyrotoxicosis for
23 years. She was diagnosed with Graves’ disease and thyroid nodules. She had bilateral exophthalmos and had high titer of plasma TSHR
antibody. Total thyroidectomy was performed and the histologic findings confirmed the clinical diagnosis. The patient had persistent
thyrotoxicosis postoperatively. Thyroid uptake demonstrated the adequacy of the thyroid surgery and the whole body scan confirmed the
presence of functioning thyroid tissue at pelvic area. The surgery was scheduled and the patient had hypothyroidism after the surgery. The
pathological diagnosis was struma ovarii at right ovary. We performed TSHR staining in both the patient’s struma ovarii and in 3 cases of
non-functioning struma ovarii. The staining results were all positive and the intensity of the TSHR staining of functioning struma ovarii
was the same as that in other cases of non-functioning tumors, suggesting that the determinant of functioning struma ovarii might be the
presence of TSHR stimuli rather than the intensity of the TSHR in the ovarian tissue. In patients with Graves’ disease with persistent or
recurrent thyrotoxicosis after adequate ablative treatment, the possibility of ectopic thyroid hormone production should be considered. TSHR
expression is found in patients with functioning and non-functioning struma ovarii and cannot solely be used to determine the functioning
status of the tumor. Coexisting of Graves’ disease and functioning struma ovarii is a rare condition. Struma ovarii is a rare ovarian tumor.
Most affected patients are asymptomatic; however thyrotoxicosis from struma ovarii has been reported in 5 % to 15 % of the confirmed cases
[1, 2]. Although the histology of struma ovarii predominantly composed of thyrocytes, the majority of the patients do not have
thyrotoxicosis. The mechanism underlying the functioning status of the tumor is still unclear. The expression of thyroid-stimulating hormone
receptor (TSHR) is thought to play a role [3, 4]. The diagnosis of functioning struma ovarii is challenging especially when the patient had
functioning thyroid gland. Here we report an usual case of coexisting Graves’ disease with functioning struma ovarii and the TSHR staining
result, including the TSHR staining of the patient with non-functioning struma ovarii. A 56-year-old woman presented with persistent
thyrotoxicosis. She was first diagnosed with thyrotoxicosis 23 years previously and had been periodically treated with antithyroid drugs for
several years at a time. On examination, she had bilateral exophthalmos. Her thyroid gland was enlarged with palpable thyroid nodules. Her
serum TSHR antibody level was elevated at 3.86 IU/L (reference range, <1.00 IU/L), thus confirming the diagnosis of Graves’ disease with
thyroid nodules. A thyroid scan with Tc99m showed generalized increased uptake in the thyroid gland with visualized activity in the
pyramidal lobe. One hyperfunctioning nodule at the upper pole of the right lobe and another hypofunctioning nodule in the middle aspect of
the right lobe were demonstrated (Fig. 1). The provisional diagnosis at that time was Graves’ disease with thyroid nodules, and ablative
treatment was planned. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration yielded an area of undetermined significance. Total thyroidectomy was
performed without perioperative complications. The surgical specimen contained 57.7 g of thyroid tissue. The histological findings supported
the clinical diagnosis of Graves’ disease and benign thyroid nodules.Fig. 1Tc99m thyroid scan showed diffusely increased uptake by the
thyroid tissue with thyroid nodules Tc99m thyroid scan showed diffusely increased uptake by the thyroid tissue with thyroid nodules Two
weeks after total thyroidectomy, the patient’s symptoms of thyrotoxicosis recurred. The differential diagnosis included inadequate
thyroidectomy or a source of extrathyroidal thyrotoxicosis such as functioning struma ovarii. A thyroid function test confirmed the presence
of post-thyroidectomy thyrotoxicosis (Table 1). The radioactive iodine uptake was evaluated to check the adequacy of the thyroid surgery,
and very low uptake of 0.2 % was found in the thyroid bed (reference range, 15 %–45 %). A radioactive iodine (I131) whole-body scan
demonstrated intense radiotracer uptake with a star artifact in the pelvic region. Single-photon emission computed tomography/computed
tomography of the pelvis confirmed the presence of inhomogeneous increased radiotracer uptake by an 8.5- × 7.2-cm mixed multicystic-solid
mass with internal calcification in the right adnexal region (Fig. 2). The plasma level of cancer antigen 125 was elevated at 48.55 U/ml
(reference range, 0–35 U/ml). Therefore the patient was diagnosed with coexisting Graves’ disease and functioning struma ovarii and surgery
is scheduled. Preoperative control of thyrotoxicosis is required to prevent thyroid storm during the surgery. In the present case,
therefore, the patient’s methimazole was restarted, and a euthyroid state was achieved before scheduling total abdominal hysterectomy with
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAH with BSO).Table 1Thyroid hormone levels and management at baseline and during follow-upAt first
presentationBefore total thyroidectomy2 weeks after total thyroidectomyBefore TAH with BSO2 weeks after TAH with BSOFree T4
(0.93–1.70 ng/dl)–1.144.81.430.11Total T4 (4.50–11.70 μg/dl)17.27––––Total T3 (80–200 ng/dl)233167.5380.7153.2–TSH (0.27-4.20
mIU/ml)<0.0050.01<0.0050.16>100TreatmentStart propylthiouracil 300 mg/dayMethimazole 7.5 mg/dayStop methimazole for 2 weeksMethimazole
2.5 mg/dayStart levothyroxine 100 mcg/dayFig. 2I131 whole-body scan after total thyroidectomy revealed a star artifact lesion in the pelvic
area Thyroid hormone levels and management at baseline and during follow-up I131 whole-body scan after total thyroidectomy revealed a star
artifact lesion in the pelvic area The patient’s perioperative course was uneventful. An 8.0- × 5.5- × 5.0-cm right ovarian mass with
minimal ascites was found, the cut surfaces of the ovary showed solid-cystic appearance. The solid component showed soft red-brown and
yellowish semitranslucent tissue resembling thyroid tissue. The cystic spaces contained clear yellow fluid. The histological diagnosis was
struma ovarii of the right ovary, without evidence of malignancy. Immunohistochemical staining for thyroglobulin (clone 2H11 + 6E1; Cell
Marque) was positive; this result confirmed the thyroid epithelial nature of the lesion (Fig. 3b). Moreover, immunohistochemical staining
for TSHR (clone 4C1/E1/G8; Abcam) was performed with normal thyroid tissue as a positive control and normal ovarian tissue as a negative
control. Immunohistochemical staining was performed by autostainer (Ventana Benchmark XT). The result showed that the struma ovarii tissue
in our patient was positive for TSHR, indicating the presence of TSHR expression in the struma ovarii tissue (Fig. 3c). Two weeks
postoperatively, the patient’s thyroid hormone levels were in the hypothyroid range. Replacement therapy with levothyroxine was initiated,
and euthyroidism was achieved.Fig. 3 a H&E staining of our patient’s ovarian section revealed typical thyroid follicles. b The thyroid
tissue in our patient’s ovarian tumor was highlighted by thyroglobulin antibody. c Immunostaining for TSH receptor showed positive staining
in our patient’s struma ovarii. d TSH receptor also expressed on the tumor cells from other patient with non-functioning struma ovarii a H&E
staining of our patient’s ovarian section revealed typical thyroid follicles. b The thyroid tissue in our patient’s ovarian tumor was
highlighted by thyroglobulin antibody. c Immunostaining for TSH receptor showed positive staining in our patient’s struma ovarii. d TSH
receptor also expressed on the tumor cells from other patient with non-functioning struma ovarii Struma ovarii is a rare ovarian germ cell
tumor which is entirely or predominantly composed of thyroid tissue . Struma ovarii has been reported in 0.3 % to 1.0 % of all ovarian
tumors and 2.0 % to 4.0 % of all ovarian teratomas . It commonly occurs in the fourth to sixth decades of life, and it is usually benign and
unilateral. Most affected patients are asymptomatic. However, patients may seek medical attention because of compressive symptoms involving
a nearby organ, ascites, or even thyrotoxicosis. Thyrotoxicosis from struma ovarii has been reported in 5 % to 15 % of the confirmed cases
[1–3, 6], but it is noted to be rare for tumors of <3 cm . However, the actual incidence remains unclear owing to a lack of precise data on
thyroid function in affected patients. Thyrotoxicosis in patients with struma ovarii has three potential causes: a hyperfunctioning struma
ovarii alone, both a hyperfunctioning thyroid gland and a struma ovarii, or a hyperfunctioning thyroid gland with an incidental non-
functioning struma ovarii . The diagnosis of a functioning struma ovarii is challenging, especially in a patient with a hyperfunctioning
thyroid gland. The evidence for the presence of a hyperfunctioning struma ovarii is based on increased radioiodine uptake by the ovary on an
I131 whole-body scan . Cervical goiter is quite common in patients with struma ovarii (16 %–40 %) [1, 2]. Because Graves’ disease is the
most common cause of hyperthyroidism with diffuse thyroid gland enlargement, a number of previous cases of thyrotoxicosis due to struma
ovarii were incorrectly treated by thyroidectomy [6, 7]. The coexistence of Graves’ disease and a hyperfunctioning struma ovarii is
extremely rare. The characteristic of the prior case reports were summarized in Table 2. In most cases, the diagnosis was based on
persistent postoperative thyrotoxicosis. In only two cases were both coexisting diseases simultaneously diagnosed [1, 8]. The optimal
preoperative method for diagnosis of hyperfunctioning struma ovarii is either confirmation of the presence of thyrotoxicosis despite the
absence of hyperfunctioning thyroid tissue or low radioiodine uptake at the neck along with high ovarian uptake of radioiodine tracer.
Increased uptake of radioiodine by an ovarian tumor on a whole-body scan alone is insufficient for diagnosis of hyperfunctioning struma
ovarii because it reportedly yields both false-positive and false-negative results . The main differential diagnosis for increased uptake of
radiotracer in the abdomen is ovarian metastasis from primary thyroid cancer.Table 2Cases of Coexisting Graves’ disease and Functioning
Struma OvariiAuthor, yearAge at diagnosisPresentationTSH receptor antibodyCervical thyroidectomy before diagnosis struma ovariiPrior pelvic
exam that result negativeOvarian scan before abdominal surgeryOvarian findingsYears after Graves’ disease diagnosisExoph-thalmosThyroid
bruitPelvic pressure symptomsPleural effusionAscitesSideMaximum diameter (cm)MalignancyKampers, 1970 64YesNANANANANAYesNANANANANo18Lefort,
1981 38YesNANANoNoPositiveNANAPositiveRight7No12Lazarus, 1987 48YesNANANAFewPositiveYes14 yearsPositiveLeft9No24Kung, 1990
40NoNANoNANoPositiveNo23 weeksNARight5No4Banyot, 1995 30NoNoYesNANANegativeNoNAPositiveRight7NA0Grandet, 2000
78NANANANAFewNAYesNAPositiveBilateral10No4Kano, 2000 50NANANANAYesPositiveNoNANALeft7Yes0Mimura, 2001
26NoNoNANANAPositiveNoNAPositiveLeft16No4Sussman, 2002 53NoNANoNANANANoNANARight7.5Yes5Bartel, 2005
54NANANANANAPositiveYesNAPositiveLeftNANo23Guida, 2005 42YesNANANoMarkedNAYesNANegativeRight12No1Teale, 2006
36YesNANANANAPositiveYesNANALeft13.5No8Chiofalo, 2007 42NoNAYesNAYesPositiveYesNAPositiveRight12No0.5Wong, 2009
44YesYesYesNANAPositiveYesNANALeftNAYes1Anastasilakis, 2013 49NoNANAYesModeratePositiveNoNANARight18No2Our case,
201556YesNoNoNoMinimalPositiveYesNot donePositiveRight8No23 Cases of Coexisting Graves’ disease and Functioning Struma Ovarii Similar to
most cases, the hyperthyroidism in our patient was thought to have arisen only from Graves’ disease based on typical signs of diffuse
thyroid gland enlargement, bilateral exophthalmos, diffuse thyroid uptake with visualized activity in the pyramidal lobe, and an elevated
level of plasma TSHR antibody. However, persistent post-thyroidectomy thyrotoxicosis with low I131 uptake at the thyroid bed and biochemical
hypothyroidism after removal of the struma ovarii confirmed the diagnosis of a functioning struma ovarii. The pathophysiology of
thyrotoxicosis from struma ovarii remains unclear. The finding of tall thyroidal epithelium with scattered papillary infoldings, which is
frequently found in struma ovarii, has a poor correlation with the presence of clinical thyrotoxicosis . There are two proposed mechanisms
underlying the pathophysiology of functioning struma ovarii. First, the ovarian tumor may have autonomous function, as in toxic multinodular
goiter . Second, in patients with coexisting Graves’ disease, TSHR antibodies stimulate the struma ovarii in the same way that they
stimulate the thyroid tissue to cause Graves’ disease. Our patient’s ovarian section revealed typical thyroid follicles without features of
malignancy. Immunohistochemical staining for the TSHR in the struma ovarii tissue was positive (Fig. 3c), thus supporting the second
hypothesis [3, 4]. We performed TSHR staining in the struma ovarii of another patient with normal thyroid function test preoperatively and
two other patients without confirm thyroid function test but was clinically euthyroid preoperatively. The staining results were all positive
and the intensity of the TSHR staining of functioning strum ovarii was the same as that in other cases of nonfunctioning struma ovarii
(Fig. 3d), suggesting that the determinant of functioning struma ovarii might be the presence of TSHR stimuli rather than the intensity of
the TSHR in the ovarian tissue. In prior case reports of coexisting Graves’ disease and struma ovarii, the diagnosis of functioning struma
ovarii almost always follows the diagnosis of Graves’ disease by several years. The circulating TSHR antibody in Graves’ disease presumably
has a stimulatory effect on the thyroid tissue in the ovary, resulting in gradual growth and increased thyroid hormone production [3, 15].
Approximately 5 % of struma ovarii are malignant, regardless of whether they are functional, and tissue sampling for malignancy testing is
very difficult. Therefore, struma ovarii should be surgically removed in all cases. Meanwhile, the coexisting Graves’ disease can be managed
medically, surgically, or by radioactive iodine ablation. In patients with Graves’ disease with persistent or recurrent thyrotoxicosis after
adequate ablative treatment, the possibility of ectopic thyroid hormone production such as that from struma ovarii or a metastatic
differentiated thyroid cancer should be considered. TSHR expression is found in patients with functioning and non-functioning struma ovarii
and cannot solely be used to determine the functioning status of the tumor. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this
journal. Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor Radioactive iodine Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy Not
available Completing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TS treated the patient,
gathered data and drafted the manuscript. SH prepared, analysed, and interpreted the histopathological samples, and critically reviewed the
manuscript. TP critically reviewed the manuscript. NT treated the patient, conceptualized the case report, gathered data, and critically
reviewed the manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript. Language editing by Edanz.
