BAG3 belongs to BAG family of molecular chaperone regulators interacting with HSP70 and anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. It is ubiquitously
expressed with strong expression in skeletal and cardiac muscle, and is involved in a panoply of cellular processes. Mutations in BAG3 and
aberrations in its expression cause fulminant myopathies, presenting with progressive limb and axial muscle weakness, and respiratory
insufficiency and neuropathy. Herein, we report a sporadic case of a 15-years old girl with symptoms of myopathy, demyelinating
polyneuropathy and asymptomatic long QT syndrome. Genetic testing demonstrated heterozygous mutation Pro209Leu (c.626C > T) in exon 3 of
BAG3 gene causing severe myopathy and neuropathy, often associated with restrictive cardiomyopathy. We did not find a mutation in any known
LQT syndrome genes. Analysis of muscle biopsy revealed profound disintegration of Z-discs with extensive accumulation of granular debris and
large inclusions within fibers. We demonstrated profound alterations in BAG3 distribution as the protein localized to long filamentous
structures present across the fibers that were positively stained not only for α-actinin but also for desmin and filamin indicating that
those disintegrated Z-disc regions contained also other sarcomeric proteins. The mutation caused a decrease in the content of BAG3 and
HSP70, and also of α-actinin desmin, filamin and fast myosin heavy chain, confirming its severe effect on the muscle fiber morphology and
thus function. We provide further evidence that BAG3 is associated with Z-disc maintenance, and the Pro209Leu mutation may occur worldwide.
We also provide a summary of cases associated with this mutation reported so far. Myofibrillar myopathies (MFMs) are a group of genetically
heterogeneous disorders characterized by myofibrillar degeneration. Accumulation of numerous Z-disc proteins, such as αB-crystallin, desmin,
or myotilin is a morphological hallmark of MFM. Most MFM patients present in early adulthood with progressive limb muscle weakness or
cardiomyopathy (Selcen 2011; Olivé et al. 2013; Fichna et al. 2014). Although distal muscles are frequently involved in MFM patients and may
mimic neuropathy, sensory-motor polyneuropathy is a rare feature. Childhood-onset MFMs are usually associated with rapidly progressing
cardiac dysfunction, however, long QT (LQT) syndrome was reported only once in a MFM patient with desmin gene mutation and variants in two
LQT genes, SCN5A and KCNH2 (Sung et al. 2010). So far several causative mutations of the MFM were identified in numerous genes, among them
was BAG3 also known as Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3 or Bcl-2-binding protein Bis. It belongs to BAG family of multi-domain proteins playing
a role of regulators of molecular chaperones (Rosati et al. 2011). BAG3 (MW ~74 kDa) consists of N-terminal bi-partite WW-domain involved in
protein–protein interactions that is followed by a proline-rich domain (PXXP), also mediating binding to other proteins, and C-terminal BAG
domain, which binds to heat shock protein Hsp 70 and the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (Doong et al. 2003; Odgerel et al. 2010; Rosati et al.
2011). Interaction of BAG3 with Hsp70 modulates its chaperone activity (Doong et al. 2003; Rosati et al. 2011). Through these interactions
BAG3 is involved in a panoply of cellular processes such as development, apoptosis, autophagy as well as cytoskeleton organization, cell
adhesion and motility (Rosati et al. 2011). BAG3 is ubiquitously expressed in all the tissues with the strong expression in skeletal and
cardiac muscle as well as in cancer cells (Homma et al. 2006; Iwasaki et al. 2007). In cardiomyocytes BAG3 was also found to regulate the
structural stability of F-actin through the actin capping protein, CapZβ1, by promoting association between Hsc70 and CapZβ1. It is
therefore proposed that BAG3 and Hsc70 play important role in stabilizing myofibril structure and inhibiting myofibrillar degeneration in
response to mechanical stress (Hishiya et al. 2010). It has been also shown that BAG-3 is important for mobilization of filamin from the Z
disk, and for subsequent ubiquitine-dependent degradation of filamin (Arndt et al. 2010). Bag3 deficiency in mice resulted in fulminant
myopathy and early lethality (Homma et al. 2006). Also, its expression is induced during cardiomyoblast differentiation and it can modulate
myogenin expression (De Marco et al. 2011). Several BAG3 mutations and polymorphisms were reported so far in humans. Heterozygous Pro209Leu
(626C > T) mutation is the only one associated with neuromuscular phenotype (see Table 1). It was first reported in three patients with
progressive limb and axial muscle weakness, who also developed cardiomyopathy and severe respiratory insufficiency in their teens; two had
rigid spine and one peripheral neuropathy (Selcen et al. 2009). The same mutation was found in several other further patients worldwide with
severe and variable phenotypes (Jaffer et al. 2011; Konersman et al. 2015). Functional studies revealed that BAG3 mutations impaired the
Z-disc assembly and increased the sensitivity to stress-induced apoptosis (Selcen et al. 2009; Arimura et al. 2011; Konersman et al. 2015).
Also, several other mutations were found in early and late onset of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients of different ethnicity (Norton et
al. 2011; Chami et al. 2014; Franaszczyk et al. 2014).Table 1Summary of reported cases with Pro209Leu (c.626C > T) BAG3
mutationsReportProband (age at onset presenting feature)CardiomyopathyQTc (s)Skeletal myopathyNeuropathyOther featuresOutcome at last
observationCurrent reportFemale (12 years)Toe-walkingFoot deformityRestrictive (subclinical at 15 years)Mean 478 msMax
574 msSubclinicalAxono-demyelinating neuropathy; nerve biopsy not doneRigid spine,Contractures, FVC 87 %Ambulant, no cardiac symptoms at
15 yearsJaffer et al. (2012)Female (1.5 years)Toe-walkingRestrictive (heart transplantation at 13 years)Not reportedProximo-distal weakness
and atrophyGiant axonal neuropathyRigid spine, elbow/finger flexion contracturesLost ambulation at 16 yearsMale (early childhood)Toe-
walking, later steppage gaitRestrictive (8 years)Not reportedProximo-distal weakness and atrophyGiant axonal neuropathyRigid spine,Pes
carinatum; FVC 53 % (13 years)Ambulant (13.5 years)Non-invasive ventilationMale (11 months)Toe-walking “clumsy”RestrictiveNot reportedSevere
proximo-distal weaknessGiant axonal neuropathyRigid spine scoliosis, Achilles tendon tightness FVC 50 % (11 years)Died of cardiorespiratory
failure at 129/12)Female (first decade), toe-walking, mobility impairmentRestrictiveNot reportedMildAxonal neuropathy pes cavus,tight
Achilles tendons, scoliosis (Cobb angle 104◦); FVC 46 %Non-ambulant at 14 years; non-invasive nocturnal ventilationFemale (older sister)
similarly affected, father died at 30 years - similar presentationOdegrel et al. (2010)Male (9 years)Restrictive/hypertrophic (9 years)Not
reportedYesGiant axonal neuropathyTransmission from asymptomatic father with somaticmosaicismSudden death at 9 yearsMale
(12 years)Restrictive/hypertrophicHeart transplantation (14 years)Not reportedSevereGiant axonal neuropathyWheelchair at 14 yearsVentilator
dependent at 29 yearsFemale (12 years). pes cavus,muscle weakness; cardiomyopathyRestrictive/HypertrophicNot reportedNeck and distal muscle
weaknessGiant axonal neuropathyDied at 20 years of cardiac and respiratory failureMale (5 years), problem runningRestrictive/hypertrophic
(10 years);Heart transplantation (13 years)Not reportedProximal muscle weaknessGiant axonal neuropathyVentilator dependent at 13 yearsDied
at 15 yearsLee et al. (2012)Female (6 years), clumsy walkingRestrictive/hypertrophic450–570 msMildAxonal neuropathyRigid spine and
scoliosis; contractures and foot deformityAmbulant at 12 yearsKonersman et al. (2015)Male (8 years),heart transplantRestrictive, orthotopic
heart transplant at 8 yearsNot reportedSevereSensorimotor polyneuropathyImbalance, spinal rigidity19 years, intermittent ventilation at day
and continuous at night via tracheostomy; feet and ankles paralyzed, ambulant with a walker across short distances Summary of reported cases
with Pro209Leu (c.626C > T) BAG3 mutations In the present study, we report the case of 15-year old girl with Pro209Leu in BAG3 with MFM,
sensory-motor polyneuropathy and long QT syndrome. We also show the effect of the mutation on the muscle fiber organization and the amount
of both BAG3 and HSP70 as well as of other sarcomeric proteins. Additionally, we provide summary of the effect of Pro209Leu mutation on
BAG3-related myopathies characterized so far. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of the proband using standard methods. Screening for
BAG3 mutations was performed by direct sequencing using ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer (from Applied Biosystems, USA). Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES) was performed on HiSeq 1500 (Illumina, USA) as previously described (Ploski et al. 2014). The open muscle biopsy of the proband
quadriceps was performed, and the muscle specimens was processed for further analyses and compared with normal muscle biopsy. The study was
performed in compliance with the national legislation and the Code of the Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects
of the World Medical Association. Part of the biopsied tissue, to be used for light microscopy, was frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid
nitrogen, cut on a cryomicrotome with a slice thickness of 8 µm and stained with the routine battery of histological and histochemical
methods. For electron microscopy, a part of the muscle specimen was fixed in glutaraldehyde, post fixed in osmium tetroxide before embedding
in Spurr embedding medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences, USA). Ultrathin sections of the selected areas were stained with uranyl acetate and
counterstained with lead citrate. The samples were viewed with JEM 1200 EX2 electron microscope. Quantitative analysis of disorganized areas
of the proband’s muscle fiber was performed on 12 electronmicrographs covering different regions of the muscle using ImageJ software. Rabbit
polyclonal antibody raised against a recombinant fragment corresponding to the C terminal 196 amino acids of human BAG3 and mouse monoclonal
antibody raised against human sarcomeric α-actinin were from Abcam (UK). The following monoclonal antibodies were also used: anti-HSP70 from
Enzo Life Sciences (USA), anti-desmin from BD Pharmingen (USA), anti-chicken gizzard filamin (F1888) from Sigma–Aldrich (USA), anti-rabbit
fast myosin heavy chain (Abcam, UK) and anti-GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphodehydrogenase) from Merck Millipore (USA). For
immunocytochemistry studies, the following secondary antibodies were used: goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with AlexaFluor-488 or rabbit
anti-mouse IgG conjugated with AlexaFluor-546 (from Molecular Probes, USA and Jackson ImmunoResearch Europe Ltd., UK, respectively). DAPI (a
dye staining chromatin) was applied in the Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Labs, USA). For western blot analysis the following secondary
antibodies were used: anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibodies conjugated with horse radish peroxidase (Merck Millipore, USA).
Distribution of BAG3, α-actinin (the marker of Z-disc), filamin and desmin in muscle biopsies obtained from the patient and healthy subject
was examined by indirect immunohistochemistry. Muscle cross-sections were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min. The fixed specimens were
thoroughly washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and treated for 30 min with a solution of 5 % normal goat serum and 0.2 % Triton X-100
in PBS. Subsequently, muscle sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with the anti-BAG3 antibody at a dilution of 1:200 and followed by
incubation with Alexa 488 conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibodies at a dilution of 1:200 for 60 min RT. For simultaneous assessment of
the distribution of other sarcomeric proteins, muscle sections were incubated with the α-actinin antibody at a dilution of 1:50, desmin
antibody (at 1:100) and anti-filamin antibody (1:100), and then with secondary anti-mouse antibody at a dilution 1:500 for 60 min RT. To
mount the slides and visualize the nuclei, the Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI was applied. The specimens were visualized using Zeiss
LSM 780 spectral confocal microscope equipped with an HCX PL APO 40x/1.4 Oil DIC M27 objective. Optical Sects. (2048 pixels × 2048
pixels × 8 bits/pixel) were collected at 0.30 µm z-spacing. In concomitant staining with two or three fluorophores, special care was taken
to control for any possible cross-talk of the detection systems. We carefully adjusted the spectral ranges of the detectors and always
scanned the images sequentially. For negative controls, the primary antibody was omitted. Control and patient’s muscles were homogenized in
10 volumes over the muscle mass of ice-cold PBS supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and Complete protease inhibitor
cocktail (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany). To evaluate the amount of BAG3, HSP70, α-actinin, desmin, filamin and fast isoform of myosin
heavy chain (fMHC), both total muscle homogenates and soluble fractions (obtained after centrifugation of homogenates at 1800×g) were
examined. Equal volumes of the samples were separated on 10 % SDS-PAGE, and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The immunoreactive
bands were detected by incubation with antibody against BAG3 (at 1:2000 dilution), HSP70 (1:1000), α-actinin (1:500), desmin (1:1000), fMHC
(1:1000) and GAPDH (1:10000 dilution) followed by the incubation with respective secondary antibodies conjugated with horse radish
peroxidase. The reaction was developed using ECL according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce, USA). Developed blots were
photographed using a G:Box system equipped with the GeneSnap software. We report a 15-year old Caucasian girl, oldest child of unaffected,
non-consanguineous parents; she has two unaffected sisters (Fig. 1a). Developmental milestones were normal, she walked unsupported at
12 months of age but at 8 years she started to toe-walk and developed foot deformity. She had no cardiac signs or symptoms. Long QT was
first seen on routine ECG before foot surgery when she was 11. At 12 years she presented with bilateral pes cavus deformity, deep tendon
reflexes in lower extremities were absent, vibration sense was reduced up to the ankles. She was toe-walking but had no other motor
impairment. Nerve conduction studies revealed axonal-demyelinating sensory-motor polyneuropathy with conduction velocity (cv) in
median/ulnar motor nerves 38 m/s. Echocardiography at that time was not relevant. The level of creatine kinase (CK) was elevated to 1.5
times upper limit of normal. At 13 years she was diagnosed with restrictive cardiomyopathy. She had rigidity of cervical and thoracic spine
and contractures at hips, knees and ankles. Muscle biopsy confirmed myofibrillar myopathy. She was last seen at 15 years with asymptomatic
long QT. Her pulmonary function was normal [forced vital capacity (FVC) 87 %]. Spinal rigidity and contractures further limited her mobility
but she was ambulant. The blood sample was subjected to direct sequencing for BAG3 and heterozygous mutation Pro209Leu (c.626C > T) in exon
3 was revealed (see Fig. 1b). Proband’s mother, father and siblings do not carry this mutation and do not present any muscle dysfunction
(Fig. 1a).Fig. 1Identification of Pro209Leu mutation in BAG3. a Pedigree diagram of the proband’s family. The arrow points to the proband
(black symbol); open symbols indicate unaffected family members. b Chromatograms illustrating identification of Pro209Leu mutation in the
proband Identification of Pro209Leu mutation in BAG3. a Pedigree diagram of the proband’s family. The arrow points to the proband (black
symbol); open symbols indicate unaffected family members. b Chromatograms illustrating identification of Pro209Leu mutation in the proband
In order to search for other genetic defects which could cause LQT syndrome in the proband, we analyzed the WES results focusing on the
following genes linked with LQT syndrome according to HGMD and/or OMIM: ACN9, AKAP9, ALG10, ALG10B, ANK2, CACNA1C, CACNA2D1, CACNB2, CALM1,
CALM2, CALM3, CAV3, FRS2, KCNE1, KCNE2, KCNE2, KCNE3, KCNH2, KCNJ2, KCNJ5, KCNQ1, RYR2, SCN4B, SCN5A, SEC61G, SNTA1, TBXAS1 and TYMS. The
mean coverage of these loci in our WES analysis was 60; 96,9 % of the coding sequence of this target had coverage >10 and 84,8 % - coverage
>20. We filtered the data to include rare variants (<1 % in available databases such as EXAC, ESP 6500, 1000 Genomes and our own collection
of >400 exomes) affecting the coding sequence or splice sites. The only variant found was a missense change in the SCN5A gene (Chr3:38598723
C > T, NM_000335.4:p.Gly1432Glu), which was not reported previously. Using Sanger sequencing we typed proband’s parents and established that
the variant came from the mother. Since she was free from LQT syndrome, we concluded that SCN5A p.Gly1432Glu is not pathogenic.
Hematoxylin/eosin staining of muscle transverse sections (Fig. 2a) revealed the presence of large deposits within some fibers (marked by an
arrow). The presence of large deposits was also shown using Trichrome staining (Fig. 2b, arrow). Noteworthy, no major variability in the
size of the muscle fibers was visible.Fig. 2Analysis of morphology of the proband’s muscle. a, b Hematoxylin/eosin and Trichrome stainings,
respectively, of the proband’s muscle. Arrows point to large deposits within the muscle fiber. c–f Electron microscopy images of the
longitudinal sections of the proband’s muscle. Explanation for the arrows in c–f in the “Results” section. Bars in a–f, as indicated on the
images Analysis of morphology of the proband’s muscle. a, b Hematoxylin/eosin and Trichrome stainings, respectively, of the proband’s
muscle. Arrows point to large deposits within the muscle fiber. c–f Electron microscopy images of the longitudinal sections of the proband’s
muscle. Explanation for the arrows in c–f in the “Results” section. Bars in a–f, as indicated on the images Electron microscopy of
longitudinal ultrathin sections showed dramatic changes in the fiber organization (Fig. 2 c–f). Z-disc streaming (Fig. 2c, arrows) and
disorganization of myofibrils as well as large areas of sarcomeric disorganization with accumulation of polymorphic dense structures
(Fig. 2d, arrow) were present. Also, focal changes containing granulomatous material (Fig. 2e, arrow) and abnormal regions with the presence
of multiple dense bodies (Fig. 2f, arrow) were visible. Qualitative analysis of disorganized areas revealed that their size significantly
varied. We observed regions as small as about less than 1 μm2 (for example the one marked with left arrow in Fig. 2c was 3 μm2) and as large
as about 176 μm2 (for example that in Fig. 2d). The size of long axis of a largest disorganized area examined reached the value of about
20 μm. To test whether the Pro209Leu point mutation within BAG3 affects its distribution in the patient’s muscle, immunostaining of the
control and proband quadriceps muscle biopsies was performed (Fig. 3a, b). Also, localization of α-actinin, the protein marker of Z-disc as
well as of other sarcomeric proteins, namely desmin and filamin was assessed in the proband’s and control muscles (Fig. 3a,
b).Fig. 3Distribution of BAG3 in human muscle fibers. Transverse sections of the muscle biopsy of the healthy subject (a) and proband (b)
were stained with anti-BAG3 antibody (in green) as well as with anti-α-actinin, anti-desmin and anti-filamin antibodies (all in red). Nuclei
were stained with DAPI (in blue). Far right panels, ~3 to ×3.5 magnification of the areas marked in a and b. These are 0.3-μm images of the
center of transverses muscle section obtained with a Zeiss confocal microscope. Arrows in a, point to the presence of BAG3 within the Z-disc
in control muscle; and in b, point to its association with severely affected Z-discs containing α-actinin, desmin or filamin. Other details
as described in Materials and Methods section. Bars 50 μm. (Color figure online) Distribution of BAG3 in human muscle fibers. Transverse
sections of the muscle biopsy of the healthy subject (a) and proband (b) were stained with anti-BAG3 antibody (in green) as well as with
anti-α-actinin, anti-desmin and anti-filamin antibodies (all in red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (in blue). Far right panels, ~3 to ×3.5
magnification of the areas marked in a and b. These are 0.3-μm images of the center of transverses muscle section obtained with a Zeiss
confocal microscope. Arrows in a, point to the presence of BAG3 within the Z-disc in control muscle; and in b, point to its association with
severely affected Z-discs containing α-actinin, desmin or filamin. Other details as described in Materials and Methods section. Bars 50 μm.
(Color figure online) In the transverse section of the control muscle BAG3 was present mainly within the Z-disc where it colocalized with
α-actinin (Fig. 3a, upper panels, arrows). It was also adjacent to desmin, which was surrounding BAG3-stained Z-discs (Fig. 3a, middle
panels, arrows). BAG3 did not co-localize with filamin but it seemed to be embedded in filamin meshwork present throughout the fiber
(Fig. 3a, lower panels). However, this defined BAG3 distribution was severely impaired in vast majority of fibers of the patient’s muscle
(Fig. 3b). BAG3 was seen in long structures present within the fibers with the variable length, ranging from about 5 μm up to seemingly over
30 μm (Fig. 3b, arrows). These elongated structures were also positively immunostained with anti-α-actinin, anti-desmin and anti-filamin
antibodies showing that mutated BAG3 was associated with severely disintegrated Z-discs where other sarcomeric proteins were recruited. To
examine the amount of BAG3 in the patient’s muscle, we performed immunoblotting with anti-BAG3 antibody (Fig. 4). The overall BAG3 content
(with respect to the amount of GAPDH) in the patient’s homogenate (P) was reduced when compared to the control samples (C1 and C2). We also
checked whether and how BAG3 mutation affects the content of HSP70 as well as of other sarcomeric proteins, α-actinin, desmin, filamin and
fMHC. Of note, we also probed the samples for slow myosin heavy chain but did not detect any signal (not shown). As shown in Fig. 4, in
muscle homogenates the intensity of the bands corresponding to those proteins was substantially decreased. As expected, we did not see these
sarcomeric proteins in soluble fraction of control muscles. The same was observed for patient’s sample thus suggesting that mutated BAG3
(and other affected partners) could form insoluble aggregates or if they were soluble they were fragmented into small peptides that migrated
out of the gel. The latter seems to be confirmed by remarkably more intensive Ponceau red staining at the gel end that was visible in the
patients’s samples (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Analysis of BAG3 and Hsp70 content in the proband (P) and healthy subjects (C1 and C2) muscle by
immunoblotting. Equal volumes of muscle homogenates and soluble fractions were subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, blotted
on nitrocellulose membrane and probed with anti-BAG3, anti-HSP70, anti-α-actinin, anti-desmin, anti-filamin and anti-fast myosin heavy chain
(fMHC) antibodies as described in Materials and Methods. Probing with anti-GAPDH antibody served as the internal loading control Analysis of
BAG3 and Hsp70 content in the proband (P) and healthy subjects (C1 and C2) muscle by immunoblotting. Equal volumes of muscle homogenates and
soluble fractions were subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, blotted on nitrocellulose membrane and probed with anti-BAG3,
anti-HSP70, anti-α-actinin, anti-desmin, anti-filamin and anti-fast myosin heavy chain (fMHC) antibodies as described in Materials and
Methods. Probing with anti-GAPDH antibody served as the internal loading control We report the complex phenotype with LQT syndrome of a girl
with Pro209Leu BAG3 mutation and provide further evidence for association of mutated BAG3 with disarrayed Z-disc within the muscle biopsy of
the patient. We also show that this mutation affects the amount of HSP70 and other sarcomeric proteins, including α-actinin, the Z-disc
marker. BAG3 mutations are rare and were not found in analysis of cohorts of 21 and 35 families with myofibrillar myopathies (Olive et al.
2011; Vattemi et al. 2011). Severe neuromuscular phenotype is associated with Pro209Leu point heterozygous mutation that appears
sporadically and probably de novo (see Table 1). So far only two families with two affected siblings were reported. In the first family,
father had somatic mosaicism (Odgerel et al. 2010) and in the second, father was affected by hearsay (Jaffer et al. 2012). Pro209Leu leads
not only to limb muscle dysfunction but also to early respiratory insufficiency or cardiomyopathy requiring heart transplantation by 20th
birthday (Odgerel et al. 2010; Jaffer et al. 2012; Konersman et al. 2015). Interestingly, long QT symptoms, severe muscle weakness and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were present in a Chinese patient with both Pro209Leu mutation and Arg258Trp (772C > T) substitution (Lee et al.
2012). In this family, proband’s father who was a carrier of the Arg258Trp mutation had long QT but no other phenotypic features (Lee et al.
2012). Several other BAG3 mutations were found in early- and late onset dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients without the obvious skeletal
muscle phenotype (Franaszczyk et al. 2014). Our patient demonstrated long QT in 90 % of recorded tracings on Holter ECG with maximal QTc of
578 ms. We were not able to find a cause of her long QT other than BAG3 mutation. Although there is possibility that the patient is carrying
more than one mutation responsible for a cardiac phenotype, no mutation in any LQT-related genes was found. The observed herein changes
within the fiber are in line with other studies describing skeletal muscles of the myofibrillar myopathy patients with the Pro209Leu
mutation (Selcen et al. 2009; Jaffer et al. 2012; Odgerel et al. 2010; Lee et al. 2012). Interestingly, majority of BAG3 mutations
identified so far, namely Pro209Leu (causing myofibrillar myopathy), Arg218Trp (causing dilated cardiomyopathy) as well as one of four novel
mutations associated with fulminant dilated cardiomyopathy in Polish patient (a large deletion of 17,990 bp removing BAG3 exons 3–4) are
located within the exon 3 indicating importance of this region for the protein activity (Arimura et al. 2011; Selcen et al. 2009;
Franaszczyk et al. 2014). Moreover, there are several phoshorylatable residues including Ser194, 195, 198 and 207, and Tyr205 in the region
preceding Pro209 residue (http://www.phosphosite.org/proteinAction.do?id=5352&showAllSites=true). Thus this part of the molecule could
undergo conformational changes and be crucial for the proper BAG3 conformation/folding. Hence, replacement of this highly conserved proline
residue with leucine might affect the overall BAG3 tertiary structure and possibly its stability, and interaction with its partners engaged
in Z-disc assembly as it was originally proposed by Selcen et al. (2009). It is also plausible that the mutation impairs chaperone activity
of heat shock proteins despite that it affects the BAG domain not involved in interaction with HSP70 (Rosati et al. 2011). Arimura et al.
(2011) suggested that Pro209Leu mutation could also disturb the multinucleation during the myoblast differentiation into skeletal muscle
myotubes. In our and other studies, it was shown that the mutation was causing severe disintegration of the Z-disc (Selcen et al. 2009,
Odgerel et al. 2010, Lee et al. 2012). We have demonstrated that mutated BAG3 in the proband’s muscle fibers still localizes to the Z-disc
marker, α-actinin, and the disorganized fiber areas contain other sarcomeric proteins such as desmin and filamin, indicating its association
with Z-disc despite its profound disintegration. Our observation that the level of HSP70 was practically undetectable in the proband’s
muscle and the content of α-actinin, desmin, filamin and fast myosin heavy chain was substantially decreased is therefore in line with the
notion that properly functioning BAG3 is important for proper organization of the myofibrill (Arndt et al. 2010, Hishiya et al. 2010). It is
also plausible that the mutation alters the degradation and/or autophagic processes associated with the improper BAG3 protein folding as it
was observed for filamin (Arndt et al. 2010). Summarizing, our data provide additional evidence that Pro209Leu BAG3 mutation leads to the
severe childhood-onset phenotype. It is characterized not only by myofibrillar myopathy, polyneuropathy and restrictive cardiomyopathy but
LQT as well. We postulate that LQT can be a part of clinical spectrum of Pro209Leu BAG3 mutation. We would like to thank Prof. Alicja Żylicz
from the International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw for a gift of antibodies against BAG3. Also, help of Ms. Natalia
Nowak from the Laboratory of Imaging Tissue Structure and Function in image analysis is greatly acknowledged. This work was supported by a
grant from Polish National Science Center (NCN, 2013/09/B/NZ4/03258 and the statutory funds for the Nencki Institute and for the Department
of Neurology and Department of Genetics of Medical University of Warsaw from the Ministry of Science and Higher Education.
