Ewing’s sarcoma belongs to a spectrum of neoplastic diseases known as Ewing’s family of tumors. This family of tumors is usually seen in
osseous sites. Ewing’s sarcoma of the cervix is extremely rare, with only 18 cases reported in the English literature. The
immunohistochemical profile of Ewing’s sarcoma overlaps with other malignancies like small cell carcinoma. The rarity and complex pathologic
picture of Ewing’s sarcoma of the cervix creates the potential for misdiagnosis. Hence, we believe this case needs to be reported to add to
the available literature. A 49-year-old white Caucasian woman presented with vaginal bleeding. A pelvic examination revealed a cystic lesion
arising from her cervix. Examination of a biopsy specimen revealed a poorly differentiated neoplasm, with sheets of small hyperchromatic
cells, staining weakly for neuroendocrine markers. She was diagnosed with small cell carcinoma and started on concurrent chemotherapy and
radiation. However, additional positive immunostaining for CD99 was strongly suggestive of Ewing’s sarcoma. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization revealed ESWR1 gene rearrangement, confirming Ewing’s sarcoma. Our patient underwent surgery, which confirmed stage IIB
Ewing’s sarcoma. She received adjuvant chemotherapy but died from progressive metastatic disease after four cycles. With early diagnosis and
appropriate treatment, Ewing’s sarcoma of the cervix can be a potentially curable disease. However, owing to overlapping clinical and
histopathological features, the diagnosis poses a challenge to oncologists and pathologists. This article guides pathologists to consider
Ewing’s sarcoma in the differential diagnosis of small cell carcinoma with weak staining for neuroendocrine markers. This literature review
will benefit oncologists encountering this rare entity. Ewing’s sarcoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) are the same entity,
displaying varying degrees of neuroectodermal differentiation. They arise from mesenchymal progenitor cells and are part of a spectrum of
neoplastic diseases, known as Ewing’s family of tumors (EFT) . EFT are characterized by reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 11 and
22, t (11; 22), and are usually seen in osseous sites, both axial and appendicular. Extra-osseous presentations are uncommon, with
specifically PNET of the female genital tract being very rare. The most common site of PNET in the female genital tract is the ovary, with
the uterine corpus being the second most common. Primary PNET of the cervix and vulva are extremely rare. In this article, we present a case
of primary PNET tumor of the cervix. The rarity of this entity can lead to diagnostic difficulties. In our case, it was initially diagnosed
as a neuroendocrine small cell carcinoma of the cervix. We also summarize a literature review of all the cases reported in the English
language. A 49-year-old gravida 2, para 2, perimenopausal woman presented with vaginal bleeding. A pelvic examination revealed a cystic
lesion arising from her cervix. Examination of a biopsy specimen revealed a poorly differentiated neoplasm involving the cervical stroma,
with sheets of small hyperchromatic cells with slightly irregular nuclei, stippled chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, minimal cytoplasm,
necrosis, and numerous mitotic figures (Figs. 1 and 2). Immunostaining showed the samples were weakly positive for neuron-specific enolase,
CD56, and synaptophysin, and negative for pancytokeratin, CK7, CK20, and CD45. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis showed a
5.3 × 4.8 × 6.6 cm irregular, enhancing mass arising from her cervix, with involvement of the adjacent vagina and parametrium (Fig. 3). A
positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) scan revealed that the mass was hypermetabolic with a standard uptake value of
5.5, and did not demonstrate any distant metastatic disease.Fig. 1Medium power (200×) hematoxylin and eosin stain showing sheets of small
tumor cells, focal necrosis, and a delicate vascular networkFig. 2High power (400×) hematoxylin and eosin stain showing small cells with
focal necrosis and mitotic activityFig. 3Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis: sagittal view. An enhancing mass is visible in the
anterior cervix Medium power (200×) hematoxylin and eosin stain showing sheets of small tumor cells, focal necrosis, and a delicate vascular
network High power (400×) hematoxylin and eosin stain showing small cells with focal necrosis and mitotic activity Magnetic resonance
imaging of the pelvis: sagittal view. An enhancing mass is visible in the anterior cervix The pathologic diagnosis was invasive malignant
small round blue cell tumor most consistent with small cell carcinoma. She completed two cycles of cisplatin and etoposide and a planned
course of 5,040 cGy over 28 fractions of 180 cGy each, which led to resolution of the vaginal bleeding. However, owing to the only weak
staining for the neuroendocrine markers, further immunostaining was performed. Stains for S-100, CD3, CD20, TTF1, and desmin were negative
whereas that for CD99 was strongly positive (Fig. 4). Diffuse membranous positivity for CD99 led to a diagnosis of Ewing’s sarcoma/PNET and
ruled out small cell carcinoma. Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed ESWR1 gene rearrangement in 90 % of cells, confirming the
diagnosis of Ewing’s sarcoma. Subsequently, chemotherapy was discontinued and our patient underwent total hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, upper vaginectomy, and resection of the parametrium. Surgical pathology showed stage IIB Ewing’s sarcoma involving
her cervix and extending into the right parametrium. Her endometrium, ovaries, and fallopian tubes were unremarkable and margins were free
of tumor.Fig. 4High power (400×) immunohistochemical diffuse and membranous CD99 positivity High power (400×) immunohistochemical diffuse
and membranous CD99 positivity She was started on chemotherapy with vincristine (2 mg/m2 on day 1), doxorubicin (Adriamycin; 75 mg/m2), and
cyclophosphamide with mesna (1,200 mg/m2 on day 1), alternating with ifosfamide plus mesna (1,800 mg/m2 days 1–5) and etoposide (100 mg/m2)
every 3 weeks. A PET scan done after two cycles demonstrated no recurrence of the tumor. After four cycles, 9 months from initial diagnosis,
she developed acute renal failure. CT scans showed evidence of metastases to her lumbar spine, pelvis, and bladder. Nephrostomy tubes were
placed, which improved renal function. Two weeks later she presented with distal colonic obstruction secondary to an extensive pelvic tumor.
Exploratory laparotomy and a diverting loop colostomy were done. One week later her disease progressed with new lung metastases, which led
to clinical deterioration and death, with an overall survival of 10 months. Ewing’s sarcoma/PNET of the cervix is an extremely rare entity.
Our review shows that there have been only 18 cases reported so far in the English literature; we report the 19th case (Table 1). In two
cases, PNET was reported in association with another malignancy. Horn et al. reported PNET with squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix, and
Tsao et al. reported carcinoma in addition to PNET, and described their case as a “carcinosarcoma” [2, 3]. The ages at presentation ranged
between 19 and 60 years, with the mean age being 39.Table 1Clinical and pathologic features, diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of peripheral
neuroectodermal tumors of the cervixAuthorAgeSymptomsDiagnosisStageSurgeryChemotherapy/intent of chemotherapyRadiation therapyOutcome1Russin
et al. 1987 60Vaginal bleedingPath/IHCIBTAH + BSO + LNDVAC for 6 weeks/adjuvantYesAlive at 16 months, NED2Sato et al. 1996 44Irregular
vaginal bleedingPath/IHCIB2TAH + BSO + LND, second look after 6 monthsCisplatin, VP16, cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), doxorubicin
(Adriamycin)/adjuvantNoAlive 6 months, NED3Horn et al. 1997 26Suspect cervical smearPath/IHCIB1TAH + BSO + LNDNo adjuvant chemotherapy; had
lung metastases 3 years after diagnosis, received 5FU and cisplatin/palliativeRT to metastasesDied 4.2 years after diagnosis4Cenacchi et al.
1998 36Irregular vaginal bleedingPath/IHC/RT-PCRIB2TAH without BSONoNoAlive 18 months, NED5Pauwels et al. 2000 45Irregular vaginal
bleedingPath/IHC/FISHIB2TAHNoPelvic RTAlive 42 months, NED6Tsao et al. 2001 24Vaginal bleeding, urinary frequencyPath/IHCTAH + transposition
of ovaries + LNSTwo cycles, VAC alternating with IE, neoadjuvant and adjuvantYesAlive 24 moths, NED7Malpica and Moran 2002 35Vaginal
bleedingPath/IHCIB1TAH + BSO + LNDAdjuvant chemotherapy/regimen not reportedNoAlive 5 months, NED8Malpica and Moran 2002 51Vaginal
bleedingPath/IHCIB2TAH + BSO + LNDAdjuvant chemotherapy/regimen not reportedNoAlive 18 months, NED9Snijders-Keilholz and Ewing 2005
21Intermenstrual bleedingPath/IHCIB2TAH without adnexectomySix courses of DIME/neoadjuvant; five courses of VIA/adjuvantNoAlive 27 months,
NED10Goda et al. 2007 19Vaginal bleeding, dischargeNoInduction VAC, planned for further consolidation after RTYesAlive, on treatment when
reported11Farzaneh et al. 2011 43Purulent vaginal dischargePath/IHCIB2TAH + BSO + LNS12 weeks of VAC alternating with IE/neoadjuvantNoAlive
4 years, NED12 weeks of VAC alternating with IE/adjuvant12Benbrahim et al. 2012 25Irregular vaginal bleedingPath/IHCIIbConiztion with
brachytherapyFour cycles of Adriamycin and Cytoxan/neoadjuvantYesAlive 8 years, NED13Arora et al. 2012 23Irregular bleeding,
dysuriaPath/IHCTAH + BSO + LNDOne cycle of CAV, followed by two cycles of cis/VP16/neoadjuvantYesAlive 4 years, NED14Masoura et al. 2012
23Irregular bleeding, abdominal painPath/IHC/RT-PCRIVTAH + BSOCisplatin once/adjuvantNo.Died, 12 days15Li et al. 2013 27Contact bleeding,
abdominal painPath/IHCIIIBUnresectableVAC alternating with IE/definitive chemotherapyYesAlive at 6 months, NED16Khosla et al. 2014
2810 weeks pregnant with vaginal bleeding and pelvic painPath/IHCIB2Termination of pregnancy, TAH + BSO + LNSAdriamycin, IE, for total of
6 weeks/adjuvantNoAlive 33 months, NED17Xiao et al. 2014 52Vaginal bleeding, uterine enlargementPath/IHCIIATAH + BSO + LNDTwo courses of
PVBPelvic recurrence 6 months, DOD 9 months18Xiao et al. 2014 59Cervix prolapse, vaginal bleedingPath/IHCIVBTAH + BSO + LNDNoneDOD19Present
case49Vaginal bleeding, lower abdominal painPath/IHC/FISHIIBTAH + BSOCisplatin/Etoposide with RT due to diagnosis of small cell VAC
alternating with IE/adjuvantYesDied, 10 months 5FU 5-fluorouracil, BSO bilateral salpingo oophorectomy, DIME Doxorubicin, Ifosfamide, Mesna,
Etoposide, DOD died of disease, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, IE Ifosfamide, Etoposide, IHC immunohistochemical studies, LND/LNS
pelvic lymphadenectomy/lymph node sampling, LSO left-sided oophorectomy, NED no evidence of disease, PVB Cisplatin, Vincristine, Bleomycin,
RT radiation therapy, RT-PCR reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, TAH total abdominal hysterectomy, VAC Vincristine, Adriamycin,
Cyclophosphamide, VIA Vincristine, Ifosfamide, Dactinomycin, VP16 Etoposide Clinical and pathologic features, diagnosis, treatment, and
outcome of peripheral neuroectodermal tumors of the cervix 5FU 5-fluorouracil, BSO bilateral salpingo oophorectomy, DIME Doxorubicin,
Ifosfamide, Mesna, Etoposide, DOD died of disease, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, IE Ifosfamide, Etoposide, IHC immunohistochemical
studies, LND/LNS pelvic lymphadenectomy/lymph node sampling, LSO left-sided oophorectomy, NED no evidence of disease, PVB Cisplatin,
Vincristine, Bleomycin, RT radiation therapy, RT-PCR reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, TAH total abdominal hysterectomy, VAC
Vincristine, Adriamycin, Cyclophosphamide, VIA Vincristine, Ifosfamide, Dactinomycin, VP16 Etoposide The most common symptom reported was
irregular vaginal bleeding. Other symptoms included dysuria, lower abdominal pain, vaginal discharge, and in one case, urinary frequency.
The most common physical findings were nodular lesions extending into the anterior vaginal wall and enlarged uterus. The vaginal bleeding
with enlarged uterus led to the preliminary diagnosis of fibroid in two patients [3, 4]. One patient had vaginal stenosis and necrotic
tissue on the cervix . Stage was not reported in three cases. Ten (62.5 %) patients were stage IB1 or IB2, one (6.25 %) stage IIA, two
(12.5 %) stage IIB, one (6.25 %) stage IIIB, and two stage IV (12.5 %). In the reported cases, multiple imaging modalities including
ultrasound, CT, and MRI were used for diagnosis and staging. Our review shows that PNET tumors are highly fludeoxyglucose avid. PET scan may
be a useful imaging modality in diagnosis, staging, and monitoring response to therapy. The diagnosis of EFTs is difficult by routine
microscopy because they have small blue cell morphology that can be seen in several malignancies. On histology examination, there are sheets
of small blue cells with “stippled salt and pepper chromatin” in the nuclei and absence of nucleoli . Necrosis and nuclear molding of
adjacent cells is common. Additionally, the cells easily become crushed during processing of the specimen, producing smudged and streaked
extra nuclear chromatin (crush artifact). Small round blue cells can be seen in a wide variety of malignancies which can be remembered using
the pneumonic “LEMON” (lymphoblastic lymphoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, medulloblastoma, oat cell/small cell neuroendocrine, and neuroblastoma).
Other soft tissue sarcomas and rhabdomyosarcoma should also be considered in the differential diagnosis. Lymphoblastic lymphomas closely
resemble PNET because they have sheets of small cells with a lack of glandular or squamous differentiation. Immunohistochemistry is critical
in the diagnosis. Small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas are usually positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin, and neuron-specific enolase,
and overlap highly with PNET. The vast majority of EFTs express high levels of a cell surface glycoprotein CD99 or MIC2 surface antigen that
is encoded by the CD99 (MIC2X) gene [7, 8]. The finding of membrane-localized MIC2 expression in a small blue cell malignancy is a sensitive
diagnostic marker for the EFTs. MIC2 lacks specificity because other tumors, like rhabdomyosarcoma, can be MIC2 positive. However, small
cell carcinomas are negative for MIC2. Benbrahim et al. reported a case of cervical PNET that was initially misdiagnosed as lymphoma .
Lymphoid markers, leucocyte common antigen, CD20, and CD3 can be utilized to differentiate lymphoma from PNET . Molecular genetic
characterization of chromosomal anomalies specific to EFT has led to increased detection. The characteristic signature translocation
involving the EWS gene at 22q12.2 and various erythroblast transcription specific-family genes, like FLI (friend leukemia virus integration
1) at 11q24.1-q24.3, is seen in 85–90 % of cases [10, 11]. ESWR encodes a multifunctional protein that regulates multiple cellular
processes. FLI1 encodes the FLI1 protein, which controls cellular development, proliferation, and carcinogenesis . The EWSR1–ERG
translocation [t (21; 22) (q22; q12)] is present in 5–10 % of EFTs, while other translocations are less common . Most of the cases reported
were diagnosed based on histopathology and immunohistochemistry (Table 1). Cytogenetic analysis was done in one case. Fluorescent in situ
hybridization was used in two cases including our case, while reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction [15, 16] was used in two
cases. Currently there is no uniformity of treatment, owing to the rarity of this neoplasm. Snijders-Keilholz et al. recommended a
multidisciplinary approach similar to that used in osseous PNETs with induction chemotherapy, surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy, and radiation
. When surgery is feasible, wide excision performed at a sarcoma center is preferable. Most patients (Table 1) with early stage disease
underwent total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Pelvic lymph node dissection was performed in 11 out of 19
cases. Of these 11 cases, eight patients are alive without recurrence, the outcome of two cases is unknown, and one patient died from
metastatic disease 4 years later. Of the eight cases that did not use lymph node dissection, two tumors were inoperable owing to stage IIIB
and IV disease. The stage of one patient is unknown. The remaining five cases were early stage (three stage I B2, two stage IIB). Of these
five cases, one patient did not receive any chemotherapy and died 4 years later. Our patient (stage IIB) died 10 months later despite
chemotherapy and radiation. The other three cases received chemotherapy and are alive without relapse. The contribution of Pelvic lymph node
dissection (PLND) to overall survival, especially in patients who had chemoradiation, is unclear. Chemotherapy was used in 16 of the 19
cases (Table 1). Two patients who were metastatic at diagnosis received palliative chemotherapy. Although adjuvant chemotherapy was used in
the earlier reported cases, a combined regimen of neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy has been used frequently in recent years, with
favorable results. The chemotherapy regimens and schedules used varied considerably. The use of ifosfamide and etoposide alternating with
vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and cyclophosphamide, which is the regimen of choice for Ewing’s sarcoma of the bone, has increased in
recent years with good outcomes. The overall survival appears to have dramatically improved with the use of chemotherapy. Eight of 19
patients (Table 1) received radiation therapy. The intent of radiation was palliative in one case, definitive in three, and adjuvant in
four. The definitive chemoradiation given to our patient was part of the small cell carcinoma regimen owing to an initial small cell
diagnosis, but she subsequently developed pelvic recurrence 9 months after diagnosis. Another case death from pelvic recurrence 9 months
after diagnosis was reported by Xiao et al. , but the authors did not report if radiation was given. Radiation doses ranged from 40 to 55 Gy
with the fractionation schedule of 180–200 cGy over 4–5 weeks. Overall, we conclude that adjuvant radiation may have a role in preventing
local recurrence and should be considered when appropriate. The follow-up of these cases ranged between 5 months and 8 years, with 15 of the
19 cases being alive and recurrence-free at the time of follow-up. Two patients died of metastatic disease 12 days and 4.2 years after
presentation, respectively. Our patient developed metastatic disease while on adjuvant chemotherapy and died 10 months after diagnosis. The
outcome of a case reported by Goda et al. is unknown. The best outcomes were noted in patients who underwent tri-modality therapy with
surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation; although owing to the paucity of cases the best approach is still unknown. Similar to skeletal Ewing’s
sarcoma, the most unfavorable prognostic factor is the presence of distant metastasis, with stage IV disease being universally fatal. A
recent review by Baldini et al. suggested that age may be a prognostic factor in survival and elderly patients do poorly. It is important to
identify these rare cases of Ewing’s sarcoma to provide early and appropriate treatment. With prompt diagnosis and aggressive multimodality
treatment, PNET of the cervix appears to be a potentially curable disease. Once diagnosis is made, referral to a tertiary care center with
dedicated multidisciplinary tumor boards and special expertise in sarcoma management is recommended. Hopefully, identification of more cases
in the future may help establish a meaningful pattern of behavior and guide clinical management of this rare entity. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions NM gathered and interpreted data regarding the disease. JG helped analyze data. MZ helped obtain
histological images and with interpretation. JS helped analyze images and contributed to the paper. MY was a major contributor in writing
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
