Unlike puerperal peripheral nerve lesions, mononeuropathy during pregnancy is rarely encountered. We report a case of bilateral relapsing-
remitting sciatic nerve palsy during two pregnancies. An extensive literature search in PubMed brought no similar cases. A healthy young
woman presented with initially unilateral sciatic nerve palsy, which manifested and worsened during the early phases of two successive
pregnancies. Electrophysiology revealed axonal lesion of the sciatic nerve with predominant affection of the peroneal part. Extensive
laboratory examination including cerebrospinal fluid examination was unremarkable. MR imaging was compatible with bilateral intraneural
perineurioma. Recurrent occurrence during two pregnancies and an anamnestic relationship between intermediate worsening of the paresis and
the menstrual cycle suggested hormone-dependency of the tumor. However, response to repeated intravenous immunoglobuline (IVIG) therapy
during pregnancy and shortly after childbirth resulted in partial reversion of foot drop. This was also indicative of an immunoneuropathy.
Nerve biopsy was not performed because of clinical improvement. The precise underlying neuropathological mechanism remained unclear. To
increase knowledge and awareness of this rare entity, potential etiologies of mononeuropathies during pregnancy are discussed in the context
of this case report. In the rare occasion of peripheral nerve mononeuropathy during pregnancy, in which therapeutic opportunities are
limited, IVIG therapy may be an option when the etiology cannot clearly be determined after thorough medical investigation. Whereas
postpartum traumatic neuropathy is a known entity, mononeuropathy during pregnancy is rarely encountered. Here we report an unusual case of
bilateral sciatic neuropathy manifesting and worsening in early pregnancy, respectively. An extensive literature search in PubMed brought no
similar cases. On this occasion potential etiologies of mononeuropathies during pregnancy are discussed in the context of our case report. A
28-year-old healthy woman with unremarkable medical history except for mild hypothyreosis developed sudden painless left-sided foot drop
during her first pregnancy at 16 weeks of gestation. Lumbar nerve root compression was excluded by MRI. Electroneurographic and
electromyographic examination 6 weeks after symptom onset revealed an isolated axonal lesion of the sciatic nerve with predominant affection
of the peroneal portion. There was no history of trauma. Family history was negative for neurofibromatosis type 1, hereditary motor and
sensory neuropathy or other neuromuscular diseases. She was diagnosed as sciatic nerve palsy of unknown origin and was recommended for
physiotherapy (strengthening exercises to the left tibialis anterior muscle). Paresis persisted during the further course of her pregnancy.
Additional neurologic symptoms did not occur. Sensory deficits were absent. She had an uneventful Caesarean delivery at 40 gestational weeks
and gave birth to a healthy girl. Thorough neurologic investigation was performed three weeks later. Follow-up MRI of the lumbar spine was
again normal. Routine laboratory parameters were unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid examination including immunologic and infectiologic
parameters was within normal limits except for a slightly increased protein level (730.4 mg/l). Inflammatory neuropathy was assumed.
However, application of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) for 3 days had no beneficial effect at this time. The patient got bracing for her
left leg and further physiotherapy was prescribed. Follow-up examination one year later showed ongoing weakness of the left foot (grade 2/5)
and toe extension (grade 3/5) as well as ankle eversion (grade 2/5). Electroneurography demonstrated stable findings with prolonged distal
motor latency of the tibialis and peroneus nerve and marked reduction of amplitudes in the peroneus nerve. A causal relation between paresis
and pregnancy was considered highly unlikely at that point in time. Three years after the first presentation at the time of her second
pregnancy she reported that the residual paresis of her left leg had gradually worsened again since the 8th week of gestation. Moreover, she
had experienced slight weakness of foot extension in the other leg as well. Upon admission at 28 gestational weeks, neurological examination
revealed complete palsy of left foot and toe extension as well as ankle eversion and slight weakness of ankle inversion and plantar flexion
(grade 4/5). The right leg now also showed paresis of foot and toe extension (grade 4+/5). Sensation was normal. The patient did not report
any pain. Motor nerve conduction studies confirmed deterioration with conduction now being absent in the left peroneal nerve. Detailed
history taking disclosed a relationship between intermediate worsening of the paresis and the menstrual cycle (deterioration 2–3 days prior
to menstruation). MRI of the pelvis (performed without contrast agent because of pregnancy) revealed bilateral fusiform irregular expansion
of the sciatic nerves with separation of single nerve fascicles and hyperintensity on T2-weighted images (Fig. 1). Compression of the nerves
by other anatomical structures could be excluded. Findings were considered compatible with bilateral intraneural perineurioma. To rule out
other differential diagnoses numerous laboratory exams were performed including CA-125 and Human Epididymis Protein 4 (HE4) as markers for
active endometriosis or ovarial tumors as well as anti-ganglioside and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) autoantibodies indicating immune-
mediated neuropathy. Results were unremarkable. Repeated cerebrospinal fluid examination with flow cytometry was normal. Protein level was
now within normal limits.Fig. 1Axial T2-weighted MRI of the pelvis. It shows bilateral enlarged sciatic nerves (arrows) with increased
signal intensity. Note that single fascicles are separated from each other but the fascicular structure of the nerve is preserved Axial
T2-weighted MRI of the pelvis. It shows bilateral enlarged sciatic nerves (arrows) with increased signal intensity. Note that single
fascicles are separated from each other but the fascicular structure of the nerve is preserved Because therapeutic options during pregnancy
were limited and an immunological etiology was still considered, intravenous steroid therapy with 1000 mg methylprednisolone was
administered for three consecutive days. It had no beneficial effect. Four weeks later the patient was additionally treated with a dose of
120 g of IVIG over 4 days. After that she reported slight improvement in gait. Standing on tip-toe was again possible. Because of that, IVIG
therapy was repeated at the same dose immediately after the uneventful Caesarean section, which was performed at 38 gestational weeks. On
follow-up examination four weeks postpartum, sciatic nerve palsy had improved up to the degree of the residual paresis after her first
pregnancy. Right-sided foot drop had resolved completely. Another MRI scan of the pelvis, now performed with contrast agent, showed a stable
extent of the bilateral lesions. Uptake of contrast agent was not seen. We suggested performing a nerve biopsy to clarify the entity of the
lesion and recommended another clinical, radiological and electrophysiological follow-up examination at three months to the patient.
However, she refused any further diagnostics because she was content with her current state. Here we report an unusual case of bilateral
sciatic nerve palsy manifesting and worsening in early pregnancy, respectively. The radiological picture was compatible with bilateral
intraneural perineurioma of the peroneal portion of the sciatic nerve. The occurrence during a period of hormonal change and the anamnestic
relationship between intermediate worsening of the paresis and the menstrual cycle suggested hormone-dependency of the tumor. Response to
timely IVIG therapy, however, was also indicative of an immunoneuropathy. An extensive literature search in PubMed for reports of lower
extremity neuropathy during pregnancy brought no similar cases except for a short report of bilateral femoral neuropathy, whose etiology
could also not be determined . Among puerperal traumatic neuropathies, the peroneal portion of the sciatic nerve is most frequently affected
. Potential etiologic mechanisms include mechanical trauma through intrapelvic compression by the fetus, stretching of the nerves or
pressure-induced ischaemia during labor . However, mononeuropathy during pregnancy is rarely encountered. In our case compression by the
fetus seemed unlikely given the fact that symptoms manifested in early pregnancy. Compression of the sciatic nerve caused by gluteal
varicosis has also been described , but this was excluded by MRI. Intraspinal or peripheral nerve endometriosis manifestations have been
reported as a cause of recurrent hormone-dependent leg monoparesis in young women , but endometriosis is known to be inactive during
pregnancy and respective laboratory examinations were unremarkable. Neurogenic tumors occur predominantly in young women. Neurinoma,
composed largely of Schwann cells, enlarge during pregnancy presumably as a result of hormonal change and shrink after giving birth [6, 7].
Progesterone receptor expression in neurofibromas has been reported . In a mouse model, estrogen and progesterone were found to foster the
growth of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor xenografts . These observations support the hypothesis about hormonal dependence of tumors
originating from the neural supporting tissues. Concentrations of steroid hormones estradiol and progesterone increase during pregnancy and
plasma progesterone levels are highest in the luteal phase at the end of the menstrual cycle. This is in accordance with the patient’s
observation of recurrent temporary worsening of the paresis a few days before her menstruation. Intraneural perineurioma, which was
suspected in our case because of characteristic MRI findings mentioned above , is known to cause painless motor mononeuropathy with sparing
of sensory fibers [11, 12]. Moreover, the sciatic or common peroneal nerves are the most commonly involved sites . However, bilateral
occurrence is extremely rare and hormone-dependent growth of this distinct entity of perineural tissue tumors has not been described before.
Unlike neurofibroma it is not a Schwann cell neoplasm but the tumor arises from the perineurial layer instead. Immunohistochemical
differentiation is possible because intraneural perineuriomas are positive for EMA (epithelial membrane antigen) and negative for S-100,
whereas Schwann cell lesions demonstrate the opposite pattern . However, in our case nerve biopsy was not performed to avoid deteriorating
partially recovered nerve function after IVIG therapy. Further uncommon pathologies of sciatic nerve tumors and tumor-like lesions consist
of neurolymphoma, commonly in the scenario of a known hematologic malignancy, or amyloidosis, which is usually also systemic with multiple
nerves being affected . Fibromatosis and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease were also discussed as differential diagnoses but family history was
negative for both. The patient did not report any liability to pressure palsies. We considered it as highly unlikely that a hereditary
neuropathy manifests and recovers so rapidly and during pregnancy only. A hereditary neuropathy possibly also would not respond to IVIG
therapy. Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy (CIDP) and Lewis Sumner Syndrome may be considered because the radiological
picture can be similar and IVIG therapy was beneficial. However, electrophysiology revealed predominantly axonal lesion of motor fibers only
and CSF protein level was only slightly increased if at all. Moreover, disease progression solely in phases of hormonal change is not a
typical characteristic of CIDP, neither of the aforementioned entities. In summary, the precise neuropathological mechanism underlying this
unusual case of relapsing-remitting sciatic nerve palsy during early pregnancy remains unclear. In the rare occasion of peripheral nerve
mononeuropathy during pregnancy, in which therapeutic opportunities are limited, IVIG therapy may be an option when the etiology cannot
clearly be determined after thorough medical investigation including electrophysiological, laboratory and radiological assessment. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. SSK and SGM drafted the
manuscript; SSK, MS, HW and SGM treated the patient; WS performed radiological diagnostics and image interpretation; all authors revised the
manuscript critically for important intellectual content. All authors agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that
questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. None. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
