In humans, Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (MTOR) encodes a 300 kDa serine/ threonine protein kinase that is ubiquitously expressed,
particularly at high levels in brain. MTOR functions as an integrator of multiple cellular processes, and in so doing either directly or
indirectly regulates the phosphorylation of at least 800 proteins. While somatic MTOR mutations have been recognized in tumors for many
years, and more recently in hemimegalencephaly, germline MTOR mutations have rarely been described. We report the successful application of
family-trio Diagnostic Exome Sequencing (DES) to identify the underlying molecular etiology in two brothers with multiple neurological and
developmental lesions, and for whom previous testing was non-diagnostic. The affected brothers, who were 6 and 23 years of age at the time
of DES, presented symptoms including but not limited to mild Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), megalencephaly, gross motor skill delay,
cryptorchidism and bilateral iris coloboma. Importantly, we determined that each affected brother harbored the MTOR missense alteration
p.E1799K (c.5395G>A). This exact variant has been previously identified in multiple independent human somatic cancer samples and has been
shown to result in increased MTOR activation. Further, recent independent reports describe two unrelated families in whom p.E1799K co-
segregated with megalencephaly and intellectual disability (ID); in both cases, p.E1799K was shown to have originated due to germline
mosaicism. In the case of the family reported herein, the absence of p.E1799K in genomic DNA extracted from the blood of either parent
suggests that this alteration most likely arose due to gonadal mosaicism. Further, the p.E1799K variant exerts its effect by a gain-of-
function (GOF), autosomal dominant mechanism. Herein, we describe the use of DES to uncover an activating MTOR missense alteration of
gonadal mosaic origin that is likely to be the causative mutation in two brothers who present multiple neurological and developmental
abnormalities. Our report brings the total number of families who harbor MTOR p.E1799K in association with megalencephaly and ID to three.
In each case, evidence suggests that p.E1799K arose in the affected individuals due to gonadal mosaicism. Thus, MTOR p.E1799K can now be
classified as a pathogenic GOF mutation that causes megalencephaly and cognitive impairment in humans. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12881-015-0240-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs)
are a group of neuro-developmental maladies marked by social/communication impairments, repetitive behaviors, and sensory reactivity issues
. Even though the molecular etiology of autism is genetically heterogeneous, up to 10 % of cases are associated with a distinct genetic
condition such as Fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, phenylketonuria, or Rett syndrome . Furthermore, 20 % of autistic patients exhibit
macrocephaly . In a number of these cases, germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN (Phosphatase andTensin Homologue) have been
revealed to be the underlying cause of disease . It has been estimated that the rate of PTEN disruption is up to 5 % in ASD patients with
macrocephaly . PTEN functions as a negative regulator of the PI3K (Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase)–AKT (AKT/Protein Kinase B)-MTOR (Mammalian
Target of Rapamycin) signaling cascade, a simplified version of which is depicted in Fig. 1. At the center of this pathway lies MTOR, a
300 kDa serine/threonine protein kinase encoded by the MTOR gene, which in humans is situated on chromosome 1p36 . By integrating upstream
signals to downstream effector molecules like ribosomal P70 S6 (S6) and ribosomal P70 S6 kinase (S6K), the PI3K-AKT-MTOR axis serves to
regulate a myriad of biological processes including cell growth and proliferation, apoptosis, protein synthesis, and transcription . MTOR is
known to mediate normal brain development by playing key roles in axonal and dendritic growth, and in the establishment and maintenance of
synaptic plasticity .Fig. 1Simplified representation of the MTOR signaling network. Green arrows indicate the specific substrates shown to
be phosphorylated/over-stimulated by p.E1799K-hyperactivated MTOR kinase. Other symbols and abbreviations used: stimulatory effects ();
inhibitory effects (); 4E-BP1 (Eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factor 4E-Binding Protein 1); AKT (AKT/ Protein Kinase B); MTOR (Mammalian
Target of Rapamycin); PI3K (Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase); PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog); RAS (Rat Sarcoma Viral Oncogene Homolog); S6K
(Ribosomal P70 S6 Kinase 1); TORC1 (MTOR Complex 1); TORC2 (MTOR Complex 2) TSC1 (Tuberous Sclerosis 1); TSC2 (Tuberous Sclerosis 2)
Simplified representation of the MTOR signaling network. Green arrows indicate the specific substrates shown to be phosphorylated/over-
stimulated by p.E1799K-hyperactivated MTOR kinase. Other symbols and abbreviations used: stimulatory effects (); inhibitory effects ();
4E-BP1 (Eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factor 4E-Binding Protein 1); AKT (AKT/ Protein Kinase B); MTOR (Mammalian Target of Rapamycin);
PI3K (Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase); PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog); RAS (Rat Sarcoma Viral Oncogene Homolog); S6K (Ribosomal P70 S6
Kinase 1); TORC1 (MTOR Complex 1); TORC2 (MTOR Complex 2) TSC1 (Tuberous Sclerosis 1); TSC2 (Tuberous Sclerosis 2) As evidenced by the
association of PTEN dysfunction with ASD and macrocephaly, hyper-activation of the PI3K-AKT-MTOR signaling cascade is an underlying factor
for neurological disease and abnormal development. Such ‘TORopathies’ include neurological ailments like focal cortical malformations (FCM),
tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), and hemimegalencephaly, all of which are highly associated with epilepsy [16, 17]. Furthermore,
hyperactivation of the MTOR axis has also been associated with somatic cancer . Although specific molecular lesions have been defined for
some TORopathies--for example, in cases where PTEN is disrupted--in many instances it remains difficult to pinpoint the exact molecular
defect due to the complexity of the MTOR signaling network . Even so, the emergence of next generation sequencing (NGS) has greatly
facilitated the search for genes and pathogenic variants that underlie neurological disease. Several recent reports have detailed the
successful use of whole exome sequencing (WES) to uncover both somatic and germline activating alterations within MTOR itself. These
clinical studies describe damaging MTOR alleles in unrelated probands who present overlapping neurological symptoms and brain defects . In a
recent cancer study, Grabiner and colleagues accessed publicly available sequencing data from tumor samples to uncover 33 MTOR alterations
that conferred hyperactivation of the MTOR signaling pathway within cancer cells. These alterations clustered around six distinct regions in
the C-terminal half of the protein . Herein, we present the clinical and genetic investigation of two brothers affected with macrocephaly
and ASD. Diagnostic Exome Sequencing (DES) identified a GOF MTOR alteration, p.E1799K, to be the causative mutation in this family. Co-
segregation and short tandem repeat (STR) analyses revealed that MTOR p.E1799K likely originated as a consequence of gonadal mosaicism.
Table 1 lists the major clinical features displayed by the proband and his brother, as well as the features of additional patients who
harbor MTOR p.E1799K but who are unrelated to the family described herein. The proband, who presented to medical genetics clinic at age 3
with macrocephaly, bilateral iris colobomas and gross motor delay, had a mildly unusual appearance, which was primarily due to macrocephaly
with a prominent forehead (Fig. 2a, left panels). The proband was the product of an uncomplicated pregnancy and was large for his
gestational age, with a weight of 2950 g (97 %) at 35 weeks; birth head circumference was not recorded. Since infancy, his linear growth and
weight have been normal; however, macrocephaly was noted by 6 months, which prompted a head ultrasound. The result showed no evidence of
hydrocephalus. Since 3 years of age, the proband’s head growth has been tracking parallel to, and 6 standard deviations above the mean.
Investigation by magnetic resonance imaging revealed megalencephaly. Bilateral iris colobomas with normal posterior poles were noted at
birth, and the proband wears glasses for strabismus. During infancy, he displayed hyperinsulinemia, which was managed through frequent
feedings and administration of diazoxide. He continues to display asthma, as well as persistent food allergies that manifest through
gastrointestinal and cutaneous symptoms.Table 1Clinical Findings Associated with MTOR E1799Ka ProbandSiblingBaynam 1Baynam 2Baynam 3Lgab
++-++Postnatal height/weightNormalNormalNormalNormalUnknown Macrocephaly+5SD+5SD>+3SD>+3SD>+3SDMRIMegalencephalyMegalencephalyMild
ventricular prominenceMegalencephalyUnknownHypogenesis of corpus callosumPerisylvian polymicrogyria,Small pons & medullaHypogenesis of
corpus callosumGray matter heterotopiaIntellectual disabilityMild disability/autismModerate disability/autismHyperactive/speech delayMarked
global delayMarked global delaySeizures--+++EyeIris colobomaIris coloboma---Noonan-like face--+++Small chest/large abdomen--+++ aThis table
does not include the case of an additional patient who harbors MTOR E1799K (Ghahramani et al., ACMG 2015) due to lack of access to the
patient's detailed clinical information bLarge for gestational ageFig. 2Clinical presentation and co-segregation analysis. a) Photographs of
the proband (left column) and his affected brother (right column) at different ages. b) Familial co-segregation/ Sanger sequencing analyses
indicate that the affected brothers are heterozygous for MTOR c.5395G>A, p.E1799K (red arrows); in contrast, both parents are homozygous for
the wild type allele. These results strongly suggest that c.5395G>A (p.E1799K) arose due to gonadal mosaicism in one of the parents.
Chromatograms are shown beneath each member of the pedigree. Note that ‘+’ indicates whole exome sequencing was performed, while open shapes
represent unaffected family members; the black shapes represent the affected brothers Clinical Findings Associated with MTOR E1799Ka aThis
table does not include the case of an additional patient who harbors MTOR E1799K (Ghahramani et al., ACMG 2015) due to lack of access to the
patient's detailed clinical information bLarge for gestational age Clinical presentation and co-segregation analysis. a) Photographs of the
proband (left column) and his affected brother (right column) at different ages. b) Familial co-segregation/ Sanger sequencing analyses
indicate that the affected brothers are heterozygous for MTOR c.5395G>A, p.E1799K (red arrows); in contrast, both parents are homozygous for
the wild type allele. These results strongly suggest that c.5395G>A (p.E1799K) arose due to gonadal mosaicism in one of the parents.
Chromatograms are shown beneath each member of the pedigree. Note that ‘+’ indicates whole exome sequencing was performed, while open shapes
represent unaffected family members; the black shapes represent the affected brothers The proband required surgery for undescended testes
and an inguinal hernia. He did not display any unusual skin pigmentation in the genital area. Further, he has never displayed seizures.
Initially hypotonic with delayed gross motor milestones, the proband walked at 18 months but remained somewhat hypotonic. His early language
milestones appeared normal, but he subsequently exhibited significant social delays that were interpreted as mild ASD. Testing at age 7
revealed that his overall cognitive ability rated in the mildly impaired range. Previous genetic testing, which included PTEN sequencing and
chromosomal microarray analysis, did not reveal any molecular abnormalities. The proband’s older brother, who had previously displayed
clinical features including macrocephaly, unilateral iris coloboma and autism, presented an unusual appearance, mainly due to severe
macrocephaly, a prominent forehead, and deep set eyes surrounded by dark circles (Fig. 2a, right panels). The product of an uncomplicated
pregnancy, the elder brother was born at 36 weeks and was large for his gestational age, with a weight of 3400 g (>97 %) and head
circumference of 36 cm (>97 %). Although his subsequent linear growth and weight were normal, his macrocephaly nevertheless persisted. Since
age 2, his head grew parallel to the norm but tracked 6 standard deviations above the mean, reaching an adult circumference of 65 cm. MRI
scans revealed only megalencephaly. Although he is lactose intolerant and displays mild asthma, he does not display the severe allergies
suffered by the proband. Unilateral iris coloboma was noted at birth and he has required several surgeries for strabismus; otherwise, his
vision has been normal. In addition, he underwent surgery for undescended testes. The older brother has never had seizures; however, he was
hypotonic and displayed significant delays in both speech and motor skills. Furthermore, repeated testing during childhood showed that he
presented mild to moderate intellectual disability. His speech and social skills remained significantly below other developmental metrics,
and as a teenager he was diagnosed with autism. Karyotype and Fragile–X test results were normal. The brothers’ parents, who are healthy and
non-consanguineous, possess normal intelligence, regular head circumference, and normal eyes. The father is of Norwegian, German and
Bohemian descent, while the mother is of mixed European and Japanese ancestry. It should be noted that in addition to conceiving/giving
birth to the proband and his brother, the parents/mother suffered a miscarriage due to trisomy 18. Furthermore, a maternal nephew displays
mild autism despite having normal intelligence, and the paternal great grandmother was stated to have an iris coloboma, though no records
are available to confirm this. No one else in the family has been reported to have macrocephaly or significant cognitive disability. Due to
the proband’s unique combination of symptoms, that is, macrocephaly and mild ASD, as well as normal PTEN sequencing results and normal
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array results, DES was undertaken at age 6 years. We performed family trio-DES on genomic DNA (gDNA)
isolated from the blood leukocytes of the proband, mother and brother. We then analyzed the resultant NGS data through bioinformatic
filtering, inheritance modeling and finally, expert medical review. In so doing, we discovered that the likely molecular lesion underlying
the brothers’ symptoms is the MTOR missense alteration, p.E1799K (c.5395G>A). All research described in this case report was conducted in
accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. Furthermore, the clinical information presented herein was collected
during the routine clinical care of a patient in the United States; thus, in accordance with US law, this study is exempt from Institutional
Research Board approval. In order to perform the variant filtering and co-segregation analysis that are integral to the exome trio
sequencing test, it is necessary to include relevant family member samples in the sequencing trio. This format, which is currently a
standard approach for clinical exome testing, is explicitly stated on the test requisition form. The mother of the patient approved the
inclusion of all family members in the test. Further, all subjects provided signed, written informed consent to participate in this study.
Written informed consent from the parents of the 6 year-old proband, as well as the written informed consent from the 23 year-old brother
have been obtained for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood extracted
from each family member utilizing the QIAsymphony gDNA extraction system (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Samples were prepared using either the
SureSelect Target Enrichment System (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) or the SeqCap EZ VCRome 2.0 system (Roche NimbleGen, Madison,
WI) . Briefly, each DNA sample was sheared, blunt-end repaired, and ligated to indexed adapters. Utilizing solution-based hybridization with
oligonucleotide probes, the coding exons and neighboring intronic sequence of each genome were enriched, while off-target sequences were
washed away. The resultant enriched exome libraries were applied to the solid surface flow cell of an Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencer
(Illumina, San Diego, CA) for clonal amplification and sequencing using paired-end, 100-cycle chemistry. The acquisition and processing of
data, alignment of sequence to Genome Reference Consortium Human genome build 37 (GRCh37), and bioinformatic filtering were performed as
described in Farwell et al., 2014 . Initial data processing/base calling, including extraction of cluster intensities, was performed using
RTA 1.12.4 (HiSeq Control Software 1.4.5). The sequence quality filtering script was executed using Illumina CASAVA software (ver 1.8.2,
Illumina, Hayward, CA). Sequencing run metrics, including data yield (Mbases), %PF (pass-filter), number of reads, per cent of raw clusters
per lane, and quality scores, were recorded in the Demultiplex_Stats.htm file and verified to surpass quality thresholds. Sequences were
aligned to the human genome reference sequence GRCh37 and variant calls were generated using CASAVA and Pindel . All exonic sequence and a
minimum of 2 bases of flanking intronic sequence were analyzed. Data analysis focused on nonsense variants, small insertions and deletions,
canonical splice site alterations, and non-synonymous missense alterations. Previously described gene mutations and polymorphisms were
screened using resources that included the Human Gene Mutation Database Professional 2011.3 (HGMD 2011.3) , the Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism database (dbSNP) , 1000 genomes , HapMap data and NCBI resources such as PubMed. Importantly, the in silico filtering pipeline
protected all variants annotated within the HGMD 2011.3 and/ or the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database. Stepwise filtering
included the removal of common Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), intergenic and 3′/5′ UTR (untranslated region) variants, non-splice-
related intronic variants, and synonymous variants. Remaining variants were filtered for family history using models of inheritance. For
every filtered variant, Ambry Variant Analyzer (AVA) was utilized to annotate the data, which included nucleotide and amino acid
conservation; biochemical nature of the amino acid substitution; population frequency as tabulated in the ESP and 1000 genomes databases;
and finally, the impact of the nucleotide substitution on protein function, as predicted by the in silico modeling algorithms PolyPhen and
SIFT . Importantly, each candidate alteration was reviewed by a molecular geneticist in order to assess the likelihood of pathogenicity. NGS
alignments were viewed using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) software (Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA) . Short tandem repeat (STR)
analysis was performed on each family member. Briefly, seven independent loci situated on separate chromosomes were amplified with
fluorescently labeled primers and the resultant products electrophoresed on an ABI3730 DNA sequencer. Candidate alterations identified as
potentially causative were confirmed using automated fluorescence dideoxy Sanger sequencing. Co-segregation analysis was performed on each
available family member. Target specific primers were designed to include 5′ terminal sense and antisense sequencing tags. The gene-specific
moieties of the primers were designed with the aid of PrimerZ ; oligonucleotides were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies
(Coralville, IA) and sequencing was performed on an automated ABI3730 DNA sequencer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) according to standard
procedures. The crystal structure of MTOR (PDB:4JSP) was used to model the location of the observed variant, MTOR p.E1799 . Visualization of
the local environment structure and overlap of the variant amino acid were performed in PyMOL (The Open Source PyMOL Molecular Graphics
System, Version 1.7.x Schrödinger, LLC). Exome sequencing of the family trio (proband, mother and brother) resulted in an average of 6.82 Gb
being collected per sample. The average exome read depth/mean fold-coverage was 65.64 per sample, with an average of 93.13 % of bases
covered at least 10-fold. On average, 81 % of bases had a quality score of Q30 or higher. Overall, the average base-call mean quality score
for the family trio exceeded Q32 (Additional file 1: Table S1). Stepwise filtering of common SNPs, intergenic and 3′/5′ UTR variants, non-
splice-related intronic variants, and synonymous variants resulted in approximately 11,000 variants being associated with each trio member
(Additional file 2: Table S2). Subsequent filtering based on family history and inheritance modeling (autosomal dominant/recessive, X-linked
dominant/recessive, and Y-linked) within the trio narrowed the list of candidates to 36 genes and 42 unique alterations (Additional file 3:
Table S3). After manual review of each alteration in order to rule out sequencing artifacts and polymorphisms, followed by expert medical
interpretation to rule out genes lacking clinical overlap, the list of candidates was narrowed to 2 genes, each with a unique alteration.
These notable candidate genes, along with their respective alterations and corresponding in silico prediction scores, are presented in
Table 2.Table 2Notable candidate genes/alterationsGeneRefSeq IsoformVariant/Coordinatesa SIFT Score (Prediction)Polyphen2_HDIV Score
(Prediction)Polyphen2_HVAR Score (Prediction) Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (MTOR) NM_004958Chr1:11190804C>T c.5395G>A p.E1799K0.133
(Tolerated)0.878 (Possibly Damaging)0.463 (Possibly Damaging) Oligophrenin-1 (OPHN1) NM_002547ChrX:67272394C>T c.2363G>A p.R788Q0.130
(Tolerated)0.995 (Probably Damaging)0.457 (Possibly Damaging) aGenomic coordinates correspond to GRCh37/hg19. Note that at the genomic
level, both the MTOR and the OLPHN1 variants are notated by their complementary bases. This is due to the fact that each gene is encoded by
the minus strand of its respective chromosome Notable candidate genes/alterations aGenomic coordinates correspond to GRCh37/hg19. Note that
at the genomic level, both the MTOR and the OLPHN1 variants are notated by their complementary bases. This is due to the fact that each gene
is encoded by the minus strand of its respective chromosome One of the candidates under consideration was an Oligophrenin-1 (OPHN1) variant
of uncertain significance (VUS), c.2363G>A (p.R788Q). Both the proband and his brother were hemizygous for this VUS, while their mother was
heterozygous. OPHN1 disruption has been shown to cause syndromic X-linked intellectual disability with cerebellar hypoplasia in affected
individuals, and it also results in distinctive facial features . Although one brother’s facial appearance demonstrated some similarity to
the faces of OPHN1-mutated individuals, the overall set of traits displayed by the family herein is incongruous with the notion that the
OPHN1 VUS is the underlying cause of disease. For instance, both affected brothers display macrocephaly, which has not been previously
attributed to mutations in OPHN1. Moreover, the lack of the key clinical finding of cerebellar hypoplasia in the affected brothers, as well
as the absence of the usual carrier phenotype in the mother makes OPHN1 an unlikely molecular candidate for disease. We therefore determined
that the MTOR alteration c.5395G>A (p.E1799K), which is carried by both affected brothers but absent in the mother (Table 3), displayed
sufficient clinical overlap with the proband’s phenotype to warrant further investigation/confirmation.Table 3Family trio DES identifies the
MTOR alteration p.E1799K (c.5395G>A) in the proband and affected brotherNucleotidesa ProbandBrotherMotherReferenceC53.23% (33/62)52.63%
(20/38)100.00% (31/31)MutationT46.77% (29/62)47.37% (18/38)0.00% (0/31)Q Score220148119 aThe variant is notated as C>T by the alignment
software because the MTOR gene is situated on the minus strand of chromosome 1. For each trio member, the percentage of reads is followed in
brackets by the fraction of wt or variant reads over the total number of reads Family trio DES identifies the MTOR alteration p.E1799K
(c.5395G>A) in the proband and affected brother aThe variant is notated as C>T by the alignment software because the MTOR gene is situated
on the minus strand of chromosome 1. For each trio member, the percentage of reads is followed in brackets by the fraction of wt or variant
reads over the total number of reads As indicated by the red arrows shown in the lower two chromatograms of Fig. 2b, automated fluorescent
dideoxy sequencing of gDNA extracted from family member blood samples confirmed the presence of the MTOR alteration c.5395G>A (p.E1799K) in
the proband and his affected brother. In contrast, c.5395G>A (p.E1799K) was not detected in the peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)
gDNA of either parent (Fig. 2b, upper chromatograms). Because the STR results are consistent with the reported familial relationships, these
co-segregation data strongly suggest that the MTOR variant c.5395G>A (p.E1799K) originated as a consequence of gonadal mosaicism in one of
the parents. Overstimulation of the MTOR signaling network, as well as hyperactivation of MTOR itself have been shown to cause symptoms that
overlap those displayed by the proband and his brother, namely macrocephaly and ASD [7–11, 23]. In humans, MTOR is expressed in every tissue
of the body and is highly expressed in brain, where it plays important roles in axonal and dendritic growth, as well as in synaptic
plasticity . It is understood that the PI3K-AKT-MTOR signaling pathway plays a key role in mammalian growth and development via its ability
to regulate protein translation (Fig. 1). Emerging evidence suggests that the MTOR axis regulates brain development by not simply acting as
an ‘on/off’ switch that promotes beneficial protein synthesis, but rather by functioning as a valve that modulates translational rates
during distinct temporal windows. Thus, if excessive protein synthesis occurs at the wrong time, it can result in significant deficits in
synaptic plasticity and behavior . Although there is ample evidence that other genes in the MTOR pathway, particularly PTEN, cause
neurodevelopmental abnormalities including macrocephaly and autism, the first report of a pathogenic mutation in MTOR itself was a mosaic
somatic mutation limited to the affected brain tissue of a child with hemimegalencephaly . Subsequently, non-mosaic germline MTOR mutations
were reported in two unrelated children with seizures and developmental delay, one of whom had documented megalencephaly and callosal
dysgenesis [20, 21]. Recently, Baynam and colleagues reported three maternal half-siblings of Aboriginal Australian heritage who presented
with megalencephaly, developmental delay, and epilepsy (Table 1). The affected individuals, who are unrelated to the family in this report,
share the same germline activating MTOR alteration as that harbored by the affected brothers described herein: p.E1799K (c.5395G>A) . The
authors showed that the alteration was not present in the blood of the clinically normal mother and, as in the case of our proband and his
affected brother, p.E1799K (c.5395G>A) was postulated to have arisen due to parental gonadal mosaicism . Assays performed on stimulated
PBMCs from one of the affected half-sisters revealed that MTOR activity was upregulated in her cells; moreover, this increase in activity
could be inhibited/rescued back to normal levels through treatment with Rapamycin . Emerging evidence indicates that altered MTOR activity
may be associated with allergic reactions that are capable of triggering neuropathology. Because PTEN is an inhibitor of the PI3K-AKT-MTOR
signaling cascade, loss-of-function (LOF) PTEN mutations result in increased MTOR activity, which in turn potentiates inflammation through
1) microglial and mast cell proliferation [38, 39], and 2) mast cell chemotaxis and activation [40, 41]. Theoharides et al. proposed a model
in which children with hyperactivation of the MTOR pathway have a lower threshold for brain mast cell stimulation and are thus more
sensitive to triggers like allergens, immune factors, neuro-hormones, stress and toxins . In support of this model, the hormone Neurotensin
(NT), which is secreted by the hypothalamus and functions as a stimulator of brain mast cells, is detected at increased levels in the serum
of autistic children . While the relationship between our patients’ colobomas and their MTOR mutation remains speculative, it is clear that
the PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway affects eye development. Most notably, Rieger anomaly is a cardinal feature of SHORT (Short Stature,
Hyperextensibility, Hernia, Ocular Depression, Rieger Anomaly, and Teething Delay) syndrome, which is caused by heterozygous
Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase, Regulatory Subunit 1 (PIK3R1) mutations . Cataracts are also an occasional feature of PTEN hamartoma syndrome
. The alteration p.E1799K, which was originally identified in multiple somatic tumor samples, has been empirically shown to cause
hyperactivation of MTOR . Interestingly, in HEK293 cells, p.E1799K selectively increases MTOR kinase activity towards the substrates AKT/
Protein Kinase B (AKT) and 4E-Binding Protein 1 (4E-BP1), but exerts minimal effect on MTOR kinase activity towards ribosomal P70 S6 Kinase
1 (S6K1) . As illustrated in Fig. 1, increased phosphorylation of 4E-PB1 and AKT by TORC1 and TORC2, respectively, triggers increased
protein synthesis. Moreover, constitutive or heightened MTOR activation has the potential to decouple and/or alter the manner in which the
PI3K-AKT-MTOR signaling axis responds to neurotransmitters and external growth and development cues that exert their effects through
neuronal cell surface receptor binding. Further support for the notion that increased MTOR activity is the mutational mechanism underlying
neurological disease in the proband and his affected brother comes from the fact that homozygous LOF genotypes are tolerated in the healthy
population . As shown in Fig. 3a, p.E1799K is situated in the FAT (FRAP, ATM, TRRAP) domain of MTOR. This domain adopts a c-shaped α
solenoid structure that clamps onto the kinase domain (KD) of the enzyme and serves to negatively regulate MTOR activity . Utilizing the
MTOR crystal structure as a basis , we interpreted the mechanism by which p.E1799K leads to the hyperactivation of MTOR kinase. Glutamic
acid 1799 (E1799), which is spatially positioned at the MTOR FAT-kinase domain interface, is directed towards Arginine 2505 (R2505), which
is situated on the kinase side of this boundary (Fig. 3c). Due to their proximity, E1799 and R2505 likely interact through local
electrostatic forces (<8 Å E1799 Oε2 – R2505 Nε), and this interaction contributes to the stringent repression of MTOR kinase activity by
the FAT domain. We propose that the substitution of lysine for glutamic acid (Fig. 3c, white and magenta sticks, respectively), disrupts
this electrostatic interaction and thereby destabilizes the local FAT-kinase environment to the point that the enzyme is shifted to a more
active state. In fact, a mechanism similar to this has been shown to underlie the widely studied and structurally adjacent MTOR activating
mutation, p.E2419K (Fig. 3c) [36, 47]. In this particular case, the substitution eliminates the E2419/R1905 salt bridge (not shown) that is
normally present at the FAT-kinase interface. The loss of the salt bridge in turn reduces the negative regulation exerted by the FAT clamp
on the KD, which results in increased kinase activity [36, 47]. Of therapeutic import is the fact that cancer derived cell lines and
xenografts that carry the MTOR p.E1799K variant are hyper-responsive to Rapamycin treatment .Fig. 3E1799K is a pathogenic activating
mutation. a) Location of p.E1799K in relation to the domain/ structural organization of MTOR. Structural elements shown are the two groups
of HEAT (Huntington Elongation Factor 3, A Subunit of PP2A TOR1) repeats; the FAT (FKBP12-Rapamycin-Associated Protein/TOR, Ataxia-
Telangiectasia, Transactivation/ Transformation Domain-Associated Protein) domain; the FRB (FKBP12-Rapamycin Binding) domain; the KIN
(Kinase) domain; and the terminal FATC (FAT C-Terminal) domain. b) The conservation plot reveals that E1799 (black rectangle) is
evolutionarily conserved across vertebrates, which suggests that this amino acid plays an essential role for the normal function of MTOR
kinase. c) A 3D schematic of the local environment surrounding the FAT-kinase domain interface that illustrates the mechanism by which
p.E1799K causes hyperactivation of MTOR kinase. The FAT domain is represented in green while the kinase domain is peach-colored. Highlighted
residues include E1799 (magenta stick), K1799 (white stick) and the activating residues described in the text: E2419, R1905 and R2505
(represented as sticks colored according to the domain in which they reside) E1799K is a pathogenic activating mutation. a) Location of
p.E1799K in relation to the domain/ structural organization of MTOR. Structural elements shown are the two groups of HEAT (Huntington
Elongation Factor 3, A Subunit of PP2A TOR1) repeats; the FAT (FKBP12-Rapamycin-Associated Protein/TOR, Ataxia-Telangiectasia,
Transactivation/ Transformation Domain-Associated Protein) domain; the FRB (FKBP12-Rapamycin Binding) domain; the KIN (Kinase) domain; and
the terminal FATC (FAT C-Terminal) domain. b) The conservation plot reveals that E1799 (black rectangle) is evolutionarily conserved across
vertebrates, which suggests that this amino acid plays an essential role for the normal function of MTOR kinase. c) A 3D schematic of the
local environment surrounding the FAT-kinase domain interface that illustrates the mechanism by which p.E1799K causes hyperactivation of
MTOR kinase. The FAT domain is represented in green while the kinase domain is peach-colored. Highlighted residues include E1799 (magenta
stick), K1799 (white stick) and the activating residues described in the text: E2419, R1905 and R2505 (represented as sticks colored
according to the domain in which they reside) In support of the notion that MTOR p.E1799K is a pathogenic mutation that causes neurological
disease in humans, Ghahramani and colleagues recently reported the same MTOR activating variant, p.E1799K, in an unrelated proband who
displayed major clinical symptoms that were almost identical to those of the brothers’ in our report: macrocephaly and intellectual
disability. Ghahramani’s group demonstrated that the p.E1799K mutation in their proband originated as a de novo germline event . Additional
evidence for the pathogenicity of MTOR p.E1799K comes from the fact that this variant is not present in the healthy human population. For
instance, the following databases of human genetic variation make no reference of healthy individuals who harbor MTOR p.E1799K: the Exome
Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes database, and the Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) [29, 46, 48]. A number of
independent clinical studies have documented patients who harbor causative MTOR missense variants and who present neurological and
developmental symptoms that overlap those of the affected brothers in our study. For example, in a 2012 report, Lee et al. detailed a
5 year-old boy who suffered from seizures and whose brain displayed hemimegalencephaly (HME). Following lateral hemispherectomy, whole exome
sequencing (WES) was performed on the patient’s excised brain tissue, as well as on his PBMCs. WES revealed that the proband harbored the
somatic MTOR alteration p.C1483Y in his affected brain regions, but neither in his unaffected brain areas nor his PBMCs. Moreover,
immunostaining revealed that the alteration in question resulted in hyperactivation of MTOR signaling. Since surgery, the patient has
remained symptom-free. These results strongly suggest that the MTOR alteration p.C1483Y caused the patient’s symptoms . Interestingly, a de
novo germline MTOR alteration at the same position, p.C1483F, was identified in a 17-month old girl who displayed megalencephaly and
intractable seizures . These data are highly suggestive that cysteine 1483 plays an essential role for the maintenance of normal MTOR
activity; moreover, substitution of p.C1483 for either isoleucine or phenylalanine potentiates the development of neurological disease in
humans. Other germline MTOR alterations have been reported in patients with epilepsy. For example, the de novo MTOR missense variant
p.M1595I was detected in a non-verbal 18 month-old male proband who displayed infantile spasms, myoclonic seizures, and global developmental
delay. Although no functional assays were undertaken in this case, multiple in silico models predicted the variant to be deleterious to
normal protein function . Because MTOR p.E1799K has been documented to be associated with overlapping neurological and developmental
symptoms in independent families, and because it has been empirically demonstrated to cause hyperactivation of MTOR kinase, we propose that
this variant is a pathogenic mutation that has the capacity to cause megalencephaly and neurological dysfunction in humans. Herein, we
demonstrate that the MTOR missense variant p.E1799K is a pathogenic mutation that results in hyperactivation of MTOR kinase activity and
causes megalencephaly/ macrocephaly and neurological impairment in humans. We demonstrate that p.E1799K exerts its effects on the developing
brain by A) causing increased protein synthesis that is either exaggerated or decoupled from normal development cues during key temporal
windows, and by B) potentially causing inflammation/ allergic reactions in the brain that could potentiate the development of focal lesions.
It is of interest that both affected brothers in this study suffer from allergies. Finally, we suggest that because cells which carry the
MTOR p.E1799K mutation are hyper-responsive to Rapamycin, treatment with this drug during post-natal development may prove beneficial in
alleviating the craniofacial and neurological symptoms that develop in children who harbor hyper-activating MTOR mutations. Pre-clinical and
clinical trials will be necessary to bear out this notion. The family described in this report has provided us with their written consent to
have their clinical histories and photographs published. Additional file 1: Table S1. Illumina Hiseq Run Metrics for family trio. (PPTX 75.6
kb) Additional file 2: Table S2. Bioinformatic Variant Filtering. (PPTX 54.9 kb) Additional file 3: Table S3. Variant Filtering Based on
Inheritance Modeling & Interpretation. (PPTX 66.7 kb) Illumina Hiseq Run Metrics for family trio. (PPTX 75.6 kb) Bioinformatic Variant
Filtering. (PPTX 54.9 kb) Variant Filtering Based on Inheritance Modeling & Interpretation. (PPTX 66.7 kb) Eukaryotic Translation Initiation
Factor 4E-Binding Protein 1 AKT/ Protein Kinase B Autism Spectrum Disorder Ambry Variant Analyzer Comparative Genomic Hybridization Database
of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Diagnostic Exome Sequencing Exome Sequencing Project Exome Aggregation Consortium FKBP12-Rapamycin-
Associated Protein/ TOR, Ataxia-Telangiectasia, Transactivation/ Transformation Domain-Associated Protein FAT C-Terminal Focal Cortical
Malformation FKBP12-Rapamycin Binding Genomic DNA Gain-of-Function Genome Reference Consortium Human Genome Build 37 Huntington Elongation
Factor 3, A Subunit of PP2A TOR1 Human Gene Mutation Database Professional 2011.3 Intellectual Disability Kinase Domain Kinase Domain Loss-
of-Function Mammalian Target of Rapamycin Next Generation Sequencing Neurotensin Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man Oligophrenin-1
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase, Regulatory Subunit 1 Phosphatase and Tensin
Homologue Rat Sarcoma Viral Oncogene Homolog Ribosomal P70 S6 Ribosomal P70 S6 Kinase Short Stature, Hyperextensibility, Hernia, Ocular
Depression, Rieger Anomaly, and Teething Delay Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Short Tandem Repeat MTOR Complex 1 MTOR Complex 2 Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex Untranslated Region Variant of Uncertain Significance Whole Exome Sequencing Competing interests EM and KR declare they
have no competing interests. The remaining authors are employed by Ambry Genetics Corp., which is a for-profit clinical testing company that
specializes in helping clinicians and patients identify the cause of genetic illness. Authors’ contributions EM and KR carried out the
clinical evaluation and provided the clinical genetics consultation to the patient. CM, ZP, and ST conceived of and coordinated the study.
CM, DNS, RH, HL, and RMB analyzed and interpreted the data. CM, RH, ZP, and ST drafted the manuscript. KR, DNS, RMB, and EM critically
revised the final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. Author information EM is a board certified
clinical geneticist. RMB and ST are board certified clinical molecular geneticists. KR and ZP are licensed genetic counselors. CM and DNS
are clinical genomics scientists and RH is a structural biologist. We are grateful to the patients and family members for giving us
permission to publish their clinical data in this report.
