Pseudoaneurysm of graft–graft anastomosis is an extremely rare but potentially fatal complication after thoracic aorta replacement with a
prosthetic graft. We report a case of pseudoaneurysm at the graft–graft anastomosis of a hand-sewn branched graft. A 65-year-old man
underwent total arch replacement with a hand-sewn branched graft for Stanford type A acute aortic dissection 22 years ago. During follow-up,
serial CT scans showed a pseudoaneurysm on the branched graft which warranted reintervention. Surgical repair involved direct suture of
multiple bleeding points which were found at the sites of the hand-sewn branches anastomosis. The postoperative course was uneventful, and
no signs of bleeding were observed by CT after the reoperation. Long-term follow-up is essential to detect late complications at the site of
hand-sewn anastomosis. Pseudoaneurysm of graft–graft anastomosis is an extremely rare but potentially fatal complication after thoracic
aorta replacement with a prosthetic graft, although it is relatively more between the native aorta and a prosthetic graft. We describe a
case of pseudoaneurysm at the graft–graft anastomosis of a hand-sewn branched graft 22 years after total arch replacement. A 65-year-old man
had undergone total arch replacement with a Gealseal knitted Dacron graft (Sulzer Vascutek, Scotland, UK) for type A acute aortic dissection
22 years ago. A hand-sewn branched graft consisting of straight grafts 28 mm and 8 mm in diameter was used for the aortic arch. We made
three holes on the 28 mm straight graft with a thermal cautery, and three straight grafts of 8 mm diameter were individually sewn with 3–0
polyester sutures before surgery. A 24-mm straight graft was used for the ascending aorta, and the branched and straight grafts were sewn
after reconstruction of neck arteries. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day (POD) 33. He underwent descending
aorta replacement six years after the initial surgery and thoracoabdominal aorta replacement 20 years after the initial surgery for
enlargement of the redidual dissection. Computed tomography (CT) angiography showed a pseudoaneurysm of 46 mm in diameter on the ascending
aorta graft before thoracoabdominal replacement. Aortography was performed but did not reveal the bleeding point; therefore, only a
thoracoabdominal aorta replacement was performed. The size of the pseudoaneurysm gradually increased and reached 60 mm, and a dye stain was
found inside the pseudoaneurysm after two years of follow up in an outpatient clinic (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Dye stains are found inside the
pseudoaneurysm of the aortic arch Dye stains are found inside the pseudoaneurysm of the aortic arch We performed median resternotomy after
exposing the left femoral and right axillary arteries. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established with cannulation of the right axillary
artery, the left femoral artery, and the right atrium under normothermia. The pseudoaneurysm was opened and a thrombus inside the aneurysm
was removed. Small bleedings were found on the anastomosis of the arch graft–brachiocephalic branch graft (Fig. 2), arch graft–left
subclavian branch graft, and ascending graft–arch graft. The bleedings were repaired with interrupted pledget-supported sutures. CPB was
weaned off after the other anastomoses including native artery–graft anastomoses were carefully examined. CPB time was 89 min, and total
operation time was 427 min.Fig. 2Intraoperative view Intraoperative view No postoperative complications or neurological sequelae were
observed. A CT angiogram showed no blood leakage on POD 13, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on POD 16. Pseudoaneurysm of a
graft–graft anastomosis long after thoracic replacement is extremely rare, and we could find no previous reports. It has been our practice
to realize branched graft for the aortic arch by sewing small diameter grafts to a large diameter graft until the branched graft became
commercially available. The Gelseal graft is a gelatin-sealed knitted Dacron graft and has been reported to dilate over time, but graft
failure has not been reported . In the present case, the Dacron graft had been implanted for > 20 years and may have resulted in
endothelialization and pannus ingrowth in the flow lumen. In an animal study, the average pannus extension from the native aorta to the
graft increased from 1–1.5 mm at seven days to 1–2 mm at 10 days and to 2–4 mm at 14 days after implantation in the descending thoracic
aorta of a dog. On the 7- and 10-day grafts, 0–5 islands of endothelial-like cells were also found . In another study, the flow surfaces
were covered with uniform thin and glistening tissue and complete endothelial-like cell coverage eight weeks after implantation in the
thoracic and abdominal aorta of a dog . These studies suggest that healing of the graft progresses over time. However, the luminal surface
of the hand-sewn branched graft may not have been covered with patient tissue 20 years after the implantation, although we did not resect
and histopathologically examine the graft in this case. Non-anastomotic false aneurysms in the middle portion of a vascular Dacron graft
have been reported because of structural failure 12 years after femoral bypass . We found no signs of suture deterioration or infection in
the present case, although material fatigue is suggested as a cause of pseudoaneurysm. Thoracic re-entry via median sternotomy carries the
risk of aneurysm injury and potentially fatal hemorrhage . We performed median resternotomy after exposure of the left femoral artery and
vein and opened the pseudoaneurysm under CPB to avoid catastrophic bleeding. Full heparinization for CPB enabled us to detect a small
bleeding and to confirm hemostasis after the repair, although an urgent start of CPB was not required in the present case. Endovascular
options such as thoracic endovascular aortic repair are also possible if anatomically they are available . We chose resternotomy because the
bleeding point could not be detected by aortography. Re-total arch replacement is preferable to bleeding repair because graft infection and
material fatigue may not be neglected even when no signs of infection are observed. It was difficult to expose the graft completely because
of adhesion, and we performed suture repair in the present case. Further, careful observation is mandatory, although the clinical course
after surgery and CT showed no signs of bleeding or infection. We report a case of the pseudoaneurysm of graft-graft anastomosis 22 years
after total arch replacement. Long-term follow-up is essential to detect late complications at the site of hand-sewn anastomosis. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this Case report. Copies of the written consent forms are available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography postoperative day cardiopulmonary bypass Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TG presented design of the report and completed the manuscript. YW,
TT, TS, and DF are in charge of patient care. TT directed all the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
