Cardiac Lipoma is a rare entity constituting approximately 10-19 % of primary tumors of the heart and pericardium. To our best knowledge,
such a large cardiac lipoma with septal enhancement in our case has never been reported before. Here we present a rare case of a 65-year-old
symptomatic female with an unusual giant cardiac lipoma. Due to the enhancement of the tumor septa, it was first diagnosed as liposarcoma
and thought to be unresectable. Debulking surgery was performed to release patient’s symptoms. The patient ultimately underwent complete
tumor resection with uneventful postoperative evolution. The postoperative pathological diagnosis is cardiac lipoma. Primary cardiac tumors
are extremely rare with a reported incidence of 0.17-0.19 % at autopsy. Cardiac lipoma constitutes approximately 10-19 % of primary tumors
of the heart and pericardium . Cardiac lipoma commonly originates from the epicardial adipose tissue of the right atrium (RA) and left
ventricle (LV). We report an unusual case of a giant epicardial lipoma with septal enhancement which was first diagnosed as liposarcoma. As
far as we know, giant cardiac lipoma with similar imaging findings has seldom been reported. A 65-year-old Chinese female, without any
positive medical and family history, presented with recurrent chest discomfort on exertion for more than 10 years. Physical examination and
laboratory tests were unremarkable. On admission, the water bottle sign of the cardiac silhouette was found on the chest roentgenogram
(Fig. 1a). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a large (10.2 × 7.5 × 3.8 cm) well-defined homogenous hypoechoic mass located in
the pericardial cavity, encompassing the anterior walls of aorta and pulmonary artery. Further assessment by enhanced computed tomography
(CT) showed a large lobulated low-density mass in the pericardial cavity (Fig. 1b). The tumor presented with septal enhancement and absence
of parenchymal enhancement. Meanwhile, computed tomographic angiography (CTA) of the heart confirmed normal coronary arteries and no
compression signs by the tumor. After extensive workup, a preoperative diagnosis of cardiac liposarcoma was made based on the extensive
growth and the enhancement of the tumor septa, which made us believe complete tumor resection was of high difficulty. Debulking surgery was
scheduled to release patient’s symptoms.Fig 1a Chest roentgenogram showed the water-bottle heart with enlarged cardiac silhouette. b
Enhanced CT showed an intrapericardial low-density tumor encompassing the free wall of right atrium. The tumor was well circumscribed and
the septa of the tumor presented with enhancement. c, d A giant lipoid mass was noted after pericardiotomy, which was yellow, soft and well-
encapsulated. e The resected tumor measured about 14 × 11 cm, weighted about 450 g and was well-encapsulated. f Histopathological study
confirmed the diagnosis of lipoma (H&E stain) a Chest roentgenogram showed the water-bottle heart with enlarged cardiac silhouette. b
Enhanced CT showed an intrapericardial low-density tumor encompassing the free wall of right atrium. The tumor was well circumscribed and
the septa of the tumor presented with enhancement. c, d A giant lipoid mass was noted after pericardiotomy, which was yellow, soft and well-
encapsulated. e The resected tumor measured about 14 × 11 cm, weighted about 450 g and was well-encapsulated. f Histopathological study
confirmed the diagnosis of lipoma (H&E stain) Intraoperatively, a giant lipoid tumor originating from RA was noted after pericardiotomy
(Fig. 1c). The tumor was based predominantly on the entire free wall of the RA, stretching down from the RA appendage all the way to the
orifice of the inferior vena cava (Fig. 1d). The RA was extremely deformed owing to the significant local mass effect. Due to well
capsulation and no signs of local invasion, the tumor was considered a lipoma and therefore resectable. Complete tumor resection was
achieved during beating heart surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass assistance. Excision required removal of most of the RA free wall. Direct
suture for RA defect seemed to be impossible because of the large defect size and the high tension of suture. In addition, the deformation
of RA could results in an unsatisfactory long-term outcome such as systemic congestion. The RA wall that remained was ultimately repaired
with a 7 × 5 cm autologous pericardial patch. After declamping the superior and inferior vena cava, the RA pressure was back to normal
according to right heart catheterization. Postoperative transesophageal echocardiography also confirmed normal right heart function. The
resected lipoma was about 14 × 11 cm and 450 g (Fig. 1e). The histopathological examination made the final diagnosis of cardiac lipoma
(Fig. 1f). The patient had an uneventful recovery and without any recurrence at 1-year follow-up. Cardiac lipoma was first described in
1856. It is extremely rare with a reported incidence of about 10-19 % among primary tumors of heart and pericardium . Histopathologically,
cardiac lipoma can be classified into two types: lipomatous hypertrophy of the interatrial septum and true lipoma. The former one is a
nonencapsulated mass of adipose tissue which is usually in continuity with the epicardial fat . The true lipoma is a neoplasm, constituted
of encapsulated masses of adipose tissue, typically mature adipocytes . Cardiac lipoma can occur throughout the heart, including
pericardium, epicardium, endocardium and myocardium. The most common chambers involved are LV and RA. According to the literature, cardiac
lipoma has no sex or age predominance and is extremely variable in size . The lipoma in our case was approximately 14 cm which had not been
reported before. Patients with cardiac lipoma are usually asymptomatic until local mass effect lead to hemodynamic changes and cardiac
insufficiency. Symptoms commonly reported are fatigue, dyspnea, palpitation, syncope and even chest pain, which are frequently a result of
coronary artery or cardiac conductive system involvement. Sudden death case caused by cardiac lipoma has also been reported . Transthoracic
echocardiography is a valuable initial investigation for detection and diagnosis of cardiac tumors, due to its relatively high accuracy and
non-invasiveness. Enhanced CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are of utmost importance and value in providing information regarding
size, location and nature of the tumor. Cardiac lipoma can be diagnosed with high certainty due to their typical imaging characteristics.
Typically in MRI, lipoma has homogenous high signal intensity in both T1- and T2- weighted images when compared with myocardium. Homogeneous
low density without enhancement after contrast infusion is another typical manifestation of lipoma in enhanced CT, which is different from
liposarcoma. Commonly, liposarcoma can be excluded by enhanced CT because it possesses higher density and enhancement after contrast
infusion. In our case, the tumor parenchyma presented with homogenous low density without enhancement while the tumor septa manifested with
high density and enhancement. Its mixed properties of lipoma and liposarcoma made our case unique, which also explained the preoperative
misdiagnosis. Preoperative evaluation of coronary artery by coronary angiography or CTA is necessary in order to exclude their affection by
tumor. There is consensus about surgical treatment in symptomatic patients with cardiac lipoma, but it is still controversial whether
performing surgery in asymptomatic patients. Some scholars prefer clinical follow-up in patients in whom the lipoma is found incidentally,
due to its very low growth rate. Surgical resection for cardiac lipoma is the optimal choice and generally offers good long-term outcomes .
Cardiac lipoma is a rare entity which constitutes only a few percent of primary cardiac tumors. This case report describes a rare giant
epicardial lipoma presenting with septal enhancement which has not been reported before. TTE, coronary angiography and especially enhanced
CT and MRI are helpful for diagnosis. For symptomatic patients, surgical treatment is the optimal therapeutic option and it is associated
with favorable long-term outcomes. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report and any
accompanying images. computed tomography computed tomographic angiography left ventricle magnetic resonance imaging right atrium
transthoracic echocardiography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution Shengjun
Wu contributed to the conception of the study and the surgery. Peng Teng contributed to the manuscript preparation and data analysis. Yuhan
Zhou contributed to the collection of data. Yiming Ni contributed to the development of methodology and the surgery. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Qiqi Gao (Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University)
for pathological consultation.
