Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serosal inflammation, particularly
abdominal pain. Other disease processes, including medical and surgical emergencies, may mimic FMF, especially in atypical cases. We present
a case of an adolescent male, referred to us with a diagnosis of colchicine resistant FMF, ultimately diagnosed with intestinal malrotation
and recurrent volvulus. In atypical presentations of FMF with potential “red flags”, a thorough patient history is extremely important and
should result in prompt referral for the appropriate diagnostic tests. Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), the most common monogenic
autoinflammatory syndrome, is characterized by recurrent episodes of fever and serosal inflammation, including abdominal pain and vomiting.
Intestinal malrotation which occurs as a result of an arrest of normal rotation of the embryonic gut, has a varied clinical presentation
from infancy through adolescence and adulthood [1, 2]. We present a case of an adolescent male, referred to us with recurrent vomiting and
abdominal pain, initially diagnosed with FMF that was resistant to colchicine, ultimately diagnosed with intestinal malrotation. A 14 year
old male of mixed Sephardic-Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry was referred to our Pediatric Rheumatology Clinic with “colchicine resistant FMF”.
From early infancy he suffered from recurrent afebrile episodes of yellowish-greenish vomiting with abdominal pain. Episodes occurred every
1 to 2 weeks, lasting for 1–3 days. Exercise, stress and infections were precipitants of episodes. The patient did not develop rashes,
joint/muscle or chest pain. He was hospitalized during several episodes due to dehydration, easily corrected by intravenous fluids. His
school attendance was severely impaired, missing about 2 days every week. His father was diagnosed with FMF, after years of recurrent fever,
abdominal pain and vomiting, with compound heterozygous mutations on the MEFV gene (M694V/E148Q). Following father’s diagnosis, our patient
underwent genetic analysis at age 11 years and a heterozygote E148Q mutation was found. Colchicine was initiated and he received up to
1.5 mg/d for 2 years prior to his referral, with no clinical improvement. He underwent investigations by multiple pediatric
gastroenterologists and metabolic diseases specialists, and his laboratory evaluation was normal including: acute phase reactants (even
during episodes), blood counts, liver and muscle enzymes, fibrinogen, celiac profile, amino-acids, organic acids, acyl-carnitine and E3
mutation. Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound were normal. His physical examination was unremarkable except for low weight (7th
percentile). Due to the history of bilious vomiting since his neonatal period he was referred by us for an upper gastrointestinal series
(UGI). This demonstrated malposition of the ligament of Treitz and a corkscrew appearance of the duodenum, consistent with malrotation
(Fig. 1). After a successful Ladd procedure with classical findings of malrotation but no intestinal ischemia, the patient is feeling well,
with no further vomiting episodes, a rapid catch up in the growth curves and full school attendance.Fig. 1Upper gastrointestinal study (UGI)
demonstrating intestinal malrotation and volvulus with abnormal position of the duodenal-jejunal junction to the right of the spine.
Normally the duodenum should sweep across from right to left across the spine (dashed line shows the left spinal pedicles). A corkscrew
appearance of the duodenum (arrow) demonstrates the volvulus Upper gastrointestinal study (UGI) demonstrating intestinal malrotation and
volvulus with abnormal position of the duodenal-jejunal junction to the right of the spine. Normally the duodenum should sweep across from
right to left across the spine (dashed line shows the left spinal pedicles). A corkscrew appearance of the duodenum (arrow) demonstrates the
volvulus We present a patient with intestinal malrotation who was initially diagnosed with FMF and treated for 2 years with an adequate dose
of colchicine with no response. Fortunately, he did not develop bowel damage after years of recurrent attacks of midgut volvulus. While the
patient fulfilled clinical diagnostic criteria for FMF (Table 1) according to the long-(but not short) version of the Tel-Hashomer criteria
(one minor and six supportive criteria), and the Yalcinkaya pediatric criteria , several “red-flags” led us to consider an alternative
diagnosis.Table 1Clinical diagnostic criteria for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF)Tel-Hashomer Criteria (adapted from reference #3: Livneh
A, et al. Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1879–1885)Long VersionMajor Criteria Typical attacks (≥3 of the same type, rectal temp ≥38 °C, attacks
lasting 12 h to 3 days) 1.Peritonitis 2.Pleuritis (unilateral) or pericarditis 3.Monoarthritis (hip, knee, ankle) 4.Fever aloneMinor
Criteria 1. Incomplete attacks (typical attacks including one of the following sites: abdomen, chest or joint with 1 or 2 of the following
exceptions: 1) Temperature < 38 °C, 2) attacks lasting 6–12 h or 3–7 days, 3) no signs of peritonitis during abdominal attacks, 4) localized
abdominal pain, 5) arthritis in joints other than hip, knee or ankle) 2. Exertional leg pain 3. Favorable response to colchicineSupportive
Criteria 1. Family history of FMF 2. Appropriate ethnic origin 3. Age <20 year at disease onset 4–7 are related to features of attacks: 4.
Severe, requiring bed rest 5. Spontaneous remission 6. Symptom-free interval 7. Transient inflammatory response with one or more abnormal
test result(s) for white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum amyloid A, and /or fibrinogen 8. Episodic
proteinuria/hematuria 9. Unproductive laparotomy or removal of “white” appendix 10. Consanguinity of parents An FMF diagnosis requires ≥1
major criteria, or ≥2 minor criteria, or 1 minor criteria plus ≥5 supportive criteria, or 1 minor criteria plus ≥4 of the first 5 supportive
criteria.Short VersionMajor criteria 1.Recurrent febrile attacks accompanied by peritonitis, synovitis or pleuritis. 2.Amyloidosis of the
AA-type without predisposing disease. 3.Favorable response to continuous colchicine treatment.Minor criteria 4. Recurrent febrile attacks 5.
Erysipelas-like erythema 6. FMF in a first degree relativeDefinitive diagnosis: 2 major or 1 major and 2 minor.Probable diagnosis: 1 major
and 1 minorYalçinkaya Pediatric Criteria (adapted from reference #4: Yalçinkaya F, et al. Rheumatology (Oxford, England)
2009;48:395–8)CriteriaDescriptionFeverAxillary temperature of >38 °C, 6–72 h of duration, ≥3 attacksAbdominal pain6–72 h of duration, ≥3
attacksChest pain6–72 h of duration, ≥3 attacksArthritis6–72 h of duration, ≥3 attacks, oligoarthritisFamily history of FMFTwo of five
criteria diagnose FMF Neonatal onset of FMF is uncommon . About 31 % percent of patients with FMF present by age 2 years (mean 1.1 years) ,
80 % by 10 years and 90 % by 20 years, but only about 5 % by 2 months of age. The most common presentation in the infants is just
“fussiness”. In almost all others fever is part of the presentation [7, 8], thus isolated vomiting in patients under 1 year of age is very
uncommon.Bilious vomiting is not characteristic in FMF.The lack of fever and other symptoms characteristic of FMF. These would be expected
in a patient with severe FMF based on the frequency of attacks, age of onset and lack of response to colchicine [6, 9].Normal acute phase
reactants during attacks. Clinical diagnostic criteria for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) Two of five criteria diagnose FMF Neonatal
onset of FMF is uncommon . About 31 % percent of patients with FMF present by age 2 years (mean 1.1 years) , 80 % by 10 years and 90 % by
20 years, but only about 5 % by 2 months of age. The most common presentation in the infants is just “fussiness”. In almost all others fever
is part of the presentation [7, 8], thus isolated vomiting in patients under 1 year of age is very uncommon. Bilious vomiting is not
characteristic in FMF. The lack of fever and other symptoms characteristic of FMF. These would be expected in a patient with severe FMF
based on the frequency of attacks, age of onset and lack of response to colchicine [6, 9]. Normal acute phase reactants during attacks.
Besides clinical criteria, the diagnosis of our patient and treatment with colchicine was initially supported by finding a heterozygous
E148Q mutation on the MEFV gene. Genetic testing in FMF is only considered supportive and not diagnostic, particularly in atypical cases.
When two mutations are found, FMF diagnosis is confirmed. In atypical cases where only one mutation is found a trial of colchicine is often
offered. Indeed up to 30 % of FMF have only a heterozygote exon ten mutation . However, controversy exists regarding the role of some MEFV
variations (Table 2), particularly for the exon 2 E148Q glutamic acid to glutamine substitution . Initially, this sequence variation was
described as a disease causing mutation with low penetrance and mild symptoms. However, recent studies showed a similar frequency of E148Q
among FMF patients and controls, and those findings support the hypothesis that E148Q is a benign polymorphism and not a disease causing
mutation . E148Q may be a disease modifier in other rheumatologic conditions . E148Q may also modify the severity of FMF when found on the
same allele with other mutations. FMF patients who are homozygous for the complex allele (E148Q-V726A/E148Q-V726A), or compound
heterozygotes (E148Q-V726A/V726A), have a more severe disease compared to patients homozygous for V726A . In our patient the E148Q
substitution is likely to be only a polymorphism, unlike his father who had a compound heterozygote M694V/E148Q mutation.Table 2Clinical
significance of the common mutations/variations found in the MEFV geneMutations associated with classic familial Mediterranean fever
(FMF) M694V M694I M680I V726AMutations associated both with classic and atypical FMF A744S K695R R761HMutations usually associated with
atypical FMF P369S/R408Q (often in cis) R329HVarients considered polymorphisms aE148Q aR202Q aCan be associated with disease in compound
heterozygote with other mutations Clinical significance of the common mutations/variations found in the MEFV gene aCan be associated with
disease in compound heterozygote with other mutations Multiple other disease processes may closely resemble FMF and must be excluded in
atypical cases, such as surgical emergencies, metabolic diseases and other periodic fever syndromes (Table 3) [18, 19]. Both FMF diagnostic
criteria have excellent but not 100 % specificity for the population in whom it was developed (99 % for adults with the Tel-Hashomer
criteria , 92 % for children with the Yalcinkaya criteria ). However, the Tel-Hashomer criteria developed for adults had a lower specificity
(54 %) in children . Therefore, in atypical cases with potential “red flags” a thorough patient history is extremely important and should
result in prompt referral for the appropriate diagnostic tests.Table 3Differential diagnosis of recurrent vomiting (often with abdominal
pain) other than familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) in the pediatric population, by ageNeonate/infancyChildhoodAdolescence GERD GERD GERD
Anatomic obstruction a >Anatomic Obstruction a IBD Dietary protein intolerancePUD PUD Metabolic disorderb Pancreatitis Cyclic vomiting Renal
disorder/obstructionCyclic vomitingPancreatitisAdrenal crisisMetabolic disordersb Biliary colicRenal colicAcute intermittent porphyriab
Anatomic Obstructiona aIncludes malrotation with midgut volvulus, pyloric stenosis, intussusception, Hirschsprung disease, congenital
atresia/stenosis/webs, incarcerated hernia bIncludes urea cycle defects, organic acidemias, fatty acid oxidation defects, disorders of
gluconeogenesis in infancy, and porphyria in childhood/adolescence GERD gastroesophageal reflux, IBD inflammatory bowel disease, PUD peptic
ulcer diseaseThe common causes in each age are marked in bold. Functional gastrointestinal disorders are a common cause of recurrent
abdominal pain but without vomiting Differential diagnosis of recurrent vomiting (often with abdominal pain) other than familial
Mediterranean fever (FMF) in the pediatric population, by age aIncludes malrotation with midgut volvulus, pyloric stenosis, intussusception,
Hirschsprung disease, congenital atresia/stenosis/webs, incarcerated hernia bIncludes urea cycle defects, organic acidemias, fatty acid
oxidation defects, disorders of gluconeogenesis in infancy, and porphyria in childhood/adolescence GERD gastroesophageal reflux, IBD
inflammatory bowel disease, PUD peptic ulcer disease The common causes in each age are marked in bold. Functional gastrointestinal disorders
are a common cause of recurrent abdominal pain but without vomiting Malrotation is an incomplete rotation of the intestine during fetal
development. The mesentery, including the superior mesenteric artery, is tethered by a narrow stalk, which can twist around itself, and
produce life threatening midgut volvulus, with an acute presentation of small bowel obstruction. Traditionally, intestinal malrotation is
considered primarily a disease of infancy with infrequent occurrence beyond the first year of life. However, recent studies demonstrate that
the prevalence of malrotation in older children and adults appears to be higher than previously thought [1, 2]. Upper gastrointestinal
series is the gold standard imaging test for diagnosis. Surgical intervention is recommended regardless of age, and presentation of volvulus
requires an emergency procedure. In summary, alterative diagnoses to FMF should be considered in cases of atypical attacks as in our
patient, even if fulfilling diagnostic criteria and supported partially by a heterozygous mutation in the MEFV gene. In some cases, as we
described, the correct diagnosis may represent a surgical or medical emergency requiring prompt treatment. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions Prof. Hashkes conceived the case, and helped to draft the manuscript. Dr. Heshin-Bekenstein drafted the initial
manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Dr. Ruthi Cytter who helped in preparing the figure.
