Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) is one of the antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis, which
is characterized by vasculitis of the small to medium-sized vessels. On the contrary, thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) is a life-threatening
condition which can cause ischemic organ injury. Although several case reports have described patients with TMA associated with ANCA-
associated vasculitis except for EGPA, there are no previous case reports of EGPA associated with TMA. A 71-year-old Japanese man was
diagnosed with EGPA based on his asthma, eosinophilia, lung opacity, refractory sinusitis, and positive myeloperoxidase-ANCA. He was also
diagnosed with TMA based on peripheral schizocytes and hemolytic anemia. We performed plasmapheresis and started high-dose corticosteroid
therapy; thereafter, he improved promptly. His case also fulfilled the classification criteria of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) based
on the pleural effusion, renal disorder, anemia, thrombocytopenia, positive antidouble-stranded DNA antibody, and low complement. Elements
of SLE were thought to affect his clinical course. We reviewed 11 patients with EGPA or hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) associated with
SLE, including our case. Patients with EGPA or HES associated with SLE had more heart complications than patients with simple EGPA or simple
HES did. Patients with EGPA or HES associated with SLE had more pleural effusion than patients with simple SLE did. Clinical manifestations
of eosinophilia with SLE or SLE with eosinophilia may differ from simple SLE or simple eosinophilia. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
(ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) is characterized by vasculitis of the small to medium-sized vessels; however, its etiology remains
unknown. There are three types of AAV: eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), and
microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). On the contrary, thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) is characterized by thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia, which can cause ischemic organ injury of brain, kidneys, heart, pancreas, liver, and lungs. TMA is a very severe disease
and needs therapeutic options such as plasmapheresis. Several case reports have described patients with MPA and GPA associated with TMA.
Regarding only MPA and GPA, 14% of patients are reported to have TMA.1 However, EGPA associated with TMA have not ever been reported. We
present a case of EGPA with TMA, which was thought to be associated with elements of SLE including hypocomplementemia. Two months before his
admission to our hospital, the thrombocytopenia (80,000/μL) of a 71-year-old Japanese man was identified by a regular medical examination.
Two weeks before his admission to our hospital, his platelet count declined to 20,000/μL, and petechia and palpable purpura emerged on both
legs. On admission to our hospital, his dyspnea was observed all day. Eleven years earlier, he was diagnosed with bronchial asthma and was
prescribed inhaled glucocorticoids. He had also undergone an operation for bilateral sinusitis of maxillary sinuses 2 years before this
admission. He was a psychiatrist. He did not have any family history of rheumatic diseases. The physical examination results at the present
admission were as follows: body temperature 37.8°C; blood pressure 122/82 mm Hg; pulse rate 100/min; and respiratory rate 30/min.
Auscultation of the chest revealed wheezing over the entire lung field. There was pitting edema in the both lower legs. Petechia and
palpable purpura on both legs were seen (Fig. 1). Petechia and palpable purpura on both legs. The laboratory data were as follows: white
blood cell count 16,900/μL (neutrophils 28%, lymphocytes 10%, monocytes 2%, eosinophils 59%, and basophils 1%); hemoglobin 7.5 g/dL;
platelets 16,000/μL; C-reactive protein 2.38 mg/dL (normal values <0.3 mg/dL); serum creatinine (Cr) 0.87 mg/dL (normal values <1.0 mg/dL);
rheumatoid factor 5 IU/mL (normal values <15 IU/mL); antidouble-stranded DNA antibody (anti-dsDNA antibody) (enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay) 27.4 IU/mL (normal values <12 IU/mL); and a high myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (MPO-ANCA) level of 10.2
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay units (EU)/mL (normal values <3.5 EU/mL); immunoglobulin E 3017 IU/mL (normal values <173 IU/mL).
Proteinase 3-ANCA was negative. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) (immunofluorescence assay on Hep-2 cell) was not detected. He also had
hypocomplementemia (complement activity : 6.1 CH50/mL [normal range: 25.0–48.0 CH50/mL], complement component 3 (C3): 40.0 mg/dL [normal
range: 86–160 mg/dL], complement component 4: 6.3 mg/dL [normal range: 17–45 mg/dL]) and low haptoglobin (<5.0 mg/dL [normal range:
83–209 mg/dL]). A peripheral blood smear showed schizocytes. A disintegrin-like and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type 1 motifs 13
(ADAMTS13) activity was 49.8% (normal range: 70.0%–120.0%) and ADAMTS13 inhibitor was negative. Urinalysis revealed microscopic hematuria
(11–20 red blood cells/high-power field) and proteinuria (0.74 g/g Cr), but no type of casts. Head computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral
sinusitis of maxillary sinuses. A chest CT showed peripheral ground glass opacity, dilated heart, and large amount of pleural effusion (Fig.
2). A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the patient's heart showed intraventricular thrombus and thin endocardium with high-intensity signal
(Fig. 3). A bone marrow specimen showed prominent eosinophilic bone marrow. FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene and t(5;12)(q31–q33;p12), which is
often observed in myeloproliferative neoplasms with prominent eosinophilia, were both negative. Chest CT showed peripheral ground glass
opacity (arrow), dilated heart, and large amount of pleural effusion. CT = computed tomography. MR image of heart showed intraventricular
thrombus (arrow) and thin endocardium with high-intensity signal. MR = magnetic resonance. The patient's poor condition and platelet decline
precluded renal biopsy. Because he had asthma, eosinophilia >10%, pulmonary infiltrates (non-fixed), and paranasal sinus abnormality, a
diagnosis of EGPA was made, based on the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference criteria,2 the European Medicines Agency algorithm,3 and the
American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 1990 criteria for the classification of Churg–Strauss syndrome.4 In addition, because the patient had
schizocytes, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal insufficiency, we also diagnosed TMA. Given the pleural effusion, renal disorder,
anemia, thrombocytopenia, positive anti-dsDNA antibody, and low complement, this patient also fulfilled the 1997 American College of
Rheumatology classification criteria5 and the 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification criteria6 for systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Because his dyspnea worsened progressively day by day and we suspected that he could develop cardiac failure
associated with EGPA, we started pulsed methylprednisolone (P-MPSL; 1000 mg/d for 3 consecutive days) and plasmapheresis. Soon after these
treatments, the eosinophils disappeared and the patient's dyspnea was improved. Regarding the TMA, the schizocytes disappeared and hemolytic
anemia improved. We finished the plasmapheresis after only 2 consecutive days. The analysis of a skin biopsy specimen 3 days after the
P-MPSL was started revealed fragmentation of the lamina elastica interna (Fig. 4A). Immunohistochemical staining of complement factor C3
showed a deposition of C3 in the vessel wall (Fig. 4B). A, Fragmentation of the lamina elastica interna in the skin biopsy specimen (white
arrow). B, Immunohistochemical staining of complement factor C3 showed a deposition of C3 in the vessel wall (white arrow). Following the
P-MPSL, we started 55 mg of prednisolone per day, and the patient's MPO-ANCA titer and anti-dsDNA antibody declined gradually. The
endocardium with high-intensity signal on MRI was diminished 3 weeks after the start of the P-MPSL. The patient's hypocomplementemia also
improved. Eosinophils remained negative. We have described the case of a patient with EGPA associated with TMA. To our knowledge, this is
the first case report of EGPA associated with TMA. Chen et al1 reported that of 220 patients with AAV excluding EGPA, 30 patients (14%) had
concomitant renal TMA by pathologic evaluation, and AAV with TMA was not rare. Using PubMed, Manenti et al7 reviewed 29 cases with AAV with
TMA, and they argued that mutations or risk haplotypes in genes encoding alternative complement regulatory proteins associated with TMA.
Thurman et al8 reported that patients with acute-onset diarrhea-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome manifested activation of the
alternative pathway of complement that is temporally related to the onset of disease. In our patient, a skin biopsy revealed C3 deposition
on the vessel wall. Magro et al9 reported that a skin biopsy is of value in establishing a diagnosis of TMA based on the microvascular
deposition of complement in the dermis and subcutaneous fat. Because hypocomplementemia also existed in our patient, an alternative pathway
of complement may have been associated with his TMA. Nevertheless, this skin biopsy finding seems incompatible to AAV because AAV is defined
as pauci-immune vasculitis. However, Brons et al10 reported that the skin lesions of patients with GPA had immune deposits. Moreover,
Chhabra et al11 revealed that the observation of immune deposits in cutaneous lesions of GPA is useful as a predictor of an active disease.
Although to the best of our knowledge, there are no case reports of EGPA with C3 or immune deposits in skin biopsy, an alternative pathway
may have been associated with the occurrence of TMA in our patient. Our patient also fulfilled the criteria for SLE, which is also
associated with TMA.12 SLE with negative ANA and positive anti-dsDNA antibody is thought to be uncommon in general. However, Almogren et
al13 reported that of 158 patients who were simultaneously tested ANA (immunofluorescence assay on Hep-2 cell) and anti-dsDNA antibody
(immuno-enzymatic assay), 24 (15.1%) patients had statuses which were negative ANA and positive anti-dsDNA antibody. In addition, Craig and
Ledue14 reported that 2 patients had positive anti-dsDNA antibody (Crithidia luciliae immunofluorescence test) among 72 patients with SLE
that had negative ANA (immunofluorescence assay on Hep-2 cell) statuses. International recommendations for the assessment of autoantibodies
to cellular antigens referred to as antinuclear antibodies15 says: “Theoretically, if ANA-indirect immunofluorescence assay is negative, one
should not proceed to defining anti-dsDNA antibodies, although if clinical suspicion of SLE is substantial anti-dsDNA antibodies assessment
may be requested by the clinician.” On the basis of these facts, we think that it does not matter to diagnose our case with SLE. Regarding
complement, Song et al16 reported that complement overactivation via both classical and alternative pathways might play an important role in
the pathogenesis of renal TMA in lupus nephritis. Eosinophils are rarely seen in SLE. We searched for case reports of EGPA or
hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) associated with SLE by conducting a PubMed search. Table 1 shows the results: 11 patients with EGPA or HES
associated with SLE, including our case. We could find only 2 cases of SLE with EGPA, including our case. D’Cruz et al17 reported a patient
who, after 26 years of SLE, developed late-onset asthma and eosinophilia, which progressed to meet the ACR 1990 criteria for the
classification of Churg–Strauss syndrome. However, except for fulfilling the Churg–Strauss syndrome criteria, D’Cruz et al's patient did not
have features in common with those of our patient. SLE With Eosinophilic Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis or Hypereosinophilic Syndrome SLE
With Eosinophilic Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis or Hypereosinophilic Syndrome Regarding heart complications, 5 patients had a heart
complication including intracardial thrombus. This is more frequent compared with those in patients with HES, because only 5% of HES
patients are reported to have cardiac symptoms.18 Considering the frequency of heart complications with SLE (pericarditis: 12%–48%,
myocarditis: 10%–40%, congestive heart failure: 7%–36%19), the heart complications that are seen in EGPA or HES patients with SLE may be
affected by elements of SLE rather than those of EGPA or HES. In our patient, the TMA, thrombocytopenia, and heart complication may reflect
elements of SLE, and not only EGPA. On the contrary, 6 of the 11 reported patients had pleural effusion. In SLE, pleural effusion is seen in
approximately 24% of patients, not only at diagnosis but also at any time.20 SLE with EGPA or HES may have more pleural effusion than simple
SLE. Clinical manifestations of eosinophilia with SLE or SLE with eosinophilia may differ from simple SLE or simple eosinophilia. In
conclusion, we have described a patient with EGPA whose case was complicated with TMA. He also fulfilled the SLE criteria, and elements of
SLE may have affected his clinical manifestations. Further studies regarding the clinical manifestations and prognosis of EGPA, TMA, and SLE
are needed.21,22,23–29 Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. This case report was approved by the Investigation and Ethics Committee at
Nagasaki University Hospital. Authors’ contributions: SF drafted the manuscript and made a substantial contribution to the concept and
design. SF, NI, ST, MU, AN, YN, TS, YH, TK, SK, KI, YH, MT, HN, TO, and AK treated the patient, collected the primary data and critically
revised the manuscript. NK is a pathologist, who assessed pathological findings. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Abbreviations: AAV = ANCA-associated vasculitis, ACR = American College of Rheumatology, ADAMTS13 = a disintegrin-like and metalloproteinase
with thrombospondin type 1 motifs 13, ANA = antinuclear antibody, ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody =
antidouble-stranded DNA antibody, C3 = complement component 3, CH50 = complement activity, CT = computed tomography, EGPA = eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, GPA = granulomatosis with polyangiitis, HES = hypereosinophilic syndrome, MPA = microscopic polyangiitis,
SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus, TMA = thrombotic microangiopathy. The authors declare that they have no competing interests and no
source of funding.
