Listeria monocytogenes has been reported to cause various infectious diseases in both humans and animals. More rarely, ocular infections
have been reported. To our knowledge, only two cases of Listeria keratitis have been described in horses. We report kerato-conjunctivitis in
four Norwegian horses associated with L. monocytogenes. Clinically, all cases were presented with recurrent unilateral kerato-
conjunctivitis. L. monocytogenes bacteria were isolated from swab samples from all cases, and cytology carried out in 3 cases was indicative
of L. monocytogenes infection. The present report describes the first known cases in which L. monocytogenes has been isolated from keratitic
lesions in horses in Norway. A potential risk factor may be feeding of silage or haylage, but other sources of infection cannot be ruled
out. The phenotypic features including antimicrobial susceptibility and serotype of the isolates are described. Laboratory detection of L.
monocytogenes demands extra caution since only low numbers of bacteria were detected in the eye-swabs, probably due to the low volume of
sample material and the intracellular niche of the bacterium. A general poor response to treatment in all these cases indicates that
clinicians should pay extra attention to intensity and duration of treatment if L. monocytogenes is identified in connection with equine
kerato-conjunctivitis. Listeria monocytogenes is an aerobic, Gram positive rod that can be found ubiquitously in nature, but is also capable
of causing severe disease [1, 2]. Sheep, cattle, goats and chickens are considered to be the most susceptible species , but all animals
including humans can be infected . The bacterium is also recognized as an important foodborne pathogen . Septicemia, encephalitis or
abortions are the most common clinical manifestations of infection , but ocular symptoms may also be seen. In food animal species ocular
symptoms are most commonly associated with infections affecting the central nervous system . The term “silage eye” refers to listerial
kerato-conjunctivitis, and may involve uveitis with hypopyon and miosis [6, 7]. In a questionnaire survey in England, “silage eye” was
recognized as the most common clinical manifestation of listerial infection in dairy cattle, but the study did not include bacteriological
data . In humans, conjunctivitis is the most common ocular presentation of L. monocytogenes infection. Listerial conjunctivitis may either
be endogenous in patients with meningitis, or exogenous . Human cases of listerial keratitis and endophthalmitis have also been reported .
Human listerial endophthalmitis has been associated with a characteristic pigmented hypopyon and elevated intraocular pressure [8, 13].
Although listeriosis is less common in horses than in ruminants, there have been reports on abortions [2, 14, 15], intra-uterine infection
[16, 17], meningo-encephalitis and septicaemia [17, 18, 21–24]. The authors are only aware of two previously reported cases of equine
kerato-conjunctivitis associated with L. monocytogenes [25, 26]. This report describes four cases of equine kerato-conjunctivis in Norway.
The clinical course of the disease, as well as microbiological features and antimicrobial susceptibility (both in vitro and in vivo) of L.
monocytogenes isolated from all 4 cases are described. A 12-year-old brown Standardbred mare with a 12 months history of unilateral
recurrent kerato-conjunctivitis was presented to the field practice of the Norwegian School of Veterinary Science (NSVS). The horse was fed
plastic wrapped silage and a commercial concentrate mix. Two previous attempts to treat the horse with topical fucidic acid eyedrops
(Fucithalmic1) and oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B (Terramycin-Polymyxin B2) eye ointment were unsuccessful. The ophthalmic examination was
performed using a focal light source and revealed mild blepharospasm of the right eye with a mild mucopurulent discharge. The palpebral
conjunctivae were moderately hyperaemic and chemotic. Direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes were normal, and no sign of miosis or
aqueous flare were seen. Multiple grayish-white sub-epithelial opacities were observed in the central part of the cornea, with an irregular
overlying epithelial surface in an area of approximately 5 × 5 mm. This area was surrounded by a diffuse stromal edema covering
approximately half of the cornea. A bacterial swab was collected from the corneal lesion, and transferred to a sterile transport medium. The
fluorescein dye test was negative. The preliminary diagnosis was bacterial kerato-conjunctivitis, and treatment with chloramphenicol eye
ointment (Chloramphenicol3) 3–4 times daily was initiated. L. monocytogenes and Micrococcus sp. were cultured from the bacterial swab. The
L. monocytogenes was considered to be of potential clinical relevance, and was found to be sensitive to chloramphenicol. However, no
improvement was observed upon re-examination 15 days later. A new bacterial swab confirmed the continuous presence of L. monocytogenes.
Treatment was altered to topical ampicillin (Pentrexyl 500 mg4 in 5 ml sterile water), gentamicin eyedrops (Garamycin5) and diclofenac eye
drops (Voltaren Ophtha6); all four times daily. In addition, the horse was treated with systemic procaine penicillin (Penovet vet7; 20
000 IU i.m.) twice daily and gentamicin (Genta-Kél8; 6.6 mg/kg i.v.) once daily; both for 5 days. A continuous gradual improvement was seen
until the horse was deemed sound by the owner around day 55, and all treatment was discontinued. At day 69, however, symptoms similar to
those described at day 1 recurred, and again, L. monocytogenes and Micrococcus sp. were cultured. Treatment with topical ciprofloxacin
eyedrops (Cilox9) and diclofenac eye drops [Voltaren Ophtha (see footnote 6)]; both four times daily, was initiated. At day 114 the horse
was hospitalized at the NSVS equine clinic. Ophthalmic examination at the NSVS confirmed abnormal findings restricted to the cornea and the
conjunctiva. The fluorescein dye test was still negative. Bacterial swabs were collected both prior to and after epithelial scrapings for
cytology, which resulted in considerable epithelial detachment. L. monocytogenes was cultured from both bacterial swabs, but the highest
numbers were found prior to scraping. No fungi were cultured. Cytology revealed a high number of rods associated with the squamous
epithelial cells that were seen both as aggregates and isolated. No neutrophils or fungi were seen. A sub-palpebral lavage system attached
to a continuous infusion pump system10 was inserted through the upper eyelid. Benzylpenicillin sodium (Penicillin 600 mg11 in 5 ml sterile
water) and gentamicin [Garamycin (see footnote 5)] eye drops were mixed daily and used in the infusion pump. In addition, the horse was
given systemic procaine penicillin [Penovet vet (see footnote 7); 20,000 IU i.m.] twice daily for 10 days, and systemic vedaprofen
[Quadrisol vet (see footnote 2); 1 mg/kg after an initial dose of 2 mg/kg] once daily for 15 days. At day 118, the footplate of the lavage
system was noted to have caused a superficial ulceration in the dorsal cornea. The infusion set was therefore removed, and a new set was
inserted in the nasal part of the lower eye lid, thereby protected by the membrana nictitans. The corneal lesion created by the lavage
system healed uneventfully within a week, indicating a normal corneal healing ability. At day 128, at which no bacteria were identified in a
follow-up cytological evaluation, the apparently irritating topical benzylpenicillin sodium treatment was discontinued. Topical treatment
with gentamicin [Garamycin (see footnote 5)] eye drops via the lavage system was maintained. The following days the inflammation was
gradually reduced. At day 140, severe kerato-conjunctivitis recurred. Slides for cytological examination were prepared, of which one
contained a high number of bacteria morphologically identical to L.monocytogenes associated with squamous epithelial cells. Interestingly,
such bacteria were not seen on three further slides. The combined treatment with benzylpenicillin sodium [Penicillin 600 mg (see footnote
11) in 5 ml sterile water] and gentamicin [Garamycin (see footnote 5)] eye drops via continuous flow was restarted, but financial
constraints made further treatment at the clinic impossible. Due to the nervous disposition of the horse, enucleation was not considered to
be an option. The horse was therefore released from the clinic against medical advice on day 150, and treated by the owner with
oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B [Terramycin-Polymyxin B (see footnote 2)] eye ointment three times daily in an attempt to control the infection.
Four weeks later, the horse was involved in a car accident and had to be euthanized due to its injuries. A 7-year-old grey Connemara gelding
with a history of recurrent unilateral kerato-conjunctivitis the last 6 months was referred to the NSVS. The pony was fed hay and a
commercial concentrate mix, but was also fed plastic wrapped haylage from the ground of the paddocks at daytime. Although treatment with
chloramphenicol eye ointment [Chloramphenicol (see footnote 3)] and diclofenac eye drops [Voltaren Ophtha (see footnote 6)] appeared to be
effective, clinical signs recurred repeatedly after treatment withdrawal. The pony exhibited a marked blepharospasm of the left eye, a
moderate periorbital edema with moderately hyperemic and chemotic palpebral conjunctivae, combined with a mild serous discharge. Slightly
nasal to the centre of the cornea, there was a faint, diffusely outlined greyish-white epithelial and sub-epithelial opacity of
approximately 2–3 mm diameter. There were no signs of uveitis. A bacterial swab was collected prior to the fluorescein dye test, which
revealed a strong dye uptake in the centre of the lesion. There were no signs of neovascularisation. A corneal scraping for cytological
evaluation resulted in epithelial detachment in an area of approximately 4 × 4 mm. The preliminary diagnosis was kerato-conjunctivitis of
possible viral aetiology. Treatment with idoxuridine eye ointment (Iducher12) four times daily, fucidic acid eye drops [Fucithalmic (see
footnote 1)] twice daily and diclofenac eye drops [Voltaren Ophtha (see footnote 6)] three times daily was initiated. The cytological
findings indicated possible listeria keratitis. This was confirmed by culturing of L. monocytogenes. Based on the results of the sensitivity
testing, topical antibiotics were changed to oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B [Terramycin-Polymyxin B (see footnote 2] three times daily, and
antiviral and anti-inflammatory treatment was continued. On day 12, the opacities were hardly visible, and there was no discharge or signs
of conjunctivitis. Treatment with oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B [Terramycin-Polymyxin B (see footnote 2)] and idoxuridine eye ointment [Iducher
(see footnote 12)] was continued for another 7 days, while diclofenac was discontinued. On day 29, the pony was re-examined. The symptoms
had gradually returned, and the owner had restarted treatment with oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B [Terramycin-Polymyxin B (see footnote 2)].
There was a diffuse stromal edema in the ventronasal cornea, surrounding several white “spots” of approximately 1 mm diameter. The left
pupil was slightly miotic consistent with mild anterior uveitis, but successfully dilated after 1 drop of 1 % atropine eye drops (Atropin
Minims13). Treatment with oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B [Terramycin-Polymyxin B (see footnote 2)], idoxuridine eye ointment [Iducher (see
footmote 12)] and diclofenac eyedrops [Voltaren Ophtha (see footnote 6)] as described above was restarted. Again, L. monocytogenes was
cultured from a bacterial swab from the corneal lesions. Around day 45, the horse was judged sound by the owner, and all medication was
discontinued. On day 76, the same symptoms recurred. Treatment with ciprofloxacin eye drops [Cilox (see footnote 9)] QID was started, and
maintained for 4 weeks. In a telephone interview 6 years later, the owner reported that the pony had shown no symptoms of ocular disease
since this treatment. They had, however, also stopped using haylage in the paddocks. A 10-year-old Icelandic horse, which was kept in a
group and fed plastic wrapped silage, was referred to the NSVS for evaluation of kerato-conjunctivitis in the right eye of 1 month duration.
Despite initial improvement after treatment with fucidic acid eye drops [Fucithalmic (see footnote 1)] twice daily for 10 days, the symptoms
recurred when treatment was stopped. The same treatment was re-initiated, this time without noticeable effect. The horse was presented with
a mild blepharospasm of the right eye, a moderate periorbital edema with moderately hyperaemic and chemotic palpebral conjunctivae. Slightly
nasal to the centre of the cornea, there was a very faint grayish epithelial opacity, only visible with a focal light source. No further
pathology was seen. A bacterial swab was collected as previously described. The fluorescein dye test was negative. Treatment with
chloramphenicol eye ointment [Chloramphenicol (see footnote 3)] three to four times daily and diclofenac eye drops [Voltaren Ophtha (see
footnote 6)] two to three times daily was initiated awaiting sampling results. At day 6, L. monocytogenes was cultured from a bacterial
swab. The topical antibiotic treatment was changed to ciprofloxacin eyedrops [Cilox (see footnote 9)] four times daily for 4 weeks. At day
30, the owner reported that the symptoms were reduced, but that a mild epiphora was still present. The treatment was therefore prolonged for
another 14 days. A few days after discontinuation of treatment, the symptoms recurred. At re-examination on day 48, the clinical findings
were identical to those described at day 1. A new bacterial swab revealed continuous growth of L. monocytogenes without changes to the
sensitivity pattern. Due to the poor clinical effect of ciprofloxacin, treatment was changed back to chloramphenicol [Chloramphenicol (see
footnote 3)] eyedrops 5 times daily (ointment at night) for 6 weeks. Around day 90, the owner discontinued the treatment without further
veterinary consultation. The following days symptoms as originally described recurred. On day 104 the horse was hospitalized at the NSVS.
The diffusely outlined epithelial opacity was still faint, but now covering more than 50 % of the corneal surface. A few superficial
stromal, very thin blood vessels were now seen progressing approximately 7 mm from the dorsal limbus. Mild uptake of fluorescein dye was
found in a 5 mm diameter area located 5–10 mm from the ventronasal limbus. The horse was treated with a continuous flow of chloramphenicol
eyedrops [Chloramphenicol (see footnote 3)] via a superior subpalpebral lavage system attached to a continuous infusion pump system (see
footnote 10) for 14 days and systemic procaine penicillin [Penovet vet (see footnote 7); 20,000 IU i.m.] twice daily for 10 days. At day 118
there were no signs of conjunctivitis, but still a faint epithelial opacity. The horse was sent home on another 14 days of chloramphenicol
eye ointment [Chloramphenicol (see footnote 3)] four times daily. According to a telephone interview with the owner at day 191 the horse had
not showed signs of ocular disease after termination of treatment at day 132. Around day 280, the horse was presented to a field
practitioner with bilateral conjunctivitis. Bacterial swabs were collected from both eyes and submitted to the NSVS for culturing. A mixed
flora was cultured, dominated by Staphylococcus aureus in the right eye and Pasturella sp in the left eye; both sensitive to
chloramphenicol. L. monocytogenes was not found at this stage. An 8-year-old Icelandic pony with a six month history of unilateral recurrent
kerato-conjunctivitis, affecting the left eye was presented to the horse clinic at Bjerke Equine Hospital, Oslo. The owner had first noticed
a problem approximately 5 months earlier whilst the horse was at pasture and described symptoms of recurrent blepharospasm with ocular
discharge. The eye was treated topically on several occasions with no lasting improvement, however the examination findings and medications
used are not known. Three months after the symptoms were first noticed, a superficial corneal ulcer associated with a corneal foreign body
was observed by the attending veterinary surgeon. During the past 2 months, the horse had been fed plastic wrapped haylage from the ground.
The foreign body was removed and the loose corneal epithelium surrounding the ulcer was debrided. The eye was medicated with topical
chloramphenicol eye ointment [Chloramphenicol (see footnote 3)] three times daily for 1 week. Two months after removal of the foreign body
the horse was presented to Bjerke Equine Hospital due to persistent problems with the eye. On examination the eye showed moderate
blepharospasm with slight epiphora. No sign of anterior uveitis was evident. The cornea had a dull appearance and there was a small area of
epithelium, approximately 1 cm in diameter, in the central cornea which had an uneven, stippled appearance. Fluorescein and Rose Bengal
staining was negative. No further abnormalities were found. The cornea was treated topically with neomycin sulphate, polymyxin B sulphate
and dexamethasone [Maxitrol (see footnote 9)] three times daily. The owner noticed an immediate improvement and on re-examination 1 week
later the horse exhibited no blepharospasm or ocular discharge. The corneal surface was shiny and smooth. The only abnormality noticed was
several very small, <1 mm, white sub-epithelial opacities in the central cornea. Medication was continued for one week. Two to three days
after treatment was discontinued, the owner noticed that the horse was showing signs of ocular discomfort once more. Treatment with topical
0.1 % dexamethasone disodium phosphate (Spersadex14) three times daily was instigated. The eye showed no improvement and was presented for
re-examination 2 weeks later. At re-examination the horse showed obvious blepharospasm and significant epiphora. The ventral palpebral
conjunctiva was chemotic. A superficial corneal ulcer was present in the central corneal area, approximately 8 × 5 mm, which was associated
with a very mild, diffuse edema. The pupil was moderately miotic, indicating mild anterior uveitis. No corneal neovascularization was
evident. Fluorescein testing resulted in a faint staining of the ulcer margins. The epithelial surface was carefully scraped and slides
prepared for cytology, thereby removing loosely adherent epithelium in an area of approximately 15 × 15 mm. A swab for bacterial and fungal
culture was collected from the affected area of the cornea. Whilst awaiting the results for the samples taken, the horse was hospitalized
and the eye treated topically with oxytetracyclin/polymyxin B [Terramycin-Polymyxin B (see footnote 2)] three times daily. A 1 % atropine
eyedrop [Atropin Minims (see footnote 13)] was applied on one occasion which resulted in a profound mydriasis. In addition the horse was
treated with systemic flunixin meglumine (Finadyne Vet15; 1,1 mg/kg iv) once daily for a period of 5 days. After 5 days the horse showed no
ocular discomfort or inflammation; the ulcer had healed and fluorescein staining was negative. At this point the horse was discharged and
the owner continued with the antibiotic treatment for a further 7 days. Cytology revealed the presence of many rod-shaped bacteria in short
chains indicative of L. monocytogenes. The bacteria were associated with squamous epithelial cells (Fig. 1). From the corneal swab it was
cultured a sparse, mixed bacterial growth dominated by L. monocytogenes.Fig. 1 a. Squamous epithelial cell with typical rod-shaped bacteria
on the surface. Note the absence of inflammatory cells. ×600 Modified Wright stain. b The rod-shaped bacteria are suggestive of L.
monocytogenes. ×1000 Modified Wright stain a. Squamous epithelial cell with typical rod-shaped bacteria on the surface. Note the absence of
inflammatory cells. ×600 Modified Wright stain. b The rod-shaped bacteria are suggestive of L. monocytogenes. ×1000 Modified Wright stain
The horse was re-examined 5 days after cessation of antibiotic treatment, 12 days after discharge from the hospital. On examination the
horse showed no blepharospasm or ocular discharge. The conjunctivae were not inflamed and the cornea was smooth with a healthy, shiny
corneal surface. No corneal ulcer, edema or neovascularisation was evident. Fluorescein and Rose Bengal staining was negative. Three small,
<1 mm, white, sub-epithelial opacities in the area of previous ulceration were still visible with magnification. No bacterial growth was
cultured from a corneal swab. Four months after discharge, the owner reported no sign of recurrence. A brief overview of key clinical
observations, culturing results and treatments in all four cases is given in Table 1.Table 1Key clinical observations, culturing results,
topical and systemic treatments in four cases of equine keratitisCase NoDay after initial examinationClinical diagnosesBacterial growth
after culturinga Topical medication (frequency)b Systemic medication (days)11Conjunctivitis, moderate central superficial keratitis1
Micrococcus spp.—moderate L. monocytogenes—sparse Chloramphenicol (TID – QID) –15Unchanged1 L. monocytogenes—sparse Ampicillin, Gentamicin
(QID) Diclofenac (QID) Procaine penicillin, Gentamicin (5 days) 55No symptoms2 ––69Conjunctivitis, moderate central superficial keratitis1
Normal flora dominated by Micrococcus spp. and L. monocytogenes Ciprofloxacin (QID) Diclofenac (QID) –114Unchanged1 L. monocytogenes
abundant before scraping/very sparse after Penicillin-Na, Gentamicin (CF) Procaine penicillin (10 days) Vedaprofen (X days)128Central
superficial keratitis improved1 No listerial growth (selective enrichment) Gentamicin (CF) –140Conjunctivitis, moderate central superficial
keratitis1 Penicillin-Na, Gentamicin (CF) –150 (released against medical advice) central superficial keratitis improved1 Oxytetracyclin -
PolymyxinB (TID) –178 (euthanized—unrelated reason) Unchanged2 21Conjunctivitis, mild–moderate central superficial keratitis1 L.
monocytogenes—sparse Oxytetracyclin - PolymyxinB (QID ), Idoxuridine (QID), Diclofenac (TID) –12Mild keratitis1 Oxytetracyclin - PolymyxinB
(QID 7 days), Idoxuridine (QID–7 days) –29Conjunctivitis, mild–moderate central superficial keratitis, mild anterior uveitis1 L.
monocytogenes—moderate (pure culture) Oxytetracyclin - PolymyxinB (QID), Atropin (1 single drop), Idoxuridine QID, Diclofenac TID –45No
symptoms2 ––76Conjunctivitis, mild–moderate central superficial keratitis1 Ciprofloxacin (QID 28 days ) –2200No further symptoms2
–31Conjunctivitis, mild central superficial keratitis1 L. monocytogenes—moderate (pure culture) Ciprofloxacin (QID) Diclofenac (BID-TID) –
30Conjunctivitis2 Ciprofloxacin (QID) –44None2 ––48Conjunctivitis, mild central superficial keratitis1 L. monocytogenes—sparse (pure
culture) Chloramphenicol (Eyedrops 5x/day Ointment at night 42 days) –90None2 104Conjunctivitis, mild–moderate central superficial
keratitis1 L. monocytogenes—very sparse (pure culture) Chloramphenicol (CF) Procaine penicillin (10 days) 118Mild keratitis1 Chloramphenicol
(QID – ointment 14 days) –162No symptoms2 41Mild central superficial keratitis1 Neomycin - Polymyxin B-Dexamethasone (TID 14 days)
–16Conjunctivitis2 Dexamethasone (TID) –28Conjunctivitis, mild–moderate central superficial keratitis (ulcerative), mild anterior uveitis1
Sparse, mixed bacterial growth dominated by L. monocytogenes Oxytetracyclin-PolymyxinB (TID 5 days) Atropin (1 single drop) Oxytetracyclin -
PolymyxinB (TID 7 days) Flunixin (5 days)45None1 No bacterial growth160No symptoms2 Treatment prior to referral and short term medications
awaiting culture results not included in the table. 1 Veterinary diagnoses, 2 Owner observation italic treatment outside clinic, BID
treatment twice daily, TID treatment 3 times daily, QID treatment 4 times daily, CF continuous flow via subpalpebral lavage system,
underlined: antibiotic treatments aTypically 3–5 days after sampling bTopical antibiotics initiated after received culture report Key
clinical observations, culturing results, topical and systemic treatments in four cases of equine keratitis Treatment prior to referral and
short term medications awaiting culture results not included in the table. 1 Veterinary diagnoses, 2 Owner observation italic treatment
outside clinic, BID treatment twice daily, TID treatment 3 times daily, QID treatment 4 times daily, CF continuous flow via subpalpebral
lavage system, underlined: antibiotic treatments aTypically 3–5 days after sampling bTopical antibiotics initiated after received culture
report In all cases, samples for microbiology were collected during the initial examination and for follow-up and evaluation of treatment
response. Sterile cotton swabs in Amies transport medium without charcoal (Copan M40 Transystem16) were used for transporting swab specimens
to the bacteriological and mycological diagnostic laboratory at the NSVS, where culturing was started within a few hours after sampling. The
samples were in all cases incubated on parallel agar plates (blood agar base no 1)17 with 5 % cattle blood of which one was incubated at
37 °C in 5 % CO2 atmosphere for 24 h while the other was incubated anaerobically for 48 h. The samples were also inoculated in serum broth
(see footnote 17) and incubated at 37 °C in 5 % CO2 atmosphere for 24 h for enrichment of growth for secondary plating on blood agar in case
of no visual growth on primary blood agar after 24 h. In addition, the samples were routinely incubated on bromothymol blue agar used for
detection of bacteria in the Enterobacteriaceae family and other Gram-negative rods. Materials from samples were also directly Gram stained
to detect any bacteria in the sample before cultivation. Growth on the plates was examined followed by recording of morphological and other
features of the colonies such as occurrence of any haemolytic zones. Gram stained colony material was examined and cell morphology recorded.
Potential Listeria-like colonies were secondarily streaked on blood agar plates at right angles close to simultaneously streaked cultures of
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and Rhodococcus equi to detect any CAMP phenomenon. Biochemical tests of Listeria-like colonies included the
catalase test, fermentation of glucose, degradation of aesculin, hippurat and H2S. The methyl red, Voges Proskauer and motility tests (in
semi-liquid agar grown at 22 and 37 °C) were also performed. Bacteriological findings from all eye swab samples collected during the course
of the disease in all cases are summarized in Table 1. Colonies suspected to be L. monocytogenes were 1.0 mm in diameter, convex and grey to
white in colour with a clear zone of β-haemolysis extending barely (about 0.5 mm) outside the colony edge. There was no growth on
bromothymol blue agar from any of the corneal swabs. There was no evidence of any antibacterial agent in the material from initial corneal
swabs as seen from the control growth of S. pseudintermedius on the blood agar incubated in CO2 atmosphere. The same type of colony was
detected on blood agar after cultivation from the LB enrichment broth after one, two and 3 days. In all four cases culturing revealed a low
to moderate number of colonies in pure culture with similar cultural characteristics to L. monocytogenes (Table 1). The β-hemolytic colonies
from the corneal swabs contained bacteria that were Gram positive, short coccoid and regular sized rods. The isolates were catalase
positive, fermented glucose, did not metabolise aesculin or hippurate, produced H2S, and were negative on methyl red and Voges Proskauer
tests. They were non-motile on semi-solid agar at 37 °C, but motile at 22 °C. They showed weak CAMP reaction with β-toxic S.
pseudintermedius but were CAMP negative with R. equi. The biochemical profile and phenotypic features suggest that the colonies were L.
monocytogenes. Incubation of the test samples and cultures of L. monocytogenes reference strains CCUG 15527 (serotype 1) and CCUG 7995
(serotype 4) for 24 h at 37 °C demonstrated that the isolated L. monocytogenes of all cases belonged to the O serotype 1 judged by the
phenotypical similarity of the colonies and their haemolytic zones. Agglutination tests performed on glass slides with antisera against
Listeria O type 1 (see footnote 17) and Listeria O type 4 (see footnote 17) also showed the same result. Antimicrobial susceptibility tests
were carried out using the tablet diffusion method with twelve different antibacterial drugs including penicillin, ampicillin, cefalexin,
amoxycillin, amoxycillin with clavulanic acid, sulphadiazine/trimethoprim, tetracycline, gentamicin, lincomycin, chloramphenicol, fucidic
acid, enrofloxacin, and colicin. Agar diffusion on Müller-Hinton (MH) agar (see footnote 17) was used with tablets containing antibiotics
(Neo-Sensitabs)18 for the susceptibility tests. The tests showed that isolates of L. monocytogenes from all four cases were found to be
either moderately susceptible or in some cases resistant towards fucidic acid. The isolates of L. monocytogenes from case 3 and 4 (both from
the initial and follow-up isolations) were found to be intermediate susceptible towards enrofloxacin. The isolates were found to be
susceptible to all other antimicrobial drugs tested. The four cases of kerato-conjunctivitis in horses associated with L. monocytogenes
reported in this study represent the first reported cases in Scandinavia. L. monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular pathogen widely
distributed in the environment where most animals are exposed to the organism during their lifetime. The bacterium causes disease either
when the host’s immune system is compromised or when the bacterium occurs in numbers high enough to overwhelm the host’s defence mechanisms
[2, 9, 11]. Although the common route of infection is oral, the bacterium may also enter the body through the nasal mucosa or open wounds.
The conjunctiva has also been mentioned as a possible entrance [24, 34]. In contrast to the high frequency of ocular signs of listeriosis
described in cattle , ocular listerial infections seem to be rare in horses with only two cases reported so far [25, 26]. All cases reported
here had symptoms of corneal disease for an extended time period prior to referral. Hence, it is not possible to determine the pathogenesis
in these cases with certainty. L. monocytogenes serotype O type 1, a common strain found in the environment, in silage and in systemically
infected animals , was cultured from all cases reported here. This is in agreement with the theory of silage as the most likely source of
infection, and with the findings of Evans et al. that ocular listerial infections seem to be caused by common strains of the bacterium that
are also found in systemic infection. The intact and healthy cornea is highly resistant to bacterial infection, due to a continuous flow of
a tear film with antimicrobial properties, as well as the physical barrier of a healthy epithelium . It has, however, been shown that L.
monocytogenes may penetrate into undamaged corneal epithelial cells of guinea pigs . Further, conjunctivitis and/or kerato-conjunctivitis
has been induced experimentally in guinea pigs and rabbits simply by direct inoculation of L. monocytogenes, while similar direct
inoculation of a variety of other bacteria did not cause infection . In fact, this characteristic ability to cause conjunctivitis and
keratitis was in 1939 even proposed as a method to identify an infectious culture as L. monocytogenes . It has also been shown that the
infectivity of listerial cultures after direct inoculation in rabbits is dose dependent . Whether direct inoculation would cause kerato-
conjunctivitis in a horse remains speculative, not least given the more than 3 times thicker corneal epithelium in horses [31, 32] compared
to rabbits . There is a well-known general association between silage feeding and listeriosis [5, 34–37]. In horses, systemic L.
monocytogenes infections have been associated with silage feeding [22, 26], feeding on poor quality hay or grazing on spray and flood-
irrigated grass clover pasture . Plastic wrapped forage (silage or haylage) is commonly used to feed horses in Norway, especially during the
winter season, and appears to be the most likely source of L. monocytogenes in the cases described here. Grass silage produced in cool, wet
climates tends to have lower sugar levels and higher moisture contents than silage produced in warmer climates. This may result in a poorer
and slower fermentation, which provides better conditions for the proliferation of L. monocytogenes in the silage . Poor quality hay or
soil-contaminated forage represent other possible sources of infection in these cases. In several studies, feeding of animals with silage
placed at or above head height in such a way that silage material could fall into the eyes of the animals has been incriminated as a
possible predisposing factor of listerial eye infection [35, 37, 39]. Such feeding routines are not common in horses. Still, frozen forage
or forage made into a hard bale as in silage or haylage may be difficult to pretend, and horses may pull forage out of the bale and throw it
up in the air, increasing the likelihood of ocular exposure to contaminated material. Hence, it appears possible that feeding routines,
although not further investigated, may have played a role in these cases. Corticosteroid treatment is known to increase the infectivity of
L. monocytogenes in laboratory animals . The case of equine listerial keratitis reported by Sanchez et al. had been treated with topical
steroids prior to referral. Only one of the horses included in this report (case 4) had been treated with topical steroids prior to the
identification of L. monocytogenes, and no other signs of immunosuppression were identified in any of these cases. L. monocytogenes is often
detected in low numbers by cultivation, sometimes together with other bacteria. This observation is important for the bacteriologist when
cultivating samples from cases of keratitis, and may be related to the intracellular growth of L. monocytogenes. The low number of Listeria
bacteria seen on culturing may have contributed to the low number of reported cases in the literature. Also, as noted by other authors there
may be lacking awareness among clinicians as well as bacteriologists regarding the potential role of L. monocytogenes in ocular infections
[9, 11, 26]. A thorough cytologic evaluation of corneal scrapings was found to be of great help in these cases, but comprehensive sampling
is crucial as indicated by positive findings in only one out of several slides at the last recurrence in case 1. Listerial infections are
commonly treated with penicillins or tetracylines, which may be effective in early stages of systemic disease. However, if severe symptoms
have developed prior to initiation of intensive antibiotic treatment, the outcome is commonly fatal . Combined use of gentamycin and
penicillin was found to be more effective than either of the antibiotics used alone in treatment of experimental listerial keratitis in
rabbits . The same combination of antibiotics was used systemically as well as topically for successful treatment of a severe case of human
listerial keratitis . Based on these findings, penicillins (ampicillin or penicillin G) and gentamicin were used systemically and topically
in case 1. Some comments need to be made regarding this combined treatment: The low lipophilicity of Penicillin G likely restricts its
ability to penetrate the barrier of the lipophilic corneal epithelium. Although topical penicillin treatment has been recommended for use in
humans with ocular surface disease , the poor penetration of the epithelium may well limit the efficacy of the drug against intracellularly
located strains of Listeria. Notable in this context is the fact that the horses in this study on many occasions had intact epithelium
covering the corneal lesions, as demonstrated by negative Fluorescein dye tests. Further, aminoglycosids may be inactivated in plasma in
approximately 8–48 h in the presence of ß-lactams . In order to minimize inactivation, a fresh mixture for continuous flow treatment was
prepared daily in case 1. The extent of potential aminoglycoside inactivation was not investigated. Despite these factors, this combined
treatment appeared to be effective, but was probably stopped too early. Various other recommendations have been published with regards to
treatment of ocular listerial infections. Both the previously reported cases of listerial kerato-conjunctivitis in horses were treated
successfully with kinolones (alone or in combination) [25, 26]. Based on these reports, the kinolone Ciprofloxacin was used in cases 1–3,
but this treatment was only successful in case 2. These treatments were carried out by the horse owners, and it is possible that the lack of
success may have been related to owners’ compliance. On the other hand, failure of listerial keratitis to respond to treatment with the
kinolone Ofloxacin despite in vitro susceptibility has been reported in a human patient . Interestingly, the isolates from cases 3 and 4
were found to be intermediate susceptible towards enrofloxacin, which was the only kinolone available for susceptibility testing. The
isolates described here were found to be susceptible to most of the antibiotics tested, but intermediately susceptible or in some cases
resistant to fucidic acid. Fucidic acid is commonly used as a “first choice” antibiotic to treat suspected bacterial keratitis or
conjunctivitis in Norway, and had been used prior to referral at least in cases 1 and 3. Despite extremely prolonged unsuccessful treatment
with chloramphenicol in case 3, hospitalization and intensified treatment with continuous flush using the same antibiotic led to final
resolution of the symptoms, although this final treatment was supplemented by systemic penicillin for 10 days. Although the possibility of
re-infections cannot be completely ruled out, we believe recurrences of symptoms in these horses after termination of treatment were related
to lack of successful elimination of the infective agent, not least due to the consistent unilaterality of the clinical signs. In summary,
we believe that several antibiotics may be used successfully for treatment, but that extra attention must be paid to intensity and duration
of treatment once L. monocytogenes has been identified in cases of equine kerato-conjunctivitis. Cases should also be monitored closely
after termination of antibiotic treatment. Difficulties in treatment similar to those described here have also been reported in human
ophthalmology [9–11, 42]. L. monocytogenes should be considered a potential pathogen in cases of indolent bacterial kerato-conjunctivitis in
horses, especially in animals fed with silage or haylage. Special attention may be required from clinicians as well as bacteriologists and
clinical pathologists in order to identify the bacteria. The generally poor response to treatment and frequent recurrences in the cases
described here indicate that clinicians should pay extra attention to the choice of antimicrobial drugs, and to the intensity and duration
of the treatment regimen if L. monocytogenes is identified from equine keratitic lesions. Further research is needed to determine whether L.
monocytogenes may act as a primary pathogen, or rather as a secondary invader in cases of pre-existing corneal lesions. Dechra Veterinary
Products A/S, Uldum, Denmark. Pfizer Inc, New York, USA. Nycomed Pharma A/S, Asker, Norway. Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, New York, USA.
Schering-Plough International, Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA. Novartis Healthcare A/S, København, Denmark. Boehringer Ingelheim Danmark A/S,
København, Denmark. Kela N.V., Hoogstraten, Belgium. Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth Texas, USA. Mila International,
http://milainternational.com/. Actavis Group, Hafnarfjordur, Iceland. Farmigea S.p.A., Pisa, Italy. Bausch & Lomb U.K. Ltd., Surrey,
England. OmniVison AB, Danderyd, Sweden. Intervet International B.V, Boxmeer, The Netherlands. Copan Italia S.p.A., Brescia, Italy. Difco
Laboratories Inc., Detroit, Michigan, USA. Rosco, Taastrup, Denmark. SLK was largely involved in the description of case 1, and had the
initial idea of reporting it together with HBH and HS. EOR was largely involved in treatment and description of cases 2 and 3, TR of cases
1-3, RAH treated and described case 4, HBH was responsible for cytological evaluations and descriptions, TA and HS were responsible for the
bacteriology. TR and TA drafted the manuscript. All authors were involved in continuous discussions regarding the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
