Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-associated gastroduodenal ulcers (GDU) are a rare digestive disease, which principally affect immunocompromised
patients. We recently experienced CMV-associated GDU occurring in a seemingly immunocompetent patient. The rarity of such a condition was
inimical to a correct clinical diagnosis. A 77-year-old woman with Alzheimer's disease was admitted to our hospital because of vomiting and
anorexia. Her general condition was extremely poor due to severe dehydration. Any invasive procedures including gastroduodenal endoscopy
could not be performed. Laboratory test results showed electrolyte imbalance, hyperglycemia, and hypercortisolemia. The plasma
adrenocorticotropic hormone level was rather low. On her 11th day in hospital, she suddenly fell into shock status. Despite intensive care,
the patient could not be rescued. An autopsy was performed and revealed that she had suffered from CMV-associated GDU and died of candidemia
that invaded through the ulcer. Her adrenal glands showed neither neoplasm nor hyperplasia, suggesting that her hypercortisolism was a
purely functional disorder. We concluded that the severe opportunistic infections were developed in association with functional
hypercortisolism. This case suggests that functional hypercortisolism, even though transient, can cause a patient to be immunocompromised.
Endogenous hypercortisolism usually presents in association with neoplastic or hyperplastic disorders, such as pituitary adenomas, ectopic
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-producing neoplasm, and adrenal tumors or hyperplasia.1 Its principal symptoms and signs are central
obesity, hyperglycemia, hypertension, electrolyte imbalance, and so on, and are known as Cushing's disease or Cushing's syndrome.1 Excess
endogenous steroids, as well as exogenous/iatrogenic ones, potentially induce opportunistic infections.2 Cortisol is primarily “the stress
hormone.” Its secretion is increased via activation of hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal axis by diverse stresses. In critically ill patients,
its secretion can reach abnormal levels.3 This pathophysiological phenomenon is known as functional hypercortisolism or pseudo-Cushing's
syndrome, which can be differentiated from “true” Cushing's syndrome by a dexamethasone suppression test.4,5 Although it is considered a
kind of adaptive reaction against severe stresses, it may introduce unfavorable effects to patients in the same manner as “true” Cushing's
syndrome.6,7 Recently, we experienced a case of severe opportunistic infections associated with functional hypercortisolism. The patient
died of candidiasis that superinfected on gastroduodenal ulcers (GDU) associated with cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. To our knowledge,
this is the first case report of its kind. In the light of its clinical importance, we report herein this case. A 77-year-old woman with
Alzheimer's disease was admitted to our hospital because of vomiting and anorexia persisting for over a month. She had been managed as an
outpatient of our hospital from January 2013 due to hiatal hernia and iron-deficiency anemia. GDU was suspected, but endoscopic examination
revealed no lesions in her stomach and duodenum. Despite detailed examinations, an etiology of her iron-deficiency anemia was not
determined. She was treated by transfusion and administration of iron supplements. Simultaneously, her Alzheimer's disease worsened, and
oral intake of donepezil was initiated from November 2013. Subsequently, she complained of nausea, which was supposed to be attributed to
donepezil, and rivastigmine patches were begun instead of donepezil. However, her sickness had become severe, and she developed
uncontrollable anorexia and vomiting. She was admitted to our hospital on February 5, 2014. On admission, she appeared to be severely
dehydrated and exhausted. Her abdomen was flat and soft, and no tenderness was found. The radiological examination revealed moderate amounts
of ascites and pleural effusion besides already-known scoliosis and hiatal hernia. Laboratory test results demonstrated hypernatremia
(156 mEq/L), hypokalemia (3.4 mEq/L), hypoalbuminemia (2.8 g/dL), and mild leukocytosis (9400/mm3). The physicians were aware that there had
been electrolyte imbalance since 1 week ago and hyperglycemia appeared 2 weeks ago (Fig. 1). To identify the cause of these laboratory test
abnormalities, hormonal tests were performed and revealed the elevated plasma cortisol level (78.2 μg/dL [normal range, 3.9–18.1 μg/dL])
accompanied by the low plasma ACTH level (7.5 pg/mL [normal range, 7.7–63.1 pg/mL]). Transitions in laboratory test results of the patient.
To alleviate the critical condition, the physicians decided to correct her dehydration and electrolyte imbalance first, and planned to
perform a dexamethasone suppression test and detailed gastrointestinal examinations later. Needless to say, the rivastigmine patch was
halted. Although strict intravenous infusion therapy was continued, the patient's general condition and laboratory data did not improve.
Oral intake was initiated on the 8th hospital day, but no nutritional efficacy was obtained. The amounts of ascites and pleural effusion
progressively increased, and her respiratory condition worsened. On the 11th hospital day, she complained of severe abdominal pain, and
suddenly fell into shock status. A markedly elevated serum level of C-reactive protein (11.73 mg/dL) suggested that she was suffering from a
critical infectious/inflammatory disorder. At that time, both the plasma cortisol (228.0 μg/dL) and ACTH (339.3 pg/mL) levels were
remarkably elevated (Fig. 1). Antibiotic administration was immediately instituted, but we could not rescue the patient. An autopsy was
performed to clarify what had happened in her body during these couple of months. The autopsy was performed 3 h postmortem. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient's family, and this case study was approved by the hospital ethical committee. First, a blood specimen
was obtained aseptically and examined on bacterial culture. Then, every thoraco-abdominal organ was removed, examined macroscopically, and
fixed in buffered formalin. Paraffin-embedded tissue specimens were sectioned in 3 μm thick and stained with hematoxylin-eosin, periodic
acid-Schiff, and immunoperoxidase for cytomegalovirus (Dakopatts, Glostrup, Denmark). The autopsy findings, including results of the blood
culture, indicated that the cause of her death was candidemia. Macroscopic examination revealed multiple deep GDU in her gastric antrum and
duodenal bulb. Candida albicans had invaded into the bloodstream via exposed vessels in the lesions of GDU, which was associated with CMV
infection (Fig. 2). CMV-infected cells were also seen in the lungs, colon, uterus, and lymph nodes. The CMV infection was confirmed
immunohistochemically (not shown). No neoplastic/hyperplastic changes were found in any examined organs including adrenal glands (Fig. 3),
suggesting that her hypercortisolism was a purely functional disorder. Histopathological findings at autopsy. (A) A deep gastric ulcer
(asterisk) associated with fungal colonization (hematoxylin-eosin; loupe magnification). (B) Fungi invading the vascular lumen (arrowheads)
in the ulcer bed (periodic acid-Schiff stain; low magnification). (C) Many CMV-infected cells (arrows) in mucosa adjacent to the ulcer
(hematoxylin-eosin; high magnification). Cut-surfaces of the adrenal glands. No neoplastic/hyperplastic changes are seen. Final pathologic
diagnoses were: (1) functional hypercortisolism (pseudo-Cushing's syndrome), (2) CMV-associated GDU, and (3) candida superinfection in GDU
and candidemia (cause of death). Unfortunately, we could not rescue the patient. To convert this negative experience to future success, we
thoroughly reviewed the clinical and pathological findings, guessed the pathophysiology, and pondered how we should have managed the
patient. The patient presented with severe exhaustion, dehydration, and cause-undetermined hypercortisolism. Detailed endocrinological
examinations were planned but could not be performed because her general condition rapidly worsened. No diagnostic procedures and radical
therapies could be done, and all our treatment approaches to her were conservative and symptomatic. She suddenly fell into shock and died,
and during this short period we couldn’t understand what had happened. The post-mortem examination revealed that the patient had died of
candidemia that had occurred as an unimaginable incidental complication of CMV-associated GDU (Fig. 2). We were surprised that such
seemingly immunocompetent patient suffered from the severe opportunistic infections. In general, it is recognized that CMV-associated GDU is
caused mostly in immunocompromised patients, especially patients receiving immunosuppressive therapies.8,9 Alternatively, there are several
reports of CMV-associated GDU developed in immunocompetent patients.10–13 However, since their precise immune conditions were not fully
examined, they might have been in immunocompromised settings. In our patient, hypercortisolism possibly affected her immune condition and
contributed to development of the life-threatening opportunistic infections. Her hypercortisolism at least was related to worsening of the
infectious disorders. In fact, endogenous hypercortisolism is considered an important etiologic factor in immunosuppression.2 As described
above, endogenous hypercortisolism is usually associated with neoplastic or hyperplastic disorders. Our patient's hypercortisolism was
considered a purely functional disorder, namely pseudo-Cushing syndrome. Anorexia, probably adverse effects of donepezil and the use of
rivastigmine patches,14 is thought to have been strongly stressful for her both physically and psychologically. This highly stressful
condition continued for a couple of months and was thought to have led to increased cortisol secretion via activation of
hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal axis.7,15 A dexamethasone suppression test would have clarified and classified her raised adrenocortical
activity.4,5 Functional hypercortisolism has been considered a secondary disorder that is induced in association with anorexia, diabetes,
alcoholism, and critically ill conditions, and so on.7,15 Hence this has not been a subject for active therapeutic interventions. However,
accumulating evidence has revealed its harmful effects comparable with those of true Cushing syndrome and benefits of correction of the
patients’ plasma cortisol levels.6,7 We should have considered an active hormonal intervention when we noticed her hypercortisolism. A more
critical issue during the hospitalization was the insufficient gastrointestinal examination. If gastroduodenal endoscopy had been repeatedly
carried out, we would have found the GDU and made a correct diagnosis in time. In actual fact, her severe general condition did not allow us
to perform detailed gastrointestinal examinations. Moreover, treatment of CMV-associated GDU requires antiviral drugs,16,17 which cannot be
used without pathologic evidence of CMV infection shown in gastroduodenal biopsy specimens. A chance of making a correct diagnosis and
choosing curable treatments is thought to have been extremely low. Premortem diagnosis of CMV-associated GDU in a patient in a severe
condition is quite difficult even by modern medical technologies.18 In conclusion, we experienced CMV-associated GDU caused in a patient
with functional hypercortisolism. This case suggested that functional hypercortisolism, even though transient, can cause a patient to become
immunocompromised. Functional hypercortisolism is considered a subject of active therapeutic interventions. The authors would like to thank
Dr. J. Aidan Carney, Emeritus Professor of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, for giving valuable comments on adrenal gland pathology. Abbreviations:
ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone, CMV = cytomegalovirus, GDU = gastroduodenal ulcers. The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
