The therapy of inflammatory bowel disease, particularly with tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers, may be associated with a number of
cutaneous adverse effects, including psoriasis-like, eczema-like, and lichenoid eruptions. Other rare skin complications are neutrophilic
dermatoses such as amicrobial pustulosis of the folds (APF), which is a chronic relapsing pustular disorder classified in this spectrum. The
authors analyzed clinical, histopathologic, and cytokine expression profiles of 3 inflammatory bowel disease patients with APF triggered by
adalimumab (patient 1) and infliximab (patients 2 and 3). All 3 patients presented with sterile pustules involving the cutaneous folds,
genital regions, and scalp 6 months after starting adalimumab (patient 1) and 9 months after starting infliximab (patients 2 and 3).
Histology was characterized by epidermal spongiform pustules with a dermal neutrophilic and lymphocytic infiltrate. Tumor necrosis factor
blocker withdrawal associated with topical and systemic corticosteroids induced complete remission of APF in all 3 patients. The expressions
of interleukin (IL)-1 beta and its receptors as well as TNF alpha and its receptors were significantly higher in APF than in controls. Also
IL-17, leukocyte selectin, and chemokines, such as IL-8, [C-X-C motif] chemokine ligand 1/2/3 (C = cysteine, X = any amino acid), [C-X-C
motif] chemokine ligand 16 (C = cysteine, X = any amino acid), and RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted)
were significantly overexpressed. Finally, the authors found significant overexpression of both metalloproteinases 2/9 and their inhibitors
1/2. The observation of 3 patients with APF following anti-TNF therapy expands not only the clinical context of APF but also the spectrum of
anti-TNF side effects. Overexpression of cytokines/chemokines and molecules amplifying the inflammatory network supports the view that APF
is autoinflammatory in origin. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including Crohn disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), may present
extraintestinal manifestations in up to 40% of cases.1 Among the extraintestinal organs, the skin is one of the most commonly affected.
Mucocutaneous findings are frequent and may occur in 22% to 75% of patients with CD2,3 and in 5% to 11% of patients with UC.4 Skin
manifestations associated with IBD are polymorphic and can be classified into 4 categories according to their pathophysiology: specific,
reactive, associated, and induced by IBD treatment.5 Cutaneous manifestations are regarded as specific if they share with IBD the same
granulomatous histopathologic pattern: perianal or metastatic CD, commonly presenting with abscesses or fistulas. Reactive cutaneous
manifestations are different from IBD in the histopathology but have close physiopathologic links: autoinflammatory skin diseases such as
neutrophilic dermatoses are the paradigm of this group. Among the cutaneous diseases associated with IBD, the most commonly seen are
erythema nodosum and psoriasis. There are a number of cutaneous manifestations because of adverse effects of IBD therapy, in particular
biologics, including psoriasis-like, eczema-like, and lichenoid eruptions as well as cutaneous lupus erythematosus. These immune-mediated
inflammatory skin reactions represent a paradoxical event considering that biologic agents, most notably anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
are commonly used in the management of severe psoriasis. Autoinflammatory neutrophilic dermatoses have been very rarely reported in IBD
patients under TNF blocker therapy;6 in particular, to the best of our knowledge, only 1 case of amicrobial pustulosis-like rash in a
patient with CD under anti-TNF alpha has been described.7 Here, we studied 3 IBD patients who developed a paradoxical skin reaction
manifesting as amicrobial pustulosis of the folds (APF) after treatment with anti-TNF alpha agents [2 patients were treated with infliximab
(a chimeric mouse–human monoclonal anti-TNF alpha antibody) and 1 with adalimumab (a fully human monoclonal anti-TNF alpha antibody)].
Amicrobial pustulosis of the folds is a chronic relapsing neutrophilic dermatosis that presents with sterile pustular lesions involving the
main cutaneous folds, genital regions and scalp.8,9 Clinical, histopathologic, and cytokine expression profiles of the 3 patients have been
analyzed. Notably, we have evaluated the main proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines commonly involved in autoinflammatory diseases with
the aim of supporting the autoinflammatory nature of anti-TNF-induced APF in IBD patients. Three patients attended our University Department
from 2012 to 2015 for having developed a skin reaction to anti-TNF agents manifesting as APF were studied clinicopathologically and
immunologically. The patients were followed-up for a period ranging from 3 to 36 months. The diagnosis of APF was established on the basis
of criteria previously suggested by Marzano et al9 and modified as reported in Table 1. To conduct the immunologic study, lesional skin
biopsies taken from the 3 patients were evaluated by means of a cytokine array method. The controls were normal skin tissue specimens taken
from 6 patients (4 women and 2 men; age range: 27–37 years) who underwent excision of benign skin tumors (melanocytic nevi). All the
controls were not overweight nor had any cutaneous or systemic immune-mediated disorder. Blood and tissue samples were collected during
routine diagnostic procedures and all patients gave oral informed consent that remaining samples could be used for research purposes. The
protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of IRCCS Fondazione Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy.
Diagnostic Criteria for Amicrobial Pustulosis of the Folds Each tissue sample was weighed and diced into very small pieces using a clean
razor blade. Frozen tissues were sliced very thinly and thawed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (sc-24948) containing protease and
phosphatase inhibitors by using 3 mL of ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer per gram of tissue. Samples were incubated on ice for
30 minutes, transferred to microcentrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and the
sample was centrifuged again. The new supernatant fluid was added to the previous one, this mixture representing the total cell lysate. To
standardize the cell lysate of each tissue sample, we measured the total proteins in each sample by a micro bicinchoninic acid kit (Thermo
Scientific, Waltham, MA). For each sample, we loaded a volume containing 100 μg of proteins in a glass slide format of cytokine antibody
array (RayBio®, Norcross, GA). The volume to be loaded was calculated by the following formula: volume (expressed in μL) = 100 μg/protein
concentration (expressed in μg/μL). Each glass slide array contained 14 subarrays and was suitable for 14 samples. Each subarray was allowed
to evaluate cytokine expression levels in a sample. Normalization of data at the end of the experiment provided semiquantitative results.
The subarray was composed by specific antibodies against target molecules coated on the glass slide. After the hybridization of tissue
lysate, each antibody bound its target molecule and unbound proteins were washed out. The slide was then incubated with biotin-conjugated
antibodies against the same target cytokines, washed and then incubated with Cy3-conjugated streptavidin, creating a biotin–streptavidin–Cy3
complex detectable using a microarray laser scanner. By using data extraction software, we could convert fluorescent signals into numerical
data and, after normalization, we obtained an expression value of signal intensity for each molecule in each sample. The molecules tested
were the following: interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), interleukin 1 receptor I (IL-1RI), IL-1RII, TNF alpha, tumor necrosis factor receptor I
(TNFRI), TNFRII, IL-17, IL-17R, leukocyte selectin (L-selectin), endothelial selectin, IL-8, regulated on activation, normal T cell
expressed and secreted (RANTES), [C-X-C motif] chemokine ligand 1,2,3 (C = cysteine, X = any amino acid) (CXCL 1,2,3), CXCL 16, matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1, and TIMP-2. Because the signal intensity data were
positively skewed, they were log transformed before analysis. The results are reported as antilog values of means with standard deviation.
Student t test for unpaired values was used to assess statistical significance of differences. The significance level was set at P < 0.05.
Clinical features are reported in Table 2. A 35-year-old woman (patient 1) was referred for evaluation of a recurrent pustular and erosive
eruption of 6 month duration involving mainly the inguinal folds and anogenital region. She had a 5-year history of undifferentiated
connective tissue disease and a 2-year history of Crohn disease (CD). For treating CD, she had been receiving adalimumab subcutaneously for
1 year (induction dose of 160 mg at week 0 and 80 mg at week 2, followed by a maintenance dose of 40 mg every other week). She was initially
treated by the gastroenterologists with several courses of systemic (amoxicillin + clavulanic acid) and topical (mupirocin) antibiotics
without any improvement. Clinical Features, Laboratory Findings, Treatment and Course in the 3 Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients With Skin
Reaction to Antitumor Necrosis Alpha Agents Manifesting as Amicrobial Pustulosis of the Folds A 38-year-old man (patient 2) and a 26-year-
old woman (patient 3) were referred to our department for cutaneous manifestations closely similar to those seen in patient 1, present since
3 months. Both had a 6-year history of IBD, namely UC in patient 2 and CD in patient 3. Both had been receiving infusions of infliximab
(5 mg/kg) for 1 year every other month, following an attack schedule of 1 infusion at time 0 and after 2 and 6 weeks. Also in these
patients, previous antibiotic regimen had failed to obtain any clinical response. On examination, in all 3 patients, there were multiple
erythematous pustules (Fig. 1A) coalescing in macerated erosive areas (Fig. 1B), symmetrically involving the major skin folds, such as
axillae and groins (Fig. 1C), and the anogenital region (Fig. 1D) as well as minor folds, such as the external auditory canals,
retroauricular flexures (Fig. 2A-B), and the area around the nostrils; the cutaneous lesions were associated with intense oozing and
accompanied by burning. In patient 1, a large eroded plaque was also present in the intergluteal fold (Fig. 2C). None of the patients was
overweight. Clinical features of amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. A, Erythematous
pustules involving the axilla in patient 3. B, Erosive area because of coalescence of pustules on the axilla in patient 3. C, Erosions with
vegetating aspects on the inguinal fold in patient 2. D, Erythematous erosive lesions on the anogenital region in patient 1. Clinical
features of amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. Macerated erosive lesions with crusts on
the retroauricular region in patient 2 (A) and in patient 3 (B). C, Erythematous plaque surrounded by an exudating erosive area on the
intergluteal region in patient 1. Results from laboratory examinations are shown in Table 2. On admission to our department, the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate was elevated in all 3 patients (60, 100, and 70 mm/first hour, respectively); C-reactive protein was also increased in
all 3 patients (1.25, 6.2, and 4.1 mg/dL, respectively; normal values <0.5 mg/dL). Patient 1 showed also mild anemia (hemoglobin:
11.4 g/dL). Antinuclear antibodies, at a titer of 1/320 with homogeneous pattern, were present in patient 1. In all 3 patients, serum zinc
levels were within the normal limits. Repeated bacteriological cultures from closed pustules were negative, while cultures from erosive
areas demonstrated the presence of Staphylococcus aureus in all 3 patients. Fungal cultures were negative in all 3 patients. In all 3
patients, light microscopy studies of skin biopsy specimens obtained from an affected area revealed a very similar pattern characterized by
spongiform pustules in the epidermis with slight acanthosis and dermal edema with a mixed neutrophilic and lymphocytic inflammatory
infiltrate (Fig. 3). Histopathologic features of amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. The
histology shows pustules (highlighted with arrows) and a mainly neutrophilic infiltrate in the epidermis as well as a predominantly
lymphocytic infiltrate in the upper dermis (hematoxylin and eosin stain; original magnification, ×200). Direct immunofluorescence, performed
on peripustular normal skin, was negative and indirect immunofluorescence failed to detect circulating antibodies in any of the 3 cases
(except for antinuclear antibodies in patient 1). Patient 1 was treated with both topical and systemic corticosteroids (clobetasol
dipropionate and intravenous methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/d, respectively), achieving rapid improvement of the clinical picture. Considering
the tendency of APF lesions to relapse upon tapering the doses of methylprednisolone and based on the potential triggering role of
adalimumab, the patient, however, was switched to ustekinumab for her CD. At the time of writing, after a follow-up period of 3 months,
there was complete resolution of the pustules and marked improvement of the intergluteal plaque, which was clinically diagnosed as
metastatic CD (the patient refused a skin biopsy on the latter site). In patient 2, a pulsed therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone
250 mg/d for 3 days (followed by oral prednisone at progressively tapering doses), in combination with switching over to sulfasalazine for
UC, induced complete healing of cutaneous manifestations, lasting at the time of writing after a follow-up of 18 months. In patient 3,
clearing of APF lesions was obtained using the same treatment schedule as in patient 1, associated with switching over to sulfasalazine as
in patient 2. At the time of writing, on a 36-month follow-up, there was still complete remission of APF. In all 3 patients, systemic
antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin + clavulanic acid) in combination with antiseptic baths was given to treat the S. aureus superinfection.
Interleukin-1 beta and its receptors (IL-1RI and II) were significantly more expressed in lesional skin of the 3 patients with APF
(20.75 ± 48.96, 4.33 ± 2.79, and 13.63 ± 13.74, respectively) than in normal skin (3.42 ± 1.87, 2.00 ± 0.82, and 4.49 ± 1.73; P = 0.023,
P = 0.013, and P = 0.027, respectively; Figure 4). The proinflammatory cytokine TNF alpha was also overexpressed (3.85 ± 0.74 versus
2.60 ± 0.19; P = 0.003) as well as its receptors TNFRI (14.74 ± 2.74 versus 5.87 ± 3.43; P = 0.005) and TNFRII (15.89 ± 4.09 versus
6.25 ± 3.31; P = 0.017; Figure 5). Finally, we observed an overproduction of IL-17 (6.09 ± 4.70 versus 2.17 ± 0.44; P = 0.014) and its
receptor IL-17R (6.68 ± 0.55 versus 3.98 ± 1.33; P = 0.026, Figure 6). Expression of IL-1 beta and its soluble receptors I and II in
homogenate samples of lesional skin from 3 patients with amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha
blockers. Six normal subjects served as controls. Numerical values represent signal intensity in a cytokine array assay. Expression of tumor
necrosis factor alpha and its soluble receptors I and II in homogenate samples of lesional skin from 3 patients with amicrobial pustulosis
of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. Six normal subjects served as controls. Numerical values represent signal
intensity in a cytokine array assay. Expression of interleukin-17, its soluble receptor, and leukocyte selectin in homogenate samples of
lesional skin from 3 patients with amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. Six normal subjects
served as controls. Numerical values represent signal intensity in a cytokine array assay. The expression of L-selectin was significantly
higher in lesional skin of the 3 patients with APF (10.32 ± 6.76) than in normal skin (2.14 ± 1.21; P = 0.005; Figure 6). As compared with
controls, lesional skin of APF patients showed overexpression of chemokines promoting neutrophil transendothelial migration into inflamed
tissues, such as IL-8 (12.53 ± 8.65 versus 2.73 ± 1.05; P = 0.003), CXCL 1/2/3 (109.70 ± 108.58 versus 7.61 ± 7.75; P = 0.001), CXCL 16
(4.40 ± 0.54 versus 2.50 ± 0.74; P = 0.007), and RANTES (19.74 ± 19.65 versus 3.41 ± 1.57; P = 0.004; Figure 7). Expression of
interleukin-8, regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted, [C-X-C motif] chemokine ligand 1,2,3 (C = cysteine, X = any
amino acid), and [C-X-C motif] chemokine ligand 16 (C = cysteine, X = any amino acid) in homogenate samples of lesional skin from 3 patients
with amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. Six normal subjects served as controls. Numerical
values represent signal intensity in a cytokine array assay. In lesional skin of APF patients, we observed a significant overexpression of
molecules involved in tissue damage, such as MMP-2 (6.96 ± 3.24 versus 2.49 ± 0.90; P = 0.008) and MMP-9 (388.69 ± 54.56 versus
24.71 ± 68.33; P = 0.0001; Figure 8). Overproduction of molecules responsible for inhibitory signals aimed at attenuating MMP-mediated
inflammation was also demonstrated: TIMP-1 (47.02 ± 83.04 versus 4.45 ± 1.63; P = 0.004) and TIMP-2 (107.45 ± 111.29 versus 48.69 ± 24.40),
the latter, however, did not reach statistical significance (Fig. 8). Expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2, matrix metalloproteinase-9,
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2 in homogenate samples of lesional skin from 3 patients
with amicrobial pustulosis of the folds triggered by tumor necrosis factor alpha blockers. Six normal subjects served as controls. Numerical
values represent signal intensity in a cytokine array assay. Amicrobial pustulosis of the folds is a rare chronic relapsing dermatosis that
affects almost exclusively young women with sudden onset of follicular and nonfollicular sterile pustular lesions involving the main
cutaneous folds, anogenital area and scalp as well as minor skin folds, particularly the area around the nostrils, retroauricular regions,
and external auditory canals. The clinical picture of APF is similar to that of the inverse type of psoriasis pustulosa, which, however,
usually spares the minor folds and often presents with psoriasis lesions in other sites of the body. Its histologic picture is characterized
by subcorneal pustules associated with a mainly neutrophilic infiltrate in the dermis, which led to include APF in the spectrum of
neutrophilic dermatoses.9 Neutrophilic dermatoses represent a clinically heterogeneous group of disorders hallmarked by an accumulation of
neutrophils in the skin and rarely internal organs.10 Amicrobial pustulosis of the folds has been reported to be associated with a number of
autoimmune diseases, including lupus erythematosus,9,11 mixed connective tissue disease,12,13 myasthenia gravis,11 Sjögren syndrome,14
celiac disease,8 rheumatoid arthritis,15 idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura,11 and immunoglobulin A nephropathy.16 It is well known that
neutrophilic dermatoses, particularly pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) and Sweet syndrome (SS), are among the better recognized extraintestinal
manifestations of IBD17 and in 2011, Lee et al7 described the first case of APF associated with IBD. Here, we report 3 additional cases of
APF in patients with IBD treated with anti-TNF alpha agents. Although APF may complicate IBD and other immune-mediated disorders at any time
during the disease course, in our patients, the strict association of APF with TNF blocker therapy and its prompt resolution upon drug
withdrawal support the triggering role of anti-TNF treatment. Tumor necrosis factor blockers are responsible for a number of cutaneous
adverse reactions, the most frequent of which are pustular eruptions.6 Pustular reactions represent a paradoxical event because TNF
antagonists are commonly used in the treatment of psoriasis, including its pustular variant. Pustular psoriasis and other neutrophilic
dermatoses, such as PG and SS are nowadays considered autoinflammatory conditions, which are characterized by recurrent episodes of sterile
inflammation, without circulating autoantibodies and autoreactive T cells.17 Increasing evidence, however, supports clinical and immunologic
similarities between autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases, giving rise to consider them as a single group of diseases with a large
spectrum of immunologic and clinical abnormalities, which include at 1 end pure autoinflammatory diseases and at the other end pure
autoimmune diseases.18 In PG and SS, we recently demonstrated an overexpression of cytokines/chemokines and molecules amplifying the
inflammatory network, supporting the view that these disorders are autoinflammatory in origin.19 In our study, we found an overexpression of
IL-1 beta and its receptors in all 3 patients. This could be linked to dysregulation of the function of inflammasome, which is a molecular
platform responsible for the activation of caspase 1, an enzyme inducing the proteolytic cleavage of the inactive pro-IL-1 beta to its
functionally active form, IL-1 beta. Interleukin-1 promotes the production and release of both classic proinflammatory cytokines, such as
TNF alpha and interferon gamma, and a number of chemokines, notably IL-8 and RANTES.20 Tumor necrosis factor alpha, which also acts as a key
regulator of other proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including the same IL-1 beta and IL-8,21 was overexpressed in all the 3 APF
patients. Also chemokines, such as IL-8, CXCL 1/2/3, CXCL 16, and RANTES, were overexpressed, promoting neutrophil transendothelial
migration into the site of inflammatory process that was also favored by the upregulation of L-selectin. In our study, we found an
overexpression of IL-17 and its receptor in all 3 patients, confirming the previously hypothesized role for this T-helper 17-related
cytokine in the pathophysiology of the whole spectrum of neutrophilic dermatoses, similarly to psoriasis and other autoimmune diseases.22–24
Interleukin-17 amplifies the recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes by increasing the local production of chemokines, most notably IL-825
and synergizing with various other cytokines, in particular with TNF alpha.26 Moreover, IL-17, such as IL-1 and TNF alpha, induces the
production of MMPs,27 a family of endopeptidases that include the so-called gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9. An improper activity of MMPs
synthesized by inflammatory cells, particularly neutrophils, is known to cause tissue damage via degradation of components of the
extracellular matrix and to influence the production of chemokines, promoting neutrophil transendothelial migration.28 Here, we found an
overexpression of MMP-9 in the skin inflammatory infiltrate, suggesting that this proteinase and to a lesser degree MMP-2 may be involved in
inducing tissue damage. Interestingly, we detected also an overproduction of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2, which likely represent an inhibitory pathway
aimed at attenuating the MMP-mediated inflammation. The main limitation of our study is the small number of patients, because of the rarity
of drug-induced APF, which may be, however, counterbalanced by the wide panel of molecules investigated and by the clear-cut differences
observed. One could argue that the ideal controls to evaluate the role of proinflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of anti-TNF-induced
APF would be samples taken from normal skin of IBD patients and/or nonlesional skin of patients with anti-TNF-induced APF. We, however, have
decided to choose normal skin of patients without any immune-mediated disorder as control to avoid the possible finding of an initial low
overexpression of inflammatory effector molecules preceding the development of cutaneous lesions; on the contrary, a strong expression of
proinflammatory cytokines is unlikely in the absence of cutaneous lesions, as previously found in other neutrophilic dermatoses, such as PG
and SS.19 Another source of bias could be the location of the biopsy because the skin of areas different from major and minor folds is not
involved in APF. Testing the normal skin of major and minor folds in IBD patients before and after treatment with TNF-blockers could be
matter for future studies aimed at identifying early molecular markers predicting the onset of skin–drug reactions. Overall, our data show
high values of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and tissue damage effector molecules, supporting the autoinflammatory origin of APF as
paradoxical skin reaction to TNF blockers. Concerning a possible explanation of this paradoxical side effect, it is possible to hypothesize
pathomechanisms similar to those of the psoriatic skin lesions occurring in the setting of anti-TNF therapy, which are mainly related to
uncontrolled increase of IFN alpha as a result of TNF pathway blockade.29,30 The activation of autoreactive T cells,31,32 certain infectious
agents,31,33 and a genetic susceptibility31,33,34 could be possible further mechanisms. Abbreviations: APF = amicrobial pustulosis of the
folds, BCA = bicinchoninic acid, CD = Crohn disease, CXCL = [C-X-C motif] chemokine ligand [C = cysteine, X = any amino acid], E-selectin =
endothelial selectin, IBD = inflammatory bowel disease, IFN = interferon, IL = interleukin, IL-1R = interleukin-1 receptor, ITP = idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura, L-selectin = leukocyte selectin, MMP = matrix metalloproteinase, PG = pyoderma gangrenosum, RANTES = regulated on
activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted, RIPA = radioimmunoprecipitation assay, SS = Sweet syndrome, TIMP = tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase, TNF = tumor necrosis factor, TNFR = tumor necrosis factor receptor, UC = ulcerative colitis. This work was supported by
“Ricerca corrente,” Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy. The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
