Malignant tracheal tumors (primary and secondary) are rare and benign tumors of the tracheobronchial tree are also rare. Few reports have
been issued on the 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) findings of tracheal tumors or benign nontumorous
tracheal lesions, which have been mainly studied by computed tomography (CT). The author reports 2 cases of intratracheal lesions with quite
different 18F-FDG PET/CT findings. The first case was of a 73-year-old woman with colon cancer treated by hemicolectomy and subsequent
adjuvant chemotherapy. Follow-up 18F-FDG PET/CT after 6 years revealed a hypermetabolic fungating mass (SUVmax: 5.8) in the distal trachea
and biopsy confirmed intratracheal metastasis. The second case involved a 61-year-old man with tongue cancer who underwent mouth floor mass
excision and right supraomohyoid neck dissection with submental flap reconstruction. Tracheal lesion was incidentally found during a 18F-FDG
PET/CT follow-up study conducted 1 year later. A benign intratracheal condition with low FDG uptake (SUVmax: 1.2) and the lesion was not
visualized by neck CT 4 months later. 18F-FDG PET/CT uptake was helpful in differentiating benign and malignant intratracheal lesions.
Malignant and benign tumors of the tracheobronchial tree are rare and in adults the majority are malignant.1,2 Intratracheal metastasis is a
secondary malignant tumor and extremely rare, although it can be an initial manifestation of recurrence.3 The signs and symptoms of these
tumors are nonspecific and chest radiographs are rarely diagnostic.2 Computed tomography (CT) is regarded as the standard imaging tool for
the diagnosis and evaluation of these tumors and benign intratracheal nontumorous lesions.4–6 However,18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (18F-FDG PET) can provide metabolic information and aid the differentiation of malignant and benign tumors, although few
reports are available on the topic. The author reports a rare case of intratracheal metastasis from colon cancer and a case of a benign
intratracheal nontumorous condition encountered during tongue cancer follow-up by 18F-FDG PET/CT, which in these 2 cases effectively
differentiated benign and malignant lesions. This case involved a 73-year-old woman with a history of colon cancer treated by hemicolectomy
and subsequent adjuvant chemotherapy. In addition, she had lung and soft tissue metastasis, which were treated by chemotherapy and surgery.
Follow-up 18F-FDG PET/CT after 6 years revealed a hypermetabolic fungating mass (SUVmax: 5.8) about 15 mm in size in the distal trachea
(Fig. 1A and B). We report it as a malignant lesion that can be both primary and metastasis. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed a multinodular
fungating mass in the distal trachea and carina corresponding to the abnormality noted on the 18F-FDG PET/CT scan. Biopsy revealed
metastatic adenocarcinoma from colon cancer. Immunohistostaining for Hematoxylin and Eosin (H & E, ×100) and thyroid transcription factor-1
(TTF-1) was negative for lung primary tumor (Fig. 2A and B). Cytokeratin 20 and caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX-2) for intestinal
differentiation were positive (Fig. 2C and D). Her symptoms included dyspnea on exertion (DOE) and a cough. She was treated by radiation
therapy and symptoms were improved. Case 1 (A and B): intratracheal metastasis from colon cancer in a 73-year-old woman. 18F-FDG PET/CT
image showing high 18F-FDG uptake (SUVmax: 5.8) within the intratracheal fungating mass (arrow) with an irregular margin (A). Noncontrast CT
scan of a combined PET/CT obtained at the level of the distal trachea shows a fungating mass about 15 mm in size in the distal trachea (B).
Case 1 (A–D): immunohistochemical staining for Hematoxylin and Eosin (H & E, ×100) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) (B) in the
specimen showed negative for lung primary tumor. Cytokeratin 20 (C) and caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX-2) (D) for intestinal differentiation
were positive and confirmed that this lesion was a metastatic adenocarcinoma that originated from colon cancer. Second case involved a
61-year-old man who underwent mouth floor mass excision and right supraomohyoid neck dissection with submental flap reconstruction for
tongue cancer. Subsequently, a tracheal lesion was incidentally found during a 18F-FDG PET/CT follow-up study conducted 1 year later. In
this case, 18F-FDG uptake was at the same level as background activity (SUVmax: 1.2) within a well-defined intratracheal mass-like lesion
about 7 mm in size (Fig. 3A and B). The patient had no respiratory symptoms and the lesion was reported as probably benign, such as mucus
secretion. No biopsy was performed and the lesion was not visualized by neck CT 4 months later (Fig. 3C). Case 2 (A–C): benign intratracheal
condition in a 61-year-old man. 18F-FDG PET/CT scan showing faint uptake with respect to background activity (SUVmax: 1.2) (A) within a
well-defined intratracheal mass-like lesion about 7 mm in size on the noncontrast CT scan of a combined PET/CT (B). The lesion was not
observed by 4-months follow-up contrast-enhanced neck CT obtained at the same level (C). In the tracheobronchial tree, primary malignant and
benign tumors, and secondary malignant tumors may occur.1 Primary malignant tracheal tumors are usually arising from the respiratory
epithelium and salivary glands, while most benign tumors are of mesenchymal origin.1,7,8 The most common primary malignant tumor in the
trachea is squamous cell carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma is also common.1,2 Secondary tracheal malignant tumors arise by direct tumor
invasion or hematogenous metastasis, but direct invasion is most common.3 Computed tomography (CT) is the standard imaging modality for the
diagnosis.2 The CT manifestations are similar in both primary and secondary malignant tumors and those of benign tumors are usually
nonspecific. 18F-FDG PET/CT can provide anatomic and metabolic information regarding these tumors. Tracheal metastasis has been documented
from 1890 and the most common primary neoplasms are those of the kidney, breast, colon, thyroid, or melanoma although others have been
described.9,10 Primary tumors in the tracheobronchial tree can cause respiratory symptoms, but metastases are usually asymptomatic or show
nonspecific symptoms and early diagnosis is difficult.1,2 Tracheal metastasis usually treated with tracheal resection, radiation therapy,
endotracheal debridement, endobronchial stents, along with chemotherapy, and the mean overall survival is 1 to 2 years after diagnosis.10
Symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis, wheezing, or stridor developed during evaluations of cancer patients, tracheal metastasis
should be considered. Benign tracheal tumors are uncommon,1,2,11 and almost all benign tumors are of mesenchymal origin.7 Benign tracheal
lesions (tumor and nontumorous condition) by 18F-FDG PET study were mainly on the benign tumors and most are hamartomas and squamous cell
papillomas.1 Benign tumors are usually well demarcated, round, and ≤2 cm in diameter, and tend to be asymptomatic until they occlude 50% to
75% of the luminal diameter.1,2 In general, benign tumors show faint or no 18F-FDG uptake, whereas malignant tumors generally show high
18F-FDG uptake. However, carcinoid tumors may show low FDG uptake and atypical pulmonary hamartoma may show high 18F-FDG uptake mimicking
malignancy.1 Other benign nontumorous intratracheal lesions have been mainly studied by CT, and to our knowledge, no reports have been
issued on their 18F-FDG PET or PET/CT findings. A previous CT study4 reported that adherent mucus and foreign body aspiration can appear as
soft tissue nodules. Adherent mucus, which tends to exhibit low attenuation, is probably the most commonly encountered tracheobronchial tree
abnormality seen on CT images. The differentiation of mucus and true tumors is usually easy, but may be difficult when mucus is thick and
tenacious. Other benign nontumorous lesions, such as tracheal stenosis caused by prolonged intubation and tuberculosis or histoplasmosis,
can show concentric soft tissue thickening. Sclerosing tracheitis5 also can exhibit diffuse circumferential tracheal thickening and
inflammatory pseudotumor6 appears as a tumor-like lesion on the CT image. However, 18F-FDG PET/CT scan can provide anatomic and metabolic
information on these benign nontumorous lesions, as occurred in our second case. In this case, the patient had no respiratory symptoms and
the tracheal lesion disappeared without treatment at his 4-month follow-up by neck CT, which indicated that the lesion was not a tumor, but
rather a common benign condition. These findings indicate when an intratracheal lesion shows mild or faint 18F-FDG uptake, a CT follow-up
study is a better choice than an invasive study. The author reports a rare case of intratracheal metastasis and of a benign nontumorous
condition, and that these 2 cases had quite different 18F-FDG uptake intensities. 18F-FDG PET/CT was helpful in differentiating benign and
malignant intratracheal lesions. All the procedures performed in the study involving human participant were in accordance with the ethical
standards of the institutional research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical
standards. Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study. Abbreviations: 18F-FDG PET =
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, CT = computed tomography, DOE = dyspnea on exertion, SUVmax = maximum standardized
uptake value. The author have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
