A 14-year-old girl presented to an outpatient clinic for evaluation of dizziness and fainting. She had been diagnosed with congenital
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCMP) after birth. Her father was 45 years old and had asymptomatic HCMP (septal wall thickness, 3.0 cm). Her
younger sister also had septal hypertrophy (septal wall thickness, 3.5 cm). Her mother had no history of gestational diabetes or
corticosteroid exposure. There was no history of sudden cardiac death in their family, including in their siblings. No infiltrative
cardiomyopathies such as storage diseases or chromosomal abnormalities were detected. She had been lost to follow-up since the age of 7
years. One year before the herein-described presentation, she visited an outpatient clinic for exertional dyspnea. Echocardiography and
cardiac magnetic resonance image (MRI) revealed 6- to 7-cm extreme septal wall hypertrophy with left mid-ventricular outflow obstruction,
but without left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (Fig. 1A, parasternal long-axis echocardiography; Fig. 1B, cardiac MRI). Holter
monitoring and a treadmill test revealed no abnormal findings. β-Blockers and calcium channel blockers were administered. At the present
admission, an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sustained ventricular tachycardia that was converted to sinus rhythm after 50-J direct-current
cardioversion (Fig. 2A, baseline ECG; Fig. 2B, ECG on second hospitalization). She planned to undergo placement of an implantable
cardioverter defibrillator that she had previously refused. Congenital HCMP is a very rare condition that is caused by a genetic
abnormality, maternal diabetes, hyperinsulinism, corticosteroid exposure, and metabolic disorders. A poor prognosis has been reported in
symptomatic patients. Although clear evidence has not been provided, septal myomectomy and/or heart transplantation might be considered in
refractory cases. In summary, we have reported a patient with congenital HCMP and extreme septal hypertrophy who survived to adolescence
despite symptoms of heart failure without management. We suggest a multidisciplinary approach to this rare condition for careful diagnosis
and management. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Extreme septal hypertrophy (*) with mid-ventricular
outflow obstruction. (A) Parasternal long-axis echocardiography. (B) Cardiac magnetic resonance image in systole. Electrocardiogram at (A)
baseline and (B) second hospitalization. (A) Marked high voltage and tall T wave represent severe left ventricular hypertrophy. (B) Wide QRS
tachycardia represent sustained ventricular tachycardia.
