Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an immune-mediated chronic cholestatic liver disease, characterized by increased concentrations of serum
IgM and the presence of circulating anti-mitochondrial antibodies. Although bone diseases such as osteoporosis or osteodystrophy are
commonly associated with PBC, osteomalacia which is caused by abnormal vitamin D metabolism, mineralization defects, and phosphate
deficiency has not been recognized as a complication of PBC. We report the case of a 49-year-old Japanese woman who complained of multiple
fractures. Hypophosphatemic osteomalacia was diagnosed from a low serum phosphorus level, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 level, high levels of
bone specific alkaline phosphatase and the findings of bone scintigraphy, although a bone biopsy was not performed. Twenty four hour urine
demonstrated a low renal fractional tubular reabsorption of phosphate, increased fractional excretion of uric acid and generalized
aminoaciduria. An intravenous bicarbonate loading test suggested the presence of proximal renal tubular acidosis (RTA). These biochemical
data indicated Fanconi syndrome with proximal RTA. A kidney biopsy demonstrated the features of tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN). The
patient was also suspected as having primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) because of high levels of alkaline phosphatase, IgM and the presence of
anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody, though biochemical liver function was normal. Sequential liver biopsy was compatible with PBC and the
diagnosis of PBC was definite. After administration of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3, neutral potassium phosphate, sodium bicarbonate for
osteomalacia and subsequent predonizolone for TIN, symptoms of fractures were relieved and renal function including Fanconi syndrome was
ameliorated. In this case, asymptomatic PBC was shown to induce TIN with Fanconi syndrome with dysregulation of electrolytes and vitamin D
metabolism, which in turn led to osteomalacia with multiple fractures. Osteomalacia has not been recognized as a result of the renal
involvement of PBC. PBC and its rare complication of TIN with Fanconi syndrome should be considered in adult patients with unexplained
osteomalacia even in the absence of liver dysfunction. Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an immune-mediated chronic cholestatic liver
disease, characterized by non-suppurative destruction of interlobular bile ducts [1, 2]. Serologically, PBC is accompanied by increased
concentrations of serum immunoglobulin M (IgM) and the presence of circulating anti-mitochondrial antibodies . Although bone diseases such
as osteoporosis or osteodystrophy, are commonly associated with PBC, osteomalacia, which is caused by abnormal vitamin D metabolism,
mineralization defects, and phosphate deficiency, has not been frequently complicated with PBC [3, 4]. In renal complication of PBC, distal
renal tubular acidosis (RTA) has been reported with the prevalence rates of 30 to 60 % generally in asymptomatic or latent condition [5, 6].
Tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN) and subsequent Fanconi syndrome, a type of proximal tubular defects, have been more rarely reported in
patients with PBC . We report herein a rare case of hypophosphatemic osteomalacia caused by TIN with Fanconi syndrome in asymptomatic PBC.
Multiple fractures due to hypophosphatemic osteomalacia were almost ameliorated after the administration of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3,
neutral potassium phosphate, and sodium bicarbonate. The renal function also remained stable after subsequent administration of middle-dose
corticosteroids. In November 2007, a 49-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital from an orthopaedist complaining of a one year
history of sustained difficulty walking and severe bilateral hip pain. Her height was 155.5 cm and body weight was 61.0 kg. Laboratory data
showed a creatinine of 1.4 mg/dl, potassium 2.8 mmol/l, calcium 9.5 mg/dl, phosphorus 2.5 mg/dl, uric acid 1.5 mg/dl, normoglycaemic
glycosuria and metabolic acidemia (pH 7.30, HCO3− 17.4 mmol/l) (Table 1). Bilateral transcervical fractures were confirmed by MRI (Fig. 1a)
and bone scintigraphy showed multiple hot spots in her joints and ribs, compatible with osteomalacia (Fig. 2). Hypophosphatemic osteomalacia
was diagnosed clinically from a low serum level of phosphorus, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (11.0 pg/dl), high levels of bone specific alkaline
phosphatase (67.5 IU/l), and the findings of bone scintigram, although a bone biopsy was not performed. Tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO) was
ruled out by total body survey with whole body computed tomography or endoscopic surveillances and a normal blood FGF23 (22.1 pg/ml,
10–50 pg/ml) level.Table 1Baseline data of the patient on admission in November 2007Peripheral bloodUrinalysis white blood cell count
6800/μlpH 6.0 hemoglobin 13.5 g/dlprotein (3+) platelet 20.1 × 104/μlurine sugar (4+)Biochemistry total protein 8.7 g/dl,bone specific
alkaline phosphatase 67.5 IU/l albumin 4.6 g/dlγ-glutamyl transpeptidase 18 IU/l total bilirubin 0.7 mg/dl1,25-dihydroxyvitamine D
11.0 pg/dl blood urea nitrogen 19.4 mg/dlintact parathyroid hormone 46 pg/ml creatinine 1.4 mg/dlparathyroid hormone-related protein
<1.1 pg/ml uric acid 1.5 mg/dlcalcitonin 24 pg/ml sodium 137.8 mEq/losteocalcin 7.6 ng/ml potassium 2.8 mEq/lfibroblast growth factor-23
22.1 pg/ml chloride 108 mEq/lIgG 1228 mg/dl calcium 9.5 mg/dlIgA 201 mg/dl phosphorus 2.3 mg/dlIgM 1084 mg/dl fasting plasma glucose
98 mg/dlanti-nuclear antibody 1:1280 hemoglobin A1c 4.8 %anti-SS-A/Ro antibody (−) total cholesterol 249 mg/dlanti-SS-B/La antibody
(−) c-reactive protein 0.17 mg/dlanti-double stranded DNA antibody 3 IU/ml lactate dehydrogenase 191 IU/lShirmer test (−) aspartate
aminotransferase 23 IU/lserum M protein(−) alanine aminotransferase 24 IU/lurine Bence Jones Protein (−) alkaline phosphatase 663 IU/lanti-
mitochondrial M2 antibody 10.0 indexArterial blood gas analysis (Room Air)24-h urine analysis pH 7.306Tmp/GFR 0.91 pO2 89.0 torr%TRP
37.9 % pCO2 35.9 torrFEUA 43.9 % HCO3 − 17.4 mmol/lglucose 12.83 gbicarbonate loading testgeneralized aminoaciduria(+) FEHCO3 −
13.25 %protein 2.464 g U-Bpco2 50.1 mmHgFEca 11.878 %,CrCl 45.76 ml/min/1.73 m2 Fig. 1MRI findings of incomplete bilateral transcervical
fractures (Arrows) before (a) and after (b) the treatmentFig. 2Bone scintigram showing multiple hot spots especially over multiple joints
and ribs Baseline data of the patient on admission in November 2007 MRI findings of incomplete bilateral transcervical fractures (Arrows)
before (a) and after (b) the treatment Bone scintigram showing multiple hot spots especially over multiple joints and ribs Urinalysis showed
pH 6.0 and twenty four hour urine demonstrated a low renal fractional tubular reabsorption of phosphate (Tmp/GFR 0.91), increased fractional
excretion of uric acid (FEUA 43.9 %) and generalized aminoaciduria. The calculated anion gap was 12.4 meq/l, with an inappropriately
alkaline urine (pH 6.0), suggestive of distal type of renal tubular acidosis (RTA). An intravenous bicarbonate loading test to assess the
tubular dysfunction demonstrated that the increased fractional excretion of bicarbonate (FEHCO3− 13.25 %) and urine-blood (UB) Pco2 gradient
(U-Bpco2 50.1 mmHg), suggesting the presence of proximal type of RTA. NH4Cl loading test was not performed because of the presence of
apparent metabolic acidemia. These biochemical data of blood and urine indicated Fanconi syndrome with proximal type of RTA. Tests for anti-
SSA and anti-SSB were negative and serum angiotensin converting enzyme levels were normal. Furthermore, serum and urine
immunoelectrophoresis revealed no monoclonal component. Any of the patient’s medication did not seem to be related to Fanconi syndrome.
Light microscopic examination of a kidney biopsy demonstrated cellular infiltration of interstitium and proximal tubular epithelium composed
mainly of CD3+ lymphocytes without glomerular involvement, consistent with features of TIN (Fig. 3a ,b).Fig. 3The Findings of Kidney and
Liver Biopsies. a, b Kidney biopsy specimen; light microscopy shows (a) cellular infiltration in the proximal tubules and interstitium, and
the presence of atrophic tubules (Hematoxylin-eosin staining) and (b) CD3 + cells infiltration in the renal interstitium. c Liver biopsy
specimen; light microscopy shows the presence of a periportal cellular infiltrate The Findings of Kidney and Liver Biopsies. a, b Kidney
biopsy specimen; light microscopy shows (a) cellular infiltration in the proximal tubules and interstitium, and the presence of atrophic
tubules (Hematoxylin-eosin staining) and (b) CD3 + cells infiltration in the renal interstitium. c Liver biopsy specimen; light microscopy
shows the presence of a periportal cellular infiltrate The patient was also suspected to be diagnosed as PBC because of high levels of
alkaline phosphatase (663 IU/l), high serum IgM levels (1084 mg/dl) and the presence of anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody (1:10). Sequential
liver biopsy demonstrated the presence of a periportal cellular infiltrate (Fig. 3c), compatible with PBC though biochemical liver function
was normal. The combination of these findings led to the patient’s diagnosis of osteomalacia caused by TIN with Fanconi syndrome in
asymptomatic PBC. The patient was started on therapy with calcitriol (1 μg/day), neutral potassium phosphate and sodium bicarbonate
(6 g/day). She was subsequently administered middle-dose corticosteroid (20 mg/day of predonisolone) and ursodeoxycholic acid (300 mg/day).
One year after the treatment, the patient became asymptomatic and renal function remained stable. Furthermore, MRI showed the bilateral
transcervical fractures of the femoral neck had almost fully repaired (Fig. 1b). Treatment is currently being continued in the outpatient
clinic. We described a severe osteomalacia caused by TIN with Fanconi syndrome in asymptomatic PBC. Although osteomalcia is rarely observed
in patients with PBC , malabsorption as a consequence of severe cholestasis and impaired ability to convert vitamin D to 25-hydroxivitamin D
can cause osteomalacia in patients with advanced PBC [10, 11]. Our case was unique in that osteomalacia developed as a result of the rare
renal involvement of asymptomatic PBC. Osteomalacia is accelerated by inadequate renal phosphorus wasting and decreased uptake of active
vitamin D as well as a decrease in 1α-hydroxylation of vitamin D [12, 13]. The serum concentration of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 which
reflects the regulation of 1α-hydroxylation of vitamin D in the kidney is impaired in renal tubular diseases such as Fanconi syndrome [14,
15]. This patient had a low circulating level of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 which is presumed to be caused by Fanconi syndrome. Indeed,
osteomalacia is a well-observed consequence of the Fanconi syndrome . Fanconi syndrome also complicated with chronic hypophosphatemia and
chronic acidemia, which considered to cause and aggravate osteomalacia [7, 17]. It is suggested that hepatic dysfunction is not implicated
in the pathogenesis of TIN, while on the other hand, TIN in the present case may be pathogenically related to PBC . First, lymphocytic
infiltration is a pathological mutual feature of TIN and PBC. Autoreactive T lymphocytes of the tubular epithelium and interstitium may be
driven by abnormal antigen expression such as mitochondrial antigen in hepatocytes and renal tubular cells . T lymphocytes of the tubular
epithelium are likely to be involved in the inhibition of proximal tubular function, leading to Fanconi syndrome. Second, Anti-M2 antibody
in patients with PBC could interfere with intrarenal three mitochondrial enzymes: pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, branched-chain α-keto acid
dehydrogenase complex and α-keto glutamate dehydrogenase complex [7, 9, 19]. Fanconi syndrome and TIN are typical renal features of
mitochondrial cytopathies . Although much remains to be elucidated about the pathogenesis of PBC and its extrahepatic complication of TIN
with Fanconi syndrome, circulating anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody would induce PBC and TIN with Fanconi syndrome. Since the usual causes of
Fanconi syndrome including metal intoxication were not confirmed, this patient was considered to have PBC-related TIN with Fanconi syndrome.
In summary, severe osteomalacia was considered to be caused by the rare renal involvement of asymptomatic PBC, which is TIN with Fanconi
syndrome. Herein, the authors present a unique case of osteomalacia developed as a result of the rare renal involvement of asymptomatic PBC.
As the prevalence of osteomalacia is increasing in aged societies where homebound elderly patients suffer from nutritional insufficiency,
lack of sun exposure, medical histories of gastrointestinal surgery, and the possibility of malignancy, careful inspection for the cause of
multiple fractures is necessary. We suggest that PBC and its rare complication of TIN with Fanconi syndrome should be considered in adult
patients with unexplained osteomalacia even in the absence of liver function tests abnormalities. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor of this journal. immunoglobulin M Primary biliary cirrhosis renal tubular acidosis tubulointerstitial nephritis Tumor-induced
osteomalacia Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Designated authors meet
all four criteria for authorship in the ICMJE recommendations. Individual contribution of each authors are as follows. SY and TM treated the
patient as an inpatient and made decisions about patient's examinations and therapies. SY and TM reviewed previous publications and wrote
the whole manuscript. SW, HT are nephrologists at Keio University Hospital and performed the renal biopsy of the patient. SW is an associate
professor of nephrology at Keio University Hospital and supervised the manuscript. KK is a director of renal pathology at Keio University
Hospital and performed the evaluation of the renal biopsy. AH is a pathologist and an assistant professor of pathology at Keio University
Hospital. AH made sections of all renal biopsy samples, took pictures of renal pathology and read patient's renal pathology. ST is a
gastroenterologist at Keio University Hospital and performed the liver biopsy of the patient. KH, TM, KM, IK, TY, KH, JT contributed to the
interpretation of the etiology and discussion. MH is a professor of dialysis center at Keio University Hospital. MH is a principal physician
of the patient and treated her as an inpatient and outpatient. HI is a professor of nephrology, endocrinology and metabolism, and supervised
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
