Thymic enlargement is a common and physiological finding in children and neonates’ X-rays, but it is usually asymptomatic. Occasionally it
can cause respiratory distress. In most cases the aetiology of this expansion remains unclear and it is diagnosed as a thymic hyperplasia.
True thymic hyperplasia is defined as a gland expansion, both in size and weight, while maintaining normal microscopic architecture. Often
it is a diagnosis of exclusion and prognosis is good. Thymic haemorrhage is an unusual condition related to high foetal and neonatal
mortality. We report a case of spontaneous massive thymic haemorrhage in a newborn developing at birth acute respiratory distress associated
with severe bilateral haemothorax. Thymic enlargement was evident after pleural evacuation and confirmed by radiographic, Computed
Tomography (CT) images and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) sequences. The spontaneous resolution of this enlargement seen with CT scan and
MRI sequences suggested a thymic haemorrhage; surgery was not necessary. Thymic haemorrhage should be considered in newborn infants with
pleural effusion, mediastinal space enlargement and Respiratory Distress. Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS) is a clinical presentation of
many diseases in the neonatal period and is one of the most frequent causes of admission to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), both in
term and preterm infants. The etiology of RDS in term newborn infants includes pulmonary and extra pulmonary diseases, with a pronounced
prevalence of the first ones. Among the extra pulmonary causes, even if rare, it has to be mentioned a mediastinal mass, which can lead to
external compression on the airways and thus lead to RDS. Thymic enlargement is a common feature in newborn-infants chest-x-ray, but usually
it is asymptomatic and the finding is absolutely accidental. Conversely thymic haemorrhage is an extremely rare condition in the neonatal
period. To our knowledge only eight cases have been published to date. The mortality is very high: two of the eight cases had a lethal
outcome, other five required surgery and only one case resolved following medical treatment. The aetiology is often unknown, but different
causes were suggested: birth trauma, haemorrhagic disease, coagulopathy, erythroblastosis fetalis, cyst and tumour. Here we describe a case
of thymic haemorrhage with perinatal onset, associated with bilateral haemothorax and severe respiratory distress at birth. Male infant born
at 38 weeks of gestation by emergency caesarean section due to acute foetal distress, in particular finding of reduced foetal movements and
reduced foetal cardiac variability on the CTG. The ultrasound scan performed on the day of delivery showed evidence of pleural and
peritoneal effusion. The pregnancy had been uneventful, normal antenatal scan and normal serology. No record of maternal drug assumption
during the whole pregnancy and before delivery. Birth weight was 3930 gr (95th centile). The obstetrical history revealed a previous full
term stillbirth, followed by a physiological normal pregnancy. On the first stillborn infant standard investigations were carried out,
according to our onsite protocol (genetics, infection and vascular investigations, histopathological examination and autopsy). All the
results came back negative, and the stillbirth was classified as Sudden Intrauterine Unexplained Death. At birth, the newborn presented with
severe cardio-respiratory depression (Apgar 1 at 1’, 7 at 5’) requiring oro-tracheal intubation and external cardiac massage, resulted in
prompt recovery of the heart rate, but prolonged need for ventilator support. The baby was then admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit
and mechanical ventilation was started. The chest X-ray showed a bilateral pulmonary opacity related to pleural effusion. The chest-abdomen
ultrasound revealed abundant bilateral pleural fluid and a minimum peritoneal effusion; it also showed a heterogeneous hyperechoic mass,
likely to be thymic. The echocardiogram revealed the presence of a modest pericardial effusion and confirmed the mediastinal hyperechoic
mass. Temporary cannulas inserted in the left and right pleura at 90 min of age confirmed a bilateral haemothorax, confirmed by the
biochemical analysis of the fluid obtained. In view of this finding, bloods were performed on admission, including a coagulation screening.
Severe alteration of coagulation factors (PT 102 s and aPTT>120 s with normal fibrinogen and antithrombin III) and mild anaemia (Hb
10.4 g/dl, Ht 31.7 %, erythrocytes 2.82 x 106/μl, PLT 282.0 x 109/L) were found. A supplementary dose of vitamin K was given (2 mg im in
total) together with fresh frozen plasma at 15 mls/kg and red packed cells transfusion at 20 mls/kg. Surgical intervention was not needed.
After 24 h the coagulation normalized and so it remained subsequently. On the 2nd day, the newborn was able to breathe unassisted. The
radiological control revealed a reduction of the bilateral pleural effusion and an enlargement of the superior mediastinal limbus (Fig. 1).
The ultrasound disclosed an enlarged thymus in the antero-superior mediastinal space (6 cm of longitudinal diameter, 3 cm of antero-
posterior diameter) with irregular limits and non-homogeneous structure. The chest CT, performed on day four of life, confirmed the presence
of an enlarged thymus, mainly developed in the left paramedian zone. The trachea appeared to be dislocated to the right. In non-contrast CT-
sequences, the thymus appeared with hyperdensity areas, as from a recent bleeding. The mass still looked non-homogeneous after the contrast
enhancement. After nearly 10 days, a chest MRI was performed (Fig. 2). It revealed a thymus of very reduced dimension, with a homogeneous
structure and hyperintense signal in both T1 and T2 sequences, compatible with the consequences of a subacute haemorrhage. Signal
hyperintensity in T2w moreover than in T1w sequences is due to extracellular methemoglobin concentration caused by erythrocytes lysis, which
occurs after about one week of acute bleeding and gradually becomes more intense.Fig. 1Chest X-ray on day 3: pleural effusion resolution;
relevant mediastinum enlargementFig. 2MR-sequences on day 16: thymus occupies the antero-superior mediastinum, with greatly reduced
dimensions compared to the previous CT scan. Thymus appears to be homogeneous and with hyperintense signal in T1 as in T2 sequences. This
aspect is suggestive of a recent bleeding. (Intera 1,5 T- Philps) Chest X-ray on day 3: pleural effusion resolution; relevant mediastinum
enlargement MR-sequences on day 16: thymus occupies the antero-superior mediastinum, with greatly reduced dimensions compared to the
previous CT scan. Thymus appears to be homogeneous and with hyperintense signal in T1 as in T2 sequences. This aspect is suggestive of a
recent bleeding. (Intera 1,5 T- Philps) Other investigations to identify possible antenatal infections (TORCH, Epstein Barr virus serology,
Parvovirus B19, Adenovirus, Enterovirus, Cytomegalovirus) were negative. A coagulation study on maternal blood didn’t reveal any
abnormality. The main tumour markers (chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein, enolase, vanilmandelic acid) were negative. An accurate
history was taken from parents about themselves and their families, but no history of coagulopathy or any other hematological condition
emerged. The newborn was discharged on day 29 in good clinical condition. A chest X-ray was performed before discharge and showed a complete
resolution of the mass. At 2 years old, the child is doing well and the radiological control is negative. Thymic enlargement is a common
accidental finding on chest x- rays in healthy neonates and infants, but there are usually no clinical symptoms and complications. Thymus
pathologic lesions are rare in infancy and the aetiology remains often unclear. Thymic haemorrhage in the perinatal period is an exceedingly
rare and severe condition, often leading to stillbirth or to severe respiratory distress at birth. In 1971 Ribet et al. reported the first
known case, with a positive outcome after surgery. Then 2 cases of spontaneous thymic haemorrhage with positive outcome after surgery are
described in 1974 by Woolley et al. . Several years after Urvoas et al. presented a case of spontaneous thymic haemorrhage in a 4-week-old
boy, with good resolution after medical treatment. In the case reported by Walsh et al. in 1996, the newborn showed severe neonatal
respiratory distress, which led to death at a few hours of age. The diagnosis was therefore post-mortem. Subsequently, Bees et al. described
a neonatal thymic haemorrhage, resolved only after surgical intervention. In 2001 Saksenberg et al. reported a case of intrauterine death in
which the autopsy revealed a thymic haemorrhage, with simultaneous cerebral haemorrhage. More recently Eifenger et al. described a case of
acute life-threatening thymic bleeding from a thymic cyst ruptured into the pleural space in a 5 week old male infant, which resolved after
surgery. In Table 1 we report a summary of the cases of thymic haemorrhage reported in literature with details of type of treatment received
and outcome of each case.Table 1Thymic haemorrhage in the perinatal period AuthorCaseTreatmentOutcomeRibet M et al. 1971 NewbornSurgical,
total excisionPositiveWoolley MM et al. 1974 One newborn, one 4 weeks old infantSurgical, total excisionPositiveUrvoas E et al. 1994 4 weeks
old infantMedicalPositiveWalsh SV et al. 1996 NewbornLethalBees NR et al. 1997 NewbornSurgical, total excisionPositiveSaksenberg V et al.
2001 Intrauterine death at 37 weeks and 4 daysLethalEifenger F et al. 2007 5 weeks old infantSurgical, total excisionPositiveSummary of the
cases reported in literature Thymic haemorrhage in the perinatal period Summary of the cases reported in literature We report a case of
thymic haemorrhage with difficult diagnosis and unclear aetiology but with a positive spontaneous outcome. To our knowledge, this is the
ninth case reported: two cases died, in five cases surgery was necessary and just one case resolved after medical treatment. We speculate
that, in our patient, the emergency caesarean section interrupted a series of events that could have led to a stillbirth. In our case the
mediastinal space enlargement revealed itself only after the progressive haemothorax drainage. The mass location and its non-homogeneous
structure were disclosed by the chest ultrasound scan and then confirmed by the CT scan. A non-homogeneous mass in the antero-superior
mediastinal space, causing the dislocation of all close structures, such as esophagus, trachea and blood vessels, suggested a thymic or
tumoral origin (lymphangioma). The anterior mediastinal space is the natural location of the thymus and the ultrasound and CT images
confirmed it. The dishomogeneously hyperechoic aspect excluded a lymphangioma. Moreover the negativity of the main tumoral markers and the
dimensional reduction at the following MRI control, excluded the tumoral mass (due to lymphangioma, lipoma or teratoma). The non-homogeneous
structure of the gland, as well as the simultaneous haemothorax associated with severe coagulation abnormalities, supported the hypothesis
of thymic haemorrhage. Surgical intervention was not necessary: the newborn clinical condition improved gradually, along with the
radiological pattern. Regarding the possible aetiology of the thymic haemorrhage we took several possibilities into considerations. In
absence of traumatic events during pregnancy, and with a negative family history, we believe it might have been determined by a spontaneous
haemorrhage, which might have caused a fast consumption of the coagulation vitamin K dependent factors that are already poor in the newborn.
In our case we assume that the coagulation abnormalities were a consequence of the haemorrhagic event. A second hypothesis is for the
haemorrhage to be a direct consequence of a primitive coagulation alteration, occurred in the terminal stage of pregnancy. But this
hypothesis could be excluded by the normality of the maternal coagulation and the absence of a clear pattern of haemorrhagic diathesis,
which had to involve other typical locations of neonatal bleeding, such as the brain and the gastric mucosa. The fibrinogen normal value
excluded a disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The simultaneous haemothorax could be explained as the consequence of a visceral
pleural tearing, as often is detected in operating theatres and not necessarily as a haemorrhagic event itself . We took also into
consideration the possibility of a Vitamin K deficiency, in view of the prolonged PT and aPTT with normal fibrinogen and platelets count.
The second dose of vitamin K given after viewing the coagulation results might have interrupted further bleeding from multiple sites. We
find though this hypothesis unlikely, as the infant didn’t present any bleeding involving skin or mucosae, which are common presentation in
Vitamin K deficiency cases. Maternal bloods didn’t show any abnormality though and the child has been healthy in the following two years of
life. The moderate pericardial and peritoneal effusion could be due to an initial hydrops, as described by other authors , concomitant to
the anemic condition, but it could also be related to the vascular peduncle compression by the thymic mass, with the consequent reduction of
the cardiac output. We don’t believe the cardio-pulmonary resuscitation to be a possible underlying cause of the bleeding of the
hypertrophic thymus, as the baby heart rate came back very quickly, by one minute after chest compression were started and the pleural
effusion was already evident before delivery. Thymic haemorrhage, as suggested in Vestfrid publication , could be underestimated, because
often misdiagnosed. However, we advise for this hypothesis to be considered in all newborns presenting at birth with respiratory distress,
mediastinum enlargement and pleural effusion. CT scan and MRI sequences allow better definition of mediastinum structures and can be helpful
in the diagnosis process and in the bleeding timing detection. Respiratory Distress Syndrome is one of the most common presentations of
neonatal diseases and it can be a manifestation of both pulmonary and extra-pulmonary illnesses. Sometimes thymic enlargement can cause
respiratory failure as well. Conversely, thymic haemorrhage is an extremely rare condition in newborns and it is related to high foetal and
neonatal mortality. It requires early diagnosis and emergency therapeutic measures in order to improve the prognosis. We have to consider
this hypothesis in all newborns presenting at birth with respiratory distress, mediastinum enlargement and pleural effusion. Radiography is
useful as a first assessment, but only ultrasound, CT and MRI images can allow better characterization of the disease and can help the
diagnostic process and the definition of the bleeding timing. Written informed consent was obtained from both parents for publication of
this Case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal upon
request. computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging respiratory distress syndrome Neonatal Intensive Care Unit prothrombin time partial
thromboplastin time platelets disseminated intravascular coagulation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions GG followed the case, participated in its revision and edited the manuscript. ALP, CG and MFR carried out
the clinical assessment of the case, drafted the manuscript, reviewed and edited the manuscript. LDP reworked radiologic images and their
comments. FF reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the co-operating
family-members for helping in documenting the necessary medical data.
