Taxanes are drugs used to treat many types of cancer, including breast and lung cancer. The most common side effects of these drugs are
neutropenia and mucositis. Signs of skin toxicity are observed in about 65% of cases and include alopecia, hypersensitivity reactions,
persistent supravenous erythematous eruption, nail changes, scleroderma reactions and others. We report two cases of skin reaction to
docetaxel and warn that it is not necessary to interrupt the treatment in these cases. Taxanes, such as paclitaxel (Taxol®) and docetaxel
(Taxotere®) are drugs used in the treatment of several tumors. Although there are no epidemiological studies on these drugs, cutaneous side
effects are frequent, with an estimated incidence of 65%. These reactions may alter the quality of life of the patients, therefore relief
for the symptoms and prevention of reactions are essential.1 We report 2 cases of cutaneous reaction to docetaxel (DCX), with the objective
of familiarizing dermatologists with the side effects of chemotherapy with taxanes and advise them about the conduct to be adopted. Case 1:
Female patient, 68 years old, diagnosed with breast carcinoma of the infiltrating ductal type, grade 3, being treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. She underwent 4 cycles with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide and 4 cycles with docetaxel and trastuzumab. The patient
mentioned that few days after the second session of chemotherapy with docetaxel and trastuzumab she presented an erythematous macule,
slightly pruriginous, on the left forearm. The clinical examination revealed a supravenous brownish macule that followed the venous pathway
on the left upper limb, onycholysis on the fingers and alopecia (Figure 1). In face of the clinical findings we concluded that it was a
persistent erythematous eruption that followed the venous pathway, secondary to use of DCX. Methylpredisolone aceponate was prescribed once
a day, for 7 days. The patient progressed with residual hyperpigmentation (Figure 2). Case 2: Female patient, 65 years old, diagnosed with
breast carcinoma of the infiltrating ductal type, grade 4, with metastasis to the lung, undergoing palliative chemotherapy with DCX and
filgrastim. She mentioned a pruriginous erythematous macule that appeared on the left forearm a few days after the third cycle of
chemotherapy and hyperpigmentation of the nail plate after the sixth cycle. The clinical examination revealed erythematous-brownish macules
on the back of hand, following the venous pathway on the left upper limb and chromonychia (Figure 3). She was diagnosed with persistent
erythematous rash following the venous pathway secondary to use of DCX and treatment was started with methylpredisolone aceponate once a day
for 7 days, with complete remission of lesion 3 months after the end of chemotherapy (Figure 4). Brownish macule following the venous
pathway on the upper left limb Residual hyperpigmentation following venous pathway on the upper left limb Erythematous-brownish macules on
back of hand following venous pathway on the upper left limb Complete remission of lesion 3 months after the end of chemotherapy In Brazil
there are two types of taxanes, paclitaxel and docetaxel. They present similar action, but distinct side effects. These drugs act
stabilizing the microtubules of mitosis, preventing breakdown and leading to cell death.1 The antineoplastic drugs are classified according
to the aggressive potential of blood vessels and adjacent tissues. They may be irritating or vesicant. The irritating drugs, such as
fluorouracil, carmustine, docetaxel and etopiside cause tissue damage that does not progress with necrosis. They my cause erythema, pain,
inflammation at the puncture site and venous pathway and a burning sensation. The vesicant drugs, such as dactinomycin, doxorubicin,
vincristine and vinblastine, cause erythema, edema, vesicles and cutaneous necrosis with functional and estethic damage.2,3 The skin, the
mucous membranes and skin appendages are tissues that have rapid cellular proliferation, therefore are very susceptible to adverse reactions
resulting from anticancer systemic treatment. Docetaxel may cause a variety of side effects as alopecia, acral erythrodysesthesia,
onycholysis, hyperpigmentation of the nail plate, urticaria, angioedema and persistent erythematous rash that follows the venous pathway2,4.
The persistent erythematous eruption that follows the venous pathway, also known as serpiginous eruption, is characterized by erythematous
macules or erythematous-purpuric papules at the site of infusion of the chemotherapeutic agent or along the venous pathway, which many times
can progress with residual hyperpigmentation. These lesions may appear between 24 hours and 15 days after infusion of the cytotoxic drug and
disappear spontaneously in weeks or months. Numerous drugs may cause this reaction, including 5-fluorouracil, docetaxel, vinorelbine and
dacarbazine.5,6 The etiology is not well defined. It is believed that a chemotherapeutic agent generates a direct cytotoxicity in the
vascular endothelium, increasing its permeability and contributing to the leakage of the medication out of the vessel, producing a direct
toxic effect on keratinocytes and melanocytes.6 The histopathological findings of this reaction are unspecific, characterized by vacuolar
interface dermatitis. The presence of spongiosis and occasional dyskeratotic cells have been reported. Prevention of this eruption can be
achieved through a saline infusion before and after chemotherapy.5,6 In long chemotherapeutic sessions, lasting over one hour, with vesicant
drugs, peripheral venous access should be replaced by central access.2 Some articles defend the use of oral corticosteroids before and after
chemotherapy, with the objective of suppressing the inflammatory response.6,7 An increased incidence of cutaneous toxicity has been reported
when docetaxel is infused rapidly, in a short period of time.8 The management of this reaction includes immediate interruption of infusion
and elevation of the affected member. Application of cold compresses is beneficial due to venous constriction and more intensive degradation
of toxic metabolic substances, in addition to alleviating pain and inflammation.2,3 The use of topical or systemic corticosteroids
associated with antihistamines has also been reported.6,9 In cases of leakage of vesicant drugs some antidotes may be used.3,7 It is
important to emphasize that the interruption of chemotherapy or modification of the standard dose of the chemotherapeutic drug is not
indicated in face of this reaction because it is self-limited.6 Conflict of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this
article: Fernandes KAP, Felix PAO. Persistent docetaxel-induced supravenous erythematous eruption. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(5):728-30.
Study carried out at the Hospital Naval Marcílio Dias (HNMD) – Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
