Gastrocolic fistula is a rare complication of adenocarcinoma of the colon. Despite radical resections, these patients usually have a poor
prognosis with a mean survival of 23 months and long-term survival is rarely reported. A 48-year-old Latino-American man presented with
watery diarrhea, diffuse abdominal pain and weight loss for 3 months. A computed tomography scan revealed a mass in the splenic flexure that
had infiltrated his stomach and diaphragm. Panendoscopy and colonoscopy confirmed the presence of a fistula between the distal transverse
colon and the stomach, which was secondary to a colon cancer. His colon, stomach and left diaphragm were resected en bloc. A histological
examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the colon that had infiltrated the full width of the gastric wall with 37
negative lymph nodes and clear surgical margins. Adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine and oxaliplatin was administered after surgery. Our
patient is alive and without any recurrence 5 years after surgery. En bloc resection with adjuvant chemotherapy offers the best treatment
option for gastrocolic fistulas. This is one of the patients with greater survival reported in the medical literature. Cologastric or
gastrocolic fistula is a pathologic communication between a segment of the colon and the stomach, and may be caused by benign or malignant
diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. It has been associated with diseases such as gastric tumors , gastric ulcers [4, 5] and pancreatitis
. Symptoms tend to be nonspecific, but most patients present with a triad of diarrhea, weight loss and feculent vomiting. Gastrocolic
fistula secondary to colon cancer is very rare. We present the case of a patient with a gastrocolic fistula originating from transverse
colon cancer and treated with a radical en bloc surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. A 48-year-old Latino-American man was admitted to our
hospital because of a 3-month history of intermittent watery diarrhea. Initially, the diarrhea was self-limited, and the stools did not
contain mucus or blood. One week before his admission, the diarrhea became persistent and was accompanied by black, tarry, malodorous feces.
In addition, our patient had a dull abdominal pain, predominantly in the left upper quadrant, which radiated to the lumbar region (the renal
fossa). Our patient had no family history of colon cancer. He smoked one pack of cigarettes daily and occasionally consumed alcohol. His
weight had decreased by 10 kg during the last 6 weeks before his admission. He had no history of peptic ulcer disease, inflammatory bowel
disease, trauma or abdominal surgery. His body temperature was 37 °C, heart rate was 70 beats per minute, respiration rate was 19 breaths
per minute, and blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg. Our patient experienced abdominal pain in response to deep palpation of the left upper
quadrant of his abdomen. There were no palpable masses. Auscultation revealed an elevated frequency of bowel sounds. His hemoglobin level
was 9.2 g/dL, hematocrit was 28.2 %, white blood cell count was 8,900/mm3, and platelet count was 623,000/mm3. His lactate dehydrogenase
concentration was 121 U/L, and his gamma glutamyl transpeptidase level was elevated (71 U/L). His albumin level was low (2.4 g/dL). Other
blood chemical and enzyme values were normal. An electrocardiogram showed no abnormalities. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen
showed a mass in the splenic flexure of the colon that had infiltrated the greater curvature of the stomach and revealed the presence of a
gastrocolic fistula; the mass also involved the left anterolateral region of the diaphragm (Fig. 1). The endoscopy revealed an ulcerated
polypoid gastric neoplasm in the greater curvature of the stomach and an ulcerated colonic neoplasm in the splenic flexure of the colon and
the distal part of the transverse colon. The largest diameter of the ulcer was 1.4 cm (Fig. 2). Biopsies taken from his stomach and colon
revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of intestinal type originating from a villous adenoma and a moderately differentiated
adenocarcinoma originating from a villous adenoma, respectively. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan performed for staging purposes
before surgery suggested involvement of the gastric, hepatic and preaortic lymph nodes (Fig. 3).Fig. 1 a Coronal computed tomography image
showing a gastrocolic fistula secondary to a tumor of the splenic flexure of the colon infiltrating the greater curvature of the stomach and
diaphragm. b Computed tomography image of the abdomen showing passage of contrast material through a fistulous connection between the
stomach and the splenic flexure of the colonFig. 2 a Gastroscopy image showing an ulcerated mass at the body of the stomach and the opening
of a fistula above the mass. b A mass at the splenic flexure of the colonFig. 3Thoracoabdominal positron emission tomography image showing a
splenic flexure tumor with enhancement of the greater curvature of the stomach and diaphragm a Coronal computed tomography image showing a
gastrocolic fistula secondary to a tumor of the splenic flexure of the colon infiltrating the greater curvature of the stomach and
diaphragm. b Computed tomography image of the abdomen showing passage of contrast material through a fistulous connection between the
stomach and the splenic flexure of the colon a Gastroscopy image showing an ulcerated mass at the body of the stomach and the opening of a
fistula above the mass. b A mass at the splenic flexure of the colon Thoracoabdominal positron emission tomography image showing a splenic
flexure tumor with enhancement of the greater curvature of the stomach and diaphragm In view of these findings, a radical en bloc resection
was performed involving a subtotal gastrectomy, a transverse left-side colectomy, small bowel resection, and left diaphragm (Fig. 4).
Histology revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma that had originated from a villous adenoma and infiltrated the full width of
the gastric wall (Fig. 5). Thirty-seven lymph nodes and surgical margins were free of tumor. The Dukes´ classification of the tumor was B.
Our patient developed a subphrenic abscess that was treated with a CT-guided drainage. Our patient received adjuvant chemotherapy consisting
of six courses of capecitabine (2 g/day for 14 days) and oxaliplatin (100 mg/day for 15 days). Our patient has now survived for 5 years.
Colonoscopies were performed at 1, 3 and 5 years. Chest/abdominal/pelvic CT scans were carried on annually for 5 years. Fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG)-PET scans were performed at 3 and 5 years of follow-up. These studies have shown no evidence of recurrence.Fig. 4Surgical specimen
showing the fistula between the stomach and the transverse colonFig. 5A colon adenocarcinoma infiltrating the gastric wall Surgical specimen
showing the fistula between the stomach and the transverse colon A colon adenocarcinoma infiltrating the gastric wall Gastrocolic fistula is
an uncommon complication of benign and malignant diseases of the gastrointestinal tract . In the past, neoplasms of the gastrointestinal
tract, such as adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon (Western countries) and adenocarcinoma of the stomach (Japan), were the most common
etiologies of gastrocolic fistula . At present, gastrocolic fistulas secondary to colon carcinoma are rare, possibly due to earlier
diagnosis of colon cancer. Two theories have been proposed for its development: the cancerous gastrocolic fistulas appear to arise from
direct extension of the tumor across the gastrocolic omentum; another theory proposes that a tumor ulcer might cause an inflammatory
peritoneal reaction leading to adherence and fistula formation [7, 9]. The classic clinical presentation of a gastrocolic fistula is a triad
of diarrhea, weight loss and feculent vomiting . Other symptoms are abdominal pain, feculent eructation, fatigue and nutritional
deficiencies . In our case, abdominal pain, diarrhea and weight loss were the main symptoms. Our patient had also upper gastrointestinal
bleeding because of ulceration of the greater curvature of the stomach. Some authors have suggested that a barium enema is the most
sensitive method for detecting this type of fistula due to the direction of the flow from the fistula is mostly from the colon to the
stomach. In our case, the first radiological assessment was CT, which delineated the fistula extending from the colon to the stomach. Upper
endoscopy is an excellent tool for visualizing the fistula opening and for taking biopsy samples for histopathology examination. Surgical
options for gastrocolic fistula have changed over time, from second- and third-stage surgeries in the 1940s to the current one-stage en bloc
resection technique . Practice parameters of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons stated that at the time of surgery, it is
impossible to distinguish between malignant and inflammatory adhesions, and recommend that colon cancer adherent to adjacent organs should
be resected en bloc . In a Canadian study, the principles of en bloc resection was violated in more than 50 % of eligible locally advanced
adherent colorectal cancers in two provinces, and physicians with fewer years in practice were more likely to perform multivisceral
resections than older physicians . Hunter et al., reported that 5-year survival after en bloc resection of colon cancer is higher compared
to colectomy with separation of adherent organs (61 % versus 23 %) . In a German study, local recurrence and overall 5-year survival for
multivisceral resection for locally advanced colorectal cancer were 11 % and 51 %, respectively . In a Japanese report of 14 gastrocolic
fistulas, mean age was 50 years with a male to female ratio of 10:4; it is similar to our patient, who is male, and 48 years old. The
fistulous formation between the distal half of the transverse colon and the greater curvature of the stomach was seen in 13 of 14 cases (93
%), similar to ours. These patients usually have a poor prognosis; the mean survival is 23.4 months (range, 3 to 112) . As far as we know,
the longest disease-free survival reported in the medical literature for a malignant gastrocolic fistula belongs to a 24-year-old woman, who
survived for more than 10 years . Our patient has now survived for 5 years, and has no evidence of tumor recurrence. Gastrocolic fistula is
a rare complication of adenocarcinoma of the colon. En bloc resection with adjuvant chemotherapy offers the best treatment option for
gastrocolic fistulas. This is one of the patients with longest survival reported in the medical literature. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography scan fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions NM-S initially evaluated the patient; OV-F operated on the
patient; OV-F, YG-G, ML-B, CR, and NM-S were major contributors to data collection, analysis, and writing of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank to Dr. Juan Gavilanes-Espinar, Dr. Angel Gutiérrez-Jiménez, Dr.
Ramón Kobashi-Margáin, Dr. Heriberto Medina, and Dr. Misael Uribe for their support to this manuscript.
