Livedo reticularis is a spastic-anatomical condition of the small vessels which translates morphologically by a reticular pattern,
interspersing cyanosis, pallor and erythema. The same can be congenital or acquired. Among the acquired, we highlight the physiological
livedo reticularis and the idiopathic livedo by vasospasm; the latter configures the most common cause. The drug-induced type is less
common. The drugs amantadine and norepinephrine are often implicated. Cyanosis is usually reversible if the causative factor is removed,
however, with chronicity, the vessels may become permanently dilated and telangiectatic. We report a case of a patient diagnosed with
Parkinson’s disease with chronic livedo reticularis associated with the use of amantadine and improvement after discontinuation of the drug.
Livedo reticularis (LR) should be considered an elementary dermatological lesion, grouped within vascular macules, representing a fi nding
of common dermatological clinical examination.1 The term 'livedo', first suggested by Hebra to describe a purplish discoloration of the skin
caused by an abnormality in the cutaneous circulation.2 LR a physiological, vasospastic response of cutaneous microvasculature to cold or
systemic disease. It is believed that the blood supply of normal skin is arranged in cones or hexagons, whose apex is composed of the
cutaneous arteriole, based on the skin territory with a 1 cm by 4 cm area, depending on its blood irrigation. Situations where there is
reduction of the circulatory flux of these arterioles or of venous drainage may lead to clinical appearance of LR.3,4 Erythematous-cyanotic
well defined spots, called complete or closed are clinically observed, delimiting internal skin areas with normal aspect or pale in
color.1,3,4 Semiologically, it is fundamental to know the difference from livedo racemosa, characteristically showing poorly defined slim
and open lesions. This should direct clinical reasoning to pathological causes.4 LR is benign in most cases; however, it may be secondary to
different disorders, especially in persistent cases. Vascular, rheumatological, endocrine or even infectious diseases are listed as possible
causes, besides conditions that lead to blood hyperviscosity. Finally, certain rugs may be responsible for a LR clinical picture (Chart 1).3
Main causes of livedo reticularis We report the clinical case of a patient with Parkinson's disease, presenting chronic, persistent LR,
associated with the use of antiparkinson medication. A male, 79-year-old patient mentioned the onset of erythematous-bluish lesions of lacy
aspect, predominantly on the lower limbs, aggravated by cold weather, for around three years. He denied local or systemic symptoms.
Hypertensive, he was medicated with propranolol. He had a cerebral vascular accident 13 years ago. A Parkinson' disease patient, he uses
amantadine in association with carbidopa and levodopa. During physical examination were observed linear maculous lesions of erythematous-
bluish color and lacy aspect on the lower limbs. No ulcerated lesions were evident, nor signs of atrophic scars (Figures 1 and 2). Livedo
reticularis. Linear maculous lesions of erythematous-bluish color and lacy aspect on lower limbs Livedo reticularis. Detail showing the lacy
aspect The laboratory investigation included a complete blood count, antinuclear factor (ANF), C3, C4, ENA profile, VDRL, rheumatoid factor,
lupus anticoagulant, total proteins and fractions, TGO, TGP, VHS and serologies for hepatitis B and C, chest radiograph and EAS, without
alterations. The hypothesis of LR associated with the use of amantadine was considered and the patient was referred for neurological
evaluation; the medication was suspended. Two months after the suspension, the patient did not present dermatological lesions anymore
(Figure 3). Two months after interruption of treatment with amantadine, the patient did not present livedo reticularis The etiological
investigation of LR involves a detailed anamnesis with information regarding the use of medication, time of onset, associated symptoms,
current diseases and recent surgeries. This physical examination is extremely important, as well as laboratory tests and histopathological
examination that may suggest the etiology. LR is an adverse effect commonly described in patients using amantadine for treatment of
Parkinson's disease, with preference for the female gender and involving mainly the trunk and lower limbs.5 The differential diagnosis with
livedo racemosa, with a pattern of irregular and incomplete circles and generalized involvement, should be considered. This is normally
pathological and results from the local and persistent blood flow impediment, as by arteriosclerosis and Sneddon's syndrome.4,6 Any case of
livedo racemosa needs neurological investigation. The skin is irrigated by arteries that are divided into arterioles at the junction of
dermis and subcutaneous cellular tissue, forming the deep vascular plexus, which is parallel to the epidermis1. Arterioles emerge from this
plexus and run perpendicularly to the epidermis, dividing into capillaries near the cutaneous surface, where they form the superficial
vascular plexus.3,5 A reduction in the volume of blood running in these arterioles may lead to LR. Amantadine is one of the best known drugs
that cause LR. Used at first as antiviral agent, today it is more commonly used in Parkinson's disease.7 It is an adamantine derivative that
stimulates norepinephrine and dopamine release into the synaptic cleft.5 This drug has a anticholinergic effect and blocks N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) receptors.8 The physiopathology of LR stimulated by this drug is still not fully known, up to 40% of patients will present
it.3,8 The amantadine-induced LR pattern suggests generalized cutaneous vascular alteration by the impact on arteries and arterioles of the
dermis, corroborated by the absence of systemic involvement during the treatment.5 It is a reversible side effect, with a variable clinical
course (1 to 48 months). 5 Progression to ulceration is possible, but is usually rapidly resolved by withdrawing the drug. As amantadine
signifi cantly improves the neurological symptoms, especially dyskinesias derived from the use of levodopa, some patients opt for living
with LR, which, except for the cutaneous manifestation, is asymptomatic.5 LR histopathology will depend on the basic cause. In the
physiological or idiopathic forms, resulting from vasospasm, no alteration was found. When associated with a drug, the histopathological
lesion examination usually shows absence of vasculitis and epidermis without alterations; is is not critical for diagnosis.4,5,6,9 It is
important to call attention to this side effect of amantadine, as this association is not always noticed by doctors and this drug is
frequently prescribed in the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Conflict of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this
article: Quaresma MV, Gomes-Dias AC, Serruya A, Vendramini DL, Braga L, Buçard-Mota A. Amantadine-induced livedo reticularis: a case report
. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(5):745-7. Study carried out at the Instituto de Dermatologia Professor Rubem David Azulay - Santa Casa da
Misericórdia do Rio de Janeiro – Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
