Left-ventricular diverticulum (LD) associated with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is extremely rare. We have not found any previous reports
of the coexistence of these two malformations. Such an association presenting with chest pain mimicking an infarct aneurysm with angina or a
takotsubo cardiomyopathy with chest pain is difficult to differentiate clinically. Here, we discuss several diseases characterized by left-
ventricular apical protrusion with chest pain to familiarize clinicians with the differential diagnosis of these diseases. A 58-year-old
woman was referred to our hospital because of complaints of chest pain and dyspnoea, mainly on exertion. An electrocardiograph on admission
showed a q-wave in lead I, a Q-wave in lead aVL, and an abnormal T-wave in the limb leads and leads V4 to V6. A transthoracic
echocardiograph revealed a PDA and a protrusion arising from the apex of the left ventricle. The diagnosis on admission was PDA and coronary
artery disease with infarct aneurysm. To evaluate the source of the chest pain, further evaluations were performed. Coronary angiography
showed no abnormal findings. Left ventriculography confirmed the presence of an apical contractile out-pouching. Based on these findings, we
revised the diagnosis as LD associated with PDA. The patient underwent transcatheter occlusion of the PDA and was discharged 3 days later.
Unexpectedly, transcatheter occlusion resolved the paroxysmal chest pain in this case. This is the first case report of LD combined with
PDA. PDA should be considered in the list of differential diagnosis of chest pain. Several diseases characterized by left-ventricular apical
protrusion with chest pain, such as LD, infarct aneurysm and takotsubo cardiomyopathy, can be misdiagnosed as one another. Therefore, it is
important to familiarize clinicians with the differential diagnosis of these diseases. Left-ventricular diverticulum (LD) is a rare anomaly
of out-pouching from the left ventricular wall. In adults, LD can be misdiagnosed as other types of heart disease, such as infarct aneurysm
and takotsubo cardiomyopathy . Adult patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is also rare. In PDA cases, the most common symptoms are dyspnoea and
palpitation. It is extremely rare for chest pain to be the main clinical presentation. Here, we reported on an adult LD and PDA case
presenting with typical “angina pectoris” relieved by PDA occlusion, which was misdiagnosed as coronary artery disease with infarct
aneurysm. A 58-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of complaints of chest pain and dyspnoea, mainly on exertion. The
symptoms started at age 18, when she developed progressive dyspnoea and stabbing chest pain located at the cardiac apex, which relieved
itself at rest. When she was 35 years old, a PDA was identified with no other cardiac anomaly present. Subsequently, the PDA was surgically
ligated through the left chest. The patient led a normal life for 15 years, at which point she started to complain of chest pain and
dyspnoea again. There was no significant history of psychological stress. Blood pressure was 104/44 mmHg. An electrocardiograph (ECG) on
admission showed a q-wave in lead I, a Q-wave in lead aVL, and an abnormal T-wave in the limb leads and leads V4 to V6 (Fig. 1a). A chest
x-ray showed cardiomegaly with increased pulmonary vascularity. A transthoracic echocardiograph revealed a suspicious coarctation of the
aorta, a PDA with moderate shunt and a contractile protrusion arising from the apex of the left ventricle (Fig. 2a to d). The maximum
internal end-diastolic diameters of the muscular protrusion were 2.0 cm × 1.5 cm, and the protrusion beat simultaneously with the enlarged
left ventricle with normal ventricular function (ejection fraction 66 %) and wall motion. The pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 41 mmHg
estimated by echocardiograph through tricuspid regurgitation velocity. The diagnosis on admission was coronary artery disease with infarct
aneurysm, recurrent PDA after surgical ligation and suspicious coarctation of the aorta.Fig. 112-lead ECG (a). Holter ECG at the onset of
symptoms (b)Fig. 2Echocardiogram showing a left-ventricular diverticulum (LD), a PDA and a suspicious coarctation of the aorta (SCOA) (a to
d). LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium; AAO, ascending aorta; AO ARCH, aortic arch; DAO, descending
aorta 12-lead ECG (a). Holter ECG at the onset of symptoms (b) Echocardiogram showing a left-ventricular diverticulum (LD), a PDA and a
suspicious coarctation of the aorta (SCOA) (a to d). LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium; AAO,
ascending aorta; AO ARCH, aortic arch; DAO, descending aorta Further evaluations were performed because of suspicions about the true
coarctation of the aorta and coronary artery disease with infarct aneurysm. Cardiac enzyme values were within normal limits. A Holter ECG
revealed a normal ST-segment at the onset of symptoms, as it appeared in the routine ECG (Fig. 1b). Helical computed tomography (CT)
confirmed the findings by echocardiographic examination. No collateral circulation was detected around the aortic narrowing, and
poststenotic dilatation was observed (Fig. 3a to d). Coronary angiography showed no abnormal findings (Fig. 4a and b). Left ventriculography
confirmed the presence of an apical contractile out-pouching which was connected directly to the left ventricular cavity by a narrow mouth,
and no aneurysmal motion was found (Fig. 4c and d). Retrograde cardiac catheterization through the aortic narrowing demonstrated no pressure
gradient. Based on these findings, we revised the diagnosis as LD associated with recurrent PDA after surgical ligation.Fig. 3Helical CT
showing a PDA, a LD at the cardiac apex and a SCOA of no collateral circulation (a to d)Fig. 4Coronary angiography showing a normal coronary
artery (a and b); Left ventriculography of a left anterior oblique view showing an LD (c and d) of similar shape compared with the Helical
CT (Fig. 3d); and an aortic angiogram showing a residual PDA shunt to the pulmonary artery (PA) and good position of the PDA occluder (e and
f) Helical CT showing a PDA, a LD at the cardiac apex and a SCOA of no collateral circulation (a to d) Coronary angiography showing a normal
coronary artery (a and b); Left ventriculography of a left anterior oblique view showing an LD (c and d) of similar shape compared with the
Helical CT (Fig. 3d); and an aortic angiogram showing a residual PDA shunt to the pulmonary artery (PA) and good position of the PDA
occluder (e and f) The patient underwent transcatheter occlusion, and a 10/8 mm PDA occluder (Starway Medical Technology, Beijing, China)
was implanted. An aortic angiogram examination confirmed its proper position and complete closure of the PDA (Fig. 4e and f). After the
release of the device, the patient showed significant improvement in symptoms and was discharged 3 days later. At a 12-month follow-up, she
was symptom-free. Muscular LD is generally regarded as a functional accessory chamber. Surgical resection may impair partial ventricular
function, and this type of diverticulum is less likely to rupture than the fibrous type. Conservative treatment and anticoagulant are
recommended. Therefore, a nonsurgical strategy with careful follow-up was performed in this case. In the present case, the typical “angina
pectoris” and left ventricular apical protrusion are two major factors for the misdiagnosis as coronary artery disease with infarct
aneurysm. It is important to familiarize clinicians with the differential diagnosis of diseases with these two factors. The differential
diagnosis for chest pain in this patient included LD causing chest pain, severe pulmonary hypertension with angina pectoris, PDA causing
chest pain, infarct aneurysm with angina pectoris and takotsubo cardiomyopathy with chest pain. Muscular LD is very rare in adults and is
often complicated by other congenital cardiac or extracardiac malformations. We have not found any previous reports on the coexistence of LD
and PDA. Muscular diverticulum is generally found at the apical region and is seldom seen at the basal region [2, 3]. Most left ventricular
diverticula are asymptomatic. Only a few reported cases presented with chest pain, and most of them were associated with coronary artery
disease. Diverticulum as the cause of chest pain is extremely rare [4, 5]. In this case, the patient was symptom-free after PDA closure,
although LD existed. Therefore, LD was not the primary cause of the chest pain. Angina pectoris related to severe pulmonary hypertension is
rarely reported in PDA patients. Because of extrinsic compression of the left main coronary artery, a massively dilated pulmonary artery
caused by severe pulmonary hypertension can lead to significant myocardial ischaemia [6, 7]. In the present case, mild pulmonary
hypertension (41 mmHg) was detected by echocardiograph and no extrinsic compression of the left main coronary artery was found in coronary
angiography (Fig. 4a). Thus, the compression of the coronary artery due to pulmonary hypertension was not the cause of the chest pain. The
cause of the chest pain is not clear. Although much is known about the pathophysiologic mechanisms of coronary steal and left-ventricular
overload caused by PDA left-to-right shunt, there are limited clinical data about chest pain as the main clinical presentation. To our
knowledge, there have been no more than 2 cases reported worldwide [8, 9]. After the PDA closure, the woman was symptom-free. The fact that
chest pain and dyspnoea were resolved first by PDA surgical ligation and later by transcatheter occlusion suggests that the chest pain was
directly related to the PDA left-to-right shunt. PDA should be considered in the list of differential diagnosis of chest pain. The mechanism
of the chest pain is unclear, but may be due to relatively lower perfusion pressure (diastolic pressure = 44 mmHg) of the coronary arteries
before PDA closure or to higher wall stress of the left ventricle during the PDA shunt. Looking the CT scan as well as at the
echocardiogram, a significantly dilated and hypertrophied left ventricle and also a slightly dilated and hypertrophied right ventricle can
be seen. The low diastolic pressure (perfusion pressure) is the result of the PDA, as a continuous AV (aorta-to-ventricle) fistula leads to
lowered “peripheral” resistance. Moreover, the continuous AV fistula also leads to higher left-ventricular pressure. These two factors will
significantly reduce the perfusion of the hypertrophied myocardium. One may suggest that under exertion, the heart develops angina on
demand. In other words, the hypertrophied ventricle(s) cannot be supplied with sufficient oxygen under the additional burden of low
diastolic pressure. This might be even more likely for the diverticulum, which in the coronary angiogram did not show a distinct epicardial
vascular supply but rather a tight muscular neck. This might explain the relatively immediate symptom relief after closure of the duct.
Several diseases are characterized by left-ventricular apical protrusion accompanied by chest pain. LD with chest pain in an adult is often
difficult to distinguish from left-ventricular infarct aneurysm with angina pectoris. The important diagnostic characteristics of
diverticulum, in this patient, were a normal ECG ST-segment, synchronous contractility, normal ventricular wall motion, a normal coronary
artery and muscular wall, and a narrow mouth. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy with chest pain should also be considered because the left
ventricular shape in the ventriculography looked slightly like a “takotsubo” (Fig. 4c and d). No emotional stress, normal cardiac enzyme
values and a normal ECG ST-segment were important diagnostic clues of diverticulum in this case. In a characteristic takotsubo ventricle,
the base of the left ventricle is hyperkinetic while the remainder of the left ventricle is akinetic or dyskinetic [10, 11]. However, the
echocardiograph of this patient showed normal ventricular function and wall motions, and the apical protrusion was contractile. A Helical CT
showed a lobulated protrusion (Fig. 3d). The shape of the protrusion was markedly different from the typical apical ballooning in takotsubo
cardiomyopathy. Some of the important diagnostic characteristics of LD, noted in a previously published review , are summarized below and
are helpful to exclude post-infarct aneurysm and takotsubo: (1) Examining synchronous contractility, normal ventricular wall motion and
normal ejection fraction is one important diagnostic characteristic. Muscular-type LD can contract synchronously with the ventricle and can
be identified relatively easily. However, fibrous-type LD cannot contract. Therefore, coronary angiography is an essential tool in these
adult cases to exclude post-infarct aneurysm. In a characteristic takotsubo ventricle, the base of the left ventricle is hyperkinetic while
the remainder of the left ventricle is akinetic or dyskinetic. However, an LD patient presents with normal ventricular function and wall
motions. (2) The varied shapes of the anatomy can also be investigated. LDs of sphere, sphere-like, lobulated, cord, conical and cylindrical
shapes are all present. However, these shapes, excluding the sphere or sphere-like shapes, are rare in post-infarct aneurysm and takotsubo
patients. (3) Finally, visualizing smaller anatomical sizes can be used to diagnose LD. Although a few reported LDs are large, most LDs are
smaller than a post-infarct aneurysm or takotsubo ballooning. Specifically, the mean neck diameter of a LD is only 1.25 ± 0.81 cm. In
addition, 83.3 % of LDs are no larger than 2 cm, and 98.3 % are no larger than 3 cm. However, the neck diameters of an infarct aneurysm and
takotsubo ballooning are usually larger than 2 to 3 cm. We have not found any previous reports on the coexistence of LD and PDA. Our results
suggested that PDA can cause chest pain. PDA should be considered in the list of differential diagnosis of chest pain. Several diseases
characterized by left-ventricular apical protrusion with chest pain, such as LD, infarct aneurysm and takotsubo cardiomyopathy, can be
misdiagnosed as one another. Therefore, it is important to familiarize clinicians with the differential diagnosis of these diseases. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Left-ventricular diverticulum Patent ductus arteriosus Electrocardiograph
Computed tomography Suspicious coarctation of the aorta Left ventricle Right ventricle Left atrium Right atrium Ascending aorta Aortic arch
Descending aorta Pulmonary artery Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HQ
collected important background information and drafted the manuscript. TQL and DW treated the patient during hospitalization. Transthoracic
echocardiography was performed by HYW. QL conducted the diagnosis and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province, China (NO. ZR2013HM028 and ZR2011HL057).
