Toxoplasmosis is a zoonosis caused by Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular protozoan parasite able to infect a wide range of hosts, including
humans. Congenital infection can cause severe damage to the fetus. Thus, it is important to detect antibodies against the parasite to
confirm clinical manifestations. Considering that all immunoglobulin isotypes may be present in biological samples from newborns and their
mothers, this study aimed to evaluate the ability to diagnose recent toxoplasmosis by using colostrum, as an alternative noninvasive way to
obtain biological samples, as well as to determine correlation rates between antibodies from serum samples to detect IgG, IgM and IgA
isotypes against T. gondii. A total of 289 puerperal women from Clinical Hospital of Federal University of Uberlândia (mean age: 24.8 years,
range: 14 – 43 years) took part in this study. Serum and colostrum samples from these patients were analyzed using ELISA and immunoblotting
assays for soluble antigens from T. gondii. ELISA immunoassays with serum samples showed reactivity in 47.0, 6.9 and 2.8 % of samples to
anti-T. gondii IgG, IgM and IgA, respectively, in comparison with colostrum samples, which showed reactivity in 46.0, 7.9 and 2.8 % of
samples to the same isotypes. Also, significant correlation rates of anti-T. gondii antibody levels between serum and colostrum samples were
observed. Interestingly, reactivity to IgM and/or IgA in colostrum and/or serum confirmed clinical manifestations of congenital
toxoplasmosis in three newborns. Immunoblotting assays showed that it is possible to detect IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies against various
antigens of T. gondii in serum and colostrum samples. IgG antibodies in serum and colostrum samples recognized more antigenic fractions than
IgM and IgA antibodies. Serum IgG detected more antigenic fractions than IgG antibodies present in the colostrum of the same patient. In
contrast, specific IgA present in colostrum recognized a higher number of antigens than IgA present in serum samples of the same patient.
Overall, the results show that it is important to investigate the occurrence of congenital toxoplasmosis, even at puerperal period.
Furthermore, this study demonstrates that T. gondii-specific IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies in serum and colostrum samples from puerperal women
may be detected with a significant correlation, suggesting that colostrum may also be used as an alternative biological sample to
efficiently diagnose recent human toxoplasmosis. Toxoplasmosis is an infectious disease caused by Toxoplasma gondii, an obligate
intracellular protozoan parasite that infects different hosts, including a third of the human population worldwide [1, 2]. The infection is
acquired mainly by ingestion of water or food contaminated with oocysts shed in felidae feces, by ingestion of raw meat containing tissue
cysts or by congenital transference of the parasites . Although, most infections are asymptomatic in immunocompetent adults, they may be
fatal for immunocompromised patients and cause severe damage to the fetus affected by congenital infection . The immune response against T.
gondii involves five isotypes of human antibodies (IgG, IgM, IgA, IgE and IgD), specific to T. gondii, which may be detected in various
biological fluids, such as serum, cerebrospinal fluid, and human colostrum or milk [5, 6]. There are several pieces of evidences showing
that breastfeeding protects the infant against a wide range of infectious diseases and there are currently many studies on human milk
composition to understand the role of its bioactive components . However, few efforts have been directed to demonstrate the role of human
colostrum against parasitic infections, including in T. gondii infection, as well as its use in immunodiagnosis . Considering high
prevalence of toxoplasmosis, and the importance to characterize the disease in its early stage, the present study was conducted to detect
the correlation of IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies with T. gondii in paired samples of serum and colostrum, and to evaluate the ability to
diagnose this disease by using colostrum, as an alternative noninvasive way to obtain biological samples. A total of 289 puerperal women
participated in this study. They were patients at the Obstetric Center of the Hospital de Clínicas da Universidade Federal de Uberlândia
(UFU), Minas Gerais, Brazil, with mean age 24 years, median age 24.8 years, ranging from 14 to 43 years. The study exclusion criteria
consisted of HIV and/or HTLV seropositive women, in whom breastfeeding is contra-indicated by the Brazilian Health Ministry . The study
conformed to the declaration of Helsinki, with its protocol approved by UFU Ethical Committee (Protocol number: 104.110). A written consent
was obtained from each patient. Human breast milk samples, volumes of 3 mL, were collected between the 1st and the 3rd day postpartum, to
ensure that it was colostrum. The samples were centrifuged at 500 × g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove fat and cleared colostrum samples were
stored at −20 °C. Serum samples were obtained from the patients one day after delivery and the aliquots were stored at −20 °C. T. gondii RH
strain tachyzoites were maintained by serial passage in cell culture for 48–72 h, using HeLa cell lines (ATCC/CCL-2; American Type Culture
Collection, Manassas, VA, USA), as described above . Briefly, cells were inoculated with tachyzoites of T. gondii and maintained by serial
passages in RPMI medium with 2 % fetal bovine serum. Free parasites were collected and washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2)
and, after addition of a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Ultra tablets, Roche, USA), lysates were obtained by repeated freezing and
thawing cycles, sonication, and centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. After supernatant recovery, total protein was estimated by
the Bicinchoninic acid kit (BCA, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and the aliquots were stored as soluble tachyzoite antigen (STAg) at −80 °C
until later use. The presence of Toxoplasma-specific IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies was investigated in serum and colostrum samples from
puerperal women by using the Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) and Immunobloting assays. The optimal dilutions for serum and
colostrum samples in each assay, as well as the time of incubation and blocking conditions for these samples, were obtained by block-
titration of the reagents. ELISA to detect IgG antibodies was carried out according to the conditions described previously with
modifications. Briefly, wells of high affinity microtiter plates (Costar Corning Incorporated, USA) were coated with 50 μL of STAg
(10 μg/mL) in 0.06 M carbonate buffer (pH 9.6) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were washed 3 times with PBS-Tween 0.05 % (PBS-T) and
blocked with PBS-T plus 5 % of nonfat powdered milk (Molico, Nestlé, São Paulo, Brazil) (PBS-T-M5 %) for 1 h at room temperature. Samples of
serum (1:64 in PBS-T-M5 %) and colostrum (1:5 in PBS-T) were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. After washing, plates were incubated with goat
anti-human IgG antibody labeled with peroxidase (Sigma) for 1 h at 37 °C. The reactions were revealed by adding peroxidase substrate system
(ABTS, KPL, Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories), and optical densities (OD) were determined at 405 nm. Two positive controls and three negative
controls were included in each plate in order to calculate the cut-off, which was established as the mean OD values for negative controls
plus three standard deviations. Results were expressed as ELISA index (EI), as follows: EI = ODsample/ODcut-off, where values of EI ≥ 1.2
were considered positive . ELISA to detect IgM and IgA antibodies was carried out as described previously with modifications. Briefly, high
affinity microtiter plates wells were coated with either human anti-IgM (KPL, Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories) or human anti-IgA (Sigma) in
0.06 M carbonate buffer (pH 9.6) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were blocked with PBS-T-M5 % for 1 h at room temperature. Samples
of serum (1:16 in PBS-T-M5 %) and colostrum (1:5 in PBS-T) were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. After washing, plates were incubated with STAg
(100 μg/mL) diluted with PBS-T-M5 %, for 2 h at 37 °C, followed by addition of rabbit anti-T. gondii IgG labeled with peroxidase according
to Wilson and Nakane . The next steps were carried out as described above. Immunoblotting assays were carried out to analyze the specificity
and pattern recognition of serum and colostrum antibodies against STAg, as described above . Briefly, STAg was separated on 12 % SDS-PAGE
under non-reducing conditions, and electrotransferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Non-specific interactions were blocked by PBS-T-M5 %
incubation, for 2 h at room temperature. Nitrocellulose strips were incubated with serum samples (diluted 1:100 or 1:50 [IgM and IgA] in
PBS-T plus 1 % of nonfat milk – PBS-T-M1 %) or colostrum (diluted 1:10 or 1:5 [IgM and IgA] in PBS-T). Protein-antibody complex was detected
by incubation with secondary antibodies, anti-IgG, anti-IgM or anti-IgA labelled with peroxidase (Sigma) for 2 h at room temperature.
Reactions were revealed by adding diaminobenzidine (Stable DAB, Invitrogen), and stopped with distilled water. The molecular weight (KDa)
for each antigenic fraction was determined using the Image Lab program Version 4.0.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules CA). After incubation
with serum or colostrum samples in duplicated nitrocellulose strips, one strip was washed with PBS-T (urea−) and the other washed with PBS-T
containing 6 M of urea (urea+) for 10 min. After washing with PBS-T, the strips were submitted to the immunoblotting assays as described
above. The intensity pixels (Int Band) obtained for each antigenic fraction of samples were evaluated using Image Lab program Version 4.0.1
(Bio-Rad Laboratories). The results for urea− or urea+ strips were expressed in avidity index (AI), as follows: AI = (urea+ Int Band/urea−
Int Band) × 100. AI <50 % corresponds to reactivity with antibodies of low avidity, while AI > 75 % corresponds to reactivity with
antibodies of high avidity. Statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA).
Differences between levels of the same antibody isotypes in human serum and colostrum samples were analyzed using Wilcoxon test. Spearman
correlation test was used to correlate the levels between the same antibody isotype in different samples or between different antibody
isotypes in the same sample. Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. T. gondii-specific IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies
were detected by ELISA in 136 (47.0 %), 20 (6.9 %), 8 (2.8 %) serum samples and in 133 (46.0 %), 23 (7.9 %), 8 (2.8 %) colostrum samples.
The levels of anti-T. gondii IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies in serum and colostrum from all puerperal women participating in this study are
shown in Fig. 1. The levels of IgG antibodies detected in colostrum samples (mean: 5.90; median/range : 5.26/1.22–14.05) were significantly
higher than IgG detected in serum samples (mean: 4.99; med: 4.66/1.28–8.62), p < 0.0001. In contrast, the levels of IgM and IgA antibodies
detected in colostrum samples (mean: 1.91; med: 1.61/1.22–5.46 and mean: 1.96, med: 1.65/1.22–4.23, respectively) were significantly lower
than IgM and IgA detected in serum samples (mean: 2.87; med: 2.36/1.58–7.88 and mean: 2.98; med: 2.02/1.22–8.20, respectively),
p < 0.0001.Fig. 1Measurement of anti-T. gondii antibody levels from assorted isotypes. Levels of IgG, IgM and IgA isotypes directed to the
parasite were detected in serum and colostrum samples from 289 puerperal women, as determined by ELISA indices (EI). The dashed line
represents the cut-off value (EI = 1.2). *** Data statistically significant (p < 0.0001, Wilcoxon) Measurement of anti-T. gondii antibody
levels from assorted isotypes. Levels of IgG, IgM and IgA isotypes directed to the parasite were detected in serum and colostrum samples
from 289 puerperal women, as determined by ELISA indices (EI). The dashed line represents the cut-off value (EI = 1.2). *** Data
statistically significant (p < 0.0001, Wilcoxon) When analyzing the anti-T. gondii antibody isotype levels detected in serum and colostrum
samples, a significant positive correlation was found when the levels of IgG were compared (r = 0.7858; p < 0.0001) (Fig. 2a). A significant
positive correlation was also observed when the levels of IgM were compared (r = 0.4975; p < 0.0001) (Fig. 2b), whereas, a negative
correlation was found when the levels of IgA were compared (r = −0.2168; p = 0.0002) (Fig. 2c).Fig. 2Correlation between levels of anti-T.
gondii antibody from assorted isotypes. Levels of IgG (a), IgM (b) and IgA (c) antibody isotypes were compared in serum and colostrum
samples from 289 puerperal women. Correlation coefficients were calculated by Spearman correlation test Correlation between levels of
anti-T. gondii antibody from assorted isotypes. Levels of IgG (a), IgM (b) and IgA (c) antibody isotypes were compared in serum and
colostrum samples from 289 puerperal women. Correlation coefficients were calculated by Spearman correlation test The antibody isotype
levels detected in serum samples showed different degrees of positive correlation, as follows: IgG vs IgM, low correlation, though it was
statistically significant (r = 0.1674; p = 0.0043) (Fig. 3a); IgG vs IgA, low correlation with no statistical significance (r = 0.1038;
p = 0.0780) (Fig. 3c); IgM vs IgA, significant correlation (r = 0.6274; p < 0.0001) (Fig. 3e). Regarding the levels of anti-T. gondii
antibody isotypes detected in colostrum samples, positive correlations were found for IgG vs IgM (r = 0.2124; p = 0.0003) (Fig. 3b) and IgM
vs IgA (r = 0.1765; p = 0.0026) (Fig. 3f).Fig. 3Correlation between levels of T. gondii-specific antibody isotypes. Samples from serum (a,
c, e) or colostrum (b, d, f) were obtained from 289 puerperal women. Correlation coefficients were calculated by Spearman correlation test
Correlation between levels of T. gondii-specific antibody isotypes. Samples from serum (a, c, e) or colostrum (b, d, f) were obtained from
289 puerperal women. Correlation coefficients were calculated by Spearman correlation test Four serum samples and four colostrum samples
presented simultaneous reactivity to T. gondii for all three analyzed isotypes, with three samples from concordant patients (60.0 %).
Simultaneous reactivity to IgG plus IgM of two isotypes was observed in serum and colostrum (4.2 and 4.5 %, respectively), to IgG plus IgA
in serum and colostrum (0.7 and 0.3 %, respectively), and to IgM plus IgA in serum and colostrum samples (0.3 and 0.7 %, respectively), with
66.7 % of concordant patients to IgG plus IgM. The most frequent event was the reactivity to IgG (40.8 % in serum and 39.8 % in colostrum)
with 94.2 % of concordant patients. As observed in Table 1, 94.1 % of patients had concordant results for anti-T. gondii antibodies when
colostrum and serum samples were analyzed.Table 1Detection of T. gondii-specific IgG, IgM and IgA isotypes in human serum and colostrum
samples from puerperal women, measured by ELISAIgG/IgM/IgASeruma n (%)Colostruma n (%)Concordant patients in serum and colostruma n
(%)+/+/+4 (1.4)4 (1.4)3 (60.0)+/+/-12 (4.2)13 (4.5)10 (66.7)+/-/+2 (0.7)1 (0.3)0 (0)-/+/+1 (0.3)2 (0.7)1 (50.0)+/-/-118 (40.8)115 (39.8)113
(94.2)-/+/-3 (1.0)4 (1.4)1 (16.7)-/-/+1 (0.3)1 (0.3)0 (0)-/-/-148 (51.3)149 (51.6)144 (94.1)Total289 (100)289 (100)272 (94.1) aData are
presented in number (n) and percentage (%) of the analyzed samples Detection of T. gondii-specific IgG, IgM and IgA isotypes in human serum
and colostrum samples from puerperal women, measured by ELISA aData are presented in number (n) and percentage (%) of the analyzed samples
According to the conventional serologic ELISA results, 30 patients were characterized as a risk group of acute toxoplasmosis since their
samples presented IgA and/or IgM in serum and/or in colostrum associated or not to presence of IgG. Their samples were selected for
immunoblotting assays in order to evaluate the detection of the three isotypes of antibodies against various T. gondii soluble antigens.
Samples from one of these patients were not tested due to insufficient volume. Immunoblotting assays showed that it is possible to detect
IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies specific to different antigen fractions of T. gondii in human serum and colostrum samples (Fig. 4). Anti-T.
gondii IgG present in serum and colostrum samples recognized a higher number of antigenic fractions than the IgM and IgA antibodies specific
for the parasite (Fig. 5). Furthermore, we observed that IgG antibodies reacted similarly to at least 20 antigenic fractions (97, 83, 66,
60, 57, 54, 50, 44, 38, 34, 32, 30, 29, 28, 26, 25, 24, 23, 22 and 21 kDa) in more than 75 % of serum samples. It is different from what was
observed in colostrum samples, where recognition varied highly among patients with reactivity to at least 14 antigenic fractions (70, 50,
39, 34, 32, 29, 27, 26, 25, 24, 23, 20, 19 and 15 kDa), with less than 50 % of frequency (Figs. 5a and 6). However, considering paired serum
and colostrum samples from the same patient, it was possible to observe that IgG present in the serum always recognized more T. gondii
antigens than IgG antibodies present in colostrum.Fig. 4Immunoblotting results for antigenic fractions from T. gondii. The assay was
performed with soluble antigen of T. gondii for detection of IgG (a), IgM (b) and IgA (c) isotypes directed to the parasites in serum and
colostrum samples from puerperal women. Molecular weights (kDa) are shown at left side. C+ positive control. C- negative control. B
blankFig. 5Reactivity of antibody isotypes towards antigenic fractions from T. gondii. Frequencies (%) of positivity for IgG (a), IgM (b)
and IgA (c) in serum and colostrum samples that recognize each antigenic fraction (kDa) of T. gondii Fig. 6Reactivity pattern of antigenic
fractions recognized by IgG, IgM and IgA antibody isotypes. Immunoblotting assays were carried out in serum and colostrum samples from
puerperal women. Data are expressed as range of frequencies (%). A: All antigenic fractions detected in samples. Molecular weights (kDa) are
shown at left side. Different colors represent different pixel density Immunoblotting results for antigenic fractions from T. gondii. The
assay was performed with soluble antigen of T. gondii for detection of IgG (a), IgM (b) and IgA (c) isotypes directed to the parasites in
serum and colostrum samples from puerperal women. Molecular weights (kDa) are shown at left side. C+ positive control. C- negative control.
B blank Reactivity of antibody isotypes towards antigenic fractions from T. gondii. Frequencies (%) of positivity for IgG (a), IgM (b) and
IgA (c) in serum and colostrum samples that recognize each antigenic fraction (kDa) of T. gondii Reactivity pattern of antigenic fractions
recognized by IgG, IgM and IgA antibody isotypes. Immunoblotting assays were carried out in serum and colostrum samples from puerperal
women. Data are expressed as range of frequencies (%). A: All antigenic fractions detected in samples. Molecular weights (kDa) are shown at
left side. Different colors represent different pixel density Regarding IgM antibodies, a pattern of recognition of T. gondii antigenic
fractions was observed only in serum samples, where more than 75 % of the samples reacted with three fractions (70, 54 and 30 kDa) (Figs. 5b
and 6). The majority of fractions were detected with less than 50 % of frequency for both types of samples. Furthermore, when both
biological samples from the same woman were taken into account, the IgM recognition profile of antigens also varied. By analyzing IgA
isotype, the profile of reactivity was opposite to the IgG antibodies. Considering both samples from the same patient, the colostrum IgA
specific antibodies recognized a higher number of antigenic fractions than the IgA antibodies present in serum. Also, 97, 83 and 70 kDa
fractions were recognized in more than 75 % of colostrum samples. However, no similar recognition pattern was observed in colostrum or serum
samples from many puerperal women, when analyzed separately, since most antigenic fractions were recognized with frequencies below 50 %
(Figs. 5c and 6). As shown in Fig. 7, the immunoblotting assay to evaluate avidity of IgG antibodies was carried out with serum and
colostrum samples from 21 out of 30 from puerperal patients, including from the risk group. Figure 8 shows the average avidity of IgG
antibodies specific for each antigenic fractions of T. gondii (Fig. 8a), as well as the frequency of recognition for each fraction by IgG
antibodies of low avidity (Fig. 8b) or high avidity (Fig. 8c).Fig. 7IgG avidity immunoblotting towards antigenic fractions of T. gondii.
Representative immunoblotting assay to detect IgG avidity in serum and colostrum samples directed to soluble antigens of T. gondii.
Molecular weights (kDa) are shown at left side. 1 and 2: membrane strips incubated with serum sample and washed with untreated or 6 M urea-
treated preparation, respectively. 3 and 4: membrane strips incubated with colostrum sample and washed with untreated or 6 M urea-treated
preparation, respectively. C+ positive control. C- negative control. B blankFig. 8IgG avidity indices against T. gondii in serum and
colostrum samples. The results are expressed in avidity index percentage (AI) towards T. gondii antigenic fractions. a. Average IgG avidity
against each antigenic fraction. b. Frequencies from antigenic fractions recognized with low avidity (AI < 50 %). c. Frequencies from
antigenic fractions recognized with high avidity (AI > 75 %) IgG avidity immunoblotting towards antigenic fractions of T. gondii.
Representative immunoblotting assay to detect IgG avidity in serum and colostrum samples directed to soluble antigens of T. gondii.
Molecular weights (kDa) are shown at left side. 1 and 2: membrane strips incubated with serum sample and washed with untreated or 6 M urea-
treated preparation, respectively. 3 and 4: membrane strips incubated with colostrum sample and washed with untreated or 6 M urea-treated
preparation, respectively. C+ positive control. C- negative control. B blank IgG avidity indices against T. gondii in serum and colostrum
samples. The results are expressed in avidity index percentage (AI) towards T. gondii antigenic fractions. a. Average IgG avidity against
each antigenic fraction. b. Frequencies from antigenic fractions recognized with low avidity (AI < 50 %). c. Frequencies from antigenic
fractions recognized with high avidity (AI > 75 %) All antigenic fractions detected with high frequency (>75 % samples) by serum IgG
antibodies (Fig. 5a) are recognized by antibodies with high avidity, except for the 50 and 60 kDa fractions, with 50 % of patients having
IgG antibodies with high avidity specific for them (Fig. 8c). In addition, no patient had IgG antibodies with low avidity in the serum in
22, 30, 32, 38, 54, 57 and 83 kDa fractions (Fig. 8b). Colostrum IgG antibodies showed a lower avidity in almost all antigenic fractions
comparing with the avidity of serum IgG antibodies (Figs. 7 and 8a). Also, 60 and 66 kDa fractions were frequently recognized by colostrum
IgG antibodies of low avidity (Fig. 8b). However, IgG antibodies of high avidity specific to 60 kDa fraction were not detected (Fig. 8c). On
the other hand, 22, 30, 38 and 54 kDa fractions were often recognized by IgG antibodies of high avidity, for both types of biological
samples (Fig. 8c). During samples collection all patients received guidelines on the importance of breastfeeding, as well as how to
breastfeed and how to hand milk to relieve engorged breast. In addition, the patients whose immunoassays of IgM and/or IgA were positive for
T. gondii were informed, and their children had a follow-up appointment scheduled with a neonatologist at the Clinical Hospital, UFU. For
these newborns, the following tests were carried out: serology for T. gondii (IgG and IgM), cranial ultrasonography to evaluate cerebral
calcifications and ventriculomegaly as a sign of hydrocephalus, and funduscopy examination to evaluate chorioretinitis. All examinations
were performed at the Clinical Hospital, UFU. Nine patients did not attend the follow-up appointment and their children were not evaluated.
The other newborns were examined and followed up for at least six months after birth to monitor the possibility of congenital infection.
Funduscopy examination and ultrasonography of the skull showed normal results for most of them, together with negative IgM and decay of IgG
level, indicating that it was the maternal antibody which was transferred. However, as shown in Table 2, three newborns manifested the
disease with monitoring and treatment of the following cases:Table 2Summary of the three clinical cases from newborns diagnosed with
congenital toxoplasmosis among the 289 puerperal women enrolled in the present studyCase numberGestation month when mother was diagnosed
with toxoplasmosis at prenatal careToxoplasmosis treatment during pregnancyCranial ultrasonography of neonateFundoscopy of neonateNeonate
serology for T. gondii Serology when mother was at puerperal stageIgGIgMSerum sampleColostrum sampleIgG (EI)IgM (EI)IgA (EI)IgG (EI)IgM
(EI)IgA (EI)15th YesDilatation of the lateral ventriclesChorioretinitisPosPosPos (3.10)Pos (3.59)Pos (1.46)Pos (7.32)Pos (1.68)Neg
(0.58)26th YesMultiple cerebral calcificationsChorioretinitisPosNegPos (4.76)Pos (3.36)Neg (1.01)Pos (10.45)Pos (3.11)Neg (0.81)3Immunea
NoNormalChorioretinitisPosNegPos (4.82)Pos (2.29)Pos (2.77)Pos (13.82)Pos (1.24)Pos (1.30) aDuring prenatal care the mother was diagnosed as
immune to toxoplasmosis Pos Positive, Neg Negative, EI ELISA indexCase 1 – During prenatal care the mother was diagnosed with acute
toxoplasmosis in the second trimester and treated with sulfadiazine, pyrimethamine and folinic acid until the 34th week of pregnancy, and
with spiramycin until delivery. Neonate presented positive IgM and IgG, dilatation of the lateral ventricles of the brain and abnormal
fundoscopy, which characterizes hydrocephalus and chorioretinitis due to congenital toxoplasmosis infection.Case 2 – During prenatal care
the mother was diagnosed with acute toxoplasmosis in the second trimester and treated with spiramycin until the end of pregnancy. Neonate
presented negative IgM and positive IgG, multiple cerebral calcifications and chorioretinitis due to congenital toxoplasmosis infection.Case
3 – Neonate presented negative IgM and increased IgG, normal cranial ultrasonography, but eye damage diagnosed as chorioretinitis due to
congenital toxoplasmosis. This case deserves emphasis because during prenatal care the mother was diagnosed as immune to toxoplasmosis, as
only IgG antibodies were detected at that time. However, our results showed that in fact she had acute toxoplasmosis in the first days after
delivery, which was confirmed by the detection of IgM and IgA specific to the parasite in serum and colostrum samples (Table 2). Summary of
the three clinical cases from newborns diagnosed with congenital toxoplasmosis among the 289 puerperal women enrolled in the present study
aDuring prenatal care the mother was diagnosed as immune to toxoplasmosis Pos Positive, Neg Negative, EI ELISA index Case 1 – During
prenatal care the mother was diagnosed with acute toxoplasmosis in the second trimester and treated with sulfadiazine, pyrimethamine and
folinic acid until the 34th week of pregnancy, and with spiramycin until delivery. Neonate presented positive IgM and IgG, dilatation of the
lateral ventricles of the brain and abnormal fundoscopy, which characterizes hydrocephalus and chorioretinitis due to congenital
toxoplasmosis infection. Case 2 – During prenatal care the mother was diagnosed with acute toxoplasmosis in the second trimester and treated
with spiramycin until the end of pregnancy. Neonate presented negative IgM and positive IgG, multiple cerebral calcifications and
chorioretinitis due to congenital toxoplasmosis infection. Case 3 – Neonate presented negative IgM and increased IgG, normal cranial
ultrasonography, but eye damage diagnosed as chorioretinitis due to congenital toxoplasmosis. This case deserves emphasis because during
prenatal care the mother was diagnosed as immune to toxoplasmosis, as only IgG antibodies were detected at that time. However, our results
showed that in fact she had acute toxoplasmosis in the first days after delivery, which was confirmed by the detection of IgM and IgA
specific to the parasite in serum and colostrum samples (Table 2). It is generally accepted that T. gondii infection may cause severe fetal
diseases, when occurring during pregnancy . This vertical transmission may vary from 6 to 72 %, depending on the gestational period when it
occurs, with the risk of transmission increasing from the 1st to the 3rd trimesters in human pregnancy. Among the serious fetal damages,
when the maternal infection takes place during the 1st trimester of pregnancy, are: decreased eyesight or blindness, hearing impairment or
deafness and mental problems . Toxoplasma gondii congenital infections are usually neglected because they are frequently asymptomatic at
birth and may remain overlooked until months or years after birth , when they can emerge, usually as severe chorioretinitis . Hence, it is
extremely important to exclude the possibility of T. gondii infection even at puerperal period, since the mother may be asymptomatically
infected during pregnancy. In the present study, it was demonstrated that in one of the cases of congenital toxoplasmosis, the pregnant
woman was diagnosed as immune to toxoplasmosis, but actually she had an acute infection with T. gondii and her baby had severe ocular
manifestation of the disease. The production of IgG antibodies is important to control T. gondii infection, but IgG-producing plasma cells
from breast tissue contribute little to the level of IgG in colostrum, when compared to IgG derived from serum [20, 21]. In the present
study, a significant association between serum and colostrum IgG levels was observed, indicating that the majority of IgG isotype was
transferred from plasma to mammary gland, explaining the immunoblotting assay results, which showed that serum IgG recognized more T. gondii
antigenic fractions than colostrum IgG. In contrast, when the levels of IgA isotype were compared between serum and colostrum samples, a
weak association was found. Furthermore, the immunoblotting assays showed that IgA antibodies present in colostrum samples recognized a
higher number of antigenic fractions than serum IgA. This is a new piece of information concerning immune response to T. gondii, even though
it is in agreement with the literature, which shows that most IgA is synthesized locally by plasma cells in mammary gland . Chardès and
colleagues demonstrated the presence of T. gondii-specific IgG, IgM and IgA antibody in serum, intestinal secretions and milk from mice
experimentally infected with cysts of the parasite via oral. They also showed that IgG antibodies present in serum and milk recognized more
antigenic fractions than IgA and IgM isotypes, and IgG antibodies also detected most of the antigens recognized by IgA. This is in
accordance with our results for human serum and colostrum samples described in the present study. However, it is necessary to make clear
that there are limitations of this approach, taking into account the fact that the recognition of parasite antigenic fractions by different
antibody isotypes depends on the individual immune response of the patients. Although 39 kDa antigenic fraction was recognized by IgG and
IgA serum and colostrum antibodies in less than 25 % if the samples, this fraction was recognized by IgG serum from all three puerperal
mothers whose newborns presented clinically confirmed congenital toxoplasmosis. In addition, this fraction was also detected by colostrum
IgA from two of these puerperal women. Thus, these results justify particular attention to determine the potential role of the 39 kDa T.
gondii fraction as a suitable marker to diagnose congenital toxoplasmosis. Also, the 60 kDa fraction may be considered a good marker for
acute toxoplasmosis infection because it was recognized frequently by IgG antibodies of low avidity, mainly in colostrum samples, including
from mothers whose neonates presented vertical infection. It is known that maternal IgG antibodies play a protective role in congenital
toxoplasmosis, by reducing placental parasitemia, as well as by their transference to the fetus through the placenta [18, 23–26]. Our
results showed that colostrum had a high level of specific IgG antibodies against T. gondii and, therefore, this may be a source of
potentially protective IgG antibodies to minimize the damage of congenital infection in the newborn. In agreement with data from literature
demonstrating that IgA isotype may remain biologically active on mucosal surfaces due to its proteolytic digestion resistance , the present
study also demonstrated that human colostrum samples have high levels of IgA antibodies against T. gondii, providing effective protection to
the child. The present study demonstrated that it is important to investigate the occurrence of congenital toxoplasmosis even at puerperal
period, as we showed that T. gondii-specific IgG, IgM and IgA antibodies may be detected with significant correlations in serum and
colostrum samples from puerperal women. These results suggest that colostrum may also be used as an alternative biological sample to
efficiently diagnose congenital toxoplasmosis and that further studies are necessary to access if the colostrum immunoglobulins specific to
T. gondii play a significant role in the control of congenital toxoplasmosis. 2,2′- azinobis-3-ethyl-benzthiazoline sulfonic acid
Bicinchoninic acid adding diaminobenzidine ELISA index Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay immunodeficiency vírus Human T lymphotropic vírus
optical density phosphate buffered saline PBS plus Tween 0.05 % PBS-T plus 1 % nonfat powdered milk PBS-T plus 5 % nonfat powdered milk
soluble tachyzoite antigen Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests regarding the results demonstrated
in the present manuscript. Authors’ contributions ACMO was involved in sample collection, carried out all laboratory tests, performed the
statistical analysis, participated in the design of the study and drafted the manuscript. HDSB and CMM participated in sample collection and
laboratory testing. FRC was involved in the parasite maintenance in cell culture, antigen preparation and laboratory testing. AMMO
participated in the design of the study and in all sample collection. AGMJ and DAOS participated in Immunoblotting assays and statistical
analysis. FMS was involved in the parasite maintenance in cell culture and antigen. CGAA did medical care to all newborns with suspected
congenital toxoplasmosis. VOSA, TWPM and JRM were the researchers responsible for experimental design, coordination of the study, data
analysis and revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Ana Claudia M Pajuaba, Marley
D Barbosa, Zilda MS Rodrigues and all Milk Banks’ employees for technical assistance. This study was supported by Brazilian Funding Agencies
(CNPq, FAPEMIG, and CAPES).
