Isolated torsion of the fallopian tube without an ovarian abnormality is an uncommon event, with an incidence of approximately 1 in
1,500,000 females. Isolated torsion of the fallopian tube occurs mostly in reproductive-aged women, and is thus extremely rare in menopausal
women and pre-pubertal girls. In case 1, 63-year-old Japanese woman presented with a 2-day history of acute lower abdominal pain. Menopause
occurred at 53 years of age. Pelvic ultrasonography showed an enlarged mass (73 × 47 mm) on the right side of her uterus. An urgent
laparoscopy was performed based on a presumptive diagnosis of right ovarian tumor torsion. During the laparoscopy, we noted a black,
necrotic, solid tumor arising from the distal end of her right fimbria. Her right fallopian tube was twisted with the tumor, but her right
ovary was normal and not involved. A laparoscopic tumorectomy with a right salpingectomy was performed. Her post-operative course was
uneventful. In case 2, a 10-year-old Japanese girl presented with a 1-day history of lower abdominal pain associated with nausea and
vomiting. Menarche had occurred 2 months earlier. A computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging examination demonstrated a dilated
tubal cystic mass with a normal uterus and bilateral ovaries. An urgent laparoscopy was performed based on a presumptive diagnosis of right
fallopian tube torsion. During laparoscopy, her right fallopian tube was noted to be dark red, dilated, and twisted several times. Her right
fimbria was necrotic-appearing and could not be preserved. Therefore, a laparoscopic right salpingectomy was performed. A histologic
examination revealed ischemic changes with congestion of her right fallopian tube, which was consistent with tubal torsion. She had an
uncomplicated post-operative course. We have presented two very rare cases of isolated fallopian tubal torsion. Radiologic interventions,
such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, in addition to ultrasonography, are helpful diagnostic tools. Isolated torsion
of the fallopian tube should be considered in the differential diagnosis of lower abdominal pain with a cystic mass and a normal ipsilateral
ovary in all female patients, regardless of age. Isolated torsion of the fallopian tube without an ovarian abnormality is an uncommon event,
with an incidence of approximately 1 in 1,500,000 females . Risk factors for isolated torsion of the fallopian tube include prior tubal
ligation, hydrosalpinx, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), a long or congested mesosalpinx, (para)tubal tumors, Morgagni hydatids, and
trauma. Presenting symptoms of isolated torsion of the fallopian tube include acute onset of lower abdominal pain that may be accompanied by
nausea, vomiting, and peritoneal signs. Since the first description of isolated torsion of the fallopian tube by Bland Sutton in 1890 , a
number of patients have been reported and generally presented during the reproductive age. Isolated torsion of the fallopian tube rarely
occurs in pre-pubertal girls [3, 4]. Isolated torsion of the fallopian tube is also extremely rare during the post-menopausal period because
of hypotrophy of the fallopian tube and the blood supply . The purpose of this report was to describe the clinical presentation, objective
findings, and surgical outcomes of two cases of isolated fallopian tube torsion that arose in patients at age extremes. A 63-year-old
Japanese woman, gravida 3 para 3, presented to our Emergency Department with a 2-day history of acute lower abdominal pain. Her medical
history was significant for osteoarthritis of the knee, a frozen shoulder, and hypertension. She had undergone hemorrhoid surgery 7 years
previously, but had no history of abdominal surgery. Menopause had occurred at 53 years of age. She was 158 cm tall and weighed 72 kg. Her
blood pressure was 141/66 mmHg and her pulse was 83 beats per minute. Her body temperature was 37.2 °C. On physical examination, tenderness
was observed in her lower right quadrant and rebound pain was marked in this area. A pelvic examination revealed an enlarged right adnexal
tumor. The laboratory results showed a white cell count of 11.73 × 103 cells/mm3, a hemoglobin concentration of 15.0 g/dL, and a hematocrit
of 45.4 %. Her level of C-reactive protein was significantly increased to 15.9 mg/dL. Levels of tumor markers were within normal limits
(cancer antigen 125 [CA 125], 9.4 IU/mL; carbohydrate antigen 19-9 , 10.3 IU/mL; and carcinoembryonic antigen , 1.0 ng/mL). Results of other
laboratory tests, such as liver function tests, kidney function tests, serum electrolyte levels, and her coagulation profile, were all
within normal limits. Pelvic ultrasonography (USG) showed an enlarged mass (73 × 47 mm) on the right side of her uterus with a partial,
high-echoic internal lesion (Fig. 1a); the site of pain was consistent with the tumor findings. No abnormal findings were demonstrated
involving her left adnexa, and her uterus was normal in appearance. There was no ascites in the pouch of Douglas. The pre-operative
diagnosis was a torsion of a right ovarian cyst. An urgent laparoscopy was performed, which revealed a twisted, dusky-red right fallopian
tube (Fig. 1b) with a black, necrotic, solid tumor arising from the distal end of her right fimbria (Fig. 1c). Her uterus and right ovary
were normal and there were no signs of necrosis on her right fallopian tube after reduction of the torsion (Fig. 1c). A laparoscopic
paratubal tumor excision with a right salpingectomy was performed. The contents of the paratubal tumor were black and fragmented (Fig. 1d).
A histologic examination revealed no viable cells within the tumor; no pathologic diagnosis was made owing to the complete necrosis of the
surgical specimen. Her right fallopian tube was macroscopically normal and there was no evidence of neoplastic proliferation (Fig. 1e). Her
post-operative course was uneventful and she was discharged from our hospital 3 days later.Fig. 1Pre-operative, peri-operative, and
macroscopic images in case 1. a: Transvaginal ultrasonography demonstrated a 73 × 47 mm cystic mass (arrow) with a partial internal high-
echoic lesion (arrow head). b: Laparoscopic view of the right fallopian tube (arrow). U uterus, FT right fallopian tube, T tumor. c: The
area shown in Fig. 1b after detorsion. The tumor can be seen arising from the distal end of the right fimbria (arrow). Note the improved
color of the right fallopian tube. F right fimbria, FT right fallopian tube, O right ovary. d: Macroscopic image of the excised solid tubal
tumor. Contents of the tumor were black and fragmented. e :Macroscopic image of the removed right fallopian tube. The tumor origin site was
not clear Pre-operative, peri-operative, and macroscopic images in case 1. a: Transvaginal ultrasonography demonstrated a 73 × 47 mm cystic
mass (arrow) with a partial internal high-echoic lesion (arrow head). b: Laparoscopic view of the right fallopian tube (arrow). U uterus, FT
right fallopian tube, T tumor. c: The area shown in Fig. 1b after detorsion. The tumor can be seen arising from the distal end of the right
fimbria (arrow). Note the improved color of the right fallopian tube. F right fimbria, FT right fallopian tube, O right ovary. d:
Macroscopic image of the excised solid tubal tumor. Contents of the tumor were black and fragmented. e :Macroscopic image of the removed
right fallopian tube. The tumor origin site was not clear A 10-year-old Japanese girl presented to our Gynecologic Section following a 1-day
history of lower abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting. She had been well before the onset of the pain. Our patient denied any
urinary or bowel symptoms or recent vaginal discharge. Menarche had begun 2 months before. Her medical and family histories were benign. She
was not taking any medications and had never used contraceptive pills. She was 149 cm tall and weighed 37 kg. Her blood pressure was
123/71 mmHg and her pulse was 101 beats per minute. Her body temperature was 37.6 °C. On physical examination, tenderness and rebound pain
were confined to her right lower quadrant. A trans-abdominal USG showed a 7-cm cystic mass in her right adnexa and a small amount of ascites
in the pouch of Douglas. There were no significant findings with respect to her uterus and left adnexa. Laboratory testing showed that her
white cell count was markedly increased to 21.6 × 106 cells/mm3, but her C-reactive protein level was 0.2 mg/dL. Tests for tumor makers,
including human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein, CA125, CA19-9, and squamous cell carcinoma-associated antigen were all negative.
A trans-vaginal USG and digital examination were not performed because of her age. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a dilated and
tortuous tubule-like structure in her central pelvis with a weakened contrast effect (Fig. 2a). She was admitted to our pediatric ward with
a suspicion of salpingitis or Meckel’s diverticulitis and was prescribed antibiotics. The same signs and symptoms persisted on the next day.
Meckel’s diverticulum scintigraphy showed no abnormal accumulation in her pelvis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed normal ovaries
and a well-circumscribed mass with a thickened wall without obvious contrast enhancement (Fig. 2b). An urgent laparoscopy was performed
based on a presumptive diagnosis of right fallopian tubal torsion. During laparoscopy, dark-red, necrotic-appearing, edematous right
fimbriae were noted with her right fallopian tube dilated and twisted along its axis several times (Fig. 2c). Her right ovary was not
involved and was normal in appearance (Fig. 2d). Her uterus and left adnexa were also normal, and no paratubal or paraovarian cysts were
noted (Fig. 2d). Her right fallopian tube was irreparably damaged, thus a laparoscopic right salpingectomy was performed. A histologic
examination revealed ischemic changes with congestion of her right fallopian tube, consistent with tubal torsion. Our patient was discharged
after surgery and had an uncomplicated post-operative course.Fig. 2Pre-operative and peri-operative images in case 2. a Contrast-enhanced
computed tomography shows a dilated fluid-filled tubular structure (arrow). b Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging shows a
hyperintense tubular structure (arrow) positioned on the superior aspect of the uterus. c The right fallopian tube was twisted, and the
fimbria was dilated, dusky in appearance, and completely necrotic (arrow). F right fimbria, FT right fallopian tube, O right ovary. d After
removal of the necrotic fimbria and distal side of the fallopian tube. The uterus and the right ovary were normal. U uterus, FT right
fallopian tube, O right ovary Pre-operative and peri-operative images in case 2. a Contrast-enhanced computed tomography shows a dilated
fluid-filled tubular structure (arrow). b Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging shows a hyperintense tubular structure (arrow)
positioned on the superior aspect of the uterus. c The right fallopian tube was twisted, and the fimbria was dilated, dusky in appearance,
and completely necrotic (arrow). F right fimbria, FT right fallopian tube, O right ovary. d After removal of the necrotic fimbria and distal
side of the fallopian tube. The uterus and the right ovary were normal. U uterus, FT right fallopian tube, O right ovary Fallopian tube
torsion is an uncommon gynecologic cause of acute lower abdominal pain in females . Although the causative mechanism underlying isolated
torsion is not fully understood, many predisposing factors that could possibly lead to this condition have been suggested; these factors are
divided into intrinsic and extrinsic causes [7, 8]. Intrinsic causes, which are directly related to the fallopian tube, include congenital
anomalies, hydrosalpinx, hematosalpinx, tubal ligation, tubal neoplasms, hypermobility, spasm, and autonomic dysfunction of the fallopian
tube [3, 7–9]. Extrinsic causes, which are attributable to changes in organs proximal to the fallopian tube, include ovarian or paratubal
masses, uterine enlargement by pregnancy or tumors, adhesions, mechanical factors, and trauma to the pelvic organs [3, 7–9]. In our
patients, the most probable causes of isolated fallopian tubal torsion were a tubal tumor (case 1) and a hydrosalpinx (case 2). A tubal
tumor that is pedunculated and located near the fimbria is referred to as a hydatid cyst of Morgagni; however, Morgagni hydatids are usually
<2 cm in size , and was thus unlikely the etiology of the torsion in case 1. Based on the macroscopic findings, we believe that there was
the possibility of an adenofibroma of the fallopian tube, although it was impossible to confirm on histology. The main causes of
hydrosalpinx in women include PID, previous abdominal surgery, endometriosis, and ectopic pregnancies; however, the causes differ in
sexually inactive girls. In case 2, our patient had not had her sexual debut and had no history of PID, appendicitis, or peritonitis. In
addition, the histologic examination revealed no obvious signs of inflammation or mass lesions in the resected fallopian tube. A possible
explanation for the hydrosalpinx was a congenital malformation of the fallopian tube or a previous asymptomatic episode of PID, which caused
distal occlusion of her fallopian tube. The correct pre-operative diagnosis of an isolated tubal torsion is very difficult because the
symptoms are non-specific and common to many other conditions. Even when imaging studies identify a pelvic mass, no specific clinical
feature is pathognomonic for a torsion involving the entire adnexa. USG is often the first imaging modality in a female with acute abdominal
and/or pelvic pain because a USG is non-invasive and there is no radiation exposure. Typically, USG findings in patients with torsion of the
fallopian tube include a dilated tube with thickened echogenic walls and tapered ends, internal free fluid with debris, and surrounding
inflammation ; however, these findings are not definitive in establishing a diagnosis of fallopian tube torsion. A CT scan is especially
useful for excluding appendicitis in patients with right lower abdominal pain in the acute setting. In addition, multiplanar reformatted
images of CT scans can be helpful in visualizing typical findings, such as a dilated fluid-filled structure, tapered ends, and configuration
of the mass in fallopian tube torsion . Although MRI may not be routinely used in the emergency setting, the superior soft tissue contrast
and multiplanar capability make it possible to distinguish a normal ovary from a cystic mass . During the diagnostic process in case 2,
digital and vaginal examinations and a vaginal USG were not performed because of our patient’s age; the diagnostic imaging by CT and MRI
were therefore critical to establish a pre-operative diagnosis. In fact, we were able to correctly establish a pre-operative diagnosis of
isolated fallopian tube torsion owing to the clinical presentation combined with the diagnostic imaging. Treatment by laparoscopy is
recommended for patients with adnexal torsion because of a smaller wound, less blood loss, and a shorter hospital stay . Even for a pregnant
patient, the laparoscopic approach is useful and more feasible during the first and second trimesters . Unfortunately, salvage of the
fallopian tube is rare because of the difficulty in making a correct pre-operative diagnosis. Removal of the fallopian tube is generally
recommended when the fallopian tube cannot be salvaged. Immediate release of torsion is always recommended, especially for reproductive-aged
women because it is not clear when irreversible damage takes place in the twisted fallopian tube. As one of the oviduct-sparing options in
children and adolescents with hydrosalpinx, Boukaidi et al. proposed a two-step conservative surgical management. The first step includes
the treatment of acute episodes of torsion by laparoscopic detorsion, puncture, and evacuation of the affected fallopian tube. The second
step includes second-look laparoscopic and salpingoscopic surgery scheduled several weeks after the first surgical procedure . Considering
adnexal torsion involving the ovary in a pediatric patient in whom detorsion and ovarian salvage is thought to be a safe option, even when
the ovary appears necrotic, this oviduct-sparing option could be adapted to isolated fallopian tubal torsion. We present two very rare cases
of isolated fallopian tubal torsion. Radiologic interventions, such as CT, MRI, and USG, were helpful diagnostic tools in recognizing this
medical emergency. Isolated torsion of the fallopian tube should be considered in the differential diagnosis of lower abdominal pain with a
cystic mass and a normal ipsilateral ovary in all female patients, regardless of age. Prompt surgical intervention is required to prevent
progression to peritonitis and maximize the likelihood of salvaging the fallopian tube. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient or the patient’s legal guardians for publication of these case reports and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions MT analyzed and interpreted the patient data, drafted the manuscript, and created the figures. HM, KK, YY, TK, SI,
HM, TS, RM, NI, KA, YT, and HI performed the physical examinations and provided the medical care. KS supervised case 1 and YK supervised
case 2. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We gratefully acknowledge the support given to us by Dr Hitoshi Niikura of
Tohoku University.
