Cardiovascular impairments are frequent in Cushing's syndrome and the hypercortisolism can result in cardiac structural and functional
changes that lead in rare cases to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Such cardiac impairment may be reversible in response to a eucortisolaemic
state. A 43-year-old man with a medical past of hypertension and history of smoking presented to the emergency department with global heart
failure. Coronary angiography showed a significant stenosis of a marginal branch and cardiac MRI revealed a nonischemic DCM. The left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was estimated as 28% to 30%. Clinicobiological features and pituitary imaging pointed toward Cushing's
disease and administration of adrenolytic drugs (metyrapone and ketoconazole) was initiated. Despite the normalization of cortisol which had
been achieved 2 months later, the patient presented an acute heart failure. A massive mitral regurgitation secondary to posterior papillary
muscle rupture was diagnosed as a complication of the occlusion of the marginal branch. After 6 months of optimal pharmacological treatment
for systolic heart failure, as well as treatment with inhibitors of steroidogenesis, there was no improvement of LVEF. The percutaneous
mitral valve was therefore repaired and a defibrillator implanted. The severity of heart failure contraindicated pituitary surgery and the
patient was instead treated by stereotaxic radiotherapy. This is the first case reporting a Cushing's syndrome DCM without improvement of
LVEF despite normalization of serum cortisol levels. Endogenous Cushing's syndrome may be caused by overproduction of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) (Cushing's disease in most cases) or by an independent high cortisol secretion from the adrenal cortex.1 Cardiovascular
impairments are frequent, due to hypertension, hyperglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, weight gain, and a prothrombotic state. Hypercortisolism
can also cause cardiac structural and functional changes2–5: hypertrophy, concentric remodeling, fibrosis, biventricular and left atrial
systolic dysfunction, and diastolic dysfunction, leading in rare cases to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). We present here the case of a man
with DCM related to Cushing's disease (CD). A 43-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension for 8 years and history of smoking,
presented to the emergency department with dyspnea. He was under treatment with amlodipine at a dose of 5 mg/day. Physical examination,
blood tests, and chest imaging revealed global heart failure. Coronary angiography revealed an isolated significant stenosis in the marginal
branch of the circumflex artery. Transthoracic echography showed a globally dilated heart (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 64 mm),
a mild left ventricular hypertrophy, and a global hypokinesia with a more prominent posterolateral wall hypokinesis (probably explained by
the stenosis of the marginal branch). Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was calculated as 28% to 30%. No significant valvular heart
disease, no sign of pulmonary hypertension, and no pericardial effusion were noted. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a
DCM, with no sign of necrosis. The patient reported no excessive alcohol consumption and investigations for usual infective, autoimmune and
infiltrative causes of cardiomyopathy were negative. The clinical picture suggested a Cushing's syndrome: easy bruising, reddish purple
striae (Fig. 1), proximal myopathy, facial fullness, as well as facial and truncal fat distribution. This was confirmed by blood tests
showing severe hypokalemia (2.4 mmol/L), urinary-free cortisol (UFC) 14 times higher than the normal range (2016 nmol/L, N < 138), 8am ACTH
level 7 times higher than the normal range (178 ng/L, N < 26), and by a failure of low-dose dexamethasone to suppress serum cortisol in a
suppression test. Pituitary gadolinium-enhanced MRI revealed a macroadenoma measuring 15 mm in diameter (Fig. 2). Thus a final diagnosis was
DCM complicating CD. Reddish purple striae (A) and bruising (B) in a context of Cushing's syndrome. Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging.
T1-weighted coronal (A), gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted coronal (B), and T2-weighted coronal (C) views showing a 15 mm macroadenoma.
Pituitary surgery had to be postponed due to the severe heart failure. Optimal pharmacological treatment of systolic heart failure was
administered (beta-blocker, ACE inhibitor, diuretics including anti-aldosterone agent) and, as described in such severe conditions,6,7 2
adrenolytic drugs (metyrapone and ketoconazole) were initiated: UFC was normalized within 2 months (Table 1). Evolution Under Anti-Cortisol
Treatment of Urinary-Free Cortisol and LVEF as a Function of Time Unfortunately, a new episode of acute heart failure occurred two months
after initial presentation. Transthoracic cardiac echography showed mitral insufficiency related to rupture of the mitral valve pillar.
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stenting (bare metal) was performed in the obtuse marginal artery. Another cardiac MRI then
revealed an impaired lateral contractility (territory of the marginal branch) related this time to necrosis (Fig. 3). Infective endocarditis
was ruled out (hemocultures were negative and no vegetation was visualized at transesophageal echocardiography). Cardiac magnetic resonance
imaging. Late gadolinium enhanced image (A) showing a subendocardial posterolateral myocardial infarction. Cine-cardiac magnetic resonance
acquisitions (diastole (B) and systole (C)) showing a severely impaired left ventricular function (LVEF estimated at 30%). In spite of
optimal treatment and normalization of cortisol levels, no improvement was found in the LVEF 6 months after discovery of the Cushing's
disease (Table 1). Thus a single-chamber defibrillator was implanted for primary prevention, and percutaneous mitral valve repair
(Mitraclip) was performed to treat the mitral regurgitation. After 1 year, since LVEF remained at 30%, cardiac transplantation was
discussed. In view of the patient's heart failure, anesthesia for transphenoidal surgery was considered too dangerous; therefore,
stereotaxic radiotherapy was performed to treat the CD 14 months after initial presentation. While awaiting the therapeutic effects of the
pituitary irradiation, tolerance and efficacy of the 2 adrenolytic agents proved acceptable. Cardiovascular complications, including
myocardial ischemia, left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiomegaly account in part for the higher mortality rate among patients with
Cushing's syndrome.8 Some studies having examined the relationship between cardiac dysfunction and hypercortisolism, found that cardiac
remodeling is independent of hypertension, and is probably due to a direct action of cortisol on myocardial tissue via glucocorticoid
receptors.2–4 A recent cardiac MRI study showed that patients with Cushing's syndrome have lower left ventricular, right ventricular, and
left atrial ejection fractions and increased left ventricular mass.5 Repetition of imaging after treatment revealed that these systolic
dysfunctions and structural changes are reversible upon correction of hypercortisolism. None of the patients in this study had DCM. Several
cases with DCM related to hypercortisolism have been published9–18 (Table 2). Case Reports of Dilated Cardiomyopathy Associated With
Cushing's Syndrome Interestingly, all these cases showed an improvement in LVEF after several months of cortisol normalization (median LVEF
improvement of 30% [min: 15%; max: 42%]; in a median time of 9 months [min: 4; max: 18]). Cushing's syndrome was due to unilateral adrenal
adenoma in 5 cases,11,12,14,15,17 ACTH-secreting adenoma in 4 cases,9,10,13,18 and of unknown cause in 1 case.16 LVEF improvement was noted
whatever the initial etiology, with a median improvement of 30% (min: 15%; max: 42%) for adrenal adenomas, 25% (min: 15%; max: 33%) for
pituitary adenomas, and 38% after bilateral adrenectomy in the subject for whom the cause was undetermined. In view of these observations,
DCM related to hypercortisolism could be considered as “reversible.” Here we have reported the first case showing no improvement of DCM in a
context of Cushing's syndrome. At presentation the cardiomyopathy could only be attributed to hypercortisolism (usual other causes of DCM
were eliminated, MRI initially showed no ischemic signs; however, unfortunately, several weeks later the patient suffered an acute coronary
syndrome with rupture of the mitral pillar and objective signs of necrosis in the lateral territory (MRI). This combination of different
causes of DCM (hypercortisolism, ischemia, and valvular defect) could explain the absence of improvement of LVEF in response to a
eucortisolemic state. Another possible explanation can be a publication bias due to the selective reporting of cases in which DCM had been
reversed. The standard treatment of CD is transphenoidal surgery with up to 65% remission rate for macroadenomas.19 For recurrent or
residual disease, therapeutic possibilities are second transphenoidal surgery, radiotherapy, medical adrenolytic therapy (mainly comprising
mitotane, metyrapone, and ketoconazole, and more rarely etomidate and mifepristone) or bilateral adrenalectomy in cases of uncontrolled
cortisol levels. Unfortunately for our patient, anesthesia for pituitary surgery was contraindicated due to very low LVEF. Combination of 2
adrenolytic agents (metyrapone, blocking the 11-beta-hydroxylase enzyme; and ketoconazole, blocking several steps in cortisol synthesis)
normalized cortisol levels and tolerance was good. The observed efficacy is consistent with results from 2 studies in which this combination
provided rapid control of severe hypercortisolism elicited by ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome6 (a combination of mitotane, metyrapone, and
ketoconazole in this study) and by ectopic ACTH syndrome or adrenal carcinoma.7 Our patient was treated by external pituitary radiation, the
therapeutic effects of which will be delayed. In conclusion, we report here the case of a DCM as a presenting feature of CD, without
improvement of LVEF after normalization of cortisol level (probably explained by subsequent associated ischemic lesions). We would like to
thank Pr Didier Revel for his interpretation of the cardiac MRI, and Dr Thibault Perret for his kind advices. Abbreviations: ACTH =
adrenocorticotropic hormone, CD = Cushing's disease, DCM = dilated cardiomyopathy, EF = ejection fraction, LVE = fleft ventricular ejection
fraction, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, UFC = urinary-free cortisol. Informed consent: Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
