Bleeding from gastric varices has high mortality rate, and obliteration using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate is the treatment of choice. Recurrent
bacteremia is rarely reported following the procedure. We aimed to report a case of recurrent bacteremia after N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate
treatment and to review published cases. In May 2014, a 43-year-old Brazilian male presented with lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Endoscopy
showed active bleeding from gastric varix. Injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate was performed and the patient was discharged. Over the next
4 months he presented with three episodes of bacteremia with severe sepsis and no identifiable focus of infection. Oral prophylaxis was
initiated in September 2014 and he has remained free of bacteremia. Six other cases of recurrent bacteremia following sclerosis with
N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate were reported in the literature. All patients had portal hypertension and bleeding from gastric varices. Average age
of patients was 55.7 years and the median time from endoscopic procedure to the first episode of bacteremia was 105 days (range 14–365). The
mean number of episodes of bacteremia per patient was 2.5. Recurrent bacteremia associated with endoscopic treatment with N-2-butyl-
cyanoacrylate is rare, but should be suspected in patients in which investigation shows no other focus of infection. Secondary prophylaxis
should be considered after the first episode. Prevalence of gastric varices in patients with portal hypertension varies from 18 to 70 % .
Bleeding from gastric varices has a mortality rate of 45 % . There are many treatment options for bleeding gastric varices and, although
limited data exist on optimal management, the first-line treatment advocated is endoscopic obliteration using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. This
liquid glue polymerizes immediately into a plastic cast after contact with blood [2, 3]. Bacteremia after endoscopic procedures may occur in
a frequency of 4.2 %, and can be higher in patients with chronic liver disease and in therapeutic procedures . Transient bacteremia
following injection of cyanoacrylate is not uncommon , but recurrent bacteremia is rarely reported. We aimed to report a case of recurrent
bacteremia after N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate treatment and to review the literature for published cases. A 43-year-old Brazilian male was under
follow-up at the gastroenterology outpatient clinic due to autoimmune hepatitis-associated liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class A/MELD 13). He
had portal hypertension and diabetes mellitus and used azathioprine (100 mg/day) and prednisone (10 mg/day). He presented at our emergency
department with lower gastrointestinal bleeding in May 2014. Upper endoscopy showed active bleeding from a gastric varix. Hemostasis was
achieved by injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and the patient was discharged 3 days after admission, using propranolol. In July 2014, the
patient returned to our hospital with a history of 7 days of fever (up to 40 °C) associated with tachycardia (cardiac rate: 110 beats/min)
and hypotension (blood pressure: 80/50 mmHg). There was no headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, cough, urinary symptoms or
bleeding. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and ceftriaxone 2 g/day and vasoactive drugs were initiated. Chest radiography
and urine exams were normal, and abdomen-CT did not show signs of abscess or ascitis. His blood culture grew Streptococcus anginosus, only
resistant to clindamycin and erythromycin. The antibiotic was continued for 7 days and the patient quickly improved and was discharged. In
August 2014, he returned presenting only fever. His blood culture revealed group C beta-hemolytic Streptococcus, only resistant to
clindamycin and erythromycin, and Escherichia coli susceptible to all antibiotics tested. Full abdomen-CT, chest-CT, transesophageal
ecochardiography, colonoscopy and a positron emission tomography did not show any signs of infection. Upper digestive endoscopy did not show
any complications at the site of the cyanoacrylate injection. The patient was treated for 4 weeks of IV ceftriaxone and discharged. In
September 2014, he returned, presenting with severe sepsis and blood cultures positive for Enterococcus faecalis susceptible to ampicillin
and E. coli susceptible to multiple antibiotics. An abdominal CT was performed and a radio-opaque material was detected within the
perigastric and cardiophrenic varicose veins corresponding to cyanoacrylate embolization. Ampicillin (12 g per day) and ceftriaxone were
maintained for 4 weeks. Due to the recurrent episodes of bacteremia, the patient was discharged using of amoxicillin–clavulanate
(500/125 mg) three times-a-day on a continuous basis. Since then, the patient remains free of episodes of bacteremia. Besides the present
case, six other cases of recurrent bacteremia following variceal sclerosis with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate were reported in the English
language literature. The characteristics of the seven cases are shown in Table 1 [2, 4, 6, 14]. All patients had portal hypertension and the
indication of injection of cyanoacrylate was bleeding from gastric varices.Table 1Characteristics of seven patients with recurrent
bacteremia following the injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for the treatment of bleeding gastric varicesCase numberGenderAge
(years)Underlying diseasesTime from application of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate to beginning of symptomsNumber of episodes with positive blood
cultureMicroorganism isolated from blood cultureFindings of the investigationTreatmentOutcomeLong term antimicrobial secondary
“prophylaxis”Wahl P, 2004 1Male60Alcoholic liver cirrhosis + portal hypertension3.5 months31st episode: Propionibacterium
acnes + Actinomyces odontolyticus 2nd episode: Propionibacterium acnes Streptococcus anginosus + Prevotella species 3rd episode: Prevotella
oralis No significant findings1st episode: IVb ceftriaxone (duration not reported)2nd episode: amoxicillin/clavulanate (duration not
reported)3rd episode: moxifloxacin (duration not reported) + surgical debridement of cyanoacrylate plugDeathNo2Male57Alcoholic liver
cirrhosis + portal hypertension12 months2 Enterobacter aerogenes Inflammation around cyanoacrylate plugIVb ceftriaxone (duration not
reported)CureYes (oral ciprofloxacin for 3 months)Wright G, 2009 3Male38Alcoholic liver cirrhosis + portal hypertension6 months3ESBLa-
producing E. coli Cyanoacrylate embolism to inferior vena cava and left renal veinIVb ertapenem for 6 monthsCureNoGalperine T, 2009
4Male69Idiopathic portal thrombosis + portal hypertension6 months2 Micromonas micros Abscess contiguous to cyanoacrylate materialIVb
clindamycin + impenem for 2 weeksCureYes (oral Cefuroxime for 3 months)5Male46Hepatitis B cirrhosis + portal hypertension + HIV2 weeks3
Klebsiella pneumoniae Cyanoacrylate embolism to spleen and left renal veinIVb piperacilin/tazobactam for 2 weeksCureYes (oral
amoxicillin/clavulanate for 6 weeks and then IVb ceftriaxone for 3 months)Reuken PA, 2012 6Male77Alcoholic liver cirrhosis + portal
hypertension3 months2ESBLa-producing E. coli Incomplete obliteration of gastric varicesIVb imipenem (duration not reported) + surgery with
cardia resection + spleno-renal shuntDeathNoPresent case7Male43Auto immune hepatitis and cirrhosis + portal hypertension + diabetes
mellitus2 months31st episode: Streptococcus anginosus 2nd episode: Group C beta-hemolytic Streptococcus + E. coli 3rd episode: E. coli + E.
faecalis Cyanoacrilate embolism to perigastric and cardioprhenic veins1st episode: IVb ceftriaxone for 7 days2nd episode: IVb ceftriaxone
for 4 weeks3rd episode: IVb ampicillin + ceftriaxone for 4 weeksCureYes (amoxicillin/clavulanate- indefinitely) a ESBL extended spectrum
beta-lactamase b IV intravenous Characteristics of seven patients with recurrent bacteremia following the injection of
N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for the treatment of bleeding gastric varices a ESBL extended spectrum beta-lactamase b IV intravenous The average
age of the patients was 55.7 years and the median time from the endoscopic procedure to the first episode of bacteremia was 105 days (range
14–365). The average number of episodes of bacteremia per patient was 2.5. All cases, after extensive investigation, showed no other focus
of infection. In one patient, the same microorganism from the blood culture grew from the cyanoacrylate thrombus after a specimen was
collected using endoscopy . N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate is a liquid glue that can be used in several types of human and veterinary procedures,
such as patch fixation for hernia repair , uterine artery embolization for leiomyomas and placenta increta , treatment of renal
arteriovenous malformation and for obliteration of gastric varices [1–6, 10–14]. Recurrent bacteremia has been described only for this last
procedure. Around 90 % of patients develop transient fever after N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate injection , however the incidence of bacteremia
after the procedure is not clear. Chen et al. observed that the frequency of bacteremia in the cyanoacrylate group was higher than in the
group under upper endoscopy without cyanoacrylate injection (15/47 vs. 1/47, p < 0.0001) . Furthermore, high volume of blood transfusion and
Child-Pugh score were factors associated with the occurrence of bacteremia . Jun et al. observed a frequency of 0.4 % of bacteremia and a
Brazilian study did not showed differences in incidence of bacteremia between band ligation and cyanoacrylate injection . A prospective
study with 55 patients only reported bacteremia after injection for treatment of bleeding gastric varices. Elective cyanoacrylate injection
for nonbleeding gastric varices was not associated with any episodes of bacteremia . Recurrent bacteremia, however, is a very rare event
with only seven cases described. All patients reported underwent cyanoacrylate treatment for bleeding gastric varices. Because of the rarity
of the condition, recurrent bacteremia associated with injection of cyanoacrylate should be a diagnosis of exclusion and other more common
diagnoses, such as spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, must be investigated. New diagnostic tools, such as F-18 FDG PET/CT, may be useful in
the diagnosis of infected cyanoacrylate plug , but require more studies. In six of the reported cases including this one, complications
associated with cyanoacrylate, such as abscess or embolism [4, 6], were found. Two cases of persistent (but not recurrent) bacteremia
reported showed incomplete obliteration of gastric varices, possibly facilitating bacterial translocation. In these cases, fever subsided
after total obliteration . Most recurrent episodes of bacteremia were caused by the same microorganism [2, 4, 6], except for the present
report and one other , in which multiple bacteria were implicated. All the microorganisms isolated from blood cultures in all reports were
commensals from the oral or gastrointestinal flora. Thus, migration of bacteria from the gastrointestinal lumen to blood vessels was
probably facilitated by the cyanoacrylate plug. Polymerization of cyanoacrylate has been described to form a large conglomerate that may
protrude intraluminally and provide an ideal route for bacterial invasion [10, 14]. We believe that after an episode of bacteremia following
the injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for the treatment of bleeding gastric varices, in which there is no evidence of the source of
infection, long term secondary prophylaxis with antimicrobials should be considered due to the gravity of these bloodstream infections. In
conclusion, recurrent bacteremia associated with previous endoscopic treatment with N-2-butyl-cyanoacrylate is very rare, but should be
suspected in patients in which extensive investigation fails to show another focus of infection. Complications associated with cyanoacrylate
must be ruled out. Secondary prophylaxis should be considered in these patients after the first episode of bacteremia. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. BAR, DAN, BCL and ELN wrote the case
report and reviewed the literature. ERC helped in the written of the manuscript, analyzed the data of the published cases reports and
supported intellectual content. ASL conceived the study and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript We would like to acknowledgement the Infectious Diseases Advisory Group of the Clinical Hospital, which provides clinical
assistance in infectious diseases for all the divisions of the hospital. The group helped us in the conception and the acquisition of data
for this manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
