Folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma is a distinctive cutaneous hamartoma composed of follicular, sebaceous, and mesenchymal components. The
lesions are most commonly found on the face and scalp of young adults, with approximately 30% occurring in the nasal or paranasal regions of
the face. The clinical differential diagnoses are extensive and include epidermoid cyst, dermal nevus, soft fibroma, and adnexal tumors
including sebaceous neoplasms. Here, the authors present a case of a 24-year-old man who presented for evaluation of an asymptomatic growth
on the nose, which had slowly enlarged over 9 years. On examination, there was a 0.6 cm dome-shaped flesh-colored papule on the nasal
bridge. The clinical differential included dermatofibroma versus intradermal nevus. A shave biopsy was performed, and histological
examination of the sections showed a proliferation of multiple enlarged and irregular-appearing sebaceous glands attached to a cystic
follicular structure. The associated dermal mesenchymal component consisted of numerous mature-appearing adipocytes associated with a
fibromyxoid stroma, prominent collections of mucin, and bundles of ropey collagen resembling a spindle cell lipoma. This combination of a
folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma with a spindle cell lipoma-like mesenchymal proliferation is unusual and has not been previously
reported. Folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma (FSCH) classically consists of a central infundibular cyst with radiating sebaceous structures
and a variable surrounding mesenchymal component.1 The lesions often present as an asymptomatic flesh-colored papule most commonly found on
the scalp and nasal region of the face of young adults. Reported locations of the lesion also include the groin and trunk, rarely including
the extremities. With the exception of rare reported cases of giant FSCH lesions, most are small in size and rarely progress to greater than
2.0 cm.1,2 FSCH is rarely diagnosed clinically because of its indistinct clinical features. Thus, the clinical differential diagnoses are
often extensive, and the final diagnosis is made through review of pathology. There are multiple pathological variants of FSCH, with neural,
vascular, and melanocytic components have been reported. We believe this case to represent a unique variant of FSCH with spindle cell
lipoma-like features, which has yet to be reported. A 24-year-old man was seen for evaluation of an asymptomatic growth on his nose, which
had reportedly slowly enlarged over 9 years. On examination, there was a 0.6 cm dome-shaped flesh-colored papule on his nasal bridge (Fig.
1). The clinical differential diagnosis included dermatofibroma versus intradermal nevus, and a shave biopsy was performed. Histological
examination showed a proliferation of multiple enlarged and irregular-appearing sebaceous glands attached to several cystically dilated
follicular structures, findings consistent with a FSCH (Figs. 2A, B). The associated dermal mesenchymal component consisted of numerous
mature-appearing adipocytes associated with a fibromyxoid stroma, CD34+ spindle cells, and bundles of ropey collagen, findings mimicking a
spindle cell lipoma (Figs. 2C, D). The stromal spindle cells surrounding the adipocytes and sebaceous structures were found to be nestin
positive (Fig. 2E). Clinical presentation consists of a 0.6 cm dome-shaped flesh-colored papule on the nasal bridge. Histopathology: A and
B, Proliferation of enlarged irregular sebaceous glands. C and D, Mature adipocytes, bland spindle cells, and bundles of ropey collagen
mimicking spindle cell lipoma, E, Nestin-positive stromal spindle cells surrounding adipocytes and sebaceous structures. Clinically, FSCH
often presents as a single asymptomatic, skin-colored, exophytic nodule with a rubbery to firm consistency.1,3 It rarely presents as a red
nodule or dome-shaped tumor commonly seen in hamartomas.1 In the largest study of FSCH by Ansai et al,1 153 cases were reviewed, revealing
that lesions are most frequently found on the face and scalp and rarely exceed 2.0 cm in size. Those exceeding the average size upwards of
2.0 cm were found in unusual locations, including the forearm, sacral area, and scrotum.1,2,4,5 Although once thought to be an extremely
rare clinical finding most commonly found in Eastern Asian populations, recent studies suggest a higher frequency that also extends to
European populations. The indistinct clinical presentation of FSCH is similar to that of many other lesions in the differential diagnosis,
including epidermal cysts, melanocytic nevi, soft fibromas, sebaceous hyperplasia, basal cell carcinoma, or benign soft-tissue neoplasms.1,3
Classic histopathologic characteristics of FSCH lesions include follicular, sebaceous, and mesenchymal elements, often presenting as
sebaceous structures arising from a central infundibular cyst confined to the dermis.3 Mesenchymal changes, represented by fibrillary
bundles of collagen with proliferating adipocytes and increased number of capillaries and small venules, are commonly found throughout the
stroma.3,6 Clefts between the epithelial component and the adjacent dermis are present.3 Immature adipocytes with spindle- or starry-shaped
nuclei and lipid droplets have been seen in the stroma of lesions, often neighboring the sebaceous structures.6 These histopathologic
findings of FSCH have remained essentially unchanged since its initial description by Kimura et al in 1991.7 Multiple histopathologic
differential diagnoses for our present lesion could be considered, including fibrofolliculoma, nevus lipomatosus cutaneous superficialis
with folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma features, FSCH with a neural component, and FSCH with perifollicular mucinosis. Although
fibrofolliculoma may show a cystically dilated follicular structure, it often contains keratinous material, and there are multiple thin
epithelial cords, lacking the fully developed sebocytes and mucinous stroma of our lesion.8 Unlike FSCH, nevus lipomatosus cutaneous
superficialis lesions are composed entirely of mature fat cells, and lack spindled cells and ropey collagen, as well as epithelial
structures.9 FSCH with a neural component should show evidence of neural differentiation and most likely present with nerve bundles
underlying the tumor.10,11 In addition, both FSCH with a neural component and FSCH with perifollicular mucinosis lack the adipocytes, ropey
collagen, and spindled cells found in the myxoid stroma that are present in our lesion.10–12 Two immunohistochemical studies have examined
the histogenesis of FSCH. Using antibodies directed against p63, CD10, CD34, Factor XIIIa, androgen, and alpha-estrogen receptor, Suarez-
Peñaranda et al3 reported that the immunohistochemical profile of the epithelial component of FSCH closely resembled that of normal
sebaceous glands. Expression of p63 has been found in sebaceous carcinomas but is absent in normal mature sebocytes, suggesting its use as a
diagnostic marker for epidermal or adnexal tumors in the skin.3 The strength of p63 staining was highest in the basal and suprabasal cells
of the epithelial units and was inversely related to the maturation of sebaceous cells.3 CD10 expression has been associated with mature
sebocytes and components of normal skin and hair follicles.13 Thus, its absence in the stroma of FSCH lesions suggests that it is of
hamartomatous nature rather than of sebaceous derivation.6 To distinguish FSCH from basal cell carcinoma, CD34 staining was used as an
indication of maturity of the FSCH cells.6 A different study by Misago et al6 reported that the epithelial component of the lesions was
characterized by activated and proliferating CK-15–positive stem cells showing sebaceous differentiation. The basal cells of the
infundibulosebaceous structures in FSCH were CK-15 positive, yet CK-19 negative, suggesting the lack of differentiation towards the
epidermis. The histogenesis of the mesenchymal component of FSCH is uncertain. The stromal adipocytes were previously thought to be the
result of metaplasia. However, Misago et al6 proposed that the adipocytes originate from nestin-positive multipotent stem cells. They
demonstrated that in some lesions of FSCH, the expression of nestin was upregulated in sebaceous duct structures in occasional association
with nestin-positive spindle cells in the stroma surrounding the adipocytes. Preadipocytes, characterized by S100 positivity, were also
identified in proximity to the sebaceous structures, suggesting lipogenesis. Nestin-positive multipotent stem cells normally found in the
connective tissue sheath of human hair follicles have demonstrated the capability to differentiate into adipocytes, Schwann cells, smooth
muscle cells, melanocytes, endothelial cells, and chondrocytes.13,14 The wide variety of possible differentiated forms of the stem cells
suggests their involvement in the multiple variations of FSCH recorded. Nestin-positive stem cells may therefore underlie the unique
presentation of spindle cell lipoma-like FSCH, as well as other reported variants including FSCH with nevus lipomatosus, FSCH with
melanocytic nevus, FSCH with a neural component, and FSCH with vascular-mesenchymal overgrowth.4,10,11,15,16 A relationship between FSCH and
sebaceous trichofolliculoma (TF) has been suggested by multiple investigators, implying that FSCH is a late-stage TF.1 However, the 2 can be
differentiated by the mesenchymal changes seen in FSCH, which are absent in TF. Interestingly, TF also lacks the upregulation of nestin
found in the stroma of FSCH.3 This lack of nestin may account for the absence of stromal variation in TF lesions.6 In addition, the
relatively minor follicular differentiation of FSCH differs from the presentation of TF, in which numerous terminal hairs and vellus hairs
extend from the cystically dilated infundibular wall.1,3 Furthermore, the congenital cases of FSCH argue against its relationship to TF.17
Although once considered exceedingly rare, FSCH lesions are increasing in reported frequency and variation. Here, we present a new variant
of FSCH, which shows spindle cell lipoma-like features; this combination of a folliculosebaceous lesion associated with a mesenchymal
proliferation resembling spindle cell lipoma has not been previously reported. Similar to other variants of FSCH, the mesenchymal elements
of the lesion are nestin positive, further supporting the hypothesis of nestin-positive multipotent stem cells as the origin for stromal
variants of FSCH. Our case contributes to the expanding variations of FSCH recorded and to elucidating the histogenesis of the mesenchymal
components of FSCH. H. Skupsky and C. M. Nguyen have full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity
of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Drafting of the manuscript: C. M. Nguyen and H. Skupsky. Critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content: D. Cassarino. Study supervision: D. Cassarino. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
