Paraneoplastic neurological syndrome (PNS) is a heterogeneous group of disorders affecting any part of the nervous system, in a patient
affected by cancer. PNS is estimated to occur in 0.01 to 8 % of cancer patients, with higher incidence in those with small cell lung cancer,
gynecological tumours or hematological disease. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD) is the most common PNS, but it has never been
reported in patients with pancreatic well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours. A 61-year-old man presented with an unusual PNS and absence
of circulating neural auto-antibodies. Subsequently, contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a large pancreatic mass, together with
multiple liver metastases, histologically diagnosed as a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor. Initial treatment with long-acting
somatostatin analogue (octreotide LAR) and prednisone achieved a biochemical response (reduction of chromogranin A level) and a radiological
disease control, but patient experienced only a brief improvement of neurological symptoms. Seven months after the onset of the symptoms, he
died from neurological impairment. PNS can be associated with metastatic non-functioning well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors. These tumors may be unresponsive to treatment with somatostatin analogues and an early neurological treatment should be considered
for the optimal management of these uncommon cases. Paraneoplastic neurological syndrome (PNS) is a heterogeneous group of disorders
affecting any part of the central, peripheral or autonomic nervous system, associated with the presence of a cancer. The etiology of these
syndromes has not been fully elucidated yet. Several authors investigated the presence of tumour-associated antibodies against neural
antigens (anti-neural antibodies), defining PNS as an immuno-mediated syndrome . However, the absence of anti-neural antibodies does not
exclude a diagnosis of PNS, as well as their presence is not sufficient to confirm this diagnosis . This syndrome occurs in 0.01 to 8 % of
patients with cancer, and its incidence is higher mainly associated with small cell lung cancer, gynecological tumors as well as
hematological diseases . In patients with well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours PNS has been only occasionally reported. Paraneoplastic
cerebellar degeneration (PCD) is the most common PNS and occurs as a result of autoimmune damage to the cerebellum. It is characterized by
subacute cerebellar symptoms and exhibits varying clinical features: In some cases only cerebellar involvement is noted, whereas other sites
of the nervous system can be involved in addition to the cerebellum. The syndrome develops within days or a few weeks with dystasia, loss of
ambulation, dysarthria, saccadic gaze, pursuit, and nystagmus . Diagnosis is driven by signs and symptoms, because imaging techniques fail
to show early abnormalities. Radiological signs of cerebellar atrophy have been reported only months after the clinical onset of the
syndrome. We report the case of a patient with symptoms of sub-acute cerebellar degeneration, in which a pancreatic well-differentiated
neuroendocrine tumor was subsequently diagnosed. A 61 year-old, Caucasian man, with controlled type II diabetes, came to our attention in
April 2011 because of loss of balance that progressed over weeks. There was no family history of neurological or autoimmune disorders. In
the preceding month, he started noticing body imbalance, reduced ability to focus on daily activities, to elaborate thoughts, and
incoordination. Neurological examination revealed signs associated with acute cerebellar degeneration, such as dysdiadochokinesia, mild
dysarthria, dizziness, vertigo and clear ataxia. Baseline International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS score) was 18. Insulin,
gastrin, glucagon, C-peptide, thyroid stimulating hormone, thyroxine, folic acid, vitamin B-12 serum levels and urinary
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) levels were normal. Results of the lumbar puncture and lower extremity electromyography were within
physiological limits. No brain masses or abnormalities were evident at both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT)
scans. No neural auto-antibodies (anti-Purkinje cells, anti-granule cells, anti-nucleolin, anti-GABAergic synapses, DOT-BLOT IgG - Ravo)
were detected, neither in serum nor in cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF). CSF analysis revealed an albumin level of 28,34 mg/dL and an IgG level of
4,50 mg/dL. The cytology of CSF was negative for tumor cells. In May 2011, an abdominal CT scan revealed a large pancreatic mass with
multiple liver metastases (Fig. 1). Subsequently, a percutaneous liver biopsy revealed pathological features of well-differentiated
neuroendocrine tumor (WDNET) of the pancreas, with a 5 % proliferation index (Ki67). Serum Chromogranin-A was elevated (524 U/l, upper
normal limit 18) and the 111In-octreotide scintigram resulted positive. An early treatment with monthly intramuscular octreotide LAR (long-
acting releasing) at the dose of 30 mg and daily oral prednisone at the dose of 25 mg were started. A complete disease restaging was
performed in September 2011. As expected, the size of the primary lesion and of liver metastases did not change significantly, whereas a
good biochemical response was detected, with Chromogranin-A serum level decreasing to 58 U/ml. Clinically, the patient experienced an
improvement in neurological symptoms. However, three months later, neurological symptoms rapidly worsened, requiring hospitalization.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a typical diffuse encephalopathy pattern, whereas the brain MRI scan was negative. Despite an increase in
the dexamethazone daily dose up to 16 mg, during the hospitalization the cerebellar syndrome further deteriorated, preventing patient’s
self-care. In October 2011, the ICARS score was 41 and Rankin scale 4 . In November 2011, seven months after the onset of the symptoms,
patient died from neurological impairment.Fig. 1Contrast computed tomography (CT) images of a patient with paraneoplastic cerebellar
degeneration due to metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour Contrast computed tomography (CT) images of a patient with paraneoplastic
cerebellar degeneration due to metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour According to diagnostic criteria, the clinical presentation
described above is a “classical” PNS. The patient developed a severe pancerebellar syndrome in less than 12 weeks, without evidence of
cerebellar atrophy at the MRI, with a progressive deteriorating clinical course, finally dying from neurological impairment. Similarly to
what reported in literature , in our case the onset of PNS preceded the diagnosis of a cancer. Thus, the presence of clinical findings
associated to PNS should focus the diagnostic work-up to search for the presence of a neoplastic disease, even in the absence of any
positivity for neural antibodies. Several studies [1, 3] reported cases of PNS in patients concomitantly diagnosed with cancer. The tumors
more commonly involved are small cell lung cancer, gynecological cancers, breast cancers, and Hodgkin’s lymphoma . Only few cases of PNS
associated with pancreatic WDNET are reported (Table 1) . In these cases the treatment of the underling cancer was followed by marked
improvement of neurological symptoms.Table 1Case report of paraneoplastic neurological syndrome associated with well-differentiated
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumorClinical syndromeAntibodiesReferenceLambert-Eaton myasthenic syndromeNot doneBertani et al. Paraneoplastic
optic neuropathyCAR, CRMP-5, anti retinal negative, anti-optic nerve positiveSlamovits et al. Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitisAnti Hu, Yo,
Ri, Ma1-2, CV2, amphiphysin: negative, GAD positiveHernández-Echebarría et al. Case report of paraneoplastic neurological syndrome
associated with well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor PCD is the most common PNS representing 24 % of all the PNS, with well-
defined criteria [3, 9]. In this case, the onset and the time course of the neurological syndrome fits the diagnosis of PCD, but grossly
abnormal EEG and the severity of global encephalopathy leading to death is non typical for this syndrome. To the best of our knowledge, the
association between a pancreatic WDNET and the detection of a PCD has not previously been reported. Neurological impairment and not tumor
progression is often the cause of death in these patients. Thus, treatment of PNS is symptomatic and the complete surgical resection of the
tumor is highly encouraged . Patients bearing well-differentiated, non-functioning pancreatic neuroendocrine cancers usually present with a
slow-growing, less aggressive disease, with life expectancy of more than 24 months . Octreotide LAR is the treatment of choice. In the
absence of response, or in case of progression, chemotherapy or everolimus may be considered . These treatments are associated with a
disease control (clinical and/or radiological) in more than 50 % of the patients . The case here reported had an atypical - and somehow
unexpected - clinical course. After three months of therapy, the patient presented with an improvement of the neurological symptoms and a
good biochemical response, with a good correlation between anti-tumor activity and control of clinical symptoms, as usually observed in
patients with this type of tumors. Instead, the neurological impairment rapidly progressed independently from the primary tumor response,
and precluded the administration of additional treatments. No immunosuppressant agents or treatment with immunoglobulins was administered.
This was due to the quick and fatal progression of the neurological symptoms. Furthermore, we recorded the absence of any immunoglobulin in
the CSF, so it is questionable whether such therapies would have been beneficial in solving or at least stopping the progressive
deterioration of the overall condition. This is the first report of an advanced well-differentiated non-functioning neuroendocrine
pancreatic tumor with associated an acute paraneoplastic neurological syndrome such as PCD. Neurological symptoms progressed independently
from the oncological course of the disease. Thus an early neurological aggressive treatment should be considered, even in the presence of a
biochemical or radiological response of the neuroendocrine tumor. Written informed consent for the publication of the clinical details and
the radiological images was obtained from the wife of the patient. A copy of the consent form is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Competing interests The authors declare no financial competing interest. In particular none of the authors the past five years
received reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from an organization that may in any way gain or lose financially from the publication of
this manuscript, either now or in the future. The authors declare no non-financial competing interests (political, personal, religious,
ideological, academic, intellectual, commercial or any other) in relation to this manuscript. Authors’ contributions MPB followed the
patient and drafted the manuscript; CS collected the acquired data and drafted the manuscript; MV performed the histological diagnoses; MT
and GVS revised manuscript critically. All authors have given their approval of the final version of the manuscript.
