A 56-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of urinary retention and overflow incontinence for 24
hours, preceded by progressive difficulty with voiding, worsening lower abdominal discomfort and bloating. Her past medical history was
significant for small bowel obstruction and neurofibromatosis with an associated benign pelvic tumor that caused similar symptoms as a
child, but had been known to be stable since that time. She had also recently been treated for a urinary tract infection. Her physical exam
revealed tachycardia and a diffusely tender abdomen with a palpable, tender suprapubic mass extending just above her umbilicus. Bedside
ultrasonography was performed to visualize her kidneys and bladder and revealed bilateral hydronephrosis and a distended bladder with marked
wall thickening (video), yielding further evaluation with computed tomography (CT). A urinary catheter was placed and 1,850 milliliters of
urine were collected. CT of the abdomen and pelvis then confirmed bilateral hydronephrosis and a severely enlarged bladder with a diffusely
thickened wall, consistent with the nodular appearance expected with neurofibroma of the bladder, as demonstrated in the figure. Laboratory
analysis of urine and blood supported suspicion of urinary tract infection and obstructive uropathy, respectively. Histopathological
analysis subsequently confirmed the presence of a neurofibroma. Neurofibroma of the bladder is an extremely rare manifestation of
neurofibromatosis type 1, or von Recklinghausen disease, not typically seen in the ED.1,2 Although the bladder is the most commonly affected
site within the genitourinary system, there are less than 80 reported cases in the literature.2 As in our patient, neurofibroma of the
bladder can lead to obstructive uropathy with hydronephrosis.3 Here, we used bedside ultrasonography in the ED for evaluation of
symptomatology, which led to the preliminary diagnosis of this rare manifestation, further captured by CT. Section Editor: Sean O.
Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM
article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management
relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Computed tomography of enlarged,
nondistended urinary bladder with diffusely thickened wall shown in transverse view after placement of a urinary catheter. Computed
tomography of enlarged, nondistended urinary bladder with diffusely thickened wall shown in sagittal view after placement of a urinary
catheter. Ultrasound of enlarged, distended urinary bladder with diffusely thickened wall and resultant hydronephrosis, prior to placement
of urinary catheter. Average bladder wall thickness is 2mm with distention.4
