Pilar cysts are common squamous-lined cysts that typically occur on the scalp. They are believed to arise from the isthmus of anagen hairs
or from the sac surrounding catagen and telogen hairs. The authors describe a rare case of a pilar cyst with prominent ductal
differentiation, presumably of eccrine derivation. Sweat duct differentiation has been described in a myriad of cutaneous neoplasms and
rarely within epidermoid cysts. The authors could only find one other case in the literature describing a pilar cyst with sebaceous and
apocrine differentiation. The clinicopathologic findings are described here. Pilar cysts, also known as trichilemmal cysts, are common,
typically solitary, dermal and/or subcutaneous cysts that preferentially occur in areas with dense hair follicle concentrations. They are
the most common cutaneous cyst in the scalp1,2 and the second most common in the head and neck. Pilar cysts occur in 5%–10% of the
population with a strong female preponderance. Histologically, they show a 3-to-4-layer thick lining of keratinocytes with abrupt
keratinization into compact keratin without a granular cell layer.2 Ductal differentiation in a pilar cyst is exceptional, and to our
knowledge, there has been only 1 case reported.3 The second case of a pilar cyst with ductal differentiation is described here. The patient
is a 62-year-old woman who presented with a mobile 2 cm mass of the left parietal scalp. The clinical differential diagnosis included a
cyst, and an excisional biopsy was subsequently performed. Histological sections showed a squamous-lined cyst with prominently interspersed
ducts lined by flat epithelial cells (Figs. 1A, B). No apocrine snouts were identified. Immunohistochemical stains for epithelial membrane
antigen and carcinoembryonic antigen polyclonal strongly highlighted the ducts (Figs. 1C, D). There was focal staining of ducts for S100.
The ducts were negative for gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP)–15. The cyst lining demonstrated an abrupt transition to homogenous
keratin and no granular cell layer. The cyst cavity showed homogenous keratin with cholesterol clefts and occasional calcifications. A focal
area of rupture, characterized by loss of the squamous lining, keratin granulomas, and granulation tissue, was seen. No dysplasia or
malignancy was identified. The constellation of pathologic findings was consistent with a pilar cyst with ductal differentiation. Because of
the focal S100 positivity of ducts and lack of apocrine snouts, an eccrine origin was favored. The cyst was completely excised at the time
of surgery, and the patient is free of disease after 1 year. A, Microscopic examination of the cyst shows squamous lining with prominently
interspersed ducts lined by flat epithelial cells. The cyst cavity demonstrates homogenous keratin with cholesterol clefts (H&E ×5). B, The
cyst cavity shows an abrupt transition to homogenous keratin and no granular cell layer (H&E ×40). C, Immunohistochemistry stain for
epithelial membrane antigen strongly highlights the ducts. D, Immunohistochemistry stain for carcinoembryonic antigen also strongly
highlights the ducts. Pilar cysts are thought to be derived from the external root sheath of the hair follicle and lined by stratified
squamous epithelium similar to that in the isthmus of the hair follicle. In contrast to the typical pilar cyst, our case showed interspersed
ducts that were believed to be eccrine. Although the presence of ductal differentiation within pilar cysts is rare, it is not surprising.3
Divergent glandular and follicular differentiation has been described in association with myriad of cutaneous neoplasms including basal cell
carcinoma,4 trichilemmoma, inverted follicular keratosis, and mixed tumors.5–8 Rare adnexal tumors have been shown to undergo trichogenic,
apocrine, and eccrine differentiation.5,6 It has been hypothesized that multidirectional differentiation of cutaneous neoplasms occurs
through pluripotential cells of the epidermis and/or adnexal structures.3,5,6 These findings are consistent with the theory of a common
embryological origin for the 3 adnexal components as a follicular–sebaceous–apocrine unit and eccrine sweat glands from stratum germinatum.5
Based on this theory, the variety of adnexal combinations encountered within hybrid cysts is not surprising. The hybrid cyst refers to cysts
with dual linings including variable combinations of epidermoid, trichilemmal, pilomatrical, steatocystoma, and eruptive vellus hair cyst
features.9,10 Also, hybrid cysts with follicular and apocrine differentiation have been described.11,12 The more common epidermoid cysts
have been described in association with eccrine ducts.13 There has only been one other report of a pilar cyst with glandular
differentiation. Hanau and Grosshans3 described a trichilemmal cyst with sebaceous and apocrine structures. It is surprising that more pilar
cysts with divergent adnexal differentiation have not been described. It is possible that this phenomenon is more common and overlooked.
Based on our observations, it would not be surprising if cases of pilar cysts with any combination of divergent follicular and/or glandular
differentiation were encountered. In conclusion, the description of this rare cyst has uncertain clinical significance and likely represents
the presence of a pluripotential cell with the ability to undergo divergent trichilemmal and eccrine ductal differentiation. As more cases
of divergent differentiation within a pilar cyst are reported, it may be possible to ascertain whether the finding of ductal differentiation
is merely a histological curiosity or has some prognostic significance. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
