A 67-year-old woman complaining of continuous fresh vaginal hemorrhage came to our emergency department in a pre-shock state. Examinations
revealed an irregularly shaped mass in the uterus and active arterial bleeding. Emergent hysterectomy and interventional radiology were not
immediately available. Foley catheter with 20mL water was inserted into the uterine cavity, then the balloon was pulled to obstruct the
uterus output (Figure). Her vital signs became stabilized, and she was transferred to another hospital two days later. A 67-year-old patient
was diagnosed as Stage IIb cervical carcinoma. In this case, we controlled active bleeding from cervical cancer by balloon tamponade
technique, which is frequently used in obstetric postpartum hemorrhage as a noninvasive and fertility-sparing procedure.1 Although devices
specially made for obstetric hemorrhages are frequently used, less expensive and more easily accessible devices such as Foley catheters and
condom catheters are also used.2,3 Only one case has ever been reported with this procedure used for hemorrhage from gynecologic
malignancies.4 In this case, we were able to achieve sufficient tamponade effect using a single quite-small volume balloon, probably because
the tumor itself and coagulated blood almost filled the uterine cavity. Similar tamponade techniques are commonly used by emergency
physicians for several emergency hemorrhages, such as vaginal, nasal, esophageal, or urethral hemorrhage, which usually require procedures
performed by each specialty physician afterwards. Such balloon tamponade techniques are valuable as a bridge to specialty treatment because
they can be conducted easily by emergency physicians using easily accessible devices. Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text
available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Successful balloon tamponade from the intrauterine mass using Foley
catheter. Arrow 1: mass and coagulated blood filling the uterine cavity. Arrow 2: foley catheter balloon put at the uterine cervix.
