A 64-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with near syncope and worsening left flank and shoulder pain. He had undergone
a difficult colonoscopy two days prior due to a tortuous colon. Initial vital signs were normal. He looked uncomfortable and had significant
left upper quadrant abdominal tenderness with guarding. Thirty minutes after ED arrival, his blood pressure dropped to 73/59 mmHg, requiring
aggressive fluid resuscitation. Bedside focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) exam demonstrated free fluid in the abdomen with
mixed echogenicity of the spleen, suggestive of splenic injury. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large subcapsular splenic hematoma
with active extravasation and surrounding intraperitoneal free fluid (Figure, Video). He was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit.
Hemorrhage continued after interventional radiology performed embolization of the splenic artery. He then required laparoscopic splenectomy
on hospital day 2 to control bleeding. He subsequently did well and was discharged on hospital day 10. Colonoscopy has been associated with
spontaneous intra-abdominal organ injury. Jammal et al described a case of subcapsular liver hematoma associated with colonoscopy.1 Lauretta
et al described a case of splenic rupture following colonoscopy that had a delayed diagnosis due to initial physician consideration of
alternate pathology, specifically intestinal rupture.2 Shankar and Rowe described a case of splenic injury following colonoscopy and then
reviewed the literature, finding a total of 93 cases.3 Increasing age was found to be a risk factor. The authors also emphasized that
patients may present with only moderate abdominal pain. A larger case series in 2012 by Aubrey-Bassler and Sowers described 613 case of
splenic rupture without known risk factors. Of these, 327 occurred as a presenting manifestation of an underlying disease. Infections were
found in 143 patients, with malaria most common (65 cases) and mononucleosis second (42 cases). Medical procedures were also highly
associated with splenic rupture, and 87 cases were associated with colonoscopy.4 In 2011 Fishback et al described the clinical and CT
findings of 11 patients with splenic rupture after colonoscopy. CT demonstrated splenic injury with subcapsular hematoma and/or perisplenic
hematoma in 10 cases and hemoperitoneum in eight cases.5 Singla et al found 102 patients with splenic injury following colonoscopy.6 The
majority (73 patients) required operative intervention with 96% requiring splenectomy. This information should prompt emergency physicians
to consider splenic injury in patients presenting with abdominal pain (even mild) and/or shock in those who have recently undergone a
colonoscopy. Bedside point-of-care ultrasound using the FAST exam may be effective in initially identifying these patients, especially those
in shock requiring immediate resuscitation and surgical consultation like the patient discussed in this case. Section Editor: Sean O.
Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM
article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management
relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Splenic rupture after colonoscopy. Left
image, ultrasound. Right image, computed tomography scan (CT). Spleen rupture case.
