Zoledronic acid (ZA) is a bisphosphonate given intravenously, most commonly for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Increase in
usage of ZA because it was FDA-approved has resulted in increasing reports of side effects. For the most part, these are systemic. Cutaneous
side effects associated with ZA are infrequent and limited to 2 reports of dermatomyositis to date. In both, patients presented with
clinical and laboratory stigmata of dermatomyositis soon after initiation of therapy. In this report, we describe a 62-year-old woman who
presented with diffuse, erythematous scaly plaques over the right thigh after 12 hours of infusion of ZA. Histopathologic examination of a
skin biopsy from the right thigh revealed patchy scale crust containing neutrophils and inspissated serum, interface change with scattered
individually necrotic keratinocytes, and a mild, superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with scattered eosinophils and pigment
incontinence—findings consistent with an interface dermatitis. Given that the patient had no other systemic manifestations or laboratory
abnormalities, to the best of our knowledge, ours is the first report of interface dermatitis secondary to ZA with the caveat that longer
follow-up is required to definitively exclude the development of drug-induced connective tissue disease. Zoledronic acid (ZA) (Reclast,
Zometa), first FDA-approved in 2001, is a bisphosphonate most commonly used for the treatment and prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis,
along with metastatic disease to the bone, hypercalcemia associated with malignancy, Paget disease, and multiple myeloma. ZA inhibits
osteoclast proliferation and induces osteoclast apoptosis, thus slowing down bone resorption, allowing the bone-forming cells time to
rebuild normal bone and allowing bone remodeling.1 The increase in usage of bisphosphonates has resulted in increasing reports of side
effects. Common systemic side effects include upper gastrointestinal tract adverse events such as nausea and dyspepsia, ocular side effects
such as nonspecific conjunctivitis, and more serious systemic side effects that include renal toxicity, atrial fibrillation, and
osteonecrosis of the jaw.2 However, cutaneous side effects associated with bisphosphonate usage are extremely uncommon and include lichen
planus,3 figurate erythema,4 spongiotic dermatitis,5 and vasculitis.6 We describe a 62-year-old woman who presented with diffuse
erythematous scaly plaques over the right thigh after 12 hours of infusion of ZA for osteoporosis. She was not on any other medication, and
her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Histopathologic examination of the skin biopsy taken from the right thigh revealed patchy
scale crust containing neutrophils and inspissated serum, interface change with scattered individually necrotic keratinocytes, and a mild,
superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with scattered eosinophils and pigment incontinence—findings consistent with an interface
dermatitis (Fig. 1). To note, however, there was no increase in dermal mucin and PAS stain did not indicate basement membrane zone
thickening. Given that the patient had no systemic manifestations of connective tissue disease and negative blood work (CBC, ANA, ESR, and
CRP), the patient was diagnosed with isolated interface dermatitis secondary to ZA. As per the referring physician, the patient had
clearance of her lesions after discontinuation of ZA. H&E (×10): patchy scale crust containing neutrophils and inspissated serum, interface
change with scattered individually necrotic keratinocytes, and a mild, superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with scattered
eosinophils and pigment incontinence. Cutaneous side effects associated with ZA are extremely limited and, to date, only 4 cases have been
reported in the literature. In terms of histopathologic reaction patterns, cutaneous side effects fall into no definite categories. Briefly,
in one, the histopathology was that of benign lymphoid hyperplasia, whereas in another it was that of an ulcer with nonspecific underlying
inflammation. The first patient was a 57-year-old woman who was on ZA for metastatic breast cancer. She presented with a 1-month history of
pruritic papules and plaques over extremities after 9 months of ZA administration.7 The second patient was a 52-year-old woman who was on ZA
for metastatic breast cancer as well, but her clinical presentation was that of painful erosions on the lip. Her symptoms started after 8
months of initiation of ZA8 (Table 1). In the other two, histopathologic findings were those of an interface dermatitis with concomitant
clinical manifestations of dermatomyositis. Briefly, the first patient was a 57-year-old woman who presented with a widespread erythematous
rash associated with fatigue, proximal muscle weakness, and weight loss 3 days after a single infusion of ZA for osteoporosis. Her
laboratories confirmed the diagnosis with an extremely elevated creatinine kinase, alanine transaminase, and alkaline phosphatase, along
with a positive antinuclear antibody.9 The second patient was a 65-year-old woman, also on ZA for osteoporosis, presented with widespread
erythematous plaques along with proximal muscle weakness and weight loss 5 months after ZA administration. The patient had positive
antinuclear and anit-Jo-1 antibodies, elevated AST, alanine transaminase, and creatinine kinase10 (Table 2). Although the histopathologic
reaction pattern in our case was also that of an interface dermatitis, the distinguishing feature in our case was the presence of scattered
eosinophils (reportedly not present in the other 2 cases of interface dermatitis associated with ZA). The presence of eosinophils in the
setting of an interface dermatitis is uncommon in connective tissue disease such as dermatomyositis or lupus erythematosus, and the presence
of “even 1 eosinophil” reportedly argues in favor of a drug reaction and against the diagnosis of interface dermatitis secondary to
connective tissue diseases.11 Furthermore, our patient had no weight loss, fatigue, nor any proximal muscle weakness, and had a negative
connective tissue disease workup (CBC, ANA, ESR, and CRP)—all of which argued against underlying/associated dermatomyositis. Biopsy-Proven
Noninterface Dermatitis Side Effects to ZA Biopsy-Proven Interface Dermatitis Associated With ZA Use Although long-term follow-up is
required to definitively exclude the development of drug-induced connective tissue disease, given that systemic manifestations of the same
typically develop soon after initiation of ZA therapy, to best of our knowledge, our patient is the first report of ZA-induced interface
dermatitis without clinical stigmata of dermatomyositis. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
