Gravid uterine incarceration (GUI) is a condition that is well discussed in literature; however, there are few acute diagnoses in the
emergency department (ED). We present a case series where three multiparous females presented to the ED with non-specific urinary symptoms.
On bedside ultrasound, each patient was noted to have a retroverted uterus and inferior bladder entrapment under the sacral promontory. GUI
is a rare condition that can lead to uremia, sepsis, peritonitis, and ultimately maternal death. Emergency physicians should include GUI in
their differential diagnosis in this patient population and use bedside ultrasound as an adjunct to diagnosis. Gravid uterine incarceration
(GUI) is a relatively rare condition that results in the uterus becoming trapped between the sacral promontory and the pubic symphysis
during pregnancy.1 As the uterus becomes more gravid, the cervix becomes superiorly displaced and can eventually lead to bladder outlet
obstruction. We report a case series of uterine incarceration where otherwise-healthy patients presented to the emergency department (ED)
between approximately 13 weeks and 21 weeks estimated gestational age with dysuria, urgency, frequency, and low back pain after being
recently seen by obstetrics and gynecology (OBGYN) which could not determine the cause for the patients’ symptoms. In this case series we
present three cases of uterine incarceration diagnosed by ultrasound in the ED, discuss previously published cases, and discuss the
implications for emergency physicians. Three multiparous patients with pertinent history and symptomatology (Table) presented to the ED with
dysuria, urgency, frequency, and low back pain between two and six weeks in duration. Further review of systems was otherwise negative. The
patients denied all toxic habits including alcohol, drugs and tobacco, and did not use any medications other than prenatal vitamins. Patient
#1 had been seen recently by OBGYN where she underwent evaluation for dysuria/urinary tract infection that was negative. Because of her
unremitting symptoms and despite reassurance, she came to the ED for evaluation. Initial laboratory evaluation of the patient revealed only
bacterial vaginosis. A bedside ultrasound assessment was performed that showed normal-appearing kidneys, and was negative for free abdominal
fluid or pericardial effusion. The inferior bladder pole was entrapped by the gravid uterus, and contained a significant volume of urine
(Figure). Upon these findings, the patients underwent straight Foley catheterization with return of 180mL urine that resulted in alleviation
of symptoms. Patient #2 presented with progressively increasing difficulty with urination over a period of two weeks. She underwent physical
exam and formal laboratory evaluation that was unrevealing for any infectious process. She was evaluated by bedside ultrasound, which again
revealed trapping of the bladder pole by the gravid uterus. She also underwent straight catheterization and was instructed on self-
catheterization with next-day follow up with OBGYN. Patient #3 had a more acute onset of her retention that developed over a two-day period.
She was evaluated in a similar manner to patients #1 and #2 with the only abnormal finding being bacterial vaginosis. Her bedside ultrasound
showed a retroflexed uterus and a significant amount of urine in the bladder. Because of her symptoms she was sent for a formal pelvic
ultrasound in the ED, which confirmed the diagnosis of uterine incarceration and showed >600mL in the bladder. She underwent straight
catheterization with return of 400mL urine. All three patients received formal ultrasounds confirming compression of the inferior pole of
the bladder. OBGYN was consulted and examined the patients in the ED, ultimately deciding to discharge the patients with close follow up the
next day. The patients were given instruction on self-catheterization, and return precautions should their condition worsen. They were seen
the next day in the OBGYN clinic and underwent a trial of pessary placement with successful alleviation of their symptoms. Three weeks later
the patients’ symptoms had improved to the point where they no longer required use of the pessary. The exact mechanism of GUI is believed to
be due to trapping of the uterine fundus in a retroverted position, which leads to a progressively elongated cervix that becomes displaced
anteriorly and leads to obstructive bladder symptoms.2 Risk factors for this condition include post-surgical adhesions, pelvic inflammatory
disease, fibroids, and laxity of supporting tissues.3 The most typical presentation occurs between 14 and 16 weeks of gestation with a
variety of symptoms mimicking common gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and musculoskeletal conditions. Physical findings include anterior
displacement of the uterus, anterior angulation of the vaginal angle, retroverted uterus, cervical displacement toward cephalad and a low-
lying fundal height for gestational age.4 Though urinary tract infections (UTI) are by far the most common cause of dysuria in pregnant
patients, a patient with a GUI can easily be misdiagnosed as a UTI even by experienced clinicians. Though these patients’ particular
presentations did not appear alarming, they could have easily been disregarded as normal pregnancy pain or Braxton-Hicks contractions if
careful attention to detail was not made. The complications of a missed GUI are rare, but could be potentially disastrous and life
threatening. These complications include hydronephrosis, UTI, bladder rupture, sepsis, peritonitis, miscarriage, oligohydramnios, fetal
growth restriction, and fetal demise.5–7 Even if these immediate complications are not present, delayed complications can include a
pregnancy loss of up to 33% in the second trimester.8,9 Because of the potential of these serious complications, this is a diagnosis that
should be considered more frequently in the ED, especially in community care settings such as ours, where obstetric patients make up a large
portion of the ED census per year. Though GUI has been extensively described in the literature, there are few reports of its actual
diagnosis in the ED setting. During a literature search we did find one case report where an ED noted that a patient had a clinically
incarcerated uterus; however, there was no ultrasonographic evidence of bladder obstruction in this particular case.10 We believe that our
case series is the first known series of GUI diagnosis in the ED using bedside ultrasonography. Although there are no established gold
standard tests for GUI, both ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging seem to be acceptable modalities for confirming the diagnosis.11,12
This case demonstrates one of the many utilities of ultrasound in the ED setting, particularly in experienced operators. While no
conclusions about statistical significance of testing for GUI can be drawn from this particular test, we emphasize two main points from our
experience. The first is that GUI is a rare, potentially fatal, but possible diagnosis in all pregnant women with symptoms of UTI and/or
bladder obstruction that should be in the differential diagnosis for emergency physicians. Second, we believe that when used in conjunction
with clinical findings, bedside emergency ultrasound is an excellent adjunct to aid in the diagnosis of GUI. Section Editor: Rick A.
McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem CIP Statement: Research data derived from
an approved Naval Medical Center, Portsmouth, VA. IRB/IACUC protocol. Disclaimers: The views expressed in this article are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, or the United
States Government. Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all
affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors
disclosed none. Inferior bladder, containing significant volume of urine, entrapped by gravid uterus. Multiparous patients with symptoms
indicating possible gravid uterine incarceration. EGA, estimated gestational age; PMH, past medical history; LEEP, look electrosurgical
excision procedure; LUQ, left upper quadrant
