The Segway® self-balancing personal transporter has been used as a means of transport for sightseeing tourists, military, police and
emergency medical personnel. Only recently have reports been published about serious injuries that have been sustained while operating this
device. This case describes a 67-year-old male who sustained an oblique fracture of the shaft of the femur while using the Segway® for
transportation around his community. We also present a review of the literature. In 2001, Dean Kamen developed a self-balancing, zero
emissions personal transportation vehicle, known as the Segway® Personal Transporter (PT).1 The Segway’s® top speed is 12.5mph and was
deemed safe for operation on urban pedestrian areas by the Centre for Electric Vehicle Experimentation in Quebec in 2006.1,2 However,
several reports have been published that showed serious injuries to the “gliders” who operate these devices.3–6 This report adds to the
growing literature of serious injury associated with the Segway® Personal Transporter. A 67-year-old male presented to the emergency
department with right leg pain after a fall from his Segway®. The patient reported that he used the personal transporter as his main means
of transportation around the community and that evening had several alcoholic drinks and attempted to drive home. En route, he subsequently
fell from the Segway® and injured his right leg. Past medical history was significant for diabetes and coronary artery disease. Physical
exam revealed a temperature of 36.6, pulse of 72 beats per minute, respirations of 14 and a blood pressure of 176/94mmHg. The patient’s
Glasgow coma scale was 15 and he did not appear to have an alcohol smell on his breath. The only outward signs of trauma were located on his
right lower extremity. A gross deformity was noted over the mid thigh with the entire lower extremity held in flexion and external rotation.
Peripheral pulses were present in the extremity and no parasthesia was noted. Radiograph of the right femur demonstrated an oblique fracture
of the proximal shaft of the femur with severe displacement and angulation (Figure). Alcohol level was 0.024% and the remainder of the
trauma studies were negative. The patient was subsequently admitted to the trauma service and underwent operative fixation the next day. He
was discharged to a rehab facility five days post injury. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission is tasked in the United States with
compiling data in the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System on injuries related to consumer products. Despite two separate recalls
issued by the commission on the Segway® Personal Transporter, only 33 injuries were noted in the National Electronic Injury Surveillance
System (NEISS) cases when searched with the key term “Segway”® from the year 2009 to 2013.7 Few injuries were identified because the
National Electronic Injury Surveillance System does not have a specific code for this means of transportation but includes it with
Scooters/Skateboards-powered under the code 5042. When compared to published data from case reports and case series, none of the NEISS match
the published literature. Most likely, the scarcity of literature is related to the under-reporting of the true number of accidents while
using personal transporters. This is evidenced by the lack of an International Classification of Diseases 10 code as well as only a handful
of reported cases. After a review of Medline, we found four separate publications that noted significant injuries in relation to the Segway®
Personal Transporter (Table 1). Of those reviewed, 16 patients required hospital admission due to significant traumatic injuries and seven
were placed in an intensive care setting. Further examination showed that much like our patient, 81% of patients had a fracture with 38%
occurring in the lower extremity. Although fractures are common, this classically differs from skateboard and scooter injuries in which the
majority occur in the upper extremity. More alarmingly, however, is the age of those sustaining injuries. Based upon reported data in the
literature and from the NEISS, the average age of those injured is 46.07 years old (Table 2) on a personal transporter. Also, 44% of those
reported injuries on personal transporters had significant head trauma that required an intensive care admission. It is difficult to
ascertain the reason for this trend but could be related to personal transporters being used more by tourists as compared to other modes of
transportation. No deaths caused by Segway® use could be found in the published medical literature or within the NEISS over the time period
selected. Ironically, however, a subsequent owner of the Segway® company perished after his personal transporter rolled off a 30-foot cliff
and into the water in the United Kingdom.8 Based upon a literature review, injuries from the Segway® Personal Transporter are likely under-
reported but those that are reported are significant in nature. Emergency physicians and the Consumer Product Safety Commission should
continue to monitor the number of injuries that present in the United States, and further studies regarding the personal transporter’s
safety should be undertaken. Section Editor: Rick A. McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Authors have no relation with the manufacturer of Segway. Oblique fracture of the proximal shaft of the femur
with severe displacement and angulation. Compiled data from all published reports on traumatic Segway® injuries requiring admission (n=16).
ICU, intensive care unit Compiled data from the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System on all Segway® injuries from 2009 through
2013. (n=33).
