A 25-year-old male presented to the ski clinic after colliding with a tree while snowboarding. He had immediate sharp pain at his
“tailbone,” but denied numbness and weakness. Past medical history was initially reported as unremarkable. On exam, he demonstrated midline
tenderness over the sacrum. Pelvic radiography was performed (Figure). Imaging revealed an acute vertebral fracture, but it also
demonstrated a large irregular left ischium to our surprise. When questioned further, the patient reported a hamstring injury in high school
leading us to diagnose this finding as an old left ischial apophysial avulsion injury resulting in an osseous excrescence. Ischial avulsion
injuries are most commonly seen in adolescence and young adults. 1 Ischial avulsion injury tends to happen during a strong contraction of
the hamstring muscles with activity like sprinting or jumping. 1–3 In puberty, the secondary ossification center appears at the apophysis
and does not fuse until adolescence. 1 This bone is weak compared to muscle and ligaments; therefore, the young skeleton is more prone to
fracture and osseous avulsions. 4–5 Radiograph is recommended to evaluate for a possible avulsion injury if there is pain over the ischial
tuberosity, swelling at the hamstring origin or a palpable step-off. 1–2 Diagnosis is often made by plain radiography; typically as a sliver
of bone displaced inferiorly and laterally from the ischium. 6 Ultrasound can be used to view other hamstring injuries; however, deep
injuries often require magnetic resonance imaging, especially in athletes with massive muscle masses. 4–5 Avulsion fracture can commonly be
misdiagnosed as a hamstring strain. However, unlike a muscular hamstring injury, avulsion fracture requires longer recovery, avoidance of
hamstring stretching for four weeks and possible surgery. 1, 3 However, other forms of rehabilitation can be started at the time of
diagnosis. The major indication for surgery is displacement of bone fragment greater than two centimeters. 2 If left untreated, the patient
may experience recurrent discomfort with sitting for periods of time, pain with running, and even muscle wasting. 1 Also, the displaced
fragment can lead to an exaggerated healing process and large mass of bone that can mimic neoplasm, such as an osteochondroma or even an
Ewing’s sarcoma in the subacute phase of healing. 4–6 Underlying pathology that should be considered with ischial avulsion injuries include
apophysitis of the tuberosity, bone tumor, metastases and osteoporosis. 5 Myositis ossificans traumatica is often seen following a sports
injury, but is rarely seen in the hamstrings. 4 Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. (A) Lateral pelvic radiograph demonstrates a minimally displaced transverse fracture of the S4 vertebrae (open
arrows); (B) Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph reveals an incidental old left ischial apophysial avulsion injury (arrows).
