Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 46 Final Diagnosis: Renal infarction Symptoms: Flank pain Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: CT Specialty: Nephrology Rare disease Acute renal infarction is an uncommon condition resulting from an obstruction or a
decrease in renal arterial blood flow. Isolated spontaneous renal artery intramural hematoma is a rare cause of renal infarction. A 46-year-
old healthy man presented to our emergency room because of sudden onset of severe right flank pain. An enhanced abdominal computed
tomography scan showed a low-attenuated lesion in the lateral portion of the right kidney but no visible thromboembolisms in the main
vessels. Computed tomography angiography revealed acute infarction resulting from intramural hematoma of the anterior segmental artery of
the right kidney, with distal occlusion. The rarity and non-specific clinical presentation of renal infarction often lead to a delayed
diagnosis that may result in impaired renal function. Clinical suspicion is important in the early diagnosis, and intramural hematoma of the
renal artery should be considered the cause of renal infarction even in healthy patients without pre-disposing factors. Although there were
some of reports that the incidence of renal infarction (RI) is 0.007% or 1.4% , the true incidence of renal infarction is actually unknown.
The cause of renal infarction is usually due to thromboembolism with emboli arising from the heart or aorta in atrial fibrillation. Renal
infarction can also be caused by other conditions, like hypercoagulable status, infective endocarditis, endovascular intervention, and renal
artery dissection cause. The clinical presentations of RI are flank pain, nausea, vomiting, and mild fever, which are nonspecific. The
rarity and non-specific clinical presentation of RI often lead to a delayed diagnosis that may result in impaired renal function. Among the
cause of RI, renal artery dissection (RAD) is often caused by an iatrogenic injury, trauma, fibromuscular dysplasia, atherosclerotic
disease, and connective tissue disorder. Isolated extra-aortic arterial dissection is very rare and has been reported in renal and carotid
arteries in a few studies at no more than 200 cases. Moreover, isolated spontaneous renal artery intramural hematoma (IMH) is also very
rare. If physicians miss the diagnosis due to its rarity, renal function may deteriorate. Herein, we report a case of RI due to isolated
spontaneous IMH treated successfully with only medical therapy. A 46-year-old man presented to our emergency department complaining of
severe right flank pain in the late afternoon. Previously, he visited out-patients clinic with the same complaint in the early morning and
was not able to find any cause of pain via kidney-ureter-bladder sonography, so he went home with some pain killers. As time went by, the
pain persisted and worsened, but it did not aggravate on movement or radiate. The patient denied any trauma histories and medical histories,
including hypertension. He was 30-pack-year current smoker and drank 1 bottle of soju (20% alcohol strength by volume) daily. He was a
captain of an ocean-going ship. The patient’s vital signs were: blood pressure (BP), 160/90 mmHg; heart rate, 89 beats/min; respiratory
rate, 20 breaths/min; and temperature, 36.5°C. On physical examination, his abdomen was soft with mild decreased bowel sound and without
tenderness or rebound tenderness, but there was tenderness on his right flank. His white blood cell count was 13 140/mm3 (neutrophil 72.3%,
lymphocyte 19.9%); hemoglobin level, 16.0 g/dl; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 1261 IU/L; creatine phosphokinase, 92 U/L; blood urea nitrogen,
11.8 mg/dL; and creatinine, 0.87 mg/dL: other results are listed in Table 1. Urinalysis indicated proteinuria of 1+ and red blood cells at
0–2/high power field. Protein-to-creatinine ratio in spot urine samples was 209.8 mg/g. C-reactive protein level was 11.30 mg/dL. There were
no specific findings on his chest radiograph and electrocardiograms. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (APCT) revealed perfusion defects
that sharply demarcated low-attenuated lesions in the lateral portion of the right kidney (Figure 1), consistent with acute infarction. The
patient was started on anticoagulation therapy with heparin. We performed coagulation tests to exclude coagulopathy and the results were
within normal range (Table 2). Arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation, were not observed on Holter monitoring. There were no thrombi or
vegetations on transthoracic echography. Three days later, a multidetector computed tomography angiography (MDCTA) was performed to evaluate
any vascular causes of RI. MDCTA revealed IMH of the anterior segmental artery of the right kidney, with distal occlusion (Figure 2). After
obtaining the findings from the MDCTA, we discontinued the heparin infusion and started tight BP control with amlodipine 5 mg and valsartan
80 mg. He felt free for pain and his BP was controlled to 120/70 mmHg within 3 days. Two months later, he had no symptoms related to RI and
BP was 115/65 mmHg with normal renal function (creatinine: 0.88 mg/dL). The follow-up APCT showed an interval decrease in the volume of
infarcted necrotic parenchyma of the right kidney, which was considerably smaller than the left one (Figure 3). Acute RI is an uncommon
condition resulting from an obstruction of or a decrease in renal arterial blood flow. Although some studies have estimated the incidence of
RI, the actual incidence is still unknown. Based on the relatively lower incidence compared to other intra-abdominal disease, it can be
easily missed and undiagnosed. The common clinical presentation is persistent steady flank and abdominal pain. Other symptoms and signs,
like fever, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, hematuria, proteinuria, and/or anuria, may accompany the pain. However, these clinical presentations
can also indicate many other intra-abdominal diseases, such as renal stones, acute pyelonephritis, appendicitis, and/or diverticulitis.
Therefore, the diagnosis is often missed and delayed, leading to renal impairments . The major cause of RI is emboli due to cardiac disease,
such as atrial fibrillation, atherosclerosis, valvular heart disease, myocardial infarction, ventricular aneurysm, and dilated
cardiomyopathy . Other causes are trauma, hypercoagulable states, hyperviscosity syndrome, fibromuscular dysplasia, factor V Leiden
mutation, dissection of renal artery or aneurysm, and idiopathic RI . The cause of RI in our case was IMH. IMH is one of the variants of
dissection that is included in acute aortic syndrome. In cases of dissection, blood flows into the intima and enters the media layer, and
the intimal flap is able to distinguish between the true and false lu-mens of the artery. In cases of IMH, hemorrhage occurs from the
weakened vaso vasorum into the media layer and an absence of communication between the dissection sac and the true lumen of the artery. The
natural history of IMH is poorly understood. Some studies have reported that patients with IMH have a better prognosis than those with
dissection, whereas others have reported that mortality and morbidity resulting from IMH are similar to those resulting from dissection .
The etiology is also not well understood. Some associated conditions include uncontrolled hypertension, fibromuscular dysplasia, and
atherosclerosis. Most often, renal artery dissection or IMH is accompanied with aortic dissection. Isolated spontaneous renal artery IMH
without aortic dissection is rare, especially in a healthy individual. Renal angiography is the most sensitive test for the diagnosis of RI
and IMH (100% sensitivity); however, it is invasive. MDCTA is noninvasive, convenient, accurate, and plays an important role for the
diagnosis of renal vascular disease . Ultrasonography is also noninvasive; however, its sensitivity is only 11% . In this case, we did not
reveal the RI on initial ultrasonography. In recent years, enhanced CT has gradually replaced renal angiography in the diagnosis of RI [7,
8]. In RI, laboratory findings typically show elevated AST, ALT, and/or LDH levels. Particularly, elevated LDH level is the most common
laboratory abnormality . The treatment of RI remains controversial. The treatments include conservative therapy, such as hydration and blood
pressure control, anticoagulation therapy such as heparin infusion or a dose of warfarin, and intravascular therapy such as thrombolysis and
angioplasty. Clinical features, causes, and time interval from the onset of symptoms to the initiation of treatment are considered when
selecting the treatment. The prognosis varies according to the site, size, and causes of RI. In this case, other renal vascular diseases
were excluded on the basis of results from MDCTA. Because the patient denied a past history of hypertension, we concluded this was not a
renal artery disease resulting from chronic hypertension; his high blood pressure was secondary to acute renal infarction. The patient was a
captain of an ocean-going ship, but he denied exposure to repetitive trauma (for example, trauma resulting from movement of the ship) or any
other situations that may result in an abrupt increase in blood pressure. The general principles of the management of IMH and aortic
dissection are similar. Controlling BP is important for managing IMH. Failure of medical therapy to control of blood pressure requires
surgical treatments or other interventions . Some studies have reported that anticoagulation therapy is useful, but there is insufficient
evidence supporting this . In this case, the injured kidney was smaller. However, we did not perform the angioplasty or stenting because his
renal function was stable and the site of IMH was not suitable for stenting due to high risk of additional infarction and the optimal time
for intervention had passed. Therefore, only anti-hypertensive treatment was administered. In patients presenting with acute flank or
abdominal pain, it is important to consider an RI and to perform an optimal diagnostic workup. Renal artery dissection or IMH was previously
most often diagnosed using renal angiography, but recently renal angiography has been replaced by MDCTA. The primary treatment is
conservative therapy, such as taking antihypertensive drugs, but time intervals to treatment, the possibility of recovering renal function,
underlying diseases, uncontrolled blood pressure, and disease progression should be considered when selecting a treatment strategy. The
rarity and non-specific clinical presentation of renal infarction often lead to a delayed diagnosis that may result in impaired renal
function. Clinical suspicion is important in the early diagnosis and intramural hematoma of renal artery should be considered as a cause of
renal infarction. Physicians should consider RI and RAD or IMH in patients with abdominal pain without risk factors when other intra-
abdominal diseases are ruled out. The abdominopelvic computed tomography (horizontal view) reveals perfusion defects, which sharply
demarcated a low attenuated lesion in the lateral portion of the right kidney (arrow). No clearly visible thromboembolism in main vessels
(bold arrow). The multidetector computed tomography angiography reveals intramural hematoma of anterior segmental artery of right kidney,
with distal occlusion (arrow). (A: coronal, B: horizontal, C: 3D and maximal intensity projection image). The abdominopelvic computed
tomography (A: horizontal view, B: coronal view) reveals interval decreased volume of infarcted necrotic parenchyme, right kidney (about 40%
involvement). Complete blood count and basic metabolic panel. Coagulation test.
