Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is widely used to treat stenotic coronary arteries caused by coronary heart disease. Coronary
artery perforation is a rare but dreaded complication of PCI. Here, we report the successful treatment of a patient with coronary
perforation of the right ventricular cavity. To our knowledge, this is the first report of its kind. The patient was a 69-year-old woman
with intermittent chest tightness and chest pain of about five years’ duration who was hospitalised for severe chest tightness and pain
persisting for three days. She had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia; routine admission examination showed no other
abnormalities. Results of routine blood, urine and stool tests, liver and kidney function, clotting time, electrocardiogram, chest
radiography and echocardiography were normal. Although coil embolisation rather than balloon is safe and effective for treating coronary
artery perforation, it may be not the best choice overall. If the perforation breaks through into the right ventricle, we may just monitor
closely rather than treat. That course may be beneficial for patients in that it reduces the risk of myocardial cell necrosis. This case
provides useful information for the treatment of such patients in the future. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is a widely used non-
surgical procedure to treat stenotic coronary arteries caused by coronary heart disease.1,2 The benefit of PCI to the patient is great, but
the procedure is accompanied by risk. Coronary artery perforation is a rare but dreaded complication of PCI, with a reported incidence from
0.12–0.93% and a mortality rate of about 7–41%.3–14 In most cases, the perforation breaks through into the pericardium, which may cause
cardiac tamponade.15 Coronary perforation can also involve the cardiac chambers.16 Here we report the successful treatment of a patient with
coronary perforation of the right ventricular cavity and provide a brief review of the literature on the treatment of coronary perforation
during PCI. The patient was a 69-year-old woman with intermittent chest tightness and chest pain over the previous five years. She was
hospitalised for severe chest tightness and chest pain persisting for three days. She had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia; the
admission examination showed no other abnormalities. Routine blood, urine and stool tests, liver and kidney function, clotting time,
electrocardiogram, chest radiography and echocardiography were normal. A diagnosis of coronary artery disease was considered. Coronary
angiography showed a right coronary arterydominant circulation. The left main coronary artery was normal, 80% of the middle segment of the
left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery showed stenosis, and the diagonal branch issuing from the site of the stenosis was thicker
than the LAD artery. Plaques, but no obvious stenosis, were found in the circumflex and right coronary arteries (Fig. 1A-C). (A) Stenosis is
shown in 80% of the middle segment of the LAD artery. (B) A diagonal branch issuing from the site of stenosis is thicker than the LAD
artery. (C) The circumflex and the right coronary arteries showing visible plaques but no obvious stenosis. After discussing treatment with
the patient, it was decided to perform PCI of the LAD artery. Because of the narrow opening of the diagonal branch, and because the diagonal
branch was thicker than the LAD artery, we planned to implant a stent at the juncture of the diagonal branch and the LAD artery, and to
position a guide wire in the artery to protect it (Fig. 2A). (A) Stenosis is shown in 80% of the middle segment of the LAD artery. (B) A
diagonal branch issuing from the site of stenosis is thicker than the LAD artery. (C) The circumflex and the right coronary arteries showing
visible plaques but no obvious stenosis. After stent implantation, the guide wire was set for expansion (Fig. 2B). After expansion,
angiography showed no mezzanine, side branch occlusion or residual stenosis at the implantation site, and forward blood flow was TIMI grade
3. However, contrast agent overflow was seen at the distal left LAD artery (Fig. 2C). The patient did not experience discomfort and had
normal blood pressure with a steady heart rate. As the guide wire did not reach the distal vessel through the perforation site even after
several attempts, it was positioned proximal to the perforation site, and a balloon was used for compression (Fig. 2D). Because this did not
successfully close the perforation (Fig. 2E), a coil was used to achieve successful closure (Fig. 2F), after obtaining the consent of family
members. The incidence of coronary perforation during PCI is low, but it has a relatively high mortality rate. The available data show that
the female gender, increasing age, treatment of a chronic total occlusion, angiographic evidence of calcification, and use of a cutting
balloon or rotational atherectomy are associated with increased risk of coronary perforation.3–14 In a randomly assigned case–control study
conducted between 2001 and 2008, Shimony and colleagues found that the strongest predictor of coronary perforation was treatment of a
chronic total occlusion.9 Gruberg et al. identified age and cardiac tamponade as predictors of mortality among patients with coronary
perforation.11 A classification scheme has been developed to help in the management of patients with perforation and to assist in delivery
of optimal care.10 Coronary perforation is divided into three classes based on angiographic appearance: I, extraluminal crater without
extravasation; II, pericardial or myocardial blushing; III, perforation ≥ 1 mm in diameter with contrast streaming and cavity spilling, i.e.
perforation into an anatomical cavity, chamber, or coronary sinus (Ellis type III CS). Managing coronary perforation during PCI requires an
accurate diagnosis of the type of perforation that has occurred. Adverse clinical outcomes (e.g. death or emergency surgical exploration)
are associated with angiographic classification of the perforation, and have been more frequently observed in patients who experienced a
class III coronary perforation.8–10,14 The management of coronary perforation often includes heparin reversal, discontinuation of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, platelet transfusion, pericardiocentesis, and emergency cardiac surgery. Additional treatment strategies
include prolonged balloon inflation, covered stents, injection of polyvinyl alcohol, coil embolisation, and intracoronary administration of
autologous blood.17–21 This patient had normal blood pressure, a steady heart rate and no manifestations of cardiac tamponade during the
three-hour procedure. Although balloon occlusion was used within an hour to apply pressure, rapid outward bleeding continued for more than
two hours. Ultrasound monitoring of the pericardial cavity was performed during the entire procedure, and overflow into the pericardial
fluid was not observed. Imaging showed that the contrast agent overflow visible at the base of the heart in the systolic phase (Fig. 2G)
dissipated quickly during diastole (Fig. 2H). Overall, the evidence indicated that this was an Ellis type III CS coronary perforation that
penetrated a ventricular cavity. Evidence for perforation of the right ventricle included the following reasons. First, overflow of contrast
agent occurred in both systole and diastole, which is consistent with the haemodynamic properties of the coronary artery and right
ventricle. If the left ventricle had been perforated, the contrast agent would have been much more evident in diastole than in systole.
Second, images from the left anterior oblique position showing the anatomy of the right ventricle support this interpretation (Fig. 3A).
Third, the velocity of the contrast agent overflow was similar to the right ventricular flow velocity, but much slower than the intra-aortic
flow velocity (Fig. 3A). (A) Images from the left anterior oblique position showing the anatomy of the right ventricle. The velocity of the
contrast agent overflow was similar to the velocity of the right ventricular flow but much slower than the intra-aortic velocity. (B) The
atypical V-shaped anatomical structure proximal to the perforation site. This patient was a 69-year-old woman. The hydrophilic coated guide
wire used for expansion and the V-shaped anatomical structure proximal to the perforation site may also have contributed to the perforation
(Fig. 3B). Others have found that LAD arteries and tortuous lesions were vulnerable to perforation, and that the guide wire was frequently
responsible for the perforation.8,14 Therefore special care should be exercised to avoid perforation when performing PCI in older females
with special anatomical structures. In the treatment of this patient, balloon compression was unsuccessful. Stent implantation was not
considered because the\ vessel lumen was too small. Although it was concluded that the ventricle had been penetrated, for safety reasons, we
carried out a block by coil embolisation. We did not use a gelatin sponge because of the risk of pulmonary embolism. The long- and short-
term safety and effectiveness of coil embolisation are good, but it might be not the best choice in all cases. If perforation does involve
the right ventricle, close monitoring without any treatment may be beneficial for the patient because of reduction in myocardial cell
necrosis. We did not use glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors during treatment, therefore the question of discontinuation did not arise. The
data show that the more patients who were given a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor required the placement of a covered stent or emergency
cardiac surgery than those who did not receive it (33.3 vs 3.2%). Clinical outcomes (tamponade, myocardial infarction, death) were similar
for patients who had and had not received a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor.8 Reversal of heparin was considered in our case but was not
adopted because of the risk of coronary thrombosis and the patient’s haemodynamic stability. Al-Lamee et al. recommend the use of protamine
‘as necessary’ in the setting of coronary perforation if heparin or glycoprotein inhibitors have been administered.22 Coronary artery
perforation is a rare but dreaded complication of PCI. Coronary perforation of the right ventricular cavity is less severe than perforation
at other sites. Although coil embolisation is a safe and effective alternative to balloon treatment of coronary artery perforation, it might
be not the best choice in the short and long term. If the perforation does break through into the right ventricle, we suggest close
monitoring rather than treatment, which may be beneficial for patients in that it reduces the risk of myocardial cell necrosis.
