Up to now, only limited data on long-term medical treatment in congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is available. Moreover, most of the drugs
used in CHI are therefore not approved. We aimed to assemble more objective information on medical treatment in CHI with regard to type and
duration, dosage as well as side effects. We searched MEDLINE (from 1947) and EMBASE (from 1988) using the OVID interface for relevant data
to evaluate medical treatment in a large cohort of patients with CHI from different clinical centers. Randomized, controlled trials were not
available. We evaluated case reports and case series. No language restrictions were made. A total number of 619 patients were medically
treated and information regarding conservative treatment was available. Drugs used were diazoxide (in 84 % of patients), somatostatin
analogues (16 %), calcium channel antagonists (4 %) and glucagon (1 %). Mean dose of diazoxide was 12.5 (±4.3) mg/kg ⋅ d (range 2–60 mg/kg ⋅
d), mean duration of diazoxide treatment until remission was 57 months. Side effects of diazoxide were usually not severe. The causal
relation between diazoxide and severe side effects, e.g. heart failure (3.7 %) remains doubtful. Mean dose of octreotide was 14.9 (±7.5)
μg/kg ⋅ d (range 2.3–50 μg/kg ⋅ d), of lanreotide 67.3 (±39.8) mg ⋅ month (range 10–120 mg ⋅ month). Mean duration of treatment with
somatostatin analogues until remission was 49 months. Frequent side effects included tachyphylaxis and mild gastrointestinal symptoms. The
risk of persistent growth deceleration was low (<5 %). Severe side effects are rare and a causal relation remains disputable. We conclude
that long-term conservative treatment of CHI is feasible. Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a heterogeneous disorder leading to increased,
often unregulated secretion of insulin from pancreatic beta cells. Clinical manifestation ranges from life-threatening hypoglycemia in
neonates to mildly symptomatic hypoglycemia in early childhood, adolescence or adulthood that might sometimes be difficult to identify . Up
to now, mutations in nine different genes have been identified. However, in almost 50 % of CHI-cases, the genetic mechanism is still
unknown, suggesting further disease-associated genes [2, 3]. CHI can be distinguished into a diffuse and focal type. Focal CHI is defined as
a focal adenomatous hyperplasia of beta cells within the pancreatic tissue, which can be identified by 18F-PET/CT and completely cured by
surgical removal of the focal lesion [4, 5]. In contrast, in diffuse CHI hyperplastic insulin-secreting beta cells are spread throughout the
whole pancreas. Sufficient reduction of hyperinsulinemia usually requires near total pancreatectomy, which in turn implicates the risk of
either persistent hypoglycemia or insulin-requiring diabetes [6, 7]. Therefore, long-term medical treatment was established during the last
decades for diffuse CHI. If CHI is promptly diagnosed and adequately treated most of the children develop a normal range of cognitive,
emotional and social skills. In these cases, clinical remission with termination of all drugs may occur after several years of intense
conservative treatment [8, 9]. Common conservative long-term treatment options include the potassium channel opener diazoxide (which is
almost ineffective in patients with defects of the KATP-channel), somatostatin analogues (octreotide, lanreotide) or calcium-channel
antagonists [6, 9–11]. Although these drugs are frequently used in patients with CHI, little is known about their dose, efficacy and safety.
Evidence-based guidelines to manage recurrent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia do not exist and therefore treatment strategies remain
controversial. Improved knowledge and optimization of conservative treatment is thus of major importance, especially in diffuse CHI, in
which surgical cure cannot easily be achieved . At present, treatment decisions are mostly based on expert opinions obtained from single-
center data. This review aims to provide more objective information collected from reports of more than 600 patients from different clinical
centers. Thereby, we provide an overview of long-term conservative treatment in CHI with regard to type and duration of treatment, dose and
frequency of severe as well as rare side effects that are often difficult to assess in small patient cohorts and single-center experiences.
We searched MEDLINE (from 1947) and EMBASE (from 1988) using the OVID interface for relevant data. Search terms were combined for the
disease, specific drugs and generic treatment options. Additional articles were found by cross-reading reference lists of retrieved
articles. Efforts were made to translate non-english articles, which allowed us to include all relevant German, Spanish, French, Portuguese,
Turkish, Danish, Polish, Chinese and Japanese articles. The latest article included for evaluation was published in June 2013. In total 113
articles, mainly case reports and case series were evaluated with specific regard to long-term conservative treatment. The reviewed
literature included a total of 1261 patients with CHI, of which 718 patients received long-term conservative treatment during their course
of disease. Long-term treatment was defined as minimum duration of 6 months. Reports were also included if treatment lasted for at least two
months at the time of publication but was described as being ongoing. For 50/718 patients a specific treatment regimen was not necessary or
not mentioned, another 49 patients were solely treated by frequent feedings and/or specific diets. Finally, 619 patients were medically
treated and information regarding conservative treatment was available. These patients are described separately. The medication most
commonly used to control hypoglycemia was diazoxide (84 %) followed by somatostatin analogues (16 %), calcium channel antagonists (4 %) and
glucagon (1 %) (Table 1). For evaluation of side effects, we included all patients that did not meet our definition of long-term treatment.
In order to obtain as much information as possible on very rare side effects, we furthermore discuss single patients that experienced such
side effects but were treated with one of the studied medications because of a disease other than CHI (e.g. octreotide in the treatment of
congenital chylothorax). These latter patients are clearly defined within the text and were not included in the analysis resulting in table
2 (Table 2).Table 1Characteristics of long-term conservative treatment in CHI: detailed description of different treatment regimen with
focus on dose, combination of different drugs and duration of treatment. Patients receiving a combined therapy are listed twiceDrugLong-term
treatedCombined therapyDoseCourse of treatmentDZXn total 521n previous surgery 16 (3 %)monotherapyn = 380 (73 %)combined therapyn = 141
(27 %)+ dieta n = 113 (79 %)+ STA n = 9 (6 %)+ CCA n = 2 (1 %)>2 combinations+ STA + dieta n = 15 (11 %)+ CCA + dieta n = 2 (1 %)n dose
given 278 (53 %)mean: 12.5 (±4.3) mg/kg • drange: 2–60 mg/kg • d 2–3 single doses p.o. • d n treatment ongoing 138 (26 %)duration given for
n = 113/138 (82 %)mean duration: 62 monthsn off medication 69 (13 %)duration given for n = 56/69 (81 %)mean duration: 57 monthsn switched to
other therapy 4 (1 %)partial pancreatectomy: 3/4 (75 %)STA: 1/4 (25 %)n not mentioned; no follow-up 309 (59 %)n dead 1 (0.2 %)STAn total
100OCT n = 79 (79 %)LRT n = 21 (21 %)n previous surgery 17 (17 %)monotherapyn = 54 (54 %)combined therapyn = 46 (46 %)+ dieta n = 16 (35 %)+
DZX n = 9 (20 %)+ CCA n = 4 (9 %)+ GLC n = 2 (4 %)>2 combinations+ DZX + dieta n = 15 (11 %)OCTn dose given 61 (77 %)mean: 14.9 (±7.5) μg/kg
• drange: 2.3–50 μg/kg • d continuously s.c. n = 28 (46 %) 3–6 injections s.c. • d n = 17 (28 %) not specified n = 16 (26 %) LRTn dose given
11 (52 %)mean: 67.3 (±39.8) mg • monthrange: 10–120 mg • month s.c. n = 8 (38 %) i.m. n = 13 (62 %) n treatment ongoing 39 (39 %)duration
given for n = 39/39 (100 %)mean duration: 35 monthsn off medication 22 (22 %)duration given for n = 6/22 (27 %)mean duration: 49 monthsn
switched to other therapy 10 (10 %)partial pancreatectomy: 3/10 (30 %)DZX: 3/10 (30 %)gastrostomy feeding: 2/10 (20 %)DZX + CCA: 1/10
(10 %)megestrol acetate: 1/10 (10 %)n not mentioned; no follow-up 29 (29 %)CCAn total 25NIF n = 19 (76 %)VPM ° n = 2 (8 %)AML n = 1 (4 %)not
specified n = 3 (12 %)n previous surgery 10 (40 %)monotherapyn = 15 (60 %)combined therapyn = 10 (40 %)+ dieta n = 2 (20 %)+ DZX n = 2
(20 %)+ STA n = 4 (40 %)>2 combinations+ DZX + dieta n = 2 (20 %)NIFn dose given 18 (95 %)mean: 0.72 (±0.36) mg/kg • drange: 0.1–2 mg/kg •
dVPMn dose given 2 (100 %)dose: 240 mg • dAMLn dose given 1 (100 %)dose: 0.1 mg/kg • d 2–4 single doses p.o. • d n treatment ongoing 16
(64 %)duration given for n = 16/16 (100 %)mean duration: 25 monthsn not mentioned; no follow-up 9 (36 %)GLCn total 7n previous surgery 6
(86 %)monotherapyn = 2 (29 %)combined therapyn = 5 (71 %)+ dieta n = 3 (60 %)+ STA n = 2 (40 %)n dose given 7 (100 %)given as mg/kg • d:
n = 5 (71 %)mean: 0.186 (±0.14) mg/kg • drange: 0.03–0.2 mg/kg • d continuously s.c. given as mg • d: n = 2 (29 %)mean: 3.2 mg • d s.c. or
i.m. n treatment ongoing 1 (14 %)duration given for n = 1/1 (100 %)mean duration: 12 monthsn off medication 3 (43 %)duration given for
n = 3/3 (100 %)mean duration: 43 monthsn switched to other therapy 2 (29 %)re-pancreatectomy: 1/2 (50 %)diet : 1/2 (50 %)n dead 1 (14 %) a
Diet frequent feeding, glucose enriched meals (dextrin, tapioca starch, ricepap), gastrostomy feeding, °VPM two patients with adult-onset
nesidioblastosis DZX diazoxide, STA somatostatin analogue, CCA calcium channel antagonists, GLC glucagon, OCT octreotide, LRT lanreotide
(long-acting release octreotide), NIF nifedipine, VPM verapamil, AML amlodipineTable 2Side effects in medically treated patients with CHI:
overview of side effects that occurred while on therapy with one or more of the analyzed medication. Side effects were linked to the
corresponding dose that was applied. Note double entries of patients that experienced more than one side effectDrugn treatedSide
effectsFrequencyDose (n dose given)DZXmg/kg • dDZX treated n = 644hypertrichosisn = 170 (52 %)11.6 (±2.9), range 5–30 (n = 132)side effects
mentioned n = 325 (50 %)fluid retention/electrolyte imbalances/edeman = 99 (30 %)12.3 (±2.8), range 8.5–17.5 (n = 48)vomiting/poor
appetiten = 40 (12 %)13.3 (±8.2), range 10–60 (n = 39)bone marrow suppressionn = 11 (3 %)10.4 (±0.46), range 10–10.8 (n = 4)heart
failuren = 12 (3.7 %)16 (±6.7), range 7.5–30 (n = 7)anaphylactic reactionn = 3 (0.9 %)8.5 (n = 1)renal failuren = 2 (0.6 %)60
(n = 1)sinustachycardian = 1 (0.3 %)up to 15 (n = 1)no (major) side effects (specifically mentioned) n = 39 (12 %)13.2 (±2.4), range 5–15
(n = 34)STAμg/kg • d or otherwise specifiedSTA treated n = 355tachyphylaxisn = 20 (18 %)19.5 (±7.3), range 7.1–26.3 (n = 18)side effects
mentioned n = 111 (31 %)GI-symptoms*n = 23 (21 %)17.5 (±9.5), range 6.6–27.4 (n = 20)(transient) impairment in growth velocityn = 15
(14 %)17.8 (±13.5), range 7.2–55 (n = 14)abnormal GH, IGF, IGF-BP (no growth impairment) n = 4 (3.6 %)25.8 (±0.72), range 25–26.3
(n = 3)necrotizing enterocolitisn = 8 (7 %)21.5 (±4.7), range 15–27 (n = 6)induration nodules/hematoma at injection siten = 5 (4.5 %)120 mg
• month (n = 2)decline in weightn = 3 (2.7 %)25 (n = 1)asymptomatic gallstonesn = 3 (2.7 %)33.9 (±24.8), range 6.6–55 (n = 3)cholestatic
jaundicen = 1 (0.9 %)40 (n = 1)elevated liver enzymesn = 3 (2.7 %)16.8 (±11.4), range 10–30 (n = 3)anaphylactic reactionn = 1 (0.9 %)not
specifiednormal growth velocity (specifically mentioned) n = 52 (47 %)19 (±8.7), range 8–55 (n = 32) 100 (±15.5) mg • month, range 90–120
(n = 6)GLCmg/kg • d or otherwise specifiedGLC treated n = 15catheter obstructionn = 9 (60 %)0.33 (±0.23), range 0.026–0.8 (n = 9)side
effects mentioned n = 15 (100 %)erythema necrolyticum migransn = 4 (27 %)0.3 (±0.12), range 0.22–0.46 (n = 4)insulin autoantibodiesn = 2
(13 %)0.2 (n = 1), 1.4 mg • d (n = 1)subcutaneous infiltratesn = 1 (7 %)5 mg • d (n = 1)no side effects (specifically mentioned) n = 1
(7 %)0.21 (n = 1)*GI-symptoms: gastrointestinal symptoms, include abdominal discomfort, fatty stock, diarrhea, unwillingness to eat;
°hematoma was notified three times out of 70 i.m. injections in a total of ten patients treated with lanreotide DZX diazoxide, STA
somatostatin analogue, GLC glucagon, GH growth hormone, IGF insulin-like growth factor, IGF-BP insulin-like growth factor binding protein
Characteristics of long-term conservative treatment in CHI: detailed description of different treatment regimen with focus on dose,
combination of different drugs and duration of treatment. Patients receiving a combined therapy are listed twice a Diet frequent feeding,
glucose enriched meals (dextrin, tapioca starch, ricepap), gastrostomy feeding, °VPM two patients with adult-onset nesidioblastosis DZX
diazoxide, STA somatostatin analogue, CCA calcium channel antagonists, GLC glucagon, OCT octreotide, LRT lanreotide (long-acting release
octreotide), NIF nifedipine, VPM verapamil, AML amlodipine Side effects in medically treated patients with CHI: overview of side effects
that occurred while on therapy with one or more of the analyzed medication. Side effects were linked to the corresponding dose that was
applied. Note double entries of patients that experienced more than one side effect *GI-symptoms: gastrointestinal symptoms, include
abdominal discomfort, fatty stock, diarrhea, unwillingness to eat; °hematoma was notified three times out of 70 i.m. injections in a total
of ten patients treated with lanreotide DZX diazoxide, STA somatostatin analogue, GLC glucagon, GH growth hormone, IGF insulin-like growth
factor, IGF-BP insulin-like growth factor binding protein In 49 patients a “sufficient control” of hypoglycemia was achieved with
nutritional treatment. Importantly, the definition of “sufficient control” might vary greatly among the different hyperinsulinism centers
further stressing the necessity of establishing a standardized fasting tolerance test to better compare the response to dietary or medical
treatment in between the different clinical centers. Almost half of these patients (49 %) were fed frequently with glucose-enriched meals.
Another eight patients (16 %) additionally required raw cornstarch and also glucocorticoids for a sufficient control of hypoglycemia .
Seventeen patients (35 %) were treated with a leucine-restricted diet, of which all except two patients suffered from the Hyperinsulinism-
Hyperammonemia Syndrome (HI/HA) caused by a mutation of the GLUD1 gene. The other two patients treated with a leucine-restricted diet were
subsequently diagnosed as carrying a dominantly inherited SUR1 mutation. Both of them developed mental retardation due to recurrent seizures
. The purpose of this study was to assemble information on medical treatment of CHI with specific regard to type and duration of treatment,
dose, as well as side effects. Since we collected as much information as available, including case reports in various languages from
different clinical centers worldwide, the strength of the evidence has to be critically assessed. Our results are biased by the fact that
publication practices tend to favor positive treatment responses and that very rare or severe side effects are more likely to be published.
However, we believe that with a more rigorous approach with regard to the quality of data, a lot of important information would have been
lost. The lack of objective information on long-term medical treatment in CHI, in particular with respect to the heterogeneity of the
condition itself is a general dilemma for the treatment of patients with CHI and appropriate counseling of their parents. We are therefore
convinced that the careful recapitulation of what has been reported for a large cohort of patients might help to improve the knowledge and
decisions on long-term treatment of CHI even with respect to the weakness that published data are biased and the lack of a more critical
approach to the evaluation of the reports. Diazoxide is a KATP-channel opener and the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for long-term treatment of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. However, many patients are diazoxide resistant due to mutations in the two
genes encoding the KATP-channel of the pancreatic beta cell (ABCC8/KCNJ11) In total 521 patients were treated long-term with diazoxide,
either alone (73 %) or in combination with other drugs or frequent feeds/specific diets (27 %). For evaluation of side effects we included
reports on short-term use of diazoxide, thus evaluating a total number of 644 cases of diazoxide application. The most frequent side effect
was a mild to severe hypertrichosis, which is thought to appear dose dependent in every patient. Of note, minoxidil, another potassium
channel opener has been used as hair-regrowing treatment for more than 20 years . In the evaluated patients hypertrichosis was reported in
only 52 % of children and seemed to be dose-independent, e.g. it occurred in a patient treated with a dose as low as 6 mg/kg ⋅ d but it was
not present in several children treated with a dose of 15 mg/kg ⋅ d . However, this may be due to underreporting, as hypertrichosis is often
considered to be of minor clinical importance. In contrast, for treated patients hypertrichosis might imply stigmatization, leading to
psychological distress and ultimately withdrawal of diazoxide, which was reported for two patients [12, 18]. Theoretically, topical KATP-
channel blocker, such as tolbutamide may be able to reduce hair growth, but is has not yet been evaluated systematically for this indication
. Less frequently, fluid retention and electrolyte imbalances were described without further specification (30 %). Diazoxide is a
benzothiadiazine derivate and decreases renal sodium-, chloride- as well as bicarbonate excretion without affecting potassium excretion
leading to an expansion of extracellular fluid volume . This appears to be opposite to other benozothiadiazines, which can antagonize water
and sodium retention during diazoxide treatment . Therefore, diazoxide is often combined with hydrochlorothiazide (HCT). Given the low rate
of fluid imbalances with diazoxide, a combined treatment is not always necessary. However, under certain conditions it seems reasonable to
start with a low dose of diazoxide and to gradually increase the dose over the first few days of treatment, e.g. in newborns with a high
glucose infusion rate (fluid overload) and/or cardiac risk factors. Alternatively, if one whishes to start with a higher dose of diazoxide,
a combined treatment with diazoxide and HCT can be considered even though signs of fluid retention are not yet present. The latter approach
allows a more rapid transition to alternative treatment in case of diazoxide unresponsiveness. Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, such as poor
appetite, nausea and vomiting occurred in 12 % of patients. Though not generally being severe, these can complicate treatment in CHI
especially if additional dietary treatment is needed. Severe side effects of diazoxide, i.e. heart failure (3.7 %), renal failure and
petechiae (0.6 %) or anaphylactic reactions (0.9 %) and laboratory parameters of bone marrow suppression (4 %) were rarely seen. In many of
these cases, a causal relation between diazoxide and these side effects might be disputable. Cardiotoxicity of diazoxide has been questioned
by various authors. Cardiomyopathy in CHI resembles cardiomyopathy seen in children of diabetic mothers, suggesting hyperinsulinemia and not
diazoxide treatment as the underlying cause [23, 24]. However, the temporal relation between cessation of diazoxide treatment and resolution
of cardiac abnormalities despite persistent hyperinsulinemia as described for some patients suggests a causative role of diazoxide . Cardiac
failure might be indirectly caused by diazoxide through water and salt retention and thus fluid overload or directly by inducing an increase
in pulmonary blood flow resulting in an increased right ventricular work as shown in patients with primary pulmonary hypertension . Finally,
in cardiomycoytes Kir6.2 is integral in the make-up of myocellular KATP-channels and KATP-channel malfunction has been implicated in the
development and progression of heart disease [24, 28]. Taken together, heart failure could ultimately result from 1) hyperinsulinemia
itself, 2) diazoxide treatment, most probably as a secondary complication due to fluid overload or due to a direct hemodynamic effect on
pulmonary blood flow or 3) an underlying KATP-channel mutation. Two patients developed renal failure under treatment with diazoxide (<1 %).
Both suffered from oliguria with elevated urea- or creatinin-levels and additionally developed petechiae, either generalized or as quick
transient petechial rash on the back of the feet while coagulation profile and/or platelet count was normal [29, 30]. These both patients
had additional problems, i.e. fluid retention and cardiac decompensation or infection. Therefore it seems more likely that renal failure was
indirectly caused rather than being due to nephrotoxicity of diazoxide. Anaphylactic reactions were described for three patients (<1 %),
requiring reduction of diazoxide dose from 600 mg ⋅ d to 350 mg ⋅ d in an adult patient with adult-onset nesidioblastosis with facial
flushing, edema and a slight decrease in blood pressure from 140/78 mmHg to 120/70 mmHg or cessation of diazoxide treatment in two patients
with recurrent rash or severe anaphylactic reaction (not further specified), respectively . Bone marrow suppression (leucopenia, isolated
neutropenia or thrombocytopenia) occurred in 11 patients (3 %) with CHI and in two further patients of which one additionally suffered from
pulmonary hypertension and heart failure, whereas in the other hyperinsulinism was due to Münchausen syndrome by proxy [33, 34]. In these
two patients neutropenia resolved when diazoxide was ceased. In another two patients diazoxide treatment was ceased due to neutropenia [12,
35], in the others outcome was not mentioned. Severe infection was not mentioned for any patient with leucopenia suggesting that this was
not the case. In summary, diazoxide is still the first line drug in the treatment of hyperinsulinism. It is easy to apply and generally well
tolerated. Common side effects are usually not severe. A causal relation between diazoxide and severe side effects remains doubtful as there
are only very few cases reported and detailed information on the course of treatment is limited. The hypothalamic release-inhibiting hormone
somatostatin is a cyclic polypeptide that is found throughout the nervous and gastrointestinal system. It binds to specific membrane
receptors called somatostatin receptors (SSTR1-SSTR5) . In the pancreas, somatostatin has inhibitory effects on the release of glucagon and
insulin from the pancreatic islet cells and suppresses the incretin glucagon-like-peptide 1 (GLP-1) . Other actions include inhibition of
gastrointestinal motility, gallbladder contractility and splanchnic blood flow . Early somatostatin infusion tests in infants and children
with hyperinsulinism confirmed its efficacy in CHI [39, 40]. However, clinical use of somatostatin was restricted due to its half-life of
less than three minutes . Therefore, various synthetic analogues of somatostatin were tested for its efficacy in CHI . Octreotide and
lanreotide have a prolonged half-life of 90 minutes (octreotide) and 23–30 days (lanreotide), respectively, when administered by
subcutaneous (s.c.) or intramuscular (i.m., lanreotide) injections (FDA). Though not officially approved for this indication it is now
common to use somatostatin analogues in the treatment of hyperinsulinism (off-label use). The use of lanreotide as an alternative to
octreotide pump treatment is relatively new but has already been proven successful in children with CHI [42, 43]. Recently, a new
somatostatin analogue preferably binding to SSTR5 (pasireotide), was granted marketing for treatment of cushing’s disease . In future,
pasireotide could also be of use in the treatment of CHI. In total, 100 patients were treated long-term with octreotide (79 %) or lanreotide
(21 %), either alone (54 %) or in combination with other drugs or frequent feeds/specific diets (46 %). For evaluation of side effects we
again included reports on short-term use of somatostatin analogues (in total 355 cases). An important aspect of somatostatin analogues in
the treatment of CHI is the loss of effect during prolonged treatment (tachyphylaxis), which usually occurs within the first days or weeks
of treatment. Tachyphylaxis occurred in a total number of 20 patients with CHI (18 %). Interestingly, tachyphylaxis is generally not
observed in patients treated with octreotide for acromegaly. Several authors propose tachyphylaxis to be caused by gastrointestinal
adaption, e.g. through tissue-specific desensitization or down-regulation of somatostatin receptors while SSTR expressed in pituitary
tumours might have a different turn-over rate and thus escape local adaption . Most adverse effects such as abdominal pain or stool
abnormalities were mild and resolved spontaneously within a few weeks under ongoing treatment. Further gastrointestinal side effects include
gallstones and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), which can be partially explained by the action profile of natural somatostatins. Of the
evaluated patients only four of them were reported to have gallstones (3.6 %) [42, 43, 45, 46], of which three were asymptomatic and
octreotide/lanreotide treatment was continued in combination with ursodeoxycholic acid. However, the incidence of asymptomatic gallstones
might be higher. In acromegaly, up to 20–30 % of patients treated with octreotide develop gallstones consistent with a recent report of 28
patients with CHI on octreotide treatment in which gallbladder pathology was detected in 32 % of children . Since the recognition or
prevention of asymptomatic gallstones might help to prevent complications, routine ultrasound once a year or prophylactic treatment with
ursodeoxycholic acid during treatment with somatostatin analogues seems feasible. In three patients liver enzymes increased while on
treatment with octreotide, which returned to normal levels in all when treatment was ceased . Interestingly, in two of these, octreotide-
induced hepatitis was associated with either a high dose (up to 40 μg/kg ⋅ d) or with a gradual increase in dose from 5 to 10 μg/kg ⋅ d.
This finding stresses the importance of dose in the development of octreotide-induced hepatitis and warrants routine examination of liver
function tests particularly when high doses are given or when dosing is increased . The most severe side effect that is discussed to be
associated with somatostatin analogues is NEC. A causal relation between octreotide and NEC is not yet proven, although the substantial
reduction in splanchnic blood flow induced by octreotide suggests a causative role . Four of eight children that developed NEC while on
treatment with octreotide clearly had other risk factors for NEC: severe cardiomyopathy (n = 1) , congestive heart failure due to excessive
fluid overload (n = 2) [52, 53], and a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) (n = 1) . Remarkably, in one of these patients the condition quickly
improved upon adequate treatment even though octreotide was increased two-fold . Severity of NEC ranged from bloody stools to death (n = 2).
Another patient additionally received nifedipine and metoclopramide, which could as well have contributed to the development of bowel
gangrene . Of the remaining three patients, two had no additional extrinsic risk factors and for one patient detailed clinical history was
not provided . Six of the patients that developed NEC were full-term neonates, for two patients gestational age was not given. All children
received octreotide within the first month of life, for one child age was not given. The occurrence of NEC may be associated with the
applied dose, as a dose-dependent reduction in splanchnic blood flow was shown in rats . All children that developed NEC received a dose
≥15 μg/kg ⋅ d and the mean dose of 21.5(±4.7) μg/kg ⋅ d was remarkably higher than the mean dose in patients without NEC (14.9 μg/kg ⋅ d).
An additional three neonates with NEC were treated with octreotide for other indications. One of these patients was born premature and had a
PDA , the other two both have had extensive cardiac surgery previous to the development of NEC with documented distal aortic ischemia in one
patient [50, 56]. An adult patient treated with octreotide for another indication already had pre-existing gastrointestinal symptoms with
abdominal distension and steatorrhoea, which worsened under treatment with octreotide. Taken together, in most of the cases reported
octreotide is merely a risk factor among others. However, all children received octreotide within the first months of life, all of them
developed NEC within the first days or weeks of treatment and all except one were treated with a dose ≥15 μg/kg ⋅ d. Since somatostatin
inhibits growth hormone secretion, treatment with somatostatin analogues might compromise growth velocity. Mild growth deceleration was
observed in 15 patients (13.5 %) [42, 45, 57–60]. Of these, eight patients caught up after treatment was discontinued, dose decreased or
even under ongoing treatment. In these patients, height normalized appropriate for parental target height. Only five patients (4.5 %)
continued to grow below their target range [45, 57, 59, 60]. In one patient outcome was not specified, another patient was still on
treatment but height remained only 0.6 SD below the expected height. For 52 patients (47 %) it was particularly mentioned that they grew
normal while on long-term treatment with somatostatin analogues. In summary, the risk of persistent growth deceleration and inappropriate
target height is very low. Nevertheless, growth should be closely monitored in all patients during and after somatostatin analogue
treatment. Calcium channel antagonists such as nifedipine or amlodipine are approved for treatment of hypertension and angina pectoris.
Their use in treatment of CHI is relatively new. They inhibit the transmembrane influx of calcium ions into the pancreatic beta cells, known
to be an essential trigger for insulin secretion . However, most hyperinsulinism centers do not consider these drugs as indicated because of
the lack of effectiveness. Therefore, in the treatment of CHI, calcium channel antagonists are merely used as a third-line drug, e.g. as an
add-on treatment, in partial diazoxide/octreotide resistance, and/or following partial pancreatectomy [16, 61, 62]. In fact, 40 % of the
evaluated patients had partial to sub-total pancreatectomy previous to treatment with calcium channel antagonist, compared to 3 % and 17 %
of patients treated with diazoxide and somatostatin analogues, respectively. Possible side effects include hypotension, peripheral edema,
headache, flushing, dizziness and nausea (FDA). In CHI, calcium channel antagonists were well tolerated, which might be related to the
relatively low dose: mean dose was 0.72 (±0.36) mg/kg ⋅ d (range 0.1-2 mg/kg ⋅ d) in patients treated with nifedipine and 0.1 mg/kg ⋅ d in
two patients treated with amlodipine, respectively, which is in the lower range of the recommended dose for the treatment of hypertension in
pediatric patients (nifedipine: 0.25-3 mg/kg ⋅ d; amlodipine: 0.05-0.5 mg/kg ⋅ d) . In summary, while calcium channel antagonists are safe
in the treatment of hyperinsulinism, these agents do not seem to sufficiently restore normoglycemia and are therefore in our opinion not
indicated as first line drugs in the treatment of CHI. Glucagon is a polypeptide hormone physiologically secreted by alpha cells of the
pancreatic islets to promote hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and thus directly increases blood glucose levels . Initially,
intravenous glucagon infusion is often used in CHI for several days or weeks to stabilize blood glucose levels, however, its long-term use
is limited due to its short half-life and the need for parenteral administration. Only 7 patients were treated long-term with glucagon,
either continuously s.c. or by frequent injections s.c. or i.m . Importantly, in all but one patient glucagon was used in combination with
other drugs or following subtotal pancreatectomy. Continuous s.c. glucagon infusion is frequently complicated by catheter obstructions
occurring daily or 2–3 times per week . A stabilized formulation of glucagon was successfully administered in three children until surgery
could be performed resulting in less problems regarding catheter blockage . Two of these patients and two additional patients reported by
Wald et al. developed erythema necrolyticum migrans [65, 69]. This might be explained by an increased bioavailability of the stabilized
formulation of glucagon and by the relatively high dose (up to 0.22 mg/kg ⋅ d intravenous (i.v.) and 0.26 mg/kg ⋅ d s.c.) administered in
the two patients reported by Wald et al., respectively. In these four patients glucagon was administered s.c. over periods of up to
3.5 months (n = 3) or i.v. as short-term management of hypoglycemia (n = 1). In all patients lesions resolved without scarring. Less severe
side effects included subcutaneous infiltrates at the site of injection (n = 1) and the development of insulin autoantibodies (n = 2),
possibly due to the amount of insulin in the glucagon preparation (up to 0.02 %) [64, 68]. In summary, glucagon is very helpful for the
treatment of hypoglycemia within the first weeks of life and it might be beneficial following pancreatectomy and as an add-on treatment,
particularly in combination with a somatostatin analogue to replace the octreotide/lanreotide-induced suppression of endogenous glucagon
secretion. However, long-term treatment is still limited by the lack of a suitable preparation for continuous s.c. infusion. Although there
is a broad spectrum of drugs available for children with CHI, a considerable number of patients do not show sufficient response to existing
medical treatment. Therefore, efforts are made to provide these patients with alternative drugs. Recently, exendin-(9–39) a specific GLP-1
receptor antagonist was shown to elevate fasting blood glucose levels in nine individuals with KATP-CHI . Furthermore, the mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTor) inhibitor sirolimus has recently been proven successful in four infants with severe hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
unresponsive to diazoxide . Another promising approach is the development of new somatostatin analogues, such as pasireotide, with modified
binding profiles and thus possibly a stronger inhibitory effect on insulin secretion . Despite increasing knowledge on etiology, data
available on long-term conservative treatment of CHI are still poor. There exists an urgent need for prospective studies or registers to
better evaluate safety and efficacy of drug treatment in CHI. This work serves as a basis to reconsider treatment strategies and provides
information especially on a rough frequency and impact of rare side effects of drugs given to patients with CHI. Recommendations based on
our analysis:Diazoxideit is important to screen for signs of fluid retention; to monitor blood gases, sodium, chloride, bicarbonate and
potassium level, in particular within the first weeks of treatment and when glucose infusion rate is high; when indicated
hydrochlorothiazide should be added.in neonates cardiac monitoring (echocardiography) should be performed.Somatostatin analoguessomatostatin
analogues should be avoided in neonates, particularly if additional risk factors for NEC are present; if not possible, an initial dose
should not be higher than 15 μg/kg ⋅ d and excessive fluid overload must be prevented, as this may trigger the risk of NEC; treatment must
immediately be stopped once any sign of NEC is present.routine abdominal ultrasound should be performed prior to and every 12 months after
initiation of treatment; if gallstones are present ursodeoxycholic acid should be added.growth curves must be monitored; dose should only be
decreased if marked growth deceleration becomes evident, as in most of the children the decrease in growth velocity is transient.liver
function must be monitored, particularly if using a high dose or when dosing is increased.lanreotide should not be used in neonates as
severe side effects might require immediate discontinuation of treatment. Diazoxideit is important to screen for signs of fluid retention;
to monitor blood gases, sodium, chloride, bicarbonate and potassium level, in particular within the first weeks of treatment and when
glucose infusion rate is high; when indicated hydrochlorothiazide should be added.in neonates cardiac monitoring (echocardiography) should
be performed. it is important to screen for signs of fluid retention; to monitor blood gases, sodium, chloride, bicarbonate and potassium
level, in particular within the first weeks of treatment and when glucose infusion rate is high; when indicated hydrochlorothiazide should
be added. in neonates cardiac monitoring (echocardiography) should be performed. Somatostatin analoguessomatostatin analogues should be
avoided in neonates, particularly if additional risk factors for NEC are present; if not possible, an initial dose should not be higher than
15 μg/kg ⋅ d and excessive fluid overload must be prevented, as this may trigger the risk of NEC; treatment must immediately be stopped once
any sign of NEC is present.routine abdominal ultrasound should be performed prior to and every 12 months after initiation of treatment; if
gallstones are present ursodeoxycholic acid should be added.growth curves must be monitored; dose should only be decreased if marked growth
deceleration becomes evident, as in most of the children the decrease in growth velocity is transient.liver function must be monitored,
particularly if using a high dose or when dosing is increased.lanreotide should not be used in neonates as severe side effects might require
immediate discontinuation of treatment. somatostatin analogues should be avoided in neonates, particularly if additional risk factors for
NEC are present; if not possible, an initial dose should not be higher than 15 μg/kg ⋅ d and excessive fluid overload must be prevented, as
this may trigger the risk of NEC; treatment must immediately be stopped once any sign of NEC is present. routine abdominal ultrasound should
be performed prior to and every 12 months after initiation of treatment; if gallstones are present ursodeoxycholic acid should be added.
growth curves must be monitored; dose should only be decreased if marked growth deceleration becomes evident, as in most of the children the
decrease in growth velocity is transient. liver function must be monitored, particularly if using a high dose or when dosing is increased.
lanreotide should not be used in neonates as severe side effects might require immediate discontinuation of treatment. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AW, CL, SK, BS and JM contributed to the acquisition of
data. AW analyzed and interpreted the data with input from CL, SK, JM and BS. CL, SK, TM and EM contributed to the conception and design of
the study and made substantial contributions to the interpretation of data. AW, SK and TM wrote the manuscript with intellectual input from
JM, BS and EM. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This research did not receive any specific grant from any funding agency
in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sector.
