We developed a protocol to procure lungs from uncontrolled donors after circulatory determination of death (NCT02061462). Subjects with
cardiovascular collapse, treated on scene by a resuscitation team and transferred to the emergency room, are considered potential donors
once declared dead. Exclusion criteria include unwitnessed collapse, no‐flow period of >15 min and low flow >60 min. After death, lung
preservation with recruitment maneuvers, continuous positive airway pressure, and protective mechanical ventilation is applied to the donor.
After procurement, ex vivo lung perfusion (EVLP) is performed. From November 2014, 10 subjects were considered potential donors; one of
these underwent the full process of procurement, EVLP, and transplantation. The donor was a 46‐year‐old male who died because of thoracic
aortic dissection. Lungs were procured 4 h and 48 min after death, and deemed suitable for transplantation after EVLP. Lungs were then
offered to a rapidly deteriorating recipient with cystic fibrosis (lung allocation score 46) who consented to the transplant in this
experimental setting. Six months after transplantation, the recipient is in good condition (forced expiratory volume in 1 s 85%) with no
signs of rejection. This protocol allowed procurement of lungs from an uncontrolled donor after circulatory determination of death following
an extended period of warm ischemia. The authors describe the feasibility of a novel, in situ lung preservation strategy developed to
procure lungs from uncontrolled donors after circulatory determination of death. See the editorial from Egan on page 1051. Valenza F ,
Citerio G , Palleschi A , Vargiolu A , Safaee Fakhr B , Confalonieri A , Nosotti M , Gatti S , Ravasi S , Vesconi S , Pesenti A , Blasi F ,
Santambrogio L & Gattinoni L . >Successful Transplantation of Lungs From an Uncontrolled Donor After Circulatory Death Preserved In Situ by
Alveolar Recruitment Maneuvers and Assessed by Ex Vivo Lung Perfusion. Am J Transplant 2016; 16: 1312–1318 26603283 continuous positive
airway pressure cardiopulmonary resuscitation circulatory determination of death ex vivo lung perfusion positive end‐expiratory pressure
uncontrolled DCDD As a measure to increase the number of organs available for transplantation, many countries worldwide have adopted organ
procurement from donors after circulatory death 1, 2, 3. The majority of organs so far have been procured from controlled donors, according
to the Maastricht definition 4, 5, mainly in Belgium, The Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States. However,
despite being an indisputable source of organs, as emphasized by the World Health Organization 6, this procedure has been considered with
caution. Indeed, the possibility that a number of potential donors after brain death (DBD) turn into donors after circulatory determination
of death (DCDD) within the controlled category of donors has caused skepticism 7. If true, this would eventually lead to a lesser number of
organs procured, since the numbers of organs procured from DCDD are significantly lower than those procured from DBD 8. Conversely, recovery
of organs from uncontrolled DCDD (uDCDD) would increase the pool of organs available for transplantation 9. However, donation from this
category adds logistical, ethical, and legal complexity to the donation process in many countries 10. In fact, far fewer organs have been
recovered from uncontrolled donors, mainly in France and Spain 11. Preclinical data show that lungs have the potential to better tolerate
warm ischemia relative to other solid organs 12, 13, 14, 15. This could make the uDCDD process safer in the lungs compared to other solid
organs. However, although deceased donors are considered a valuable strategy to procure lungs 16, there are few reports on lung donation
from uDCDD 17, 18, 19. We are currently investigating the safety/efficacy of a clinical protocol designed to procure lungs from uncontrolled
donors after determination of death with circulatory criteria. In this report, we present the first case recruited, and discuss some
peculiarities of our protocol. The trial was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda and of the San Gerardo
Hospital (NCT02061462). Subjects with cardiovascular collapse, treated by an advanced life support crew on scene first, then transferred to
the emergency room (San Gerardo Hospital, Monza), are considered to be potential donors if declared dead after advanced cardiac life support
attempts failed. Unwitnessed collapse, no‐flow period of >15 min, or low flow >60 min are among exclusion criteria. After clinical diagnosis
of death (5 min of no touch), a recruitment maneuver (RM) is performed (RM: positive end‐expiratory pressure, PEEP 5; inspiratory/expiratory
ratio 1:1; respiratory rate, RR 10/min; Pressure controlled + 25 ×2, PC + 30 ×2, PC + 35 ×4) and continuous positive end‐expiratory pressure
(CPAP 10 cmH2O, 100% FiO2) is applied until death is confirmed according to circulatory criteria (20 min of flat electrocardiogram in our
country). After next of kin consent to donation is obtained, heparin is given (10 000 U endovenous push, followed by 3 min of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, CPR), a new RM is performed and ventilation is started (respiratory rate 4/min, tidal volume 6 mL/kg, PEEP 8
cmH2O, fraction of inspired oxygen 100%, I/E ratio 1:1). If chest radiograph is negative, the subject is transferred to the operating room.
If bronchoscope evaluation is negative, lungs are perfused in situ with a fibrinolytic agent (15 mg recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
), flushed with preservation solution (Perfadex® [XVIVO Perfusion AB, Göteborg, Sweden], 60 mL/kg antegrade, 250 ×4 mL retrograde) and cold
stored on ice. Once transferred to the Fondazione Ca’ Granda (25 km away from Monza), lung function is evaluated after ex vivo lung
perfusion (EVLP), run with a low‐flow, open atrium and low hematocrit technique, as previously described 20. An overview of the protocol
flow is shown in Figure 1. Lung‐ DCDD protocol flow. DCDD, circulatory determination of death. A pilot phase of potential donor's
recruitment active from 8 am to 4 pm, 7 days a week started on May 12, 2014. Recruitment was interrupted for logistical reasons during the
summer (from August 1, 2014 to September 15). During this first period, five subjects aged <65 years were treated because of
cardiocirculatory arrest and transferred to the emergency room of the San Gerardo Hospital. However, all of them arrived beyond recruitment
time and were not considered potential lung donors. On November 1, 2014 recruitment was activated on a 24‐h‐a‐day, 7‐days‐a‐week basis.
Since then, the potential donor recruitment system has been activated for 10 subjects. Details are shown in Table 1. Potential lung donors
CCA, cardiocirculatory arrest; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; BLS, basic life support; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; VF,
ventricular fibrillation; ALS, advanced life support; ER, emergency room; Smoking, active smoking of >20 cigarettes/day or history of >20
packs/year; LMA, laryngeal mask airway. Subject number 1 in Table 1 was the only one with lungs procured that had EVLP. These lungs were
transplanted. He was a 46‐year‐old male who had thoracic pain and, soon after arrival of the emergency team, collapsed. CPR was started
immediately (0 min no flow); a first return of spontaneous circulation revealed ST‐elevated myocardial infarction, but pulseless electrical
activity developed soon after. The subject was transferred to the emergency room while automated chest compression (LUCAS™, Jolife
AB/Physio‐Control, Lund, Sweden) was ongoing. After the diagnosis of aortic dissection, the possibility of receiving extracorporeal life
support (VA‐ECMO) was excluded and the medical team decided to withdraw further treatment. The subject was declared dead after a total
low‐flow time of 45 min. Recruitment maneuvers and CPAP were applied and death was confirmed. Chest radiograph showed reduced lung volumes
and a wide mediastinum consistent with the diagnosis of dissection (Figure 2). Consent for donation was obtained 2 h after death. At that
time, heparin was given and ventilation started. The donor was then transferred to the operating room where lungs were procured (4 h and
48 min after death) and cold stored on ice. Upon arrival to the Fondazione Ca’ Granda, EVLP was run for a total of 6 h, after which lungs
were deemed suitable for transplantation (Table 2) and cooled down. Time flow of the donation process is shown in Table 3. Lungs were
offered to a rapidly deteriorating recipient with cystic fibrosis (LAS 46) who had been hospitalized for 4 months. The patient was on
noninvasive ventilation 24 h a day and consented to the transplant in this experimental setting. Surgery was complicated by cardiogenic
shock and need of VA‐ECMO support with massive bleeding. Intensive care unit stay (19 days) was initially characterized by
distributive‐hypovolemic shock. Primary graft dysfunction at 72 h was grade 2; lung function was proper throughout the following days.
Weaning from mechanical ventilation was difficult because of muscle fatigue due to preoperative deconditioning. Hospital length of stay was
39 days. Six months after transplantation, the recipient is at home, in good condition (forced expiratory volume in 1 s 85%). Three‐ and
6‐month surveillance lung biopsy were both negative. Chest radiograph of the donor. Functional data during ex vivo lung perfusion (EVLP)
EVLP was run as previously described 20. Briefly, during the first 40 min of the procedure blood flow was gradually increased up to a target
perfusate flow of 40% of the estimated cardiac output, and temperature of the perfusate gradually increased from 25°C to a left atrium
target temperature of 37°C. Once the lung outflow temperature exceeded 32°C, a gas mix of air and 5% CO2 was connected to the circuit
oxygenator and mechanical ventilation was started. After 4 h from the start of the procedure, ventilator FiO2 was set at 1 and circuit
oxygenator gas mix changed to N2/CO2. Twenty minutes later, measures were taken to evaluate lung suitability. At this time the decision was
made to offer the lung to the recipient; EVLP continued during this time so that normothermic perfusion lasted a total of 320 min. Data are
presented as mean ± standard deviation. LA temp, left atrium temperature (°C). Vt, tidal volume (mL/kg donor weight); PAPm, mean pulmonary
arterial pressure (mmHg); PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance (dine*s/cm5); PVR was calculated considering wedge pressure 2 mmHg, as measured
at the end of the procedure in the pulmonary veins with a pressure probe; Pawm, mean airways pressure (cmH2O); Pawpeak, peak airways
pressure (cmH2O); Cpldyn, dynamic lung compliance (mL/cmH2O); FiO2, fraction of inspired oxygen; PCO2 and PO2 IN, partial pressure of CO2
and O2 measured on a sample of perfusate taken from the pulmonary artery cannula (mmHg); PCO2 and PO2 OUT, partial pressure of CO2 and of O2
measured on a sample of perfusate taken from lung outflow (mmHg); PCO2 and PO2 OUTright/left, partial pressure of CO2 and of O2 measured on
samples of perfusate taken from right/left pulmonary vein, respectively. Timing of lung procurement CCA, cardiocirculatory arrest; ROSC,
return of spontaneous circulation; RM, recruitment maneuver; CPAP, continuous positive end‐expiratory pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; CPR,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, rTPA, recombinant tissue plasminogen activator; EVLP, ex vivo lung perfusion. The present case report
confirms that lung procurement from uDCDD is feasible. The protocol implemented allowed procurement of lungs even after an extended period
of warm ischemia. Preclinical investigations show that lungs may be preserved in the non‐heart‐beating donor with lung inflation and
ventilation 13, 15. Lungs are anatomically open to air and can receive oxygen through diffusion. Consequently, they better tolerate the
absence of blood. Moreover, as many as 60 min of total warm ischemia time is considered clinically safe according to UK criteria for DCDD
organ procurement 7. Taking advantage of this background, and after preclinical investigations, we developed an in situ preservation
strategy to procure lungs from uDCDD. The procedure consisted of lung recruitment maneuvers, CPAP, and protective mechanical ventilation.
Lung recruitment maneuvers are of crucial importance to fully open up the lung at the beginning of in situ preservation in order to
facilitate oxygen diffusion to distal alveoli. Recruitment maneuvers, together with chest radiograph (Figure 2), can also provide important
information on lung function at early stages of the donation process. As keeping the lung open over time is imperative, in our protocol CPAP
is applied at the outset. This maintains the lung fully open during the 20‐min ECG recordings required by Italian legislation, time possibly
needed in other countries to procure organs. Thereafter, low tidal volume–high PEEP ventilation is applied with a low respiratory rate to
avoid the harm of hypocapnia 21. Using this strategy, in our donor respiratory mechanics were stable over 4 h (Figure 3). The figure shows
airway pressure measured during the open‐lung preservation strategy. A first recruitment maneuver (RM, PEEP 5, I:E 1:1, RR 10, Pressure
controlled + 25 ×2, PC + 30 ×2, PC + 35 ×4), was followed by continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP 10 cmH2O, 100% FiO2). Consent to
donation was obtained 2 h later. Thereafter, a new recruitment maneuver was performed, and low frequency–low tidal volume–high PEEP
ventilation started (respiratory rate: 4/min, tidal volume: 6 mL/kg, PEEP: 8 cm H2O, FiO2: 100%, inspiratory/expiratory ratio: 1:1). PEEP,
positive end‐expiratory pressure. The preservation strategy we adopted differs from that described by Steen et al. 22. Indeed, whereas they
applied a technique of topical lung cooling via chest tubes, we used in situ preservation with lung recruitment maneuvers, CPAP, and
mechanical ventilation between declaration of death and cold flush and storage. It is possible that topical cooling allows longer in situ
preservation time 23, 24, relative to our strategy, aimed at gaining time for procurement. However, this case report indicates that lungs
recovered from uDCDDs can be suitable for transplant after >4 h of total warm ischemic time, in line with results obtained from preclinical
investigations 15. The recipient's postoperative course, likely caused by massive blood loss that required intraoperative ECMO, might have
also been related to the use of uDCDD lungs. However, the 6‐month clinical outcome proves the feasibility of this preservation strategy. The
validity of machine perfusion when solid organs are procured from uDCDD donors has been suggested 25, 26. Because of the impossibility to
obtain PaO2/FiO2 for lung evaluation after cardiac arrest, we decided to include EVLP in our protocol as Steen mentions in his seminal
article 22. During EVLP, pulmonary vascular resistances were higher than in DBD donors, as previously shown 27. Assessment of vascular
resistance is of great relevance when dealing with DCDD lungs to exclude clot formation after circulation has stopped. In our protocol,
heparin was added only after consent to donation was obtained, but lungs were treated with rTPA before flushing with the preservation
solution. In fact, fibrinolytic treatment improves the quality of DCDD when applied during EVLP 27. Importantly, at this time of the
process, response of the lung to vasculature flushing is used to decide whether to proceed with EVLP or not (see Figure 1, procurement).
Indeed, in a rat model the time to flush the lungs with a constant volume of preservation solution correlates with the development of lung
edema 28. This first “successful case” supports the validity of our protocol. However, while it allows the assumption that lung procurement
is feasible even after an extended warm ischemia time, efficacy and safety remain to be more extensively proven. Nevertheless, our case may
add to the discussion on the relevance of lungs procurement from uDCDD. In fact, the present protocol has a number of potential advantages.
There are virtually no costs; indeed, most of the subjects are intubated at the time of death after CPR withdrawal, and only a ventilator is
needed to preserve the lungs. Procedures are not invasive: at the time of donor's death, relatives face an intact body, apart from
endotracheal intubation. Clearly, impossibility to procure organs other than the lungs is a major weakness of the present protocol. However,
tissues may be procured. Moreover, as the lung preservation strategy is simple, if proven safe and efficacious, many emergency rooms that do
not have the possibility of setting up ECMO technology might be actively involved in lung and tissue procurement in a hub‐and‐spoke model as
the one we have described. As recently pointed out by Egan and Reqaurd, a number of ethical issues come with uDCDD programs 19. A clear
separation of treatment from procurement is one of these. For this reason, the regional (AREU 118) and local (San Gerardo Hospital)
emergency teams treated the subject until death diagnosis. Thereafter, a separate team of neuro‐intensivists (San Gerardo Hospital), eager
in the process of donation, took the responsibility upon the arrival of the procurement team (Fondazione Ca’ Granda). As in the protocol of
Egan et al 19, we are committed to build a multidisciplinary team. Moreover, a continuous program of medical and paramedical staff education
is active. During the first 6 months of activity, there were two denials of consent out of five requests. In a situation such as sudden
death, this can be expected, particularly if, as in Egan's protocol 19, witness to the cardiac arrest is not necessarily the next of kin. In
this regard, the possibility to extend the time from death to organ consent offered by the in situ preservation strategy is of great
interest. Lung preservation procedures, including heparin, ventilation, and bronchoscopy, were all applied postmortem. Only blood was
withdrawn just before hands‐off. This decision might be considered a weakness of our protocol, particularly in countries where, unlike
Italy, there is a general education about this kind of donation. We elected to use this strategy to make this novel donation process easier
to accept. In conclusion, we have confirmed previous findings on the feasibility of lung donation from uDCDD. We also provided evidence that
in situ lung preservation with recruitment maneuvers, CPAP, and protective ventilation followed by EVLP after procurement allows
lung transplantation after extended periods of warm ischemia. The authors of this manuscript have no conflicts of interest to disclose as
described by the American Journal of Transplantation. Authors are in debt to Angelica Perazzoli for her logistical support to the
implementation of the EVLP program. Authors are also indebted to all surgeons, anesthesiologists, critical care physicians, pneumologists,
nurses, and personnel involved at all levels in the lung transplantation program of the Fondazione Ca’ Granda. This study was funded by
Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda–Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, and by Regione Lombardia.
