Carbapenem resistance among the Enterobacteriaceae is a serious healthcare challenge. blaIMI is a carbapenemase gene mediating resistance to
carbapenems but has not been commonly found. A blaIMI-carrying Enterobactercloacae, which was also resistant to colistin, is reported here.
E. cloacae strain WCHECl-1060 was recovered from a blood sample of a leukemia patient, who was not previously exposed to colistin. Strain
WCHECl-1060 belongs to a new sequence type, ST410, and was resistant to carbapenems and colistin but was susceptible to third-generation
cephalosporins. A new allelic variant of blaIMI-1, which has two silent mutations compared to the original blaIMI-1 variant, was found in
strain WCHECl-1060. Conjugation and transformation experiments failed to transfer blaIMI-1, suggesting a likely chromosome origin. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of an IMI-1 carbapenemase-producing colistin-resistant E.cloacae in China. Microbiological laboratories
should be aware of the unusual carbapenem-resistant but third-generation cephalosporin-susceptible profiles of these IMI-producing isolates.
The trend of colistin resistance among the Enterobacteriaceae should be also monitored. Enterobacter cloacae strain WCHECl-1060 was
recovered from the blood of a 30-year-old male patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in our hospital on October 2014. Species
identification was performed using the Vitek II automated system (bioMerieux, Lyon, France) and was also confirmed by partially sequencing
the gyrB gene as described previously . In vitro susceptibility tests were performed using the Vitek II system and minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of amikacin, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, colistin, imipenem and tigecycline were also determined using the
microdilution broth method followed recommendations of the Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute . Strain WCHECl-1060 was susceptible to
ceftazidime (MIC 1 μg/mL), amikacin (MIC 4 μg/mL), ciprofloxacin (MIC 8 μg/mL) and tigecycline (MIC 4 μg/mL) but resistant to imipenem (MIC
256 μg/mL) and colistin (MIC >256 μg/mL). Strain WCHECl-1060 was also susceptible to aztreonam, ceftriaxone, cefepime,
piperacillin–tazobactam, gentamicin, tobramycin, levofloxacin, trimethoprim–sulphamethoxazole and minocycline, intermediate to
nitrofurantoin and cefotetan, and resistant to meropenem and ertapenem as determined by Vitek II. Strain WCHECl-1060 was screened using PCR
for blaIMI with in-house designed primers IMI-Fn (AGAGTTCYATTCACCCATCACA) and IMI-Rn (TCTCCAATCGACCGCATGAA) and for other acquired
carbapenemase-encoding genes blaGES, blaKPC, blaIMP, blaNDM, blaOXA-48 and blaVIM as described previously . blaIMI was the only
carbapenemase gene detected in strain WCHECl-1060. The complete coding sequence of blaIMI was further amplified with an additional pair of
in-house designed primers, IMI-up (CTGGCACGCATAGTAACCCA) and IMI-dw (ATGCCGAAAGTGCAAGCCT). Sequencing of the amplicon revealed the presence
of blaIMI-1. Of note, the blaIMI-1 gene identified here had two silent mutations (T201C and C459T, positions assigned with respect to the
ATG start codon of the blaIMI-1 gene) compared to the original blaIMI-1 gene (GenBank accession number U50278) found in the USA and has one
silent mutation (T201C) to another blaIMI-1 variant (GenBank accession JX090311) found in Taiwan. In total, three types of blaIMI-1 have
been found so far and the blaIMI-1 gene identified here is a new variant whose sequence has been deposited into the GenBank under the
accession number KP284436. Strain typing was performed using the multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) scheme for E. cloacae
(http://pubmlst.org/ecloacae/). Strain WCHECl-1060 was of a new sequence type, ST410, which was assigned by the curator of the MLST
database. Conjugation experiments were performed using the azide-resistant Escherichia coli strain J53 as the recipient with potential
transconjugants being selected on media containing 2 μg/mL imipenem and 150 μg/mL sodium azide. Transformation experiments were carried out
using plasmid DNA prepared from WCHECl-1060 by alkaline lysis, which was electroporated into E. coli strain DH5α with potential
transformants being selected on media containing 2 μg/mL imipenem. Both conjugation and transformation experiments failed to transfer
carbapenem resistance, suggesting that blaIMI-1 was likely located on the chromosome. This result was not surprising considering that most
blaIMI genes found so far are chromosome-borne . Currently, there are 11 assigned variants of IMI enzymes (IMI-1 to -11,
http://www.lahey.org/Studies/other.asp#table1). In addition, carbapenemase NCM-A shares 97 % amino acid identity with IMI-1 and is therefore
also a type of IMI enzyme. The distribution of IMI-producing isolates is summarized in Table 1. Two features of the distribution of IMI-
producing isolates could be noticed. First, although IMI/NCM-A type enzymes have been reported for 20 years, surprisingly, only a few IMI-
producing isolates have been identified since then. In contrast, another Class A carbapenemase, KPC, has been commonly found in carbapenem-
resistant Enterobacteriaceae worldwide. Second, although IMI-producing isolates are not common, they have a wide geographic distribution
having been found in isolates from Asia, Europe, and North and South Americas (Table 1). Several reasons could be proposed for the scarce
identification of IMI-producing isolates. IMI has only weak activity against third-generation cephalosporins and, based on available data,
IMI-producing Enterobacter spp. are also usually susceptible to ciprofloxacin [10, 11]. As third-generation cephalosporins and
fluoroquinolones are the most common antimicrobial agents used for treating human infections, the susceptibility of IMI-producing isolates
to these commonly-used agents may hinder their wide dissemination. In addition, genes encoding IMI-1 and NCM-A are largely found on the
chromosome rather than carried by plasmids, which may serve as an obstacle for horizontal transfer of the genes between strains and between
species. Nonetheless, the current epidemiological pattern of IMI-producing strains have not been fully understood and therefore more
surveillances for IMI-producing strains is warranted. The exact origin of IMI enzymes and how it emerged in Enterobacter spp. also remain
unknown.Table 1The distribution of IMI-producing isolatesIMI typea Host speciesLocationAccession numberReferences1 E. cloacae USAU50278 E.
cloacae TaiwanJX090311 E. cloacae France E. asburiae Ireland E. cloacae CanadaKR057494 E. cloacae ChinaThis study2 E. coli SpainJN412066 E.
asburiae USADQ173429 E. cloacae ChinaAY7808893 E. cloacae Hong KongGU0150244 E. cloacae SingaporeKF9587507 E. cloacae SingaporeKM1032968 E.
cloacae UKKP081315NCM-A E. cloacae ArgentinaAJ536087 E. cloacae CanadaKR057492 E. cloacae CanadaKR057493 E. cloacae CanadaKR057495 E.
cloacae CanadaKR057496 E. cloacae FranceZ21956 a bla IMI-5, -6, -9, -10 and -11 have been assigned but no sequences nor publications are
available The distribution of IMI-producing isolates a bla IMI-5, -6, -9, -10 and -11 have been assigned but no sequences nor publications
are available This is the first report in China of an E. cloacae clinical isolate that carries blaIMI-1 and is resistant to colistin.
Nonetheless, three IMI-producing E. cloacae strains have previously been found in China. IMI-1 was found in Taiwan (GenBank accession number
JX090311) but no details such as susceptibility are available for the host strain. IMI-2 was detected in a single strain in Zhejiang
Province and IMI-3 was reported from Hong Kong but the susceptibility of both strains to colistin has not been tested [11, 12]. The
resistance to colistin of strain WCHECl-1060 is unexpected and worrying as colistin is not available for clinical treatment in China, the
patient had no exposure to this agent and Enterobacter spp. is not intrinsically resistant to colistin . Unfortunately, there is no national
data on the susceptibility of Enterobacter spp. to colistin in China. As colistin is expected to become available in China soon, monitoring
resistance to colistin among the Enterobacteriaceae is required at both national and local levels. Resistance to colistin imposes a great
challenge for treating carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae. However, the mechanism conferring resistance to colistin among Enterobacter
spp. remains largely uninvestigated although a recent study revealed resistance to colistin in an E. cloacae strain recovered in the USA is
associated with cross-resistance to the host antimicrobial lysozyme . Further investigation for the resistance mechanism of strain
WCHECl-1060 is warranted. In conclusion, this is the first report in China of an IMI-producing colistin-resistant E. cloacae clinical
isolate. The unusual resistance profile, i.e. being resistant to carbapenems while susceptible to third-generation cephalosporins, of the
Enterobacteriaceae should prompt laboratories to be aware of the presence of IMI enzymes. As colistin is crucial last resort antimicrobial
against infections caused by Gram-negative bacilli, monitoring resistance to colistin among Enterobacter spp. and studies on the colistin-
resistance mechanism are much needed to combat antimicrobial resistance. The sequence of the blaIMI-1 variant in this study has been
deposited into the GenBank under the accession number KP284436. The MLST profile of strain WCHECl-1060 is available at the E. cloacae MLST
database (http://pubmlst.org/ecloacae/). minimum inhibitory concentrations multi-locus sequence typing Liang Huang and Xiaohui Wang
contributed equally to this work LH, XW, YF and YX carried out the study and helped to draft the manuscript. PX participated in the design
of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. ZZ conceived of the study, analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project no.
81222025), the New Century Excellent Talents Program, Ministry of Education, China (Project no. NCET-13-0399) and a grant from Sichuan
Bureau of Science, China (Project no. 2013JQ0042). The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
