Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency, and immediate diagnostic steps must be taken to establish the specific cause. Recurrence of
bacterial meningitis in children is not only potentially life-threatening, but also involves or induces psychological trauma to the patients
through repeated hospitalization with many invasive investigations. A 6-year-old boy was diagnosed with recurrent bacterial meningitis
caused by Streptococcus Pneumonia 23 F. He had received serial imaging studies for identifying the cause. The initial sinus computed
tomography (CT) also showed sinusitis without bony defect of sinus. However, after performing nuclear scan, the results showed cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) leaked originating from the right petrooccpital region into the middle ear. Subsequent high resolution CT (HRCT) reports showed
focal enlargement of the right facial nerve canal, erosion of the bony canal at geniculate ganglion and tympanic segment with tiny high-
density spots. The reconstruction HRCT showed multiple bony defects at temporal bone. The magnetic resonance imaging revealed multifocal
bony destruction with CSF collection in the right petrous ridge, carotid canal and jugular foramen. Eventually, CSF leakage to the right
middle ear was confirmed and this could be the cause of the recurrent bacteria meningitis in this patient. Although recurrent bacterial
meningitis in childhood is not common, this case report illustrates that recurrence of meningitis within a short period should be considered
as cause of underline immunologic or anatomic defect. Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency, and immediate diagnostic steps must be
taken to establish the specific cause so that appropriate antimicrobial therapy can be initiated [1, 2]. The mortality rate of untreated
bacterial meningitis approaches 100 % and, even with optimal therapy, morbidity and mortality may occur [2, 3]. Recurrence of bacterial
meningitis in children may be caused by many reasons from cranial or dural anatomic defect and immumity deficiency . Bacteria migration,
along congenital or acquired pathways from the skull or spinal dural defects should be taken into consideration when children had recurrent
bacteria meningitis . However, symptoms and signs of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea or otorrhea are difficult to find in such patients
. The CSF leakage caused by traumatic injury is common, while leakage caused by congenital bony abnormality is rarely reported. Here we
present the case of a 6-year-old boy with repeated bacterial meningitis within 6 months and further imaging exanimations finally proved the
cause of CSF leakage originating from the right petrooccpital region into the middle ear. The 6-year-old boy complained of nausea, vomiting
and headache for one week. He received medical treatment at local medical clinics initially, but his condition still persisted without
improvement. Progressed symptoms and fever were also noted after initial medical treatment, and, he was transferred to our emergency
department (ED) for further evaluation. At the ED, the previous history of the patient was obtained from his family. This boy had
experienced one earlier episode of AOM in his young-infant stage and experienced a single episode of acute sinusitis about 2 months prior to
admission. Moreover, no any history of skull trauma was noted before admission. However, the physical examinations revealed general
appearance as lethargy and neck stiffness with positive meningitis signs (Brudzinski’s sign and Kerning sign). After admission, blood was
sampled for complete blood count (CBC) with differential count (DC) analysis, biochemistry, glucose levels, and blood culture. Immediately
lumbar puncture with CSF survey (CSF analysis, bacterial culture, virus culture and CSF biochemistry test) was also performed. The blood
laboratory tests showed leukocytosis with shift to the left (white blood cell (WBC) count: 29190/mm3, and bands: 4 %), and the results of
CSF analysis revealed WBC count as 3240/uL with predominant neutrophils as 91 %, glucose levels as 55 mg/dL, and total protein levels as
160.5 mg/dL. Moreover, the gram stain of CSF showed Sptreptococcus Pneumoniae (Fig. 1), and antibiotics with vancomycin and cefotaxime were
given immediately. The cultures of CSF and blood both showed Sptreptococcus Pneumoniae 23 F. Based on the report of the sensitivity to
antibiotics in the strain of 23 F, vancomycin was useful and given continuously for 14 days. To trace back his past history, about 6 months
ago, this pediatric patient suffered from bacterial meningitis, and was admitted for survey and treatments. The CSF gram stain showed
Sptreptococcus Pneumoniae. Both CSF and blood cultures also showed Sptreptococcus Pneumoniae 23 F. After complete antimicrobial treatment
with vancomycin for 14 days, he was discharged home without complication.Fig. 1Gram stain of the CSF showed Streptococcus Pneumoniae (black
arrow) in the patient Gram stain of the CSF showed Streptococcus Pneumoniae (black arrow) in the patient To further survey the cause of
recurrent bacteria meningitis in such short period, we analyzed immunological functions of this boy, including complements and various
immunoglobulins. However, the results showed normal immunity. According to the previous history of recurrent sinusitis for several weeks, we
suspected that recurrent meningitis may be due to a bony defect caused by chronic sinusitis. Sinus computed tomography (CT) was performed
but only right side maxillary sinusitis was noted without any bony defect. Moreover, nuclear scan was arranged and performed for studying
CSF leakage. Notably, the results showed CSF leaked originating from the right petrooccpital region into the middle ear (Fig. 2). Subsequent
high resolution CT (HRCT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of bilateral ears were both carried out. The HRCT reports showed focal
enlargement of the right facial nerve canal, erosion of the bony canal at geniculate ganglion and tympanic segment with tiny high-density
spots (Fig. 3) and the reconstruction HRCT showed multiple bony defect at petrous part of temporal bone (Fig. 4). The MRI reports revealed
multifocal bony destruction with CSF collection in the right petrous ridge (near the Meckel cave and facial nerve canal at geniculate body
ganglion region), carotid canal and jugular foramen (Fig. 5). Eventually, CSF leakage to the right middle ear was confirmed and this may
explain the cause of the recurrent bacteria meningitis in this boy. Further surgical approach for bony defect was suggested, but his family
refused and asked for medical treatments. Therefore, after complete antimicrobial treatments with vancomycin for 14 days, this patient was
discharged home, and received conjugated streptococcus pneumoniae vaccination (Prevenar 7) by self-payment, which is not included in the
program of our national schedule vaccination at that time.Fig. 2Radioisotope cisternography showed CSF leak into right side middle ear area
(red arrow)Fig. 3HRCT of the right side ear showed enlargement to facial nerve cannel (red arrow)Fig. 4Reconstruction in brain HRCT showed
multiple bony destructions at the right side (black arrow) compared to the left side (red arrow)Fig. 5MRI showed CSF accumulation at right
middle ear Radioisotope cisternography showed CSF leak into right side middle ear area (red arrow) HRCT of the right side ear showed
enlargement to facial nerve cannel (red arrow) Reconstruction in brain HRCT showed multiple bony destructions at the right side (black
arrow) compared to the left side (red arrow) MRI showed CSF accumulation at right middle ear Recurrence of bacterial meningitis in children
is not only potentially life-threatening, but also involves or induces psychological trauma to the patients through repeated hospitalization
with many invasive investigations. In our case report, this patient had suffered from bacteria meningitis twice, and required repeated
hospitalization for invasive CSF survey and for managements of infectious emergency. This situation did suffer very much for the patient and
his family. Therefore, to avoid repeated meningitis again is essential for this patient and to understand why recurrence of bacterial
meningitis occurred is also important for primary clinicians. Clinically, it is reasonable for primary clinicians to survey for immune
deficiency or CSF leakage caused by defect of anatomy . In addition, the bacteria specificity could provide some informative clues: Based on
some investigations, pneumoccocus or hemophilus may suggest cranial dural defects, E. coli or other gram negative bacillus may suggest
spinal dural defects, and meningococcus may suggest immunologic deficiency of the patient . Moreover, spontaneous cerebrospinal fistula
could be difficult for clinicians to make the diagnosis and only revealed recurrent attacks of meningitis. Recurrent meningitis may occur in
92 % of such fistulas which indicates the importance of accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatments for CSF leakage . Recurrent
meningitis, clear otorrhea, or rhinorrhea are signs requiring several investigations of the temporal bone. When the ear drum is intact, CSF
passes down the eustachian tube and may result in rhinorrhea. If the tympanic membrane is perforated, either spontaneously or after
myringotomy, otorrhea may occur. Some case reports have reported that congenital CSF leakage may present as serous otitis media and be
revealed at the time of myringotomy . Also, CT scan involving 1-mm sections in coronal and axial planes of the temporal bone is certainly
the most precise and reliable method available [13, 14]. In our case report, the initial CT scan could not find out the leakage This may be
due to the difficult in identifying the right location of CSF leakage by routine head or brain CT scan which is too broad to image the otic
capsule, ossicles, and facial nerve accurately. Furthermore, the coronal images are usually reconstructions, which provide significantly
less detail than the directly-obtained coronal image. To test for CSF leakage, clinician may test the ear or nose drainage for beta-2
transferrin, a desialylated form of the protein transferring, which is almost exclusively found only in CSF [15, 16]. Therefore, to
localization of the fistula may require diagnostic imaging studies . Nuclear medicine examination (Radioisotope cisternography) or
fluorescein dye study via lumbar puncture should be considered to identify the location of leakage . In our case report, radioisotope
cisternography combined with HRCT (1-mm section) and MRI appeared helpful to identify the location. From this case report, we found that
recurrent bacteria meningitis is critical and should be prompt a search for an underline immunologic or anatomic defect. CSF leakage is
common to cause misdiagnosis or failure to make a timely early diagnosis, which means that suitable treatment may be delayed. Better
knowledge of the possible sites and pathways of fistulas (even rare ones) is necessary. The different pathways of spontaneous CSF leakage
should be clearly understood and carefully examined by the radiologists and primary clinicians. Congenital inner ear malformation is an
uncommon fistula route, which can be misdiagnosed even regular CT (usually cut every 5 mm) is performed without performed high resolution CT
(usually cut every 1 mm). The treatment for this congenital fistula is based on filling of the bone pathway, which can be repaired with
biometerials. Although recurrent bacterial meningitis in childhood is not common, this clinical condition remains a neurological emergency
for primary care physicians. This case illustrates that recurrence of meningitis within a short period should be considered as cause of
underline immunologic or anatomic defect. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of this Case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consents is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Emergency
department Cerebrospinal fluid White blood cell Computed tomography High resolution computed tomography Competing interests There is no
conflict of interest related to this study. Authors’ contributions YCL, CYC and KHW reviewed the medical records, and drafted the
manuscript; HPW designed and oversaw the case report. HPW and HTK revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript for publication. We thank the Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine for his assistance with the interpretation of the
imaging studies of this patient.
