CREST (calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, oesophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia) syndrome comprising calcinosis cutis,
Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia and primary sclerosing cholangitis are both chronic fibrotic
diseases but the association between them is extremely rare. While primary sclerosing cholangitis has been associated with diffuse cutaneous
scleroderma, the association with limited cutaneous scleroderma or CREST has not been previously reported in the literature. This case
report illustrates the association between CREST and primary sclerosing cholangitis. We report the case of an 84-year-old Asian woman with a
long history of CREST who was admitted with abdominal pain, fatigue and progressive derangement of her liver enzymes. This was initially
thought to be secondary to her bosentan therapy for pulmonary hypertension but it persisted despite bosentan being ceased. Primary
sclerosing cholangitis was subsequently diagnosed on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography and she was referred to a hepatologist for
treatment. This case highlights the need to consider primary sclerosing cholangitis in patients with CREST who present with abdominal
symptoms and deranged liver enzymes when other causes have been excluded. Relevant differential diagnoses for this presentation, which can
be difficult to exclude, include immunoglobulin G4-associated cholangitis and antimitochondrial antibody negative primary biliary cirrhosis.
It is of particular significance to rheumatologists and gastroenterologists but has broader relevance to all medical specialists involved in
the care of patients with CREST. Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a rare idiopathic chronic progressive liver disease resulting in
fibro-obliterative inflammation of the hepatic bile ducts and ultimately cirrhosis and liver failure . It is more frequent in men and
strongly associated with inflammatory bowel disease [1, 2]. The liver disease usually associated with scleroderma is primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) with approximately 15 % of patients with PBC reported to have scleroderma . The association was first made by Murray-Lyon et
al. in the 1970s . In contrast, the relationship between PSC and scleroderma is extremely rare with only one case report, to the best of our
knowledge, of PSC and diffuse cutaneous scleroderma . We describe a case of PSC occurring in a patient with CREST (calcinosis cutis, Raynaud
phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia) syndrome, which is a type of limited cutaneous scleroderma.Fig.
1Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrating prominent common bile duct and prominent irregular hepatic ducts Magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrating prominent common bile duct and prominent irregular hepatic ducts An 84-year-old Asian woman
was electively admitted to our hospital for investigation of a 6-month history of liver function test (LFT) derangement, abdominal pain,
fatigue and weight loss. The results of her LFTs were as follows: alkaline phosphatase 953 U/L, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase 1164 U/L,
alanine aminotransferase 81 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 89 U/L, bilirubin 13 μmol/L and albumin 33 g/L. She had experienced Raynaud’s
phenomenon for 50 years and had a confirmed diagnosis of CREST complicated by pulmonary hypertension, for which she had been treated with
bosentan for the past 7 years. Her abdominal pain was initially attributed to esophageal dysmotility associated with her CREST and had
improved with pantoprazole. The most frequent severe side effect of bosentan is liver toxicity, typically manifested by a transaminasemia .
Of interest, animal models have demonstrated that bosentan may also cause cholestatic liver injury through inhibition of the bile salt
export pump (BSEP) . Our patient’s LFT derangement was initially attributed to bosentan and this was decreased and then changed to
macitentan which does not interfere with BSEP . However, her LFT derangement gradually worsened despite these measures and therefore other
causes were sought. There were no other new medications, her hepatitis serology was negative and there was no evidence of cholecystitis,
cholelithiasis or biliary obstruction on ultrasound. Computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen was also unremarkable. An autoimmune screen
revealed positive antinuclear antibody consistent with CREST, antimitochondrial antibody and other liver autoantibodies negative.
Immunoglobulin levels including immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) were normal. Tumor markers including cancer antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9) and
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were similarly normal. She proceeded to magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) which demonstrated
a prominent common bile duct and prominent irregular central hepatic ducts with areas of beading and narrowing in both lobes favoring
stricturing and PSC (Fig. 1). A liver biopsy was not pursued given her age and comorbidities, in particular her pulmonary hypertension.
While this may have provided useful additional information particularly in the exclusion of other differential diagnoses, findings can be
nonspecific . In addition, a biopsy is generally not required for the diagnosis of PSC where cholestatic biochemical abnormalities and
characteristic changes on cholangiography are present. PSC is a complex heterogeneous probably immune-mediated disease with an unpredictable
clinical presentation and course. Diagnosis is made in patients with a cholestatic biochemical profile and characteristic bile duct changes
on cholangiography (MRCP or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, ERCP) where secondary causes of sclerosing cholangitis have been
excluded . Typical symptoms include right upper quadrant abdominal pain, fatigue, pruritus and weight loss. Autoantibodies have no role in
the routine diagnosis of PSC but antimitochondrial antibody is usually negative whereas it is positive in PBC . Abdominal ultrasound and CT
findings are usually nonspecific and ERCP has been regarded as the gold standard for diagnosis. However, MRCP has comparable diagnostic
accuracy and is noninvasive without the potential for pancreatitis and bacterial cholangitis . In a meta-analysis of six studies, the
sensitivity and specificity of MRCP for diagnosing PSC were 86 and 94 % respectively . In the presence of an abnormal cholangiogram, a liver
biopsy is not required to establish a diagnosis of PSC. No drug therapy has been conclusively proven to alter the natural history of this
disorder and liver transplantation is the treatment of choice for advanced liver disease . PSC should be differentiated from secondary
causes of sclerosing cholangitis and IgG4-associated cholangitis. Another potential differential diagnosis for this case was
antimitochondrial antibody negative PBC as antimitochondrial antibody may be negative in less than 10 % of cases . However, patients with
PBC should have a normal biliary tree on cholangiography . Secondary causes of PSC were ruled out on the basis of our patient’s history,
physical examination and imaging studies. Of importance, there was no dominant stricture on MRCP. IgG4-associated cholangitis is more
difficult to differentiate and it is possible that IgG4-associated cholangitis, autoimmune pancreatitis and PSC are different manifestations
of the same disease . This is, however, an important distinction as IgG4-associated cholangitis may be glucocorticoid responsive , while no
effective medical therapy is available for PSC. This diagnosis was thought less likely in our patient’s case as IgG4-associated cholangitis
rarely occurs in the absence of pancreatitis, for which there was no evidence, and her IgG4 level was normal . Both scleroderma and PSC are
fibrotic diseases with widespread connective tissue disturbance occurring in CREST and abnormal collagen deposition in the bile duct
epithelium. While PSC has been reported to occur in diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis, this is the first case report of PSC occurring
with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-In-Chief of this journal. bile salt export pump
calcinosis cutis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia computed tomography endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography immunoglobulin G4 liver function tests magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography primary biliary cirrhosis
primary sclerosing cholangitis Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AP was
the medical registrar as part of the medical team caring for this patient and clinically assessed her as well as organizing and reviewing
relevant investigations. She did a literature review and wrote the case report. JM was the consultant rheumatologist attending this patient
as both an in-patient and out-patient. He read this case report and made several amendments and suggestions. Both authors read and approved
the final manuscript. We thank Professor Ian Roberts-Thomson, gastroenterologist, for his review of this case report.
