Group A Streptococcus is one of the most morbid infections in modern obstetric practice. Pregnant women are known to have a 20-fold
increased risk of invasive Group A Streptococcus with greatest risk in the first 4 days postpartum. The overwhelming majority of these
infections will present with fever, uterine tenderness, or vaginal discharge. A much smaller subset may present to the Emergency Room after
initial hospital discharge with much less obvious symptoms. In our case, persistent palpitations with unexplained tachycardia led to
improper diagnosis in multiple Emergency Rooms. A 37 year-old Caucasian female presents with four post-partum days of unexplained sinus
tachycardia and absence of fever, uterine tenderness, or vaginal discharge, which elicits an extensive cardiac and pulmonary workup in
multiple Emergency Rooms. Consequent late diagnosis of invasive Group A Streptococcus infection lead to significantly increased morbidity
including toxic shock syndrome, acute renal failure, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, multiple
laparotomies, fasciotomy, intubation, continuous renal replacement therapy, and extensive hospital course and recovery. Persistent
palpitations with unexplained tachycardia in the post-partum patient in the Emergency Room setting is a potential early warning of Group A
Streptococcus infection. Even in the absence of reported clinical fever, uterine tenderness, or vaginal discharge, an early speculum and
pelvic exam, with or without consultation with the obstetrics service, is prudent due to the potentially high morbidity or even fatality of
Group A Streptococcus infection. The incidence of puerperal Group A Streptococcus (GAS) infection is 6 per 100,000 live births in the United
States . Pregnant and postpartum women have a 20-fold increased risk of invasive GAS infection compared with non-pregnant women . The
incidence of epidemic puerperal sepsis due to GAS was reduced with the introduction of hand washing, antiseptics and penicillin . However,
invasive GAS infection associated with pregnancy and childbirth reemerged in the mid-1980s and is associated with high morbidity and
mortality compared with other maternal infections . Transmission can occur from healthcare providers, other patients, or a community-
acquired source . About 14 % of puerperal GAS infections are nosocomially acquired . It is transmitted by respiratory droplets or contact
with secretions from lesions. Infections occur predominantly in the postpartum period within the first 4 days and maternal mortality is the
highest in the first 2 days . Mortality approaches 60 % when shock develops . Currently, there is no screening process for GAS in the
postpartum period and no algorithm for treatment. Invasive GAS infection can cause endometritis, necrotizing fasciitis of the reproductive
organs, and if severe, toxic shock syndrome. Rarely, it can cause non-gynecologic infections such as empyema, necrotizing fasciitis of the
extremities, and pyomyositis. Necrotizing soft tissue infections in the obstetrical population are most commonly associated with GAS and can
range from cellulitis, to necrotizing fasciitis, to death from septic shock . Cellulitis is an infection of the dermis and subcutaneous
tissue. The tissue is usually erythematous, tender and warm with the patient presenting with fever and chills . The first symptom of
necrotizing fasciitis is usually diffuse swelling of a limb when the superficial and deep fascial layers are destroyed by infiltrative
infection . It is important to distinguish cellulitis from necrotizing fasciitis, as the treatment for cellulitis is not effective for
necrotizing fasciitis. While uterine tenderness, clinical fever, and vaginal discharge are common initial symptoms, our case illustrates
that clinical diagnosis in the Emergency Room can be much more subtle, with a patient presenting with as vague a finding as unexplained
tachycardia. As such, a high index of suspicion, especially among busy Emergency Room physicians, is critical for correct diagnosis and
reduction of corresponding morbidity and mortality. A 37 year-old Caucasian female, G6P3033, post-partum day (PPD) #4, presented to labor
and delivery as a transport from an outside hospital for symptoms of malaise, dyspnea, and tachycardia. The patient had had a vaginal
delivery 4 days prior of a healthy male infant, complicated only by a midline episiotomy that was cut to expedite delivery in the setting of
a non-reassuring fetal heart tone. Estimated blood loss was 300 cc. Her past medical history was significant for methylene tetrahydrofolate
reductase heterozygous mutation, asthma, chickenpox in childhood, anxiety, and panic disorder. Her medications included ibuprofen and a
prenatal vitamin. Her initial post-partum course was uncomplicated except for a new onset tachycardia of 120/min and transient shortness of
breath of unknown etiology on PPD#1. This prompted a chest x-ray and pulmonary computed tomography (CT) scan, both of which were negative
for an acute process or pulmonary embolus. Beside the new onset tachycardia, all other vital signs remained stable, the patient remained
afebrile, and it was thus decided to send the patient home on PPD#2. A script for ibuprofen 600 mg q6 h was written for pain management.
Later that day, on PPD#2, the patient presented to an outside Emergency Room complaining of palpitations. She denied fevers, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, or purulent vaginal discharge. She complained of only minimal lochia, not excessive for a recent vaginal delivery.
Vital signs were again stable, except for a tachycardia to 130/min. The patient remained afebrile. Hemoglobin and hematocrit were 9.5 g/dL
and 28.5 % respectively, white blood cell count was 8.9 × 103/μL and thyroid stimulating hormone was 1.28 UIU/mL. Electrocardiogram was
performed showing a persistent sinus tachycardia. Echocardiography was within normal limits, showing a left ventricular ejection fraction of
60–65 %, normal left ventricular systolic function, no wall abnormalities, and no pericardial effusion. With no clear indication of
infection, the etiology of the sinus tachycardia remained unknown and the patient was discharged from the ER on metoprolol 12.5 mg PO BID.
Two days later, on PPD#4, the patient presented to a second ER complaining of palpitations and dyspnea. She now complained of generalized
body aches, and felt that she was too weak to walk. The patient again had tachycardia ranging from 120 to 135/min, with otherwise normal
vital signs. Patient was again afebrile and denied uterine tenderness or purulent vaginal discharge. Chest CT and electrocardiogram were
again normal with no acute processes. A right upper quadrant ultrasound and abdominal CT scan were significant for peri-hepatic fluid and
mild splenomegaly but were otherwise unremarkable. At this time, the decision was made to transport the patient to the initial hospital
where the delivery was performed, and where the first Emergency Room visit had occurred. Although slight suspicion of endometritis was
raised, in the absence of a fever, uterine tenderness, or reported purulent discharge clinical suspicion remained low and there was no
documentation of a pelvic or speculum examination. Upon arrival at the new Emergency Room, the patient continued to complain of
palpitations, shortness of breath, malaise, and generalized body aches. She felt unable to walk and developed diarrhea. Vital signs were
again normal except for tachycardia into the 130’s/min. Patient remained afebrile with complete blood count showing a white blood cell count
of 2.5 × 103/μL, a creatinine of 1.0 mg/dL, and a blood urea nitrogen of 19 mg/dL. Three days early these values were white blood cell count
of 9.6 × 103/μL, creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL, and blood urea nitrogen of 6 mg/dL. Pelvic ultrasound showed no signs of retained products of
conception. At this time, the decision was made to transport to our hospital, a tertiary care center for the region. Shortly after arrival
to our institution’s labor and delivery unit, a rapid response was called secondary to a pulse of 140/min, respiratory rate of 30/min, and
blood pressure of 121/66 mmHg. Due to increasing concern for sepsis, the patient was sent to the Surgical Intensive Care Unit (SICU) and was
started on piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375 g IV q 8 h. In the SICU a full physical exam was performed. On abdominal examination there was an
approximately 2 cm × 2 cm area of erythema close to the umbilicus. A pelvic exam revealed diffuse erythema on the labia minora and labia
majora. The cervix was noted to have two 0.5 cm white ulcerative lesions. There was foul smelling copious thick yellow liquid coming from
the external cervical os. An endometrial curette was used to obtain an aerobic and anaerobic uterine culture. Bimanual exam revealed no
retained products in the vagina or lower uterine segment. With close interaction between Obstetrics and Gynecology, Infectious Disease, and
Surgical Intensive Care Unit services, a suspected diagnosis of Toxic Shock Syndrome (TTS) from probable Group A Streptococcus infection was
made. This concern gained further validity when the patient provided information that both her husband and 2 year old child at home had
streptococcus pyogenes (Strept Throat) infections over the previous 4 weeks. Results of blood cultures and uterine cultures later confirmed
GAS infection. At this time the patient was started on intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy. The recommendation from the Infectious
Disease consultant was to achieve source control in this critically ill patient by performing a hysterectomy. In the operating room, a
laparotomy was performed, and a large boggy uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries were visualized. A decision was made to perform a total
abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAHBSO) secondary to the diffuse nature of the infection. The proximal aspect of
the vaginal cuff was also noted to be necrotic and this tissue was gradually debrided. Intra-operatively, Colorectal Surgery was consulted
to inspect the integrity of the rectum. They performed a rigid proctoscopy which showed no visible rectal lesions. Exam of the perineum
revealed no grossly necrotic areas in the vagina. Intraoperatively, the patient required 7U packed red blood cells, 5U fresh frozen plasma,
3U platelets, 10U cryoprecipitate. The patient remained intubated upon return to the SICU. She was started on ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g IV
q6 h, and clindamycin 900 mg IV q8 h. Over the next twenty-four hours in the SICU, she required persistent use of norepinephrine and
vasopressin, and developed hemorrhagic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation. She returned to the OR for an exploratory
laparotomy, where bleeding sites in the posterior cul-de-sac, and ovarian pedicles were again ligated and pelvic packing was placed. She
required an additional 4U packed red blood cells, 4U fresh frozen plasma, 2U platelets, and 2U cryoprecipitate. She was taken to the
operating room twenty-four hours later for reopening of the laparotomy site, perineal lavage, and removal of packing. The ovarian pedicles
and vaginal cuff were both hemostatic, and cystoscopy showed bilateral ureteral jets. Forty-eight hours later she underwent one last
abdominal washout procedure. In the forty-eight hours after the TAHBSO, she developed an acute kidney injury with a creatinine spike of
1.8 mg/dL, urine output of approximately 30 cc/hr, and significant metabolic acidosis. She was started on continuous renal replacement
therapy, and required this for the next 5 days. Vasopressors were utilized for a total of 4 days after the TAHBSO. Six days after the TAHBSO
the patient was extubated in the SICU. Seven days after the TAHBSO, she began to develop compartment syndrome in her left forearm as well as
paresthesias on the left median nerve distribution. She was consequently taken to the OR for a decompressive fasciotomy of the forearm,
flexor and extensor compartments as well as carpel tunnel release with median nerve neurolysis (Figs. 1, 2). Finally, 13 days after the
TAHBSO she was transferred out of the SICU to a floor bed where she remained for two more weeks before discharge. At discharge, the patient
was to have extensive physical, occupational, and recreational therapy. Patient was feeling well upon discharge and had been following with
multiple specialty clinics.Fig. 1Left forearm intraoperative photograph #1. Left forearm status post decompressive fasciotomy of the flexor
and extensor compartments as well as carpel tunnel release with median nerve neurolysisFig. 2Left forearm intraoperative photograph #2. Left
forearm status post decompressive fasciotomy of the flexor and extensor compartments as well as carpel tunnel release with median nerve
neurolysis—zoomed view for scaling purposes Left forearm intraoperative photograph #1. Left forearm status post decompressive fasciotomy of
the flexor and extensor compartments as well as carpel tunnel release with median nerve neurolysis Left forearm intraoperative photograph
#2. Left forearm status post decompressive fasciotomy of the flexor and extensor compartments as well as carpel tunnel release with median
nerve neurolysis—zoomed view for scaling purposes Puerperal infections can affect an estimated 5–10 % of pregnant women . Pregnant and
postpartum women have a 20-fold increased risk in invasive group A streptococcal (GAS) infection compared with non-pregnant women . GAS
infections occur predominantly in the postpartum period within the first 4 days, and maternal mortality is the highest within the first
2 days approaching 60 % when shock develops [6, 7]. As such, timely diagnosis and aggressive treatment of puerperal sepsis with antibiotics,
fluids and source control is critical . Since puerperal GAS infections can present with nonspecific symptoms, in our case with new onset
persistent postpartum palpitations and tachycardia, healthcare providers, and especially Emergency Room physicians, must maintain a high
level of suspicion. Our case illustrates not only the importance of timely diagnosis and prompt treatment of puerperal GAS, but also how
subtle initial symptomatology can be. This situation is complicated even further by the fact that these patients often present to busy
emergency departments with these vague symptoms. These very same symptoms, including but not limited to fever, tachycardia, shortness of
breath, myalgia, and weakness, are some of the most common complaints in all of medicine. The initial primary symptom in our case was
persistent palpitations and tachycardia of unknown etiology, which pointed physicians away from GAS to consider predominantly cardiac and
pulmonary etiologies. This complaint fueled an extensive cardiac and pulmonary evaluation at multiple facilities. On the contrary, the
seemingly less obvious source of the complaint, an infectious etiology received less attention. Perhaps the seriousness of this situation
could have been partially mitigated by increased early vigilance and cognizance to infectious etiology, specifically GAS symptomatology. The
purpose of this report is not to question the competency of the health care personnel who took care of the patient initially as the
diagnosis was certainly quite challenging early on, with these challenges exacerbated exponentially with the hustle and bustle inherent to
emergency rooms. However, much can be learned from this situation. In addition to gathering a history of present illness, a thorough
gynecologic history, an antepartum history, intrapartum history, and postpartum history are all critical in the recent post partum patient.
Such initial information helps to elicit any risk factors for postpartum infection. Recent lacerations, episiotomies, premature rupture of
membranes, and mode of delivery, are all critical to know. Compromised mucosal or cutaneous barriers (e.g., episiotomy, vaginal mucosal
tears, etc.) and a transiently more neutral vaginal pH after amniotic fluid release favoring organism growth are two factors that could
increase the likelihood of GAS infection during this period . Compromised immunity of pregnancy is undoubtedly also a risk factor. Knowledge
of a previous upper respiratory tract GAS infection is also paramount as this can cause hematogenous seeding to the placenta and uterus.
Asking about sick household contacts, specifically those recently diagnosed with strep throat (streptococcus pyogenes), is also critically
important. Sick contacts may very well have been the source of infection in our case. Below are a few of the commonly presenting symptoms of
GAS, although the presentation can vary greatly.Fever (greater than 38.5 °C within the first forty-eight hours postpartum and for greater
than 4 h in duration)Fever and pain in postpartum patients can be masked with liberal use of antipyretics such as acetaminophen and
ibuprofen. This occurred in our case. Therefore, it is important to take this effect into account when evaluating postpartum patients who
had a recent history of fevers, but are afebrile at presentation.Abdominal pain or tendernessHypotension with or without tachycardia or
leukocytosisSudden onset of shock and organ dysfunction (renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome) Fever (greater than 38.5 °C
within the first forty-eight hours postpartum and for greater than 4 h in duration)Fever and pain in postpartum patients can be masked with
liberal use of antipyretics such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen. This occurred in our case. Therefore, it is important to take this effect
into account when evaluating postpartum patients who had a recent history of fevers, but are afebrile at presentation. Fever and pain in
postpartum patients can be masked with liberal use of antipyretics such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen. This occurred in our case.
Therefore, it is important to take this effect into account when evaluating postpartum patients who had a recent history of fevers, but are
afebrile at presentation. Abdominal pain or tenderness Hypotension with or without tachycardia or leukocytosis Sudden onset of shock and
organ dysfunction (renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome) Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome is associated with higher
mortality and presents with hypotension, tachycardia and leukocytosis. The diagnosis is made when the patient is hypotensive (systolic blood
pressure ≤90 mmHg in adults) and streptococci are isolated from a previously sterile site, plus two or more of these findings :Renal
dysfunction (adults with normal renal function: creatinine ≥2 mg/dL)CoagulopathyLiver dysfunction (adults with normal liver function:
transaminases or bilirubin ≥2× upper limit of normal)Acute respiratory distress syndromeErythematous macular rash—may desquamateSoft tissue
necrosis Renal dysfunction (adults with normal renal function: creatinine ≥2 mg/dL) Coagulopathy Liver dysfunction (adults with normal liver
function: transaminases or bilirubin ≥2× upper limit of normal) Acute respiratory distress syndrome Erythematous macular rash—may desquamate
Soft tissue necrosis Gram stain of tissues can be used for earlier diagnosis as it usually takes 8–24 h to recover organisms from blood
cultures. However, if a case of puerperal sepsis is suspected in a postpartum patient, it is crucial to start antibiotics immediately to
prevent life-threatening complications. Our case underscores the significance of not overlooking this diagnosis in a postpartum patient who
may not necessarily fit the septic picture, as the consequences can be dire. Screening all pregnant women for GAS colonization at the time
of Group B Streptococcus screening may at first seem promising, but this too has many limitations, and is not routinely practiced in the
United States. GAS colonization during pregnancy is exceedingly rare. For instance, one study in Vermont in which 35–37 week recto-vaginal
swabs were cultured for GAS showed that only two individuals out of 6944 or 0.03 % had a positive GAS culture . Further, in this study these
two individuals did not receive antepartum treatment, yet neither of the mothers or infants became infected. Given the rarity of GAS
colonization during pregnancy, compounded by the lack of clinical GAS infection even when a rare culture is positive argues against
establishing routine GAS screening in pregnancy. A high index of suspicion in the postpartum patient with fevers, pain, abdominal
tenderness, tachycardia, or hypotension, and comprehensive history taking likely represents a far more cost-effective approach to GAS
identification and early therapeutic intervention. We believe in the post partum patient with persistent palpitations and tachycardia
presenting to the Emergency Room that a high level of suspicion needs to be maintained for pelvic infectious etiology even in the absence of
reported pain, clinical fever, or vaginal discharge. This is supported by the known serious morbidity and mortality of GAS infection, as
well as the time sensitive nature of diagnosis. Routine pelvic exam in the postpartum patient with tachycardia and palpitations, especially
in the Emergency Department where these patients often present, may allow earlier diagnosis of this potentially highly morbid or even fatal
infection. GAS infections are commonly suspected with fever, uterine tenderness, and vaginal discharge. The use of antipyretics may mask
these symptoms. In our case, persistent palpitations and tachycardia in the post partum patient led to a missed diagnosis in numerous
Emergency Rooms and increased morbidity from this time sensitive infection. A high index of suspicion is critical for diagnosis in the
Emergency Room setting and early pelvic exam, with or without obstetric consultation, is likely prudent in the postpartum patient with
unexplained palpitations and tachycardia. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this Journal. Group A Streptococcus
Postpartum day Surgical intensive care unit Toxic shock syndrome Total abdominal hysterectomy bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy NAK Major
contributor in writing the manuscript, reviewing, and editing multiple times. During hospital course, this author rounded on the patient
daily. XG Major contributor in writing the manuscript and reviewing. This author also rounded daily on the patient. AW and PB Major
contributor in reviewing and editing. This author was involved in the Total Abdominal Hysterectomy Bilateral Salpingo-Oophorectomy. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Kevin Kiley, Chairman of the Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology at Albany Medical Center, for his support of departmental research efforts. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests.
