Congenital transmesenteric hernia in neonates is a rare cause of intestinal obstruction with devastating outcomes and still remains a
challenge to diagnose pre-operatively. Patients are often managed with emergency surgical exploration and may need bowel resection. We
present 2 neonates with small bowel obstruction secondary to strangulated transmesenteric hernia through a congenital defect in the small
bowel mesentery, which were managed successfully. We have also reviewed the literature about congenital transmesenteric hernia in neonates.
Congenital transmesenteric hernia (CTMH), a herniation of viscera through an anatomic defect in the mesentery, is rare in new born and still
a challenge and still a challenge for the paediatric surgeon to diagnosis pre-operatively. It usually presents with intestinal obstruction
and is associated with high morbidity and mortality. It represents 5-10% of all cases of internal hernias in children. This entity creates a
diagnostic dilemma as the clinical presentation is vague, and initial diagnosis is usually that of acute intestinal obstruction. The actual
diagnosis of internal hernia is only established during surgery. A delay in diagnosis is lethal and can lead to death. We report 2 cases of
CTMH in neonates (Neonatal-CTMH) with a short history of bowel obstruction and on emergency exploration were found to have strangulated CTMH
through a congenital mesenteric defect. We have also reviewed the literature with emphasis on early diagnosis in new born, followed by early
surgical management to avoid high morbidity and mortality. A 5-day-old baby girl was referred for progressively increasing abdominal
distension, bilious vomiting, and not passing stool for 1-day. Her birth history was unremarkable she passed meconium on day-1 of her life.
Physical examination showed distended abdomen with visible bowel loops in the upper abdomen. A plain X-ray of the abdomen was suggestive of
proximal small bowel obstruction. After initial resuscitation, an upper gastrointestinal (GI) contrast study was planned, but due to
deterioration of her clinical condition, an emergency laparotomy was carried out considering acute small bowel obstruction secondary to
volvulus of bowel. On exploration, there was a 2-cm mesenteric defect in distal ileal mesentery through which a segment of jejunum was
herniated, which was mildly dusky [Figure 1]. The rest of her bowel was normal. The entrapped bowel was released, and mesenteric defect was
closed. Her postoperative course was uneventful, and she has remained well after surgery. Intraoperative finding (of case 1) showing bowel
herniated through a mesenteric defect (a) and a defect in the ileal mesentery through which loops of bowel herniated (b) A 5-h-old baby boy
was referred with tachypnoea and decrease activity. His birth history was unremarkable, and his Apgar score was 8 and 10 at 1 and 5 min,
respectively. On examination, baby had stable vital signs and mildly distended abdomen. A plain abdominal X-ray at 8-h of age showed small
bowel pushed towards the left side with few air fluid levels. He received initial management with nil per oral, orogastric tube, intravenous
fluids and antibiotics. During next few hours, he developed further abdominal distension associated with high and bilious orogastric output
and required elective intubation. Further deterioration in his clinical assessment prompted for early surgical intervention. Exploratory
laparotomy revealed peritoneal cavity full with meconium and a mesenteric defect in terminal ileal mesentery [Figure 2] through which a
segment of the mid-ileum was herniated, which was ischemic and had multiple perforations. After releasing the entrapped small bowel,
resection of ischemic bowel segment was carried out followed by primary anastomosis, closure of the mesenteric defect, peritoneal wash and
wound closure. Patient's postoperative course was slow and steady. He was discharged home after 3-weeks on full feeds and since then has
remained well with normal growth and development. Intraoperative photograph (of case 2) after reduction of the hernia contents showing
congenital mesenteric defect in the mid ileum through which loops of small bowel herniated resulting gangrenous bowel To conduct the
literature review, PubMed search was performed using words “congenital internal hernias,” “transmesenteric hernia,” “intestinal
obstruction,” and “mesenteric defect,” separately and in different combinations, limiting it to neonates (i.e., <1-month of age). Additional
studies were recruited from the reference list cited. The literature review excluding patients older than 1-month or where age was not
specified yielded total of 15 cases of CTMH from 1950 to 2014 [Table 1]. Addition of our 2 cases will make a total of 17 cases Neonatal-
CTMH. Characteristics of 17 neonates with CTMH reported in the literature from 1950 to 2014 RDS: Respiratory distress syndrome; VSD:
Ventricular septal defect; UGIS: Upper gastrointestinal series; AXR: Abdominal X-ray; ICV: Intra-cerebroventricular; US: Ultrasound; CT:
Computed tomography, CTMH: Congenital transmesenteric hernia Preoperative diagnosis of Neonatal-CTMH has remained a challenge as the
clinical presentation often occurs as bowel obstruction. The bowel obstruction may progress rapidly to strangulation and shock. Bowel
ischemia was reported as soon as 6 h after onset of symptoms. The role of imaging modalities in accurate diagnosis of Neonatal-CTMH is
limited as there is no specific modality to support its diagnosis prior to surgical exploration. Hence, the definitive diagnosis is reached
at surgery as happened in our cases and also reported by others.. The role of contrast study is limited, as it will not yield the specific
diagnosis, it also has the potential of radiation exposure and hypothermia in neonates and finally it leads to delay in the surgical
exploration. In some reported cases of Neonatal-CTMHs, associated bowel anomalies such as jejunal/ileal atresia, intestinal duplication,
Hirschsprung's disease, and malrotation have been reported. Even in the presence of associated GI anomalies, diagnostic modalities may prove
of little help to diagnose Neonatal-CTMH as the underlying cause of acute bowel obstruction. Hence in presence of bowel obstruction, regular
clinical assessment and further progress of symptoms of the new born babies remains the best possible guide to decide further course of
management. In our cases, the decision of early surgical exploration was taken due to clinical deterioration of neonates and the absolute
diagnosis was established at surgery. The outcome of Neonatal-CTMH depends greatly on index of suspicion of the diagnosis, followed by
surgical intervention as a rapid progression from incarceration to strangulation of the bowel can happen, which may lead to sepsis and
death. Janin et al. have reported high morbidity and mortality in their series and in Murphy series of seven neonates; six new born died
[Table 1]. In our cases, our early surgical intervention was helpful, but yet in one case, the herniated bowel segment was already
infarcted, and baby required bowel resection. This highlights that a high index of suspicion and an early surgical intervention may be
helpful to avoid the high-risk morbidity and mortality in such cases. In CTMH, bowel loops herniate through a defect in the mesentery in the
absence of a hernia sac. In majority of cases a mesenteric defect of about 2-5 cm in diameter has been noted in the ileal mesentery, but
defect may also occur in the fold of treves, and at or near to the duodeno-jejunal junction leading to internal hernia and its sequel. In
literature review of 13 Neonatal-CTMHs, the anatomical site of congenital transmesenteric defect included proximal jejunum (1), proximal
ileum (3), mid ileum (3) and terminal ileum (7) as showed in Table 1. The association of small bowel atresia and other systemic anomalies in
Neonatal-CTMH supports the congenital aetiology of this defect, which may happens during embryogenesis possibly due to a vascular insult,
incomplete tabularization, or defect occurring during the return of bowel and rotation process. The existence of a small or large congenital
mesenteric defect leaves behind a potential risk of bowel herniation and its sequel, which may happen early in neonatal period as observed
in few reported cases including ours, or it may result in internal hernia later in life. In summary, it is difficult to make an accurate
preoperative diagnosis of Neonatal-CTMH. The definitive diagnosis and localization is made intra-operatively. An early surgical consult is
of great importance to reduce the risk of further morbidity and mortality. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
