Giant inguinoscrotal hernias are extremely rare nowadays, but they may still be encountered after years or even decades of neglect. Such
hernias containing both bowel loops and urinary bladder have not been reported in the medical literature to date, to the best of our
knowledge. We report a case of a 65-year-old Moroccan man who presented with giant right-sided and long-standing inguinoscrotal hernia with
compromised quality of life due to walking difficulties and sexual discomfort. Computed tomography revealed a voluminous hernia sac
containing small and large bowel loops, greater omentum, and urinary bladder. Surgical repair was done through the classical inguinal
incision using the Lichtenstein tension-free hernioplasty technique. No debulking or abdominal enlargement procedure had to be performed,
apart from a partial omentectomy. Giant inguinoscrotal hernia containing intestinal segments and urinary bladder is a challenging surgical
disease. A Lichtenstein tension-free technique seems to be the best surgical procedure for both the patient and the operating surgeon. It
should be used whenever possible in such cases. Although inguinal hernia is one of the most common surgical disease states encountered in
medical practice, its treatment has evolved and has become easily accessible, especially in high-income countries. Thus, giant inguinal
hernia has become extremely rare and appears only after years of neglect or lack of an accessible surgical facility. It is defined as an
inguinal hernia that extends below the midpoint of the inner thigh in standing position . Because of the physiological changes associated
with the loss of domain, surgical repair is often challenging and may lead to potentially fatal complications. Numerous surgical techniques
have been described, but none has been adopted as a standard procedure. Further, reduction of the hernia contents via an enlarging internal
inguinal ring is difficult and scarcely reported in the medical literature. In this report, we describe an unusual case of a giant
inguinoscrotal hernia containing bowel loops and urinary bladder, which we managed through the classical inguinal incision using the
Lichtenstein tension-free hernioplasty technique. We also highlight different problems relative to the management of this uncommon disease.
A 65-year-old Moroccan man presented with a longer than 12-year history of a right-sided inguinoscrotal hernia, for which he had previously
refused any surgical treatment. He reported a large inguinoscrotal swelling that was gradually getting bigger and recently reached below the
level of his mid-thigh. He also described episodic abdominal pain and increasingly difficult urination. This development significantly
affected his quality of life, with difficulties in walking and sexual activity, prompting him to finally accept surgical management. He had
no history of chronic cough, constipation, or previous surgery. Clinical examination revealed a very large, irreducible, no cough impulse,
and non-tender right inguinoscrotal hernia. The hernia mass was about 30 cm in size and extended to the midpoint of the inner thigh. The
scrotal skin was thickened, but there were no signs of inflammation, excoriation, or ulceration (Fig. 1). Computed tomography demonstrated a
voluminous hernia sac containing small and large bowel loops, greater omentum, and urinary bladder (Figs. 2 and 3). The patient underwent
surgery while under general anesthesia. A Foley catheter was inserted before the incision was made. The hernia was approached through a
right inguinal incision. The hernia sac was dissected and carefully separated from cord structures. The sac contained most of the small
bowel with its mesentery, cecum with ascending colon, sigmoid colon, and greater omentum and urinary bladder (Figs. 4 and 5). There was no
evidence of ischemia or any adhesions. Manual reduction of the hernia contents into the abdominal cavity was achieved with difficulty after
widening of a deep inguinal ring and a partial omentectomy, but without any bowel resection. Also, the urinary bladder was easily
repositioned to its pelvic position without injury, and the majority of the hernia sac was resected. Next, the previously enlarged internal
inguinal ring was repaired with interrupted non-absorbable monofilament sutures, and the hernia was treated with polypropylene mesh using
the Lichtenstein tension-free technique. Last, the patient’s hemostasis was checked and a suction drain was placed on the mesh and in the
scrotum. The patient was extubated during the immediate postoperative period and did not require any mechanical ventilatory support. Mild
difficulty on respiration was seen and was successfully managed during the first 3 postoperative days in the intensive care unit. On the
sixth day after surgery, the drain was removed and the patient was discharged. At his 6-month follow-up examination, the hernia repair was
intact without signs of recurrence, scrotal hydrocele, or seroma.Fig. 1Preoperative photograph of the patient’s giant right-sided
inguinoscrotal hernia extending below the midpoint of the inner thigh. The patient is in supine positionFig. 2Computed tomography findings.
Coronal and sagittal sections show urinary bladder and intestinal segments incarcerated in the large inguinoscrotal hernia sacFig. 3Axial
computed tomography demonstrating urinary bladder and bowel loops at the level of the femurFig. 4Intraoperative photograph of part of the
hernia sac contentsFig. 5Intraoperative photograph of the patient’s giant hernia sac Preoperative photograph of the patient’s giant right-
sided inguinoscrotal hernia extending below the midpoint of the inner thigh. The patient is in supine position Computed tomography findings.
Coronal and sagittal sections show urinary bladder and intestinal segments incarcerated in the large inguinoscrotal hernia sac Axial
computed tomography demonstrating urinary bladder and bowel loops at the level of the femur Intraoperative photograph of part of the hernia
sac contents Intraoperative photograph of the patient’s giant hernia sac In high-income countries, the diagnosis of inguinal hernia is
usually made early, when the patient notices the development of swelling or groin pain. Given the potential hernia strangulation, surgical
correction is often carried out without delay. Consequently, giant inguinoscrotal hernias have become extremely rare and are currently seen
in clinical practice only after years or even decades of self-neglect [2, 3]. In addition to the classical complications of inguinal
hernias, the massive size of giant hernias often causes difficulty in walking, sitting, or lying down, with mobility dramatically
restricted. The penis may be buried inside the scrotum causing dribbling of urine over the scrotal skin, which is already congested by
lymphatic and venous edema, leading to excoriation, ulceration, and secondary infection [4, 5]. Patients may also complain of difficulty in
voiding and recurrent urinary tract infections, especially when the bladder is contained within the hernia sac. These specific problems
severely impair the patient’s quality of life, with considerable psychological and social impact . In our patient, the small bowel with its
mesentery, cecum with ascending colon, sigmoid colon, and greater omentum were found in a right-sided inguinoscrotal hernia, together with
urinary bladder. Such a case has not been reported in the medical literature to date, to the best of our knowledge. Repair of a giant
inguinal hernia is a real challenge, even for experienced surgeons. Abrupt and forced reduction of massive contents of the hernia sac into
the limited space of the peritoneal cavity leads to a sudden increase of intraabdominal and intrathoracic pressures. This can cause
abdominal compartment syndrome, resulting in compromised respiratory and cardiac function due to splinting of the diaphragm and reduction of
venous return . This syndrome is associated with a worsening of morbidity and mortality rates. In addition, reintroduction of the intestine
into the abdomen may also cause intestinal obstruction, wound dehiscence, and hernia recurrence. Surgical options for combating this loss of
domain may be divided into either distending the abdominal wall to increase the abdominal space or debulking the abdominal contents. The
enlargement of the peritoneal cavity by progressive preoperative pneumoperitoneum has been highly recommended in the past [8, 9], but
usually it causes expansion of the thin hernia sac rather than the contracted abdominal cavity, requires prolonged preoperative
hospitalization, and fails several times. However, lengthening of the abdominal wall has been described using prosthetic mesh and a scrotal
skin flap after creating an anterior abdominal wall defect . Later, a modification was proposed by using the hernia sac as a peritoneal flap
. Similarly, a tensor fasciae latae musculocutaneous flap was alternatively used to cover mesh at an anterior abdominal wall defect, and
component separation techniques have also been described [12, 13]. As for debulking of the hernia contents, this approach, which includes
resection of usually the colon, small intestine, or greater omentum, has also been reported with some success, but it is associated with a
greater risk of prosthetic infection or anastomotic leakage [9, 14]. In our patient, none of these techniques were mandatory. Therefore, in
spite of massive and specific content, we performed a forced reduction through only an enlarged deep inguinal ring. No debulking or
abdominal enlargement procedure had to be performed, apart from a partial omentectomy. Operative repair was achieved through a standard
inguinal incision with polypropylene mesh using the Lichtenstein tension-free technique. The mesh, positioned over the posterior wall of the
inguinal canal, helps to strengthen the weakened abdominal wall, thus affording significant reduction of the risk of hernia recurrence.
According to recent medical literature, current guidelines suggest the Lichtenstein technique as the preferred surgical option for repair of
giant inguinal hernias [4, 15]. Moreover, close postoperative monitoring of intraabdominal and intrathoracic pressure is essential in the
management of these patients. Our patient developed mild respiratory distress after surgery but was successfully managed in the intensive
care unit. Otherwise, a compression bandage with adequate drainage should be implemented to prevent the development of a large scrotal
hematoma. Additionally, most authors agree that the scrotal skin should be left redundant, as it retracts due to the dartos muscle
contractions and acts as a safety net to allow the contents temporarily back into the scrotum if the patient develops postoperative
respiratory compromise [7, 13]. Giant inguinal hernias are uncommonly encountered in modern surgical practice. However, surgical repair is
challenging because of the potentially fatal complications related to increased intraabdominal pressure and the risk for recurrence, which
is much higher than in other inguinal hernias. Therefore, adequate preoperative preparation, combined with intensive postoperative
monitoring, is essential to obtaining good outcomes. The Lichtenstein tension-free technique seems to be the best surgical procedure for
both the patient and the operating surgeon. It should be used whenever possible. Informed consent from the patient is needed to cover all
possible surgical options, because the final decision regarding surgery is generally made intraoperatively. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions All authors contributed to the treatment of the patient and to the conception, writing, and revision of the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the team of Department of Digestive Surgery I at Mohammed V Military
Hospital for providing support and helping in the preparation of the manuscript.
