Wandering spleen is a rare condition that accounts for less than 0.25% of all indications for splenectomy. It is characterized by ectopic
localization of the spleen owing to the lack or weakening of its ligaments. Torsion is the most common complication due to its long pedicle
and high mobility, which may result in acute abdomen. We report a case of torsion in a wandering spleen in a 28-year-old male presenting
with an acute abdomen that was treated by splenectomy. Wandering spleen is a rare condition, which may be incidentally detected as an
abdominal mass or can present with torsion of its pedicle causing an acute abdomen. Alternative names are: ectopic spleen, displaced spleen,
floating spleen, or pelvic spleen. It is characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of one or all ligaments that hold the spleen in
its normal anatomical position in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen.1 It mainly affects children (one-third of cases), with a female
predominance after age one.2 Among adults, it most frequently affects women of reproductive age, in whom acquired laxity of the splenic
ligaments is usually the cause.2 Due to lack of specific symptoms, diagnosis is difficult, unless there is torsion, presenting as acute
abdomen. Radiological imaging is required to make diagnosis; treatment is either splenopexy or splenectomy. We report a case of torsion of
wandering spleen in a 28-year-old male presenting with an acute abdomen, which was treated by splenectomy. A 28-year-old undergraduate
student was admitted to the emergency department with a 2-day history of generalized abdominal pain. He had been having recurrent, central
abdominal pain for 20 years. He vomited shortly before presentation; vomit contained recently-ingested meals, and was non-bilious and
without evidence of blood. There was associated anorexia and abdominal distension. There was no history of weight loss, change in bowel
habit, blood in the stool or previous abdominal surgery. A review of other systems was normal. On physical examination, he was acutely ill-
looking, in pain distress, febrile, dehydrated, pale, anicteric with neither pedal edema nor peripheral lymph node enlargement. Blood
pressure was 120/70 mm Hg (normal range: 120/80 mm Hg), pulse rate was 124/min (normal range: 60-100/min), regular; respiratory rate was 40
cycles/min (normal range: 12-20 cycles per min). The abdomen was distended with multiple scarification marks (Figure 1) as a traditional
treatment for enlarged spleen. He had generalized tenderness and guarding, but there was no rebound tenderness or abdominal rigidity. There
was a firm, tender, palpable mass extending from the left costal margin into the pelvis. Intra-abdominal fluid was demonstrable by shifting
dullness; bowel sounds were present. The remainder of the examination was normal. The complete blood count showed a low hematocrit (34%)
(normal range: 42-54%), elevated total white blood cell count (17,000/mm3) (normal range: 4,000 to 11,000/mm3), and thrombocytopaenia
(85,000/mm3) (150,000-450,000/microliter). Electrolytes, urea and creatinine and urinalysis were normal. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a
massively-enlarged spleen (30 cm in its long axis) with pericapsular fluid collection extending from the inferior margin of the left sub-
costal region to the right iliac fossa, and fluid collection in the left paracolic gutter. There was left hydronephrosis. Abdominal computed
tomography scan demonstrated absence of spleen in the normal splenic area, soft tissue structure with well-defined borders extending into
the pelvis and intra-abdominal fluid, with a conclusion of ectopic spleen. Distended abdomen with multiple scarifications. At operation,
there was a 1200 ml of hemoperitoneum; a massively-enlarged, pale spleen, with a 20 cm-long pedicle extending into the pelvis, twisted on
its pedicle, with dilated vessels (Figures 2 & 3). Splenectomy was performed; the spleen measured 20 × 30 cm and weighed 2300 g. The normal
weight of spleen in an adult is 150-200 g. Other organs were normal. Post-operative period was uneventful, and he received vaccination
against Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. He was discharged on the tenth day of admission.
Histology of the removed spleen showed a severely-congested spleen without evidence of malignancy. Massively-enlarged spleen observed at
operation. Massively enlarged spleen showing the twisted pedicle. Acute torsion of wandering spleen is a rare cause of acute abdomen.
Wandering spleen is most-commonly diagnosed in young children,2 as well as women between the ages of 20 and 40 years.3 This case was unusual
in that it occurred in an adult male. Wandering spleen is very rare, with fewer than 500 occurrences of the disease reported on 2005.4 The
most common complication of wandering spleen is torsion,5 which was the complication noted in this case presentation. Other complications
are splenic infarction, splenic abscess, variceal hemorrhage, and pancreatic tail necrosis.3 The symptoms of wandering spleen may vary from
an asymptomatic intra-abdominal mass to acute abdominal signs secondary to splenic torsion. Patients may have intermittent abdominal pain
resulting from torsion and de-torsion, which may be similar to the case presented, as the patient had been having recurrent central
abdominal pain for 20 years. Medical imaging is very important in the diagnosis of wandering spleen. Ultrasonography and computed tomography
scan of the abdomen are the most useful diagnostic methods and demonstrate absence of spleen in its normal anatomical position, with a
comma-shaped structure located elsewhere in the abdomen or pelvis,6 as was observed in the reported case. Treatment of wandering spleen is
either splenopexy or splenectomy. Splenopexy is preferred for a viable wandering spleen to prevent any future complications, especially in
children.7 In the event of acute torsion with splenic infarction, splenectomy is indicated. Splenectomy was carried out for the patient
presented because of splenic infarction and a massively enlarged spleen. The pericapsular fluid collection may be due to inflammatory fluid
following splenic infarction while the hemoperitoneum may have been due to splenic vessel rupture following torsion. Other indications for
splenectomy in wandering spleen are secondary hypersplenism, functional asplenia, and any suspicion of malignancy.7 In conclusion, torsion
of wandering spleen should be considered as a possible cause of acute abdomen in a patient with an acute abdomen whose spleen is absent from
its anatomical position on abdominal ultrasound or computed tomography scan with a demonstration of a mass elsewhere in the abdomen or in
the pelvis. Increased awareness of this medical condition may help in reducing the incidence of complications. Disclosure. Authors have no
conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and
the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. We invite students from a variety of medical disciplines to submit original
contributions based on their supervised research. The Student Corner of Saudi Med J aims to help students explore research opportunities and
network with other peers and mentors in the same field. Submitted Abstracts should include the following: Title should be
descriptiveAuthor’s names and affiliation(specify college level/year, academic degree of Senior >Author)Abstract must be structured and not
more than 300 wordsThe following are the typical headings: Objectives (background, why the study was done, specific aims)Methods (setting,
date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis)Results (findings, data and statistical tests) andConclusion (general
interpretation of results) Title should be descriptive Author’s names and affiliation(specify college level/year, academic degree of Senior
>Author) Abstract must be structured and not more than 300 words The following are the typical headings: Objectives (background, why the
study was done, specific aims)Methods (setting, date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis)Results (findings, data and
statistical tests) andConclusion (general interpretation of results) Objectives (background, why the study was done, specific aims) Methods
(setting, date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis) Results (findings, data and statistical tests) and Conclusion (general
interpretation of results) Submitted Abstracts should be co-authored by a Senior Supervisor Abstracts will be reviewed by Student’s Corner
Section Editor There is no fee to submit an Abstract Ethical Approval should be provided Non-indexed materials
