Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are typically used as antidepressants. Clinically significant SSRI-induced thyroid
dysfunction is rare. We report a case of hyperthyroidism induced by fluoxetine in a female patient with major depressive disorder. Her
thyroid profiles indicated hyperthyroidism after a 10-week treatment with fluoxetine and were restored after discontinuation of fluoxetine
and administration with venlafaxine. In the first year of follow-up, her thyroid functions as well as her depressive symptoms remained
perfectly normal. This case highlights the necessity of monitoring thyroid profiles during SSRI treatment. Thyroid abnormalities can
profoundly influence emotional stability and physical activity and are important in the pathogenesis of mental illnesses.1 Thyroid profiles
influence the development and differentiation of neuronal and glial cells, which further disturb the cerebral homeostasis and cause changes
in neural plasticity, synaptic transmission, and macroscopically, the function of brain.2 The overlap of patients with both thyroid
abnormalities and mental illnesses is not a rare issue for clinical endocrinologists and psychiatrists. Moreover, the relationship between
hypothyroidism and depression has been generally known, although the intrinsic mechanism remains to be convincingly elucidated.3 Notably,
among the numerous factors that can affect thyroid functioning, iatrogenic disturbances in thyroid indices can dramatically affect the
course of illness and determine medication treatment strategies.4 We report herein the emergence of thyroid dysfunction during treatment
with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) for depression in a woman. To our knowledge, this is the first case report to document
a reversible, fluoxetine-induced hyperthyroidism after 10-week treatment. Mrs. A, a 38-year-old Chinese woman, came to the hospital with
symptoms of dysphoria, insomnia, poor memory, and headache. She complained that family troubles made her feel depressed, lose all her
interests, and intermittently entertain suicidal thoughts. She had no history of systemic diseases or substance abuse, and she denied any
family history of psychiatric diseases. Clinical laboratory investigations, including thyroid function tests and a cranial computed
tomography scan, were all normal. She was diagnosed with major depressive disorder according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 5th edition criteria. She was prescribed 40 mg per day of fluoxetine and 5 mg per day of olanzapine. Three weeks later,
her depressive symptoms had significantly improved. To address her remaining depressive symptoms, however, her dosage of fluoxetine was
increased to 60 mg per day, and olanzapine was reduced to 2.5 mg per day. Three weeks later, her sleep and appetite had improved, but her
affect had become labile. Consequently, fluoxetine was reduced to 40 mg per day. One month later, she complained of palpitation, and her
appetite increased. Although laboratory tests for hematological, biochemical, and reproductive systems were all within normal ranges,
thyroid function tests revealed significantly elevated total thyroxine (T4), free T4 and free triiodothyronine (T3), relatively low
thyrotropin (TSH), and normal level of thyroid peroxidase antibody. To further confirm her condition, a consultation with an endocrinologist
was immediately requested and revealed second-degree enlargement of the thyroid, without obvious tenderness on physical examination.
Electrocardiogram and chest x-ray results were all normal. A color Doppler ultrasonography scan detected a diffusely enlarged thyroid, but
an emission computed tomography scan yielded a normal result. Because her baseline thyroid functioning was normal, no signs of infection
were indicated, and she had no exposure to radioactivity or medication (other than the low-dose olanzapine), we diagnosed hyperthyroidism
and considered it possibly related to fluoxetine exposure. Immediately, fluoxetine was discontinued, and 150 mg per day of venlafaxine
extended release (XR) was initiated, while maintaining the olanzapine dosage at 2.5 mg per day. Four weeks later, her mood had significantly
stabilized, and her thyroid hormone levels had generally normalized, with the exception of a slightly low free T4 level, in the absence of
any treatment for hyperthyroidism. At follow-up 6 weeks later, her thyroid functions were unchanged, and it became completely normal 5
months after switching to venlafaxine. Her thyroid hormone levels during the whole course are listed in Table 1. Normalization of thyroid
function tests after switching from fluoxetine to venlafaxine, despite continuation of the same low dose of olanzapine, indicates that
fluoxetine, and not olanzapine, was the inciting agent for Mrs. A's hyperthyroidism. Thyroid Function Levels During Antidepressant Therapy
Clinically significant SSRI-induced thyroid dysfunction is rare. To the best of our knowledge, only 4 cases of hypothyroidism associated
with SSRI administration—escitalopram-induced subclinical hypothyroidism,5 escitalopram-induced,6 paroxetine-induced7 and sertraline-
induced8 hypothyroidism—have been reported previously. Besides, 2 Spanish cases of hyperthyroidism secondary to a long-term treatment of
fluoxetine have already been reported in 1999.9 However, limited online information is available for these 2 cases. Our case demonstrates
that a short-term usage of fluoxetine may even induce hyperthyroidism in specific individuals. In our case, sufficient hematological and
auxiliary examinations have been done to exclude other possibilities which may account for hyperthyroidism. In the first-year follow-up of
this patient, thyroid profiles as well as her depressive symptoms remained perfectly normal. In contrast, clinically silent SSRI-induced
abnormalities in thyroid function tests have been widely documented.2,10 After paroxetine treatment in severely depressed patients, for
example, T4 level has been reported to decrease by 11.2%. Fluoxetine has been reported to reduce T3 and T4 levels in otherwise euthyroid
depressed patients.11 Similarly, sertraline and fluoxetine have been reported to reduce hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone
secretion, which would reduce secretion of TSH from the pituitary gland and thyroid hormones from the thyroid.12 As a potent serotonin-
specific reuptake inhibitor, fluoxetine can increase the concentration of serotonin in cerebrospinal fluid and other serotonergic tissues.
Therefore, serotonin acting at 5-HT2 receptors on the thyroid follicular cells may promote the production and release of thyroid hormones.13
As evident in our depressed patient with hyperthyroidism, we speculate that in susceptible patients, fluoxetine can have a more potent
stimulatory effect on the thyroid than inhibitory effects on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, which ultimately demonstrates as
hyperthyroidism. This case indicates that monitoring of thyroid hormone levels during treatment with SSRIs is warranted, particularly when
clinical response is insufficient or otherwise atypical or complicated. The authors thank the patient for her understanding and permission
to publish her case. Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding: The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
