Dear Editor, Among the clinically significant carbapenemases, the New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase (NDM) is one of the most formidable. NDM
efficiently hydrolyses β-lactams and last-resort carbapenems. Hence, therapeutic options for infections by NDM-producers are restricted to a
handful of antibiotics, such as colistin, tigecycline, and fosfomycin.1 NDM is predominantly associated with Enterobacteriaceae. This
carbapenemase has also been described in Acinetobacter spp. but has been much less frequently detected in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.1 The first
report of NDM-1 production in P. aeruginosa came from Serbia in 2011.2 It is now acknowledged that the NDM-1 gene is endemic to the Balkan
states.3,4 NDM-producing P. aeruginosa has since been isolated from other European countries,4,5,6,7 as well as in India8 and Egypt.9 Local
hospital laboratory surveillance suggests that approximately 12% of P. aeruginosa isolates are not susceptible to carbapenems.10 Previously,
only producers of the metallo-β-lactamases (MBLs) VIM and IMP had been sporadically detected.11 Here, we describe the first observed case of
NDM-1-producing P. aeruginosa in Southeast Asia. P. aeruginosa was cultured from the endotracheal aspirate of a 90-year-old female patient
with colon cancer in March 2015. The isolate exhibited multidrug resistance to carbapenems (meropenem, imipenem, minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) > 32 mg/L), cephalosporin (ceftazidime, cefepime, MICs > 256 mg/L), aminoglycosides (gentamicin, amikacin, MICs > 256
mg/L), and fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, MICs > 32 mg/L). The isolate was partially resistant to aztreonam (MIC 16 mg/L).
Colistin susceptibility was observed at an MIC of 1 mg/L. Phenotypic testing for carbapenemases using the KPC/MBL Confirm Kit (Rosco
Diagnostica A/S, Taastrup, Denmark) indicated the presence of an MBL. Comprehensive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) screening for
β-lactamase genes was performed.12 The isolate was positive for blaNDM and determined to be blaNDM-1 by full-length gene sequencing. The
isolate was negative for other MBLs (IMP, VIM, SPM, DIM, AIM) and for genes encoding class A carbapenemases (KPC, GES). TEM and CTX-M
extended spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) were found to be present. Plasmid analysis using S1 nuclease pulsed-field gel electrophoresis13 and
spin column plasmid extractions (QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit, QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA) did not the reveal the presence of plasmids. Southern
blot analysis with a blaNDM-1 probe of S1 nuclease-treated DNA agarose plugs indicated that the probe hybridized to high molecular weight
chromosomal DNA, suggesting that blaNDM-1 was situated on the chromosome (data not shown). Furthermore, solid media conjugation assays were
performed to assess the transferability of blaNDM-1 from the clinical isolate to the azide-resistant recipient Escherichia coli J53. No
transconjugants were obtained, suggesting the non-transmissibility of blaNDM-1 (at least to E. coli), again suggesting a chromosomal
position. Because the isolate was highly resistant to most antibiotics, including rifampicin, this excluded the use of the rifampicin-
resistant laboratory strain of P. aeruginosa for conjugation. Hence, we were unable to assess the intra-species transmissibility of
blaNDM-1. P. aeruginosa blaNDM-1 may be present chromosomally2,5,6 or on a plasmid; in the latter context, blaNDM-1 is transmissible.8 The
nucleotide sequences immediately flanking blaNDM-1 were determined by an inverse PCR and primer walking approach. Two copies of blaNDM-1
were detected and separated by an Insertion Sequence Common Region (ISCR) element (Figure 1). Sequencing of this ISCR element revealed a 97%
nucleotide homology to ISCR24. ISCR24 has been identified in the genetic environment of a novel blaPME-1 (Pseudomonas aeruginosa ESBL 1) and
implicated in the acquisition of the ESBL by P. aeruginosa.15 This is not surprising because ISCR elements mediate the mobilization of
almost every class of antibiotic resistance genes, including those encoding ESBLs and carbapenemases.16 ISCR elements, such as ISCR1, have
been found to be associated with NDM-1 from P. aeruginosa.3,5,7 Jovcic et al.3 reported two copies of blaNDM-1 in P. aeruginosa (Figure 1),
where it is presumed that the ISCR1 element, as part of its rolling-circling mechanism of transposition, duplicates adjacent genetic
segments.16 Because ISCR elements are known to construct extended clusters of antibiotic resistance genes on plasmids as well as on
chromosomes,16 it would be interesting to investigate the presence of other resistance determinants surrounding blaNDM-1 and the ISCR24-like
region that may contribute to its multidrug resistance. After this isolate was identified, two other NDM-1-producing P. aeruginosa isolates
with antibiograms identical to the initial isolate were cultured from the sputum samples of two other patients in April and May 2015. One of
the isolates was from a 58-year-old male with intracranial bleeding from a ruptured aneurysm, and the other was from an 84-year-old female
with a femur fracture, complicated by pancreatitis and small intestine perforation. The genetic relatedness of the three NDM-1 P. aeruginosa
isolates was investigated by DiversiLab rep-PCR fingerprinting (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France), which revealed that the rep-PCR
profiles were indistinguishable, suggesting that the three isolates were clonal in nature. PCR mapping and sequencing of the two latter
isolates reveal a blaNDM genetic context identical to that of the first isolate. Because all three patients stayed in the same surgical
intensive care unit, the detection of indistinguishable NDM-1-positive P. aeruginosa suggested a transmission event. In summary, this is the
first report of the emergence of NDM-1 in P. aeruginosa in Southeast Asia in an unusual genetic context. The apparent intra-ward
transmission of this extremely drug-resistant isolate highlights the gravity of this escalating public health issue. The blaNDM-1 sequence
from the initial P. aeruginosa isolate has been deposited into Genbank under the accession number KT364224. This work was supported by a
National University Health Engineering Medicine Seed Grant (#N171-000-099-001) provided to Jeanette WP Teo. Comparative schematic diagrams
of the diverse genetic organizations of blaNDM-1 in P. aeruginosa. The selected blaNDM-1 sequences are chromosomally located and associated
with ISCR elements and class I integrons.3,5 Typical common genetic features surrounding blaNDM-1 are the insertion sequence ISAba125 and
the bleomycin resistance gene (bleMBL).14
