The aim of the study was to compare the central corneal thickness (CCT), intraocular pressure (IOP), and tear insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) levels of 2 patients with acromegaly before and after the surgical treatment of the disease. CCTs, IOP levels, and tear IGF-1 values
showed a decrease after the treatment in 2 patients. As we found higher CCT, IOP, and tear IGF-1 levels in the active phase of the disease
in two acromegaly patients, detailed information about the activity of the disease may be important before the examination of these
patients. Acromegaly is caused by sustained overproduction of growth hormone (GH) or somatotropin. Most of the actions of GH are mediated
through the circulating and locally produced insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). Plasma IGF-1 concentrations correlate better than plasma
GH levels with the clinical manifestations of acromegaly, and successful treatment is associated with normalization of IGF-1 concentrations.
High IGF-1 levels in the subretinal fluid of a patient with acromegaly have been reported previously. Bramsen et al. reported that increased
central corneal thickness (CCT) was observed as a part of soft tissue thickening in acromegaly patients, and this could be an important
indicator for the diagnosis and the control of the acromegaly. In this study, we evaluated the CCT, intraocular pressure (IOP), and tear
IGF-1 values of 2 acromegalic patients before and after treatment. A newly diagnosed acromegaly patient aged 45-year-old woman was referred
to our clinic for an ophthalmologic examination from the Endocrinology Department of our hospital. Serum IGF-1 level was 750 ng/ml
(reference ranges of IGF-1 in ages 46–85: 94–166 ng/ml). Complete ophthalmological examination including CCT with ultrasonic pachymetry
(Tomey Corporation, Nagoya, Japan), and standard threshold perimetry with the Humphrey visual field analyzer 24-2 program (Carl Zeiss
Meditec, Inc., Dublin, CA, USA) were performed. After informed consent was obtained from the patient, basal tear samples were collected
atraumatically from the inferior tear meniscus of both eyes using glass capillary tubes or micropipettes. Tear samples were diluted in
phosphate-buffered saline, placed in microtubes, and stored at −70°C until further examination. Tear IGF-1 concentrations were measured
using a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (Quantikine, R and D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) according to the manufacturer's
instructions. Tear IGF-1 level was 0.63 ng/ml. Best-corrected visual acuities were 1.0 in both eyes. Anterior segment and fundus examination
were normal. Optic disc examination revealed normal in both eyes (cup-to-disc ratio was 0.3 in both eyes). CCT was 615 μm in the right eye
and 612 μm in the left eye. IOP levels were 24 mm Hg in the right eye and 23 mm Hg in the left eye. Visual field examination was normal.
After the patient was referred to a neurosurgery by the endocrinology clinic for an operation, he underwent transsphenoidal adenectomy for
the pituitary adenoma. Three months after surgery she was admitted to our clinic for a control examination. Anterior segment and fundus
examination revealed normal. Visual field examination was normal. The patient's serum IGF-1 values had fallen to 125 ng/ml. Besides tear
IGF-1 values were 0.32 ng/ml. CCT was 585 μm in the right eye and 575 μm in the left eye. IOP levels were 20 mm Hg in the right eye and 19
mm Hg in the left eye. The patient was undertaken to a routine follow-up. Another newly diagnosed acromegaly patient aged 55-year-old woman
was referred from endocrinology clinic for an ophthalmologic examination. The complete ophthalmologic examination was performed to the
patient. After informed consent was obtained basal tear samples were collected for the IGF-1 measurement. Serum IGF-1 level of the patient
was 1340 ng/ml. Tear IGF-1 level was 0.98 ng/ml. Best-corrected visual acuities were 1.0 in both eyes. Anterior segment and fundus
examination were normal. CCT was 595 μm in the right eye and 590 μm in the left eye. IOP levels were 22 mm Hg in the right eye and 21 mm Hg
in the left eye. Optic disc examination were also normal in both eyes (cup-to-disc ratio was 0.4 in both eyes). Visual field examination was
normal. The patient also was referred to the Neurosurgery Department for an operation, and she also underwent pituitary surgery. Three
months after surgery the patient's complete ophthalmological and visual field examination revealed normal. Serum IGF-1 value had fallen to
389 ng/ml. Besides tear IGF-1 value was 0,25 ng/ml. CCT values were 565 μm in the right eye and 560 μm in the left eye. IOP levels were 18
mm Hg in the right eye and 17 mm Hg in the left eye. The patient was also taken to a routine follow-up. In acromegaly, normalization of
IGF-I in serum has been used to follow-up the success of surgical and medical therapies. Van Setten et al. reported that the IGF-1 level was
elevated not only in the serum, but also in the subretinal fluid and aqueous humor in a patient with acromegaly. This study inspired us to
hypothesize that the eyes might be another target organ for the effects of excess GH and IGF-1, hence in our study we measured tear IGF-1
levels and evaluated the relationship with CCT and IOP before and after treatment in two acromegaly patients. Ciresi et al. emphasized that
high GH may have stimulatory effects on the cornea, as well as on other target organs. Uncontrolled acromegalic patients had higher CCT
values than controlled acromegalic patients in their study. Bramsen et al. divided 27 pituitary adenoma patients into two groups as those
with and without acromegaly and reported higher CCT values in the group with acromegaly. In contrast, Polat et al. reported no statistically
significant difference regarding median right and left corneal thicknesses and mean CCT values between acromegaly and control groups. They
divided 30 patients with acromegaly into two groups as those with active and inactive. The CCT values were also not significantly different
between these subgroups. To our knowledge our study is the first study to measure tear IGF-1 levels. Thus, normal range values have not been
established yet. We think that possible growth effect of tear IGF-1 may have an impact on CCT. We found a higher CCT, IOP, and tear IGF-1
values in the active phase of the disease. The activity of the disease may have an impact on ocular parameters such as CCT, IOP, and tear
IGF-1 values. However, longitudinal studies including larger populations and controls are needed to confirm this relationship. Nil. There
are no conflicts of interest.
