Severe falciparum malaria may be complicated by prolonged haemolysis and recurrent fever after parasite clearance. However, their respective
etiologies are unclear and challenging to diagnose. We report the first case of severe falciparum malaria followed by prolonged haemolytic
anaemia and rhinomaxillary mucormycosis in a previously healthy adult male. A 30-year old Bangladeshi man was admitted with severe
falciparum malaria complicated by hyperlactataemia and haemoglobinuria. Prior to admission he was treated with intravenous quinine and upon
admission received intravenous artesunate and empiric ceftriaxone. Thirty hours later the peripheral parasitaemia cleared with resolution of
fever and haemoglobinuria. Despite parasite clearance, on day 3 the patient developed recurrent fever and acute haemolytic anaemia requiring
seven blood transfusions over six days with no improvement of his haemoglobin or haemoglobinuria. On day 10, he was treated with high-dose
dexamethasone and meropenem with discontinuation of the ceftriaxone. Two days later the haemoglobinuria resolved. Ceftriaxone-induced
haemolysis was the suspected final diagnosis. On day 16, the patient had progressively worsening right-sided facial pain and swelling; a
necrotic ulceration of the hard palate was observed. Rhinomaxillary mucormycosis was diagnosed supported by microscopy findings. The patient
initially responded to treatment with urgent surgical debridement, itraconazole, followed by two weeks of amphotericin B deoxycholate,
however was subsequently lost to follow up. This case highlights the range of potential alternative aetiologies of acute, prolonged
haemolysis and recurrent fever following parasite clearance in severe falciparum malaria. It emphasizes the importance of a high degree of
suspicion for alternative causes of haemolysis in order to avoid unnecessary treatments, including blood transfusion and steroids. It is
critical to consider and identify common invasive bacterial and rare opportunistic co-infections as a cause of fever in severe malaria
patients remaining febrile after parasite clearance to promote antimicrobial stewardship and prompt emergency care. The mortality rate of
adult severe malaria remains high at between 10 % and 30 %. In surviving patients recovery is usually complete, and neurological sequelae
occur in less than 1 % . Rare complications following severe falciparum malaria include acute, prolonged haemolytic anaemia and invasive
fungal infections [2, 3]. Prolonged anaemia following parasite clearance in falciparum malaria is multifactorial. Proposed mechanisms
include hypoproliferative erythropoiesis, ineffective erythropoiesis, red blood cell (RBC) membrane alteration with reduced survival, and
continued peripheral haemolysis . Broadly, the causes of ongoing haemolysis after parasite clearance are complex and include: (1) immune-
mediated, secondary to parasite antigens, complement activation, splenic retention, or drug-induced autoimmune haemolysis (i.e. aryl-amino-
alcohol containing antimalarials) , and (2) non-immune mediated, secondary to rupture of sequestered schizonts and uninfected RBCs and
oxidative stress [8, 9]. Recently, delayed onset haemolysis after falciparum malaria has been associated with parenteral artesunate use in
non-immune patients with high ring stage admission parasitaemias . Three patterns of post-treatment anaemia following malaria have been
proposed namely, ‘rising’, ‘persistent’ and ‘post-artesunate delayed haemolysis’ . Invasive fungal infections complicating severe falciparum
malaria infections are rare, particularly mucormycosis . Zygomycetes can cause life-threatening angioinvasive mucormycoses that present as
rhinocerebral, pulmonary, renal, gastrointestinal, cutaneous and/or disseminated infection. Individuals with an immunocompromising condition
or iron overload are particularly predisposed to these acute-onset, rapidly progressive and aggressive infections. The overall mortality is
44 %, however in the case of haematogenous disseminated disease up to 94 % of patients have a fatal outcome . Successful management of
mucormycosis requires prompt diagnosis, reversal of underlying immunosuppression, and urgent surgical debridement together with anti-fungal
therapy. Only one case of disseminated mucormycosis complicating severe falciparum malaria has been reported . We report the first case of
rhino-maxillary mucormycosis following Plasmodium falciparum infection complicated by prolonged haemolysis after parasite clearance. A
30-year-old previously well Bangladeshi male was admitted to a local tertiary care hospital with a 20-day history of fever, chills, rigors,
headache, myalgias, and anorexia. He had been suffering from nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, jaundice with scleral icterus and dark urine for
five days. One day prior to admission, he was diagnosed with malaria on thick smear at a private hospital, however parasite density result
was unavailable. There he was treated with intravenous quinine (750 mg 8-hourly x five doses) and azithromycin, due to limited availability
of first line therapy of artesunate, before being referred for further management. Past medical history was significant for three prior
malaria infections. His most recent episode of suspected vivax malaria was 30 days prior to admission, which was partially treated with an
incomplete course of chloroquine. He had no history of jaundice, liver disease, transfusions, malignancy, or autoimmune disease. There was
no family history of jaundice or iron treatments. He did not take any regular or traditional medicines. There was no history of betel nut
consumption. On admission, he had a temperature of 39.7 oC, Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) 15/15, blood pressure (BP) 127/60 mmHg, heart rate (HR)
127 beats per minute, a respiratory rate (RR) of 24 breaths per minute with oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 93 % on room air, and body weight of
65 kg. He appeared unwell with pronounced scleral icterus, black urine, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly (4 cm and 5 cm below the costal
margin, respectively). There was no conjunctival suffusion or lymphadenopathy. Admission peripheral blood smear confirmed a diagnosis of
falciparum malaria (360 parasites/μl). Severity criteria included hyperlactataemia (lactate 6.8 mmol/L), hyperbilirubinaemia (total
bilirubin 58 μmol/L), and 4+ haemoglobinuria (blackwater fever); hence the case was classified as severe malaria (Table 1). He was promptly
treated with intravenous artesunate 120 mg, 2.4 mg/kg body weight (Guilin Pharmaceuticals, China) at 0, 12, 24 and 48 h (four doses), in
addition to empiric ceftriaxone 2,000 mg every 12 h, as per local hospital practice. After 30 h his peripheral parasites cleared with
resolution of the fever and haemoglobinuria, and he was switched to oral artemether/lumefantrine (AL) combination 80/480 mg (Novartis,
Switzerland).Table 1Laboratory investigationsParameterDay 0Day 3Day 4Day 7Day 10Day 28/29Normal RangeHaemoblobin
(g/L)1073231363468140–180Haematocrit (%)28.6108.410--20.447–54Mean corpuscule volume (fL)79.4--76.473.5--8376–96Platelets (x103/μl)38--
32160180160150–400White blood cells (x103/μl)8.43.23.24.583.84–10Lactate (mmol/L)6.83.6--------0.9–1.7Creatinine
(μmol/L)18517715913326513335-124Bicarbonate (mmol/L)18.317.1--29.6--23.223–28Base excess (mmol/L)−7−8--0--0(-2)–(+3)Anion gap (mmol/L)1917--
15----10–20Total bilirubin (μmol/L)588275------3–21Indirect bilirubin (μmol/L)34--53------2–14Alanine aminotransferase (IU/L)2359----
1260575–41Alkaline phosphatase (IU/L)66--74------44–147Gamma-glutamyl transferase (IU/L)18--13------<55Lactate dehydrogenase (IU/L)----2950
------140–280International normalization ratio--1.3----2.18--0.8–1.2Partial thromboplastin time (seconds)--15----27--<30Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (mm)a --155--147160610–10 aWestergren method Laboratory investigations aWestergren method On the third day of admission
he developed fever, confusion, dyspnoea (RR 28, SaO2 90 %), tachycardia (HR 106), hypotension (BP 100/80 mmHg), recurrent 4+ haemoglobinuria
with severe microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin of 32 g/L) accompanied by elevated lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin, consistent with acute
haemolytic anaemia (Table 1, Fig. 1). Pre-transfusion peripheral blood smear showed no schistocytes and reticulocytes of 2 % (reticulocyte
production index 0.15 (compared to RPI of 0.3 on day 3 in blackwater fever patients ). Direct antiglobulin test (DAT; anti-IgG and anti-C3d)
was negative and indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) was positive. Glucose was normal. Blood and urine bacterial cultures were negative.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase testing and haemoglobin typing were not available. Human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, hepatitis A,
hepatitis B and hepatitis C serology were negative. Hepatitis B antigen was negative. He promptly received transfusion of three units
matched whole blood. Intravenous artesunate was substituted for AL despite parasite clearance due to the notion that the recurrent fever
must be due to malaria. In total, he received seven doses of artesunate (total dose of 840 mg) and three doses of AL (total dose of
artemether 240 mg, and lumefantrine 1,440 mg). Empiric amikacin 500 mg, 7.5 mg/kg 8-hourly was added on day 6 to broaden antibacterial
coverage for potential multi-drug resistant gram-negative bacteria given his ongoing fever despite negative blood and urine cultures. The
haemolysis continued for nine days and he required a total of 10 transfusions (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Haemoglobin, haematocrit (HCT) and mean
corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH) profile during hospital admission. Arrows indicate timing of one-unit whole blood transfusions. Asterisk
indicates initial transfusion of 3 units Haemoglobin, haematocrit (HCT) and mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH) profile during hospital
admission. Arrows indicate timing of one-unit whole blood transfusions. Asterisk indicates initial transfusion of 3 units On day 10, bone
marrow biopsy revealed gross hypercellularity with erythroid hyperplasia and no evidence of lymphoma, leukaemia, or haemophagocytic
syndrome. Meropenem (500 mg 8-hourly) was empirically substituted for amikacin and ceftriaxone given his renal dysfunction to cover
potential extended-spectrum β-lactamase producers, and dexamethasone 5 mg 6-hourly was initiated for suspected autoimmune haemolytic
anaemia. The haemoglobinuria resolved two days after steroid treatment and ceftriaxone discontinuation. His haemoglobin slowly recovered,
reaching 76 g/L by day 20. On day 16, he had ongoing fever with right-sided facial pain and swelling. A large, 3 × 2 cm ulcer on the right
upper hard palate covered with yellow slough and an area of necrosis was observed (Fig. 2a). The right maxillary sinus was tender on
palpation. He had pain with right eye extra-ocular movements but no ocular discharge, proptosis, pupil asymmetry, diplopia, or decreased
visual acuity. There was no nasal or ear involvement. A swab of the hard palate ulceration revealed long, broad, aseptate hyphal elements
displaying 90° branching consistent with Mucor, (Fig. 2b). Fungal cultures failed to grow. MRI showed extensive right-sided opacification
and mucosal thickening of the maxillary and ethmoid sinuses with no radiographic evidence of orbital or cerebral extension (Fig. 3). He
underwent prompt surgical debridement of the oral ulcer and right maxillary sinus. His steroids were discontinued and he was started on oral
itraconazole 100 mg 12-hourly until first line treatment with amphotericin B became available nine days later. Intravenous amphotericin B
deoxycholate 50 mg daily, was continued for 14 days with improvement of his facial swelling and oral ulceration. The patient was pleased
with his clinical improvement and hospital care, however due to a family emergency in his remote village he left hospital against medical
advice and could not attend follow up.Fig. 2Oral ulceration. a Ulcer on right upper hard palate measuring 3x2cm, covered with yellow slough
and a posterior area of necrosis. The borders of the ulcer were undermined. b Light microscopy x100 image of wet mount from swab sample of
hard palate ulceration showing long, broad, aseptate hyphal elements displaying 90° branching consistent with Mucor Fig. 3MRI brain.
Opacification and mucosal thickening of the right maxillary and ethmoid sinuses. Left – T2 weighted image; right– T1 weighted image Oral
ulceration. a Ulcer on right upper hard palate measuring 3x2cm, covered with yellow slough and a posterior area of necrosis. The borders of
the ulcer were undermined. b Light microscopy x100 image of wet mount from swab sample of hard palate ulceration showing long, broad,
aseptate hyphal elements displaying 90° branching consistent with Mucor MRI brain. Opacification and mucosal thickening of the right
maxillary and ethmoid sinuses. Left – T2 weighted image; right– T1 weighted image The mechanism of the haemolytic component of anaemia
following parasite clearance in falciparum malaria is poorly understood and challenging to differentiate. This case does not completely
conform to one of the three patterns of post-treatment malaria anaemia as it appeared bimodal within a short time period, where the initial
episode of haemolysis occurring while parasitaemic resolved by 30 h after artesunate treatment, and a second episode of massive haemolysis
began on day 3 with 75 % drop in haemoglobin that persisted for 10 days requiring multiple transfusions. This case highlights that drug-
induced haemolysis may contribute. Several antimalarial drugs can cause haemolysis by differing mechanisms including quinine, mefloquine,
halofantrine, and primaquine. Two possible culprit drugs in our case include quinine and ceftriaxone. Quinine was given prior to admission,
and blackwater fever (intravascular haemolysis with haemoglobinuria) was observed on his initial presentation with P. falciparum
parasitaemia. Quinine-induced haemolytic anaemia is considered drug-dependent and proposed to occur through an immune-complex mechanism [30,
31], however since the acute haemolysis began on day 3, by which time around 95 % of the drug would have been eliminated , and the DAT was
negative, quinine seems less likely to be the cause. Drug-induced immune haemolytic anaemia (DIIHA) is rare but the commonly cited incidence
of 1 per million people is likely an underestimate due to under-diagnosis . In patients with DIIHA, ceftriaxone is the second most common
antimicrobial cause after cefotetan [30, 33]. The onset of ceftriaxone-induced DIIHA ranges from 30 min to 34 days following exposure . In
this case, the negative DAT and positive IAT suggest the presence of an alloantibody or free autoantibody. The DAT is typically positive in
most cases of drug-induced haemolytic anaemia but a negative DAT is possible if massive haemolysis occurs before testing [33, 34]. A
diagnosis of ceftriaxone-induced DIIHA is supported in our case because the haemoglobinuria stopped two days after discontinuing
ceftriaxone, however the haemoglobin was still recovering to baseline 2 weeks post-ceftriaxone discontinuation. Steroids do not improve
DIIHA, but were administered in this case for potential autoimmune haemolytic anaemia . Since steroid was started at the same time that
ceftriaxone was stopped, establishing the cause of haemolysis is confounded. The diagnosis of ceftriaxone-induced haemolytic anaemia could
not be confirmed because specific ceftrixone- antibody testing was not available. The differential diagnosis for acute onset haemolytic
anaemia with positive IAT and negative DAT following parasite clearance includes alloantibody mediated from previous transfusion, drug-
induced haemolytic anaemia, microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia, an intrinsic RBC abnormality, or may be a non-specific finding [30, 33].
Delayed haemolytic transfusion reactions are generally mild and the onset of haemolysis is usually 2 to 11 days after subsequent
transfusion. This diagnosis was unlikely as there was no history of previous blood transfusion and haemolysis started before the
transfusions. Reports of post artesunate delayed haemolysis typically occur in hyperparasitaemic patients and manifest 7–14 days following
the first dose of artesunate [19, 20]. This diagnosis is unlikely since this patient did not have a high parasitaemia and haemolysis started
three days after the start of artesunate. The available blood results do not support the diagnosis of a microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia,
intrinsic RBC abnormality or functional asplenia since there were no obvious red cell abnormalities or Howell-Jolly bodies on peripheral
blood smear. Fever in severe malaria usually resolves by day 4 to 5 . Thus, recurrent or prolonged fever after severe malaria should prompt
investigation into alternative causes. We identified a necrotic oral ulcer, from which a sample showed Mucor morphology on slide microscopy
(Fig. 2). While our diagnosis was not confirmed by culture, this is not a prerequisite for the diagnosis since these organisms are difficult
to grow and frequently cultures yield no growth. While mucormycosis is frequently fatal in immunocompromised hosts, such as those with
haematological malignancies and diabetes mellitus, cases in patients without any immune impairment have been reported [28, 36]. These
infections manifest as localized cutaneous or disseminated deep infections and are characterised by necrotic lesions due to the
angioinvasive behavior of these organisms. Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is the most common clinical presentation of mucormycosis, representing
around 60 % of all cases . This category is further divided into 2 subtypes: the highly aggressive, often fatal rhino-ocular-cerebral form
and the less fatal rhino-maxillary form. The latter subtype manifests as necrosis of the palate due to angioinvasion and thrombosis of the
sphenopalatine and greater palatine arteries [38, 39]. Invasive fungal infections are rarely reported in association with severe malaria . A
recent review summarized nine cases of invasive fungal infections complicating falciparum malaria; 5 Aspergillus, 1 hyalohyphomycosis, 2
Cryptococcus, 1 Absidia, and 1 disseminated candidiasis . The immune suppression due to malaria infection itself may predispose individuals
to invasive fungal infection [3, 22]. Parasitic digestive vacuoles containing malaria pigment phagocytosed rapidly by polymorphonuclear
granulocytes can cause functional exhaustion, which blunts microbicidal activity of granulocytes . Neutrophil dysfunction might result from
haemolysis-induced haem oxygenase-1 induction . High-dose steroids may also have inhibited the polymorphonuclear leukocyte response and
decreased granulocyte phagocytosis. In this case, the iron overload state secondary to massive haemolysis and multiple transfusions may have
promoted fungal growth [37, 42, 43]. All reported Aspergillus and Absidia infections complicating severe malaria have occurred in patients
with marked haemolysis [3, 23, 24, 26]. In this case it was difficult to definitively exclude a predisposing immunocompromising condition.
However, bone marrow biopsy did not suggest an underlying haematologic malignancy, HIV serology was negative, and random glucose was normal
in the setting of acute illness, although haemoglobin A1C testing was unavailable to definitely rule out diabetes. It is likely that malaria
related immune suppression augmented by the administration of steroids and multiple blood transfusions with massive haemolysis (iron
overload) contributed. The initial low parasitaemia is consistent with post-treatment presentation and the severity criteria present on
admission are consistent with a delayed time to recovery in severe malaria patients from low transmission settings . Concomitant bacterial
infection was not definitively excluded since admission blood culture results were not available, however the day 0 white blood cell count
was normal. The kidney and liver dysfunction that developed when mucormycosis was diagnosed has several explanations but is unlikely related
to disseminated Mucor. More plausibly, the kidney injury was due to high cell-free haemoglobin generated during massive haemolysis,
ischaemia, or nephrotoxic drugs (i.e. amikacin). The liver dysfunction was likely due to ischaemia during hypotensive episodes. In addition
to urgent surgical debridement, the recommended first line anti-fungal therapy for the treatment for mucormycosis is amphotericin B
deoxycholate or liposomal amphotericin B. Unfortunately, the availability of these medications is often inadequate in resource-limited
settings. In this case, surgical debridement was successful but itraconazole was the only available anti-fungal with activity against
Mucorales. Although the patient follow up was truncated there was a favorable in-hospital clinical response to itraconazole, which is in
keeping with other reports of successful treatment with itraconazole monotherapy [44, 45]. The oral ulceration differential diagnosis
includes squamous cell carcinoma, deep fungal infection, tertiary syphilis and acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis . In our case, the
acute course of disease goes against a diagnosis of squamous cell cancer. Negative non-treponemal syphilis serology and an atypical
presentation exclude tertiary syphilis. The sinus involvement and presence of fungal hyphae makes acute necrotizing gingivitis unlikely.
Most cases of rhinocerebral mucormycosis involve both sides of the palate, however hemi-palatal involvement has been reported [38, 39]. This
patient presented with typical symptoms of rhinomaxillary mucormycosis including fever, headache, lethargy, pain and swelling of the
maxillary sinus. Microscopy differentiated Mucor from aspergillus as broad, aseptate hyphae at 90° angles were observed. This case
illustrates that both prolonged haemolysis and recurrent fever occurring after parasite clearance in falciparum malaria are challenging to
diagnose. A systematic approach to the differential diagnoses is vital as management can be critically different. The potential diagnosis of
ceftriaxone-induced haemolytic anaemia is important as this drug is widely used empirically. Although the incidence of ceftriaxone-induced
haemolytic anaemia is low, this diagnosis should be considered and ceftriaxone discontinued to prevent unnecessary blood transfusions,
steroid treatment and mortality [30, 33]. Steroids are not recommended as treatment for severe malaria because steroids increase
gastrointestinal bleeding, convulsions, and prolong coma [50, 51]. Investigating fever in resource-limited setting is challenging, as
microbiologic diagnoses are frequently not possible. However, delayed evaluation of recurrent fever after parasite clearance may lead to
unnecessary empirical anti-malarial and anti-bacterial use, which has important consequences on the individual and global level. Although
invasive fungal infections rarely complicate severe malaria, early diagnosis and treatment with surgical debridement plus anti-fungals are
essential to improve patient outcomes. Empiric overuse of antimicrobials contribute to anti-microbial resistant organisms, which is a global
public health concern in this era of reduced research and development into novel antimicrobial therapeutics. To combat this pressing issue,
improved microbial diagnostics are urgently needed in resource-limited settings. Potentially reversible drug-induced haemolytic anaemia may
rarely complicate severe malaria following parasite clearance but needs to be considered to avoid unnecessary blood transfusion or steroid
treatment. Ceftriaxone is a commonly used empiric antibiotic, however rarely (<0.1 % incidence) it may cause life threatening haemolysis.
This diagnosis must be considered early as stopping the drug may be the only treatment needed and the haematologic response can be rapid.
Caution must be exercised when considering steroid use in severe falciparum malaria, since no benefit has been shown, whereas there are
potential adverse effects, such as in the present case where it may contribute to immunosuppression facilitating fungal infection. Recurrent
fever after parasite clearance should prompt a thorough septic evaluation to avoid delays in diagnosis and overuse of empiric
antimicrobials. Invasive fungal infections are a rare complication (<0.1 % incidence) of severe malaria but should be considered in
individuals with prolonged fever after parasite clearance. Mucormycosis infection is a medical emergency requiring urgent surgical and
medical management and carries high morbidity and mortality. Potentially reversible drug-induced haemolytic anaemia may rarely complicate
severe malaria following parasite clearance but needs to be considered to avoid unnecessary blood transfusion or steroid treatment.
Ceftriaxone is a commonly used empiric antibiotic, however rarely (<0.1 % incidence) it may cause life threatening haemolysis. This
diagnosis must be considered early as stopping the drug may be the only treatment needed and the haematologic response can be rapid. Caution
must be exercised when considering steroid use in severe falciparum malaria, since no benefit has been shown, whereas there are potential
adverse effects, such as in the present case where it may contribute to immunosuppression facilitating fungal infection. Recurrent fever
after parasite clearance should prompt a thorough septic evaluation to avoid delays in diagnosis and overuse of empiric antimicrobials.
Invasive fungal infections are a rare complication (<0.1 % incidence) of severe malaria but should be considered in individuals with
prolonged fever after parasite clearance. Mucormycosis infection is a medical emergency requiring urgent surgical and medical management and
carries high morbidity and mortality. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. red blood cell Glasgow coma score
blood pressure heart rate respiratory rate oxygen saturation artemether lumefantrine combination direct antiglobulin test indirect
antiglobulin test drug-induced immune haemolytic anaemia Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions KP performed the clinical assessments, obtained photographs and drafted the manuscript and figures. RJM performed the
clinical assessments, obtained photographs and assisted in drafting the manuscript. AG was responsible for clinical care of the patient. AG,
and AMD revised the manuscript critically for intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the medical
residents, attending physicians and support staff at Chittagong Medical College Hospital for their assistance and collaboration with the
Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU) and the staff of the malaria team at MORU who helped with data collection. Special
thanks to Dr. Rabiul Alam Md Erfanuddin and Dr. Marcus Eder for clinical assistance and data collection; Dr. Katherine Chipperfield,
haematopathologist at Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, Canada, for reviewing the bone marrow slides and peripheral blood smears; Dr.
Neil Smith at Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham, UK, for his review and advice on the haematological aspects of the case; and the British
Columbia Center for Disease Control for assessing the fungal microscopy images. Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit is funded by
the Wellcome Trust of Great Britain.
