Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Case series Patient: — Final Diagnosis: Coronary anamolies Symptoms: Chest pain Medication:
None Clinical Procedure: PTCA with stent/CABG Specialty: Cardiology Challenging differential diagnosis Coronary artery anomalies are rare,
accounting for about 0.3–1.3% of patients undergoing diagnostic coronary angiography. Interventions in these cases are still rare, and
therefore pose technical challenges during intervention. CT Angiography provides a non-invasive means of assessment of coronary artery
disease and also shows the anatomy of the coronary tree. This helps in knowing the origin of the coronaries and also to plan selection of
hardware. There are no specific guidelines for use of guiding catheters and guide wires in anomalous coronary artery intervention. We report
a series of 5 patients presenting with effort angina who had anomalous coronary arteries with coronary stenosis diagnosed by CT angiography.
Three patients received percutaneous intervention, 1 patient underwent CABG, and 1 patient received medical management. CT Angiography
provides a useful tool for showing the coronary anatomy and for selecting the guiding catheter and the guide wire that remain the mainstay
of interventions in coronary artery anomalies. Coronary artery anomalies are rare, accounting for about 0.3–1.3% of patients undergoing
diagnostic coronary angiography. Most coronary artery anomalies are clinically silent and do not affect quality of life. However, specific
forms of anomaly may be associated with symptoms such as myocardial ischemia, congestive heart failure, and sudden death. The exact
incidences of these events are not known. CT angiography provides a non-invasive means of assessment of coronary artery disease and also
shows the anatomy of the coronary tree. Multislice computed tomography (MSCT), in the presence of an expert interpreter, may achieve a high
level of reliability and accuracy in the visualization of the coronary tree. This modality obviates much of the risk and discomfort
associated with catheterization, although it retains the risks inherent in radiation exposure and use of contrast agents. We report a case
series of 5 patients aged 40–60 years, of which 2 were women. All the patients presented with effort angina and were treadmill-test positive
for inducible ischemia. The demographic characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1. These patients opted for a form of non-
invasive coronary angiography – CT coronary angiography (CT-CAG). Incidentally, these patients were found to have anomalous origin of
coronary arteries along with coronary stenosis on CT-CAG. Of the 5 patients, 3 patients had anomalous left circumflex originating from right
coronary artery and 2 patients had anomalous right coronary artery originating from the left sinus. Of the 5 patients, 3 had coronary
stenosis in an anomalous artery, 1 had stenosis in a non-anomalous artery, and 1 patient had stenosis in both anomalous and non-anomalous
arteries. These patients were later subjected to an invasive procedure – percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Appropriate guiding
catheters and guide wires were selected as the coronary anatomy was already known by CT coronary angiography. Three patients successfully
underwent coronary angioplasty with stenting. The details of the angioplasty (i.e., type of catheter used, guide wire selection, location of
lesion, stent type and size) are provided in Table 2. Non-ionic contrast agent (Iohexol – trade name: Omnipaque) was used and the amount of
contrast agent used ranged from 50 ml to 110 ml. The total fluoroscopic times ranged from 20 to 70 min. Procedures were uneventful. All 3
angioplasty patients were discharged with dual antiplatelets, statins, beta-blockers, and other medications. One patient was underwent CABG
and another patient had anomalous coronaries with no significant stenosis on coronary angiography. Coronary artery anomalies (CAAs) are a
diverse group of congenital disorders whose manifestations and pathophysiological mechanisms are highly variable . Coronary artery anomalies
are rare, accounting for about 0.3–1.3% of patients undergoing diagnostic coronary angiography . Most coronary artery anomalies are
clinically silent and do not affect the quality of life. However, specific forms of anomaly (e.g., ostial atresia, coronary compression
between great vessels, coronary fistula, anomalous left coronary artery arising from pulmonary artery , and muscular bridge) may be
associated with symptoms such as myocardial ischemia, congestive heart failure, and sudden death . Conventional coronary angiography is
currently the criterion standard for evaluation of known or suspected coronary artery disease; however, it is associated with use of
contrast agent and ionizing radiation, and is an invasive procedure. In contrast, CT angiography is a non-invasive procedure but also uses
contrast agents and radiation. Multislice computed tomography (MSCT) achieves a high level of reliability and accuracy in the visualization
of the coronary tree but requires expertise in interpretation of the images . In patients with anomalous coronary arteries, invasive
coronary angiography is associated with difficult cannulation/non-selective angiogram/aortic root angiogram; therefore, it uses more
contrast agent, requires multiple pieces of hardware, and gives increased radiation doses to the patient and the staff performing the
procedure. CT angiography overcomes this and provides information on anomalous coronaries and lesions using the same amount of contrast and
radiation as that for the normal coronaries. Isolated cases of PCI for acute MI involving the anomalous arteries have been reported
previously (PCI in single coronary artery , PCI in anomalous RCA originating from left coronary sinus ). In prior case reports, selection of
the guiding catheters was based on experience and trial-error method. Few authors have suggested specific catheters based on the site of
origin of the anomalous vessels or its ostial anatomy . The use of Hockey Stick or Multipurpose catheter may be considered when the usual
techniques fail to visualize an anomalous RCA. Isolated case reports of CT-CAG guided anomalous coronary artery interventions have also been
described in the literature (CT-CAG guidance for intervention of an anomalous origin of RCA from the left sinus ). We report a case series
of 5 patients with anomalous coronary arteries detected by CT angiography, who presented with effort angina and were treadmill-test positive
for inducible ischemia. However, in 1 patient in whom CT angiography showed anomalous coronaries with stenosis, conventional angiography
showed anomalous coronaries with no significant stenosis and was advised to receive medical management. Based on the CT angiography report,
we could select appropriate guiding catheters and guide wires in 3 patients. Knowing the origin of the anomalous artery for intervention, we
could reduce the amount of contrast used and lower the radiation dose. The limitations of CT-CAG are that it cannot be done in STEMI
patients where primary PCI is being performed, and it requires an expert interpreter. Anomalous coronary arteries pose technical
difficulties, not only during diagnostic imaging, but also during interventions. CT coronary angiography, if available, can be performed in
stable angina patients if an experienced interpreter is available. CT angiography not only helps to delineate the anatomy of the coronary
vessels and the lesions, but also guides selection of the hardware for a successful intervention. However, challenge remains in acute
myocardial infarction patients with anomalous coronary arteries who are taken for primary percutaneous coronary interventions. Conflict of
interest None. CT Angiogram showing anomalous RCA originating from left sinus with stenosis in proximal RCA. Coronary angiogram showing
anomalous RCA originating from left sinus with stenosis in proximal RCA, stent deployment in proximal RCA using AL1 catheter. Coronary
angiogram showing anomalous LCX originating from right sinus with stenosis in mid-RCA, stent deployment in mid-RCA. Coronary angiogram
showing anomalous LCX originating from right sinus with stenosis in distal LCX and ostioproximal major OM, stenting to distal LCX with PTCA
wire in major OM. CT Angiogram showing anomalous LCX originating from right sinus with critical ostial stenosis of RCA and LCX. Demographic
characteristics of patients. H/o – History of; DM – diabetes mellitus; HTN – hypertension; IHD – Ischemic Heart Disease; TMT – tread mill
test; M – males; F – Female; PTCA – percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty; LAD – left anterior descending artery. Patient
interventional profiles.
