A 50-year-old male presented with acutely progressed paraplegia. His magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated two well-demarcated components
with opposite signals in one cystic lesion between the T1- and T2-weighted images at the T1 spine level. The patient showed immediately
improved neurological symptoms after surgical intervention and the histopathological exam was compatible with a neurenteric cyst. On
operation, two different viscous drainages from the cyst were confirmed. A unique similarity of image findings was found from a review of
the pertinent literature. The common findings of spinal neurenteric cyst include an isointense or mildly hyperintense signal relative to
cerebrospinal fluid for both T1- and T2-weighted images. However, albeit rarer, the signals of some part of the cyst could change into
brightly hyperintensity on T1-weighted images and hypointensity on T2-weighted images due to the differing sedimentation of the more viscous
contents in the cyst. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most important radiographic tool in the diagnosis of a spinal neurenteric cyst
(NEC) and to differentiate it from other spinal cord tumors.1) However, imaging findings of NEC could vary based on the cyst's contents.
Such inconsistent imaging findings make it difficult to diagnose NEC preoperatively. Here, we present a case of an adult male with acute,
progressive paraplegia due to an intradural NEC in the cervicothoracic region with atypical findings on MRI. We also discuss the unique
similarity among other cases that reported atypical imaging findings in patients diagnosed with NEC from a review of the pertinent
literature. A 50-year-old man with no history of trauma presented to the outpatient clinic with weakness in the left leg, and decreased
temperature and pain sensation on the right side. His neurologic status was compatible with Brown-Sequard syndrome. MRI demonstrated a well-
defined intradural extramedullary mass located on the left anterolateral aspect of the spinal cord, severely compressing the cord at the T1
spinal level (Fig. 1). The lesion consisted of two well-demarcated components with opposite signals on MRI between the T1- and T2-weighted
images without enhancement. The supernatant component showed a mild hyperintensity on T1-weighted images and isointensity on T2-weighted
images relative to cerebrospinal fluid, which are common imaging features of a cyst. The infranatant component demonstrated a bright
hyperintensity on T1-weighted images and hypointensity T2-weighted images (Fig. 2). The radiologist suggested that the lesion could be a
benign tumor, such as a fat-containing epidermoid cyst or schwannoma with a melanocytic component. The patient's neurologic status rapidly
worsened and he developed paraplegia, including loss of bladder function, some hours after admission. The patient underwent an emergency
surgery. After the dura and arachnoidal space were opened following a total laminectomy of T1, a thin translucent cystic membrane was found.
During the dissection of the cyst from the proximal side, clear fluid was drained from the supernatant cyst wall, after which yellow-green
mucinous fluid was drained (Fig. 3). A histopathological examination showed a cystic lesion lined by a simple columnar or cuboidal
epithelium with mucin resembling that of the gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 4). The final diagnosis was NEC. The patient's motor weakness and
sensory deficit improved completely after the emergent surgery. The common MRI findings of spinal NEC for both T1- and T2-weighted images
include isointense or mildly hyperintense images relative to cerebrospinal fluid without enhancement.234) However, our case showed two
heterogeneous components with opposing signals between T1- and T2-weighted images in one cyst. The reason for the two different signals in a
cyst could be differing viscosities of the cyst's contents as noted in the operative findings. Some atypical imaging findings1567) in spinal
NEC have been reported, including an enhanced NEC mimicking a spinal cord abscess6) and an intra-cystic calcification.1) Two reports56)
showed similar MRI findings to those seen in our patient (Table 1). Paolini et al.7) reported atypical imaging findings of a spinal NEC that
consisted of two components. Their operative findings showed two different viscous drainages from the cyst: a milky fluid followed by a
denser, whitish, and jellylike substance. Jhawar et al.5) also reported a spinal NEC with two different fluid levels on MRI. Such a fluid-
fluid level was presumed to be a result of contents with different viscosities, such as blood and protein, in the NEC. Althogh the NEC,
especially in case of a homogenous cyst, shows cystic T1- and T2-weighted sinals,8) the dense viscous contents, which would be produced by
the cystic wall, hemorrage, and/or other necrotic cell debris,79) could contribute to differing sedimentation levels and cause the opposite
signal; a hyperintense signal on T1-weighted and hypointense signal on T2-weighted images compared to the signal of less viscous contents in
a cyst. NEC usually has an insidious onset and a chronic course with progressive worsening over months.5) However, some atypical cases
presenting with acute neurological deterioration similar to our case have also been reported.58) The main reason may be a sudden increase in
different viscous contents caused by spontaneous hemorrhage, trauma, inflammation, or retention of mucous secretions.38) In the present
case, the increased thick mucinous secretion could be one cause of the acute neurological deterioration. The spinal NEC can show
heterogeneous signals within a cyst, such as brightly hyperintense signals on T1-weighted images and hypointense signals on T2-weighted
images, due to more viscous contents that are produced by the cystic wall, as noted in our case. A finding of opposite signals between the
T1- and T2-weighted images within a cystic mass should no longer be an atypical MRI finding in spinal NEC. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No
potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. *Signal intensity compared to cerebrospinal fluid.
