Epileptic seizures and headache attacks are two common neurologic phenomena characterized by paroxysmal alteration of brain functions
followed by complete restauration of the baseline condition. Headache and epilepsy are related in numerous ways, and they often co-occur.
Although the link between these two diseases is not completely clear, several clinical, physiopathological and therapeutic features overlap.
Headache is reported in association with epileptic seizures as a pre-ictal, ictal or post-ictal phenomenon. We present the case of a
40 year-old woman affected by eyelid myoclonia with absences (EMA) with a history of prolonged headache attacks. A video-EEG recording
performed during one of these episodes showed subcontinuous epileptic activity consisting of generalized spike-and-wave discharges (GSWDs),
clinically associated with tensive headache. Our work represents one of the few well EEG-documented cases of ictal epileptic headache in
idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE). Epilepsy and headache are two common neurologic disorders with recurrent, transient, paroxysmal
episodes of altered brain function, that share clinical features, pathophysiological mechanisms and therapeutic approaches. Epilepsy and
headache may either coexist independently in the same individual or be related in numerous ways, although the nature of this association is
unclear. Headache is common in epileptic patients and it can be defined as inter-ictal (not time-locked to a seizure) or peri-ictal (pre-
ictal, ictal, post-ictal) headache . When headache itself represents the “sole” epileptic manifestation, it is called ictal epileptic
headache (IEH). The diagnosis of this rare phenomenon, characterized by cephalic pain, with or without migrainous features, relies on the
EEG evidence of an irrefutable ictal pattern and on the electro-clinical responsiveness to intravenous antiepileptic drugs [2, 3]. In
literature, there are few well documented cases of IEH in patients with focal seizures, whereas IEH is only exceptionally reported in
generalized epilepsies [4, 5]. In this paper, we describe the case of a 40 year-old woman affected by eyelid myoclonia with absences (EMA)
with a sustained episode of ictal epileptic headache documented by video-EEG study. We report the case of a 40-year-old woman referred to
our Epilepsy Unit for a history of seizures started at the age of 14, consisting of typical absences with or without eyelid flutter and
tonic-clonic seizures. Her family history was positive for migraine without aura. Neurologic examination and neuroimaging study were normal.
Several interictal EEG recordings, performed over time, documented the presence of generalized polyspike-and-wave complexes, triggered by
active eye closure, often associated with eyelid myoclonia and photosensitivity. A diagnosis of eyelid myoclonia with absences (EMA) was
made on the basis of electroclinical and neuroimaging findings. The patient was started on antiepileptic drugs, which led to seizure-freedom
for about ten years. In addition, she had always presented sporadic, prolonged tensive headache attacks, rarely accompanied by migrainous
features (nausea and visual manifestations). Recently, on waking, the patient complained the sudden onset of a sustained tensive headache,
unresponsive to conventional treatment. Because of the persistence of symptoms, after about three hours she came to our attention, and we
performed a video-EEG recording, which showed the presence of a subcontinuous epileptic activity consisting of generalized spike-and-wave
discharges (GSWDs), clinically correlated with a tensive headache with bilateral and symmetrical eyelid flutter, facilitated by eye closure
(Fig. 1). The electroclinical pattern lasted for hours, configuring a non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE). During video-EEG monitoring,
Diazepam was administered with a gradual improvement of both clinical symptoms and EEG abnormalities. The patient reported complete
resolution of the headache attack after about 24 h. Video-EEG recordings performed on the following days were normal (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Ictal
epileptic headache during NCSE documented by video-EEG. The EEG tracing showed the activation of subcontinuous epileptic activity consisting
of GSWDs, clinically related to a prolonged tensive headache with bilateral and symmetrical eyelid flutter (a). The EEG pattern confirmed
the presence of an eye closure sensitivity characterized by GSWDs related to bilateral and symmetrical eyelid flutter (b)Fig. 2Video-EEG
performed some days after NCSE, showing a normal tracing during rest (a) and during eye closure (b) Ictal epileptic headache during NCSE
documented by video-EEG. The EEG tracing showed the activation of subcontinuous epileptic activity consisting of GSWDs, clinically related
to a prolonged tensive headache with bilateral and symmetrical eyelid flutter (a). The EEG pattern confirmed the presence of an eye closure
sensitivity characterized by GSWDs related to bilateral and symmetrical eyelid flutter (b) Video-EEG performed some days after NCSE, showing
a normal tracing during rest (a) and during eye closure (b) The complex relationship between epilepsy and headache/migraine remains poorly
understood. Although these two conditions often co-occur and are related in numerous ways, epidemiologic, genetic and pathophysiological
studies are controversial. Besides, the prevalence and the incidence of these disorders are different in all stages of life. In epileptic
patients the onset of the disease generally occurs under the age of one and over the age of sixty, while migraine/headache mainly involves
people in their middle age. In young patients autonomic features during both headache/migraine attacks and seizures are more frequent when
compared to the adult population, where autonomic manifestations are usually associated with other neurologic symptoms (the autonomic system
threshold appears to be age-specific and, particularly in children, its activation is presumed to be lower than that of sensori-motor or
other networks) [6, 7]. Assumed that interictal headache is the most frequent form (25–60 % of the cases), in the subgroup of patients with
peri-ictal headache, post-ictal headache account for 10–50 %, pre-ictal for 5–15 % and ictal for 3–5 % . According to IEH criteria , only 15
cases of IEH have been reported in literature so far; however, they were all characterized by extremely heterogeneous headache clinical
features (in terms of pain characteristics and location), etiology and EEG pattern. Migraine with or without aura, tension-type or
unclassifiable headache have been described. According to published data, IEH is mainly associated with partial epileptic syndromes or
encephalopathies; from a subsyndromic point of view, most patients had a symptomatic posterior focal epilepsy. Only one case of IEH in
idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) has been reported until now [4, 5]. Our case offers the opportunity to document the rather exceptional
association of IEH and EMA. The electroclinical pattern detected during video-EEG was characterized by tensive headache with bilateral and
symmetrical eyelid flutter facilitated by eye closure, correlated with GSWDs. This epileptic activity persisted for hours representing, by
definition, a NCSE. The headache attack as expression of an epileptic seizure is an interesting phenomenon and its pathophysiological
mechanisms have received considerable attention over the last decade. Neocortical dysexcitability (hypo- and hyper-excitation in headache
patients and hyper-excitation in epileptic patients) is the main physiopathological mechanism underlying the onset of both diseases.
Cortical spreading depression (CSD) seems to be the connection point between headache and epilepsy. CSD represents a neuronal depolarization
wave, followed by a suppression of bioelectrical activity. Neural modifications are associated with changes in regional blood flow, which
increases during the phase of depolarization and lowers during neural suppression. The occipital cortex is considered to be the area where
most migraine-related CSD phenomena start . Moreover, the occipital visual cortex plays an important role in the genesis of eye
closure–induced seizures and photosensitivity in several common forms of epilepsy, including EMA. Indeed, the interictal epileptiform
discharges over the posterior brain regions and spiky posterior alpha activities suggest the main role of occipital cortex, in EMA network.
The normal alpha generator produces the posterior alpha rhythm reactive to eye opening and closure (blinking). The malfunction of such
generator may produce the spiky posterior alpha activity during sustained eye closure . These electro-clinical data were corroborated by
EEG-correlated functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies in patients with EMA: an increased blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD)
signal in the visual cortex was detected after eye closure, regardless of the presence of EEG paroxysms, suggesting a transient state of
increased neuronal activity or a defective inhibition . Moreover, in photosensitive patients local hyperexcitability of the primary visual
cortex has been detected, as well as impaired intracortical inhibition . In some patients with IEH, intermittent photic stimulation (IPS)
determined a photoparoxysmal response (PPR) with or without headache [13, 14]. In other words, the electro-clinical characteristics and
focal changes of cerebral blood flow observed in patients with EMA suggest the main involvement of the occipital cortex. These findings, in
agreement with the role of the occipital cortex during migraine-related CSD, may explain the occurrence of headache as the main ictal
symptom of NCSE in our case. Although the putative role of the excitation/inhibition unbalance in the occipital cortex constitutes an
intriguing issue, in IGE patients with IEH the speculation is strongly limited by the poor availability of well-documented cases. To date,
indeed, IEH remains an extremely rare phenomenon and thus the exact pathophysiological point of connection between headache and epilepsy
remains enigmatic. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by Editor- in- Chief of this Journal. Ictal epileptic headache Eyelid myoclonia with
absences Generalized spike-and-wave discharges Non-convulsive status epilepticus Idiopathic generalized epilepsy Cortical spreading
depression Functional magnetic resonance imaging Blood oxygen level-dependent Intermittent photic stimulation Photoparoxysmal response
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MF, CDB, ATG conceived the study and
helped to draft the manuscript. JF, MA, SC, MM took part in the design of the study. MF, CDB, AM participated in writing the manuscript. All
authors agreed to accept equal responsibility for the accuracy of the content of the paper. All authors read and approved the final version
of the manuscript.
