These authors contributed equally to this work. The gamma‐aminobutyric acid type A receptor β3 gene (GABRB3) encodes the β3‐subunit of the
gamma‐aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor, which mediates inhibitory signalling within the central nervous system. Recently, GABRB3
mutations have been identified in a few patients with infantile spasms and Lennox–Gastaut syndrome. We report the clinical and
electrographic features of a novel case of GABRB3‐related early‐onset epileptic encephalopathy. Our patient presented with neonatal
hypotonia and feeding difficulties, then developed pharmacoresistant epileptic encephalopathy, characterized by multiple seizure types from
3 months of age. Electroencephalography demonstrated ictal generalized and interictal multifocal epileptiform abnormalities. Using a
SureSelectXT custom multiple gene panel covering 48 early infantile epileptic encephalopathy/developmental delay genes, a novel de novo
GABRB3 heterozygous missense mutation, c.860C>T (p.Thr287Ile), was identified and confirmed on Sanger sequencing. GABRB3 is an emerging
cause of early‐onset epilepsy. Novel genetic technologies, such as whole‐exome/genome sequencing and multiple gene panels, will undoubtedly
identify further cases, allowing more detailed electroclinical delineation of the GABRB3‐related genotypic and phenotypic spectra. This
article is commented on by Pearl on pages 330–331 of this issue. Gamma‐aminobutyric acid type A Gamma‐aminobutyric acid type A receptor β3
gene What this paper adds A report of a novel GABRB3 mutation associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy.A detailed
description of the clinical and electrographic features of the case.A review of the few other reported cases of GABRB3‐related epileptic
encephalopathy.A discussion of this gene's association with other neurodevelopmental disorder phenotypes.Increased clinical awareness of the
role of multiple gene panels in the diagnosis of early infantile epilepsy. A report of a novel GABRB3 mutation associated with early
infantile epileptic encephalopathy.A detailed description of the clinical and electrographic features of the case.A review of the few other
reported cases of GABRB3‐related epileptic encephalopathy.A discussion of this gene's association with other neurodevelopmental disorder
phenotypes.Increased clinical awareness of the role of multiple gene panels in the diagnosis of early infantile epilepsy. A report of a
novel GABRB3 mutation associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. A detailed description of the clinical and electrographic
features of the case. A review of the few other reported cases of GABRB3‐related epileptic encephalopathy. A discussion of this gene's
association with other neurodevelopmental disorder phenotypes. Increased clinical awareness of the role of multiple gene panels in the
diagnosis of early infantile epilepsy. Gamma‐aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors are ligand‐gated chloride channels that act as the
primary mediators of fast inhibitory synaptic transmission in the central nervous system. They belong to the Cys‐loop superfamily, and are
formed by pentameric assemblies of different subunit subtypes: α1–α6, β1–β3, γ1–γ3, δ, ε, π, θ, and ρ1–ρ3.1 Most GABAA receptors contain two
α‐subunits, two β‐subunits, and another, most commonly a γ‐subunit.2, 3 These subunits have four transmembrane domains, of which the second
transmembrane domain forms a central ion pore with the other four subunits4 (Fig. 1a). When GABA, the physiological ligand of GABAA
receptors binds to the receptor, the ion pore opens, facilitating chloride influx or efflux. The direction of chloride flux depends on
intracellular chloride concentration, regulated by the potassium‐chloride KCC2 and sodium–potassium–chloride NKCC1 co‐transporters. In
developing brains, the predominance of NKCC1 leads to increased intracellular chloride, resulting in GABA‐mediated chloride efflux which
depolarizes the cell membrane, thus leading to neuronal excitation.5 Mature neuronal cell bodies have low intracellular concentrations of
chloride due to high levels of KCC2 expression, leading to GABA‐mediated chloride influx that hyperpolarizes the cell membrane leading to
neuronal inhibition.6 (a) Top: Schematic diagram of the gamma‐aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor and the gamma‐aminobutyric acid type
A receptor β3 (GABRB3) subunit (depicted on the left). Most physiological heteromeric GABAA receptors are thought to include two α‐, two β‐,
and one other (most frequently a γ‐) subunits. Bottom: Each β3‐subunit consists of an extracellular domain, an α‐helical M1–M4 transmembrane
bundle, and an M3–M4 intracellular loop. The M2 segments line the ion channel pore that tapers as it traverses towards the intracellular
side of the membrane. The de novo heterozygous mutation in GABRB3 in our proband is located in amino acid position 287. Thr287 is located in
the M2 segment. Previously reported mutations in patients with epileptic encephalopathies are located in amino acid positions 110, 120, 138,
180, and 302. Polymorphisms and mutations implicated in childhood absence epilepsy are in positions 11, 15, and 32, clustered closer to the
N terminus. All above mutations and variants are depicted as circles with corresponding numbers. (b) Interictal electroencephalogram (EEG)
recording is seen above, showing high‐amplitude multifocal discharges, particularly in the right anterior region (circle). Ictal EEG is
depicted below, demonstrating generalized fast activity, more prominent over the frontal regions. Given the central inhibitory role of GABAA
receptors, it is not surprising that, to date, several genetic epilepsy syndromes have been associated with variants in GABAA receptor
subunit genes including GABRA1, GABRB3, GABRD, and GABRG2.7 GABRB3, located on chromosome 15q11.2‐q12, encodes the β3‐subunit of the GABAA
receptor. Reduced GABRB3 expression has been postulated in the pathogenesis of absence seizures, abnormal sensory processing, and other
neurodevelopmental disorder phenotypes such as Angelman syndrome, autism spectrum disorders, and intellectual disability.8, 9, 10
Furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphisms and missense mutations in GABRB3 have previously been implicated in childhood absence
epilepsy.11, 12 In 2013, GABRB3 mutations were identified in patients with infantile spasms and Lennox–Gastaut syndrome.13 To date, few
cases of GABRB3 epileptic encephalopathy have been described in the literature. We report a case of early‐onset epilepsy with a de novo
GABRB3 mutation identified on a diagnostic multiple gene panel, and delineate the electroclinical phenotype in our patient. A male,
first‐born to unrelated white parents, was delivered after induction of labour, by forceps delivery at 42 weeks' gestation. The antenatal
period was unremarkable and he was born in good condition. His maternal grandfather reported having seizures in childhood provoked by
startling, but these resolved spontaneously and there were no further neurodevelopmental concerns. Family history was otherwise
non‐contributory. The patient presented with neonatal hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and failure to thrive in early infancy. At 3 months
of age, he developed clusters of short seizures characterized by eye deviation, eyelid flickering, tonic arm extension, and back arching.
Ictal electroencephalography (EEG) revealed generalized fast activity, more prominent over the frontal regions, and interictal recordings
showed high‐amplitude delta/theta multifocal (but predominantly right anterior) discharges (Fig. 1b). Initially, complete cessation of
seizures was achieved in response to therapeutic doses of the GABA transaminase inhibitor vigabatrin. However, severe hypotonia, sedation,
and respiratory difficulties ensued, hence the patient was weaned off vigabatrin and it was discontinued. Seizures recurred at 5months of
age, and, despite multiple antiepileptic therapies (initially carbamazepine 14 mg/kg/day; then levetiracetam 40 mg/kg/day, topiramate 4
mg/kg/day, and sodium valproate 25 mg/kg/day in combination; and finally ketogenic diet with levetiracetam up to 50 mg/kg/day), he continued
to have ongoing intractable epilepsy. At the time of last review, age 3 years 2 months, he had 10 to 20 epileptic seizures per day. Seizure
semiology was varied, with episodic behavioural arrest, focal motor events, myoclonic jerks, and brief tonic seizures with lower‐limb
extension. Parents also reported frequent paroxysms of laughter of undetermined origin, but these episodes have not been captured on EEG.
Over time, he developed severe global developmental delay with signs of slow progress but no obvious evidence of regression. At 3 years 2
months, head circumference plotted on the 0.4th centile. A few subtle dysmorphic features were evident, including mild prominence of his
forehead with long eyelashes, tented mouth appearance, high‐arched palate, and bilateral undescended testes. There was also marked axial
hypotonia and severe head lag. An overall paucity of limb movements was observed, although some antigravity movements were evident.
Peripheral tone was low/normal, deep tendon reflexes were brisk throughout, and plantar responses up‐going bilaterally. There was no
evidence of ankle clonus. He could make some vocalizations and was feeding orally with only occasional drooling, and no episodes of choking
or swallowing difficulties. Extensive neurometabolic investigations were essentially unremarkable (Table SI, online supporting information),
including a normal MRI brain (age 14 mo) and comparative genomic hybridization microarray analysis for genomic copy number variants. Further
diagnostic testing was undertaken using a multiple gene panel covering 48 genes (Table SII, online supporting information) causing early
infantile epileptic encephalopathy. A custom SureSelect library was created (Agilent's SureDesign tool,
https://earray.chem.agilent.com/suredesign/). Libraries were made following the SureSelectXT Custom Capture protocol (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA, USA) and sequenced in‐house on an Illumina MiSeq. Of targeted regions (target genes and their intron–exon boundaries),
99.7% were covered at ≥30×. A single heterozygous missense mutation of GABRB3 (c.860C>T, p.Thr287Ile) was identified (Fig. 1a). Subsequent
Sanger sequencing of both proband and parents confirmed these findings, establishing that the mutation was absent in the parents and likely
to have occurred de novo (Fig. S1, online supporting information). The variant identified is classified as ‘likely pathogenic’ according to
the American College of Medical Genetics/Genomics Standards and Guidelines,14 which infers greater than 90% certainty of being
disease‐causing. This variant occurred de novo, providing strong evidence of pathogenicity. It was absent in control population databases
including ExAC (http://exac.broadinstitute.org/), 1000 Genomes (http://browser.1000genomes.org/index.html), and Exome Variant Server
(http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/) (moderate evidence). Furthermore, the amino acid change occurs in a transmembrane domain lining the ion
channel pore4 (moderate evidence). In silico analysis provided further evidence of pathogenicity, with Polyphen2 (score 1.000, sensitivity
0.00, specificity 1.00), SIFT (score 0.000), and PROVEAN (score −5.65) predicting the variant to be probably damaging, damaging, and
deleterious, respectively. We report a novel mutation in GABRB3 in a patient with severe intractable early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy. Our report highlights the recent finding that mutations in GABRB3 are an emerging cause of early‐onset epilepsy syndromes.
To date, five other cases of GABRB3 early infantile epileptic encephalopathy have been reported,10, 13 to our knowledge (Table 1). We
postulate that there are several features common in all these cases, including: (1) seizure onset in infancy, <10months of age, (2) multiple
seizure types including infantile spasms, (3) variable EEG abnormalities, and (4) associated comorbidities such as neurodevelopmental delay,
attention‐deficit–hyperactivity disorder, autistic features, and intellectual disability. Similar to previous reported cases, our patient
manifested features of a non‐specific early infantile epileptic encephalopathy disorder, with multiple seizure types and significant delay
in development. Reported patients with early‐onset epileptic encephalopathy due to GABRB3 mutations ADHD, attention‐deficit–hyperactivity
disorder; EEG, electroencephalography. Our patient harboured a mutation affecting a highly conserved protein domain located in the second
transmembrane loop lining the ion channel (Fig. 1a). It is difficult to postulate what the exact pathogenic mechanism of this variant is
without any in vitro or in vivo functional work; however, it is probably due to loss of function and haploinsufficiency. It is possible that
the position of the amino acid change within the receptor pore could negatively impact on receptor function, for example by inhibiting the
pore's opening and subsequent chloride flux. Other mechanisms including reduced GABRB3 protein expression and incorrect cellular trafficking
of GABRB3 could also play a role. This is the first reported mutation affecting this region and, to date, most other reported GABRB3
mutations causing epileptic encephalopathies target the extracellular protein domains, near the amino (N)′ terminus13 (Fig. 1a). GABRB3 has
also been implicated in other neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism, childhood absence epilepsy, and Angelman syndrome. A single
nucleotide polymorphism at the promoter region of GABRB3 (T>C substitution in position −897, numbering with respect to the initiator
methionine of exon 1a), which leads to reduction of the promoter's transcriptional ability, has been associated with childhood absence
epilepsy in previous studies.12 Other researchers have reported that a rare GABRB3 single nucleotide polymorphism (c.31C>T; p.Pro11Ser)15
and other variants (c.44C>T; p.Ser15Phe, and c.94G>A; p.Gly32Arg) (NM_021912.4) are linked with childhood absence epilepsy phenotypes
associated with eyelid myoclonus and generalized tonic–clonic seizures.6, 11 Probands had typical generalized 3Hz spike and wave discharges
during childhood, with clinical symptoms later remitting, without neurological sequelae. The identified mutations were also present in other
family members who never had epileptic seizures, suggesting variable penetrance. The same mutations were not found in 630 healthy ethnically
and sex‐matched comparison individuals in one study. However, p.Pro11Ser was later described in an asymptomatic individual, suggesting it
may be a rare single nucleotide polymorphism.6, 15 Interestingly, genetic variants implicated in childhood absence epilepsy are clustered
much closer to the N‐terminal domain of the protein than those identified in GABRB3 early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Fig. 1a). In
Angelman syndrome, deletions encompassing GABRB3 have been reported.16 Mice with Gabrb3 knockout have epilepsy and other abnormalities that
show some similarities to patients with Angelman syndrome.17 The extent to which GABRB3 accounts for the clinical phenotype of Angelman
syndrome is currently unclear. Other genes including GABRG3 and GABRA5 are also often contained within deletions causing Angelman
syndrome.16 The more severe phenotype associated with such deletions might indicate an additive role for these genes in disease
pathogenesis. EEG recordings in Angelman syndrome often demonstrate specific rhythmic patterns that are less prominent in patients with
deletions encompassing GABRB3. Indeed, no such rhythmicity was evident in our participant. At present, there are too few reported cases of
GABRB3‐related epilepsy for clear phenotype–genotype correlations or comparisons with Angelman syndrome due to chromosome deletions with
GABRB3 haploinsufficiency. It is currently unknown whether mutation type and location affect clinical disease presentation, or whether other
environmental or epigenetic factors may play a role. Increasing availability of novel genetic technologies, such as multiple gene panels and
whole‐exome sequencing will undoubtedly accelerate the identification of further cases, allowing more detailed delineation of the spectrum
of GABRB3‐related disorders. Recent studies suggest that GABRB3 mutations cause attenuated chloride currents and channel activity impairment
through subunit hyperglycosylation.11 The mechanisms through which GABRR3 mutations affect neuronal networks giving rise to epilepsy and
neurodevelopmental delay are yet to be fully elucidated. Further research is needed, not only to understand the underlying disease
pathogenesis but also to identify novel therapies, which may also have wider implications for GABAA modulation in other neurological
disorders. Figure S1: Top panel: De novo heterozygous mutation in GABRB3, c.860C>T (p.Thr287Ile) detected by panel and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing (red rectangle). Click here for additional data file. Table SI: Neurometabolic investigations undertaken in patient. Table SII:
Epilepsy and severe delay gene panel result. Click here for additional data file. The authors have stated that they had no interests that
might be perceived as posing a conflict or bias.
