Myocardial bridge refers to the myocardial tissue with which the coronary artery is partly covered. Though it has long been regarded to be
benign, patients with myocardial bridges may present with myocardial ischemia, acute coronary syndromes, coronary spasm, sudden cardiac
arrest or even sudden death. In present study, we reviewed four cases with myocardial bridge and no stenosis of coronary artery, which
included acute coronary syndrome and sudden cardiac arrest. These cases indicated that cardiac events in patients with myocardial bridge may
be associated with coronary spasm, myocardial supply/demand mismatch or cardiac arrest. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12872-015-0158-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Myocardial bridge (MB), a common
anatomical variant, refers to the myocardial tissue with which the coronary artery is partly covered. It is almost exclusively located in
the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD), rarely in the left circumflex artery and right coronary artery. The frequency of MB
varies with different countries and studies . At autopsy the prevalence of MB is reported to be as high as >50 % while the angiographic MB
is less commonly observed. Though MB has been regarded as to be benign clinically for a long time, several cardiac events including cardiac
arrest, even sudden death caused by MB have been reported. In present study, we reviewed a series of patients with MB presenting with
evidence of ischemia and no stenosis of coronary artery. Four case reports were showed. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of the case reports and any accompanying images. A 58-year-old Chinese man came to our hospital because of recurred
lasting chest pain at night for 3 days, which was continued about 1 h. The electrocardiogram (ECG) during episodes of chest pain showed ST
segment elevation in leads V1–V5 (ECG not obtained). He had a history of smoking for 30 years. On admission, physical examination was
unremarkable, except the blood pressure was 152/84 mmHg. ECG showed ST segment depression about 0.03 mV–0.05 mV in leads V5–V6 (ECG not
obtained). The myocardial enzyme was normal, the level of troponin I (cTnI) was 0.1 ng/ml (reference, < 0.5 ng/ml), creatine kinase-MB (CK-
MB) was 1.8 ng/ml (reference, < 5 ng/ml) and myohemoglobin was 18 ng/ml (reference, < 80 ng/ml). Echocardiography and chest x-ray were
normal. Coronary angiography (CAG) demonstrated there was a MB in the middle segment of the LAD (Fig. 1). No stenosis of coronary artery was
found.Fig. 1In case 1, coronary angiography with myocardial bridging (MB) of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) during
diastole (a) and systole (b) In case 1, coronary angiography with myocardial bridging (MB) of the left anterior descending coronary artery
(LAD) during diastole (a) and systole (b) A 51-year-old Chinese man with a six-month history of angina was admitted to our hospital because
of a sudden chest pain lasting about 80 min which reflected to left upper limb and finger side accompanied by diaphoresis. ECG showed ST
segment elevation in leads III and aVF (Figure S1 showed in the Additional file 1). Cardiac biomarkers were elevated. The levels of cTnI,
CK-MB and myohemoglobin were 6.0 ng/ml, 43.5 ng/ml and 148 ng/ml respectively. CAG showed that a MB in the middle segment of the LAD
(Fig. 2). The patient suffered several episodes of chest pain in hospital. ECG showed ST segment elevation in inferior leads (Figure S2
showed in the Additional file 1, ST segment elevation: lead III > lead II). After treatment with nitrates and diltiazem, the chest pain was
relieved.Fig. 2In case 2, coronary angiography showed that a MB in the middle segment of the LAD (a diastole; b systole) In case 2, coronary
angiography showed that a MB in the middle segment of the LAD (a diastole; b systole) A 55-year-old Chinese woman was presented to our
hospital because of sudden chest pain and shortness of breath for 3 h. She had a one-year history of hypertension. The levels of cTnI, CK-MB
and myohemoglobin on admission were 0.5 ng/ml, 11.9 ng/ml and 217.3 ng/ml respectively. The ECG revealed faster atrial fibrillation with a
ventricular rate of 110 beats/min and ST segment depression in leads V6 (Figure S3 showed in the Additional file 1). Reexamination of
cardiac biomarkers showed that cTnI, CK-MB and myohemoglobin were 5.8 ng/ml, 15 ng/ml and 25.6 ng/ml. CAG showed that a MB in the middle
segment of the LAD (Fig. 3).Fig. 3In case 3, coronary angiography showed that a MB in the middle segment of the LAD (a diastole; b systole)
In case 3, coronary angiography showed that a MB in the middle segment of the LAD (a diastole; b systole) A 55-year-old Chinese man was send
to our hospital for lasting chest pain for 6 h and sudden cardiac arrest. His past medical history were remarkable for hypertension and
diabetes for 3 years. He had a 30-years history of smoking. On admission, his blood pressure was 108/52 mmHg, respiratory rate was 30
breaths/min and his heart rate was 88 beats/min. The pupil diameter was 7 mm on both sides and the light pupillary reflex was disappeared.
ECG showed that ST segment depression about 0.01 mV–0.02 mV in leads V4–V6 (Figure S4 showed in the Additional file 1). The levels of cTnI,
CK-MB and myohemoglobin on admission were 0.1 ng/ml, 1.8 ng/ml and 125 ng/ml respectively. He suffered recurred cardiac arrest in hospital.
CAG showed that a MB in the middle segment of the LAD (Fig. 4). He is doing well at 4 months of follow-up after cardiac arrest.Fig. 4In case
4, a MB in the middle segment of the LAD was showed in coronary angiography (a diastole; b systole) In case 4, a MB in the middle segment of
the LAD was showed in coronary angiography (a diastole; b systole) Since described by Cranicianu in 1922 , MB has been widely investigated.
Though it has long been regarded to be benign, Ishikawa et al. recently found that MB may be an anatomic risk factor for coronary
atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction . Furthermore, MB can lead to myocardial ischemia, infarction, ventricular tachycardia,
ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac death. In present study, we reviewed the cases with MB and no stenosis of coronary artery, to
investigate the underlying mechanisms how cardiac events were caused in the patients who have MB and no stenosis of coronary artery.
Coronary artery spasm, first described in 1959 by Prinzmetal et al. , is not an uncommon and has been recognised as an important cause of
chest pain in patients with normal or significant obstructive coronary artery. The incidence of spontaneous coronary spasm varied in
different countries . It was reported that the incidence of spontaneous coronary spasm was between 0.26 % and 0.93 % during CAG, which may
be underestimated owing to nitroglycerin administration, the true incidence may be higher than that is angiographically demonstrable .
Compared with those have not MB, coronary spasm at myocardial bridge site was more easily to be provoked by either acetylcholine
administration or physical exertion . In case 1, ST segment elevation in V1-V5 leads during episodes of chest pain suggested acute ischemia
of LAD. CAG demonstrated no stenosis of coronary artery and MB in LAD, which suggested that spasm in LAD may lead to acute ischemia in
patient. In addition, coronary spasm that has not MB can also lead to acute ischemia in patient. Like in case 2, when the patient complained
of chest pain, the ECG showed ST segment elevation in inferior leads, which revealed acute ischemia of right coronary. No stenosis of right
coronary artery was found in CAG. The ECG changes showed that episodes of chest pain may be caused by spasm of right coronary artery. These
cases suggested that coronary spasm may play an important role in acute ischemia in patients with MB. Acute ischemia occurs when the supply
of myocardial blood flow is inadequate compared with the demand. It usually occurs in the setting of coronary arteriosclerosis and coronary
spasm. Though MB has long been regarded as a variant without hemodynamic or physiological relevance, recent researches have shown that MB
can impair coronary blood flow. Furthermore, there existed an abnormal coronary flow reserve in the site distal to the bridged segment . In
case 3, the faster atrial fibrillation increased the demand and decreased the supply of myocardial blood flow, which intensified myocardial
supply/demand mismatch and leaded to acute ischemia. Sudden cardiac death is an uncommon type of coronary artery disease, which mainly
caused by ventricular flutter or ventricular fibrillation. Corrado D et al. reported that in their study, among 16 sudden cardiac deaths
with aged under 35 years caused by non-atherosclerotic coronary diseases, six cases were founded to have MB in the LAD. In addition, MB can
lead to sudden death among of the young athlete such as basketball and football players . These studies indicated that MB may be a cause of
sudden cardiac death among individuals without coronary atherosclerosis, which seemed superficially healthy. In case 4 of present study,
during and after episodes of chest pain, the patient suffered several episodes of cardiac arrest, which may be associated with MB in the
LAD. The patients with MB can be treated according to the Schwarz classification . No treatment was needed in patients without objective
signs of ischemia. For symptomatic patients, beta-blockers and non-dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers are important drugs in first-
line therapy. Owing to intensifying systolic compression of the bridged segment, nitrates should be avoided unless there is significant
concomitant vasospasm. Indeed, though increasing the milking effect on angiography, nitrates have been used effectively in some patients
(such as case 2 in present study), which may be associated with their capability to reduce preload and to relieve vasospasm . Intracoronary
stenting, myotomy and coronary artery bypass graft surgery should be limited to patients with refractory symptoms despite intensified
medical therapy. In conclusion, the present study showed that though MB is generally thought to be a benign coronary abnormality, it may
lead to myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction and even sudden death. Written informed consent were obtained from all patients for
publication of the cases report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Additional file 1: ECGs with case 2 to 4 were showed. (PDF 396 kb) ECGs with case 2 to 4 were showed. (PDF 396 kb) Myocardial
bridge Left anterior descending coronary artery Electrocardiogram Coronary angiography Min Yu and Lihong Zhou contributed equally to this
work. Competing interest There are no conflicts of interest. Authors’ contribution MY and LHZ drafted the manuscript. TTC, KHY and CJZ were
involved in data collection. XRT and MY conceived of the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We have no one to
acknowledge to.
