The antituberculosis drugs isoniazid (INH), rifampicin (RMP), pyrazinamide (PZA), and ethambutol (EMB) usually expose patients to the risk
of fulminant hepatic failure (FHF). This report presents a case of liver transplantation in antituberculosis drugs-induced FHF and reviews
the relevant literature. A 39-year-old woman with pelvic and salpinx tuberculosis experienced complex pelvic exenteration. After the
operation, she was administrated INH, RMP, PZA, and EMB to prevent tuberculosis. Two months later, examination revealed severe FHF and the
antituberculosis therapy regimen was changed to ciprofloxacin and streptomycin. Subsequently, urgent orthotopic liver transplantation was
performed. Posttransplantation, her serum transaminases improved gradually, but her total bilirubin level and direct bilirubin level
continued to worsen, which may have been related to the rejection. However, irreversible damage from antituberulosis drugs was note
excluded. Two liver biopsies and histological examinations were performed. One year after transplantation, she died as a consequence of
ischemic cholangitis and pulmonary infection. A literature review revealed 9 other published cases of antituberculosis drugs-associated FHF
with liver transplantation. This report suggests that, in most cases of antituberculosis drugs-induced FHF, discontinuation of toxic drugs
and orthotopic liver transplantation are always sufficient treatment. Tuberculosis (TB) is 1 of the major causes of death from a curable
infectious disease. The United Nations has estimated there were about 9 million new cases of TB in 2013. Together, India and China account
for almost 40% of the world's TB cases.1 The most effective chemotherapy regimen for TB is a combination of isoniazid (INH), rifampicin
(RMP), pyrazinamide (PZA), and ethambutol (EMB) or streptomycin (SM). Frequent adverse effects of treatment include hepatotoxicity, skin
reactions, gastrointestinal disorder, and neurological disorder.2 Hepatotoxicity is 1 of the most serious adverse drug reactions associated
with anti-TB drugs. However, INH, RMP, and PZA each have hepatotoxic side effects, which increase when the drugs are combined and may limit
their use.3 Here, we report a case of orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) for anti-TB drugs-induced fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) in
China. We additionally present a review of the literature. This was a case report. The Institutional Review Board of the third affiliated
hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangdong, Guangzhou, approved this study. Informed consent was obtained from the patient. In May 2013, a
39-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital outpatient clinic with a 10-day history of fatigue, anorexia, and jaundice. She had no
abdominal pain or fever. Her liver tests revealed an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of 1414 U/L (normal range, 13–35 U/L), an
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 388 U/L (normal range, 3–35 U/L), a total bilirubin level of 9.6 mg/dL (normal range,
0.23–1.40 mg/dL), a direct bilirubin level of 4.8 mg/dL (normal range, 0.0–0.4 mg/dL), and an indirect bilirubin level of 4.79 mg/dL (normal
range, 0.15–1.22 mg/dL; Table 1). The patient had a history of pelvic and salpinx TB and experienced complex pelvic exenteration 3 months
before her admission. After the operation, anti-TB therapy was started with INH (200 mg/d), RMP (480 mg/d), and PZA (1200 mg/d) prophylaxis
for latent TB infection, per her expected course. The patient denied any prior history of chronic liver disease. She did not take any
special dietary, herbal, or other supplements and did not drink alcohol. Other laboratory data included ammonia (180 μmol/L; normal range,
0.0–54.0 μmol/L), prothrombin time (PT, 70.9 s; normal range, 11.0–14.5 s), and activate part plasma prothrombin time (APTT, 83.4 s; normal
range, 28.0–40.0 s). Serologic markers were negative for acute viral hepatitis, Budd–Chiari syndrome, and autoimmune hepatitis. Record of
the Patient's Liver Function From Day 1 to 15 Months After Her Admission to Our Hospital All of the anti-TB drugs were discontinued because
of presumed anti-TB drugs hepatotoxicity. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an anechoic mass and computed tomography revealed a mildly
irregular liver contour. Two months after her admission, she had developed stage II to stage III hepatic encephalopathy and marked
deterioration of synthetic liver functions. Her laboratory tests revealed an AST level of 100 U/L, an ALT level of 56 U/L, a total bilirubin
level of 51.3 mg/dL, a direct bilirubin level of 30.4 mg/dL, an indirect bilirubin level of 20.9 mg/dL, a PT of 46.4 s, and an APTT of 68.5
s (Table 1). A liver biopsy specimen demonstrated severe destruction of the liver parenchyma with massive hepatic necrosis (Fig. 1). She was
administered packed red blood cells, fresh-frozen plasma, platelets, and cryoprecipitate transfusion to correct her coagulopathy, as well as
an artificial liver support system to improve her condition. A diagnostic paracentesis yielded fluid that was consistent with spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis, and she was given anti-infection treatment. Microscopic image of H&E staining for liver tissue demonstrated extensive
chronic tissue damage to the liver parenchyma with massive hepatic necrosis, cholestasis, and intrahepatic bile duct proliferation
compatible with drug-induced hepatotoxicity (×20). Despite these measures, the patient experienced worsening encephalopathy, azotemia, and
hepatic synthetic dysfunction. OLT was performed 4 months after admission, and its course was uneventful. Immunosuppression was started with
low-dose tacrolimus alone because of the presence of active TB. The anti-TB therapy was continued with EMB, moxifloxacin, and SM. Because
her laboratory tests revealed elevated liver enzymes, a second liver biopsy was performed 6 months after admission. Histological examination
showed that the liver lobule structure was preserved. Hepatocellular cholestasis and granulocyte infiltration around small bile duct were
evident (Fig. 2). Microscopic image of H&E staining for liver tissue demonstrated hepatocyte swelling, cytoplasm rarefaction, spotty
necrosis scattering in the hepatic lobule, cholestasis in a small proportion of hepatocytes, and inflammatory cells infiltrating in portal
duct areas and the small bile duct (×20). The patient's case was complicated by an acute rejection episode that was treated with the
temporary intensification of immunosuppression therapy with methylprednisolone and sirolimus (rapamune). However, her situation became much
worse and a severe steroid-resistant rejection episode occurred 7 months after admission, a liver biopsy was performed and showed extensive
multiacinar collapse with loss of hepatocytes, portal inflammation, and biliary obstruction (Fig. 3). Laboratory test showed further
increases in liver enzymes (Table 1). Fifteen months after admission, she died as a consequence of ischemic cholangitis and pulmonary
infection. Microscopic image of H&E staining for liver tissue demonstrated the hepatic lobule structure and small bile duct were damaged,
showing spotty and fragmental necrosis, proliferation of fibrous connective tissue, and inflammatory cells infiltrating in the hepatic sinus
and area of tube convergence (×20). The liver has a central role in drug metabolism and detoxification and is consequently vulnerable to
injury. Drug-induced acute liver failure accounts for approximately 20% of acute liver failure in children and a higher percentage of acute
liver failure in adults.4 INH, RMP, and PZA are all widely used as first-line multidrug therapy for TB. Most recent studies have revealed
anti-TB INH-induced symptomatic hepatotoxicity with subclinical elevations of serum transaminases rates of 10% to 20%.4 RMP alone is rarely
severely hepatotoxic; however, in combination with INH, its hepatotoxicity occurs earlier and 5% to 8% more frequently than with either
medication alone.5 Although PZA alone is relatively safe, PZA in combination with INH and RMP is significantly associated with higher
hepatotoxicity than INH alone.6 No cases of hepatotoxicity have been described for EMB or SM.7 In the present report, we have described a
case of acute irreversible FHF following the administration of second-line treatment with anti-TB drugs and OLT, which did not prevent the
patient's death. A Medline search of all English-language articles from January 1994 to January 2015 identified 9 reported cases of FHF
caused by anti-TB medications in patients who received a liver transplant (Table 2).8–15 Three cases were attributed to INH, RMP, and
PZA9,11,12; 3 cases were attributed to INH and RMP8,13,14; 2 cases were attributed to INH alone8,15; and 1 case was attributed to EMB,
ciprofloxacin, and SM.10 The onset of anti-TB induced FHF occurred between 3 days and 4 months after anti-TB treatment. The patients
reported prodromes of influenza-like illness, high fevers, anorexia, jaundice, ascites, maculopapular rash, nausea, vomiting, dizziness
rash, epistaxis, and abdominal pain, most of which were quickly reversible by withholding the drugs and OLT. The patient described in this
manuscript had symptoms of hepatotoxicity 2 months after the initiation of treatment with INH, RMP, PZA, and EMB. The patient's symptoms
include fatigue, anorexia, and jaundice. After discontinuing anti-TB drugs and completing OLT, the patient's serum transaminases became
normal. Nonetheless, total bilirubin and direct bilirubin levels continues to rise, which may have been related to the rejection, but did
not exclude the possibility of irreversible damage from anti-TB drugs. Clinical Characteristics and Therapeutic Regimen of the 9 Cases
Included in the Review The exact pathogenesis of the anti-TB induced hepatotoxicity is not well understood. However, some susceptibility of
drug-induced liver injury can today be foreseen before drug administration by phenotyping and genotyping studies.16 Most anti-TB drugs are
liposoluble and their elimination requires biotransformation into compounds that are more water soluble. Accordingly, anti-TB drugs-induced
hepatotoxicity is not the result of a hypersensitivity or allergic reaction and is most probably caused by toxic metabolites. The hepatic
metabolization of INH mainly involves 2 enzymes: N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) and cytochrome P450 2E1. NAT2 acylates INH to acetyl INH,
followed by hydrolysation to acetylhydrazine, and cytochrome P450 2E1 contributes to oxidation. Some genetic variants are associated with
increased or reduced enzyme activity. Slow acetylators have been associated with a higher risk of anti-TB drugs-induced hepatotoxicity than
quick acetylators.17 Physicians should always consider this adverse effect in the absence of other clear hepatic disease.16 The American
Thoracic Society, the British Thoracic Society, the Task Force of the European Respiratory Society, the World Health Organization, and the
International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease have all published guidelines for management of drug-induced hepatotoxicity, which
remains an exclusion diagnosis based primarily on a detailed history and judicious blood tests, imaging, and liver biopsy. Of the relevant
biomarkers, ALT shows the best diagnostic performance for drug-induced hepatotoxicity.17 The onset of jaundice and the presenting clinical,
biochemical, and histological features of anti-TB drugs-induced hepatotoxicity are difficult to distinguish from other forms of hepatitis.18
For most anti-TB drugs, the relationships between serum concentrations and toxicity had not been established yet. So, monitoring of the
anti-TB drugs during treatment is insufficient.18 Healthcare team members and patients should communicate regularly to help prevent,
recognize, and manage drug toxicity. Abbreviations: ALT = alanine aminotransferase, APTT = activate part plasma prothrombin time, AST =
aspartate aminotransferase, EMB = ethambutol, FHF = fulminant hepatic failure, INH = isoniazid, OLT = orthotopic liver transplantation, PT =
prothrombin time, PZA = pyrazinamide, RMP = rifampicin, SM = streptomycin, TB = tuberculosis. XL and YL have contributed equally to the
manuscript. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation, China (81200094, 81102022); Natural Science Foundation of
Guangdong, China (S2012040006228); Foundation for Distinguished Young Talents in Higher Education of Guangdong, China (2012LYM_0004); Young
Teachers Cultivation Foundation of Sun Yat-Sen University, China (13 ykpy 33, 14 ykpy20). The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
