Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 51 Final Diagnosis: Transient ischemic attack Symptoms: Unilateral left-
sided weakness and slurred speech Medication: Lisinopril 20 mg daily Clinical Procedure: Transesophageal echocardiogram Specialty:
Cardiology • Neurology Rare disease In 1856, a Bohemian physician, Vilém Dušan Lambl, first described the presence of filiform lesions in
aortic valve leaflets. Lambl’s excrescences are tiny filiform strands that arise on the line of valve closure, and result from valvular wear
and tear. It is a rare cause of cardioembolic stroke that can be detected by transesophageal echocardiogram. We encountered a 51-year-old,
African-American woman with a history of recurrent strokes that we suspect may be the result of Lambl’s excrescence. The patient was treated
with dual antiplatelet therapy and was recommended to have surveillance transesophageal echocardiograms at 6 months and 1 year from the time
of discharge. As there are no definitive guidelines for the management of patients with Lambl’s excrescences, we present a review of the
current medical literature and a specific case report in an attempt to provide a better strategy for managing this condition. In our case
report, we focus on the management and treatment for Lambl’s excrescence because no clear evidence has been published in the literature. Our
review indicates that Lambl’s excrescence, despite its relative scarcity, should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a patient
with cryptogenic stroke. In 1856, Vilém Dušan Lambl, a Bohemian physician first described the presence of filiform lesions on aortic valve
leaflets . Lambl’s excrescences (LEs) are found on the line of closure of heart valves, and can result in mechanical endothelial damage.
This condition is most often diagnosed incidentally by transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) . They carry a potential risk of embolizing to
distant organs causing stroke or myocardial infarction . Histologically, they are composed of fibroelastic and hyalinized stroma covered by
a layer of endothelial cell lining . They are similar histopathologically to cardiac papillary fibroelastomas (CPFs). They differ in that
CPFs are larger and are found away from the line of valve closure, whereas LEs are found at the line of valve closure . Although the most
common causes of cardioembolic stroke include atrial fibrillation, valvular heart disease, patent foramen ovale, and left ventricular
dysfunction , LE is not commonly considered in the list of potential causes of stroke. LEs are hypothesized to form as a result of valvular
wear and tear. Once formed, they can be a source of microthrombi . Since the first description of LE involving the aortic valve in 1856,
only several cases have been reported in the medical literature. An evidence-based approach to the management and treatment of LE has yet to
be elucidated. We report a case of a 51-year-old woman with a history of 2 prior cerebral vascular accidents, who presented to the emergency
department with transient ischemic attack (TIA) symptoms. A 51-year-old, right-handed, African-American woman presented to the emergency
room with transient symptoms of worsening baseline left-sided weakness and slurred speech. Her past medical history was significant for
well-controlled hyper-tension for 11 years, 2 ischemic strokes, and the presence of LE on the aortic valve on TEE. She was also a former
tobacco abuser prior to February 2013. A review of her medical record revealed 2 prior hospitalizations. During her first hospitalization in
February 2013, the patient was admitted for an ischemic stroke. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple areas of acute
ischemia, including the right corona radiata and centrum semiovale, with multiple foci of acute ischemia in the gray-white matter interface
on the right hemisphere (Figures 1, 2). Her medical workup included an electrocardiogram (EKG), carotid Doppler, and transthoracic echo-
cardiogram (TTE) with bubble study, all of which were negative. Aortography and 4-vessel cerebral angiography done did not show
atherosclerotic plaque or occlusive disease. Her lipid profile showed total cholesterol 142 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 83 mg/dL,
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 36 mg/dL, and triglyceride 114 mg/dL. She was diagnosed with a cryptogenic stroke and was discharged home
with aspirin 81 mg daily and pravastatin 40 mg daily. Subsequently, the patient underwent outpatient cardiac monitoring with an implantable
loop recorder, which did not reveal cardiac arrhythmia. During her second hospitalization 3 months later (May 2013), the patient presented
with a transient episode of left-sided weakness and slurred speech. An MRI brain with diffusion revealed a resolving old ischemic infarct
with new areas of punctate acute ischemia in the posterior supratentorial brain at the level of the centrum semiovale (Figure 3). TEE at
that time revealed a 2-mm wavy strand on the aortic valve protruding into the ascending aorta, suggestive of an LE. There was no evidence of
valvular vegetation (Figures 4, 5). The left atrium was normal in size, and no thrombus was detected in the left atrium or left atrial
appendage. She was discharged home and instructed to take aspirin 81 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily. The patient returned to the
emergency department several months later with similar symptoms of transient left-sided weakness. It was noted that the patient was not
compliant with the dual antiplatelet therapy in the prior month. Her symptoms resolved upon initial evaluation. She scored 2 points on the
NIH Stroke Scale. On physical examination her vital signs were stable and the neurological examination was consistent with diminished
strength intensity of 4/5 in both proximal and distal left upper and lower extremities. This was consistent with her baseline motor
function. All her laboratory values were normal, including a lipid panel, hypercoagulability workup, and troponins. Bilateral carotid
Doppler ultrasonography showed a stable carotid plaque in the common carotids with no evidence of a hemodynamically significant stenosis on
either side. MRI of the brain showed improvement of her prior ischemic strokes, but no evidence of a new ischemic event. TTE did not show
any potential cardioembolic source. Since the MRI failed to reveal any focal finding, the multidisciplinary team decided to resume dual
antiplatelet therapy with aspirin 81 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily. At her 3-month and 6-month follow-up visits, the patient had no
further neurological events to suggest ongoing thromboembolic risk. Her symptoms of left-sided weakness remained essentially unchanged. The
patient reported compliance with her medications during this time period. She also had a repeat TEE at 6 months, which showed a stable size
LE. We advised the patient to continue with lifelong dual antiplatelet therapy and to repeat TEE in 12 months to evaluate the stability of
the LE. Only several cases of LE have been reported in the medical literature. We performed a review of published literature using PubMed to
identify previously published cases of LE from 1981 up to 2014 (Table 1) . Aortic and mitral valves were the two most common locations of
LE. However, ischemic events were more commonly observed in association with LEs on aortic valves as compared to mitral valves . Although
there has been some case reports on giant LEs (≥2 cm in diameter) associated with ischemic stroke , no clear evidence exists in the
literature showing the correlation between the strand size and potential risk of thromboembolic event. Whether LEs are involved in
generating ischemic events remains controversial. In the only prospective study in our review, Roldan et al. performed TEE assessment on
healthy volunteers (Group 1: n=88), patients without suspected cardioembolic disease (Group 2: n=88) and patients undergoing TEE for
suspected cardioembolic disease (Group 3: n=49). They found a similar prevalence of valve excrescences across all groups, suggesting that
excrescences were not associated with cardioembolic phenomenon. This was further supported by their observation that the rate of
cardioembolic events over approximately >4 years was similar in those with and without valve excrescences. Additionally, they noted that
aspirin and warfarin therapy did not seem to affect the prevalence or natural history of valve excrescences. However, due to the relatively
small sample size, low event rates, and lack of histological confirmation of the type of excrescence, the authors were unable to
definitively exclude LE as a possible source of cardioembolic events. Their findings are in contrast to those of Freedberg et al., who
noted, in a retrospective analysis, a higher prevalence of excrescences in patients with embolic phenomenon than those without (10.6% vs.
2.3%) . Given the lack of consensus in literature, it is difficult to exclude LEs as a possible source of embolic phenomenon in patients
with cryptogenic stroke. In our case, alternative causes were ruled out (negative EKG, hypercoagulability panel, carotid US, and
arrhythmias), leading us to suggest that LEs may have been responsible for our patient’s presentation. This is in line with previous case
reports documenting a similar association . However, for our patient, the first episode of stroke was diagnosed as cryptogenic stroke and no
TEE workup was done at that time. Therefore, we could not conclude that her stroke was associated with an undiagnosed LE. During her second
episode of stroke, an LE was found on TEE and she was started on dual antiplatelet therapy. During the last hospitalization, our patient was
diagnosed with TIA as there was no evidence of an infarct on brain MRI. Although our patient’s CHA2DS2-VASc score was 4, there was no
evidence of atrial fibrillation revealed from her loop recorder. Therefore, we decided to instruct the patient to continue with dual
antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 81 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg daily) since she had failed aspirin alone in the past. In the event our patient
was to develop atrial fibrillation, switching from dual antiplatelet to anticoagulation therapy and excision of LE would be considered. We
recommended our patient to have a surveillance TEE at 6 months and 1 year from the time of hospital discharge to visualize the stability of
LE. Further research is needed to evaluate the clinical importance of LE, including the pathophysiology, its association with ischemic
events, and how to manage and treat it. It is our opinion that physicians should still consider LE in the differential diagnosis for a
patient with cryptogenic stroke until conclusive evidence suggests otherwise. We recommend performing a TEE in this population, and if LE is
present, we suggest that treatment with dual antiplatelet therapy should be considered. If there is a recurrent ischemic event while on this
therapy, a trial of anticoagulation therapy should be considered before proceeding with surgical resection of the LE. Indication for the
surgical resection of LE is still controversial, simply based on a few case reports and poor follow-up outcomes. In conclusion, our case is
in line with previous case reports; however, this underscores the need for well-designed studies to determine appropriate strategies for
treating valve excrescences in these patients. We thank Lauren Cohen-Sahalon for her contribution in manuscript preparation (review and
editing). MRI brain diffusion scan coronal view. Multiple areas of acute ischemia in the right corona radiata centrum semiovale with
multiple foci of ischemia in the gray-white matter interface on the right. MRI brain diffusion scan axial view. Area of acute ischemia in
the right corona radiata centrum semiovale. MRI brain axial view with diffusion revealed a resolving old ischemic infarct with new areas of
punctuate acute ischemia in the posterior supratentorial brain at the level of centrum semiovale. Transesophageal echocardiogram showing a
small strand on the aortic valve protruding into the ascending aorta. Transesophageal echocardiogram showing the small Lambl’s excrescence
(arrow), LV (Left Ventricle), AV (Aortic Valve), A (Aorta). Previously reported cases of Lambl’s excrescence.
