Type A aortic dissection is an emergency condition that requires immediate surgery. Graft replacement of the ascending aorta is the main
treatment for this disorder. However, after ascending aortic replacement, the dissection flap may progress to the distal side (to the
descending aorta) and a new intimal tear may develop. In this study, we report on a 66-year-old woman who had a history of ascending aortic
replacement six months earlier. She was admitted to hospital with a new onset of back pain. Computed tomography revealed a new dissection
tear originating from the distal side of the subclavian artery orifice. Thoracic endovascular dissecting aneurysm repair (TEVDAR) was
carried out on the patient. Additional complications were not observed in the postoperative period. Complete cure was provided and the
patient was discharged on the fourth day after the operation. TEVDAR may be safe and effective in preventing progression of the aortic flap
and the formation of a new intimal tear in type A aortic dissections. Optional hybrid interventions could ameliorate the outcomes in aortic
dissection cases. Aortic dissection (AD) is a life-threatening emergency situation that progresses rapidly. Early mortality rates are as
high as 50%, even under optimal treatment conditions.1-3 Alternate treatment approaches may be used according to the specific AD subtype.2
The standard AD classification system used in clinical practice is Stanford’s classification. This system categorises AD into two classes,
type A and B, according to the presence or absence of ascending aortic involvement. Surgical replacement of the ascending aorta is indicated
as the most appropriate curative therapy for Stanford type A AD. However, type B AD may initially be treated medically, with subsequent
surgery or endovascular intervention.2,3 During the postoperative period, close monitoring of the progression of the flap, organ perfusion
and other systemic events is critical. A rigorous postoperative follow up is required if the dissection flap involves the abdominal aorta or
if the dissection has progressed significantly.4 Failure to closely monitor the disease progression in patients with type A AD undergoing
surgical replacement of the aorta can result in significant clinical complications, such as secondary type B AD, as presented in the current
case. The use of supplementary medication or hybrid interventions may improve the success rate of the initial ascending aortic graft
replacement surgery. Here, we report on a secondary type B AD patient who had previously been operated on for a type A AD. Thoracic aneurysm
repair with endovascular graft is usually an elective procedure, but a dissecting aneurysm of the thoracic aorta is a more progressive and
serious condition. We therefore undertook thoracic endovascular dissecting aneurysm repair (TEVDAR) instead of thoracic endovascular
aneurysm repair (TEVAR). The presentation, management and clinical outcomes of the case are presented in the context of the current clinical
literature. A 66-year-old woman was admitted to hospital with severe backache. This patient had undergone ascending aortic replacement
surgery to treat type A AD six months prior to the presentation (Fig. 1). The medical history of the patient included hypertension for the
past 25 years, nephrectomy due to nephrolithiasis eight years earlier, polio sequela and a motor deficit of the left leg. Dissection flap
without tear during the initial diagnosis of type A AD. Her systolic blood pressure was 130 mmHg on the right arm and 110 mmHg on the left
arm. All arterial pulses were determined by manual examination. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a type B dissection flap
involving the left subclavian artery with retrograde progression. The diameter of the true lumen had narrowed significantly to < 10 mm, and
the total diameter (with false lumen) was 43.7 mm at the widest section (Fig. 2). The peak aortic diameter was measured at 67.2 mm. We
therefore initiated preparation for the TEVDAR surgery. Dissection flap with tear (flow can be observed between the true and false lumen)
nine months after replacement of the ascending aorta. The patient underwent surgery under general anaesthesia. During the operation, an
initial exploration of the right common femoral artery was conducted. A 5-F pigtail catheter was inserted into the ascending aorta through
the right brachial artery. This artery was chosen to facilitate proximal imaging, as delivery of the catheter through the left brachial
artery could have been inhibited by the presence of the thoracic aortic stent placed six months previously. Contrast imaging of the aortic
arch revealed the brachiocephalic truncus sourced from the left common carotid artery (Fig. 3) (bovine arch). Moreover, the origin of the
retrograde dissection flap was identified 1 cm distal to the left subclavian artery in the contrast view (Fig. 3). View of the flap tear on
the distal side of the subclavian artery. Following the completion of the measurements, a 40 × 212-mm tube stent–graft was implanted into
the descending aorta, including the proximal subclavian section. The placement of the tube stent–graft was challenging because of the
narrowing of the true lumen and the high-angled aortic progression. The graft was placed using forced external manoeuvres. An extension tube
stent–graft with a diameter of 42 × 112 mm was placed through the right common femoral artery. The correct placement of the extension tube
stent–graft was confirmed with angiography and the application was concluded (Fig. 4). Primary repair of the right common femoral artery was
conducted. Closed flap tear after TEVDAR application. After surgery, no pulse deficit was observed in the left limb. The patient recovered
in the intensive care unit and hydration was administered for deficient blood urine nitrogen and creatinine levels (due to the patient’s
nephrectomy history). She was discharged on the fourth day after surgery. All current treatment strategies for AD are associated with a high
mortality rate. This risk is further increased by the extended patient transfer times. However, recent advances in surgical procedures may
improve the overall morbidity and mortality rates in AD.2,3,5 In the present case, a brachiocephalic truncus in the left common carotid
artery (bovine arch) was detected by contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Hornick et al. retrospectively analysed a series of AD cases and
they concluded that bovine arch anatomy is not associated with increased incidence of AD compared with the normal anatomical configuration.
Therefore bovine arch anatomy was likely not a significant factor in the development of AD in the present case.6 The primary treatment
strategy for type A AD is graft replacement of the ascending aorta.5,7 However, dissection or distension of the distal aorta may be
neglected in most cases. In the present case, the patient had undergone replacement of the ascending aorta due to type A dissection nine
months earlier. Upon presentation, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) detected a progression of the previous flap to the level of
the renal artery. No additional progression of the dissection flap had been observed in the previous CT images (Fig. 3)). In the earlier CT
examination, the true lumen had retained the contrast. However, our examination nine months later showed the contrast agent passing through
the false lumen. Despite the absence of a rupture in the aorta, these recent flap changes could have caused organ ischaemia due to the
narrowing of the lumen diameter. Therefore, we proposed that the type B dissection was closely related to the previous type A dissection in
this case. Moreover, the same risk factors that resulted in the previous dissection of the ascending aorta (hypertension, etc) could also
have resulted in disruption of the distal section of the aortic intima, even though the damage to the proximal aorta had been completely
repaired. TEVDAR application is beneficial to most patients diagnosed with type B AD. Although this procedure is associated with higher
costs, the benefits of this intervention include reduced risk of complications, shorter recovery time in the intensive care unit and a more
rapid return to normal quality of life. Additionally, the management of type A AD using surgical and medical hybrid therapy may be critical
to the prevention of secondary complications, such as the development of a secondary type B AD. In high-risk AD cases, TEVDAR may result in
improved outcomes and a better quality of life.
