Ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia and clefting syndrome or “Lobster claw” deformity is a rare congenital anomaly that affects tissues of
ectodermal and mesodermal origin. Nasolacrimal duct (NLD) obstruction with or without atresia of lacrimal passage is a common finding of
such a syndrome. The authors report here even a rarer presentation of the syndrome which manifested as bilateral NLD obstruction and
lacrimal fistula along with cleft lip and palate, syndactyly affecting all four limbs, mild mental retardation, otitis media, and sinusitis.
Lacrimal duct obstruction and fistula were managed successfully with endoscopic dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR) which is a good alternative to
lacrimal probing or open DCR in such a case. The ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting (EEC) syndrome or “Lobster claw” deformity is a
rare autosomal dominant familial disorder with variable penetrance. It involves both ectodermal and mesodermal tissues and consists of
ectodermal dysplasia manifested as hypopigmentation of the skin and hair, scanty hair and eyebrows, absence of eyelashes, nail dystrophy,
hypo- and microdontia, ectrodactyly, and cleft lip and palate. Other associated clinical features include abnormalities of genitourinary
system (i.e., renal agenesis, urethral atresia, and hydronephrosis), conductive or sensorineural hearing loss, choanal atresia, mammary
gland or nipple hypoplasia, ophthalmological findings (i.e. nasolacrimal duct obstruction, lower lid punctal stenosis, photophobia, corneal
ulcerations, keratitis, blepharitis, and entropion), gland abnormalities (i.e. hypoplastic thymus, hypopituitarism, and growth hormone
deficiency), and on exceptional circumstances presence of white sponge nevus, delayed developmental milestones, and malignant lymphoma but
without any intellectual deficit. Chromosome 19, within the region of D19S894 and D19S416, has been postulated as the locus for the
abnormalities found in EEC syndrome. Recently, the p63 gene has been targeted in numerous studies. Though the syndrome is rare, the exact
prevalence of EEC syndrome is not known. Just more than 300 cases have been reported in literature so far. Bilateral lacrimal fistulas may
also be seen in patients with VACTERL, CHARGE, and Down's syndrome. Here, we present a case of EEC syndrome with bilateral congenital
lacrimal fistulas, which is by far one of the rare combinations of this syndrome. A 17-year-old male student was admitted with epiphora and
intermittent discharge of pus from an accessory openings situated close to the medial canthus of both eyes (more on the right side than
left) since he was 4 years of age. He also presented with nasal regurgitation of fluid. There was clefting of the lip and palate, and the
absence of digits in all four limbs since birth. There were no urinary symptoms. There was no family history of such a condition, but the
patient was mildly mentally retarded since childhood. He underwent cleft lip repair surgery in childhood [Fig. 1]. Gross appearance of the
patient The general examination was unremarkable except scar mark of previous cleft lip surgery over face and webbing of fingers of upper
and lower limbs. On local examination, regurgitation of pus on pressure over lacrimal sac area test was positive bilaterally. Lacrimal
syringing was performed, and there was regurgitation of fluid mixed with pus through the fistula and other punctum with hard stop
bilaterally [Fig. 2]. Right sided lacrimal fistula and repaired cleft lip of the same patient Otoscopic examination showed purulent
discharge with perforated tympanic membranes bilaterally. Ultrasonography of the lower abdomen and urinary tract were within normal limits.
Paranasal sinus X-ray revealed little mucosal thickening of both maxillary sinuses with normal midline nasal septum and turbinates. Pure
tone audiometry showed bilateral mild conductive hearing loss. High resolution computed tomography of temporal bone revealed only minimal
soft tissue density lesions in middle ear bilaterally [Fig. 3]. Smaller left lacrimal fistula of the patient Endoscopic
dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR) operation was planned on both sides in two sittings under general anesthesia after diagnosis. The operation on
the right side was done first as symptoms were more on that side. The surgery was performed with 0* 4 mm diameter rigid Hopkins rod
telescope and the “mucosal flap” technique was used. Nose is decongested with a mixture of 4% lignocaine and 1:1000 adrenaline solution in a
ratio of 10:1 approximately 10 min before surgery. At the beginning of the surgery, 2 ml of readymade solution of 2% lignocaine containing
1:100000 adrenaline is injected just anterior to and above the middle turbinate. Now, an incision is taken starting 8 mm above the axilla of
the middle turbinate and brought 8 mm anterior to it and from there vertically downward to the attachment of inferior turbinate and
ultimately taken posteriorly to the insertion of uncinate process under the edge of middle turbinate. Thus, a posteriorly based mucosal flap
is created which is raised to expose the suture line between the frontonasal process of maxilla and lacrimal bone. Now, a part of frontal
process is removed using DCR punch forceps along the previously identified suture line to make a neo-ostium, and this is continued up to the
fundus of the sac superiorly. Agger nasi cell forms a good guide to the fundus. Thus, the lacrimal sac is fully exposed. Now, the inferior
is punctum is dilated, and the lacrimal sac is tented using Bowman's probe. Now, a vertical incision is made over the medial wall of the sac
using DCR spear knife as posteriorly as possible. Free flow of normal saline was established inside the nose preoperatively while syringing
[Fig. 4]. Peroperative picture during endo-DCR showing free passage of water on syringing after excision of sac wall Two horizontal
releasing incisions are given on superior and inferior aspects of the flap making it “I” shaped. The flaps are rolled out. Then, the center
of the original nasal mucosal flap is trimmed to make it “C” shaped to cover the raw bony edges. Normally, anterior lacrimal flap is covered
by mucosal flap. Usually, there is no need to pack the nose at the end of the procedure. All patients receive broad spectrum antibiotic
therapy for 5 days and antibiotic-steroid eye drop for 2 weeks. Saline nasal spray was administered immediately after the surgery and for 4
weeks postoperatively to aid in removal of blood clots from the nasal cavity. The tearing was relieved postoperatively on the right side.
Lacrimal syringing performed on the seventh, fourteenth, and twenty- first postoperative day along with nasal endoscopy showed normal
passage of saline in the nose and throat. The patient was followed up to 1 year. Spontaneous resolution of lacrimal fistula observed on
successful treatment of concurrent NLD obstruction even without excision of the tract. We performed endoscopic DCR on the left side after 3
months and obtained similar results. Sinusitis and chronic otitis media were treated conservatively and responded. Cleft lip was repaired in
the childhood by a plastic surgeon. The acronym EEC was coined by Rudiger in 1970 and recognised first as a distinct clinical entity by
Cockayne, who drew attention to “dacryocystitis” which commonly affects these patients and its association with “atresia of the lacrimal
ducts,” in its first published report. Since that description in 1936, several other reports have appeared in the ophthalmic literature
detailing its ocular manifestations. There are very few studies which tell about its prevalence in general population. According to one
study, EEC is relatively common than other similar syndromes (i.e. Acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth syndrome (ADULT), Limb-mammary
syndrome (LMS), etc.) with over 200 published cases. Another study observes a large Dutch family with autosomal dominant limb mammary
syndrome (LMS) with at least 27 affected members. Lacrimal duct atresia was found in 7 out of 15 such patients with LMS. In all these
syndromes, NLD atresia is a common feature. According to another case report, NLD obstruction was present in the most of the affected
members of a family of ADULT syndrome and was resistant to therapy. Mcnab et al. studied some families with EEC syndrome and showed lacrimal
canalicular atresia or absent lacrimal puncta along with NLD obstruction with cleft lip and palate are common in such families. Moreover,
limb deformities and lacrimal drainage anomalies though common are not unique to it. We found a similar combination of findings in our case.
Wojcicki et al. operated 10 such patients with NLD atresia by either duct dilatation or open DCR and observed both procedure effectively
improved patients’ quality of life. According to one case series, obstructed lacrimal canaliculi or NLD may be associated with lacrimal
gland dysfunction. In such patients with dry eye and obstructed NLD surgery may be required. They operated successfully three cases without
any technical difficulties. The only postoperative complication was cheese-wiring of the lid margins from the inserted O’donoghue tubes in
one case. This was abetted by the abnormally thin lid margins overlying the canaliculi. Moreover, they have not found it necessary to resort
to dacryocystectomy or Lester Jones bypass tubes. Tien and Tien described a case of EEC syndrome with bilateral lacrimal fistulae where they
excised the fistulas and intubated the NLDs with improvement in symptoms. Elmann et al. reported a case of EEC syndrome with left lacrimal
fistula and other bilateral congenital lacrimal anomalies who underwent left conjunctivo DCR with the insertion of a Jones tube with a
resolution of lacrimation postoperatively. According to the authors that is the only second report detailing management of congenital
lacrimal anomalies in EEC syndrome, and the first describing management of punctal atresia with conjunctivo DCR and Jones tube placement. In
that sense, ours is the second case to report bilateral lacrimal fistulas in a patient of EEC syndrome and first only to manage it by
endoscopic endonasal DCR surgery. We performed endoscopic DCR alone because our patient was an adult one and making a big neo-ostium
endonasally, we wanted to allow the fistula tract heal spontaneously thus avoiding an extra surgery like fistulectomy, and our postoperative
result was very encouraging. Endo DCR also avoids external scar mark on the skin and do not hamper lacrimal endothelial pump mechanism. We
did not find any particular technical problem preoperatively. Al-Salem et al. studied fifteen patients of congenital lacrimal fistula and
found the spontaneous resolution of discharge through fistula in 27% cases on successful treatment of concurrent NLD obstruction with
lacrimal sac massage, so as our case. Buss et al. reported clinical presentation and management of 24 cases of EEC syndrome observed
conductive deafness and genitourinary problems in some cases required surgical intervention. We were able to manage otitis media and
sinusitis conservatively. We would like to conclude that EEC syndrome presenting with bilateral lacrimal fistulas is a rare and crippling
condition, it needs multidisciplinary team approach consisting of an orthopedic surgeon, psychiatrists, ophthalmic and plastic surgeon,
urologist, and ENT surgeon to manage such a case. A patient of EEC syndrome presenting with NLD obstruction and fistula, endoscopic
endonasal DCR can be a better alternative to duct dilatation and even open DCR. The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate
patient consent forms. In the form the patient(s) has/have given his/her/their consent for his/her/their images and other clinical
information to be reported in the journal. The patients understand that their names and initials will not be published and due efforts will
be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to
thank the Principal, R. G. Kar Medical College, Kolkata for allowing us to conduct this research work properly.
