Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 54 Final Diagnosis: WPW and AVNRT Symptoms: Palpitations • shorthness of
breath Medication: — Clinical Procedure: EP Study/Radiofrequency Ablation Specialty: Cardiology Rare co-existance of disease or pathology
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is the most common form of supraventricular tachycardia. In contrast, Wolff-Parkinson-
White (WPW) pattern consists of an accessory pathway, which may result in the development of ventricular arrhythmias. Frequent tachycardia
caused by AVNRT and accessory pathways may play a role in left ventricular systolic dysfunction. A 54-year-old man presented with
palpitations and acute decompensated congestive heart failure. His baseline EKG showed Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) pattern. While
hospitalized, he had an episode of atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT). He underwent radiofrequency catheter ablation for
AVNRT, and his accessory pathway was also ablated even though its conduction was found to be weak. He was clinically doing well on follow-up
visit, with resolution of his heart failure symptoms and normalization of left ventricular function on echocardiography. This case raises
the question whether the accessory pathway plays a role in the development of systolic dysfunction, and if there is any role for ablation in
patients with asymptomatic WPW pattern. Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is the most common form of supraventricular
tachycardia. In contrast, Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) pattern consists of an accessory pathway which predisposes to the development of
ventricular arrhythmias if conduction takes place through this pathway. WPW in asymptomatic patients is less understood. Little is known
about the role of AVNRT and accessory pathways in the development of left ventricular dysfunction. A 54-year-old man with hypertension,
dyslipidemia, and diabetes presented to the hospital complaining of several weeks’ history of palpitations and 1-week history of progressive
shortness of breath, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, bilateral leg swelling, and weight gain. He also complained of intermittent
palpitations. On examination, his blood pressure was 166/88 mm Hg and his heart rate was 102 beats per minute (bpm). He had an elevated
jugular venous pressure (JVP), clear lungs, normal S1/S2 with no added sounds, and 2+ pitting edema bilaterally. His EKG demonstrated sinus
tachycardia, left ventricular hypertrophy and WPW pattern (Figure 1). CXR showed subsegmental atelectasis. His creatinine was 1.4 (baseline
1.06), and pro-BNP was 3732 pg/ml. He was started on intravenous furosemide and continued on metoprolol and lisinopril. The following
morning, he had abrupt onset of palpitations and a 12-lead EKG revealed narrow complex tachycardia with a short RP interval at a heart rate
of 180 bpm, suggestive of AVNRT (Figure 2). Carotid massage was attempted without success, but rapid intravenous administration of adenosine
6 mg converted him back to sinus rhythm. A 2-D echocardiogram showed severely reduced systolic function with ejection fraction (EF) of
25–30% (LV function was normal 6 months prior), mild left ventricular hypertrophy with borderline enlarged left ventricle, left atrial
enlargement, and a small-to-moderate pericardial effusion without hemodynamic effect. Because of the presence of unexplained cardiomyopathy
as well as preexcitation in this relatively young patient, a blood sample was obtained to rule out Fabry’s disease. The test was performed
at the Mayo Clinic, but was negative. An electrophysiologic study (EPS) confirmed typical AVNRT, and the patient underwent a slow pathway
ablation. In addition, the EPS revealed a bystander right anterolateral accessory pathway with weak anterograde conduction and no retrograde
conduction. The pathway’s effective refractory period (ERP) from the coronary sinus os was 360 ms, and from the high right atrium it was 390
ms. The AH interval was 69 ms and the HV interval was –31 ms. During mapping there appeared to be evidence of a pathway potential and it was
felt the benefits of ablation outweighed the risks. There was no evidence of preexcitation post-ablation (Figure 3). Coronary angiography
revealed no evidence of coronary artery disease. The patient was discharged home on optimal heart failure medications and was clinically
compensated and palpitation-free at follow-up. A repeat echocardiogram done 6 months later showed improved EF of 60–65%. Atrioventricular
nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is a narrow complex tachycardia characterized by the presence of dual electrical pathways near or in the
AV node. In contrast, Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) pattern is diagnosed by the presence of short PR interval, delta waves, and widened QRS
complex. Once symptomatic arrhythmias develop, it is termed WPW syndrome . Its prevalence is estimated to be 1–4.5 per 1000 . The risk of
sudden cardiac death is approximately 0.3% when conduction through the accessory pathway predisposes to the development of ventricular
fibrillation, especially in the presence of atrial fibrillation . Our patient presented with intermittent palpitations, new-onset
symptomatic systolic dysfunction, and an EKG with preexcitation, suggestive of a right free-wall origin. His palpitations during the
hospital stay were caused by a narrow complex tachycardia highly suggestive of (AVNRT) given the location of the retrograde p wave in the
terminal portion of the QRS, making atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT) unlikely since the participation of a right-sided free-
wall accessory pathway would demonstrate a longer RP interval. AVNRT was confirmed during the EPS by a combination of: (1) short septal VA
time of 50 ms, (2) dissociating the ventricle from the atrium during ventricular pacing, and (3) consistent termination of the tachycardia
without advancing the atrial electrogram. While hypertension and diabetes could have contributed to the development of his cardiomyopathy,
the presence of WPW pattern as the sole or partial contributor to possibly explain his cardiomyopathy cannot be definitely proven.
Interestingly, it has been reported that the location of the accessory pathway may lead to left ventricular dysfunction in asymptomatic WPW
syndrome . The postulated mechanism is that right-sided accessory pathways can lead to dyssynchronous LV contraction with subsequent
remodeling and depressed function . In addition, incessant tachycardia from AVNRT may play a role in the development of systolic dysfunction
. There remains a controversy on how to approach asymptomatic patients with WPW pattern, given the low annual incidence of sudden cardiac
death (up to 0.39%) and the relatively low sensitivity and specificity of non-invasive testing used for risk stratification, (e.g., exercise
or pharmacological stress test) . The current American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for
asymptomatic patients with WPW restricts catheter ablation to high-risk occupations . Our patient was undergoing radiofrequency catheter
ablation for AVNRT, and, given the possible association of LV dysfunction associated with an accessory pathway and the known risk (although
low) of sudden cardiac death, we felt that ablation of the accessory pathway in the same setting was a reasonable therapeutic approach,
despite current guidelines. While the presence of delta waves may be an incidental finding, it may play a significant role in patients with
newly diagnosed congestive heart failure. Comorbid conditions, risk of sudden cardiac death, and left ventricular dysfunction should all be
taken into consideration when physicians evaluate asymptomatic WPW patients who may be considered for catheter ablation. In selected cases,
a judicious and well-balanced clinical decision may be more beneficial and patient-oriented than rigid adherence to guidelines. Conflicts of
interest Authors report no conflicts of interest. Pre-excitation with delta waves (arrows). AV nodal reentry tachycardia. The P waves can be
seen immediately following the QRS complex (arrows). Normal sinus rhythm.
