Retrorectal cystic hamartomas are rare congenital presacral lesions and malignancy is extremely rare. Although surgical excision is the
essential for treatment, a unique feature of our case compared with previously reported tailgut cysts is that this patient's blood irregular
antibodies are positive with higher operational risks. A 44-year-old woman presented to our department complaining of pelvic and perineal
pain for 6 months. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a well-demarcated hypodense, multilocular cystic
lesion, 10 cm in size, in the presacral region of the right of the midline. We found her blood irregular antibodies were positive in the
preoperative examination. So she quitted surgery. Exploratory laparotomy and incision and drainage of pelvic tumor were operated.
Postoperative routine pathology showed: (retroperitoneal tumors) moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Combined with clinical symptom
and imaging, malignant transformation of retrorectal cystic hamartomas (tailgut cysts) was diagnosed. Taking into account that cyst is not
sensitive to radiotherapy, so tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and raltitrexed were infused into the cysts and 3 cycles oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2)
were completed. Now although the lesion is shrink, but yellow, viscous mucus still secrete constantly, 100 ml/w. Given surgical excision is
the essential for treatment, complete surgical excision should be implemented as far as possible. But if surgery cannot be carried out like
the presented case, systemic chemotherapy and local radiotherapy are also available, which can alleviate the symptoms of oppression and
improve the quality of life partly. Tailgut cysts or retrorectal cystic hamartomas are rare congenital presacral lesions identified in all
age groups. They are believed to arise from the remnants of the embryonic hindgut. Retrorectal cystic hamartomas are 3 times more common in
women than men. They can be detected at any age, including infancy.1,2 Malignancy in tailgut cysts is extremely rare, the majority being
adenocarcinomas and carcinoid tumors.3–5 We report a case of adenocarcinomas associated with a tailgut cyst. A unique feature of our case
compared with previously reported tailgut cysts is that this patient's blood irregular antibodies are positive with higher operational
risks. A 44-year-old woman presented to our department complaining of pelvic and perineal pain for 6 months. We found no abnormality on
physical examination in February 2013. A nontender, extrinsic, well-defined presacral mass was discovered by digital rectal examination
which compressed the rectum. No mucosal abnormalities were revealed in the sigmoidoscopy. Routine laboratory tests and tumor marker results
were within normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a well-demarcated hypodense, multilocular
cystic lesion, 10 cm in size, in the presacral region of the right of the midline (Fig. 1). We found her blood irregular antibodies were
positive in the preoperative examination. So there was little chance to finish cross matched blood. It was full of hazard to hemorrhage as
the lesion was huge. So she quitted surgery. At exploratory laparotomy for excision of the lesion, we found that the mass was adherent to
and not easily separated from the rectum and surrounding pelvic wall. The size of the mass had slight change until October 2014. Abdominal
CT demonstrated that lesion was bigger than the last CT image, 14 cm in size (Fig. 2). What's more, the patient had difficulty in passing
her motions with shape changing. But the patient still refused to receive treatment. In January 2015, the patient experienced ventosity and
progressive aggravation. Abdominal CT demonstrated that lesion was bigger than the last CT image, 16 cm in size (Fig. 3). Taking into
account the cystic mass, paracentesis was carried out with about 2000 ml yellow liquid extracted. Cancer cells were not found in cytological
tests. Abdominal CT demonstrated that lesion shrank. In March 2015, laboratory test showed carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) elevated. We
realized the possibility of malignant transformation. So exploratory laparotomy and incision and drainage of pelvic tumor were operated. We
found that the mass was adherent to and not easily separated from the rectum and surrounding pelvic wall. Adipose and osseous tissues were
seen in the cystic lesion. Part of the lesion was resected with a drainage tube indwelled. Postoperative routine pathology showed:
(retroperitoneal tumors) moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Combined with clinical symptom and imaging, malignant transformation of
retrorectal cystic hamartomas (tailgut cysts) was diagnosed (Fig. 4). Then tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and raltitrexed were infused into the
cysts and 3 cycles oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2) were completed. Now although the lesion is shrinking, but yellow, viscous mucus still secrete
constantly, 100 ml/w. As surgical excision is the essential for treatment, we still suggest this patient to operate by prestoring herself
blood and autologous blood transfusion. The CT image took in February 2013, 10 cm in size, in the presacral region to the right of the
midline. The CT image took in October 2014, 14 cm in size. The CT image took in January 2015, 16 cm in size. Postoperative routine
pathology: Combined with clinical symptom and imaging, malignant transformation of retrorectal cystic hamartomas (tailgut cysts) was
diagnosed. This study was approved by the institutional review boards and ethics committees of Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute. The
patient has consented for the publication of the present case report. In the literature, various terms have been used to describe tailgut
cysts, including cyst of the postanal intestine, mucus-secreting cyst, retrorectal cystic hamartomas, simple cyst, retrorectal cyst, and
enterogenous cyst.1,3,6 They are believed to arise from the remnants of the embryonic hindgut. The human embryo possesses a true tail as an
extension of the primitive gut. A tailgut cyst is a rare congenital lesion representing a nonregressed tail. It was most often found in
asymptomatic middle-aged women.1 Because the lesion is located in the bathy-pelvis and extremely rare, so it is difficult to diagnosis.
Imaging examination is an effective way to diagnosis. Ultrasound shows multilocular cystic lesions with internal echoes due to mucoid
material or inflammatory debris. Abdominal CT demonstrated a well-demarcated hypodense, bilocular cystic lesion in the presacral region.
Some may have calcifications. There is one report of endoscopic ultrasonography-fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) with a flexible
echoendoscope.7 Puncture should be performed when other etiologies are considered or if malignant degeneration changes management. It is the
most accurate diagnosis. What's more, malignant transformation should be paid to special attention. It can be used as a marker of malignant
transformation that CEA elevated. Malignant transformation in the form of adenocarcinoma or neuroendocrine tumors, although rare, does
occur. Mathis et al8 reported 31 patients with tailgut cysts and 4 of them (13%) had malignant findings: adenocarcinoma in 3 and
neuroendocrine tumors in 1. They concluded that presacral tailgut cysts should be removed because of the risk of malignant transformation,
because 2 of the 4 patients with malignancy had died through the follow-up period. Therefore, complete resection of these lesions is
recommended, as surgical excision is the gold-standard treatment.9 But simple cyst excision or drainage leads to recurrence and possible
infection. The treatment of choice is complete excision of the lesion, with resection of the coccyx and a surrounding margin of grossly
normal tissue.3,10 If surgery cannot be carried out, systemic chemotherapy and local radiotherapy can be implemented. Prognosis for tailgut
cysts with malignant transformation depends on the status of complete surgical resection and tumor histology and grade. Local recurrences
and distant metastasis have been occasionally reported. Two cases with local recurrences and 1 case with a distant metastasis have been
reported in adenocarcinomas arising in tailgut cysts in the literature.11,12 Tailgut cysts should be taken into account, if a retrorectal
mass cannot be diagnosis clearly. Given surgical excision is the essential for treatment, complete surgical excision should be implemented
as far as possible. Malignant transformation, although unusual, may be focal, so meticulous examination of the gross mass and thorough
samplings are important. The coccyx and a surrounding margin of grossly normal tissue should also be excision, when malignant transformation
was confirmed. But if surgery cannot be carried out like the presented case, systemic chemotherapy and local radiotherapy are also
available, which can alleviate the symptoms of oppression and improve the quality of life partly. Abbreviations: CEA = carcinoembryonic
antigen, CT = computed tomography, EUS-FNA = endoscopic ultrasonography-fine needle aspiration, TNF = tumor necrosis factor. Xiang-Rong Zhao
and Chao Gao contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by Science and Technology Development Plans of Shandong Province
(2014GSF118176). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
