Escherichia coli is a rare cause of community-acquired meningitis in adults unless predisposing factors are present (e.g., previous
penetrating cranio-cerebral injury or neurosurgery, immunosuppression, chronic alcoholism, history of cancer, diabetes mellitus, advanced
age). We describe the case of a 53-year-old woman, resident in Germany, suffering from community-acquired bacterial meningitis caused by
CTX-M-9 type extended spectrum β-lactamase producing Escherichia coli. Because typical predisposing factors were not apparent, pathogen
identification resulted in expanded diagnostics to exclude a distant or contiguous primary focus. By magnetic resonance tomography, a
previously unrecognized large retropharyngeal abscess with cervical spondylodiscitis was detected. In retrospect, the patient had complained
about neck pain for a few weeks prior to meningitis onset, but the symptoms were interpreted as being related to a herniated disk.
Meningitis and osteomyelitis resolved completely under surgical treatment and meropenem therapy. In case of adult Escherichia coli
meningitis, underlying diseases should always be carefully excluded, especially if predisposing factors are not apparent. Bacterial
meningitis is a potentially life-threatening neurological emergency requiring early recognition of meningitis symptoms, rapid diagnostic
evaluation of etiology, and immediate antimicrobial therapy. Its estimated annual incidence is 2–5 per 100,000 people in the Western world,
and it ranks among the top ten causes of infection-related deaths worldwide and leads to permanent neurological sequelae in 30–50 % of the
survivors . In immunocompetent children and adults, meningitis is most often caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis
comprising over 80 % of meningitis cases, followed by Streptococcus agalactiae, Haemophilus influenzae and Listeria monocytogenes [2, 3]. In
contrast, Escherichia coli is a rare cause of community-acquired adult meningitis comprising about 1 % of meningitis cases even though it is
a common pathogen in neonatal meningitis and in the nosocomial setting, especially after penetrating cranio-cerebral injury or subsequent to
neurosurgical procedures . Community-acquired cases, however, occur almost exclusively in case of a preexisting risk factor, such as
advanced age, history of cancer, immunosuppressive therapy, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, chronic alcoholism, or diabetes
mellitus, and typically secondary to a distant or contiguous focus of infection, such as urinary tract infection, gastrointestinal
infection, or otitis media [4, 5, 8–11]. Furthermore, the mortality rate is higher among patients with Escherichia coli meningitis than
among those with other bacterial meningitides [4, 8]. We describe a community-acquired Escherichia coli adult meningitis case caused by a
CTX-M-9 type extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) producing strain. This case is of special interest because typical predisposing factors
for Escherichia coli meningitis were not apparent. Thus, as a result of the unexpected pathogen identification, expanded diagnostics was
performed to exclude a primary focus which led to diagnosis of previously unrecognized retropharyngeal abscess and cervical
spondylodiscitis. A 53-year-old woman, resident in Germany, was admitted to the emergency department because of confusion, aphasia and
agitation. Her partner reported that she had complained about neck pain for a few weeks which had been interpreted as being related to a
herniated cervical disk in an X-ray examination seven days ago and treated with analgesics. Furthermore, the patient had suffered from
unspecific flu-like symptoms in the previous week and intermittent diarrhea during the previous two months. Her past medical history
revealed a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease based on nicotine addiction, a chronic pain syndrome following repeated vertebral disk
herniation, obesity, and appendectomy as well as surgical repair of an epigastric and umbilical hernia six years ago. Because of the chronic
lumbar pain, she had been under long-term morphine treatment with suspicion of morphine addiction, but had not received intraspinal
steroid/analgesics injections for several months. On physical examination, she had a body temperature of 38.6 °C; pulse rate and blood
pressure were within the normal range. In the examination of respiratory system, cardiovascular system, and abdomen, no abnormalities were
detected. The neurological examination also showed no abnormalities, especially no meningism and no neurological deficits, apart from the
confusion, aphasia and agitation. Laboratory analysis at admission (Table 1) revealed a pronounced leukocytosis with an increase mainly in
the neutrophil granulocytes, and a strongly elevated serum C-reactive protein level, indicating an infectious cause of the patient’s
symptoms. Furthermore, a rise of lactate dehydrogenase, liver enzymes and cholestasis parameters, and a hyponatremia were observed. In the
emergency department, a magnetic resonance tomography of the brain was performed, but demonstrated no abnormalities apart from first signs
of a subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy.Table 1Selected results of laboratory testing at admission and of lumbar puncture,
respectivelyParameter (unit)Normal rangePatient’s resultBlood leucocytes (10^3/μl)4.0–9.033.5 Blood neutrophil granulocytes (%)50–7090, with
a left shift Blood lymphocytes (%)25–403 Blood monocytes (%)2–145Blood erythrocytes (10^6/μl)4.0–5.55.1Blood thrombocytes
(10^3/μl)150–400292Serum C-reactive protein (mg/l)0.0–5.0163.9Serum procalcitonin (ng/ml)0.05–0.240.29Serum creatine kinase
(U/l)0–19063Serum lactate dehydrogenase (U/l)0–249423Serum alanine transaminase (U/l)12–78156Serum aspartate transaminase (U/l)0–3538Serum
gamma-glutamyltransferase (U/l)0–55160Serum total bilirubin (mg/dl)0.0–1.01.84Serum lipase (U/l)73–393303Serum total protein
(g/dl)6.6–8.77.0Blood glucose (mg/dl)60–12095Serum creatinine (mg/dl)0.5–1.10.7Serum sodium (mval/l)136–145129Serum potassium
(mval/l)3.5–5.14.3Liquor leucocytes (/μl)0–51,657 Liquor neutrophil granulocytes (%)0–453.1 Liquor lymphocytes (%)48–723.9 Liquor monocytes
(%)15–4541.8Liquor protein (mg/dl)15–35204.5Liquor glucose (mg/dl)25–600Liquor lactate (mmol/l)0.6–2.213.2 Selected results of laboratory
testing at admission and of lumbar puncture, respectively An immediate lumbar puncture was not successful because of the patient’s
agitation, but was conducted on the second day of admission, when nuchal rigidity emerged. Because of strongly suspected bacterial
meningitis, antimicrobial treatment with ceftriaxone (4 g daily in two divided doses) and ampicillin (12 g daily in six divided doses) was
started. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (Table 1) was consistent with bacterial meningitis, showing 1,657 leukocytes per μl, increased
protein, undetectable glucose and increased lactate. Cerebrospinal fluid was also subjected to microscopic Gram stain examination and
routine culture: The Gram stain revealed a high number of Gram-negative rods, and Escherichia coli grew on the culture plates. Species
identification was performed by Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption / Ionization (MALDI) Time of Flight (TOF) Mass Spectrometry (Bruker
Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), and antimicrobial susceptibility testing was done by microdilution in accordance with European Committee on
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) recommendations , using pre-configured microtiter plates (MERLIN Diagnostika GmbH, Bornheim-
Hersel, Germany). The Escherichia coli strain exhibited elevated minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for aminopenicillins (amoxicillin:
>128 mg/l, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid: 128/2 mg/l), oxyimino-cephalosporins (cefotaxime: 16 mg/l, ceftazidime: 2 mg/l), fourth-generation
cephalosporins (cefepime: 64 mg/l) and monobactams (aztreonam: 16 mg/l), a synergy phenomenon in the double-disk synergy test with
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid consistent with an ESBL, and a positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for blaCTX-M-9 group. In contrast, it
showed low MICs to piperacillin/tazobactam (≤1/4 mg/l), carbapenems (imipenem: 0.0625 mg/l, meropenem: ≤0.03125 mg/l, ertapenem: ≤0.0625
mg/l, doripenem: ≤0.03125 mg/l) and fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin: ≤0.015625 mg/l, levofloxacin: ≤0.0625 mg/l), and was also susceptible
to several other types of antibiotics such as aminoglycosides, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, tigecycline, colistin and fosfomycin. In
multilocus sequence typing (MLST), the strain was assigned to ST73. On the second day after admission, the initially taken blood cultures
also flagged positive for ESBL-producing Escherichia coli. Of note, the patient’s ESBL carriage was not previously known. The antimicrobial
therapy was switched to meropenem (6 g daily in three divided doses). After pathogen identification, additional diagnostics was performed to
exclude a primary focus of infection: Although a urine culture yielded an Escherichia coli strain having the same antimicrobial
susceptibility pattern, the patient’s past medical history was negative for urinary tract infection symptoms. Furthermore, chest X-ray,
abdominal ultrasound and transesophageal echocardiography conducted at admission and / or during the further hospital stay merely showed
degenerative changes in the spine and an early-stage atherosclerosis, but did not reveal a primary focus. Thus, a magnetic resonance
tomography of the spine was added in consideration of the patient’s neck pain even though that pain had already been attributed to a
herniated cervical disk. However, magnetic resonance tomography showed a large descending retropharyngeal abscess with a cervical
spondylodiscitis at C2-C3 down to C4-C5 and a secondary spinal canal stenosis (Fig. 1). Additionally, multiple disk protrusions were found,
especially in the lumbar spine. Thus, the search for a source of meningitis, initiated because of the unexpected pathogen identification,
led to diagnosis of previously unrecognized retropharyngeal abscess and cervical spondylodiscitis. In addition to continued meropenem
treatment, the patient was immediately subjected to neurosurgery: The abscess was evacuated including polymethylmethacrylate-assisted
ventral diskectomy. Intraoperative swabs also yielded the ESBL-producing Escherichia coli.Fig. 1Result of magnetic resonance tomography of
neck and spine. Magnetic resonance tomography, done on the seventh day after admission, showed the descending retropharyngeal abscess,
measuring 7 cm × 3.5 cm × 1.5 cm, and the cervical spondylodiscitis at C2-C3 down to C4-C5 Result of magnetic resonance tomography of neck
and spine. Magnetic resonance tomography, done on the seventh day after admission, showed the descending retropharyngeal abscess, measuring
7 cm × 3.5 cm × 1.5 cm, and the cervical spondylodiscitis at C2-C3 down to C4-C5 Initially, therapy was complicated by morphine withdrawal
delirium requiring sedation of the patient. Then, the patient’s condition rapidly improved, and she had fully recovered without any
neurological sequelae when meropenem treatment was stopped after 21 days (14 days after source-control surgery). Control computer tomography
and magnetic resonance tomography three weeks and two months after admission, respectively, both proved complete remission of the
retropharyngeal abscess and the spondylodiscitis. Nevertheless, hospitalization was prolonged because of secondary complications including
prolonged dysphagia subsequent to the retropharyngeal abscess and several hospital-acquired infections. Specifically, the patient required
mechanical ventilation in the course of two hospital-acquired pneumonia episodes, the first episode empirically treated with 7 days
ceftriaxone and erythromycin, the second with 7 days imipenem. Then, she received 7 days vancomycin for treatment of Enterococcus faecium
bacteremia. In addition, she developed bilateral trochanteric decubitus ulcers due to being bedridden for weeks. ESBL-producing Escherichia
coli was isolated from those decubitus which were subsequently treated surgically and with 10 days ciprofloxacin. Finally, the patient
received 12 days caspofungin because of candidemia. Of the antimicrobials used for therapy of the hospital-acquired infections, imipenem and
ciprofloxacin also had in vitro activity against the meningitis-causing Escherichia coli strain. However, neither clinical nor radiological
signs of a meningitis relapse occurred after cessation of meropenem, which may indicate that the meningitis had already been cured at the
time-point of meropenem cessation. After all, the patient was discharged from hospital in good health three months after admission. Previous
case series on adult Gram-negative bacillary meningitis usually include or even focus on nosocomial meningitis cases which occur
particularly subsequent to penetrating cranio-cerebral injury or neurosurgery [4, 5, 8–11, 13, 14], whereas Escherichia coli is a rare cause
of community-acquired adult meningitis . However, in the present case there was no evidence of a nosocomial meningitis origin. In
particular, the patient had never received any intraspinal injections close to the cervical spine and an infiltration of the lumbar spine
dated back several months. Considering only the community-acquired adult Gram-negative bacillary meningitis cases included in the above
mentioned case series, it is striking that most cases, namely about 75 % [4, 8] to 95 % [5, 9], occurred in patients with predisposing risk
factors such as advanced age, history of cancer, immunosuppressive therapy, HIV infection, chronic alcoholism, or diabetes mellitus.
However, our patient did not display any of those risk factors. Moreover, about 75 % of the cases [4, 8] occurred secondary to a distant or
contiguous infection (e.g., urinary tract infection, gastrointestinal infection, or otitis media). Thus, in the present case, diagnostics
was extended after pathogen identification to exclude a primary focus of infection, which led to diagnosis of the previously unrecognized
retropharyngeal abscess with cervical spondylodiscitis. Consequently, our case report highlights the importance of searching for a source of
meningitis in cases of Escherichia coli adult meningitis, especially if typical risk factors are not apparent. Probably, the patient’s
meningitis as well as the cervical spondylodiscitis had arisen through contiguous spread from the retropharyngeal abscess. However,
retropharyngeal abscesses are mainly polymicrobial infections containing common oropharyngeal microflora but not Enterobacteriaceae.
Typically, they are caused by anaerobic organisms and beta-hemolytic streptococci (especially Streptococcus pyogenes), followed by viridans
group streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae [15, 16]. Furthermore, the majority of
spondylodiscitis cases are acquired by hematogenous spread, followed by direct external inoculation, whereas spread from contiguous tissues
is comparably rare . In hematogenous spondylodiscitis, Staphylococcus aureus is most commonly identified (apart from tuberculosis which is
the leading cause worldwide), but multiple other pathogens may also be causative agents. In case of direct external inoculation, cutaneous
organisms may also be found. Thus, even though Escherichia coli may be no rarity in hematogenous spondylodiscitis, in cases acquired through
contiguous spread based on a retropharyngeal abscess one would expect pathogens from the oropharyngeal microflora rather than Escherichia
coli. Because Escherichia coli is no typical cause of a retropharyngeal abscess, one may suppose a previous unrecognized Escherichia coli
bacteremia. However, a precedent distant focus of infection was not found in the present case and, therefore, the reason for the
retropharyngeal abscess remains elusive. In particular, the patient’s past medical history was negative for urinary tract infection symptoms
even though one urine culture yielded the ESBL-producing Escherichia coli strain. The latter may be explained by colonization of the urinary
tract subsequent to an assumable colonization of the gastrointestinal tract, or, less likely, may result from the bacteremia present during
the meningitis episode. The hypothesis of lasting gastrointestinal and urinary tract colonization is supported by the fact that the ESBL-
producing Escherichia coli strain was detected from the patient’s bilateral trochanteric decubitus ulcers which occurred only after full
meningitis remission and were, thus, probably not related to the meningitis episode. In addition, normal findings in abdominal ultrasound
argue against a precedent gastrointestinal infection although the patient reported that she had had intermittent diarrhea during the
previous two months. The abnormal liver function test results may, in consideration of previously normal values, also be interpreted as
accompanying sepsis-related changes because hepatic dysfunction represents a common manifestation during sepsis process . Furthermore, prior
abdominal surgery as a potential source of Escherichia coli bacteremia dated back several years. Of note, the presented community-acquired
Escherichia coli adult meningitis was caused by an ESBL-producing strain. This may increase the significance of the present case report
because ESBL-producing strains have been rarely identified in Escherichia coli meningitis, in community-acquired cases even less than in the
nosocomial setting [13, 19, 20]. Our Escherichia coli isolate produced a CTX-M-9 group ESBL and was assigned to ST73 in MLST. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report of a CTX-M-9 group ESBL in the setting of Escherichia coli meningitis. CTX-M-9 group ESBLs are
comparably infrequent in Germany, accounting for only 7–12 % of ESBLs detected in Escherichia coli isolates (for comparison: CTX-M-1-group
80–93 %) [21, 22]. In contrast, ST73, along with ST131, ST69, and ST95, belongs to the major pandemic clonal lineages as was summarized in a
recent review . Interestingly, in some of the reviewed studies providing appropriate subanalyses, ST73 strains tended to occur more
frequently in community-acquired than in hospital-acquired infections [24, 25], but were only rarely (0–2 %) associated with ESBL production
[24, 26]. Community-acquired Escherichia coli adult meningitis is a rare entity which usually occurs merely in case of predisposing factors.
If typical risk factors are not apparent, it may be prudent to extend diagnostics for exclusion of underlying diseases and precedent
infections. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RK: acquired and interpreted data, drafted the
manuscript. AN: acquired clinical data, obtained consent from the patient. MK: acquired and interpreted data, critically revised manuscript.
SGG: critically revised manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Not applicable. There was no external funding source
for this case report.
