This case report describes macular hole (MH) formation and spontaneous closure after vitrectomy for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD)
repair. A 58-year-old man referred with a macula-off superior RRD, in whom vitrectomy was performed. MH with vitreomacular traction (VMT)
caused by the posterior vitreous cortex remnants developed 2 weeks after vitrectomy. Four weeks postoperatively, optical coherence
tomography revealed resolution of the VMT and spontaneous closure of MH without providing any treatment. This is the first report of an MH
formation and spontaneous closure after vitrectomy for RRD. This suggests that the VMT mediated by the posterior vitreous cortex remnants
has an important role in the development of secondary MH. Macular hole (MH) develops from tangential anteroposterior traction by the
vitreous. This is supported by histopathological studies and optical coherence tomography (OCT). In several diseases, MH may develop after
vitrectomy. Brown first reported secondary MH after rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) repair in 1998. Previous several studies
described that MH can develop after vitrectomy. However, we found no previous reports on MH formation and spontaneous closure after
vitrectomy for RRD. This report describes the first description of MH and spontaneous closure after vitrectomy for RRD with clear
documentation by OCT and provides an understanding of the mechanisms of secondary MH after vitrectomy. A 58-year-old man with decreased
vision (20/200) and inferior visual field defect in his left eye referred to our hospital. Fundoscopy, OCT, and B-scan ultrasonography
showed a macula-off superior RRD with a superior horseshoe-like tear [Fig. 1]. The Pars plana vitrectomy (23 gauge) was performed after
phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation. At the end of the surgery, fluid-air exchange, endolaser photocoagulation, and gas
tamponade (SF6, 20%) were performed by the author. The patient was instructed to maintain a supine position for 7 postoperative days.
Preoperative fundus photograph, optical coherence tomography (a and c), and B-scan ultrasonography (b and d) superior retinal detachment
with vitreous haziness due to vitreous hemorrhage and cataract After 2 weeks, the postoperative best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) had
decreased to 20/400, which was lower than the preoperative BCVA, even though the entire retina was attached. OCT showed an MH with
vitreomacular traction (VMT) caused by the posterior vitreous cortex remnants [Fig. 2]. We decided to monitor the patient's progress without
providing any other treatment. Two weeks after vitrectomy, the posterior vitreous cortex around the disc region (a and c) was removed, but
the remnant posterior vitreous cortex and vitreomacular traction remained present in the macular region (white arrow) (b and d). Along with
the posterior vitreous cortex remnants, a macular hole was found (red arrow) (b and d) Four weeks after the vitrectomy, OCT revealed
spontaneous resolution of the VMT as well as the posterior vitreous cortex remnants and MH [Fig. 3]. Further, his vision improved to 20/100.
Finally, the MH had completely closed [Fig. 3] and his BCVA was 20/40 after 6 weeks. Four weeks after the surgery, the remnant posterior
vitreous cortex and vitreomacular traction had regressed spontaneously (a). The white arrowhead indicates the closed macular hole with
bridging (a). At 6 postoperative weeks, the macular hole had completely closed (b) The development of MH after RRD repair is a rare
occurrence. The prevalence of the development of secondary MH after RRD repair ranges from 0.24% to 0.5% in literature. Brown first reported
secondary MH after RRD. Recent studies reported secondary MH formation after vitrectomy for RRD repair. The mechanism of secondary MH after
vitrectomy for RRD is not well known. Several studies support at least 2 pathogenic mechanisms for MH formation in the vitrectomized eyes.
One mechanism is related to cystoid macular edema, without vitreoretinal traction. In this mechanism, cystoid degeneration develops, the
small cysts merge together to form a larger cyst, and the larger cyst can directly rupture to form a full-thickness MH. The other mechanism
is vitreofoveal tangential traction, which may play a role in the development of full-thickness MH. The vitreofoveal traction such as an
epiretinal membrane (ERM) results in a subfoveal cyst, which subsequently develops into a full-thickness MH. ERM was found to be one of the
underlying pathologies in the development of MH after vitrectomy. Kumagai et al. reported 47 cases of secondary MH after vitrectomy, showing
that all eyes diagnosed with secondary MH had an ERM or membrane-like tissue. This is similar to the proposed mechanism for the MH related
VMT. Vitreomacular adhesion is observed after partial posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), when a portion of the posterior vitreous remains
attached to the macula. The tangential contraction of the vitreous cortex remnants layer can lead to macular distortion and edema and to the
formation of MH. Recent studies have reported that removal of VMT through enzymatic vitreolysis can assist MH closure. In this case, as
shown in Figs. 2 and 3, the postvitreous cortex around the disc region was removed, but due to insufficient PVD induction, remnant posterior
vitreous cortex remained in the macular region. We believe that induced VMT was the cause of MH and spontaneous removal of VMT lead to the
closing of MH. Similar mechanisms could have caused secondary MH after vitrectomy in our case. VMT by the posterior vitreous cortex remnants
plays an important role in the development of secondary MH, and the release of VMT may have been the main reason for the eventual closure of
the MH. Our findings conclusively provide an understanding of the mechanisms of secondary MH after vitrectomy. Nil. There are no conflicts
of interest.
