A 34-year-old patient with a swelling over the upper eyelid for nearly 1 year was seen in our clinic. The history, examination and
investigations were suggestive of a benign lacrimal gland tumor. The tumor and lacrimal gland were resected. Subsequent histopathological
examination revealed the tumor was a primary ductal adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland. This is a very rare tumor with less than half a
dozen cases reported so far. This case report is being presented to highlight an unusual presentation of this rare malignancy. Tumors
originating from the lacrimal gland account for nearly 10% of all orbital tumors. Epithelial tumors constitute about one-third of lacrimal
gland tumors. Of these epithelial tumors, the most common are a pleomorphic adenoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and not otherwise specified
adenocarcinoma. Subtypes of lacrimal gland adenocarcinoma such as primary ductal adenocarcinoma are extremely rare; with less than a dozen
cases reported so far. Herein, we report a patient diagnosed with primary ductal adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland, who had an unusually
benign presentation. A 34-year-old lady was referred to our clinic with a history of progressive, painless swelling over the right lateral
upper eyelid, for the past 1 year. She also had mild blurring of vision; without any diplopia. There were no systemic symptoms including
loss of appetite, loss of weight, fever or a headache. No significant medical, surgical or family history could be elicited. On examination,
her uncorrected vision in the right eye was 6/10, while in the left eye was 6/6. Intraocular pressures in the right and left eyes were 12
mmHg and 14 mmHg, respectively. There was a prominent swelling over the superotemporal aspect of the right eyebrow measuring 3 cm × 2 cm in
size [Fig. 1]. Palpation of the mass indicated a smooth surface, firm in consistency, and nontender. The margins of the swelling were well
defined. It was not attached to the skin but was adherent to the underlying structures, rendering it relatively immobile. Pulsation and
transillumination were absent. The orbital rim was palpable and regular. Hertel exophthalmometry was 17 mm on the right and 16 mm on the
left. The right eyeball was slightly displaced inferiorly. Fullness of the right eye upper lid Anterior and posterior segment examination
was normal in both eyes. Systemic examination revealed no abnormality. The provisional diagnosis was a benign lacrimal gland tumor due to
the long history, absence of pain, or any systemic features. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the orbit and brain, with contrast, showed a
well-defined regular homogenous enhancement of lacrimal gland mass measuring 2.8 cm × 1.8 cm × 2.0 cm within the superolateral part of the
right orbit [Fig. 2]. There was no extraconal, intraconal, intracranial, intraocular, or paranasal sinus involvement. No bony erosions were
noted. Computed tomography-scan showing the lacrimal gland tumor A resection of the tumor and the lacrimal gland was performed on February
8, 2013, through a subbrow incision. A well demarcated solid mass was observed intraoperatively. Subsequent histopathological examination
(HPE) demonstrated nodules of tumor cells with large, vesicular nuclei, and prominent nucleoli with frequent mitoses within the central area
of the collecting lacrimal ducts [Fig. 3]. The tumor cells were positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), Ckit (CD117), and periodic
acid-Schiff (PAS/D) but negative for S100 protein, cytokeratin-20 and Melan A. Thus, a diagnosis of primary adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal
gland was made. Histopathological examination of the lacrimal gland tumor (×10) Postoperatively, the right upper eyelid swelling resolved
uneventfully. The patient refused radiotherapy as she was pregnant during that period. Two months postexcision, a repeat CT brain, and orbit
were done and showed diffuse enhancing soft tissue around the right orbit, which suggested inflammatory activity [Fig. 4]. So far, the
patient has been well, and there is no sign of recurrence or metastasis. Postoperative computed tomography-scan of the orbit Lacrimal gland
fossa lesions may be divided into three categories: Inflammatory, lymphoproliferative, and epithelial lesions. Among epithelial lesions, 55%
are benign, and 45% are malignant. Furthermore, among the malignancies, adenoid cystic carcinoma is the most frequently found (66%),
followed by a carcinoma-ex-pleomorphic adenoma (18%), primary adenocarcinoma (9%), and mucoepidermoid carcinoma (3%), in that order. Primary
ductal adenocarcinoma in the lacrimal glands is extremely rare, very aggressive and carries a poor prognosis. This tumor arises in the upper
eyelid and usually presents as a mass accompanied by symptoms such as rapid growth, pseudoptosis, exophthalmos, dystopia, pain, and reduced
visual acuity. However, patients with this disease are usually symptomless initially, leading them to be diagnosed at an advanced stage.
Radiological features which suggest malignancy are bony erosion, the irregular margin of the mass and focal calcification within the lesion.
However, primary adenocarcinomas frequently present as well demarcated cystic lesions misleading the examiner into diagnosing it as benign.
In this case, the patient did not have typical clinical features of a lacrimal gland malignancy. Usually, malignant lesions of the lacrimal
gland are characterized by a rapid growth in <6 months, ptosis, ocular motility disturbances, diplopia, and bone erosion on radiographs. The
presence of pain in malignant tumors is another characteristic feature. Her CT orbit had shown a well-defined regular homogenous enhancement
of lacrimal gland mass but with no radiological features of malignancy. In this case, HPE played a very important role to make the precise
diagnosis. Immunohistochemistry has been successfully utilized in the diagnosis of many adnexal tumors. However, since, primary ductal
adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland is very rare, only a few markers have been reported. These include EMA, carcinoembryonic antigen,
matrix metalloproteins-2, 9, and 13, cytokeratin 7 and proto-oncogene human epidermal growth factor receptor-2/neu. Currently, there is no
clear protocol for treatment of primary ductal adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland due to the infrequent occurrence of this disease.
However, in the majority of cases of lacrimal gland malignancies, the optimal treatment plan is complete removal of the tumor, orbital bone
resection, and maintaining health and intact vision of the patient's eye. In cases, where the tumor extends outside the orbit or is widely
infiltrating the orbital structures, palliative treatment in the form of radiotherapy, or local resection can be done. If incompletely
removed, the recurrence rate is high, and the disease can progress rapidly and may be fatal. Thus, it has been recommended that radical
excision of the lesion is essential to prevent such recurrence or progression. An en bloc resection of the orbital tumor and contents,
together with orbitectomy, is considered to be the most logical and effective method of treatment. In our case, as the tumor was suspected
to be benign we performed a local resection of the tumor along with the lacrimal gland. This case report seems to confirm the features of
primary adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland, which is an extremely rare tumor. However, it also shows that this condition can have features
mimicking a benign tumor. The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms. In the form, the patient(s)
has/have given his/her/their consent for his/her/their images and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patients
understand that their names and initials will not be published, and due efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot
be guaranteed Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank the Head of the Ophthalmology Department, Queen
Elizabeth Hospital for permission to present this case.
