Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension is defined as a group of diseases characterized by a progressive increase in pulmonary vascular
resistance that results in right heart failure and premature death. Although therapies exist to improve hemodynamic instability and
symptoms, there is no cure for pulmonary arterial hypertension and it remains a life-threatening condition. A recent study performed in
China reported, for the first time, the effect of pulmonary arterial denervation on functional capacity and hemodynamics in patients with
refractory idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. We report a case of a 60-year-old white Brazilian man, with controlled hypertension
and stage 2 obesity who complained of progressive fatigue with moderate to light exertion of approximately 1 year’s duration. During this
period, he underwent myocardial perfusion scintigraphy without evidence of obstructive ischemic disease. He had no clinical evidence of
systolic heart failure. He had undergone biological mitral valve replacement 3 years previously for mitral valve stenosis and ablation of
atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia 18 months previously. At the time of valve replacement, he had no reported evidence of pulmonary
arterial hypertension. His echocardiogram showed normal function of a mitral prosthesis, normal global left ventricular systolic function
(left ventricular ejection fraction 62 % measured using the Teichholz method), stage I diastolic dysfunction, and a mean systolic pulmonary
arterial blood pressure of 50 mmHg. In the 6-minute walk test, the patient walked 104 meters. Catheterization of his right heart chambers
and pulmonary arteries confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. Electroanatomic reconstruction of the right ventricular outflow
tract and pulmonary artery was performed under direct fluoroscopic visualization, and a merger was made with a formatted image of cardiac
computed tomography angiography. Then we performed irrigated cardiac catheter ablation of the pulmonary trunk. At the patient’s 3-month
follow-up, he showed improvement in functional class for fatigue on major exertion, increased distance walked in the 6-minute walk test, and
reductions in pressure of both the right cavities and the pulmonary artery. Currently, with 6 months of clinical follow-up, the patient has
maintained his functional classification and is pedaling his bicycle. Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension is defined as a group of
diseases characterized by a progressive increase in pulmonary vascular resistance that results in right heart failure and premature death .
Recent therapeutic advances have improved the treatment options, including prostanoids, endothelin receptor antagonists, and
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors [3–6, 8, 9]. The pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension is believed to be due to an
imbalance between locally produced vasodilators and vasoconstrictors . Recent studies have demonstrated that vascular wall remodeling also
contributes to elevated pulmonary vascular resistance . A meta-analysis of 23 randomized controlled trials demonstrated a reduction in
mortality of patients who used targeted therapies approved for use in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension . A 60-year-old white
Brazilian man, with controlled hypertension and stage 2 obesity presented to our institution with a complaint of progressive fatigue with
moderate to light exertion of approximately 1 year’s duration. During that period, he had undergone myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
without evidence of obstructive ischemic disease. He had no clinical evidence of systolic heart failure. He had undergone biological mitral
valve replacement 3 years previously for mitral valve stenosis and had undergone ablation of atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia 18
months previously. At the time of valve replacement, there was no reported evidence of pulmonary arterial hypertension. The patient’s
medication list included aspirin 100 mg/day, carvedilol 50 mg/day, atorvastatin 10 mg/day, and losartan 25 mg/day. His echocardiogram showed
normal function of a mitral prosthesis, global left ventricular systolic function within normal limits (left ventricular ejection fraction
62 % measured using the Teichholz method), stage I diastolic dysfunction, and mean pulmonary arterial systolic blood pressure of 50 mmHg. In
the 6-minute walk test, the patient walked 104 meters (Table 1). Catheterization of his right heart chambers and pulmonary arteries
confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension (Table 2). During the follow-up period, therapy with nifedipine and sildenafil was not
tolerated secondary to orthostatic hypotension. The patient was referred for radiofrequency ablation of the pulmonary artery trunk for the
treatment of refractory pulmonary hypertension. Table 16-Minute walk test resultsTime pointDistanceBaseline104 m3 months after ablation250
m6 months after ablation302 mTable 2Right catheterization and mean systolic blood pressure measurements before and after pulmonary artery
ablationStructuresBaseline3 months6 monthsRight pulmonary arterial pressure, mmHg463531Left pulmonary arterial pressure, mmHg463330Pulmonary
artery trunk pressure, mmHg473629Right ventricular pressure, mmHg403330Right atrial pressure, mmHg201411 6-Minute walk test results Right
catheterization and mean systolic blood pressure measurements before and after pulmonary artery ablation The procedure was performed in the
catheterization laboratory with direct visualization using fluoroscopy and radiopaque contrast dye. The patient remained under unconscious
sedation. Catheterization of the right femoral artery via the standard Seldinger technique was performed using an 8-French valved short
sheath after subcutaneous injection of a local anesthetic. Subsequently, this sheath was replaced with a steerable long sheath (Agilis®; St.
Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) using the standard over-the-wire technique. Unfractionated heparin was administered intravenously,
targeting an activated coagulation time between 250 and 350 seconds. Electroanatomic reconstruction of both the right ventricular outflow
tract and pulmonary artery was performed using the EnSite Velocity Cardiac Mapping System (St. Jude Medical) under direct fluoroscopic
visualization, and a merger was made with the formatted image obtained by performing cardiac computed tomography angiography (Fig. 1). The
Agilis® sheath was advanced into the right ventricular outflow tract just before reaching the pulmonary valve. Through this long sheath, we
introduced an ablation catheter with an open irrigated tip (St. Jude Medical). The parameters used for each application according to our
protocol were as follows: power of 5 W, maximum temperature of 48 °C, 60-second duration in each spot, maximum impedance variation of 10 %
from baseline values, and an irrigation flow rate of 17 ml/minute, which created a circle in the pulmonary artery trunk.Fig.
1Electroanatomic reconstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract and pulmonary artery was performed using the EnSite Velocity Cardiac
Mapping System, and a merger was made with a formatted image obtained by performing cardiac computed tomography angiography Electroanatomic
reconstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract and pulmonary artery was performed using the EnSite Velocity Cardiac Mapping System,
and a merger was made with a formatted image obtained by performing cardiac computed tomography angiography The patient was discharged the
next morning. No noteworthy changes before or after the procedure or before discharge in the patient’s radiographic or echocardiographic
laboratory parameters were seen. The patient’s blood pressure in both the right heart chambers and the pulmonary artery were determined
using catheterization before and at 3 and 6 months after the procedure. The results are shown in Table 2. At the patient’s 3-month follow-up
examination, he showed an improvement in functional class for fatigue with major exertion. He also demonstrated an increased distance walked
in the 6-minute walk test and reduction of the pressures in both the right cavities and the pulmonary artery. Currently, with 6 months of
clinical follow-up, he has maintained his improvement in functional classification and is pedaling his bicycle. There is no cure for
pulmonary arterial hypertension, and it remains a life-threatening disorder, though therapies can improve patients’ symptoms, hemodynamics,
and outcomes . A recent study performed in China reported, for the first time, the effect of pulmonary arterial denervation on functional
capacity and hemodynamics in patients with refractory idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension . The ablation of the pulmonary artery
could be a promising tool in the future for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. The ethics committee (Paola Baars Gomes Moises, Luis Marcelo Rodrigues Paz, Humberto Cesar Tinoco, and Jonny Shogo
Takahashi) at our institution approved the execution of the case. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors' contribution All authors read and approved the manuscript. We thank Sérgio Oliveira and Pacemed for their technical
support.
