Aggressive course and resistance to treatments usually characterize very early onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEO-IBD). Some VEO-IBD
cases are due to monogenic immune defects and can benefit from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). We describe a Caucasian male
baby who presented in the first months of life macrophage activation syndrome, followed by intractable colitis, recurrent episodes of fever
and mild splenomegaly. After several immunological, genetic and clinical investigations, subsequently a therapeutic attempt with colectomy,
analysis of VEO-IBD-associated genes, revealed a causative mutation in XIAP. The genetic diagnosis of a primary immune deficiency allowed
curing the boy with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Our report, together with novel findings from recent literature, should
contribute to increase awareness of monogenic immune defects as a cause of VEO-IBD. Comprehensive genetic analysis can allow a prompt
diagnosis, resulting in the choice of effective treatments and sparing useless and damaging procedures. Very early onset inflammatory bowel
disease (VEO-IBD) is a rare and usually severe disorder, distinct from adult disease as regards extension, histopathology and treatment. A
primary immunodeficiency (PID) may be the cause of the disease in a not negligible proportion of cases [1, 2]. Notably, gut inflammation can
be the first and sole clinical manifestation of a PID for several years, while infections can develop later or remain underestimated.
Indeed, IBD or IBD-like inflammation can be often the sole or the first manifestation of Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD) [3, 4], Wiskott
Aldrich Disease , NEMO deficiency or Polyendocrinopathy Enteropathy X-linked (IPEX) . Recently also IL10R and XIAP deficiencies have been
reported in children with early onset colitis, expanding the “universe of primary immunodeficiency” in IBD. Early onset IBD can be also
presenting feature of autoinflammatory disorders, such as mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) [10, 11]. Moreover, functional studies have
shown that VEO-IBD can occur in patients with TTC7A gene mutations, causing defects in the enterocytes and in T cells, giving rise to the
development of a severe apoptotic enterocolitis . Diagnosis of monogenic causes of early and very early onset-IBD is important in cases that
could benefit from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). It is thus important to increase awareness of the possible monogenic
etiology of VEO-IBD among pediatricians, promoting the development of reliable strategies for a prompt and thorough differential diagnosis.
We report the case of a male baby, born to non-consanguineous healthy parents, who was hospitalized at 2 months of age with mucous and
bloody diarrhea, fever and failure to thrive. The medical history revealed that he was admitted at the same hospital 1 month before because
of high fever and hepatosplenomegaly that were attributed to a cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection with macrophage activation syndrome (MAS)
(Table 1).Table 1Summary of clinical features and treatments1 month2 – 3 months11.5 months15 monthsClinical featuresHigh fever,High
feverIntractable diarrhoeaIntractable diarrhoea, Vomit,Hepatomegaly,Bloody and mucous diarrhoeaRecurrent feverRecurrent
feverSplenomegalyFailure to thriveSkin rashMild splenomegalyMild hepato-splenomegalyHaematological valuesWBC 25.000/μlWBC: 5.140/μlWBC:
31.440/μlWBC: 18.400/μl(N 38 %)(N29%)(N 55 %)(N 62 %)CRP: 14,3 mg/LCRP: 21 mg/LCRP: 107 mg/LCRP: 99 mg/LAST: 219 U/LAST: 47 U/LALT: 327
U/LALT: 41 U/LLDH 2300 U/LTriglycerides: 2,39 mmol/LTriglycerides: 3,08 mmol/LFerritin: 1.651 ng/mlFerritin: 18.000 ng/mlIgA: 0,54 g/LIgG:
5,67 g/LIgM: 0,74 g/LhypoalbumiemiaSpecialist investigationsBone marrow smear: negativeColonoscopy: inflammatory colitis with erosions and
aphthae and increased cell apoptosisColonoscopy: Crohn’s-like colitisEGDS normalCMV negative in mucosaVirologyBlood CMV: 435.800
copies/mlBlood CMV: negativeImmunological evaluationsNormal Degranulation AssayDHR test normalGenetic evaluationsPRF1, SAP, STXBP2 wild
typeFOXP3: wild typeMVK: wild typeIL10, IL10RA, L10RB: wild typeXIAP: mutateTherapeutic interventionsGlucocorticoids, ganciclovirIntravenous
glucocorticoids, tacrolimus,Glucocorticoids, Azathioprine, AdalimumabGlucocorticoids, Adalimumab,TPNTPNTPNAntibioticsSurgical
interventionnonenoneColectomyHSCT DHR dihydrorhodamine TPN total parenteral nutrition HSCT hematopoietic stem cell transplantation CRP C
Reactive Protein: normal values below 10 mg/L also the EGDS acronimous should be added in the legenEGDS Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Summary
of clinical features and treatments DHR dihydrorhodamine TPN total parenteral nutrition HSCT hematopoietic stem cell transplantation CRP C
Reactive Protein: normal values below 10 mg/L also the EGDS acronimous should be added in the legenEGDS Esophagogastroduodenoscopy In spite
of the absence of hemophagocytosis at the bone marrow smear, the main causes of familial lymphohistiocytosis were studied, yet with normal
results. An antiviral therapy with ganciclovir, together with high dose dexamethasone, led to resolution of fever. When the boy presented to
our department, no sign of MAS was present and CMV was not detected in body fluids. A colonoscopy showed inflammatory colitis with erosions
and aphthae (Fig. 1); the analysis of mucosal specimens revealed increased enterocyte apoptosis, leading to the suspicion of autoimmune
enteropathy.Fig. 1Image of colonoscopy investigation. In the pictures is possible to appreciate the colonoscopy features of the patient, in
particular the erosions and apthae. Image of colonoscopy investigation. In the pictures is possible to appreciate the colonoscopy features
of the patient, in particular the erosions and apthae. Genetic analysis of the FOXP3 gene, responsible for IPEX, did not evidence any
mutation. Total parenteral nutrition, tacrolimus and high dose steroids (10 mg/m2) were administered with good clinical and endoscopic
response. In the following months, after stopping steroids, in spite of continuing therapy with tacrolimus, the boy remained dependent on
parenteral nutrition because of severe stunting. He developed several bouts of fever accompanied by increased acute phase reactants,
worsening of diarrhea, skin rash and mild splenomegaly, but always not fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of MAS. Colonoscopy showed severe
mucosal inflammation plus colon ulcerations, rectal and sigmoid erythema with fragile mucosa. In addiction edematous pseudopolypoid lesions
and serpiginous ulcer covered by fibrin exudate have been observed from rectum to transverse colon. Ascending colon showed areas of
reparative or scar tissue. Histologic examination confirmed the presence of a chronic inflammatory infiltrate in the lamina propria and
submucosa with rare epithelioid granulomas. Terminal ileum was healthy. Taking into account the novel clinical picture, MKD was suspected,
but no mutation was detected in the MVK gene. Due to the presence of Crohn’s-like features, chronic granulomatous disease was also
suspected, but the diagnosis was ruled out by normal results of dihydrorhodamine (DHR) flow cytometric assay. A poor clinical response was
obtained with standard dose glucocorticoids, azathioprine and, subsequently, with adalimumab (30 mg twice per month, subcutaneously). A
transitory improvement was observed only after colectomy, however, recurrence of fever episodes persisted and the boy soon developed a
Crohn’s-like ileitis. Further genetic analyses were thus performed, including the sequencing of Interleukin (IL)-10 Receptor (IL10RA and
IL10RB), Interlukin-10 (IL10) and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) genes. A deletion of two base-pairs was found in exon 4 of XIAP,
causing a frameshift and a premature stop codon (RefSeq NM_001167, c.1021_1022delAA, p.N341YfsX7, Fig. 2a, b) . The mutation was proven to
be causative based on absent expression of the protein in T lymphocytes analyzed by flow cytometry with two anti-XIAP antibodies clones
(clone48 BD Biosciences, cloneE-2 Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Since XIAP interacts with Nucleotide binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2),
we also analyzed IL-8 production in response to muramyl dipeptide (MDP), revealing impaired signaling of this pathway (Fig. 2c, d). Based on
the identification of XIAP mutation and the functional studies performed, the diagnosis of XIAP deficiency was made, so the patient
underwent allogeneic-HSCT from a group A1 positive, CMV negative and EBV positive HLA-matched unrelated donor. He received peripheral stem
cells (12,8x106 CD34+ cells/kg) after a myeloablative-conditioning regimen as illustrated in Fig. 3. Nine days after transplantation,
gastrointestinal bleeding with severe anaemia occurred. On day +15, micafungin was administered together with replacement of the central
venous catheter (CVC) because of Candida sepsis. A CMV infection (+33 days) was successfully treated with ganciclovir and Foscavir. The
patient developed an absolute neutrophil count above 500/μL on day +17 and a platelet counts above 50.000/μL on day +45. Six months after
transplantation, a gradual improvement of appetite was observed, allowing the suspension of parenteral nutrition. The immunosuppressive
therapy was interrupted after 9 months. Both upper endoscopy and ileoscopy were normal. On the last follow-up (+15 months), after temporary
ileostomy reversal, the patient was found in good clinical conditions and no symptoms related to XIAP deficiency nor gastrointestinal
problems were observed.Fig. 2Electropherogram and functional test of XIAP mutation. a The Figure shows electopherograms of the mutation
(c.1021_1022delAA) in exon 4 of XIAP in genomic DNA of patient, mother (heterozygous) and control (wild type). b Scheme of the protein
structure of XIAP: BIR 1, 2, 3 and RING domains are shown. Black arrow indicates the localization of the mutation found in our patient. The
mutation results in the substitution of the wild-type amino acids NIHLTHSLE with the mutant amino acids YSFNSFT until the stop codon and in
the truncation of the protein at 347 amino acid of the 497 wild type protein. c Detection of the XIAP protein by flow cytometry on patient,
his mother and in two healthy donors (male age related with patient and female controls age related with mother). The intracellular staining
was performed with two different anti-human XIAP antibodies that recognize the N-terminal domain (amino acids 1-202) or the C-terminal
domain (amino acid 268–426), respectively in the left and in the right side. The XIAP expression was evaluated on the CD45+ CD3+ cell gate.
Grey area in the dashed line represents staining with secondary antibody alone. d NOD signalling pathway assay was performed testing
patient, mother and age matched controls PBMCs unstimulated (US) or treated with IL-1β and MDP. The integrity of the pathway was measured
using an IL-8 ELISA. PBMCs from our Crohn’s like patient were unable to induce the production of IL-8 after MDP stimulation, compared with
wild-type controls and his mother, who carries in heterozygous the same mutation. The histograms report the mean of the values obtained by
two different experiments.Fig. 3HSCT drug treatments. The figure illustrates the conditioning regimen administered to the patient before the
HSCT and the combined drugs used for the prevention of graft-versus-host disease. Electropherogram and functional test of XIAP mutation. a
The Figure shows electopherograms of the mutation (c.1021_1022delAA) in exon 4 of XIAP in genomic DNA of patient, mother (heterozygous) and
control (wild type). b Scheme of the protein structure of XIAP: BIR 1, 2, 3 and RING domains are shown. Black arrow indicates the
localization of the mutation found in our patient. The mutation results in the substitution of the wild-type amino acids NIHLTHSLE with the
mutant amino acids YSFNSFT until the stop codon and in the truncation of the protein at 347 amino acid of the 497 wild type protein. c
Detection of the XIAP protein by flow cytometry on patient, his mother and in two healthy donors (male age related with patient and female
controls age related with mother). The intracellular staining was performed with two different anti-human XIAP antibodies that recognize the
N-terminal domain (amino acids 1-202) or the C-terminal domain (amino acid 268–426), respectively in the left and in the right side. The
XIAP expression was evaluated on the CD45+ CD3+ cell gate. Grey area in the dashed line represents staining with secondary antibody alone. d
NOD signalling pathway assay was performed testing patient, mother and age matched controls PBMCs unstimulated (US) or treated with IL-1β
and MDP. The integrity of the pathway was measured using an IL-8 ELISA. PBMCs from our Crohn’s like patient were unable to induce the
production of IL-8 after MDP stimulation, compared with wild-type controls and his mother, who carries in heterozygous the same mutation.
The histograms report the mean of the values obtained by two different experiments. HSCT drug treatments. The figure illustrates the
conditioning regimen administered to the patient before the HSCT and the combined drugs used for the prevention of graft-versus-host
disease. VEO-IBD can represent a serious diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. In our case, a monogenic cause for the disease was
extensively searched because of complex clinical features such as a CMV-induced macrophage activation syndrome, recurrent fever, and
intractable course of the disease. A familial haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis was suspected and seemingly ruled out by functional and
genetic analysis as well as by the good response to antiviral treatment. Afterwards, the association of early colitis with recurrent fever,
rash and splenomegaly arouse the suspicion of Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency , yet genetic analysis excluded the presence of the disease. Only
some more months later, when disease relapsed in spite of colectomy, further genetic investigations were performed and the pathogenic
deletion in XIAP gene identified. The pathogenic role of XIAP in haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is well documented [14, 15], and
probably due to increased apoptosis of T cells during anti-viral responses [16, 17]. The deletion found in our patient, leading to a
functional defect of NOD2 signaling, has been previously described in two brothers with recurrent lymphohistiocytosis but without intestinal
inflammation . Furthermore, other XIAP mutations have been described in cases with IBD [9, 18, 19]. Notably, mutations affecting BIR-2
domain of XIAP have been associated with impairment of NOD2 signaling and IBD-like manifestations [19, 21]. Also Aguilar et al. have
described a clinical overlap between Crohn’s disease and XIAP deficiency-associated IBD . The XIAP mutation described here can thus explain
both recurrent episodes of fever with mild splenomegaly, which likely represent incomplete bouts of lymphohistiocytosis, and intractable
inflammatory colitis. In fact, XIAP deficiency is recognized as a highly heterogeneous disorder, whose expression probably depends upon the
different type of mutation, environmental and infectious factors. Thus, although this is a serious primary immunodeficiency, the indication
for HSCT is not always an easy issue, due to high transplantation related risks . Nevertheless, recent studies show that idiopathic colitis
with XIAP deficiency could be successfully treated with allo-HSCT using a specific conditioning regimen . We highlight the diagnostic
challenge of VEO-IBD, with particular reference to possible monogenic defects of immunity. High-throughput genetic analysis can offer
valuable option to cope with heterogeneity and severity of VEO-IBD. In our patient, an earlier genetic diagnosis could have promoted a
timely HSCT, which could have been able to induce a complete remission, sparing colectomy. Although a sequential functional and genetic
approach has been recommended , we suggest that functional investigations should not delay a promptly genetic analysis, to allow an early
detection of rare monogenic disorders in children with VEO-IBD. We don’t have a long follow-up; nevertheless our results suggest that allo-
HSCT is also an effective procedure for VEO-IBD. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient for publication of
this Case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Cytomegalovirus Hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation Macrophage activation syndrome Nucleotide binding oligomerization domain 2 Very early onset inflammatory bowel disease
X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MG
conceptualized and designed the study, carried out the genetic analyses, contributed to draft manuscript. SA, AB and GM carried out the
clinical analyses and contributed to draft the manuscript. CL carried out the flow cytometry analyses. SC supervised the experimental
analysis and critically reviewed the results. AT contributed to evaluate the clinical features and drafted the initial manuscript. AMB
conceptualized and designed the study, drafted the initial manuscript and critically reviewed the results. All authors contributed
substantially to article editing and approved the final manuscript as submitted and take full responsibility for the manuscript. This work
was supported by the grants from the Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Italy (RC 40/2011).
