Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma is a rare and aggressive lymphoma with a dismal prognosis. Synchronous intravascular large B-cell
lymphoma involving gastrointestinal stromal tumor has not previously been documented. We report a case of a 61-year-old Chinese woman who
presented with high fever of unknown origin for 20 days, and hematemesis, melena for 2 days. A computed tomography scan revealed a mass
lesion located in the anterior wall of the stomach. Surgery was performed to remove the tumor and histopathology showed a gastrointestinal
stromal tumor and a synchronous intravascular large B-cell lymphoma. The patient refused further treatment and died 4 months after surgery.
To the best of our knowledge, this case represents the first report of synchronous intravascular large B-cell lymphoma involving a
gastrointestinal stromal tumor. According to the actual WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues 2008,
intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL) belongs to the category of mature B-cell neoplasms. It is a rare type of extranodal large
B-cell lymphoma with selective growth of lymphoma cells within the lumina of small to intermediate calibre vessels. It typically occurs in
elderly persons. It may be present in any organ in the absence of lymphadenopathy with various systemic symptoms, such as fever of unknown
origin, general fatigue, marked deterioration in performance status, and neurological alteration. The absence of typical clinical
manifestations and the aggressive behavior of IVLBCL frequently make accurate and immediate diagnosis difficult. Synchronous IVLBCL and
menigioma or breast cancer has been reported [1, 2]. Stomach is one of the most common sites for malignant extranodal lymphomas. A wide
variety of histological subtypes have been reported, the most of which are mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue(MALT) lymphoma and diffuse
large B cell lymphoma. IVLBCL in stomach has not yet been described in the literature. Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is a rare
mesenchymal tumor. Stomach is the most common site of involvement of GIST. There are several reports of concomitant gastric GIST and MALT
lymphoma in the English literature [3, 4]. To the best of our knowledge, this case represents the first report of synchronous IVLBCL
involving a gastric GIST. A 61-year-old woman presented with a 20-day course of high fever of unknown origin, general fatigue, and two-day
history of hematemesis and melena, was admitted to Guangdong General Hospital in July 2013. Physical examination was normal. Abnormal
laboratory values included; hemoglobin: 51 g/L (reference interval 115–155 g/L), sodium concentration: 126 mmol/L(reference interval
136–145 mmol/L), total protein: 59 g/L(reference interval 60–80 g/L), white protein: 14 g/L(reference interval 35–55 g/L), lactate
dehydrogenase(LDH): 1233 U/L(reference interval 109–245 U/L). Activated partial thromboplastin time: 58 s(reference interval 30–45 s),
plasma fibrinogen(Fg): 5 g/L (reference interval 1.9–4 g/L). Computed tomography(CT) scan of the abdomen showed a heterogeneous mass of
2.5 cm in diameter in the anterior wall of the stomach which was 4 cm away from the cardia. Surgical examination showed no lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly or other masses in the abdomen. Partial gastrectomy was performed. Gross examination revealed the tumor was located in
submucosa, and had an ulcer on the surface. Histologically, the tumor was monomorphic, composed of spindle-shaped cells. Mitotic activity
ranged between 2 and 4 in 50 high power fields. Immunohistochemical examination showed that it was positive for CD34 and CD117, but negative
for smooth-muscle actin. The Ki67 proliferation index was about 2 %. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of gastrointestinal
stromal tumor. Further inspection revealed multifocal, scattered malignant cells which were exclusively within the lumina of intratumoural
and surrounding submucosa blood vessels. These cells were discohesive and displayed a lymphoid phenotype with a rounded morphology,
hyperchromatic round or irregular nuclei with prominent nucleoli, and a small amount of amphophilic cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical
examination showed these cells were CD20, MUM1 positive, and CD10, CD3 negative. The Ki67 proliferation index was close to 100 %. The
morphology and immunohistochemical profile indicated a diagnosis of intravascular B-cell lymphoma involving gastrointestinal stromal tumor
(Fig. 1, a-h). The patient refused further treatment and died 4 months after the surgery.Fig. 1Morphology and representative
Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor. The tumor had an ulcer on the surface (a, ×20). It was composed of spindle-shaped cells and had
atypia lymphoid cells within intratumoural blood vessels (b, ×200). There were the same cells in surrounding submucosa blood vessels (c, ×40
and d, ×400). The spindle cells were CD117 positive (e, ×200). The lymphoid cells were CD20 positive (f, ×200). The Ki67 proliferation index
of the lymphoid cells was close to 100 % (g, ×100). The lymphoid cells were CD3 positive (h, ×200) Morphology and representative
Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor. The tumor had an ulcer on the surface (a, ×20). It was composed of spindle-shaped cells and had
atypia lymphoid cells within intratumoural blood vessels (b, ×200). There were the same cells in surrounding submucosa blood vessels (c, ×40
and d, ×400). The spindle cells were CD117 positive (e, ×200). The lymphoid cells were CD20 positive (f, ×200). The Ki67 proliferation index
of the lymphoid cells was close to 100 % (g, ×100). The lymphoid cells were CD3 positive (h, ×200) Our patient showed a series of
nonspecific symptoms as fever of unknown origin, general fatigue, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, severe anemia, hypoalbuminaemia,
hyponatremia, elevated LDH level and coagulation disorders. The presumptive diagnosis was GIST. Histopathologically confirmed ulcer on the
tumor might explain the symptoms of gastrointestinal hemorrhage and anemia. Previous retrospective analysis of GISTs also concluded that
these two symptoms were the most common clinical presentations for a GIST . However GIST alone failed to identify the reason for the other
symptoms. Further inspection revealed IVLBCL both in the tumor and gastric submucosa around the tumor, and all the symptoms of the patient
could be explained by an IVLBCL. Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma has two main clinical patterns, a Western pattern characterized by
neurological or cutaneous involvement and an Asian variant featuring multiple organ failure, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia and
hemophagocytic syndrome. However, an immediate diagnosis of IVLBCL in many patients still remains challenging, because tumor involvement can
occur in any organ, even without apparent clinical signs. Hematological abnormalities and increased LDH levels commonly occur , but these
manifestations are also common in other hematological diseases. Moreover, increased soluble interleukin-2(IL-2) receptor levels have been
reported in patients with IVLBCL , Furthermore, soluble LR11(sLR11) levels are significantly higher in patients with IVLBCL than in those
with other hematological malignancies, and may represent a potentially powerful diagnostic indicator for IVLBCL. In addition, the
significant reduction of sLR11 levels upon disease remission suggests that this protein may represent a sensitive marker for disease
monitoring . But a widely used specific serum biomarker that is directly derived from IVLBCL cells has not yet been identified. The organs
selected by the physician for biopsy are key to accurate diagnosis. In Asian cohorts, the most relevant diagnostic site seems to be the bone
marrow . There are several cases reported as IVLBCL colonizing preexsistent hemangiomas . Actually we have a case of IVLBCL involving
hepatic cavernous hemangioma(unpublished case). Skin lesions including telangiectasia, senile angioma-like eruption, purpuric plaques and
indurated erythematous plaques were present in one third of patients. An early diaganosis could be made by biopsy of these lesions . Even in
patients without skin lesions, the usefulness of random skin biopsy (RSB) for the diagnosis of IVLBCL has been suggested . Asada et al.
recommended deep biopsy involving subcutaneous fat because the affected vessels were located in the deep dermis or subcutaneous adipose
tissue in cases . In pathological examination, neoplastic cells of IVLBCL are large lymphoid cells with prominent nucleoli and express
B-cell-associated antigens like CD19, CD20, CD22 and CD79a, and almost all are CD10 negative cases showing a non-germinal center pattern
with IRF4/MUM1 positivity. They are negative for T cell markers like CD3, CD5. Factors underlying the exclusively intravascular location of
the tumor cells remain enigmatic but could be related to the absence of certain endothelial adhesion proteins that has been demonstrated in
IVLBCL, such as CD29 and CD54 . Clinical outcomes of IVLBCL were extremely dismal before the rituximab era. However the recent development
of rituximab-containing chemotherapy has improved the outcome of IVLBCL: a retrospective analysis of Western and Asian cohorts reported
3-year overall survival rates of 81 and 60 % respectively [20, 21]. But our patient refused further treatment because she could not afford
the expensive treatment costs, and died 4 months after surgery. In conclusion, we describe the first case of synchronous ILBCL and GIST of
the stomach, the occurrence of a GIST in this particular case could be considered fortuitous. We want to emphasize that nonspecific clinical
findings as fever and progressive deteriorated general conditions in combination with elevated LDH and low albumin levels should should
raise the suspicion for lymphoma in general and after exclusion of these even for rare lymphoma like IVLBCL. Absence of lymphoadenomegaly,
hepatosplenomegaly, bone marrow involvement, or other solid neoformations does not rule out a lymphoproliferative disorder. The informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s relatives for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. intravascular large B-cell lymphoma mucosa- associated lymphoid
tissue gastrointestinal stromal tumor lactate dehydrogenase Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions ZF made the diagnosis and drafted the report. LYH contributed to concept, approved the final version of the
manuscript and provided the funding support. LXL carried out the immunohistochemical examination. CY collected the clinical data. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This article was supported by grants from the National Nature Science Foundation of China
(No. 81172244) and National Clinical Key Subject Construction Project Fund of China.
