Etiologies for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage are wide and range from infectious to vasculitis and malignant processes. Idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura is an autoimmune disorder characterized by persistent thrombocytopenia, with a relatively indolent course in young
patients, but a more complicated progression and high associated mortality in the older patients. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, complicating
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, is a very uncommon association, with only 2 reported cases in the literature. We present a 69-year-old
healthy woman presenting with petechial rash, progressive dyspnea, and bilateral alveolar infiltrates. She was found to have idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura associated with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. The patient had an excellent response to high doses of pulse steroids
and immunoglobulins. A high index of suspicion for noninfectious pulmonary diseases should be considered in patients with autoimmune
diseases presenting with pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxia. Flexible bronchoscopy with sequential lavage is a relatively safe procedure in
patients with coagulopathy and should be attempted to detect and confirm the diagnosis; absence of hemoptysis should not preclude the
diagnosis. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) is a clinical diagnosis characterized by diffuse radiographic alveolar infiltrates, hemoptysis,
anemia, and is usually accompanied by respiratory failure.1 These features—along with increasingly hemorrhagic fluid on sequential
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and the presence of hemosiderin-laden macrophages on cytologic analysis—are key components for timely DAH
diagnosis. When a patient presents with DAH, the clinician team needs to perform a comprehensive evaluation to identify the underlying cause
with a detailed history, physical examination, and laboratory analyses, to search for the most common causes.2 The treatments, as well as
short and long-term outcomes, vary with the underlying causes of DAH. The association of DAH with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
is very rare, with only 2 cases reported in the literature.3,4 We present the case of an elderly woman with acute ITP, complicated with DAH.
A 69-year-old woman with a history of hypertension presented with a generalized petechial rash and shortness of breath of 3 days duration.
The rash was nonpruritic, painless, and started at the thighs, but rapidly disseminated to the rest of the body. She had progressive dyspnea
on exertion, with a significant decrease in exercise tolerance. She denied fever, headache, dizziness, hemoptysis, or bleeding from
anywhere. There was no history of new drug use, unusual food intake, contact with any sick persons, or recent travel. Her only medication
was enalapril, which she had been taking for several years. The patient denied any use of recreational drugs, tobacco, or alcohol. On
admission, she was afebrile, normotensive with mild tachypnea (respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute). Physical examination revealed
scattered petechial rash, more prominent in lower extremities, nonpalpable and nonblanching. Chest auscultation revealed coarse crackles
bilaterally. Cardiovascular, abdominal, and neurological examinations were normal. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy or visceromegaly.
Laboratory examination revealed thrombocytopenia (platelets 7000/μL), anemia (hemoglobin 10.8 mg/dL and hematocrit 34%), and leukocytosis
(white blood cells 11,600/μL). The coagulation profile was normal, which excluded disseminated intravascular coagulation. Arterial blood gas
on ambient air revealed a partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 64 Torr, a partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 37 Torr (pH 7.45),
and an increased alveolar-arterial gradient (44 Torr). Diffuse airspace consolidation was found on chest roentgenogram (Fig. 1A). Computed
tomography (CT) of the chest showed diffuse ground glass alveolar opacities and patchy infiltrates (Fig. 1B, C). She was started on broad-
spectrum antibiotics and received intravenous steroids. Peripheral smear showed giant platelets and occasional small platelet clumps, with
no schistocytes. A flexible fiber-optic bronchoscopy (FFB) showed normal mucosa with no endobronchial lesions (Fig. 2A). Serial aliquots of
BAL fluid (BALF) turned more hemorrhagic, confirming the bronchoscopic diagnosis of DAH (Fig. 2B). Cytology of BALF showed a substantial
amount of hemosiderin-laden macrophages, further supporting the diagnosis. All BALF cultures and gram stains were negative. A, Chest
radiograph on admission showing bilateral patchy infiltrates. B and C, Chest computed tomography (CT) coronal and axial views showing
bilateral patchy ground glass and alveolar infiltrates. A, Flexible fiber-optic bronchoscopy (FFB) showing normal mucosa. B, Bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF) showing sequential BAL aliquots with increased hemorrhagic fluid. The patient remained with severe thrombocytopenia and
hypoxia despite steroids and platelets transfusion. High doses of pulse steroids and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIGs) were added with
clinico-radiological improvement. A bone marrow aspirate was morphologically normal. Additional laboratory studies failed to reveal an
etiology for secondary thrombocytopenia (Table 1), supporting the diagnosis of ITP. Steroids were gradually tapered. Repeat chest radiograph
showed almost complete resolution of bilateral infiltrates (Fig. 3). Platelet count returned to normal by week 10 after admission without
any additional therapies (Fig. 4). Laboratory Parameters Follow-up chest radiograph showed significant improvement in diffuse alveolar
hemorrhage. Figure showing the patient's platelet counts from admission until complete recovery. Idiopathic ITP is an autoimmune disorder
characterized by a low platelet count due to autoantibody binding to platelet antigen(s), leading to their premature destruction by the
mononuclear phagocyte system and, in particular, the spleen.5 ITP has an insidious onset, with no preceding viral or other illness.
Diagnosis of ITP requires exclusion of other etiologies for isolated thrombocytopenia. The estimated incidence of ITP in adults ranges from
1.6 to 3.9 per 105 adults per year.6 Symptoms and signs of ITP are highly variable and range from a fairly common asymptomatic patient with
mild bruising, mucosal bleeding (eg, oral or gastrointestinal tract bleeding) to frank bleeding from any site. Overall, symptomatic bleeding
is uncommon unless the ITP is severe (platelet count <30,000/μL). Investigations in patients presenting with possible ITP focus on excluding
conditions that might cause nonimmune thrombocytopenia. Acute thrombocytopenia with neurological signs may indicate a diagnosis of
thrombotic ITP; lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly may suggest the presence of a lymphoproliferative disorder. Bone marrow examination in
adults is recommended for patients older than 60 years or when splenectomy is considered. Clinical manifestations of ITP are related to
bleeding and thrombocytopenia. Bleeding due to thrombocytopenia is seen in two-thirds of patients with ITP. The most common type of bleeding
associated with ITP is referred to as “platelet-type,” with intracranial hemorrhage being the most severe and relatively more common in
adults.7 There is a poor correlation between the degree of thrombocytopenia and bleeding; however, more severe thrombocytopenia (platelet
count <10,000/μL) is associated with serious bleeding.8 Previously reported cases3,4 and our patient with DAH due to ITP had very low
platelet counts (<10,000/μL). There are no randomized studies evaluating “no treatment” to therapy with corticosteroids or IVIGs. In
addition, there is no indication for therapy in asymptomatic adults or patients with a platelet count >30,000 /μL. IVIG infusion is useful
in 75% of patients where platelets have to be raised either due to symptoms or signs (as in our patient) or planned surgical procedure.9
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage is recognized by the clinical constellation of hemoptysis, anemia, diffuse radiographic pulmonary infiltrates,
and hypoxemic respiratory failure. Hemoptysis is a usual presenting symptom, although it can be absent in one-third of the patients,
irrespective of the severity of DAH.10 Other constitutional, nonspecific symptoms like fever, chest pains, cough, and dyspnea can be seen.
The histopathology of DAH includes the presence of intra-alveolar red blood cells (RBCs) and fibrin, with an accumulation of hemosiderin-
laden macrophages, which may take 2 to 3 days to accumulate. One of the 3 histologic patterns—pulmonary capillaritis, bland pulmonary
hemorrhage, and diffuse alveolar damage—are associated with DAH. All causes involve injury or inflammation of the arterioles, venules,
alveolar wall, or interstitial capillaries. Isolated pulmonary capillaritis is the most common histological finding and portends a better
prognosis when compared to DAH associated with systemic vasculitis or collagen vascular disease.11 Clinical presentation of the underlying
process associated with DAH is variable, and diagnosis relies on the clinician's recognition along with specific clinical, laboratory,
radiologic, and pathologic features. A comprehensive history and examinations help to narrow the differential diagnosis in patients
presenting with DAH. It is important to evaluate for multisystemic disorders versus isolated pulmonary conditions.12 The most common causes
associated with vasculitis or capillaritis include antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis, antiglomerular basement
membrane disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and other collagen vascular diseases. The radiologic features of diffuse alveolar opacities
are nonspecific. Cavities and nodules on chest imaging are suggestive of vasculitis, and lymphadenopathy is more suggestive of infections or
malignancy.13,14 Bronchoscopy with BAL is indicated to document alveolar hemorrhage and exclude infections. A rising red blood cell count in
sequential aliquots from the same location is considered diagnostic of DAH. The utility of transbronchial biopsy in patients with suspected
DAH is controversial, and this technique is rarely used in identifying the underlying etiology.15 A confident diagnosis may be made without
tissue biopsy; however, more accessible sites such as skin, or upper airway lesions, should be biopsied when clinically indicated.16 Therapy
for DAH is based on treating both the autoimmune destruction of the alveolar capillary membrane and the underlying condition.
Immunosuppressive agents are the mainstay of treatment, especially in vasculitis-related causes. The incidence of ITP in the older
individual is uncommon, and the association with DAH is an extremely rare presentation. We found 2 cases reported in the English literature
of DAH due to ITP, one in a young male with Kabuki syndrome and the second one in an older male who responded well to high-dose IVIG therapy
combined with corticosteroid pulse therapy.3,4 The exact mechanism by which ITP may cause DAH remains unknown, but the literature and our
present case suggest that the underlying mechanism is an immune process. We have excluded other etiologies of alveolar hemorrhage to a
reasonable degree, and our patient was treated successfully with steroids and IVIGs for underlying ITP. DAH can present as a medical
emergency, and early identification is of paramount importance. Patients in whom the diagnosis of DAH is suspected should undergo early FFB
with sequential BAL for confirmation. Thrombocytopenia is a common finding in medical practice, occasionally associated with life-
threatening bleeding complications. The presence of ITP in an older person associated with bilateral infiltrates and anemia, with or without
hemoptysis, should raise suspicions for the presence of DAH. Early diagnosis and aggressive management can lead to better outcomes. The
incidence of major hemorrhagic complications and ITP-related mortality is particularly high among older patients. We report this case to
raise clinical awareness of a rare but potentially fatal association of ITP with DAH. Abbreviations: BALF = bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, CT
= computed tomography, DAH = diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, FFB = flexible fiber-optic bronchoscopy, ITP = idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura, IVIG = intravenous immunoglobulin. Conflicts of interest and source of funding: None of the authors has a financial relationship
with a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject of the manuscript. No financial support was used for this case report.
