Intrapleural fibrinolytic enzyme therapy is a potentially surgery-sparing treatment for poorly resolving parapneumonic effusion and empyema.
It is safe in the majority of patients, however the most significant risk associated with this treatment is severe bleeding secondary to
pleural hemorrhage. Contraindications for intrapleural enzyme therapy are not widely agreed upon and little is known about how to treat this
difficult and potentially lethal hemorrhagic complication. An independent 82-year-old Caucasian man presented to hospital with an empyema
complicating community-acquired pneumonia and coincidental pulmonary embolus. He was initially commenced on intravenous antibiotics, pleural
drainage and anticoagulation, however failed to improve significantly and was commenced on intrapleural fibrinolytic enzyme therapy. Shortly
after, he suffered severe pleural hemorrhage that was uncontrollable despite emergency thoracotomy and washout. Subsequent hemostasis was
achieved after re-exploration and application of topical fibrin-thrombin sealant spray. The patient survived and was discharged home.
Intrapleural enzyme therapy can be effective in loculated parapneumonic effusion and empyema, but massive pleural hemorrhage can complicate
its use. Pleural hemorrhage appears to be associated with anticoagulation or coagulopathy, and can be difficult to manage. This case adds to
the body of data on bleeding complications following intrapleural enzyme therapy, and to the best of our knowledge is the first report of
fibrin-thrombin sealant use in this setting. Pleural infection is common and is increasing globally. Unfortunately, patients experience high
morbidity and mortality nearing 20 % . Conventional treatment strategies consist of appropriate antibiotics and drainage of the pleural
space with tube thoracostomy. However, pleural collections are often viscous and loculated by fibrinous septations, resulting in inadequate
drainage and necessitating surgery . The intrapleural administration of agents to improve drainage was first described using streptokinase
and streptococcal deoxyribonuclease (DNase) nearly 65 years ago . Since then, there have been studies showing varied results, and a number
of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have attempted to address this. The first Multicenter Intrapleural Sepsis Trial (MIST1), that
randomized patients with parapneumonic effusions to intrapleural streptokinase or placebo, surprisingly failed to show any benefit in
clinical outcomes such as length of stay, need for surgery or mortality . The subsequent MIST2 trial attempted to assess the efficacy of
alteplase alone or in combination with DNase, since DNase is thought to decrease effusion viscosity . Combination treatment significantly
improved radiological resolution, reduced frequency of surgical referral, and hospital length of stay compared to placebo. Overall serious
adverse effects did not differ statistically significantly between treatment groups, however two patients who experienced intrapleural
hemorrhage were both in the combination group. Whether or not anticoagulation constitutes an absolute contraindication is not widely agreed
upon. And although bleeding complications seem to be perceived as rare , there are a number of reports of severe pleural bleeding requiring
transfusion or emergency surgery . In those requiring surgery, an active focal bleeding site is infrequently found and thoracotomy and
decortication is often described . We present a case of a patient with life-threatening refractory pleural hemorrhage following the
intrapleural administration of alteplase and DNase that was managed successfully by thoracotomy and adjunctive topical fibrin-thrombin
sealant. An 82-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to a local private hospital with a 6-day history of cough, malaise and left-sided
pleuritic chest pain. A chest radiograph demonstrated left basal consolidation consistent with community-acquired pneumonia (Fig. 1a). Blood
tests on admission are shown in Table 1. A computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram demonstrated a right-sided pulmonary embolism, left
lower lobe consolidation and moderate left-sided pleural effusion. (Fig. 1d-e). Intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam, subcutaneous enoxaparin
(65 mg twice daily) was commenced, and a 6 French pigtail tube thoracostomy was performed under ultrasound guidance (Fig. 1b). Turbid yellow
fluid was drained and results of the analysis are shown in Table 2. After 3 days, suboptimal clinical and radiologic resolution resulted in
transfer to our institution under the respiratory physicians where intrapleural enzyme therapy was commenced with alteplase (10 mg in 50 mL
of saline, 12-hourly) and dornase alfa (Roche AG, Basel, Switzerland)) (5 mg in 50 mL of saline 12-hourly).Fig. 1 a Chest radiograph on
presentation at hospital. b Chest radiograph after initial pigtail drain insertion. c Portable chest radiograph during medical emergency
call. d Transverse contrast-enhanced computed tomography image on presentation to hospital – lung window. e Pulmonary embolus in division of
right pulmonary artery. f Computed tomography angiogram following medical emergency team callTable 1Admission blood
testsHemoglobin135 g/LWhite cell count10.3 × 10^12/LNeutrophils8.2 × 10^9/LPlatelets318 × 10^9/LC-reactive
protein132.9 mg/LSodium130 mmol/LPotassium4.2 mmol/LUrea10.6 mmol/LCreatinine91 umol/LAlbumin25 g/LTotal protein68 g/LLactate
dehydrogenase258 U/LD-dimer2310 ng/mLAPTT52 secondsINR1.2 APTT activated partial thromboplastin time, INR international normalized
ratioTable 2Pleural fluid analysispH7.8Albumin14 g/LTotal protein42 g/LLactate dehydrogenase3570 U/LGlucose<1.0 mmol/LCytologyMesothelial
cells, macrophages and mixed inflammatory cells. No atypical or malignant cells. No micro-organisms seenAcid-fast bacilli not
detectedCultureLight growth of Staphylococcus aureus a Chest radiograph on presentation at hospital. b Chest radiograph after initial
pigtail drain insertion. c Portable chest radiograph during medical emergency call. d Transverse contrast-enhanced computed tomography image
on presentation to hospital – lung window. e Pulmonary embolus in division of right pulmonary artery. f Computed tomography angiogram
following medical emergency team call Admission blood tests APTT activated partial thromboplastin time, INR international normalized ratio
Pleural fluid analysis On the second day (after the third dose) of enzyme therapy, a medical emergency call was activated for sudden
hypotension (blood pressure 70 mmHg systolic) and respiratory distress. Drainage had become sanguineous and then ceased, presumably due to
obstruction of the small-bore drainage tube. An examination revealed hypovolemic shock and a chest X-ray demonstrated complete opacification
of the left hemithorax with mediastinal deviation toward the right (Fig. 1c). His hemoglobin level dropped to 91 g/L, and our patient was
transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and was transiently responsive to fluid boluses. An urgent CT angiogram demonstrated collapse
of the left upper and lower lobes due to a massive pleural effusion, but no contrast extravasation to indicate active bleeding (Fig. 1f). A
32 French tube thoracostomy was performed in intensive care, resulting in the immediate drainage of over 3000 mL of sanguineous fluid. Our
patient remained unstable and was transferred to the operating theater for left thoracotomy and exploration for bleeding. A posterolateral
thoracotomy was performed through the fifth intercostal space. On entering the pleural cavity, a further 3600 mL of blood was immediately
evacuated with cell salvage. The pleural cavity was then explored systematically. Anteriorly, a small adhesion from the superior segment of
the lower lobe appeared to have torn and was bleeding and was controlled with point diathermy. The lung appeared inflamed, hyperemic and a
small abscess cavity was noted in the lower lobe, which was evacuated. The entirety of the pleural cavity was then examined directly and
with the assistance of vidoeoscope. This revealed widespread hyperemic pleural surfaces, which bled on contact. No focal cause for massive
hemorrhage could be found. Pleural biopsy would later show fibrous and fibrinous pleuritis thickened with abundant inflammatory granulation
tissue. Following copious washout the incision was closed with two drains and our patient was returned to the ICU. A total of 2500 mL of
cell-salvaged blood was returned to the patient. Despite aggressive correction of coagulopathy, the drains accumulated over 1800 mL of blood
over 3 hours, and our patient was returned to theater for repeat exploration and hemostasis. Again, only diffuse pleural hemorrhage was
encountered and no discrete bleeding point was seen. The pleural cavity was packed extensively with gauze packs for 20 minutes in an attempt
to gain control, but was not successful. The pleural cavity was then sprayed with fibrin-thrombin sealant (Tisseel, Baxter AG, Vienna,
Austria), the lungs re-inflated, and the chest closed in an attempt to control bleeding via pleurodesis. Our patient was returned to the ICU
and required vasopressor support and ongoing transfusions despite minimal drain output. A moderate apical effusion developed on chest X-ray,
but this was managed expectantly. Hepatic and renal dysfunction ensued requiring hemofiltration. Extubation was achieved on the fifth
postoperative day and drains removed on the ninth after draining a total of 2760 mL. A further 14 days in the ICU were required for weaning
of renal support and subsequently our patient was transferred to the ward. After a brief period of rehabilitation, our patient was
discharged home. Table 3 shows total blood products administered.Table 3Blood products administered from date of surgery (units)Day 0Packed
red blood cells21Fresh frozen plasma17Platelets5Cryoprecipitate15Recombinant factor VII6.0 mgAlbumin 4 %1Day 1Packed red blood cells3Fresh
frozen plasma4Platelets1Day 2Packed red blood cells2Fresh frozen plasma4Platelets2Day 3Packed red cells1Day 4Packed red cells2Table 4Summary
of results of literature reviewStudyStudy typeSampleIntrapleural therapy usedAnticoagulation or antiplatelet useHemorrhagic
complicationsThommi et al. 2012 Single centre placebo controlled randomized controlled trial68 adultsPlacebo or
alteplaseUnspecifiedHemorrhage requiring transfusion in two patientsRahman et al. 2011 Multicentre placebo controlled randomized trial210
adultsPlacebo or alteplase or DNase or alteplase + DNaseUnspecifiedTwo intrapleural hemorrhages and one hemoptysis in alteplase + DNase
group. Two episodes of gastrointestinal bleeding in the DNase group.Maskell et al. 2005 Multi-centre placebo controlled randomized trial427
adultsPlacebo or streptokinaseUnspecifiedSeven hemorrhages (local or systemic) in streptokinase group, six in placebo groupNie et al. 2014
Meta-analysis of randomized trials879 adults, 98 childrenPlacebo, streptokinase, urokinase, tPAUnspecifiedNonsignificant increase in severe
side effectsPiccolo et al. 2014 Retrospective observational study107 adultstPA and DNaseUnfractionated heparin × 1, chronic liver disease
and ↑prothrombin time × 1Hemorrhage requiring transfusion in two patientsAnevlavis et al. 2011 Case seriesTwo adultsAlteplaseTherapeutic
dose tinzaparin (14,000 IU), Prophylactic tinzaparin (3500 IU)Two massive pleural hemorrhagesChai and Kuan, 2011 Case reportOne
adultStreptokinaseNilMassive pleural hemorrhageGoralski et al. 2009 Case report and literature reviewOne adultAlteplaseNilSevere pleural
hemorrhageGervais et al. 2008 Retrospective observational study66 adultsAlteplaseWarfarin × 1, low-molecular-weight heparin (dalteparin
5000U TDS) × 2, unfractionated heparin × 1Five major pleural hemorrhages in four patients who were anticoagulated. No hemorrhage in those
receiving prophylactic anticoagulation or clopidogrelRuiz et al. 2006 Case reportOne adultAlteplaseNilMassive pleural hemorrhage DNase
deoxyribonuclease, tPA tissue plasminogen activator Blood products administered from date of surgery (units) Summary of results of
literature review DNase deoxyribonuclease, tPA tissue plasminogen activator Despite first being performed over 65 years ago, understanding
of the use of intrapleural therapy continues to evolve. A recent meta-analysis of ten randomized controlled trials concluded that compared
to placebo, intrapleural fibrinolytic therapy decreased the chance of needing surgical intervention and length of hospital stay, but lead to
a nonsignificant increase in severe side effects . In severely ill patients who pose high surgical risk, intrapleural therapy may mitigate
the need for thoracic surgery. A particularly high-risk situation exists where one-lung ventilation is complicated by ipsilateral pulmonary
emboli, as was present in this case. However, contraindications to intrapleural enzyme therapy, in particular regard to therapeutic
anticoagulation, are not widely agreed upon. In MIST 1 and 2, anticoagulation did not constitute exclusion criteria [4, 5], and in the
recent RCT by Thommi et al. patients were still eligible too as long as international normalized ratio (INR) was <4, partial thromboplastin
time <100 s, platelets >60,000 . Their most recent recommendation is that the INR and partial thromboplastin time be <4 and <50 s,
respectively . However, there have been a number of cases reporting major hemorrhage in patients who are coagulopathic or anticoagulated.
Gervais et al. reported a series of 66 patients who received intrapleural tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), of which there were five major
pleural hemorrhages in four patients, all of whom were therapeutically anticoagulated at the time . Notably, of those who did not bleed, 38
were receiving prophylactic subcutaneous heparin or dalteparin, 12 were receiving aspirin, and two were receiving clopidogrel. Piccolo et
al. described a series of 107 patients treated with intrapleural tPA/DNase in which two patients experienced nonfatal hemorrhage requiring
blood transfusion . One was coagulopathic from chronic liver disease, the other dialysis dependent and anticoagulated for concurrent
pulmonary embolism. The latter patient died 19 days later due to sepsis. In addition, there have been a number of individual case reports of
pleural hemorrhage, causing hemorrhagic shock, following intrapleural enzyme therapy. Ruiz et al. reported massive hemothorax, following
intrapleural alteplase for complicated parapneumonic effusion in a 31-year-old woman . The patient was not reported as being coagulopathic
or anticoagulated at the time, was resuscitated, and underwent thoracotomy. No source of bleeding was seen and it could not be attributed to
traumatic drain insertion. A further two case reports of massive hemothorax, resulting in hypovolemic shock, were reported by Anevlavis et
al. in adults who received intrapleural alteplase while receiving low-molecular-weight heparin (tinzaparin). Additionally, Goralski et al.
report a 40-year-old man with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) on antiretrovirals and end-stage renal failure who received intrapleural
alteplase for a parapneumonic effusion, suffered a cardiac arrest due to hemorrhagic shock . He was resuscitated, underwent an emergency
thoracotomy for evacuation of hemothorax. No bleeding source was identified and bleeding continued until administration of platelets, fresh
frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, and activated factor VII, returned his coagulation profile to baseline. Table 4 summarizes the findings of
the literature review. The above cases indicate that serious bleeding complications may be more common than they are perceived, and a recent
review of intrapleural enzyme therapy called for further documentation of complications and their management . Our case is similar to those
discussed above, in that the patient developed massive hemothorax in the setting of therapeutic anticoagulation, however different in that
he received combination alteplase with DNase intrapleurally. The contribution of DNase to bleeding is uncertain. This case report adds to
the body of data on severe pleural hemorrhage following intrapleural enzyme therapy in patients who are anticoagulated, raising the
awareness of this complication among clinicians. In such patients, it is recommended that the risks and benefits of intrapleural therapy
versus surgery should be carefully evaluated in a multidisciplinary team environment. Moreover, those who receive intrapleural enzymes in
the setting of bleeding risk factors should be closely monitored. This report is also unique given that hemorrhage continued despite
thoracotomy, aggressive correction of coagulopathy, and hemostasis was achieved only after the application of topical fibrin-thrombin
sealant, Tisseel. Fibrin-thrombin sealants were first used during hemostasis by Bergal in 1909 . Modern fibrin-thrombin sealants, which
consist of human origin fibrinogen and thrombin, and antifibrinolytic, aprotinin, have been approved by the FDA for hemostasis, adhesion and
sealing. In thoracic surgery, they have been successfully employed to treat persistent bronchopleural fistulas following lung resection or
recurrent pneumothorax . Although not a new method of hemostasis per se, this is the first case report to describe the use of fibrin-
thrombin sealant to successfully treat refractory pleural hemorrhage following intrapleural fibrinolytic enzyme therapy and anticoagulation.
For junior surgeons, including trainees, who have not yet come across severe refractory pleural hemorrhage in practice, we believe this case
report to offer valuable reference of the successful use of topical fibrin-sealant in this context. Severe pleural bleeding may complicate
the use of intrapleural enzyme therapy for complicated parapneumonic effusion or empyema, particularly in anticoagulated or coagulopathic
patients. In severe refractory pleural hemorrhage, the use of topical fibrin-thrombin sealant can be an effective life-saving adjunct to
surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Activated partial thromboplastin time C-reactive
protein Computed tomography Deoxyribonuclease human immunodeficiency virus Intensive care unit International normalized ratio Randomized
controlled trial Tissue plasminogen activator Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions SV initiated the case report, drafted and prepared the manuscript. DL critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
