Primary ovarian ectopic pregnancy is a rare type of ectopic pregnancy which has an estimated prevalence ranging from 1:7000 to 1:70,000
accounting for almost 3 % of all ectopic cases. Here we report the case of a 25-year-old woman who presented to our clinic with abdominal
pain, 6 weeks’ delay of menstruation and 3 days of vaginal bleeding, whose transvaginal ultrasonography showed an ectopic gestational sac
with yolk sac inside, in her right ovary. This case shows that early diagnosis is very important particularly in places like the Sub-Saharan
region of Africa. A 25-year-old African woman was referred to our clinic with 6 weeks’ delay of menstruation, frequent increasing abdominal
pain and 3 days of vaginal bleeding. Her general condition was good and her vital signs were normal. She felt tenderness in an abdominal
examination and had a small amount of vaginal bleeding. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed an ectopic gestational sac with yolk sac inside,
in her right ovary. Our final diagnosis was ectopic ovarian pregnancy and we successfully treated her with methotrexate. After 3 weeks of
methotrexate administration her beta human chorionic gonadotropin was negative and a sonographic examination was completely normal. Ectopic
ovarian pregnancy is a very important medical situation. It should be diagnosed in its early stages otherwise it could be life-threatening
and surgical treatment may be inevitable. Because of the importance of fertility, medical treatment is an acceptable option and can be
feasible with early diagnosis. Primary ovarian ectopic pregnancy is a rare type of ectopic pregnancy which has an estimated prevalence
ranging from 1:7000 to 1:70,000 accounting for almost 3 % of all ectopic cases . It is usually terminated by a rupture in the first
trimester and because of the increased vascularization of the ovarian tissue it leads to internal hemorrhage and hypovolemic shock status.
The diagnosis is usually made by emergency laparotomies and histopathologic assessment. Diagnosis is made using the Spiegelberg criteria
which include:The gestational sac is located in the region of the ovary.The ectopic pregnancy is attached to the uterus by the ovarian
ligament.Ovarian tissue in the wall of the gestational sac is proved histologically.The tube on the involved side is intact. The gestational
sac is located in the region of the ovary. The ectopic pregnancy is attached to the uterus by the ovarian ligament. Ovarian tissue in the
wall of the gestational sac is proved histologically. The tube on the involved side is intact. Non-tubal pregnancies are the most common
type of ectopic pregnancy and ovarian pregnancies are the second most common type; ovarian pregnancies are very common with intrauterine
devices (IUDs). Surgical treatments are often performed in these cases because of the late onset of clinical symptoms which leads to late
diagnosis [1, 2]. Methotrexate (MTX) treatment can be used for patients in the early phases if their condition is stable. A 25-year-old
African obese woman with a history of two cesarean sections was referred to our clinic with 6 weeks’ delay of menstruation, frequent
increasing abdominal pain and 3 days of vaginal bleeding. She had a regular menstrual period before the symptoms. In her medical history
there was no record of use of an IUD, endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease. This was her third spontaneous pregnancy and there was
no abortion. Her general condition was good and her vital signs were normal: blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse 70 beats per minute (bpm),
temperature 36.5 °C. A physical examination showed minimal tenderness in all sides of her abdomen with an increase in right lower pelvic
section. A speculum examination showed a small amount of cervical bleeding, a palpable mass in rectouterine cavity and increased temperature
and tenderness at right adnexial region. Transvaginal ultrasonography (USG) showed empty uterine cavity with 11 mm thickness. However, her
rectouterine cavity was observed to be filled with heterogenous liquid including septations and hyperechogenic areas which were thought to
be a coagulum. An ectopic gestational sac and yolk sac seemed to be inside her right ovary, and were identified close to the midline, which
correlated with her 6 weeks’ delay of menstruation (Fig. 1). The fetus and fetal heart beat were not clearly seen. Vascular proliferation
called ‘ring of fire’ which is typical for ectopic ovarian pregnancy was detected around the gestational sac (Fig. 1). Her left ovary and
tubal structures seemed to be normal. She declared her previous menstrual periods were regular but that her last period was 2 months ago.
Laboratory analysis showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 11,600/mm3, red blood cell count (RBC) of 400000/mm3, hemoglobin (Hb) of
12.3 g/dl, hematocrit (Htc) of 36 %, beta human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) of 6580 and normal urine results. She was diagnosed as having
an ectopic ovarian pregnancy and was hospitalized. She and her family were informed about the stability of the condition and in view of her
history of two previous cesarean sections, medical treatment of MTX was planned. A single dose of 90 mg intramuscular MTX was administered.
She was stable. A progressive decrease in her beta HCG levels (4310 at fourth day, 2190 at seventh day, 210 at 14th day) as well as a
diminishing of intraabdominal liquid and significant regression of her right ovarian sac were observed and she was discharged with weekly
beta HCG test control advice. At the third week after the MTX treatment her beta HCG level was below 5 and her intraabdominal fluid had
nearly disappeared (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Ultrasound images of ovarian gestational sac before medical methotrexate therapy. (a) Ovarian gestational
sac (b) Colour doppler image of gestational sacFig. 2Control ultrasonographic image after the methotrexate treatment Ultrasound images of
ovarian gestational sac before medical methotrexate therapy. (a) Ovarian gestational sac (b) Colour doppler image of gestational sac Control
ultrasonographic image after the methotrexate treatment The history of ectopic pregnancy is as old as humanity. The first successful
operation for ectopic pregnancy took place in 1759 in the USA but the usual treatment was still medical up to the 1800s with a maternal
mortality rate reaching up to 60 % . The high mortality rates drew special attention which led to crucial developments in the diagnosis and
treatment of this condition. Salpingectomy, which started to be performed from the 1800s, is observed to be lifesaving because it decreased
the maternal mortality rates to nearly 5 %. Ovarian ectopic pregnancy is a rare variant of ectopic pregnancy . It occurs by fertilization of
an ovum retained in the peritoneal cavity leading to implantation on the ovarian surface . Women with ovarian ectopic pregnancies usually
present with lower abdominal pain, menstrual irregularities as in other ectopic conditions and corpus luteum cyst. Although early diagnosis
and early treatment are crucial, preoperative and sometimes intraoperative diagnoses are difficult. Diagnosis is usually made by
pathological assessment and therefore the Spiegelberg criteria are very important for the diagnosis of ectopic ovarian pregnancy .
Prediagnosis is usually supported by increased beta HCG levels. The current data inform that most cases occur in the first trimester. Early
onset rupture can lead to massive intraabdominal hemorrhage resulting in hypovolemia which can be life-threatening. Some rare cases that
reach second trimester are also documented . There are also published cases of twin ovarian ectopic pregnancies and coincidence of uterine
and ovarian ectopic pregnancies . We also found some articles on ectopic pregnancies of advanced gestational age diagnosed preoperatively
with USG and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [7, 11]. In the study of Hallat, a preoperative diagnosis was achieved in 28 % of 25 primary
ectopic pregnancy cases. All other cases were diagnosed by pathological assessment postoperatively . Phupong and Ultchaswadi declared that
the evaluation of beta HCG together with transvaginal USG can be helpful for early diagnosis . The cause of implantation anomalies in
ovarian ectopic pregnancy is not clear [7, 12, 13]. There are various hypotheses such as:Delay of ovum liberation.Thickening of tunica
albuginea.Tubal dysfunction.Intrauterine contraception devices (for example, IUDs). Delay of ovum liberation. Thickening of tunica
albuginea. Tubal dysfunction. Intrauterine contraception devices (for example, IUDs). Pelvic inflammatory disease does not have an effect on
ovarian ectopic pregnancy like it does on tubal pregnancy [9, 14]. IUDs are thought to be a main factor in ovarian ectopic pregnancy cases
according to the majority of studies. It is believed that IUDs trigger mild inflammation that disturbs the ciliary activity of the
endosalpinx and leads to ovum transport delay and ectopic implantation [15, 16]. In our case, ectopic pregnancy was diagnosed from clinical
and laboratory examinations and evaluations of her condition. Because of her two previous cesarean sections and the suspicion of secondary
salpingitis by endemic chronic pelvic infections we performed medical treatment with MTX. Primary ovarian ectopic pregnancy is usually seen
among young fertile multipara women who use an IUD . Berger and Blechner documented that the ratio of ovarian ectopic pregnancy among women
using an IUD to all ectopic cases is 1:9; its prevalence in the general population is detected as 1:150 to 200 . Our case had no history of
IUD usage. In the case series of Raziel et al., 18 of 20 cases of ovarian pregnancy were using an IUD . The link between IUDs and ovarian
pregnancy in fertile patients is worthy of comment. In their study, Lehfeldt et al. detected that the IUDs prevent uterine implantation by
99.5 % and tubal implantation by 95.5 %; however, there is no preventive effect on ovarian implantation . As the definitive diagnosis is
made surgically and histopathologically even in patients with early onset, surgical interventions have both a diagnostic and a therapeutic
value. Because oophorectomy is a radical procedure for ovarian ectopic pregnancy, consideration should be given to the patient’s age,
fertility, her desire to have further pregnancies, and the size of the mass; wedge resection can also be another surgical option. Medical
and conservative treatments have also been introduced in recent years to prevent ovarian tissue loss, pelvic adhesions and to preserve the
patient’s fertility. These include administration of mifepristone for patients diagnosed using a transvaginal USG, parenteral prostaglandin
F2a and MTX treatment for non-ruptured cases detected with laparoscopy [11, 19]. Pagidas and Frishman performed MTX treatment for ovarian
ectopic cases diagnosed using transvaginal USG and achieved healing. They emphasized that early staged cases diagnosed by transvaginal USG,
can benefit from MTX treatment . Di Luigi et al. also performed and succeeded with multidose MTX treatment which they administered to a
37-year-old patient with a history of two previous cesarean sections and IUD usage; she was diagnosed at 6 weeks of ectopic ovarian
pregnancy by use of a transvaginal USG. They emphasized that with careful clinical evaluation and transvaginal examination early staged
ovarian ectopic cases can be treated medically which preserves the normal anatomy crucial for fertility . A review of the data shows that
MTX treatment is chosen after a clear diagnosis and detection of the localization of ectopic cases by laparoscopy and therefore laparoscopy
is declared to be a supporting diagnostic procedure . In cases in which the gestational sac is lower than 30 mm, without fetal cardiac
activity, and less than 6-weeks old, MTX treatment is supported in particular and is superior to surgery because it does not disturb
fertility . In our case although she had pelvic fluid of hemorrhagic character that could have been caused by pelvic rupture, a clinical
evaluation and consideration of her previous operations led us to treat her medically. Her beta HCG levels progressively decreased after
single dose MTX and she did not face the risks of further surgery. Although ovarian ectopic pregnancy is a rare condition, after careful
evaluation, the selection of medical procedures should take into consideration the preservation of fertility particularly for young
patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Human chorionic gonadotropin Intrauterine device
Methotrexate Ultrasonography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions BO, AD,
and OEG were involved in management of the patient. BO and EMM drafted the manuscript. EMM and BO provided valuable input and guidance
during the preparation of the manuscript. BO was responsible for overall management of the patient and supervised the writing critically.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank the staff of Nyala Sudan Turkey Research and Training Hospital,
the patient and relatives who were kind enough to give their consent to publish this case report.
