A 77 year old male with history of renal lithiasis leading to right nefrectomy and end stage renal disease (ESRD) secondary to possible
vascular nephropathy and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis diagnosed in 2009, started ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (APD) due to clinical
decline. Insufficient drainage of the peritoneal dialysis solution with progressive bilateral testicular edema (more severe in right side)
was observed from the first APD session. As a consequence, the patient needed temporarily hemodialysis. In order to diagnose a patent
peritoneal-vaginal duct, a dynamic 99mTc-Phytate scintigraphy was performed after introduction of peritoneal dialysis solution (600, 1200
and 2000 mL) labelled with 74 MBq of 99mTc-Phytate in the abdominal cavity. A total of 60 images (30 seconds per image) were acquired and a
hypogastric uptake of radiotracer was observed (Figure 1 - Panel a). Right inguinal and scrotal uptake was observed only after performing
the Valsalva's maneuver (Figure 1 - Panel b). Delayed sectorial images (Figures 2 and 3) were acquired following the peritoneal drainage
period (250 seconds per image), revealing the presence of peritoneal dialysis solution in both inguinal canal and right scrotal area (Arrow
and head arrow). Due to the peritoneal-vaginal leakage an inguinal hernioplasty with raquideal anesthesia was performed. The peritoneal-
scrotal dialysate leakage is the major non-infectious catheter-related complication in patients receiving APD, caused by increased
intraperitoneal pressure and the loss of integrity of the peritoneal membrane, although the most common cause is fluid extra-vasation from
an indirect hernial sac or patent peritoneal-vaginal duct (1). Pleural, abdominal or genital dialysate leaks tend to develop during the
first year of APD, while early leaks after catheter insertion are usually observed in the first 30 days of APD (2). Several diagnostic
methods including intraperitoneal infusion of contrast, abdominal x-ray, computed tomography or peritoneal scintigraphy are employed when
the leak diagnosis is uncertain. The peritoneal scintigraphy has proven to be a useful tool for the diagnosis of the peritoneal leakage
(2,3), being an effective method for identifying structural abnormalities and localization of the source of the leak.
