To present our recent experience with intralesional bleomycin (IBI) in nonmelanoma extraocular tumors, and present previous experience on
periocular capillary hemangiomas and orbital lymphangiomas in a tertiary referral hospital. This was a retrospective descriptive study of
patients with eyelid and extraocular malignancies where conventional therapies failed, or surgery was contraindicated or refused and were
offered IBI as an alternate therapy. All patients were recruited from the Oculoplastics Clinic at Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town,
South Africa. A solution containing 1 international unit of bleomycin per milliliter saline was injected intralesionally together with 2%
lignocaine in a ratio of 4:1. The injected volume was calculated to be equivalent to the estimated volume of the lesion. A multipuncture
technique with a 29-gauge needle was used. Patients requiring retreatment were injected every 4–8 weeks until satisfactory clinical
endpoints were achieved. Our previous experience with IBI in extensive capillary hemangiomas and orbital lymphangiomas is reviewed. Cases
are presented to illustrate that IBI induced significant regression and reduction in tumor size and marked clinical improvement of the
eyelid and orbital basal cell carcinomas, Kaposi sarcoma, and mycosis fungoides. The improvements obviated the need for further surgical
intervention in most cases. Based on clinical experience we propose that IBI should be considered a treatment modality in select cases of
the malignant eyelid and ophthalmic vascular tumors where the conventional standard of care is not possible. IBI is a reasonable alternative
or adjunct to consider in such cases. At times, the practicing ophthalmologist is faced with patients who present with malignant and
nonmalignant eyelid and orbital tumors where standard surgical or medical therapy is not possible. For example, surgery may not be possible
due to an extensive tumor or the presence of significant co-morbidities. Hence, alternate or adjunct therapies are a viable option for
consideration. Such diverse cases were the impetus for our investigation into intralesional bleomycin (IBI) as a therapeutic modality in
selected eyelid, periocular, and orbital tumors. Basal cell carcinomas (BCC) are common malignancies of the mid face, nose, and periocular
regions with increasing frequency with advanced age. A recent literature review of topical and intralesional nonmelanoma (but nonocular)
skin cancers, concluded that IBI in two small series of cases was 100% therapeutically effective.1 There is considerable literature on the
use of IBI in congenital vascular and lymphatic anomalies of the head andneck and other areas of the body. IBI is used in these cases
because the sclerosing effect is beneficial in causing regression.23 There is, however, a paucity or complete absence of clinical reports on
the use of IBI in eyelid and periocular tumors. In this study, we assessed the efficacy of IBI in inoperable eyelid malignancies and
periocular vascular tumors. This retrospective descriptive study evaluated three cases of eyelid and periocular BCC and one case of Kaposi
sarcoma, where the recognized surgical standard of care treatment was not possible or not advisable due to the size of the tumor or patient
comorbidities and underwent IBI treatment. Case reports are presented for each case. The use of IBI in other eyelid tumors is briefly
described. Informed consent was obtained from all participants by the first author. All patients were managed with respect to the ethical
principles for medical research involving human subjects in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. A solution containing 1
international unit (IU) of bleomycin per milliliter in saline was injected intralesionally together with 2% lignocaine usually in a ratio of
4:1 bleomycin:lignocaine. The expected volume to be injected was calculated to be equivalent to the clinically estimated volume of the
lesion. This volume was not measured precisely and was estimated based on the clinician's judgment and experience. A multipuncture technique
with a 29-gauge needle was used to spread the drug as homogeneously as possible throughout the tumor. Injections were administered under
general anesthesia, conscious sedation or with patients fully awake depending on their age and/or preference. Posttreatment follow-ups were
performed every 4–6 weeks, and tumors requiring retreatment were injected every 4–8 weeks until satisfactory clinical endpoints were
achieved. Routine postinjection histology was not obtained. Clinical photographs were used to assist with comparisons between injections. In
2010, a 92-year-old Caucasian male was referred with a recurrent right lower lid biopsy-proven BCC. The lesion was excised 5 years earlier
but had recently increased in size and involved the majority of the lower lid and lid margin as well as extending to the inferior orbit as
demonstrated on computed tomography scan. Due to the patient's age, fragile condition, and extent of the tumor, IBI was used along with one
minor, limited tumor debulking attempt under local anesthesia. The patient had a progressive, positive response to treatment and after 8
IBIs over the duration of 12 months, the tumor was invisible and he retained a completely functional eyelid with good cosmesis. He is
currently 97 without tumor recurrence to date [Figure 1a and b]. (a) Pretreatment basal cell carcinoma is infiltrating the right lower
eyelid and anterior orbit. (b) One year after 8 intralesional bleomycin treatments with no signs of clinical recurrence In 2012, an 81-year-
old female Caucasian female was referred to our tertiary eye center with a right lower lid biopsy-proven BCC. On examination, the lesion was
located on the medial third of the lower lid adjacent to the lacrimal apparatus. She was frail, wheelchair-bound and was reluctant to
undergo surgery. IBI was offered. After each injection, there was demonstrable tumor reduction. Four treatments of IBI were required over
the duration of a year. The bleomycin was successful in shrinking the tumor to the point where no tumor was visible biomicroscopically. A
totally acceptable posttreatment lid anatomy was obtained without having to intervene surgically. Currently, at 84 years of age she still
has no signs of recurrence [Figure 2a and b]. (a) Pretreatment right lower lid histologically proven basal cell carcinoma. (b) One year
after 4 intralesional bleomycin treatments An 80-year-old Caucasian male was referred with a biopsy-proven BCC of the right lower lid. His
general health was fragile and with inoperable unstable angina he was a procedure risk even under local anesthesia or sedation. IBI was
offered and administered 4 times over the course of 6 months. Total biomicroscopic tumor regression was achieved with good anatomical
outcome [Figure 3a and b]. Six monthly follow-ups was maintained, and after 4 years the patient remains alive (in spite of unstable angina)
and presented recently with signs of a small tumor recurrence at the temporal edge of the treated area. This was successfully re-treated
with additional IBI. (a) Basal cell carcinoma involving the right lower lid margin before treatment. (b) One year after 4 intralesional
bleomycin treatments. No signs of tumor recurrence clinically In 2013, a 35-year-old non-Caucasian male presented with a periocular tumor,
localized to the subconjunctival bulbar and fornix. This lesion was detected 3 weeks prior to the presentation. Submental lymphadenopathy
was present with oral candidiasis and a single dark purple lesion on the hard palate. He had hyperpigmented pruritic papular eruptive skin
lesions in keeping with the retroviral disease. He tested positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and the CD4 lymphocyte cell count
was 25/mm3 confirming a diagnosis of HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Histological examination of the periocular lesion confirmed
Kaposi sarcoma with immunohistochemistry positive for human herpes virus 8. The visual acuity in the affected eye was 20/20 and external
beam radiotherapy would result in unacceptable side effects to the globe. We offered IBI treatments. Four injections with monthly intervals
into all four quadrants of the tumor area were administered with a complete clinical resolution of the tumor after 6 months [Figure 4a and
b]. (a) Kaposi sarcoma infiltration of bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva before treatment. (b) Six months after 4 intralesional bleomycin
treatments. Slight injection but no tumor visible biomicroscopically IBI injections have also been successfully used postoperatively in
three cases undergoing adjunctive chemotherapy for eyelid BCC. In these cases, the intraoperative frozen section histology confirmed clear
margins, but the later paraffin sections revealed incomplete excision. These cases were reconstructed at the primary procedure based on the
intraoperative frozen section evidence of complete tumor removal. We believed repeat surgery would result in inadequate cosmesis and hence a
single cycle consisting of three IBI's 4–6 weeks apart was used with no evidence of tumor recurrence to date. There was no effect in one
case of massive kissing eyelid nevus. Tumor reduction was achieved in one case of T-cell lymphoma. No patients in this study, who were
treated with IBI, had any known local or systemic side effects. A landmark case report in 2008 by Léauté-Labrèze et al.4 documented the use
of systemic propranolol for severe hemangiomas of infancy. We successfully used IBI for infants with periocular capillary hemangiomas which
were refractory to conventional treatments.5 In infants under 1-year-old, general anesthesia was administered and a dose of 0.5 mg/kg (range
0.2–0.9 mg/kg per injection) was injected, diluted to 15 IU in 15 ml normal saline +1% lignocaine. A multipuncture technique was used, and
the injection volume did not exceed the estimated volume of the tumor. Postinjection pressure was applied for 10 min, and oral analgesics
were prescribed postinjection with review and retreatment every 4 weeks.5 Recently, a case series reported good outcomes of IBI for
histologically and/or radiologically confirmed orbital lymphangiomas resulting in preservation of visual acuity and no recorded orbital or
optic nerve side effects.6 Bleomycin is a glycopeptide first isolated and reported by Umezawa et al. from the soil fungus, Streptomyces
verticillus in 1966.7 Bleomycin has antibacterial, antineoplastic, antiviral (it induces apoptosis and tumor necrosis factor), and
antiangiogenic properties.7 These are principally due to its sclerosing effect on the vascular endothelium. Of all the various biochemical
actions, the most important is the effect on DNA where strand scission results in free radicals release once the metal core is oxidized.8
Bleomycin is directly cytotoxic to keratinocytes and eccrine epithelium.9 Cysteine proteinase is an enzyme found in most tissues, except the
skin, and lungs. It inactivates bleomycin via hydrolyzation.10 The cytotoxic effects of bleomycin are therefore magnified in the skin (and
lungs) due to the absence of this enzyme, explaining some pulmonary and dermatologic side effects of the drug.9 Systemic bleomycin is
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for chemotherapeutic treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck, cervix, penis, and skin. It has also been approved for use in the management of Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma,
testicular carcinoma, and malignant pleural effusions. There are currently no FDA-approved treatments using IBI, but it is used off-label
most frequently for the treatment of recalcitrant warts.89 Salwa et al. reported on a series of 3 patients with periocular BCC where
significant co-morbidities precluded surgical resection. Patients were successfully treated with a combination of IBI and
electrochemotherapy (ECT), a technique where cells are temporarily permeabilized after exposure to a brief electric pulse thus enhancing the
intracellular uptake of chemotherapeutic drugs.11 In this series, we have used IBI supplemented with lignocaine to enhance the intracellular
uptake of this chemotherapeutic antibiotic. Lignocaine acts as a local anesthetic and enhances the uptake of hydrophilic chemotherapeutic
agents such as bleomycin via a membrane stabilizing effect. In our series of patients, we have observed a range of outcomes from no effect
(in kissing congenital nevus) to tumor reduction (T-cell lymphoma, congenital capillary hemangiomas) and tumor ablation (BCC, orbital
lymphangioma). No local or systemic side effects occurred in any of the patients. The most commonly reported side effects associated with
IBI are a pain, erythema, and swelling. The pain usually lasts 72 h but is relieved with analgesia.8 Local skin necrosis, ulceration, and
eschar formation may also occur at the site of injection.12 Reports of patients developing flagellate hyperpigmentation of the skin after
treatment with bleomycin may be as high as 20%. The pigmentation often fades with the cessation of drug use. The above reactions may be
explained by the decreased concentration of hydrolase in the skin resulting in increased levels of bleomycin.10 There are no reports of
pulmonary fibrosis attributed to IBI in humans8 but in the murine model pulmonary fibrosis is well recognized.13 Concerns about side effects
of the intralesional drug in children have been mitigated by reports of serum levels of bleomycin that are 100 times lower when the drug is
injected intralesionally than when the same dose is administered intravenously.14 Recent guidelines on the management of BCC do not include
the use of intralesional chemotherapy. Reasons for the current exclusion include a lack of adequate, well-designed randomized trials with a
long-term follow-up. The result is an absence of therapeutic guidelines but widespread off-label use.12 At present, the most commonly used
intralesional agents (mostly off-label) in the management of BCC are methotrexate (MTX), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), bleomycin and interferon,
with interferon-α, and 5-FU being the most widely used.9 Kirby and Miller12 reviewed 56 articles on the use of intralesional chemotherapy in
nonmelanoma noneyelid skin cancers. They12 reported IBI in 11 case reports that documented a 100% clearance rate after IBI. This rate is
better than that reported for conventional excision (90%) and similar to the cure rate after Mohs micrographic surgery (99%).12 High-risk
histological subtypes were excluded from these case reports.12 The review did find higher cure rates of BCC with IBI compared to
intralesional agents, such as MTX, 5-FU, and interferon, however, the sample size was smaller for the bleomycin group compared to the other
groups.12 Good et al.9 reviewed the literature on intralesional chemotherapy in the treatment of BCC, including bleomycin. There were a
number of reports on bleomycin-mediated ECT to treat BCC. As bleomycin is a hydrophilic molecule, ECT is postulated to enhance intracellular
penetration of bleomycin by changing the permeability of the cell membrane. Adding local anesthetic to the mixture may also enhance
penetration. In the largest series15 to date, 20 patients with BCC were treated with ECT and bleomycin with a complete cure rate of 98%. In
a single case report, an 82-year-old female with multiple recurrent BCCs on her face was treated with multiple IBIs without ECT and all
lesions healed without recurrence.16 Salwa et al.11 describe 3 cases with significant comorbidities precluding surgical resection where ECT
with IBI was used effectively in periocular BCC's after a single treatment. This outcome concurs with earlier trials of the ECT/IBI
combination in BCC elsewhere on the skin.15 Mechanisms for enhancing the efficacy of IBI include the use of local anesthetics, ECT or
electroporation. Electropermeabilization is claimed to enhance intracellular delivery of hydrophilic molecules possibly necessitating only a
single injection.11 Recently Chitwood et al.1 reviewed the topical and intralesional treatment of nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) and
evaluated the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of treatment. In comparison to other treatment modalities, IBI had a 100% aggregate clearance
rate in nonocular NMSC.1 The cost of IBI was similar to intralesional 5-FU (clearance rate 98%) and MTX (clearance rate 98%), but only 16%
the cost of interferon alfa-2b (clearance rate 72–79%), 14% of interferon gamma (clearance rate 14–33%) and <1% the cost of Interferon beta
(with a clearance rate of 59%).1 Therefore, IBI is not only highly effective but also a cost effective treatment in cutaneous BCC. A paucity
of published experience exists with intralesional chemotherapeutics on lesions of the eyes and ocular adnexa. We believe that once an eyelid
lesion is healed to the point of it being invisible to the individual, it is difficult and unethical to convince a patient to accept a
posttreatment biopsy. Hence, we have not routinely performed posttreatment biopsies in this series. Currently, are evaluating posttreatment
biopsy specimens for the histologic effect of IBI. Recurrence rates are vital to determine whether to institute IBI as a definitive
treatment for BCC in anatomically sensitive sites such as the eyelids. Our longest follow-up is 4 years with a mean of all our cases around
2 years. Clearly, longer follow-up would warrant reporting in future publications. A larger case series will not only assist in generating
long-term follow-up data but will also contribute to establishing confidence in this treatment modality. However, Léauté-Labrèze et al.4
have shown the world that the “humble” academic effort of reporting clinical cases can dramatically change global patterns of patient
care.17 Based on clinical experience over 6 years, we propose that IBI be considered a treatment modality in select cases of the malignant
eyelid and ophthalmic vascular tumors where the conventional standard of care is not possible. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
