Orbital tumors constitute a group of diverse lesions with a low incidence in the population. Tumors affecting the eye and ocular adnexa may
also secondarily invade the orbit. Lack of accumulation of a sufficient number of cases with a specific diagnosis at various orbital
centers, the paucity of prospective randomized studies, animal model studies, tissue bank, and genetic studies led to the development of
various myths regarding the diagnosis and treatment of orbital lesions in the past. These myths continue to influence the diagnosis and
treatment of orbital lesions by orbital specialists. This manuscript discusses some of the more common myths through case summaries and a
review of the literature. Detailed genotypic analysis and genetic classification will provide further insight into the pathogenesis of many
orbital diseases in the future. This will enable targeted treatments even for diseases with the same histopathologic diagnosis. Phenotypic
variability within the same disease will be addressed using targeted treatments. Orbital tumors constitute a group of diverse lesions with a
low incidence in the population. Tumors affecting the eye and ocular adnexa may also secondarily invade the orbit. The low number of
patients with a specific diagnosis at many centers limits prospective randomized clinical trials. Therefore, all the available
recommendations on diagnosis and management are from small prospective case series or retrospective studies. The lack of animal models and
tissue bank material limit the extent of scientific studies to be conducted regarding the pathogenesis and treatment of orbital lesions.
Genotypic analysis of orbital tumor cases is rare. However, recently more data has been gathered. Due to all these factors, various myths
regarding the diagnosis and management of orbital tumors have developed over time and continue to influence the decision making process of
orbital specialists. The use of orbital imaging studies, including computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), allows
localization of the mass in the orbit. This localization allows the correct surgical approach to biopsy the lesion. As a result, anterior
orbitotomy techniques using a transconjunctival or skin approach are used more often now than the traditional lateral orbitotomy (Kronlein,
Berke) that required a larger incision and osteotomy. MRI allows evaluation of the internal tissue features better through T1- and
T2-weighted (T1W and T2W) imaging sequences and patterns of contrast enhancement. Seven common orbital myths are listed below. These myths
are discussed using case summaries and literature data. Although MRI and CT can provide clues about the presumptive diagnosis in some cases,
it is best to do an orbital biopsy, either excisional or incisional, if the lesion is in a surgically accessible location. However, if the
lesion is in a location that is difficult to reach surgically and morbidity is expected, then a clinical diagnosis based on imaging findings
can be cautiously pursued. A 43-year-old female presented with pain, proptosis, and decreased vision in the right eye. Orbital MRI
demonstrated an ill-defined mass located in the right orbital apex isointense to the extraocular muscles on T1W images [Figure 1a],
hyopintense on T2W images [Figure 1b] with moderate contrast enhancement [Figure 1c]. At this point, the MRI findings were consistent with
either an inflammatory mass or a nonepithelial tumor such as lymphoma.1 Although some studies suggested that diffusion weighted images can
be used to differentiate between these two disease conditions, there is still a considerable overlap between them. A 42-year-old female
presenting with painful proptosis. (a) T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging shows ill-defined orbital lesion occupying the apex. The
lesion is isointense to the cerebral gray matter and extraocular muscle. (b) The apical lesion shows marked contrast enhancement after
gadolinium injection. (c) T2-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates that lesion is hypointense to the cerebral gray matter
and extraocular muscle The tumor had a location that was difficult to reach surgically with the potential of a number of surgical
complications. Therefore, based on the MRI findings, a presumptive diagnosis of idiopathic orbital inflammation was made and the patient was
treated with a tapering dose of 1 mg/kg/day oral prednisolone. The symptoms resided after corticosteroid treatment, and the patient
continued to do well at 2 years follow-up without any recurrence. This case illustrates an example where the diagnosis was established based
on the imaging studies without histopathologic evidence. If the patient had not responded to oral corticosteroid treatment or she had
recurrent symptoms and signs after discontinuation of the drug, an incisional biopsy via orbitotomy surgery would have been necessary to
establish the histopathologic diagnosis. In some diseases such as idiopathic orbital inflammation (IOI), there is phenotypic variability
from case to case with the same histopathologic diagnosis. It appears that IOI is a heterogeneous collection of diseases. Variables such as
age, location, and histopathologic findings all affect the response to treatment.2 Recently, gene expression profiling methods have been
used to demonstrate this heterogeneity among cases labeled as IOI. Genomic upregulation involving immunoglobulin, CXCR4, YKL-40, CXCL9, SLAM
Family 7, and IL-7 receptor have been observed in some patients with IOI. Alternately, genomic downregulation involving alcohol
dehydrogenase 1B, perilipin 1, adiponectin, leptin receptor, and C1Q have also been documented in some patients with IOI by gene expression
array methods.2 Gene expression findings may help in prognostic and therapeutic decision making for patients with IOI. While some cases
diagnosed histopathologically as IOI respond to a single course of tapering corticosteroid therapy, others demonstrate recurrence upon
cessation of corticosteroid treatment and require other treatments such as external radiotherapy or surgical excision. Recently, a subgroup
of IOI cases has been linked to IgG4 disease.3 Genotypic analysis will definitely shed more light on the phenotypic variability observed
among IOI cases. Consequently, targeted subset treatment of IOI cases may become possible in the future. Cavernous hemangioma is the most
frequent benign orbital tumor in adults. Cavernous hemangiomas are usually well-circumscribed lesions. Differential diagnosis of well-
circumscribed orbital lesions includes schwannoma, solitary fibrous tumor, and some metastatic tumors in addition to cavernous hemangioma.
However, cavernous hemangioma is by far the most common well-circumscribed orbital lesion. Figure 2a and b illustrate two cases of presumed
orbital cavernous hemangioma on MRI. The case presented in Figure 2a had compressive optic neuropathy and vision decrease, and the orbital
tumor was discovered with MRI. The patient presented in Figure 2b had a headache and the tumor was discovered once MRI was performed to
investigate the cause of the headache. (a) T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging showing a well-circumscribed orbital lesion that
compresses the optic nerve on the left side. (b) T1-weighted coronal magnetic resonance imaging is showing a well-circumscribed orbital
lesion that does not encroach on the optic nerve on the right side. (c) Gross photograph of the tumor depicted in Figure 2a which proved to
be a cavernous hemangioma on histopathologic examination after excision. (d) Gross photograph of the tumor depicted in Figure 2b which was
also read as cavernous hemangioma The treatment of cavernous hemangioma is surgical excision of the tumor.45 Sometimes an asymptomatic
lesion located in the posterior orbit is difficult to access surgically, and the patient can be observed conservatively for signs of the
globe, optic nerve compression, and visual loss.56 External beam radiation treatment has also been advocated in the treatment of orbital
cavernous hemangiomas located in the orbital apex that cannot be resected.7 The tumor depicted in Figure 2a had a well-circumscribed orbital
mass that was thought to be a cavernous hemangioma. Since the tumor produced optic nerve compression and vision loss, a decision was made to
proceed with immediate surgery. An anterior orbitotomy was performed and the tumor was removed in toto with a cryoprobe without
complications [Figure 2c]. The case depicted in Figure 2b also had an intraconal, well-circumscribed orbital mass. However, in this case,
there was no optic nerve compression, vision loss, or disfiguring proptosis. Although immediate surgery is probably unnecessary in this
case, the tumor may demonstrate growth in the future and lead to visual deterioration. Therefore, it is probably better to remove this tumor
rather than wait for optic nerve complications to develop at which time surgery may be more difficult to perform. Additionally, permanent
vision loss may result without timely treatment. We performed an anterior orbitotomy via a superolateral skin crease incision and removed
the tumor in toto with a cryoprobe [Figure 2d]. Histopathologic examination findings were consistent with a cavernous hemangioma. For this
case, some may recommend observation until tumor growth has been documented.5 We believe that it is best to remove these lesions before they
encroach on the optic nerve and globe provided that they are in a surgically accessible location and the risk of complications is low. A
27-year-old male presented with a 5 years history of left proptosis, loss of visual acuity, and diplopia [Figure 3a]. The patient had been
followed elsewhere with a presumptive diagnosis of orbital lymphangioma. Surgery was not performed for years due to concerns of
intraoperative hemorrhage for years. Orbital MRI findings revealed a cavitary mass with fluid-fluid levels occupying almost the entire orbit
[Figure 3b and c]. A detailed search demonstrated that tumors producing fluid-fluid levels include lymphangioma, hemangioma, aneurysmal bone
cyst, chondroblastoma, osteoblastoma, intracranial schwannoma, peripheral nerve schwannoma, and extracranial neck and head
schwannomas.8910111213 Nontumoral causes include fibrous dysplasia, tumoral calcinosis, and myositis ossificans.813 We thought that the
lesion could be a lymphangioma as suspected, but it could also represent one of the rarer histopathologic entities listed above. We
proceeded with an anterior orbitotomy and performed a piecemeal subtotal tumor excision [Figure 3d]. The lesion was yellow-white in color,
had intrinsic vascularity, was unencapsulated and with a fragile structure during surgical dissection. Histopathology findings and
immunohistopathology were consistent with schwannoma [Figure 3e and f]. This case illustrates that a high index of suspicion is required for
imaging findings thought to represent the classic appearance of certain tumors. A 31-year-old male with a 5 years history of proptosis in
the left eye. (a) Facial photograph shows left proptosis. (b) T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates a cavitary mass in the
left orbit. (c) T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging shows fluid-fluid levels in the tumor. (d) Gross photo of the excised tumor shows
yellowish hemorrhagic tumor fragments. (e) Histopathologic examination demonstrates schwannoma consisting mostly of spindle shaped tumor
cells with elongated nuclei forming bundles and cellular areas without obvious mitosis (Antoni A pattern) (H and E, ×400). (f)
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells diffusely stain positive with S-100 (S-100, ×100) Recently drugs that target sonic hedgehog and
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways have been used in the treatment of unresectable (locally advanced or metastatic) eyelid
carcinomas (basal and squamous cell, respectively) not amenable to surgical excision. Locally advanced eyelid and periocular carcinomas have
traditionally been treated using wide surgical excision, exenteration, external beam radiotherapy, and systemic (intravenous) chemotherapy
[Figure 4a-d]. A 65-year-old female with locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid with orbit and bone invasion. (a) Facial
photograph shows ill-defined eyelid squamous cell carcinoma affecting the lateral canthal region. (b) Anterior segment photograph of the
left eye demonstrates vascularized corneal opacification and conjunctival keratinization as secondary effects of locally advanced eyelid
cancer. (c) Orbital computed tomography shows orbital and bone invasion from eyelid tumor. (d) Facial photograph 6 months after orbital
exenteration, bone removal, external radiotherapy, and intravenous chemotherapy (cisplatin and doxorubicin) Basal cell carcinomas (BCC) are
known to be associated with abnormal Hedgehog pathway signaling that results in an uncontrolled proliferation of basal cells. This pathway
is normally inhibited by patched homologue 1 (PTCH 1).14151617 However, when PTCH 1 is deficient, a transmembrane protein called smoothened
(SMO) activates the Hedgehog pathway. Vismodegib selectively binds to the extracellular domain of SMO, thereby prevents Hedgehog
signaling.14151617 Therefore, vismodegib is a treatment option for locally advanced BCC in the periocular region with extensive eyelid and
orbital involvement. Patients who cannot undergo extensive surgery possibly exenteration because of medical reasons and comorbidities or
patients who do not wish to undergo this type of disfiguring surgery are potential candidates for vismodegib. Vismodegib is prescribed
orally and may be associated with serious side effects including muscle cramps, alopecia, and development of new squamous cell
carcinomas.1417 Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) have been shown to demonstrate overexpression of EGFR.1718 Patients with unresectable
(locally advanced or metastatic) SSC of the skin were treated with cetuximab with a tumor response rate of 69%.18 Similarly, a study of 424
head and neck SCCs randomized to high dose radiation with or without cetuximab has shown superior survival with the addition of cetuximab.17
Advanced eyelid SCC with the orbital extension has been treated with intravenous cetuximab and oral erlotinib with good clinical and
radiological response. Side effects of EGFR inhibitors include skin toxicity in the form of acne-like rash, papular and pustular eruptions,
mucositis, esophagitis, and conjunctivitis.1718 Based on these experiences, patients with locally advanced or metastatic BCC and SCC with
advanced age and comorbidities who are not amenable for surgery are potential candidates for targeted therapies. High cost, long-term
treatment, and side effects are relative limitations of targeted therapies. Long-term results are currently unknown. Optic nerve gliomas are
generally accepted to be low-grade pilocytic astrocytomas. These tumors occur in children younger than 10 years of age. Optic nerve gliomas
demonstrate an association with neurofibromatosis type I (NF1). As outlined above, BRAF duplicate mutations have been found in some patients
with optic nerve gliomas and NF1 demonstrating tumor growth and local invasion on serial examinations.19 In another study, BRAF duplicate
mutations were found in almost all patients with optic nerve/chiasmal gliomas.20 Therefore, inhibitors of BRAF and other pathway components
such as sorafenib have been tested in clinical trials as a treatment for optic gliomas. However, sorafenib produced an unexpected and
unprecedented acceleration of tumor growth in children with pilocytic astrocytoma, irrespective of NF1 or tumor BRAF status.21 In vitro
studies with sorafenib indicate that this effect is likely related to paradoxical ERK activation.21 Therefore, novel agents that modulate
signal transduction and are thought to inhibit tumor growth may paradoxically induce tumor progression. In this case of optic gliomas, the
myth still holds true that radiotherapy and chemotherapy are the mainstays of treatment.2122 Recent evidence suggests that treatment with
sorafenib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, may be beneficial in metastatic adenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glands unresponsive to
conventional chemotherapy.23 In another report, inhibition of KIT tyrosine kinase by imatinib mesylate achieved a significant reduction of
tumor burden making the adenoid cystic carcinoma amenable to surgical resection.24 Lacrimal gland adenoid cystic carcinomas are frequently
positive for MYB, and this finding suggests that MYB and its downstream targets are potential therapeutic targets for these tumors.
Therefore, targeted treatments for MYB and its downstream products holds promise for ACC of the lacrimal gland.2526 Aggressive locally
recurrent and metastatic adenoid cystic carcinomas may express vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and c-kit. In a phase II clinical
trial of sunitinib, a novel agent which acts as a multi-targeted inhibitor of VEGF receptor, c-kit, FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 in ACC of the
salivary gland, no responses were observed but sunitinib was well tolerated and prolonged tumor stabilization of ≥6 months was achieved in
62% of assessable patients.27 This experience indicates the challenges in evaluating molecular targeting agents. A Phase II clinical trial
on dovitinib, an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase, in metastatic salivary gland adenoid cystic carcinoma is already underway and
initial data on tumor regression in encouraging. In summary, our understanding about orbital diseases is expanding based on the genomic
analysis and targeted therapies. Collaborative research bringing together a larger number of patients will improve therapeutic approaches to
this diverse group of diseases. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
