We aim to illustrate the potential viability of MCTD as an underlying aetiology of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome. The case is probably the
first description available in the literature of the Melkersson–Rosenthal as an early manifestation of mixed connective tissue disease. The
Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome consists of a triad of recurrent lip and/or face swelling, fissured tongue, and intermittent facial palsy.
Mixed connective tissue disease is a multisystemic disorder with overlapping features of systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and
polymyositis, and is differentiated from them by a high titer of antibodies to ribonucleoprotein. The paper presents a case report of
Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome with an onset in childhood that derived from vasculitis that turned out to be an early manifestation of mixed
connective tissue disease. We used MRI to evaluate patient’s brain structure and Immunoblot Ena Profil 1 test to test serum autoantibodies
level. The patient has a typical for Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome triad of symptoms: bilateral facial nerve palsy, lingua plicata and
facial oedema. Both TC and MRI of the head show no changes as well as laboratory tests except Anti-SS-A (Anti-Ro) and Anti-RNP autoantibody
serum level that was highly positive. Neurological involvement of the MCTD usually includes, according to the frequency of the occurrence,
trigeminal neuralgia, headaches, sensorineural hearing, cerebral haemorrhage, transverse myelitis, cauda equina syndrome, retinal
vasculitis, progressive multifocal encephalopathy, and demyelinating neuropathy. For clinical practice it is important to remember that
Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome can also be the neurological manifestation of MCTD, especially when accompanied by other systemic symptoms.
The Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome consists of a triad of recurrent lip and/or face swelling, fissured tongue, and intermittent facial palsy.
Mixed connective tissue disease is a multisystemic disorder with overlapping features of systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and
polymyositis, and is differentiated from them by a high titer of antibody to ribonucleoprotein . The paper presents a case report of
Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome with an onset in childhood that derived from vasculitis that turned out to be an early manifestation of mixed
connective tissue disease. Patient aged 38, female was admitted to the Neurology Department of our Speciality Hospital in order to diagnose
the occurrence of the upper limbs weakness localized mostly proximally with additional numbness sensation in the lower limbs. Apart from
that the patient suffered from a recurrent alternate facial nerve palsy, dizziness, intermittent fever, hypertension, obesity, coli
lymphadenopathy, hipercholesterolemia, glucose intolerance, thyroid goitre, left ovary cyst, hands, and ankles oedema. The symptom of
recurrent alternate facial nerve palsy first occurred at the age of 5 to return at the age of 18, 30, and 32. There were no relevant factors
in the gynaecological history—her periods were regular and mildly abundant. The family history reveals that her 14-year-old daughter has
lingua plicata (Fig. 1) and suffers from tongue numbness and ecchymoses on the palate and the oral mucous membrane. These symptoms would
appear once a month and subside without treatment.Fig. 1Patient’s daughter. Lingua plicata (or fissured tongue). One of the triad of the
symptoms of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome that consist of recurrent lip and/or face swelling, fissured tongue, and intermittent facial palsy
Patient’s daughter. Lingua plicata (or fissured tongue). One of the triad of the symptoms of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome that consist of
recurrent lip and/or face swelling, fissured tongue, and intermittent facial palsy Closer examination revealed: an excessively smooth left
nasolabial furrow (Fig. 2), trouble with both eye closure, lingua plicata, (Fig. 3), ecchymoses on the palate, and oral mucous membrane, the
superficial deprivation feel of the face; muscle strength and tension were normal, also muscle strength reflexes show no change; Romberg’s
as well as Babinski’s signs were negative. At admission, a TC of the head was performed and no abnormality was shown. The MRI of the head
had shown no change of the normal brain structure. The lumbar puncture was recommended as the next step and cerebrospinal fluid parameters
were in the normal range.Fig. 2Patient. Smooth left nasolabial furrow. After bilateral facial nerve palsy patient is unable to
smileFig. 3Patient. Lingua plicata (or fissured tongue). One of the triad of the symptoms of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome that consist of
recurrent lip and/or face swelling, fissured tongue, and intermittent facial palsy Patient. Smooth left nasolabial furrow. After bilateral
facial nerve palsy patient is unable to smile Patient. Lingua plicata (or fissured tongue). One of the triad of the symptoms of
Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome that consist of recurrent lip and/or face swelling, fissured tongue, and intermittent facial palsy As for the
laboratory findings, a glucose intolerance and hipercholesterolemia were confirmed. Elisa test for Borrelia burgdorferi antibody was
negative in both IgM and IgG class. The results of basic laboratory tests, including blood morphology, CPK, CRP level, glucose, urinalysis,
liver and kidney function tests, were normal. The results of electrocardiography were also normal. The level of IgA, IgG, IgM antibodies
were within the range. There was no trace of Anti-RNP, Anti-Sm, Anti-SS-B, Anti-Scl 70, and Anti-Jo-1 in blood serum. High titers of Anti-
SS-A were detected. Based on these findings the immune deficiency was discluded, diagnose of vasculitis was stated and chloroquini phosphas
was administered in a dosage of 250 mg per day. Symptoms like dizziness, intermittent fever, coli lymphadenopathy, limbs weakness with an
additional numbness sensation, ecchymoses on the palate, and oral mucous membrane subsided completely after 4 weeks of the therapy. Mixed
connective tissue disease is a multisystemic disorder with overlapping features of systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and
polymyositis, and is differentiated from them by a high titer of antibodies to ribonucleoprotein . MCTD was first described by Sharp in 1972
and published in The American Journal of Medicine. Three sets of the MCTD diagnostic criteria exist in clinical practice—those by Sharp,
those by Alarcon-Segovii and Villareala, and those by Kasukawa . Anti-RNP antibodies appear to be pathogenic, and their disappearance is
associated with periods of remission in MCTD. The production of Anti-RNP antibodies may be induced by a molecular mimicry, possibly
involving influenza B matrix protein, retroviral p30gag antigen, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus. The subclasses of Anti-RNP
antibodies may be associated with different clinical scenarios. In addition, some HLA subtypes are associated with specific patterns of
tissue injury in the presence of Anti-RNP antibodies . The most frequent CNS manifestation is a trigeminal (fifth cranial) nerve neuropathy.
Furthermore, neurological involvement of the MCTD usually includes, according to the frequency of the occurrence: headaches, sensorineural
hearing, cerebral haemorrhage, transverse myelitis, cauda equina syndrome, retinal vasculitis, progressive multifocal encephalopathy, and
demyelinating neuropathy . So far there was no publication regarding the connection between Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome and MCTD. As
stated before, Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome is a rare disease which includes a triad of symptoms: facial nerve palsy, lingua plicata, and
facial oedema [5, 6]. Autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance is well documented. The responsible gene was found on
chromosome 9 p11 . The aetiology is unknown; however, pathological specimens of a sick tissues demonstrate non-caseating granulomas grouped
around the vessel space that could indicate that vessel inflammation is the most possible cause of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome .
Histologic evidence is not necessary for the diagnosis of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome. As shown in the patient’s history as well as one of
the researches, total of 13 (29.5 %) patients with Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome had a family history [9, 10]. As for our patient, as a
child she suffered from the recurrent alternate facial nerve palsy which first occurred at the age of 5 to return at the age of 18, 30, and
32. When other symptoms like limbs weakness, dizziness, intermittent fever, hypertension, coli lymphadenopathy, hipercholesterolemia, hands,
and ankles oedema appeared, a systemic disease was taken into consideration and diagnosis was stated. In our opinion, our patient’s daughter
suffers from oligosymptomatic form of Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome, which is probably derived from vasculitis based on the occurrence of
ecchymoses on the palate and oral mucous membrane. Because her symptoms were mild and subsided without treatment, we decided to choose to
wait and devise a strategy. This case illustrates the potential viability of MCTD as an underlying aetiology of Melkersson–Rosenthal
syndrome and is probably the first description available in the literature of the Melkersson–Rosenthal as an early manifestation of a mixed
connective tissue disease. For clinical practice it is important to remember that Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome can also be the neurological
manifestation of MCTD, especially when accompanied by other systematic symptoms. The patient has given their consent for the Case Reports to
be published. DJ collected data and wrote abstract, case report, conclusion. JB wrote discussion. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript. None The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
