Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest:None declared Patient: Male, 62 Final Diagnosis: Sternoclavicular osteomyelitis Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Debridement Specialty: Infectious Diseases Rare disease Sternoclavicular osteomyelitis is a rare disease, with less than
250 cases identified in the past 50 years. We present a rare case of sternoclavicular osteomyelitis in an immunosuppressed patient that
developed from a conservatively treated dislocation. A 62-year-old white man with a history of metastatic renal cell carcinoma presented to
the emergency department (ED) with a dislocated left sternoclavicular joint. He was managed conservatively and subsequently discharged.
However, over subsequent days he began to experience pain, fever, chills, and night sweats. He presented to the ED again and imaging
revealed osteomyelitis. In the operating room, the wound was aggressively debrided and a wound vac (vacuum-assisted closure) was placed. He
was diagnosed with sternoclavicular osteomyelitis and placed on a 6-week course of intravenous Nafcillin. Chemotherapy patients who sustain
joint trauma normally associated with a low risk of infection should be monitored thoroughly, and the option to discontinue
immunosuppressive therapy should be considered if signs of infection develop. Sternoclavicular osteomyelitis is a rare disease, with less
than 250 cases identified in the past 50 years . Conditions that suppress the immune system can increase the risk of developing this
disease. These include chemotherapy, alcoholism, diabetes mellitus, HIV/AIDS, and long-term use of steroids. We present a rare case of
sternoclavicular osteomyelitis in an immunosuppressed patient that developed from a conservatively treated dislocation. This report
demonstrates the possible ramifications of continuing immunosuppressive therapy in patients who sustain joint trauma, even if the risk of
infection is minor. A 62-year-old white man presented to his primary care physician with a complaint of left chest discomfort, localized
superolaterally to the manubrium. The onset was a few hours earlier, while he was moving heavy equipment, which caused him to feel a “pop”
over the left chest. The patient denied previous episodes or any exacerbating or alleviating factors. Otherwise, review of systems was
negative. The patient had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and gastritis. Of note, he was diagnosed with right-sided renal cell
carcinoma in 1994, which was surgically managed by nephrectomy. In 2009 he was found to have metastasis to the mediastinum, for which he was
subsequently placed on chemotherapy consisting of Pazopanib (800 mg). The patient denied alcohol, tobacco, and intravenous drug use. Family
history consisted of leukemia and lymphoma. Based on these findings he was referred to the emergency department (ED). At the ED, radiography
revealed dislocation of the left sternoclavicular joint (SCJ). An orthopedic specialist suggested conservative management consisting of pain
control and avoiding bearing weight in the affected limb. The patient was discharged and instructed to follow up at the clinic. However,
over the subsequent days the patient began to experience dull pain that was worsening at the same location. He described symptoms of fever,
chills, and night sweats, which caused him to present to the ED again. On examination, the temperature was 38.6°C, the blood pressure 111/60
mm Hg, and the pulse 140 beats per minute. The patient appeared pale, diaphoretic, and cachectic. There was leukocytosis and electrolytes
were within normal limits. Other laboratory test results were negative. Transverse helical computed tomography (CT) without contrast of the
left shoulder revealed inflammatory changes anterior to the SCJ, with articular erosions. Within the subcutaneous tissue, anterior to the
joint there was a soft tissue mass measuring 7×2.5 cm, likely an abscess. A bone scan revealed increased uptake of the SCJ space. Blood
cultures grew S. aureus. Based on this, the patient was diagnosed with sternoclavicular osteomyelitis and bacteremia. The patient was
emergently taken to the operating room. The SCJ underwent aggressive debridement, the clavicular head was excised and a wound vac was
placed. Under suspicion of malignant infiltration, histopathological examination was obtained and did not show the presence of malignant
cells. The patient was placed on intravenous Nafcillin for 6 weeks. Ultimately, he did well and was able to return to work and normal daily
activities. Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis are 2 distinct entities. Septic arthritis involves direct invasion of the joint space, most
commonly by bacteria . Osteomyelitis involves an infection of the bone that can occur due to hematogenous seeding or direct extension. In
this case, findings on imaging suggested osteomyelitis. A 7×2.5 cm abscess was present anterior to the SCJ, which is frequently seen in SCJ
osteomyelitis . Additionally, a bone scan revealed increased uptake, consistent with osteomyelitis. The literature was reviewed in detail
and, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of sternoclavicular osteomyelitis in a patient taking Pazopanib. We reviewed 7
cases of sternoclavicular osteomyelitis specific to patients that were on immunosuppressive therapy (anti-cancer therapy and steroids)
(Table 1). In our patient, the SCJ was dislocated traumatically as previously discussed. The standard of care in open wounds is
discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy, due to high risk of infection. Due to the low risk of infection present with minor trauma and
dislocation, the drug was continued in this patient. In the cases reviewed, osteomyelitis occurred without trauma specifically mentioned
(Table 1). This is in comparison to our patient in which trauma occurred. It has been theorized that if trauma to a joint space occurs, the
reactive vascular response increases the chance of hematogenous seeding to the area . Therefore, if Pazopanib was discontinued early,
osteomyelitis may have been prevented in our patient. Pazopanib is a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived growth
factor inhibitor (via inhibition of tyrosine kinase) indicated for advanced renal cell carcinoma and soft tissue sarcoma . Major adverse
effects of this medication include hepatotoxicity, QT interval prolongation, impairment of wound healing, and increased risk of infection;
however, the effect of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) on wound healing is unclear . We reviewed the literature in detail and did not find a
clinical trial assessing the effect of TKI on wound healing. Therefore, warnings and adverse effects listed for this drug are similar to
other TKIs, including immunosuppression. Infections in uncommon locations can occur, so it is advised to discontinue the drug if the risk of
infection is high. It should be stopped 1 week prior to any surgery, and stopped in any patient with a healing wound . Common infections
associated with chemotherapy-induced immunosuppression include viral (HSV, CMV, EBV), bacterial (S. aureus, gram negative organisms), and
fungal infections (Candida, Aspergillus) . The most common cause of sternoclavicular osteomyelitis is S. aureus; however, when this is
coupled with immunosuppression, the causes are diverse. In the literature the causes described include S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, N.
gonorrhea, S. pyogenes, S. enteritidis, Scedosporium apiospermum, and C. albicans (Table 1). Although no established consensus is evident,
multiple theories exist as to the pathophysiology of introduction of bacteria into bone. There are always situations in which bacteria are
introduced into the blood transiently, known as transient bacteremia . Common examples include brushing teeth and flossing . Transient
bacteremia has also been linked to trauma . Immunocompetent individuals quickly clear transient bacteremia. However, in immunosuppressed
patients with impaired healing, osteomyelitis can occur more readily . Due to the known immunosuppressive effect of chemotherapy agents, it
is becoming increasingly important to monitor immunological function during therapy . Humoral immune function can be assessed through
quantitation of serum immunoglobulins (serum electrophoresis, immunoelectrophoresis) and specific antibodies (agglutination, ELISA), and
testing the immune response to mitogens . Cellular immune function can be assessed through quantitation and response to mitogens, and
Dihydrorhodamine flow cytometry testing can be used to assess neutrophil function . Immunosuppressed patients who sustain joint trauma can
be assessed by these immunologic parameters. Normal values will assure the clinician that the patient is able to mount an adequate
immunological response. Additionally, if signs of infection develop (e.g., fever or leukocytosis), immunosuppressive therapy must be
discontinued. This case demonstrates the effect of chemotherapy on the immune system and how rare infections can develop as a result. It is
important to consider the ramifications when continuing immunosuppressive agents in patients who sustain joint trauma, even when the risk of
infection is low. Immunosuppressed patients sustaining joint trauma should be monitored thoroughly and the option to discontinue
immunosuppressive therapy should be considered if signs of infection develop. Sternoclavicular osteomyelitis of patients on
immunosuppressive therapy. AML – acute myelogenous leukemia; SCC – squamous cell carcinoma; NHL – non-Hodgkins lymphoma.
