*Je Moon Yoon and Mi-Ae Jang contributed equally to this article. Stickler syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder that affects the
ocular, auditory, and musculoskeletal systems. Ocular-only variant of Stickler syndrome type 1 (OSTL1) is characterized by high risk of
retinal detachment without systemic involvement and is caused by alternatively spliced exon 2 mutation of COL2A1. We report the cases of two
Korean families with OSTL1 carrying likely pathogenic variants of COL2A1. All patients presented with membranous vitreous anomaly,
peripheral retinal degeneration, and/or rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, but no systemic manifestations. By genetic analysis, two likely
pathogenic non-exon 2 variants, c.2678dupC (p.Ala895Serfs*49) and c.3327+ 1G>C, were identified in COL2A1. Our results demonstrate that
COL2A1 defects in OSTL1 are not confined to mutations in exon 2. Together with molecular data, ophthalmologists should consider genetic
diagnosis of Stickler syndrome in patients with vitreous anomaly to prevent blindness from retinal detachment. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of genetically confirmed OSTL1 in Korea. Stickler syndrome is a hereditary connective tissue disorder of collagen associated
with ocular, orofacial, auditory, and musculoskeletal manifestations . Patients with Stickler syndrome have a high risk (50-70%) of
developing rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) because of retinal breaks . Therefore, early diagnosis is important to prevent visual
loss from RRD. Stickler syndrome type 1 (STL1; MIM 108300) is caused by mutations in COL2A1, which is located on 12q13.11 and encodes type
II collagen found in cartilaginous tissue and vitreous humor . STL1 has characteristic membranous vitreous anomaly and presents with multi-
system abnormalities . Recently, the ocular-only variant of STL1 (OSTL1; MIM 609508) has been reported to have a high risk of RRD, but with
minimal or absence of systemic involvement . Mutations involving exon 2 of COL2A1 are characteristic of OSTL1 . We report the first
genetically confirmed cases of OSTL1 in Korea with two novel mutations in COL2A1. In family A, the proband (II-3, Fig. 1A) was a 39-yr-old
man who visited the retina clinic for a regular check-up. His uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 (right) and 20/25 (left). The fundus
displayed radial perivascular atrophy, peripheral vitreous condensation, and a vitreous membrane (Fig. 1B). His older brother (II-2) had a
history of retinal surgeries due to RRD in both eyes. His parents could not be examined but had no history of ocular disease, including
retinal detachment, and there were no remarkable findings in other systems. The proband received prophylactic cryotherapy in both eyes to
prevent RRD. In family B, the proband (I-2, Fig. 2A) was a 57-yr-old woman who presented with sudden visual loss in the right eye. Her best-
corrected visual acuity was finger counting in the right eye, and 20/20 in the left eye. Fundus examination revealed RRD with multiple
retinal tears in the right eye (Fig. 2B). Vitreous membrane and radial perivascular atrophy were observed in both eyes. No systemic
abnormalities were seen. Her first son (II-1; 35-yr) was myopic and had quadrantic lamellar cortical opacity (Fig. 2C). Radial perivascular
atrophy was also seen; however, there were no retinal breaks. The second son (II-2) had history of retinal surgeries due to bilateral RRD.
Prophylactic cryotherapy was performed in the non-detached eyes of the proband (I-2) and her first son (II-1). After obtaining informed
consent, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of probands and their available family members. PCR and sequencing were
performed by amplifying all coding exons of COL2A1 on the ABI 3730xl analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) using BigDye
Terminator v3.1 Cycle sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems). Sequences were analyzed by comparison with the reference sequence of COL2A1,
NM_001844.4. In family B, the second son (II-2) of the proband refused the genetic test. The proband of family A (II-3) was found to be
heterozygous for a frameshift variant of COL2A1 (c.2678dupC; p.Ala895Serfs*49) with mutation in exon 40 (Fig. 3A). The other affected
individual (II-2) refused the genetic test. In family B, the proband (I-2) was heterozygous for a novel variant (c.3327+ 1G>C) with mutation
in intron 47 (Fig. 3B). The family study revealed that her first son (II-1) was heterozygous for the variant. Identified variants,
c.2678dupC and c.3327+1G>C, were predicted to be truncating variants. These variants were absent from the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
Database (dbSNP), Exome Sequencing Project database, and in-house collection of 150 control exomes of Korean descent. We regarded them as
likely pathogenic variants that may cause OSTL1 according to the standards and guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology . Here we present two cases of OSTL1 carrying two likely pathogenic variants of COL2A1.
Although several Korean STL1 cases with COL2A1 mutations have been reported , these are all typical STL1 with musculoskeletal anomalies. In
this study, all patients had ocular characteristics consistent with STL1, but systemic features were absent. This is the first genetically
confirmed case of OSTL1 with non-exon 2 mutations in COL2A1 in the Korean population. Most COL2A1 mutations in STL1 are spread throughout
the gene and are predictive of premature termination, suggesting that the phenotype usually results from a quantitative defect in type II
collagen synthesis because of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay . Two different COL2A1 transcripts resulting from alternative splicing of exon 2
have been reported . NM_001844.4 is the longer transcript, and it contains a large cysteine-rich domain in the amino-propeptide encoded by
exon 2, which is predominantly expressed in the vitreous body . In contrast, the shorter transcript in which exon 2 is spliced out is
predominantly expressed in adult cartilage. Therefore, mutations in exon 2 of COL2A1 have been considered to cause more damage in the eye
than in other tissues. However, we demonstrated that the OSTL1 is not confined to mutations in the alternative spliced exon 2. The first
variant, c.2678dupC, is located in exon 40; it has been previously reported in one Caucasian patient with STL1 . Although clinical
information was not provided in that study, c.2678dupC could contribute to the ocular phenotype on the basis of our case report. The second
variant, c.3327+1G>C, is located within the consensus splice site in intron 47. Richards et al. also reported a COL2A1 splicing mutation
involving intron 51 in an OSTL1 patient, suggesting that tissue-specific missplicing could be a mechanism. Recent studies showed that
preventive treatment can significantly reduce the risk of RRD ; patients who did not receive prophylaxis had a 5-fold increased risk of RRD
compared with those who received cryotherapy . Therefore, high suspicion and genetic diagnosis for Stickler syndrome is important, given the
emerging subgroup of OSTL1 with a high risk of RRD. In conclusion, we identified two likely pathogenic variants of COL2A1, resulting from
non-exon 2 mutations, which cause OSTL1. Clinicians should consider genetic diagnosis of OSTL1 in patients with vitreous anomaly to prevent
blindness. We thank the patients and their families for participation in this study. This work was supported by a grant from the Korean
Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (HI13C1826) and Collaborative Genome Program for Fostering
New Post-Genome industry through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning
(NRF-2014M3C9A 2064620). Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this
article were reported.
