A South African girl with CANDLE Syndrome is reported with emphasis on the orodental features and dental management. Clinical manifestations
included short stature, wasting of the soft tissue of the arms and legs, erythematous skin eruptions and a prominent abdomen due to
hepatosplenomegaly. Generalized microdontia, confirmed by tooth measurement and osteopenia of her jaws, confirmed by digitalized
radiography, were previously undescribed syndromic components. Intellectual impairment posed problems during dental intervention. The
carious dental lesions and poor oral hygiene were treated conservatively under local anaesthetic. Prophylactic antibiotics were administered
an hour before all procedures. Due to the nature of her general condition, invasive dental procedures were minimal. Regular follow-ups were
scheduled at six monthly intervals. During this period, her overall oral health status had improved markedly. The CANDLE syndrome is a rare
condition with grave complications including immunosuppression and diabetes mellitus. As with many genetic disorders, the dental
manifestations are often overshadowed by other more conspicuous and complex syndromic features. Recognition of both the clinical and oral
changes that occur in the CANDLE syndrome facilitates accurate diagnosis and appropriate dental management of this potentially lethal
condition. The CANDLE syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder in which autoinflammatory processes lead to multisystem complications.
The acronym “CANDLE” pertains to Chronic Atypical Neutrophilic Dermatosis with Lipodystrophy and Elevated temperature. Other variable
features include intellectual disability and short stature. Published reports are scanty and apart from macroglossia no other oro-dental
features have been mentioned in the literature. The CANDLE syndrome, which is classified as a proteasome-associated autoinflammatory
syndrome (PRAAS), and known as the Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome (NKJO) was delineated in 1939 by Nakajo, a medical staff member at Tohoku
University in Japan. The initial syndromic features included erythematous skin lesions, clubbed fingers, periosteal thickening and cardiac
insufficiency . Thereafter, Nishimura et al. expanded the phenotype to include hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy. Additional
phenotypic features which have been reported included prominent eyes, enlarged nose and lips; elongated, broad fingers; gross wasting of the
arms and legs, severe joint pains and fever that were alleviated by the use of steroids; muscle atrophy and weakness; mild mental
retardation; hepatomegaly; macroglossia; short stature and calcifications of the basal ganglia are other documented syndromic manfestations
[1, 4–6]. Garg et al., described a syndrome with similar features to NKJO and coined the term “Joint contractures, Muscular Atrophy,
Microcytic anemia, and Panniculitis-induced Lipodystrophy (JMP) syndrome”. The main difference between the NKJO and JMP syndromes is the
absence of fever in JMP syndrome and the absence of seizures in NKJO . Toretello et al. subsequently proposed the acronym “CANDLE” and drew
attention to the fact that affected persons were homozygous for an autosomal recessive gene. In a further significant development, Wang et
al. 2014 suggested that the CANDLE syndrome, NakajoNishimura syndrome and JMP syndrome may be clinical variants of the same genetic disorder
reflecting intragenic heterogeneity in the determinant PSMB8 gene mutations. In this article, we have documented and reviewed the clinical
manifestations in an affected girl with emphasis oro-facial features and dental implications. In this context previously undescribed
abnormalities include microdontia, microstomia and diastemata have been documented. These observations will be of practical significance in
dentistry. A South African girl born in 2001 was seen in 2013 at the age of 12 years at the St Joseph’s home for disabled children, Cape
Town. She was referred to Tygerberg Dental Hospital for routine dental management. In early childhood, the affected girl received medical
attention for painful progressive panniculitis, myositis and arthritis. A presumptive diagnosis of the CANDLE syndrome had previously been
established on a basis of the characteristic phenotypic features of CANDLE syndrome described in medical literature, including typical
facial characteristics, marked hepatosplenomegaly, fevers, lymphadenopathy, calcification of her basal ganglia on CT, and episodes of
intense inflammation without infectious cause. She also suffered from delayed growth together with pronounced lipodystrophic chondritis,
which resulted in a flattened nasal bridge (Fig. 1). She was severely immunocompromised as a result of immunosuppressant drugs. She also had
type II diabetes mellitus, gastric reflux and had a history of tuberculosis during infancy.Fig. 1The affected girl presenting with a
flattened nasal bridge The affected girl presenting with a flattened nasal bridge At the age of 12 years she had short stature, with broad,
thick fingers, wasting of the soft tissue of her arms and legs and an enlarged abdomen due to hepatosplenomegaly. Her facial features were
coarse. Diffuse erythematous skin plaques were evident on her arms and limbs. There was no previous history of dental problems but marked
oedema was noted around the perioral and nasal area. The mandibular symphyses were prominent and microstomia was present. There was no
evidence of jaundice, anemia, cyanosis or clubbing. Cervical lymph nodes were palpable on the right side of the neck. The oral soft tissues
appeared unremarkable but bleeding occurred when probing the gingival margins corresponding to teeth 21, 37 and 47. Generalized spacing of
her teeth and a Class III malocclusion (incisal classification) were evident. All teeth showed microdontia and mamelons were present on the
incisal surfaces. (Fig. 2). Both first mandibular molars were absent possibly as a consequence of previous extractions.Fig. 2Generalized
microdontia, spacing of teeth and mammelons affecting the permanent dentition Generalized microdontia, spacing of teeth and mammelons
affecting the permanent dentition Numerous investigations for autoimmune and infectious diseases had been undertaken. These included Anti-
Nuclear antibodies ANA (3 consecutive tests), anti-DNA antibodies and other auto-antibodies. She had a normal white blood cell count, mild
microcytic anemia, and mild elevation of platelet levels. These investigations all yielded negative results. Inflammatory markers and serum
triglycerides were elevated. At times of flare, transient elevation of muscle enzymes CK, AST and ALT had occurred. Her uric acid levels
were normal. She had been investigated several times for HIV with negative results, given that these infections are highly prevalent in
South Africa. Investigations for infectious disorders included tests for bacterial, viral, parasitic, and fungal infections; all were
negative. The syphilis RPR test was non-reactive. Urine studies yielded normal results. Abdominal ultrasonic studies confirmed the presence
of hepatosplenomegaly. A CT scan of her brain was undertaken shortly after a seizure, revealing calcifications of her basal ganglia, but no
other signs of a mass lesion or inflammation. Histopathological investigations of multiple tissues showed diffuse neutrophilic infiltrates
at multiple sites including muscle, liver and skin. She had significantly increased levels of Interferon gamma (IFN-y). A panoramic view (64
kV, 112 mAs) confirmed missing teeth 36 and 46, and revealed caries on teeth 15, 25 and 21. There was generalized spacing of mandibular
dentition and an overerupted first maxillary right molar (Fig. 3). The radiologist also noted generalized osteopenia of the mandible.
Further investigations were undertaken to confirm the presence of osseous changes and to establish the magnitude of possible
osteopenia\osteoporosis. According the WHO, osteopenia is defined as “bone density measurements (T score) between 1 and 2.5 standard
deviations below the young adult mean” . To avoid exposing the young patient to further radiation exposure and as the panorex radiograph was
already available, the bone mineral density (BMD) was determined by digitalizing and analyzing the dental images. The BMD of the mandible
correlates favourably with that found in the lumbar spine and neck of the femur which are the conventional sites of BMD measurements [11,
12]. Both linear and densitometric measurements were obtained using an analytical software package (J Image). The Panoramic Mandibular Index
(PMI), Klemmeti Index and Mandibular Cortical Width (MCW) were measured as described by Mansour et al. . The mean pixel intensity that is
the amount of the radiolucency or radioopacity of a region on the radiograph on a gray scale from zero (complete radioopacity) to the
highest value (complete radiolucency) was determined.Fig. 3A panorex image of the jaws showing generalized microdontia A panorex image of
the jaws showing generalized microdontia The Klemmeti Index measures the morphology of the mandibular cortex and is conventionally
categorized as C1 (normal), C2 (osteopenic), or C3 (osteoporotic). Since standard values for bone mineral density in children are available,
the results were compared to two females of similar age and ethnicity using the same exposure values (Table 1). All results indicate that
the BMD of the affected girl was much less than the two girls of same age, gender and ethnicity.Table 1Bone mineral density measurements of
the girl with Candle syndrome compared with two unaffected females of same age, ethnicity and genderDensitometric analysisAffected
girlControl 1Control 2 Mean PI78.6594.296.3Morphometric analysis Mandibular cortical width0.66 mm (mean)2.08 mm (mean)2.81 mm
(mean) Klemmeti indexC 3C 1C2 Panoramic mandibular IndexNot applicable Bone mineral density measurements of the girl with Candle syndrome
compared with two unaffected females of same age, ethnicity and gender Cone beam tomography (CBCT; 110 kV, 3.46 mAs) was used to ascertain
whether additional complications were present. The results of this investigation revealed that the frontal and sphenoidal sinuses were
absent. Both maxillary sinuses were hypoplastic, the left side to a greater degree (Fig. 4). Bilateral opacification of the external
auditory canals was noted. There was bilateral widening of the diploeic space in the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone and bilateral widening
of the diploeic space of the maxilla, the left side being more prominent than the right.Fig. 4Cone Beam Tomography showing hypoplasia of
both maxillary sinuses Cone Beam Tomography showing hypoplasia of both maxillary sinuses Alginate impressions of both the maxillary and
mandibular arches were made and the impressions were immediately poured into a laboratory dental stone. All measurements were taken directly
from the unsoaped plaster study models. The teeth measured included the maxillary and mandibular permanent central and lateral incisors, the
maxillary and mandibular permanent canines, first and second premolars and the maxillary first molars. A sliding manual caliper was used to
measure the mesiodistal tooth width according to the guidelines defined by Hunter and Priest . The results of the measurements were compared
with unpublished data from a report of research conducted in South Africa (unpublished data di Pasquale 2012). All the affected girl’s teeth
were smaller than the mean of the sample (Table 2). There was a total reduction in the size of 7.47mm in each quadrant in the maxilla and
8.14 mm in each quadrant in the mandible. This is s a clinically important difference and could be considered to be diagnostic of
microdontia.Table 2Comparison of normal tooth size in black South African females with patient’s tooth sizeUnpublished dataPatient's
measurementsToothMeanStd. deviationMinimumMaximumRightLeftMeanDifferenceUpper 610.500.419.6511.159.5010.209.850.65Upper
56.970.386.217.675.505.105.301.67Upper 47.550.436.708.546.006.506.251.30Upper 37.880.416.838.747.007.007.000.88Upper
27.280.535.858.016.206.106.151.13Upper 19.040.497.8010.206.807.607.201.84Lower 611.470.5610.3612.77Lower
57.590.446.718.525.005.605.302.29Lower 47.640.436.858.596.005.905.951.69Lower 37.100.316.547.866.106.106.101.00Lower
26.130.335.576.864.904.104.501.63Lower 15.470.314.726.353.904.003.951.52 Comparison of normal tooth size in black South African females with
patient’s tooth size The carious lesions and poor oral hygiene were treated conservatively under local anaesthetic. Prophylactic antibiotics
were administered an hour before all interventions and due to the nature of her general condition, invasive procedures were .avoided where
possible. Regular follow-ups were scheduled at six monthly intervals. During this period, her overall oral health status had improved
markedly. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of this case report and any accompanying
special investigations and images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Our
approach to the documentation and discussion of the orofacial and dental manifestations of the CANDLE syndrome was constrained by the rarity
of the disorder as only approximately 30 cases have been reported in the literature. The strength of our approach is the combination of
expertise of the authors, involving different scientific, dental and clinical disciplines. The CANDLE syndrome is caused by homozygosity for
mutations in the Proteasome (Prosome, Macropain) Subunit, Beta Type, 8 (PSMB8) gene that encodes for proteasomes that are responsible for
the physiological degradation of proteins. Mutations of PSMB8 result in an accumulation of modified and oxidated proteins in cells and
tissues, leading to an increase of cellular stress and increased apotosis occurring in muscle and fat [1, 15–17]. Recent developments
indicate that not all individuals affected by the CANDLE syndrome have PSMB8 mutations . Brehm et al. 2015 identified 8 mutations in 4
proteasome genes, PSMA3, PSMB4, PSMB9, and proteasome maturation protein (POMP), that have not previously been related to the disease. These
mutations affect transcription, protein expression, protein folding, proteasome assembly, and, eventually, proteasome activity . Microdontia
has previously not been reported in CANDLE syndrome. This developmental abnormality can involve either the primary or permanent dentition
and as a component of a few genetic syndromes (Table 3). Microdontia can also occur in non- genetic conditions notably as a complication of
radiation or chemotherapeutic treatment .Table 3Microdontia in genetic syndromesSyndromic conditionsReferenceGorlin-Chaudhry-Moss
syndromeWilliam syndromeTurner syndromeRothmund-Thomson syndrome[31, 32]Seckel syndrome[33, 34]Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia[35, 36]Kenny-
Caffey Syndrome.Coffin-Lowry syndromeMicrocephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism[39, 40] Microdontia in genetic syndromes Shafer et
al. classified microdontia into three categories viz:True generalized microdontia in which all the teeth are smaller than normal is
rare.Relative generalized microdontia occurs when teeth are normal in size, but appear to be smaller than normal. For example, if the jaws
are large and teeth are normal.Microdontia involving a single tooth. True generalized microdontia in which all the teeth are smaller than
normal is rare. Relative generalized microdontia occurs when teeth are normal in size, but appear to be smaller than normal. For example, if
the jaws are large and teeth are normal. Microdontia involving a single tooth. Over 300 genes are implicated in tooth development . Many of
these genes regulate ectodermal-mesenchymal interactions in a programmed sequence. In turn, these processes control the shape, number and
sizes of teeth. Similar ectodermal-mesenchymal interactions occur throughout the developing fetus and in many instances, involve the same
genes. For these reasons, the occurrence of dental anomalies in genetic syndromes could be an indicator of common developmental factors in
both dental and other tissues . The relationship between growth and tooth size indicates that repeated ectodermal– mesenchymal interactions
occur during the initiation and morphogenesis phases of tooth development. Although epigenetic influences affect the position of tooth
forming tissue within the jaw, scheduling of the communicating signals explains differences in tooth size. In this context, no particular
gene has been implicated as the primary cause of microdontia. Although a decrease in bone density is commonly associated with the long-term
use of corticosteroids, there is no documented evidence to suggest that steroids influence odontogenesis. Microstomia refers to a decrease
in the size of the opening of the mouth. Although there are no standardized criteria to measure the extent of mouth opening, microstomia
affects both function and aesthetics . Microstomia can result in to difficulty in swallowing, speech impairment, deficient oral hygiene and
dental caries. In the affected girl, small dimensions of the oral orifice compromised dental management scaling and polishing. The term
refers to increased spacing between teeth and is often caused by loss of interproximal contact between teeth. The most common site of
diastemata is in the anterior maxilla between the cuspid teeth . Generalized increase in interdental spacing occurs when there is a
disproportionate relationship between the size of the teeth and that of the jaw . Interproximal tooth wear may be a contributing factor. The
generalized spacing of the affected girl’s teeth was probably the result of the microdontia. Hypoplasia of the cranial sinuses was evident
on CBCT investigation of the affected girl. Sinuses serve several functions: they decrease the weight of the anterior aspect of the skull,
increase the resonance of the voice, have a protective role by dampening pressure (e.g. due to trauma to the face), increase the rigidity of
the facial bones and serve to protect structures such as the eyes. They also filter and humidify the air during respiration . The results of
the both densometric and linear measurements suggest that osteopenia was present in the affected girl. It is uncertain however, whether the
osteopenia resulted from the long-term use of systemic corticosteroid or whether it is a previously unreported syndromic component.
Periodontal disease, decreased alveolar bone density and edentulism are frequent in persons affected by osteoporosis. Fractures of the jaw
can result in impaired function, affecting the individual’s quality of life. The presence of severe immunosuppression that was compounded by
diabetes mellitus in the affected girl was a matter of concern. In these circumstances, a multi-disciplinary approach was necessary for the
provision of dental management. Factors that warranted consideration when planning her dental treatment included diet, blood glucose levels,
reduced leukocyte function Decreased integrity of the blood vessels, which is a common complication of diabetes mellitus was also relevant.
In addition, immunosuppressive drugs could result in bone marrow suppression and decrease the production of platelets and leukocytes as well
as induce osteopenic changes that could predispose to jaw fractures. Together, these factors increase the risk of developing infection,
delayed wound healing and prolonged bleeding times. In these circumstances, the dental management of the affected girl was by conventional
procedures with an increased awareness of the risks of possible complications. The CANDLE syndrome is a rare condition with grave
complications including immunosuppression and diabetes mellitus. As with many genetic disorders, the dental manifestations are often
overshadowed by other more conspicuous and complex syndromic features. Recognition of both the clinical and oral changes that occur in the
CANDLE syndrome facilitates accurate diagnosis and appropriate management of this potentially lethal condition. All investigations were
undertaken with full ethical approval in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki as updated in the version promulgated in June 2013 and
the Singapore Statement on Research Integrity. Ethics approval was received from the University of Cape Town Faculty of Health Sciences
Institutional Ethics Committee (no. 203/2013). Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions TR made substantial contributions to examining the patient, acquisition of dental records, conception, drafting and revising
the manuscript. LS participated in the design and drafting of the report and assisted in revising it for critical content. CS managed the
medical condition of the patient and contributed to the content. Tdi P provided the data on tooth size prediction and also undertook
comparative analysis of the tooth sizes. NA assisted in the interpretation of the radiographs, was responsible for the dental management of
the patient, took the impressions for orthodontic models and measured the teeth. MC participated in the examination of the patient and
revising intellectual content. SS was responsible for the interpretation and writing the reports of the CBCTs and Panorex radiograph. LL
undertook the molecular investigations and provided expert guidance during the project and in the compilation of the manuscript. PB
contributed significantly to the conception, drafting and revision of the manuscript. He also made considerable contributions to the
intellectual content and gave final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
wish to acknowledge the following: Dr M Kumar, University of the Western Cape, for the analysis of the digital radiographs Financial support
was available from the National Research Foundation and the Medical Research Council of South Africa via grants received by Prof Beighton
(MRC: 415882 and NRF: 443503). The content of this article is the sole work of the authors. No benefits of any form have been or are to be
received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.
