Congenital epidermolysis bullosa (CEB) is a rare genodermatosis. The digestive system is very frequently associated with skin
manifestations. Pyloric atresia (PA) and oesophageal stenosis (OS) are considered the most serious digestive lesions to occur. The aim of
this work is to study the management and the outcome of digestive lesions associated to CEB in four children and to compare our results to
the literature. A retrospective study of four observations: Two cases of PA and two cases of OS associated to CEB managed in the Paediatric
Surgery Department of Fattouma Bourguiba Teaching Hospital in Monastir, Tunisia. Four patients, two of them are 11 and 8 years old,
diagnosed as having a dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa since the neonatal period. They were admitted for the investigation of progressive
dysphagia. Oesophageal stenosis was confirmed by an upper contrast study. Pneumatic dilation was the advocated therapeutic method for both
patients with afavourable outcome. The two other patients are newborns, diagnosed to have a CEB because of association of PA with bullous
skin lesions with erosive scars. Both patients had a complete diaphragm excision with pyloroplasty. They died at the age of 4 and 3 months
of severe diarrhoea resistant to medical treatment. Digestive lesions associated to CEB represent an aggravating factor of a serious
disease. OS complicating CEB is severe with difficult management. Pneumatic dilatation is the gold standard treatment method. However, the
mortality rate in PA with CEB is high. Prenatal diagnosis of PA is possible, and it can help avoiding lethal forms. Congenital epidermolysis
bullosa (CEB) is a rare genodermatosis. It is classified into three major groups on the basis of the cleavage level with the cutaneous
basement membrane zone: The simplex form (SEB), the junctional form (JEB) and the dystrophic form (DEB). The digestive system is very
frequently associated with cutaneous manifestations of CEB. Pyloric atresia (PA) and oesophageal stenosis (OS) are the most important
digestive lesions observed. JEB is the most frequently associated group to PA whereas recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
Hallopeau–Siemens (RDEB-HS)type is the most frequently complicated with OS. The aim of this work is to study the management and outcome of
digestive lesions associated to CEB in four observations and to compare our results to the literature. This is a retrospective study of four
observations: Two cases of PA and two cases of OS associated to CEB managed in the Paediatric Surgery Department of Fattouma Bourguiba
Teaching Hospital in Monastir, Tunisia. Each patient had a physical examination with biological (blood count, urea, and creatininemia) and
radiological explorations (Plain X-ray, abdominal ultrasonography and upper contrast study). A digestive fibroscopy was indicated for the
patients with OS. An 11-year-old boy was diagnosed as having RDEB-HS in the neonatal period. He was admitted for investigation of
progressive dysphagia to solids which started a year before. He has no pathologic familial history. At physical examination, the patient was
under-nourished with a weight of 20 kg (<3rd percentile), a height of 130 cm (−1.5 standard deviation ) with a body mass index (BMI) of
11.83 (<3rd percentile).Numerous bullae and open weeping lesions were present particularly on traumatic points (hands, elbows, knees and
feet). There was also syndactyly of fingers and toes with club-shaped hands and onychodystrophy with anonychy. He had bullae and scars of
the mouth with tongue retraction and dystrophic teeth. We noted iron deficiency anaemia with haemoglobin of 6.6 g/dl. An upper contrast
study completed with upper digestive fibroscopy confirmed OS localised 20 cm from the dental arch [Figure 1]. Upper contrast study
oesophageal stenosis The patient had three sessions of pneumatic dilations associated to local steroid infiltration (HSHC). Dilation
sessions were done a month apart. The initial outcome was relatively favourable with a partial regression of the stenosis (5-7 mm). An
8-year outcome was marked with a normal oral nutrition with weight gain. Upper contrast study (5 years after the last dilation session)
showed a normal oesophagus diameter with a regular wall [Figure 2]. Upper contrast study normal oesophagus diameter with regular wall An
8-year-old boy diagnosed as having RDEB-HS in the neonatal period was admitted for dysphagia to liquids. He has no pathological familial
history. He was hospitalised at the age of 3 years for herpetic encephalitis with a favorable outcome. Dysphagia started at the age of 2
years, with a progressive aggravation from dysphagia to solids to difficulties to swallow the saliva. At physical examination, there was a
severe growth retardation with a weight of 19 kg (<3rd percentile) and a height of 113 cm (−2 SD and −1 SD) and a BMI 14.96 (25th
percentile); a huge haemorrhagic bulla was noticed in the left inguinal region with multiple dystrophic scars on face, neck and abdomen.
There was poororo-dental hygiene with vesiculo-bullous lesions of the tongue and an onychodystrophy of big toes with partial scarring
alopecia of the scalp. The biological investigation revealed a moderate iron deficiency anaemia with a haemoglobin of 11.5 g/dl. An upper
contrast study completed by an upper digestive fibroscopy confirmed the presence of 3 mm tight OS at the junction of the median — The
inferior third of the oesophagus with dilation of the upper part. The patient had two pneumatic dilations at a 2 months interval with local
steroid infiltration hydrocortisone hemisuccinate (HSHC). The outcome was favourable with the regression of the stenosis and disappearance
of dysphagia. He had a moderate weight gain (9 kg in 4 years). A 4-day-old, full-term male was transferred to our department because of
suspected congenital PA. He was a product of a normal vaginal delivery and had a birth weight of 2.35 kg with APGAR 9/10. The father and
mother were second cousins. Paternal ant has presented post-traumatic bullous lesions on her face. Two paternal cousins operated for
congenital PA. Both of them developed cutaneous bullous lesions and died shortly. After, it was attributed to CEB. No further etiologic
explorations were made. At birth, the patient presented post-prandial non-bile stained vomiting. Physical examination revealed a Stage I
dehydration, a left upper abdominal fullness, a right ectopic testis and a left clubfoot. A plain abdominal-X-ray showed a dilated stomach.
The rest of the abdomen was gasless [Figure 3]. An upper contrast study showed a gastric distension with no opacification of the bulb or the
duodenum compatible with a PA [Figure 4]. Abdominal plain X-ray dilated stomach, the rest of the abdomen is gasless Upper contrast study
gastric distension with no opacification of the bulb or the duodenum After the correction of the dehydration, an abdominal exploration via
laparotomy showed a complete antro-pyloric diaphragm (Type I PA). The patient had a complete excision of the diaphragm via a longitudinal
incision with pyloroplasty. At day 2 of hospitalization, the patient presented bullous skin lesions with erosive scars on the hypogastric
region, dorsal side of the left foot and left elbow: Aspect advocating CEB. Skin biopsy of the affected zone was made for ultra structural
examination, but no report was available. Oral nutrition was introduced at day 5 of post-surgery with a good tolerance. The patient was
discharged at day 12 of post-surgery. He was hospitalised at the age of 3 months and a half for severe diarrhoea with dehydration which was
attributed to a gastroenteritis resistance to medical treatment. The patient died 2 weeks after because of severe hemodynamic alterations. A
10-day-old, full-term male was transferred to our department because of suspected congenital PA. He was a product of a normal vaginal
delivery and had a birth weight of 3.1 kg with APGAR 7/9. The father and mother were second cousins. At day 3 of life, the patient presented
post-prandial non-bile stained vomiting with weight loss. Physical examination revealed the dehydration Stage II with weight loss (600 g)
and a palpable stomach. No skin anomaly was noticed. A plain abdominal-X-ray showed a dilated stomach, the rest of the abdomen was gasless.
Abdominal ultrasonography eliminated pyloric hypertrophy stenosis. An upper contrast study showed a gastric distension with opacification of
the antro-pyloric region without opacification of the bulb and the duodenum advocating the diagnosis of PA. After correction of the
dehydration, an exploratory laparotomy showed a complete antro-pyloric diaphragm (Type I PA). A complete diaphragm excision with
pyloroplasty was practiced via a longitudinal incision opposite to the diaphragm. At day 5 of hospitalisation, the patient presented bullous
skin lesions with erosive scars on the abdomen, four limbs and the scalp: A spect advocating CEB [Figure 5]. Skin biopsy was not
unfortunately done. Bullous skin lesions with erosive scars Oral nutrition was introduced at day 6 of post-surgery with good tolerance. The
patient was discharged at day 15 post-surgery. He was hospitalized at the age of 3 months for severe diarrhoea with dehydration. The patient
died of severe hemodynamic alterations. CEB is a rare genodermatosis with a prevalence is estimated to 1/50,000 births. In Tunisia, the
prevalence varies between 8/100,000 and 12/100,000 births. Its transmission can be either autosomal dominant or recessive. Mucous membranes
can be affected including the digestive system with bullae and ulcers complicating feeding and scarring may limit the mobility of the
tongue. OS and PA are the two most frequent severe digestive lesions associated to CEB. OS is due to dystrophic cicatrisation of recurrent
bullae and ulcerative lesions of an inflammatory mucosa. This may lead to difficulty in maintaining adequate nutrition. The severity of
digestive lesions is correlated with the group of CEB. DEB and particularly RDEB-HS is the group with the highest morbidity. OS complicates
frequently RDEB-HS. Its incidence is estimated to 20% of the patients with RDEB. This incidence is 79.1% in RDEB-HS, 86.7% for flexural
(inverse)-RDEB. OS in case of RDEB-HS occurs between the ages of 4 and 59 years with a mean age of 16 years. The age of our two patients was
respectively 11 and 8 years. Chronic inflammation and ulcero-bullous lesions are caused by traumatism of the malpighian epithelium of the
oesophagus mucosa by solid and hot food. Food pressure exerted on the oesophagus opposite to the aorta cross and to the tracheal carina
explains the frequent localization of the stenosis at the superior third of the oesophagus. One of our two patients had the stenosis at the
superior third of the oesophagus whereas the second was at the junction of the median and inferior thirds. Diagnosis of stenosis is usually
made byan upper contrast study. Digestive fibroscopy is a useful tool for stenosis confirmation but is not recommended because of the
oesophageal and buccopharyngeal mucosafragility. Pneumatic dilation is the gold standard treatment of the oesophageal stenosis complicating
RDEB. However, oesophageal replacement is indicated in cases of pneumatic dilation failure. PA can be associated to the majority of types of
CEB and most frequently to the junctional group. This association is a heterogeneous disease with lethal forms that can lead to death within
few months after birth despite surgical correction. This can be explained by diffuse lesions including both skin and mucosa. Many criteria
support an autosomal recessive transmission. It is generally revealed during the neonatal period, at the first feeding attempts. Prenatal
diagnosis of PA by ultrasonography is possible. Anatomic stomach features can be studied from the 14th gestation week. Diagnosis is
frequently based on the association of polyhydramnios with gastric enlargement. Clinical symptoms are non-bilious vomiting, respiratory
distress, dehydration, and gastric distension. Gastric perforation can complicate PA. Diagnosis is based on abdominal plain X-ray and upper
contrast study. Treatment consists of correction of dehydration and biological anomalies completed by an excision of the diaphragm with
pyloroplasty. Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty is the most frequently used. After surgery, gentle stomach suction with parenteral nutrition is
necessary before introducing a progressive enteral nutrition. A delay of enteral feeding is controversial. The long-term prognosis of PA
with CEB is characterised by high mortality rates which approximate 100% in spite of surgical correction. It was the case of our two
patients who died shortly after discharge. Some authors reported genetic mutations of integrin beta4 (ITGB4) gene which codes for β4
integrin. This mutation is implicated in a severe form PA with diarrhea resistant to medical treatment. Though, a favourable outcome is
reported in some cases of mild CEB with PA. A number of digestive manifestations associated to CEB are reported such as gastro-oesophageal
reflux in SEB, constipation in DEB and exsudative enteropathy in JEB. Digestive lesions associated to CEB represent an aggravating factor of
a serious disease. OS complicating RDEB-HS is severe with difficult management. Pneumatic dilatation is the gold standard treatment method.
However, the mortality rate in PA with CEB is high particularly in the presence of ITGB4 mutation. Prenatal diagnosis of PA is possible, and
it can help to avoid lethal forms. Research laboratory: LR 12SP13. There are no conflicts of interest.
