Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is a rare nongenetic polyposis syndrome first reported by Cronkhite and Canada in 1955.1 Up to the present
time, the literature consists of ∼400 cases of CCS with the majority being reported from Japan2 although 49 cases have been described in
China.3 CCS is characterized by diffuse polyposis of the digestive tract in association with ectodermal changes, such as onychomadesis,
alopecia, and cutaneous hyperpigmentation. The principal symptoms of CCS are diarrhea, weight loss, abdominal pain, and other
gastrointestinal complications, such as protein-losing enteropathy and malnutrition. It has been traditional to consider that CCS is
associated with a poor prognosis. This paper describes a relatively mild case and reviews the literature, which more recently, suggests that
it may be a more benign condition that might actually be reversible with treatment. There is some evidence that infection or disturbed
immunity may be involved in the pathophysiology and that targeting such abnormalities could have therapeutic potential. A strong case could
be made for establishing an international case registry for this disease so that the pathophysiology, treatment, and prognosis could become
much better understood. A previously healthy, 53-year-old, nonsmoking, nonalcohol drinking, female taxi driver presented to our department
in July 2014 with an 8-month history of abdominal pain and weight loss. In December 2013, she developed intermittent colicky pain in the
left lower abdomen and started to note blood and purulent mucus in her stools. As her stools were positive for blood and white cells, a
diagnosis of infective enteritis was made and she was treated with levofloxacin but this did not lead to any improvement. In Feburary 2014,
she was admitted to a local hospital for upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy. Gastroscopy revealed multiple protuberant lesions in
antrum and erosions in duodenum. Colonoscopy showed multiple ulcers and polyps in the colon with biopsies being reported as sessile adenoma.
She was diagnosed as having ulcerative colitis and treated with intravenous omeprazole 40 mg daily, mesalamine 3 g daily by mouth, and
dexamethasone 10 mg of retention enemas daily. After 10 days, the abdominal pain and the mucopurulent bloody stools started to improve, but
during this period she began to develop hyperpigmentation of both the hands and the feet. She also complained of fatigue and dysphagia and a
second colonoscopy showed that the colitis and proctitis was persisting. In March 2014, she was admitted to a local tertiary care general
hospital. She was started on enteral nutrition but her abdominal pain and diarrhea got worse and she started to develop alopecia and her
finger nails started to peel. Gastroscopy showed esophagitis, chronic superficial gastritis, multiple ulcers in the duodenum and a biopsy
revealed chronic inflammation, stromal edema, and vascular proliferation. In May 2014, the patient went to a tertiary gastroenterology
hospital in order to try and make a definite diagnosis. The possibility of CCS was raised and she was also seen in the dermatology
department where fungal infection was excluded and the nail changes were diagnosed as onycholysis. She was prescribed esomeprazole 20 mg
p.o. Bid and Arsanyl, a kind of mucosal protective 100 mg p.o. Tid and went back to her hometown. Between May and July, she also took
Chinese herbal medicines and Arsanyl in addition to the proton pump inhibitor (PPI) but continued to suffer from epigastric discomfort and
anorexia. The pigmentation faded gradually and the alopecia and onycholysisalso improved. A repeat gastroscopy in July 2014 showed
esophagitis, chronic superficial gastritis, and multiple gastric polyps. She was admitted to our department in the late of July 2014 having
lost 15 kg in 8 months. Physical examination revealed some tenderness of the left lower abdomen, slight alopecia, hyperpigmentation of the
hands, especially over the metacarpophalangeal joints and onycholysis of both the hands and the feet (Fig. 1A and B). (A) Hyperpigmentation
and onycholysis of the hands. (B) Hyperpigmentation and onycholysis of the feet. Stool and urine routine tests were normal with a negative
fecal immunochemical test of occult blood. Hematology and all immunoglobulins were normal. A screen for autoantibodies, including
antinuclear antibody, was negative and liver and renal function tests were normal. Serum albumin was 38.5 g/L, low-density lipoprotein LDL
was 1.84 (2.07–3.37) mmol/L, and serum iron was 47.8 (7.3–23.6) μmol/L. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), NSE, CA19–9, CA125, CA724, CA153
were all normal although Cyfra211 was slightly elevated 4.48(0.1–3.3) ng/mL. TSH was slightly elevated 4.31(0.27–4.2) μIU/mL, but T3, T4,
FT3 and FT4 were all normal. ECG, chest x-ray were normal and abdominal ultrasound revealed a fatty liver. Ultrasound of the thyroid showed
diffuse thyroid nodules. Carbon-13 breath test (Rapid Urease Test) for Helicobacter pylori was negative. Upper GI radiography: irregular
mucosa of the antrum and duodenal bulb with nodular filling defects. Gastroscopy: numerous polypoid lesions with nodular edematous mucosa
throughout the stomach and duodenum (Fig. 2A), no polyps found in the esophagus. Biopsies from the antrum: chronic inflammation in mucosa,
stromal hyperemia and edema, and focal hyperplasia (Fig. 3A). Colonoscopy: multiple polyps were found in the cecum, ascending colon, sigmoid
colon, and rectum as well as erosions (Fig. 2B). No polyps were found in the terminal ileum. Biopsies showed a mixture of inflammatory cells
consisting of lymphocytes and neutrophil granulocytes and clusters of epithelioid cells, crypt abscesses, stromal edema and hyperemia,
infiltration of eosinophile granulocytes, and focal hyperplasia of epithelial cells (Fig. 3B). (A) Endoscopic appearance of the stomach
showing numerous polypoid lesions with nodular edematous mucosa throughout the stomach. (B) Endoscopic appearance of the colon showing
multiple polyps. (A) Biopsies from polyps in the antrum showing chronic inflammation in mucosa, stromal hyperemia, and edema, and focal
hyperplasia. (B) Biopsies from polyps in the colon showing a mixture of inflammatory cells consisting of lymphocytes and neutrophil
granulocytes and clusters of epithelioid cells, crypt abscesses, stromal edema and hyperemia, infiltration of eosinophile granulocytes, and
focal hyperplasia of epithelial cells. The patient was then diagnosed as CCS according to her symptoms, endoscopic findings, and pathology
report. We prescribed Chinese herbal medicines and Arsanyl 100 mg tid in addition to esomeprazole 20 mg p.o. Bid for her. The treatment
principle of Chinese herbal medicines was nourishing the liver and kidney according to the theory of traditional Chinese medicine, the chief
medicinal was prepared rehmannia root, Radix Rehmanniae Praeparata. Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is characterized by polyposis, which can
occur anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract except the esophagus. Initially CCS was considered to be a hamartomatous polyposis syndrome,
but it is now thought that the polyps can additionally be inflammatory, adenomatous, and hyperplastic in type. Other clinical manifestations
of CCS include ectodermal changes, such as onychomadesis, alopecia, and cutaneous hyperpigmentation. Symptoms include diarrhea, weight loss,
abdominal pain, taste abnormalities, and features of malnutrition. Anemia, serum electrolyte disturbances, and hypoproteinemia are common in
CCS patients as a result of chronic diarrhea and malnutrition. Osteoporotic fractures may result from malabsorption of calcium or prolonged
glucocorticoid therapy or both 3 and death can occur for a variety of reasons including severe infection and malignant change. Goto divided
the disease into 5 types according to the principal symptom:2 Diarrhea (type 1), dysgeusia (type 2), sensory abnormalities in the mouth
accompanied by thirst (type 3), abdominal symptoms other than diarrhea (type 4), and alopecia as a predominant symptom (type 5). All
patients must have gastrointestinal polyposis and hyperpigmentation although there is a report of a possible case of CCS without polypsis
but severe atrophy and diffuse marked edema of the gastric and duodenal mucosa.4 As ectodemal change and vitiligo are prominent, scalp
biopsy has shown noninflammatory loss of follicular units, miniaturization of the hair shafts, markedly dilated follicles, and heavy
deposition of glycosaminoglycans in the reticular dermis.5 The initial symptoms of our case were abdominal pain, purulent diarrhea with
rectal bleeding. Consequently, she would have been classified as type I, as the other features including the partial loss of taste and the
ectodermal changes, such as onychomadesis, alopecia, and hyperpigmentation, appeared later. It was interesting to note that in our case,
following treatment with mesalamine and dexamethasone, the abdominal pain and diarrhea were the first features to be relieved. The
improvement in onychomadesis and regrowth of hair followed later raising the possibility that the first features to appear maybe the first
to improve with treatment. The cause of CCS is completely unknown and there is no evidence that it is a hereditary disease other than 1 case
report of the condition occurring in a 50-year-old man and his son.6 There have been reports of increased levels of IgG4 or IgG4 containing
plasma cells in the polyps of CCS 7,8 although this could not be confirmed in another study where out of 7 cases only 1 showed an increased
IgG4-positive plasma cells. Consequently, the current evidence for some form of immune abnormality is not sufficient to draw any firm
conclusions. Some cases have been reported to be associated with hypothyroidism.9 In our case the TSH was minimally elevated 4.31 μIU/mL
(0.27–4.2) although the T3, T4, Free T3, and Free T4 were all normal. Interestingly thyroid nodules were found on ultrasound examination.
There is also some preliminary work from Asia suggesting there may be some relationship with H. pylori infection.10–12 However, in view of
the ubiquitous distribution of this organism in Asia it would be of interest to assess the prevalence of CCS in geographical areas with a
low prevalence of H. pylori. There is no specific treatment for CCS although a variety of approaches have been tried on an empirical basis.
Symptomatic and supportive treatment is important and may lead to improvement.13 This includes nutritional support with high-protein
supplements or enteral feeding, correction of anemia and electrolyte imbalance, replacement of any mineral or vitamin deficiencies, as well
as treatment of any associated infection.14–16 Proton pump inhibitors may also be worth prescribing.11 Progressive remission, including
regression of the polyps, after H. pylori eradication has been reported 10–12 although in some of the reports it is not clear what the H.
pylori status of the patients was before the start of treatment. CCS does appear to be common in Asia where the prevalence of H. pylori is
high and it is noteworthy that there is a report incriminating this organism as a risk factor for the development colorectal adenomas.17
However, our patient had a negative carbon-13 breath hydrogen test and therefore was not given H. pylori eradication therapy. In view of
reports of a possible immunological basis for CCS, immunosuppression by corticosteroids or long-term azathioprine has been reported to lead
to improvement.7,8,18 Corticosteroids are more frequently used to maintain remission although they carry the risk of osteoporotic fracture.3
Not surprisingly, there have been no controlled trials assessing the optimal dosage or duration of treatment with corticosteroids or
azathioprine for the treatment of CCS. Furthermore, following any remission, it is still uncertain whether medication should be continued
and if so, at what dose. The possibility of using mesalazine has also been explored with the suggestion that some patients might improve
with this drug or sulphasalazine .15,19 In cases where there is a failure to respond to steroids, cyclosporine may be worth considering.20
In addition, a recent study has shown that TNF may play an important role in the development of CCS. Consequently, infliximab may be worth
considering and Watanabe and colleagues have tried this drug in a patient suffering from frequent relapses with high levels of tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) in tissue affected by CCS. They showed that after 20 months of treatment the patient experienced a complete
remission with disappearance of the polyposis.21 The role of surgery in the treatment of CCS is unclear, but it may have to be considered if
complications develop.16 Adenomas found at endoscopy should be removed and followed up by surveillance endoscopy to facilitate early
detection of any malignancies which can then be treated appropriately. The literature suggests that CCS has a poor prognosis with Poulson
and colleagues suggesting a 5-year mortality of 55%.22 Furthermore there also seems to be a relatively high risk of malignancy at a variety
of sites both inside and outside the gastrointestinal system. However, because the condition is so rare, estimates of survival rates and the
prevalence of cancer in CCS are unlikely to be very accurate. However, as there seems to be some evidence that better treatment regimes are
being developed for CCS these figures might be expected to improve. There seems little doubt that the majority of cancers in CCS are in the
gastrointestinal with the suggestion that ∼14 % of patients develop this complication.23 Gastric cancer seems to be the most common
malignancy with a Japanese study reporting a prevalence of 10.2%. Some cases had multiple gastric cancers of the stomach which tended to be
well differentiated and often limited to the submucosa. 24,25 Carcinomas also occur in colon 26 and rectum.27,28 Serrated adenomas appear to
account for 40% of the polypoid lesions in CCS which is much higher than their prevalence in polyps in the general population and patients
with colorectal cancer associated with CCS frequently have polyps containing serrated adenomas.29 Interestingly, patients with CCS seem to
have a tendency to develop extra-intestinal cancer, such as cholangiocellular carcinoma,30 giant cell bone tumor, 31 and lung cancer.32 In
addition, some cases of CCS have been associated with cancer in >1 organ with one report describing cancer in the esophagus, stomach, and
lung 32 and another concomitant esophageal and gastric cancers.33 Steroids and anti-TNF treatment seems to show promise in the treatment of
CCS and there is a report of raised CEA levels falling after treatment with steroids. In addition, if the disappearance of polyps previously
reported following the use of an anti-TNF 21 can be confirmed, this suggests that these drugs should perhaps be introduced at an earlier
stage. Obviously, there is a strong need for long-term follow-up studies in order to determine whether some of the more encouraging
treatment results reported recently are maintained over time. In 1 case of CCS, the CEA level increased remarkably and then decreased
following prednisolone treatment. Whether steroid or anti-TNF therapy can lower the risk of carcinomas in the long term will need longer
follow-up of patients taking this type of medication. In view of the fact that malignant change in the gastrointestinal system is a
significant risk in CCS, appropriate screening needs to be put in place, although there are currently no guidelines on how this should be
done and at what frequency. Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is a rare nonhereditary polyposis condition, which needs to be differentiated from
other polyposis syndromes such as Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis, juvenile polyposis syndrome, and Cowden syndrome.
This should not be difficult when all the other features are present but when they appear later, as in our case, the diagnosis can be more
difficult to establish. The observation that remission can sometimes be induced by the eradication of H. pylori suggests that some form of
infection might be important in the pathogenesis of CCS. However, not all cases are associated with H. pylori infection, raising the
possibility that the antibiotic combination used for the eradication of H. pylori might be clearing another, not yet identified, organism.
Perhaps a lesson needs to be learned from Whipples disease and the subsequent identification Tropheryma whipplei. Another possible mechanism
that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of CCS is autoimmunity. Some support for this hypothesis comes from reports that the condition
seems to improve with immunosuppressive therapy such as corticosteroids, azathioprine, cyclosporine, and more recently anti-TNF treatment.
However, it remains to be determined whether anti-infectives or immunosuppressives should be used alone and, if so, which is best.
Furthermore, some form of a combination of these 2 approaches might achieve even better results than the 2 treatments alone. It has been
traditional to consider that CCS is associated with a poor prognosis and a 5-year mortality of 55% after diagnosis has been reported.22
However, in the cases reported from China, the mortality has not been so high and, so far, our patient's illness has been relatively mild.
In addition, with the advent of treatment modalities that seem to have a significant impact on the course of the disease, it is likely that
the outlook will improve further. Rather than relying on a series of case reports with variable follow-up, a strong case could be made for
the introduction an international CCS patient registry to enable the prognosis and treatment of CCS to be far more accurately established.
The patient has given written informed consent for her case to be reported. Because it was not a clinical trial and no off-label drugs was
used, the ethical approval is not necessary for this case report. Abbreviations: CCS = Cronkhite-Canada syndrome, CEA = carcinoembryonic
antigen, LDL = low-density lipoprotein, PPI = proton pump inhibitor, TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor alpha, TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
