Donor shortage is a major limitation in organ transplantation. Several studies have reported that extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO)-assisted organ donation can be successfully completed without inducing warm ischemia in patients with brain death. The present report
described clinical experience of three patients (23-yr old man, 32-yr old man, and 41-yr old woman) who underwent ECMO for the evaluation of
brain death and organ donation. They donated six kidneys, three livers, and one both lungs without warm ischemia by ECMO. Six kidney
recipients successfully recovered normal status without hemodialysis and two liver recipients survived with normal liver functions, but one
liver recipient and one lung recipient died 3 and 15 days after transplantation. Our report strongly encourages ECMO-assisted organ donation
from brain death patients with refractory cardiopulmonary collapse to achieve improved organ transplantation. Donor shortage is a major
limitation of organ transplantation. According to the data from the Korean Network for Organ Sharing, the prevalence of brain-dead donation
in Korea is lower than in other developed countries, as approximately 5.4/1,000,000 person-years (1) and some brain-dead donors fail to
complete the donation process because of cardiopulmonary collapse (2). Furthermore, cardiac and/or pulmonary failure have the potential to
impair the function of the transplanted organs. In the case of organ failure, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) can rapidly provide
excellent cardiopulmonary support that allows organ perfusion without warm ischemia (3,4,5). Cardiac arrest or failure are potentially fatal
complications which might develop after brain death (6). Fearing this complication, ECMO-assisted organ donation was successfully conducted
in brain-dead patients with circulatory failure (7,8). However, the application of ECMO to potentially brain-dead patients with circulatory
failure is a controversial ethical issue (9,10). Furthermore, at this time, there is no current guideline for these rare cases. Recently,
the authors performed a successful case of organ donation in a potentially brain-dead patient following cardiac arrest (11). After this
experience, the researchers utilized ECMO to diagnose brain death and complete the organ procurement for patients on the verge of brain
death with circulatory failure. The results of this study may help shape clinical guidelines for organ transplantation in potentially brain-
dead patients with circulatory collapse. A 23-yr-old man was referred on April 15, 2013 to our center for brain death diagnosis and organ
donation after suffering a spontaneous cerebellar hemorrhage. On admission, the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was three. Though the initial
vital signs were stable with blood pressure (BP) 150/100 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 125/min, and saturation of peripheral oxygen (SpO2) 100%, BP
gradually declined. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed global hypokinesia with an ejection fraction <10%. One hour later, his systolic BP
decreased to 40 mmHg and remained hypotensive despite medical treatment. Ultimately, cardiac arrest developed and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) was performed. After 13 min of CPR, venoarterial (VA) ECMO was established. The ECMO flow was set to 4 L/min in order to
maintain the mean arterial BP (MAP) above 60 mmHg and SpO2 98%. He was diagnosed with brain death by the Brain Death and Organ Donation
Committee. After 20 hr of ECMO maintenance, the patient's organs including the liver, both lungs, and both kidneys were successfully
retrieved for donation. A 32-yr-old man was diagnosed with acute subarachnoid hemorrhage following a motor vehicle accident. He was referred
to our intensive care unit (ICU) from another hospital on November 6, 2013 for the diagnosis of brain death and organ donation. On
admission, his BP was 40/18 mmHg, HR 86/min, and SpO2 97%. The patient's BP did not respond to dopamine or vasopressin infusions. VA ECMO
support was initiated and ECMO flow was set to 5 L/min. The diagnosis of brain death was made by the Brain Death and Organ Donation
Committee. After 25 hr of ECMO maintenance, the organs including the liver and both kidneys were successfully retrieved for donation. A
41-yr-old woman was referred to our ICU on April 11, 2014 for the diagnosis of brain death and organ donation. About one month ago, she was
found in her house, having hung herself. On admission, the patient's vital signs included BP 112/60 mmHg, HR 114/min, and SpO2 100%. One
hour after admission, the patient developed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and hypotension. Although atrial
fibrillation was controlled with amiodarone, hypotension persisted and cardiac arrest developed. VA ECMO was successfully established after
45 min of CPR. The patient was confirmed to be brain dead by the Brain Death and Organ Donation Committee. After 14 hr of ECMO maintenance,
the organs including the liver and both kidneys were successfully retrieved for donation. In total, three patients donated six kidneys,
three livers, and one both lungs to six, three, and one patient, respectively (Table 1). The median age of the six patients who underwent
kidney transplantation (KT) was 42.5 yr (interquartile range , 36.3-50.5 yr). Four of these patients were female and they had all been
receiving hemodialysis regularly due to end stage renal disease (ESRD). None of the patients experienced primary graft failure or acute
rejection after KT. They were discharged without requiring further hemodialysis. During the follow-up period of a median of 11.2 months
(IQR, 6.9-18.8 months), none of the patients progressed to ESRD requiring hemodialysis. Two patients with liver cirrhosis due to chronic
hepatitis B and one patient with a primary graft failure (after liver transplantation) received liver transplantations. The median age of
the three patients who received liver transplantations was 58.0 yr (range, 49-62 yr), and all three were male. During a median of 11.6
(range, 0.1-17.4 months) months of follow-up, two patients had normal liver function. The third patient who had primary graft failure with
an earlier liver transplant died 3 days after this transplant due to multi-organ failure. Two ECMO-supported lung lobes were transplanted to
a 59-yr-old man who had an acute exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis associated with interstitial lung disease. He died 15 days after lung
transplantation due to hospital acquired pneumonia (Table 2). Organ donation from brain-dead patients has been widely used in many
transplantation centers to expand the potential pool of organs. According to a recent report, more than 90% of deceased donors are brain
dead (12). However, the relative shortage of organ donation turned the attention to potential donors after circulatory deaths (DCDs).
Currently, less than 10% of deceased donations are DCDs (12). Because circulatory deaths develop in many different clinical situations, the
Maastricht classification is now widely used to differentiate between different causes (13). Using this system, DCDs are divided into four
categories: uncontrolled (type I- brought in dead, type II- unsuccessful resuscitation) and controlled (type III- awaiting cardiac arrest,
type IV- cardiac arrest after brain death). If circulatory collapse occurs in potential donors before they are diagnosed with brain death,
they cannot be classified as brain-dead donors or as type IV Maastricht patients. In addition, current guidelines do not address this
medical complication, and the decision to use these patients for transplantation is controversial. This study describes the use of ECMO for
potentially brain-dead patients with circulatory collapse. In these patients, family members had agreed to organ donation and ECMO
application before the final diagnosis of brain death was made. These patients were referred to Samsung Medical Center for brain death
evaluations and organ donation. ECMO support was needed to ensure survival while the diagnosis of brain death was made. Two of the patients
underwent CPR and VA ECMO support. One patient was placed on ECMO support to manage refractory circulatory shock. In these patients, the use
of ECMO helped to successfully maintain adequate organ perfusion. Because ECMO support continued until organ retrieval, there was no warm
ischemic time in these patients. Ultimately, 10 major organs including six kidneys, three livers and one both lungs were successfully
donated to 10 patients. The outcomes of organ transplantations from these patients were relatively good. Although two patients died, their
deaths were not related to the malfunction of the donated organs. During the follow-up period (a median of 11.7 months), no functional
decline was seen in the donated organs of the remaining eight patients. In these cases, EMCO support was initiated immediately before or
during the brain death examination. These cases can be controversial because ECMO was used to preserve the functions of potentially useful
organs. However, there is no current guideline for this particular clinical situation. As ECMO use becomes more widespread, it is likely
that this type of dilemma will be increasingly more common. The authors in one previous article suggested that ECMO support should be
considered as a reanimation maneuver during brain death diagnosis (9). The findings of this study suggest that ECMO might be used as an
emergent therapy. Rapid cardiac dysfunction after brain death is a well-known clinical relevance for organ donation (6). According to a
study using an animal model of brain death, contractile function was observed to decline by ~50% after 60 min of brain death (14). The most
serious event in the heart after brain death is thought to be the loss of the vasculature's sympathetic regulation. This leads to marked
vasodilation and intravascular hypovolemia, which results in decreased coronary perfusion pressure and reduction of preload, and therefore
decreased contractile function (15). These changes in cardiac function may make brain-dead patients increasingly prone to cardiac arrest.
Before this report, a few studies reported that some patients received ECMO support to permit the end of a brain death diagnosis and organ
donations (9,10,16,17,18). As in our cases, the diagnosis of brain death and organ transplantation were successfully completed in some cases
(9,10,18). In contrast, unsuccessful results including failure of brain death diagnosis (10,16) and failure of retrieval of viable organs
(17) were also reported. Both successful and unsuccessful cases were also reported (10). There are three important things that clinicians
should consider before using ECMO support to this particular situation. First, although our patients were stable under ECMO support, a few
studies reported unsuccessful results as discussed above. Therefore, the diagnosis of brain death needs to be performed more rapidly in
patients with hemodynamic deceleration during ECMO support. Second, a decision to apply ECMO support to the suspected brain dead patients
with cardiovascular collapse need to be performed very carefully considering that medical resources are limited. Third, there is no current
guideline for the apnea test in patients with ECMO support. Therefore, the authors performed apnea test according to a modified protocol
developed for this study. Sweep gas flow was adjusted to set pressure of arterial CO2 (PaCO2) ranging from 35 to 45 mmHg and mechanical
ventilation was changed to T-piece. Sweep gas flow was then further decreased to 1L/min and 100% of oxygen was delivered through ECMO during
the apnea test. The test was considered positive if PaCO2 increases more than 20 mmHg from the baseline or ≥60 mmHg without decrease in
PaO2. The current guidelines from many institutions including those from the Korean Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service (HIRA) do
not approve ECMO for patients with severe neurologic injury and cardiopulmonary instability. However, in this study, the use of ECMO allowed
practitioners to complete the diagnosis of brain death and procurement of organs in the 3 patients without warm ischemia. This case and
previous reports (9,10) suggest that ECMO support must be considered in such patients, and recognized by the Korean HIRA and other
countries' services. In conclusion, ECMO support can be an option as rescue therapy for the diagnosis of brain death and organ donation in
patients with suspected brain death with refractory cardiopulmonary collapse. We thank Sora Cha from the Organ Transplantation Center of
Samsung Medical Center for coordinating organ transplantation and helping us collect patient medical data. DISCLOSURE: The authors have no
potential conflicts of interest to disclose. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION: Conception and coordination of the study: Lee H, Cho YH, Sung K.
Acquisition of data: Lee H, Cho YH, Sung K, Yang JH, Chung CR, Jeon K, Suh GY. Manuscript preparation: Lee H, Cho YH. Manuscript approval:
all authors. CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. end stage renal disease; RA-ILD, rheumatoid
arthritis associated interstitial lung disease; Cr, creatinine (mg/dL); eGRF, estimated glomerular filtration rate using the Modification of
Diet in Renal Disease Study equation; TB, total bilirubin (mg/dL); AST, aspartate transaminase (IU/L); ALT, alanine transaminase (IU/L).
