Epidural corticosteroid injections (ESIs) have been used for several decades and now represent the most common intervention performed for
the management of back pain with a radicular component. However, several reports have presented devastating complications and adverse
effects, which fuelled concerns over the risk versus clinical effectiveness. The authors offer a comprehensive review of the available
literature and analyse the data derived from studies and case reports. Studies were identified by searching PubMed MEDLINE, Ovid MEDLINE,
EMBASE, Scopus, Google Scholar and the Cochrane Library to retrieve all available relevant articles. Publications from the last 20 years
(September 1994 to September 2014) were considered for further analysis. Studies selected were English-language original articles publishing
results on complications related to the technique used for cervical and lumbar ESIs. The studies had to specify the approach used for
injection. All studies that did not fulfil these eligibility criteria were excluded from further analysis. Overall, the available literature
supports the view that serious complications following injections of corticosteroid suspensions into the cervical and lumbar epidural space
are uncommon, but if they occur they can be devastating. The true incidence of such complications remains unclear. Direct vascular injury
and/or administration of injectates intra-arterially represent a major concern and could account for the vast majority of the adverse events
reported. Accurate placement of the needle, use of a non-particulate corticosteroid, live fluoroscopy, digital subtraction angiography, and
familiarisation of the operator with contrast patterns on fluoroscopy should minimise these risks. The available literature has several
limitations including incomplete documentation, unreported data and inherent bias. Large registries and well-structured observational
studies are needed to determine the true incidence of adverse events and address the safety concerns. Serious complications including damage
to the neural elements, stroke and death have been reported with epidural corticosteroid injections (ESIs) but are mostly anecdotal. Their
true incidence is unknown, but such outcomes seem to be rare. Vascular penetration is possible, relatively more frequent in the cervical
segments and potentially hazardous. Intravascular injection can be reduced by use of injected contrast media. The use of a blunt needle,
live fluoroscopy, digital subtraction angiography and the administration of a small test dose initially could help reduce the adverse
effects. Many complications can be avoided by a thorough understanding of the anatomy, accurate placement of the needle and familiarisation
of the contrast patterns on fluoroscopy. More research must be performed regarding the benefits versus risk, techniques and outcome of ESIs.
Epidural corticosteroid injections (ESIs) have been used for decades as a therapeutic modality in the management of spinal pain syndromes
attributed to disc pathology and spinal stenosis. Although the exact pathophysiology of these conditions remains obscure, it has been
suggested they occur through an ectopic “firing action potentials” mechanism in nerve roots derived from the mechanical compression . This
mechanical compression could stimulate a local inflammatory process, which forms the rationale behind the administration of the
corticosteroids. This theory is further strengthened by findings suggesting that the lavage of inflammatory mediators may reduce pain and
inflammation . Epidural injections can be administered through a transforaminal, interlaminar or caudal route. The interlaminar route is
considered to be non-specific and the injectate is free to spread within the posterior epidural space with possible flow anteriorly,
cephalad and caudally . This could be influenced by tissue fibrosis, scarring or hypertrophy, which may occur in spinal pathology .
Transforaminal ESIs are more specific and selected nerves can be targeted. ESI administered through this route could in theory deposit a
larger mass of corticosteroid close to the pain generators at the ventral epidural space allowing a greater degree of drug diffusion, so
transforaminal ESI may be more efficacious in alleviating patients’ pain . However, several prospective randomised studies have failed to
demonstrate a statistically significant difference in terms of pain reduction and functional score improvement between the transforaminal
and interlaminar approaches [5, 6]. In a recent systematic literature review of comparative studies involving patients with lumbosacral
radicular pain, Chang-Chien et al. , suggested that both approaches are equally effective and demonstrated only minor non-significant
differences between them. In contrast to the interlaminar and transforaminal routes, caudal epidural injections require relatively higher
volumes of corticosteroids but are considered to be easier and safer and are preferred in patients after spinal surgery. The modality of
imaging may influence the efficacy of ESI. Currently, fluoroscopy, ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) imaging have been used and their
utilisation continues to increase. The choice amongst them partly lies in personal preference but also on the availability and prior
training on the device. Limited evidence currently exists in terms of the effectiveness and safety differences between these techniques. For
instance, a recent literature review by Bui and Bogduk concluded that CT-guided lumbar transforaminal injection of corticosteroids is
neither more effective nor safer than the fluoroscopy-guided injections but that CT is associated with significantly higher radiation doses
than conventional fluoroscopy. Ultrasound has gained popularity and maybe a safe alternative to the other radiological imaging modalities .
Several authors have questioned the overall efficacy of ESIs for the management of radicular pain . In a systematic review of the available
literature in 2009 by Chou et al. , ESIs were moderately effective for short-term symptom relief in patients with low back pain but
conferred no long-term benefit. In a similar manuscript, Pinto et al. concluded that epidural corticosteroid injections offer only short-
term relief of leg pain and disability for patients with sciatica. The authors questioned the clinical justification of this procedure when
comparing the benefits with the risks. Furthermore, in a systematic review including data from the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled
Trials, Staal et al. concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support the use of injection therapy in subacute and chronic low back
pain. These conclusions have been challenged by several other trials and systematic reviews . In patients with lumbar radicular pain caused
by contained disc herniations, MacVicar et al. suggested that lumbar transforaminal injection of corticosteroids is effective in reducing
pain, restoring function, reducing the need for other healthcare modalities and avoiding surgery . In line with these deductions, Quraishi
concluded that in patients with lumbar radiculopathy, ESIs result in an improvement in pain but not disability. Friedly et al. suggested
that epidural injection of glucocorticoids plus lidocaine offered minimal or no short-term benefit as compared with epidural injection of
lidocaine in the treatment of lumbar spinal stenosis alone. ESIs were found to have significant effect in relieving chronic intractable pain
of cervical origin, providing long-term relief . Some meta-analyses suggested that there is good evidence for the effectiveness of cervical
interlaminar epidural injections in managing radiculitis secondary to disc herniation and fair evidence in managing axial or discogenic
pain, pain of central spinal stenosis and pain of post-surgery syndrome [15, 17]. The same authors concluded that the evidence is poor for
cervical transforaminal epidural injections. It should be mentioned, however, that several of these studies have been criticised for flaws
and deficiencies, adding further overall confusion. In addition to the controversy surrounding the efficacy of ESIs, some authors have
raised concerns regarding potential adverse events. On 23 April 2014 the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a warning to the
medical community covering the potential risks of these injections . The warning states that “injection of corticosteroids into the epidural
space of the spine may result in rare but serious adverse events, including loss of vision, stroke, paralysis, and death”. This systematic
review aims to scrutinise the available literature, present the available data and documentation from several authors, and analyse the risks
involved with the ESIs in the cervical and lumbar spine. This review was carried out in accordance to the PRISMA guidelines . Data were
documented according to a standardised protocol, where objectives and inclusion criteria were specified in detail. Publications from the
last 20 years (September 1994 to September 2014) were considered for further analysis. Studies selected were original articles, in the
English language, publishing results on complications related to the technique used for the ESIs. Only cervical and lumbar ESIs were
included and the studies had to specify the approach used for injection. All studies that did not fulfil these eligibility criteria were
excluded from further analysis. Studies were identified by searching the following resources/databases to retrieve all available relevant
articles: PubMed MEDLINE, Ovid MEDLINE, EMBASE, Scopus, Google Scholar and the Cochrane Library. The terms used for the search included
‘epidural’, ‘injection’, ‘corticosteroid’ and ‘steroid’ both isolated or in combination with specific words including ‘transforaminal’,
‘interlaminar’, ‘adverse events’, ‘complication’ and ‘side effect’. The identified articles and their bibliographies including any relevant
reviews were manually searched for additional potential eligible studies. Two of the authors (Ippokratis Pountos and Gavin Walters) of this
systematic review performed 208 the assessment, in an independent, unblinded and standardised manner. Most citations were excluded on the
basis of information provided by their respective title or abstract. In any other case, the complete manuscript was obtained and scrutinised
by two reviewers. Of 3255 papers initially identified, 162 met the inclusion criteria (Fig. 1). This included 58 studies, of which 38
recorded complications while the remaining 20 state that 217 no complications were encountered . 101 case reports were also found
.Fig. 1Flowchart of study selection Flowchart of study selection The review of the available literature identified 11 manuscripts presenting
complications following interlaminar cervical ESIs (Table 1) [21, 22, 24, 26, 28–34]. One manuscript that reports no complications has also
been identified but only includes 14 interlaminar cervical ESIs .Table 1Complications reported with interlaminar cervical epidural
corticosteroid injectionsStudy, yearDesignPtsMedicationsImagingComplicationsBotwin et al., 2003 Retrospective cohort study157 pts, 345
injections, C6–7 or C7–T1Triamcinolone acetonide 80 mgFLOverall 16.8 %:23 Increased neck pain (6.7 %)16 Non-positional headaches (4.6 %)6
Insomnia (1.7 %)6 Vasovagal reactions (1.7 %)5 Facial flushing (1.5 %)1 Pyrexia (0.3 %)1 Dural puncture (0.3 %)Derby et al., 2003
Retrospective survey4389 InjectionsNANA3 Dural punctures (0.07 %)17 Vagal symptoms (0.4 %)3 Paraesthesia and numbness (0.07 %)Goel and
Pollan, 2006 Prospective cohort29 pts, 65 injectionsNAFL16.9 % headaches21.5 % insomnia, flushing of the face, temperature6.2 % of increased
painKwon et al., 2007 Retrospective cohort study76 pts, 76 injectionsTriamcinolone acetonide 40 mgFL2 Dural punctures (2.6 %)Kranz et al.,
2011 Retrospective cohort study50 pts, 53 injectionsBetamethasoneCT1 Intra-thecal injectionManchikanti et al., 2012 Prospective cohort
study2376 InjectionsNAFL100 Intravascular placement of needle (4.2 %)24 Dural puncture (1 %)6 Transient nerve root irritation (0.25 %)5
Transient spinal cord irritation (0.21 %)16 Profuse bleeding (0.7 %)1 Vasovagal (0.04 %)2 Facial flushing (0.08 %)Lee et al., 2012
Prospective cohort study~127 InjectionsDexamethasone sodium phosphate 10 mgFL1 Vasovagal and syncope (0.8 %)1 Dural puncture (0.8 %)Beyaz
and Eman, 2013 Retrospective cohort study65 ptsNAFL1 Vasovagal (1.54 %)1 Transient increase of pain (1.54 %)Manchikanti et al., 2013 RCT120
pts, 654 injectionsBetamethasone 6 mg (n = 60)FL2 Subarachnoid punctures (0.3 %)4 Intravascular penetrations (0.6 %)5 Nerve root irritations
(0.76 %)1 Pain lasting 1 week (0.15 %)Lee et al., 2014 Retrospective cohort study143 ptsTriamcinolone acetonide 40 mg1 Itching sensations1
Facial flushing1 Dry mouth1 Erectile dysfunctionManchikanti et al., 2014 RCT120 pts, 688 injectionsBetamethasone 6 mg (n = 60)FL6
Subarachnoid punctures (0.3 %)10 Intravascular penetrations (0.6 %)3 Nerve root irritations (0.76 %)1 Pain lasting 1 week (0.15 %) CT
computed tomography, FL fluoroscopy, NA not available, pts patients, RCT randomised controlled trial Complications reported with
interlaminar cervical epidural corticosteroid injections CT computed tomography, FL fluoroscopy, NA not available, pts patients, RCT
randomised controlled trial Based on the available studies, the incidence of dural puncture ranged between 0.07 and 2.6 %. Vasovagal
reactions ranged between 0.04 and 1.7 %. In a prospective study including 2376 injections, Manchikanti et al. reported 100 cases where
intravascular placement of the needle occurred . However, complications that could potentially be correlated with inadvertent intravascular
injection of corticosteroids were low and included 11 cases of transient nerve root or spinal cord irritation, one vasovagal event and two
cases of facial flushing. In a retrospective analysis of the results of 345 C6–7 or C7–T1 injections, Botwin et al. reported an overall
incidence of complications of 16.8 %. A large proportion of these adverse events were related to an increase of neck pain, headache,
insomnia and vasovagal reactions. There are limited studies analysing the complications from this approach. Furman et al. presented 504
cervical (C3–C8) transforaminal ESIs performed on 337 patients . They reported identification of 98 intravascular injections that did not
result in any adverse effects. Similarly, other authors have reported no complications [27, 31, 37–39]. In a retrospective review of 1579
injections, Derby et al. reported two cases of aggravated radicular pain, two cases of prolonged paraesthesias and the development of skin
rash in one patient. In another study including 43 ESIs with prednisolone, 19 % of patients experienced minor neurovegetative manifestations
. Scanlon et al. conducted an anonymous survey asking the US physician members of the American Pain Society about their experience with
regards to serious complications following cervical transforaminal epidural corticosteroid injections (TESIs) . From the 287 replies, 78
complications were reported, among which there were 30 brain or spinal cord infarcts and 24 neurologic complications including death of
unsuspected aetiology (n = 5), high spinal anaesthesia (n = 3), transient ischaemic attacks (n = 3), and spinal cord or brainstem oedema
(n = 3). Overall, the survey revealed 13 cases with a fatal outcome . The literature search found 11 studies that present adverse effects
following interlaminar lumbar ESIs (Table 2) [34–36, 40, 42, 44, 45, 47–52]. In addition, four studies that involve more than 250 patients
have reported no adverse events following interlaminar lumbar epidural ESIs [46, 54, 55, 60]. In a prospective cohort study including 1450
injections, Manchikanti et al. reported an incidence of 0.8 % for dural puncture and profuse bleeding following the injection . A
prospective, randomised blinded study including 106 patients has reported a rather high number of minor adverse effects . In particular,
26 % of the patients experienced discomfort and pain at the injection site, 18 % had non-positional headache and 10 % suffered from nausea
after the injection. In an analysis of 6631 interlaminar lumbar ESIs, Huang et al. found 42 cases of inadvertent lumbar facet joint
injection . In 31 cases the physician recognised the lumbar facet joint injection. A similar study design reported by Candido et al.
reported the incidence of intradiscal injection to be one in 4723 .Table 2Complications reported with interlaminar lumbar epidural
corticosteroid injectionsStudy, yearDesignPtsMedicationsImagingComplicationsCarette et al., 1997 Prospective randomised blinded study78 pts,
162 injectionsMethylprednisolone 80 mgBL1 Dural puncture (0.6 %)27 Transient headacheKraemer et al., 1997 RCT87 pts, 87
injectionsTriamcinolone 10 mgCT1.9–3.6 % headacheValat et al., 2003 RCT39 pts, 117 injectionsPrednisolone acetate 50 mgBL2 HeadacheArden et
al., 2005 RCT115 pts, 3 injections eachTriamcinolone acetonide 80 mgBL4 Non-specific headache2 Postdural puncture headache, nausea5 OtherKim
et al., 2010 Retrospective cohort study150 pts, 150 injectionsDexamethasone 16 mgFL42 Facial flushing (28 %)Kim et al., 2011 Prospective
randomised study60 pts, 120 injectionsDexamethasone phosphate 15 mg or methylprednisolone acetate 80 mgFL1 Intrathecal injectionManchikanti
et al., 2012 [34, 40]Prospective randomised blinded study120 pts, 213 injectionsBetamethasone 1 mL (n = 60)FL3 Subarachnoid punctures
(1.4 %)Manchikanti et al., 2012 Prospective cohort study1450 InjectionsNAFL7 Intravascular placement of needle (0.5 %)4 Transient nerve root
irritation (0.28 %)11 Dural punctures (0.8 %)11 Profuse bleeding (0.8 %)4 Local haematoma (0.28 %)1 Headache (0.07 %)2 Facial flushing
(0.13 %)Bartynski et al., 2013 Retrospective cohort study276 pts, 392 injectionMethylprednisolone acetate 80 mgFL1 Dural puncture1 Transient
paraparesisCandido el al. 2013 Prospective randomised blinded study106 pts, L3–S1Methylprednisolone acetate 120 mgFL26 % discomfort and pain
at the injection site18 % non-positional headache10 % nauseaEvansa et al., 2015 Prospective randomised study120 pts, 120
injectionsMethylprednisolone acetate 80 mgFL (n = 56), US (n = 56)15 Dizziness or pain at injection site or facial flushing1 Intrathecal
injection BL blind, CT computed tomography, FL fluoroscopy, NA not available, pts patients, RCT randomised controlled trial, US ultrasound
Complications reported with interlaminar lumbar epidural corticosteroid injections BL blind, CT computed tomography, FL fluoroscopy, NA not
available, pts patients, RCT randomised controlled trial, US ultrasound Fourteen studies were identified that presented adverse effects
following transforaminal ESIs (Table 3) [34, 50, 53, 56–59, 61, 63, 65–69]. In contrast, no adverse events were presented by a number of
other authors [25, 62, 70–78]. McGrath et al. retrospectively reviewed the charts of patients receiving ESIs over a 7-year period . Of the
3964 injections included, only minor complications were reported in 84 injections. The most common complication reported was increased pain,
which was encountered in half of the patients. Two prospective studies analysing a large number of transforaminal lumbar ESIs reported an
incidence of intravascular penetration of between 7.4 and 7.9 % [34, 57]. The main difference was an 8.7 % rate of vasovagal episodes
reported by Karaman et al. . A similar rate was reported by Ploumis et al. , although only 20 patients were included in that study. Hong et
al. identified six intradiscal injections among 249 transforaminal ESIs, which represents an incidence of 2.4 % . A lower incidence of one
in 402 injections was reported by Candido et al. , although this was tenfold higher than after interlaminar ESI .Table 3Complications
reported with transforaminal lumbar epidural corticosteroid injectionsStudy, yearDesignPtsMedicationsImagingComplicationsBotwin et al., 2000
Retrospective cohort study207 pts, 322 injectionsEither betamethasone 9–12 mg or methylprednisolone 80 mgFL10 Non-positional headaches
(3.1 %)8 Increased back pain (2.4 %)2 Increased leg pain (0.6 %)4 Facial flushing (1.2 %)1 Vasovagal reaction (0.3 %)1 Increased blood sugar
(258 mg/dL) in an insulin-dependent patient with diabetes mellitus (0.3 %)1 Intraoperative hypertension (0.3 %)Ahadian et al., 2011
Prospective randomised study98 pts, 98 injectionsDexamethasone 4, 8 or 12 mgFL1 Pain at injection site5 Vascular uptake6 Paraesthesia during
procedureKaraman et al., 2011 Prospective cohort study562 pts, 1305 injectionsTriamcinolone acetonideFL97 Vascular penetration (7.4 %)8.7 %
vasovagal episodes5 Transient erectile dysfunction (0.9 %)5 Facial flushing (0.9 %)McGrath et al., 2011 Retrospective cohort study1667 pts,
3964 injectionsNAFL42 Increased pain6 Numbness9 Pain at injection siteManchikanti et al., 2012 Prospective cohort study1310
InjectionsNAFL104 Intravascular placement of needle (7.9 %)16 Transient nerve root irritation (4.6 %)8 Profuse bleeding (1 %)1 Vasovagal
(0.08 %)2 Facial flushing (0.15 %)Cansever et al., 2012 Prospective cohort study153 ptsMethylprednisolone 40 mgFL2 DiscitisWewalka et al.,
2012 Cohort study37 pts, 65 injectionsTriamcinolone 40 mgCT3 Transient weakness14 Increased low back pain2 Low blood pressure post-
injectionKoh et al., 2013 RCT53 ptsTriamcinolone 20 mgFL1 Burning at injection site (1.9 %)Manson et al., 2013 Retrospective cohort study91
pts, 106 injectionsTriamcinalone 40 mgFL2 Vasovagal episodesHong et al., 2014 Prospective cohort study239 pts, 249 injectionsDexamethasone
5 mg and mepivacaine 3 mLFL6 Intradiscal injectionManchikanti et al., 2014 RCT120 pts, 601 injectionsBetamethasone 3 mgFL28 Intravascular
infiltrations (4.6 %)9 Nerve root irritations (1.5 %)Kraiwattanapong et al., 2014 Prospective cohort study38 pts, 72
injectionsMethylprednisolone 80 mgFL3 Worsening of leg painPloumis et al., 2014 Prospective cohort study20 pts, L4–S1Betamethasone 9 mgFL2
Vasovagal episodes (10 %)Tauheed et al., 2014 RCT60 ptsMethylprednisolone 60 mgFL3 Transient paraesthesia of nerve distribution CT computed
tomography, FL fluoroscopy, NA not available, pts patients, RCT randomised controlled trial Complications reported with transforaminal
lumbar epidural corticosteroid injections CT computed tomography, FL fluoroscopy, NA not available, pts patients, RCT randomised controlled
trial A large number of case reports presenting rare adverse events following ESIs exist (Fig. 2) . The available literature has described
deaths following ESIs [89, 93, 97]. Reviewing the available case reports, the most common and devastating complication was infarction of the
spinal cord, cerebellum, brain and brainstem [97, 141]. Infarctions could occur due to damage to the blood vessels, or either to vasospasm
or an emboli from particulate matter associated with the corticosteroid injection. Damage to the blood vessels could result in haematomas,
and subdural and epidural haematomas have been reported [124, 135, 144, 146, 155, 162, 164]. Permanent paralysis can occur following such
haematomas . Direct damage to the spinal cord by trauma or direct injection of ESI medications into the cervical spinal cord has been also
documented [140, 148, 160, 173]. Such a complication can occur with an absence of pain being reported by the patient when the spinal cord
structures were punctured . Subdural and intrathecal spread or diffusion of the injected mixture of corticosteroids, anaesthetic and
contrast dye could result in cauda equina and conus medularis syndromes, arachnoiditis, meningitis and temporary respiratory depression
[139, 148, 153, 171]. Intracranial subdural haematoma after accidental dural puncture has also been presented . Furthermore, cases of
pneumocephalus, pneumorrhachis and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak can occur [90, 94, 95, 147, 151, 153, 170].Fig. 2Reported major
complications and approach used Reported major complications and approach used Infections and abscesses have been also reported following
ESI [108–114, 117–127, 130, 132, 133, 164]. With the exception of a fungal infection outbreak in the USA in 2012, infection rates are
considered rare . Infection rates vary following an epidural injection, but, on average, are reported to be one in 60,000–100,000 epidural
injections . The documented outbreak in 2012 was possibly caused by a contaminated glucocorticoid product used for epidural and paraspinal
injection [108, 109]. In single case reports, cases of meningitis, vertebral osteomyelitis, and spinal and paraspinal abscesses have been
reported that are caused by microorganisms including Aspergillus spp., Staphylococcus aureus and methicillin-resistant S. aureus [111, 113,
126]. Patients’ skin flora has been proposed to be the most common source of infection . Blindness after ESI has been reported multiple
times [82–84, 86, 87, 154, 167]. It has been hypothesised that this complication is caused by an abrupt rise in the CSF pressure caused by
the volume of the injected pharmaceutical agents. In the cervical spine, this complication can be the result of the administration of radio
contrast agents administered in the intracranial vasculature . The patient’s vision returned to normal within 1 year of follow-up in some
studies [82, 83], but permanent visual impairment in patients’ vision was reported by some authors [84, 86, 87, 167]. Vaginal bleeding has
been reported as a potential complication of ESI [99, 101]. Suh-Burgmann et al. have retrospectively reviewed 8166 ESI procedures and
reported an incidence of 2.5 % (n = 201; 197 patients) for abnormal vaginal bleeding . Of these women, 70 % were premenopausal and 30 % were
postmenopausal. Suppression of the hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian axis causing anovulatory cycles has been hypothesised to be the mechanism
for this adverse effect . Case reports have also presented other complications including iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome [131, 166],
persistent hiccups [128, 152], convulsions , reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome , epidural granuloma formation , subdural
block , Brown–Séquard syndrome , herpes zoster outbreak , steroid myopathy and corticosteroid-induced psychosis following ESI. Spinal
epidural lipomatosis is a rare condition of adipose tissue hypertrophy in the epidural space and has been reported to occur after ESI [138,
143, 161]. In addition, cardiopulmonary arrest following ESI and anaphylaxis and other adverse events due to the epidural corticosteroid
compounds can occur [134, 136, 149, 169, 175]. Complex regional pain syndrome and development of neuropathic pain following ESI have also
occurred [158, 163]. ESIs have been used for more than 60 years since Lievre et al. reported the use of epidural hydrocortisone in a series
of 20 patients. Over the years, their use has expanded significantly. In Medicare beneficiaries in the USA, the number of epidural
injections has increased by 106.3 % in the decade between 1997 and 2006 . Currently, ESIs are the most common intervention performed for the
management of chronic low back pain in the USA . Nevertheless, their clinical need and effectiveness has been questioned by several studies
. Indications for ESI are not robust and the outcome could not be correlated with the extent of the underlying pathology, e.g. the degree of
lumbar spinal stenosis, but could be determined by factors such as age, sex and the preceding opioid use . Collectively, this systematic
review contains data from more than 100,000 ESIs reported in prospective or retrospective studies. The reported complications were minor in
the vast majority. Major events have been reported anecdotally and it is impossible to comment on their true incidence based on the
available results in the literature. Overall, the potential causes of adverse events could be categorised into three distinct categories:
(1) direct damage to the blood vessels or adjacent anatomical structures during the procedure; (2) intravascular administration of the
injectate; and (3) a local or systemic reaction including bacterial contamination. Direct damage to the blood vessels or adjacent structure
is an inherent risk for any injection, including ESIs. Direct damage to the spinal cord by the needle and the injection of corticosteroids
into the cervical spinal cord has been also documented in a very limited number of case reports. Clinically significant haematomas derived
from piercing or damage to the blood vessels can occur and the reported incidence for all epidurals is less than one in 150,000. This
complication is increased in patients with coagulopathy and patients on anticoagulant medications . Inadvertent dural punctures can occur
after ESIs and CSF flashback is pathognomonic of this complication. Other complications, including intracranial subdural haematoma after
accidental dural puncture and cases of pneumocephalus, pneumorrhachis and CSF leak, have been presented in case reports [90, 94, 95, 98].
Intravascular injection of the corticosteroids, carrier and/or the local anaesthetic could account for the large majority of the serious
adverse effects. The reported incidence of inadvertent intravascular injection with fluoroscopically guided TESI is reported to range from
9 % to as high as 32.8 % [25, 189–192]. This incidence is related to the level at which the injection is performed. Furman et al. [25, 189]
reported an incidence of fluoroscopically confirmed intravascular penetration of 19.4 % for cervical TESIs, 8.1 % for lumbar TESIs and
21.3 % for TESIs at the S1 level. In addition, Sullivan et al. suggested that intravascular uptake is twice as likely to occur in patients
over rather than under 50 years of age . Vascular embolic events from intra-arterial injection of particulate corticosteroids have been
found to account for serious complications including spinal cord infarction, paraplegia and death [93, 100, 102, 103, 105]. Houten et al.
presented three cases of paraplegia which ensued suddenly after instillation of the corticosteroid solution in the artery of Adamkiewicz.
Similar cases have been reported by others . It should be mentioned that intra-articular injections pose a higher degree of danger, while
venous uptake has been considered benign [193, 194]. In terms of the injectate, medium-sized particles between 51 and 1000 µm have the
potential to enter and occlude a blood vessel . Smaller particles (10–50 μm) may still be able to occlude capillaries . Irrespective of the
size, it has been suggested that when corticosteroid particles enter a blood vessel they could coalesce and precipitate, forming larger
particles . Non-particulate corticosteroids are soluble and should not cause embolic infarction. The injection of the particulate
corticosteroid methylprednisolone into the vertebral artery of four pigs resulted in permanent loss of consciousness, while the animals
receiving dexamethasone and prednisolone recovered fully . Dawley et al. demonstrated that methylprednisolone and its non-particulate
carrier can produce significant injury to the blood–brain barrier when injected intra-arterially. The authors also suggested that in
addition to the cerebral microvasculature occlusion by the particulate corticosteroids, damage can occur via toxicity of the carrier or the
corticosteroid. Based on several observations that failed to highlight any difference in the efficacy of particulate and non-particulate
corticosteroids, we would recommend the use of soluble non-particulant agents . The local anaesthetic, corticosteroid or carrier can cause
local and systemic reactions. Blockage of the neural elements by the local anaesthetic can occur. A transient blockage of the neural
conduction is expected; however, the reported central canal, conus medularis and cauda equina syndromes must have an underlying cause, i.e.
hematoma, infarct, etc. Transient systemic reactions including headaches, vasovagal reactions and facial flushing have been reported; these
reactions occurred shortly after the ESI and could represent a reaction to the injected anaesthetic agents and/or corticosteroids. It is
rather unclear whether ESIs pose a long-term risk of certain conditions and whether a cumulative effect of prolonged exposure exists. If
that is true, epidural corticosteroids could have similar systemic effects to that of long-term corticosteroids administered through other
routes. For instance, a significant number of the patients with chronic back pain conditions are treated with repeated injections over
prolonged period of time. Corticosteroids are known to interfere with calcium homeostasis, reducing bone formation and increasing bone
breakdown. Osteoporosis and an increased fracture risk could theoretically occur; however, the available literature does not support this
theory. Manchikanti et al. prospectively evaluated 100 patients receiving epidural injections and reported no change in bone mineral
density. Insulin resistance is another adverse effect associated with corticosteroid administration; however, studies looking specifically
at patients receiving ESIs did not find any changes in the fasting glucose levels [200, 201]. Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
suppression has been demonstrated to occur after ESIs [200, 202]. Maillefert et al. showed that following ESI with dexamethasone a profound
decrease in the serum levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) occurs. These levels of ACTH returned to normal 3 weeks after the
injection . Hypertension can also occur following ESIs; a mean systolic blood pressure increase of 5 mmHg has been previously reported
following ESIs . Finally, corticosteroid administration represents a risk factor for wound complications postoperatively and poses an
increased risk for infections . ESIs are frequently performed prior to spinal surgery, either as a disgnostic tool or for pain management,
but their contribution to complications of such procedures is currently unknown. Severe infections are rare after spinal injections and have
an incidence of 0.1–0.01 % . The only exception is a fungal infection outbreak in the USA in 2012. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 25 deaths due to epidural corticosteroid-related meningitis (many due to Aspergillosis) were identified: 337
patients were affected in 18 US states and 14,000 patients were probably exposed to contaminated corticosteroids . In the authors’ opinion,
several recommendations can be made with the aim of minimise the incidence of major complications after ESIs. First, ESIs should be
performed under fluoroscopic guidance and the needle position should be confirmed in at least two planes, typically anteroposterior and
either an oblique or lateral plane. Intravascular penetration has been the primary concern related to ESIs. Aspiration prior to the
injection is specific but not sensitive at detecting intravascular needle placement, being unable to produce a flashback of blood in 74 % of
cases in which the needle was ultimately determined to be intravascular . Injection of contrast media is recommended and operators must be
able to distinguish between intravascular, epidural and subdural contrast flow patterns. The use of a blunt needle and the suggestion that a
small ‘test’ dose of the medication should be inject initially has been proposed . Fluoroscopy can detect unintentional vascular injections
. Dynamic live fluoroscopy was found to perform better than static intermittent fluoroscopy, which was found to miss 57 % of the
intravascular injections . Digital subtraction angiography can be used as a radiologic adjunct to identify vascular compromise during the
injection. However, in a case report by Chang et al. , an anaesthetic test dose and digital subtraction angiography performed twice did not
prevent a catastrophic spinal cord infarction and the resultant paraplegia. It is under debate whether the transforaminal route poses a
higher risk of serious complications when performed by an experience physician. Given the lack of evidence, one could argue that it is
reasonable to consider the transforaminal approach only when the interlaminar route has failed. Finally, informed consent should be taken
and the patient should be aware of the potential risk and benefits of this procedure. The survey of cervical injections conducted by Scanlon
et al. is the only manuscript that presents a high number of serious and fatal cases. Possible mechanisms explaining these events include
the intra-arterial injection of particulate corticosteroid or trauma causing embolisation to the distal basilar or vertebral arteries.
Despite the fact that the study presents the extreme end of potential complications, it is unclear what the true incidence of these events
is. As previously mentioned, it would be of enormous educational interest to have further details regarding these events, especially details
of the technique and imaging used as well as the training and experience of the physician . The warning issued by the FDA regarding ESIs
merits further discussion and analysis, and the use of corticosteroids for injections in the epidural space for spinal pain syndromes is not
FDA approved. The FDA mentions that, despite their use, the effectiveness of ESIs has been challenged and could potentially result in
serious adverse events including death, stroke and paralysis. In support of these arguments, the FDA has published several case reports.
Major adverse events can occur with ESIs, but such events are rare, their true incidence is unknown and they have only been presented in
case reports. For instance, none of the studies included in Tables 1, 2 and 3 presents such major devastating complications. Thus, several
authors have criticised the FDA’s warning statement as inaccurate. Of note is Manchikanti et al. conclusion stating that the FDA’s warning
is an additional burden on patient access to pain-relieving treatments . Should the FDA’s warning letter be replaced by an evidence-based
educational guidance to safeguard the best clinical practice? Several limitations can be found in the available literature. A large
proportion of the available case reports and studies provide insufficient documentation, i.e. the approach used for ESI, symptom duration,
volume injected or even the number of injections. In addition, the majority of the studies report adverse effects incidentally as their main
aim is to report the efficacy of the injections. Furthermore, the available studies were heterogeneous with regards to the outcome measures,
and in several manuscripts the surgical technique, corticosteroid dosage and the addition of other medications are not reported. It is of
note that many studies did not look at or record the complications or adverse effects of corticosteroid exposure but present results from
several pain and functional scores. Therefore, it is possible that both the short- and long-term adverse effects of corticosteroid exposure
remain unreported. As previously highlighted, there is a risk of bias. ESIs are relatively safe; however, although major complications of
ESIs have been reported, their true incidence remains obscure. Vascular penetration and administration of pharmaceutical agents intra-
arterially could account for a large proportion of the adverse events reported. With accurate placement of the needle, use of non-
particulate corticosteroids, live fluoroscopy, digital subtraction angiography and familiarisation of the contrast patterns on fluoroscopy
these risks should be minimised. Further research is required to shed more light on the best clinical practice for the use of ESIs and the
true incidence of complications relating to them. No funding was received for the preparation of this manuscript. IP, MP, GW, DB, and PVG
have no conflicts of interest to declare.
