†The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Mycobacterium (M.) bovis causes tuberculosis and has a broad host range, including
humans, livestock, and wild animals. M. bovis infection of wild boar has been reported in several European countries. We report here the
first case of M. bovis infection in a domesticated wild sow in Korea. Granulomatous and necrotizing lesions with small numbers of acid-fast
bacilli were observed in nodules of the lung of wild sow. Furthermore, the M. bovis isolate from the wild sow had spoligotype SB0140 and a
novel MIRU-VNTR allelic profile, which is not found in cattle and deer in Korea. Mycobacterium (M.) bovis is the main causative agent of
tuberculosis, a chronic contagious disease in a broad range of mammals, including cattle, deer, llamas, pigs, cats, wild cats, foxes,
possums, and badgers . The possum and badger are considered maintenance hosts of M. bovis in New Zealand, as well as in the United Kingdom,
Spain, Portugal, Ireland and France , whereas wild boar is considered a maintenance host of M. bovis in Spain, Portugal and the United
Kingdom . In Korea, M. bovis infection has been reported in cattle and deer, but not in wild boar. Here, we report the first M. bovis
infection in a domesticated wild sow (Sus scrofa) in Korea. In February 2012, an adult wild sow weighing approximately 200 kg was sent to
the Veterinary Laboratory Agency, where a postmortem examination was performed by the authorized personnel according to the National Bovine
Tuberculosis Eradication Programme in Korea. At necropsy, mandibular, retropharyngeal, bronchial, hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes and
lungs were collected for histopathological examination and mycobacterial culture. Tissue samples for histopathology were fixed in 10%
neutral buffered formalin, and sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Ziehl–Neelsen stain. Mycobacterial culture was
performed using the BD BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) 960 System, and culture isolates were identified using Ziehl-Neelsen
stain and multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay as described by Kim et al. . The molecular type was determined using spoligotyping
and the mycobacterial interspersed repetitive unit-variable number tandem repeat (MIRU-VNTR) method . The nodules in the lung were very firm
(panel A in Fig. 1), and their cut surface revealed thick yellow caseous material. The histopathology of lymph node sections revealed
granulomatous and necrotizing lesions with small numbers of acid-fast bacilli (panel B in Fig. 1). M. bovis was isolated and identified
using multiplex PCR assay (Fig. 2). The spoligotype was determined as SB0140, and the MIRU-VNTR allelic profile was 253264103433101 based on
the MIRU 2, MIRU 26, MIRU 27, MIRU 31, ETR-A, ETR-B, QUB 11a, QUB 18, QUB 26, VNTR 2401, VNTR 3171, VNTR 3232, and VNTR 3336 loci. In Korea,
wild swine are bred for meat. The M. bovis-infected wild sow was a brood sow, the offspring of a captured wild swine. Interestingly, the M.
bovis isolate had a unique MIRU-VNTR allelic profile that has not been reported in other animals in Korea . This implies that M. bovis
strain in the sow might have originated from wild swine, but not from other livestock, such as cattle and deer. However, additional studies
are needed to investigate whether M. bovis transmits between wild swine and domesticated pigs. In conclusion, this report provides the first
case of tuberculosis by M. bovis in a wild sow in Korea. The lymph node sections contained granulomatous and necrotizing lesions with acid-
fast bacilli. M. bovis isolate from a wild sow had a novel MIRU-VNTR allelic profile. This work was supported by a grant from the Animal and
Plant Quarantine Agency and in part by a grant from the Bio-industry Technology Development Program (grant No. 314025-03) of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Korea. Conflict of Interest: There is no conflict of interest.
