Conflicts of interest: none Celiac axis compression syndrome, also known as median arcuate ligament syndrome or Dunbar syndrome, is a rare
condition. This syndrome was first reported by Harjola in 19636. Dunbar described it as a clinical syndrome in his memorial paper in 19654.
It is characterized by compression of the celiac axis by the median arcuate ligament of the diaphragm. The median arcuate ligament is a
fibrous arch formed at the base of the diaphragm at the level of the 12th thoracic vertebra, where the left and right diaphragmatic crura
join1. This fibrous arch forms the anterior aspect of the aortic hiatus, through which the aorta, thoracic duct, and azygos vein pass. The
median arcuate ligament usually comes into contact with the aorta above the origin of the celiac axis. However, in some individuals, the it
may be abnormally low and passes in front of the celiac axis, causing its compression, which is named median arcuate ligament syndrome5.
Some patients with this syndrome refer severe clinical manifestations such as postprandial abdominal pain, weight loss, and vomiting. The
primary treatment modality for this condition is surgical division of its fibers. The traditional surgical approach has been through an
upper abdominal laparotomy incision. Roayaie et al. in 2000 reported the first patient with celiac axis compression syndrome treated by
laparoscopy access. Afterwards, several authors have demonstrated that the laparoscopic access may be employed with success to treat this
condition8. To best of our knowledge, this is the first report of laparoscopic treatment of the celiac axis compression syndrome in Brazil.
A 60-year-old woman presented with a three-year history of intermittent postprandial epigastric pain, and weight loss of 6 kg. The abdominal
pain was relieved with fasting. She denied nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Physical examination was normal. Several exams, including
abdominal ultrasonography, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, colonoscopy, small bowel radiographic study, tomography failed to reveal any
abnormality. Finally, an angiotomography showed high-grade stenosis of the anterior wall of the proximal celiac axis caused by extrinsic
compression of the median arcuate ligament (Figure 1A). FIGURE 1- 3D reconstruction of abdominal aortic angiotomography showing severe
stenosis of the proximal segment of the celiac axis caused by extrinsic compression of the median arcuate ligament (Figure 1A, arrow). The
stenosis was successfully treated by laparoscopic section of the median arcuate ligament and celiac ganglionectomy (Figure 1B, arrow). The
patient underwent laparoscopic section of the ligament and celiac ganglionectomy. The patient was placed in reverse Trendelenburg position
with the legs abducted and supported on cushioned spreader bars. The operation was performed through five trocars inserted in the upper
abdomen, similar to that of Nissen-Rosetti procedure. A right subcostal retractor was used to retract the left lobe of the liver laterally
and the stomach was retracted to the patient's left side with a Babcock clamp. After dividing the gastrohepatic omentum and identifying the
right crus of the diaphragm inferiorly to the cardia, the junction of both crus was carefully separated to expose the anterior surface of
the aorta and identify the median arcuate ligament and celiac plexus. The median arcuate ligament that was compressing the proximal celiac
axis was sectioned and all neural tissue overlying the celiac axis was resected. The operation was uneventful and lasted 70 min. The patient
was discharged from the hospital 12 h after the operation completion and had an uneventful recovery. At two-month follow-up, she referred
only two episodes of mild abdominal pain and gained 3 kg. An angiotomography obtained at that time showed no celiac axis stenosis (Figure
1B). Since the first report of the celiac axis compression syndrome several decades ago, controversy still remains regarding the
pathophysiology and clinical implications of this condition. The observation of celiac axis compression in asymptomatic patients leads to
questions about the real existence of the syndrome. Some authors suggested that the clinical manifestations are caused by ischemia secondary
to the reduction of blood flow through the stenotic celiac axis2 , 3 , 7. However, others claimed that pain originates from direct
compression of celiac ganglia5 , 8. In the past, celiac axis compression syndrome was diagnosed by conventional angiography5. Lateral
projection of aortography was the first choice to identify the celiac axis stricture. Nowadays thin-section multidetector CT scanners,
associated with three-dimensional reconstruction, have become the best method to obtain high-resolution images of the aorta and its
branches. Angiotomography, especially during expiration, has a high precision to identify celiac axis compression syndrome8. In addition,
this method also allows visualization not only of the stenosed vessel but also the underlying median arcuate ligament and adherent tissue
using three-dimensional imaging. Angiotomography is also important to exclude the presence of celiac axis calcifications, an important cause
of arterial stricture. The angiotomography of this patient showed a severe stricture of the celiac axis caused by extrinsic compression of
the median arcuate ligament. The stricture was successfully treated by laparoscopic section of the median arcuate ligament. Postoperative
angiotomography demonstrated absence of residual stenosis of the celiac axis after the operation. The available evidence demonstrates that
both laparoscopic and open ligament release associated with celiac ganglionectomy are effective in provide celiac artery revascularization
and sustained symptom relief in the majority of patients with the syndrome2 , 3 , 5. The laparoscopic approach is feasible, safe, and
successful, if performed by experienced laparoscopic surgeons. Although the laparoscopic treatment of celiac axis compression syndrome is a
new technique, several authors have demonstrated its affectivity in providing symptom relief in patients1 , 2 , 8. In addition, this access
has several advantages, such as reduction of postoperative pain and blood loss, shorter hospital stay and faster recovery. More recently,
this syndrome has been effectively treated with robot-assisted surgery3. The advantages of this approach compared to the laparoscopic access
have not yet been completed evaluated. The high cost of robot-assisted surgery is an important drawback in our country. Financial source:
none
