Conflict of Interest: None Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a multicentric vascular neoplasm, with cutaneous and extracutaneous involvement.
Different clinical and epidemiological variants have been identified. The classic form is manifested mainly in elderly men with indolent and
long-term evolution, with lesions localized primarily in the lower extremities. We present two cases of classic Kaposi's sarcoma (CKS) in
two female patients with extensive, exuberant skin involvement and rapid evolution, with good response to radiotherapy. KS is a vascular
endothelium multifocal angioproliferative disorder, of preferred mucocutaneous location, with potential to reach internal organs. It was
described by Moritz Kaposi as idiopathic multiple pigmented sarcoma of the skin, in 1872.1,2 Currently, four clinical-epidemiological forms
are recognized: classic, endemic, iatrogenic and epidemic, each one with its own natural history, preferred location and prognosis.1,3 CKS
mainly affects the skin of lower limbs in aged people. It has a long-term course with typical clinical presentation of macules, papules,
erythematous-violaceous plaques or nodules.4 In the absence of treatment, clinical course of KS varies from innocuous lesions seen in its
classic variant to rapidly progressing and fatal lesions in epidemic KC.1,5 Two cases of CKS in female patients are presented, with
extensive and exuberant cutaneous involvement, of rapid progression and good response to radiotherapy. Female patient, 82 years old, black,
born in and from Rio de Janeiro. She has presented for 9 months painful and pruritic nodular lesions, initially in the left inframammary
region which spread to abdomen, back and buttocks regions. At the dermatological examination, she presented multiple exophytic,
erythematous-violaceous nodules and tumors lesions, some ulcerated, located in the left inframammary region and left breast, left flank,
back and buttocks region (Figure 1). She did not present lesions in the mucosae and internal organs. Multiple erythematous-violaceous,
exophytic nodules of different diameters, located in the inframammary region and left flank. In greater detail, ulceration on the surface of
one the nodules Female patient, white, 90 years old, born in and from Rio de Janeiro. She resported a condition of approximately 18 months
of progression since the onset of a few violaceous nodules in the upper right limb. After one month, there was the onset of multiple lesions
of similar characteristics to previous ones on the abdomen and lower and upper limbs. Edema and sensation of lower limb fatigue were
associated with clinical features. At the dermatological examination, she presented plaques and violaceous nodules of different diameters
located on the upper and lower limbs, trunk, dorsum of feet and plantar region (Figure 2). This last location included reports of pain.
Irregular violaceous plaques involving legs and dorsum of feet. Violaceous plaques of keratotic surface, located in right plantar region In
both cases a cutaneous biopsy was performed, which revealed numerous vessels of varied sizes in the dermis, exhibiting endothelial cells
with nuclear hyperchromatism and some atypias, proliferation of fusiform cells, showing endothelial markers and diapedesis of red blood
cells and histopathological picture compatible with Kaposi's sarcoma (Figure 3). Immunohistochemistry for HHV 8 was positive in both cases.
Serologies for HIV 1 and 2, hepatitis B and C were negative. Thorax and abdomen tomography and upper digestive endoscopy did not reveal
changes. Non-encapsulated dermal nodular proliferation composed by irregular vascular channels with extravasated red blood cells and
proliferation of fusiform cellsrface, located in right plantar region Case 1 patient had the left mammary region and abdomen treated with
radiotherapy, which was also used to treat the lower limbs of case 2 patient. They received three 800 centigray fractions on days 0-7-21.
The first patient responded well with reduction of some lesions and regression of others, but had radiodermititis in the treated site
(Figure 4). Two months after radiotherapy, new nodular lesions appeared in these sites. Extensive erosion due to acute radiodermititis.
Hyperchromic macules and plaques can be observed in the area treated with radiotherapy (Patient 1) In case 2, there was satisfactory
response to radiotherapy, with improvement of lesions and symptomatology (Figure 5). Resolution of KS lesions, with only hyperchromic
macules remaining after three sessions of radiotherapy (Patient 2) Kaposi's sarcoma is a low-grade vascular tumor that may involve the skin,
mucosa and viscera, developing in one of four different clinical-epidemiological contexts.6 The patients described presented CKS in
accordance with clinical history, age bracket and exclusively cutaneous location. Chang et al. discovered the human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) in
93% of KS lesions through Polymerase Chain Reaction in 1994.6,7 However, its role is not clear, whether a causative agent or present only in
those lesions with a function not yet defined,.4 In our patients, HHV8 was detected as described in literature. CKS is a rare disease with
indolent course, involving preferably men between 40 and 70 years of age and of Mediterranean and Eastern Europe origin.6 It involves mainly
the skin, starting with violaceous macules in the distal portion of lower limbs, progressing to plaques, nodules and tumors lesions.4 As the
disease develops, lesions become hardened, with irregular surface, where there may be ulceration and perilesional edema.4,6 Our patients are
an exception to this pattern regarding sex, geographic origin and distribution of lesions. About 10% of patients suffer mucous and visceral
involvement, usually compromising lymph nodes and the gastrointestinal tract.8 The course of CKS is slow, but progression of lesions may be
variable; macules or tumors may not change for months to years or present a fast growth in weeks and disseminate. A rapid progression may
lead to central necrosis and ulceration of lesions, as in case 2.9 Unlike epidemic KS, CKS does not have a universally accepted staging
classification. The staging system proposed by Brambilla et al in 2003 is based on objective criteria which follow closely the clinical
variability of CKS. This system is composed of four stages based on cutaneous lesions: location, presence or absence of complications and
visceral involvement (Chart 1).9 Both cases 1 and 2 were evaluated as stage IVB due to fast progression, characteristics, location and
behavior of lesions, presenting local complications nevertheless, Case 1 with pain and ulceration and Case 2 with pain in the plantar region
upon walking. Staging of Classic Kaposi's Sarcoma Stage V: visceral involvement (oropharynx, gastrointestinal tract, lymph nodes, bone
marrow, lungs). Fast: Increase in total number of nodules/plaques or in total area of plaques, in 3 months. All prevail in stage III and IV;
lymphedema and lymphorrhea are observed in stage II and rarely in stage I Source: Bambrilla et al 20039 In localized forms of CKS, the
available therapeutic alternatives are radiotherapy, surgery, intralesional injections and observation. When there is internal involvement
or local complications, systemic therapy with antiproliferative medication is required.10 Even though there is not enough evidence in
literature for recommending a therapeutic strategy, radiotherapy studies have reported a complete response in approximately 60-93% of the
cases, being effective in localized cutaneous forms.10 Although the disease of the patients here presented was in stage IV, radiotherapy was
the option, justified by the age of the patients. In both cases clinical exuberance and rate of progression emphasized the idea of CKS
variability. Over recent years an increase in reported cases of CKS with different behavior has been noted. All data about these cases must
be gathered for evaluating possible new clinical KS classifications. Financial Support: None How to cite this article: Muñoz Trujillo J,
Alves NRM, Medeiros PM, Azulay-Abulafia L, Alves MFGS, Gripp AC. Clinical exuberance of classic Kaposi's sarcoma and response to
radiotherapy. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(6):883-6. Study carried out at Hospital Universitário Pedro Ernesto - Universidade do Estado do Rio
de Janeiro (HUPE-UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
