Spontaneous vertebral artery dissection accounts for 2% of all ischemic strokes and can occur as a consequence of sports events. We present
an unusual case of spontaneous bilateral vertebral artery dissection in a 30-year-old male patient during a basketball game. He developed
severe dysphagia, right hemiparesis, and balance dysfunction. We also present a review of the pathology, diagnosis, symptomatology,
treatment, prognosis, and occurrence of this entity in sports. Stroke is a rare condition in the young adult population, with fewer than 5%
of all strokes occurring in adults younger than 45 years. Vertebral artery dissection (VAD) accounts for 20% of these cases and is a
possible result of trauma or chiropractic neck maneuvers. Spontaneous occurrence is rare. A 30-year-old man with an unremarkable medical
history was admitted to the emergency room after experiencing numbness on the right side of his face and dizziness while playing basketball.
He recounts that he quickly had a transient cold sensation on the right side of his face extending to his right arm and leg. These symptoms
were followed by a cramp-like sensation on the right arm and weakness of the right leg. Afterward, the remaining symptoms were
weakness/numbness on the right side of the face and difficulty with speech and swallowing. The patient recently had an uneventful upper
respiratory tract infection and had no toxic habits. Family history was unremarkable. In the emergency room, he had right facial asymmetry
with tongue deviation to the right and right hemiparesis. Laboratory values and the initial head computed tomography scan were unremarkable.
Forty-eight hours later, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed multiple recent infarcts at both cerebellar hemispheres,
suggestive of a VAD (Figure 1). Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed bilateral VAD (Figure 2). He was anticoagulated and required
gastrostomy for severe dysphagia. Axial diffusion-weighted image (DWI) demonstrating focal areas of restricted diffusion in both cerebellar
lobes, compatible with acute infarcts. Magnetic resonance angiography image showing almost complete thrombosis of the basilar artery
(arrow). This is an extension from the vertebral artery dissection and thrombosis. The patient was admitted to an inpatient rehabilitation
facility where he scored 81 on the Functional Independence Measure17 at initial evaluation. He was discharged after 16 days, with a score of
107. At 6 months, he was asymptomatic, and continues to work as a security guard. Spontaneous vertebral artery dissection (SVAD) is a
nontraumatic tear or disruption in the wall of the vertebral artery.4 It is a rare cause of ischemic stroke, comprising 2% of all ischemic
strokes.30 However, in patients younger than 45 years, SVAD accounts for 20% of all ischemic strokes, with an annual incidence of 2.6 to 5
in 100,000.3 Recently, the incidence of SVAD has increased, in part because of the higher use of modern diagnostic imaging studies rather
than a true increase.18 There is no clear sex predominance; however, women tend to develop this condition 5 years earlier than men.4
Simultaneous damage of multiple vessels can occur in 30% of cases.3 A recent multicenter study evaluating spontaneous cervicocranial
dissections reported that 7% have bilateral vertebral artery involvement.14 Bilateral VAD has been linked to chiropractic maneuvers of the
cervical spine, yet has also been reported as a result of a volleyball game, basketball match, swimming, dancing, or even episodes of mild
exertion such as lifting a dog or coughing.14,28 Sudden neck movements and stretching can cause arterial tears.4 The extracranial vertebral
artery is vulnerable to dissection in 3 segments throughout its course: at its origin from the subclavian artery, through the spine within
the intervertebral foramina, and at the dura when penetrating the cranium.3 This last segment is the most common location for dissection.4
Extracranial VAD can extend intracranially in 10% of cases.4 Headaches occur in 50% to 75% of patients who experience SVAD.12,18 Pain is
often localized at the occipital area unilaterally, yet can occur bilaterally as well. Posterior neck pain can be the initial symptom.9
Tinnitus, vertigo, nausea, unilateral facial numbness, and balance disturbance can all be accompanying symptoms.18 Neurologic sequelae after
an SVAD depend largely on the site of brain ischemia. Frequent patterns of ischemic brain damage are cerebellar infarction in the posterior
inferior cerebellar artery territory and lateral medullary infarction.4 Lateral medullary syndrome (Wallenberg syndrome)11 can manifest as
contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation on the trunk with similar symptoms on the ipsilateral side of the face.5 Other findings
can include ipsilateral Horner syndrome as well as limb ataxia, vertigo, nystagmus, nausea, vomiting, and dysarthria.38 Dysphagia occurs in
50% to 100% of patients with this syndrome.27 Diagnosis of SVAD should be considered with symptoms consistent with a cerebrovascular event
accompanied by neck and/or occipital pain. Younger patients with no previous risk factors experiencing symptoms after strenuous activities
or chiropractic maneuvers should further increase the consideration of SVAD on the differential diagnosis.4 Digital subtraction angiography
is the gold standard for diagnosis.2,3,12,18 The most common findings are an eccentric, smooth, or irregularly tapered stenosis.12 MRI and
MRA are viable alternatives to digital subtraction angiography for cerebral artery dissection, with a reported sensitivity of 60%.4,12,18
More recently, computed tomography angiography is more sensitive (100%) and specific (98%) in the diagnosis of VAD.12 Color duplex
ultrasound is an adjuvant diagnostic tool with MRI and MRA,15,32 with a sensitivity of 75% to 86% efficacy. It is now a follow-up
examination tool.12,17 The current recommended initial imaging studies are MRI or MRA followed by computed tomography angiography if
diagnosis is still in question.4,12,18 Management of SVAD focuses on antithrombotic therapy.3,4,12,18 Intravenous heparin infusion is
commonly used in the acute phase followed by oral anticoagulation with warfarin for the next 3 months.3 If follow-up imaging is
unremarkable, anticoagulation can be switched to oral antiplatelet therapy for 3 additional months.12 A risk factor for anticoagulation is
increased bleeding, but several studies have proven no additional risk of hemorrhage with heparin or any other anticoagulant.3,4,12
Controversy exists in the selection of the treatment for SVAD. A Cochrane review found no increased risk of ischemic events or intracranial
bleeding with the use of either anticoagulants or antiplatelet agents.22 Persistent neurologic symptoms after discharge were seen in 42% of
patients with this condition.6,12 In a prospective study of 169 patients with SVAD, outcome was favorable (modified Rankin scale of 0 or 1)
in 82% of patients presenting with ischemic symptoms.1 Low baseline score on the National Institute of Health Score Scale (NIHSS) and
younger age were independent predictors of a favorable outcome. Bilateral SVAD was not a factor related to poor clinical outcome.1 Patients
with SVAD have a significantly better modified Rankin scale when compared with those with spontaneous internal carotid artery dissection
(sICAD). Recurrent transient ischemic attacks and ischemic strokes were more common in patients with SVAD when compared with those with
sICAD. Only higher NIHSS score was seen as a risk factor for increased mortality and poor outcome in this study.35 In general, SVAD has a
relatively benign prognosis, with low risk of recurrence of ischemic and/or aneurysmal symptoms.18 To our knowledge, SVAD has only been
reported once during or after a basketball game. A professional basketball player developed symptoms of stroke and died 7 days later.8
Similar sequelae have been seen after playing golf, including unilateral vertebral artery occlusion, dissection, and/or aneurysm
formation.13,24,33,37 The proposed mechanism in all these cases coincides to be a mechanical stretch on the vertebral artery caused by
sudden neck movement while playing golf, especially during a golf swing. VAD occurs in contact sports such as judo,20 mixed martial arts,31
and kickboxing.23 In these cases, symptoms do not necessarily occur during a match yet are linked to sport contact including grappling or
kick to the jaw. Of these, only the judoka suffered immediate neurologic symptoms during contact sports participation. VAD has occurred in
Australian football,25 rugby,25 tennis,25,29 and soccer.26,34 VAD has also been seen in horse racing,10 weight lifting,21 scuba diving,19
inline skating,16 trampoline jumping,36 and gymnastics.7 Although uncommon in the general population, VAD is an important cause of ischemic
stroke in young adults, and spontaneous occurrence is rare. However, VAD can occur during sports events and should be considered as a
differential diagnosis in young patients with spontaneous occurrence of ischemic stroke symptomatology. The authors thank Gory Ballester-
Ortiz, MD, University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine for imaging study analysis. The authors report the following potential conflicts of
interest in the development and publication of this article: Editorial support was provided by grants from the National Center for Research
Resources (U54 RR 026139-01A1) and the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities (8U54 MD 007587-03) from the National
Institutes of Health.
