Conflicts of interest: none Hepatocellular adenoma (HA) is a rare benign neoplasm of the liver. It is strongly associated with oral
contraceptive used by woman in childbearing age, by men receiving anabolic steroids and metabolic diseases. HA incidence has raised over the
years from 5 per 1 milion in 19649 to 4 per 100.0003 , for unknown reasons. HA is important because of its risk of complications such as
life threatening rupture of the tumor and malignant transformation. Surgical treatment in ruptured HA has a high mortality rate but it is
still the standard procedure in those cases5. Emergency liver resection in ruptured HA has a mortality rate from 5-10%, but in elective
resections the mortality rate is under 1%. Different procedures have been suggested to decrease mortality rates and spare liver parenchyma,
such as arterial embolization of ruptured adenomas, although it is not an available procedure in most centers. A 44-year-old woman admitted
in the emergency department of another hospital with complaints of sudden upper quadrant abdominal pain. She had been using oral
contraceptives for 31 years. She presented with acute mild abdominal pain in epigastrium as well as right hypochondrium pain followed by
light dyspnea and dizziness. She was treated with analgesics and ordered an abdominal ultrasound made only three days after the pain. The
ultrasound showed a solid liver mass in the right hepatic lobe measuring 150x100x100 mm3. She was discharged without additional treatment.
After almost five months after the occurrence, she was referred to our surgical department for diagnostic investigation after another
episode of abdominal pain just like the last time, followed by tachycardia and cold sweating. Physical examination revealed mild anemia and
a diffuse abdominal pain, without peritonitis or palpable masses. Lab exams showed 8.61g/dl haemoglobin, white blood count 8.980/mm3 and
214.00 platelets. Liver transaminases level were altered: ALT 306 IU/l, AST 154 IU/l, alkaline phosphatase 142 IU/l and gamma-glutamyl
transferase 229 IU/l. Alfa-fetoprotein and clotting functions were normal. Abdominal CT and MRI showed an enlarged liver, with a contrast
enhanced liver mass involving segments VI and VII. The liver mass measured 118x70mm2 associated with a perilesional voluminous hematoma
measuring 8cm and haemoperitoneum. The radiologic findings suggested a ruputured hepatocellular adenoma (Figure 1) Patient was admitted and
sent to observation room to be prepared for surgical procedure after clinical improvement. She was transfused with two bags of packed red
bloods cells and intensive electrolytes control. Patient was sent to the operation room and had an open laparotomy with Chevron incision.
During operative exploration was found a voluminous liver lesion involving segments VI and VII, large subcapsular hematoma over the right
hepatic lobe and mild hemoperitoneum. The right lobe of the liver had strong adhesions to the right diaphragm. It was decided to make an
anterior approach with inflow control due to the risk of bleeding, by ligation of the right portal vein and the right hepatic artery. The
procedure continued with parenchyma right transection in the cantlie´s line, showed by isquemic demarcation, using bipolar forceps, argon
coagulator device and kelly-crush technique. The liver parenchyma was dissected by the hematoma in some parts, disarranging the liver
architecture. In the last part of the procedure, was mobilized all the right liver lobe followed by outflow control, by ligation of the
right hepatic vein. During the liver mobilization, was able to see a large rupture in the posterior part of the liver and multiple adhesions
between liver parenchyma and diaphragm, but without any sign of active bleeding. The surgery was completed with an anatomic right
hepatectomy (Figures 2 and 3) The surgical specimen weighted 1.170 g, measured 18,0x14,0x12,0 cm, presenting with a 12 cm rupture,
externalizing an irregular and hemorrhagic mass. The tumor measured 1,0x6,0x6,0 cm, friable, along with a large subcapsular hematoma and
clear margins. Microscopy showed a neoplasm filled with hepatocytes cells showing enlarged plasmatic volume, eosinophils, macrovesicular
steatosis, regular nucleus with minimum atypia and rare nucleolus. There was sinusoidal dilatation with spots of necrosis and hemorrhage.
All these data corroborate with the hepatocellular adenoma (Figures 4 and 5). Patient was kept in the intensive care unit for a day. There
were no blood transfusions and the patient was discharged in the 6th operative day without any complications. FIGURE 1- MRI showing adenoma
and bulky subcapsular hematoma FIGURE 2- Liver adenoma and subcapsular hematoma envolving all right hepatic lobe FIGURE 3- Liver remnant
after anatomic right hepatectomy (round ligament pulled caudally) FIGURE 4- Hepatic adenoma of 6 cm FIGURE 5- Right hepatic lobe oppened
with the presence of adenoma and multiple clots infiltrating hepatic parenchyma HA is a rare condition, and is commonly associated with oral
contraceptive use6. The longer women uses oral contraceptives with increased estrogen level, the higher is the chance to develop
hepatocellular adenomas. It´s frequently seen in woman in childbearing age, as well as in men and diseases like hemochromatosis and type 1
glycogen storage disease4. It has clinical importance because of the risk of complications. Spontaneous rupture is the most important
complication and usually happens in adenomas greater than 5 cm, in 20-40% of the cases4. Approximately 10% of patients with HA present with
acute abdominal pain due to rupture and hemoperitoneum, in some cases followed by hipovolemic shock. Patients might also refer nauseas,
vomiting, anorexia and fever. Mortality in ruptured HA has been associated with late diagnosis, coagulopathy and post-operative
complications8. Conservative treatment is used to small adenomas, mainly the ones related to oral contraceptives and anabolic steroids. The
follow up in these cases includes abdominal TC or ultrasound each sux months. Although, when the adenoma is higher than 5cm or show
symptoms, the surgical treatment is recommended because of the increased risk of hemorrhage and malignant transformation6. The surgical
treatment vary on the case, as well as the different approaches of liver resection. The standard treatment for ruptured HA must be local or
segmental resections, to spare as much liver parenchyma as possible. Laparoscopic hepatectomy is a feasible option for benign liver lesions
in elective cases1 , 2, but when it comes to ruptured, the open laparotomy is preferred due to bleeding and close contact to important liver
vessels. Patients with ruptured HA must have elective resections when possible. There are several procedures to avoid emergency treatment
but surgery still remains the main approach. If patient is stable and the tumor is localized in one segment, partial hepatectomy should be
promptly made, but if there is important blood loss, volemic reposition with fluids and transfusions of hemocomponents should be attempted
as well as arterial embolization10, with late resection when patient is stable. The selective arterial embolization have been playing an
important role in the treatment of ruptured and non-ruptured HA, with low complication rates when compared with emergency surgery7. Arterial
embolization is a very expensive procedure and is not available in most centers. Financial source: none
