The authors present a case of recurrent acute liver failure because of occupational exposure to organic solvents. A 35-year-old man with a
3-week history of worsening jaundice and flu-like symptoms was admitted to our hospital. Viral hepatitis serology and autoimmune factors
were negative. The authors considered liver transplantation, but the patient's liver function spontaneously recovered. Liver biopsy revealed
massive infiltration of neutrophils, but the cause of the acute hepatitis was not identified. Four months after discharge, the patient's
liver function worsened again. The authors considered the possibility of antinuclear antibody-negative autoimmune hepatitis and initiated
steroid treatment, which was effective. Four months after discharge, the patient was admitted for repeated liver injury. The authors started
him on steroid pulse therapy, but this time it was not effective. Just before the first admission, he had started his own construction
company where he was highly exposed to organic solvents, and thus the authors considered organic solvent-induced hepatitis. Although urine
test results for organic solvents were negative, a second liver biopsy revealed severe infiltration of neutrophils, compatible with toxic
hepatitis. Again, his liver function spontaneously improved. Based on the pathology and detailed clinical course, including the patient's
high exposure to organic solvents since just before the first admission, and the spontaneous recovery of his liver damage in the absence of
the exposure, he was diagnosed with toxic hepatitis. The authors strongly advised him to avoid organic solvents. Since then, he has been in
good health without recurrence. This is the first report of recurrent acute liver failure because of exposure to organic solvents, which was
eventually diagnosed through a meticulous medical history and successfully recovered by avoiding the causative agents. In acute liver
failure with an undetermined etiology, clinicians should rule out organic solvent-induced hepatitis. Acute hepatitis is a medical condition
characterized by the presence of inflammatory cells in the liver tissue.1 Acute hepatitis results from a wide variety of causes; viral- and
drug-induced hepatitis are the most common causes in adults. In Australia, Denmark, the United Kingdom, and the United States, acetaminophen
use is the most common cause of acute hepatitis, whereas in Asia and some other parts of Europe, viral hepatitis predominates.2 Acute
hepatitis is also a rare complication of exposure to organic solvents. To the best of our knowledge, however, there are no reports of
recurrent acute hepatitis because of chemical exposure, including organic solvents. We report a case of recurrent acute liver failure
because of acute hepatitis in a construction worker with high exposure to organic solvents. A 35-year-old man with a 3-week history of
progressively worsening jaundice, cough, and flu-like symptoms was initially evaluated in a local emergency room. He worked at a
construction site. Liver function test results at a regular checkup 13 months before presentation were normal. He denied using alcohol,
tobacco, or other recreational drugs, and had no family history of liver disease or liver cancer. Initial evaluation at his local emergency
room revealed evidence of acute hepatitis, including an international normalized ratio of prothrombin time (PT-INR) of 1.62, aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) level of 1107 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 1716 IU/L, total bilirubin level of 22.0 mg/dL, and
alkaline phosphatase level of 478 IU/L. He was urgently transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and management of acute
hepatitis, with liver transplantation anticipated. Physical examination at our hospital revealed scleral icterus and trivial lack of
awareness (grade I hepatic encephalopathy),3 but no other signs of chronic liver disease. Viral hepatitis serologies and autoimmune factors
were negative. Computed tomography revealed inflammation around the portal vein, no intra- or extrabiliary ductal dilatation, and no sign of
liver atrophy or splenomegaly. Hepatomegaly was suspected [total liver volume, 2227 mL (% standard liver volume, 149%].4 His condition was
initially stable without symptoms of fatigue, anorexia, or encephalopathy, but 2 weeks after admission, his PT-INR and serum total bilirubin
level gradually increased to 2.53 and 38.0 mg/dL, respectively. Therefore, we placed him on the registration list for liver transplantation,
including that from a living donor. His brother was willing to donate, and was evaluated as a living donor candidate. Soon after that,
however, the patient's liver function recovered remarkably with only supportive therapy. Thus, we decided to avoid living donor liver
transplantation for this patient 4 weeks after admission. The patient underwent a liver biopsy, which revealed massive infiltration of
neutrophils, strongly suggesting acute hepatitis (Figure 1). The histopathologic findings did not reveal the cause of his acute hepatitis.
He was discharged 8 weeks after admission when his PT-INR had recovered to 1.31 and his total bilirubin level had decreased to 9.3 mg/dL,
but the cause of the acute hepatitis was not revealed. The clinical course of the first admission is shown in Figure 2A. Liver biopsy
results at the first admission showed massive infiltration of neutrophils. A, Clinical course of the first admission. B, Clinical course of
the second admission. C, Clinical course of the third admission. ALT = alanine aminotransferase, AST = aspartate aminotransferase,
PSL = prednisolone, PT = prothrombin time, TBIL = total bilirubin. Four months after discharge, the patient's liver function showed
worsening at a regular outpatient examination (AST level, 254 IU/L; ALT level, 420 IU/L; total bilirubin level, 1.8 mg/dL; and PT-INR,
1.19), and he was again admitted to our hospital (Figure 2B). We considered the possibility of atypical, antinuclear antibody/antismooth
muscle antibody-negative autoimmune hepatitis mainly based on his recurrent clinical course in the absence of steroids, and started him on
oral prednisolone (40 mg/d). After starting the prednisolone, his liver function gradually improved (AST level, 43 IU/L; ALT level,
257 IU/L; total bilirubin level, 1.1 mg/dL; and PT-INR, 1.19), and he was discharged 8 weeks after admission. After discharge, we gradually
tapered the dose of prednisolone to 10 mg/d during 20 weeks. Four months after his second discharge, the patient was again admitted to our
hospital for acute liver failure, with an AST level of 617 IU/L, ALT level of 1145 IU/L, total bilirubin level of 7.7 mg/dL, PT-INR of 1.27,
and grade I hepatic encephalopathy (Figure 2C). We initiated steroid pulse therapy (prednisolone 1 g for 3 days). He, however, did not
respond to the treatment this time, and 2 weeks after admission, his liver function deteriorated (AST level, 210 IU/L; ALT level, 894 IU/L;
total bilirubin level, 25.2 mg/dL; and PT-INR, 1.92). Computed tomography revealed apparent liver atrophy compared with the first admission
(total liver volume, 1255 mL; percent standard liver volume, 84%) and increased ascites. We again considered liver transplantation, with
immediate initiation of liver-supporting therapy, including glycyrrhizin, intravenous fluid loading, and ursodeoxycholic acid. His liver
function somewhat recovered (AST level, 210 IU/L; ALT level, 894 IU/L; total bilirubin level, 25.2 mg/dL; and PT-INR, 1.92 at 2 weeks after
the third admission) and no hepatic encephalopathy developed, but the liver atrophy did not improve. At that time, based on his repeated
worsening liver function after discharge, we began to suspect toxic hepatitis because of exposure to organic solvents (eg, toluene, xylene,
and epoxy resin) used in his workplace. The patient had used organic solvents for 7 years in the workplace, and had founded his own company
2 months before his first admission. A meticulous medical history revealed that he had foregone protective gloves to cut costs after
starting his own company and had thus been exposed to increased doses of organic solvents with his bare hands despite strict laws requiring
the appropriate management of such agents in Japan. Urine test results, including hippuric acid, methylhippuric acid, and mandelic acid,
however, were negative. Another liver biopsy was performed, which revealed more severe infiltration of neutrophils compared with his
previous biopsy (Figure 3), a finding compatible with toxic hepatitis. In conclusion, considering the pathology and detailed clinical course
of the patient, he was diagnosed with recurrent toxic hepatitis because of high exposure to organic solvents, and was strongly advised to
avoid organic solvents in collaboration with the Labor, Health, and Welfare Organization. He has been in good health without recurrence for
1 year. Work up lists for etiology in this case was summarized in Table 1. Liver biopsy results at the third admission revealed more severe
infiltration of neutrophils compared with his previous biopsy. Work Up Lists for the Differential Diagnosis This study was approved by
Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine at the University of Tokyo Research Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board. Written
informed consent was obtained and recorded. In the preparation of this article, all efforts were made to protect patient privacy and
anonymity. We report a case of acute toxic hepatitis. Two points in this case should be emphasized. First, the patient's acute hepatitis
resulted from exposure to organic solvents. Second, his acute hepatitis occurred 3 times in total, and all episodes of acute hepatitis
recovered without liver transplantation. To the best of our knowledge, there is no other reported case of recurrent acute hepatitis because
of organic solvent exposure. Several studies reported on the risk of liver toxicity induced by a number of industrial chemicals including
organic solvents, because most chemicals metabolized in the hepatocyte could deteriorate liver function.5,6 It, however, is usually
difficult to diagnose or even to suspect the toxic hepatitis because of occupational exposure because of its rarity.7,8 Diagnosis of
occupational toxic hepatitis generally needs 3 criteria as follows: first, liver dysfunction should occur only after occupational exposure,
with the medical history of occupational exposure at workplace; second, liver enzyme levels have to be greater than at least double the
upper limit of normal range; third, other causes of liver damage such as viral infection and autoimmune hepatitis have to be excluded.8 In
the current case, the patient had founded his own construction company 2 months before his first hospital admission. Since then, in an
effort to reduce costs by omitting protective gloves, he had been exposed to increased doses of organic solvents with his bare hands. On
admission, his liver enzyme levels were acutely elevated to greater than double the upper limit of normal. We first suspected other causes
of acute hepatitis, including antinuclear antibody/antismooth muscle antibody-negative autoimmune hepatitis, which were finally excluded,
and the patient was eventually diagnosed with occupational toxic hepatitis because of organic solvent exposure. In general, testing the
breath, blood, and urine for metabolites is useful for diagnosis.9 In our case, the tests were negative. Typical pathologic findings of
toxic hepatitis because of organic solvent exposure include inflammatory cell infiltrates, lipogenesis, fibrogenesis, and cholestasis.10 In
the current case, although lipogenesis and cholestasis were not observed, massive infiltration of neutrophils was prominent. Because of
negative results of toxicological urinalysis and undistinctive pathologic findings, which organic solvents in toluene, xylene, and epoxy
resin mainly affected was not identified in this particular case. We usually treat acute hepatitis because of organic solvent exposure with
liver-supporting therapy, including glycyrrhizin, intravenous fluids, and ursodeoxycholic acid; plasma exchange and liver transplantation
may be attempted in severe cases.11 In previous cases of acute hepatitis, 3 patients recovered spontaneously without liver transplantation,
but 1 patient died of acute hepatitis before liver transplantation.12–15 In the current case, on the patient's first and third admissions,
he fulfilled the King's college criteria for liver transplantation.16 The patient's laboratory test results indicated gradual recovery,
however, and thus liver transplantation was avoided. In conclusion, we report a case of recurrent acute liver failure caused by organic
solvents. Toxic hepatitis because of organic solvents may recover spontaneously, but may also recur. Thus, it is important to consider the
possibility of chemical exposure as the cause of acute liver failure as soon as possible, and to instruct the patient to avoid exposure.
Abbreviations: ALT = alanine aminotransferase, AST = aspartate aminotransferase, PT-INR = prothrombin time-international normalized ratio.
Authorship: DI and TT conducted the study, collected the data, processed the data, wrote the article, and were responsible for proofreading
the article. KI, YS, KH, HN, and HF proofread and approved the article. NA and NK performed the critical review and proofread the article.
The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
