Conflict of Interest: None Chromoblastomycosis is a chronic subcutaneous fungal infection caused by traumatic implantation of dematiaceous
fungi in the skin. The clinical presentation is usually a verrucous plaque lesion and the diagnosis is confirmed by the visualization of
muriform bodies at direct examination or at the histologic study. This report describes a rare case of tumoral chromoblastomycosis confirmed
by histologic study and whose agent was identified by culture and micromorphology. Man, 77 years old, institutionalized for psychiatric
history. He was taken to dermatological evaluation due to a painless tumor in his left knee that was presenting a progressive growth for a
year, and the patient denied previous trauma. Physical examination revealed a tumor in his left knee, pinkish in color, measuring 3
centimeters in major axis (Figure 1). In the direct mycological examination with 20% KOH, the research for fungal structures was negative. A
biopsy of the lesion was performed and anatomopathological studies showed epidermis with moderate irregular acanthosis and dermis presenting
lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with granulomatous outline, and some giant cells containing muriform bodies (Figure 2). Culture of fragment of
the material in Sabouraud agar showed growth of nonspecific dematiaceous cottony colony and microcultivation showed Cladosporium type
fructification, confirming the hypothesis of chromoblastomycosis by agent of the complex Fonsecacea pedrosoi (Figures 3 and 4). Tumor in
left knee, pinkish in color, measuring 3 cm in major axis Histologic examination (x100): epidermis with moderate irregular acanthosis,
dermis with lymphohistiocytic infiltrate presenting granulomatous outline and some giant cells containing muriform bodies (detail, x 400)
Culture in Sabouraud agar presenting cottony dematiaceous colony Microcultivation with septated dematiaceous hyphae and Cladosporium type
fructification The described clinical presentation is the rarest of the chromoblastomycosis condition, however its location in the lower
limbs and male involvement remains similar to other cases.1-3 The negative mycological direct examination can be interpreted consistently
with the clinical form, since the epidermal lesion presented full, making it difficult to collect material containing some fungal structure;
at the same time, recent publications on the subject highlight that in about 6% of cases the examination may be negative.2 Despite the
peculiarities of the case, the identified agent is from the complex Fonsecacea pedrosoi, the main agent of chromoblastomycosis in our
country.1-3 Financial Support: None How to cite this article: Veasey JV, Machado BAR, Lellis RF, Muramatu LH, Zaitz C. Tumoral
chromoblastomycosis: a rare manifestation with typical complementary exams. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(6):907-8. Study performed at Hospital
da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo - São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
