Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a fatal clinical syndrome characterized by excessive immune activation and inflammation. It is
frequently complicated by acute kidney injury (AKI) that often develops as acute tubular necrosis (ATN). Meanwhile, renal thrombotic
microangiopathy (TMA) is a rare pathologic finding that mostly occurs in hemolytic uremic syndrome or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
There are only few reports on TMA developing in patients with HLH. We present here a rare case of TMA associated HLH. A 60-year-old woman
was admitted for a fever of unknown origin that had persisted for several weeks. She presented with AKI and pancytopenia. Clinical,
laboratory and bone marrow biopsy findings met the criteria of HLH. Kidney biopsy showed TMA and minimal ATN, which suggested that the
primary cause of AKI was TMA in this case. Because of sustained oliguria, we initiated hemodialysis (HD) and also decided to use
chemotherapy composed of dexamethasone, etoposide and cyclosporine for treatment of HLH. Six months after the initiation of chemotherapy,
pancytopenia was completely resolved, indicating the resolution of HLH. At the same time, serum creatinine decreased to a normal range
without the need for HD, suggesting the resolution of TMA. We report a case of renal TMA associated HLH. This case suggests that renal TMA
should be considered as a primary cause of AKI in patients with underlying HLH. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a very rare
clinical syndrome characterized by excessive immune activation and inflammation . Severe HLH is commonly accompanied by various organ
dysfunctions including manifestation of acute kidney injury (AKI). Indeed, the prevalence of AKI in severe HLH has been reported as
30 ~ 50 %, and acute tubular necrosis (ATN) by sepsis or dehydration due to fever has been suspected as the renal pathology in HLH with AKI
[1, 2, 4]. Meanwhile, thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) is rarely detected in the renal pathology state, which develops secondary to
hematologic, autoimmune or infectious disease. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a well
characterized disorder associated with TMA [5, 6]. However, TMA is rarely detected in patients with HLH, despite the frequent development of
renal complications. In the present case, we encountered AKI developed as TMA in a patient diagnosed with HLH. We successfully treated both
the TMA and HLH using cytotoxic therapy including dexamethasone, etoposide and cyclosporine. A 60-year-old woman was admitted because of
persistent fever of unknown origin lasting for several days. She had been in a good state of health prior to admission and had no specific
underlying disease. She had no related family history and medication history. Upon physical examination, the vital signs were as follows:
blood pressure, 120/80 mmHg; pulse rate, 87 beats per minute; and body temperature, 37.8 °C. There were no palpable lymph nodes in the neck,
armpit and groin areas. Both legs had pitting edema and petechial rashes. She also complained of diffuse abdominal pain and oliguria that
had been present for several days. Laboratory findings are summarized in Fig. 1. Pancytopenia (white blood cell count, 2750/μL; hemoglobin,
8 g/dL; platelet count, 63,000 /μL) was detected and serum creatinine level was significantly elevated (4.59 mg/dL). Serum ferritin,
C-reactive protein and lactate dehydrogenase were increased as well. Prothrombin times (PT), activated partial thromboplastin times (aPTT)
and fibrinogen were within normal limits. There was no dyslipidemia, including hypertriglyceridemia. The patient’s soluble interleukin-2
receptor level in serum was 5.2 % (normal range 5–30 %) and natural killer (NK) cells activity was decreased (NK cells activity, 3.7 %;
normal range 6–29 %). Urinary protein/creatinine ratio was 906.4 mg/g. Peripheral blood smear showed normocytic normochromic anemia and
thrombocytopenia. The examination revealed no schistocytes and anisocytosis, which suggested absence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
(MAHA). Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) scan for the evaluation of abdominal pain showed no abnormal findings for the bowel, pancreas
or the biliary tract. Both kidney sizes were normal without chronic change, but there was significant splenomegaly, multifocal ascites and
pleural effusion were detected.Fig. 1Clinical course and laboratory findings of the patient Clinical course and laboratory findings of the
patient At first, we used broad-spectrum antibiotics for neutropenic fever and initiated hemodialysis for acute renal failure. However, we
did not find any etiology for neutropenic fever from urine or blood culture studies. In addition, virus studies, including epstein-barr
virus, parvovirus B19, adenovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B and influenza virus were negative on serologic tests. Anti-
hepatitis C virus antibody was positive but alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase levels were normal, which suggested that
hepatitis C virus was in an inactive state. The patient showed no evidence of tuberculosis in chest X-ray, sputum acid-fast bacillus (AFB)
stain and AFB culture, sputum and urine tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction. Autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus or
rheumatoid arthritis were carefully ruled out by clinical symptoms and signs and by autoantibody tests. Consequently, we decided to perform
a bone marrow (BM) biopsy to determine the reason for fever and pancytopenia. BM biopsy revealed about 10 % cellularity and numerous
histiocytes with engulfed lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear and red blood cells, which were suggestive of hemophagocytosis (Fig. 2). Finally,
the patient was diagnosed with HLH based on fever, progressive pancytopenia, hyperferritinemia, splenomegaly, decreased NK cell activity and
hemophagocytosis in BM and negative results on viral and autoimmune marker studies.Fig. 2Bone marrow biopsy findings. Microscopic findings
of bone marrow aspiration shows hemophagocytosis of red blood cells (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×400) Bone marrow biopsy findings. Microscopic
findings of bone marrow aspiration shows hemophagocytosis of red blood cells (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×400) Meanwhile, a kidney biopsy was
performed to investigate the cause of acute kidney injury because renal function did not improve. PT times (PT INR, 1.13) and aPTT times
(aPTT, 23.3 seconds) were within normal limits. But complete blood count showed thrombocytopenia. We used prophylactic transfusion of
platelets in preparation for a kidney biopsy that could cause bleeding. Under light microscopic examination, glomeruli were slightly
enlarged with hypercellularity involving mesangial and endothelial cells. Capillary lumens were frequently filled with fragmented red blood
cells and platelet aggregates (Fig. 3a). Tubules revealed focal moderate atrophy and loss with interstitial fibrosis (Fig. 3b). In an
immunofluorescence study, staining for immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin M, immunoglobulin A, C4, fibrinogen, kappa and lambda were negative.
In electron microscopy, no electron-dense deposits were found and epithelial foot process showed focal marked effacement (Fig. 3c). The
above histologic findings were compatible with renal TMA.Fig. 3Kidney biopsy findings. a Light microscopic findings show capillary lumens
filled with fragmented red blood cells and platelet aggregates (H&E stain, ×400). b Light microscopic findings show tubules reveal focal
moderate atrophy and loss with interstitial fibrosis (H&E stain, ×200). c Electron microscopy findings show focal effacement of podocyte
foot processes. There are no electron-dense deposits (Original magnification, ×5000) Kidney biopsy findings. a Light microscopic findings
show capillary lumens filled with fragmented red blood cells and platelet aggregates (H&E stain, ×400). b Light microscopic findings show
tubules reveal focal moderate atrophy and loss with interstitial fibrosis (H&E stain, ×200). c Electron microscopy findings show focal
effacement of podocyte foot processes. There are no electron-dense deposits (Original magnification, ×5000) At this time, we planned
6 cycles of cytotoxic therapy comprised of dexamethasone, etoposide at 100 mg/m2 and cyclosporine at 200 mg/day for the treatment of HLH
based on the HLH-2004 protocol . Dexamethasone started at 10 mg/ m2 for 2 weeks, and then reduced to 50 % of initial dose every 2 weeks. As
etoposide is cleared by both renal and hepatic routes, dose adjustment of etoposide based on renal function is recommended for the HLH-2004
protocol. We started at etoposide 100 mg/m2 with dose reductions of 25 % based on the patient’s renal function. The general condition of the
patient gradually improved and the fever subsided 7 days after the initiation of cytotoxic therapy. Concomitantly, urine output also
increased and we ceased hemodialysis at 28 days from the first initiation of hemodialysis. After the 4th cycle of etoposide treatment, she
suffered neutropenic fever due to vancomycin-resistant enterococci infection, which was successfully treated with linezolid and recombinant
human granulocyte colony stimulating factor. After 7 cycles of etoposide treatment, she was discharged with normal kidney function and no
signs of fever or neutropenia. At 6 months after the initial presentation, she showed no signs of HLH recurrence. A bone marrow aspiration
and biopsy was done and the bone marrow biopsy looked normal cellular with normal hematopoiesis. Her serum creatinine level were in the
normal range (0.99 mg/dL). In this report, we describe a patient admitted for persistent fever, edema and abdominal discomfort. She also
complained of oliguria for the past several days. Laboratory findings showed pancytopenia combined with AKI. The cause of the neutropenic
fever was diagnosed as HLH and the cause of the acute renal failure was renal TMA. Cytotoxic therapy targeting HLH improved both neutropenic
fever and AKI, suggesting that TMA may have developed secondary to HLH. With regard to the neutropenic fever, we concluded that a severe
bacterial infection might have been the main cause. Therefore, we also suspected that AKI might have developed, as associated with the
infection and volume depletion due to fever and poor oral intake over the past few days. Contrast dye used for abdominal CT could have
contributed to the aggravation of acute kidney injury. However, we could not find any evidence of infection in the blood, urine culture
study, and radiologic exam. In addition, broad spectrum antibiotics did not improve pancytopenia even though the fever partially subsided.
In addition, renal function did not improve with fluid therapy and sustained hemodialysis. As a result, we decided to perform kidney biopsy
for acute kidney injury of unknown origin and bone marrow biopsy for fever of unknown origin as well. Kidney biopsy showed pathologic
findings compatible with TMA. ATN, which is the main finding in cases of infection associated with AKI or pre-renal AKI, was minimal. This
suggested that the primary cause of AKI in this case was not pre-renal or infection-associated AKI but TMA. Interestingly, bone marrow
biopsy revealed active hemophagocytosis. From the physical exam, radiologic findings and laboratory findings such as fever, progressive
pancytopenia, hyperferritinemia, and splenomegaly, we diagnosed HLH in this patient. Renal TMA frequently manifests as AKI in nearly 90 % of
the cases . This disease entity describes a pathological process of microvascular thrombosis due to endothelial injury. Usually, it results
from HUS, TTP or malignant hypertension, all of which may induce significant endothelial injury in microvasculature [5, 6, 8]. Her
laboratory findings showed that MAHA was negative and the stool study for E.coli O157:H7 as well as the streptococcus pneumonia urinary
antigen test were negative. The patient’s blood pressure was normal and clotting parameters were within normal limits as well. Therefore, we
could rule out HUS, atypical HUS, TTP, disseminated intravascular coagulation and malignant hypertension for the etiology of renal TMA. Our
next consideration was whether the development of TMA was related to underlying HLH. Acute kidney injury is frequent in severe HLH cases and
results from inflammatory or ischemic lesions of the renal tubules [2, 9]. The most frequent presentation of renal damage in HLH is ATN [2,
4, 10]. Some authors have described intrarenal lesions associated with hemophagocytosis . Nephrotic syndrome can also occur but seems to be
less common than ATN and collapsing glomerulopathy, minimal-change disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with marked podocytosis
have been reported [2, 4, 12]. Vascular lesions have been also reported and in a few reports it was a feature of TMA [4, 13]. Clinical
features in renal TMA in HLH patients are summarized in Table 1. AKI was present in 5/5 cases and oliguria in 2/5 cases. Proteinuria and
microscopic hematuria was present in 5/5 and 4/5 cases, respectively. Our case showed generalized edema, proteinuria and hematuria
compatible with nephritic syndrome. Nephritic syndrome associated with renal TMA in HLH is more frequent than nephrotic syndrome. Dialysis
therapy was required for two patients. Four patients recovered and death occurred in one case.Table 1Clinical summary of renal TMA in
HLHPatient number12345 Age6318241860 GenderFemaleFemaleMaleFemaleFemale RaceCaucasianAsianNAAsianAsianEtiology of HLHCMVIdiopathicParvovirus
B19IdiopathicIdiopathicRenal manifestation ProteinuriaPositivePositivePositivePositivePositive 24 hr urine7.3 g/day9.6 g/dayNA>3.5 g/dayNA
Urine PCRNANA510 mg/gNA906 mg/g Microscopic
hematuriaPositivePositiveNegativePositivePositive OliguriaAbsentNAAbsentAbsentYes DialysisHDNoNoNoHDTreatment SteroidsYesYesYesYesYes
IVIGYesYesYesYesYes Cytotoxic agentsNoNoNoNoYesOutcomeDeadCuredCuredCuredCuredReferenceThaunat et al.,Thaunat et al.,Ardalan et al.,Chiang
et al.,Our case CMV cytomegalovirus, HD hemodialysis, HLH Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, hr hour, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, NA
not available, PCR Protein:Creatinine Ratio Clinical summary of renal TMA in HLH CMV cytomegalovirus, HD hemodialysis, HLH Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis, hr hour, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, NA not available, PCR Protein:Creatinine Ratio Pathogenesis of HLH could
explain the development of TMA. The release of large amounts of tumor necrosis factor (TNF), an important inflammatory cytokine, by
activated macrophages was detected during the acute phase of HLH [4, 14]. Renal endothelial cells are activated by TNF and acute endothelial
cell changes may lead to altered vascular reactivity, permeability, adherence of leukocytes, coagulation and microvascular vasomotor
autoregulation [8, 14, 15]. Therefore, we postulate that these inflammatory processes may cause severe vascular endothelial cell injury and
then induce platelet adhesion on its surface for the initial event of platelet aggregates [8, 15]. Nevertheless, TMA in HLH has been rarely
reported maybe because diagnostic biopsy has been rarely done in HLH patients. Hence it is possible that TMA in HLH may occur with greater
frequency than previously known. After the diagnosis of HLH, we decided to perform cytotoxic therapy targeting HLH. The therapy was based on
the HLH-2004 protocol, which was comprised of a cocktail of etoposide, dexamethasone, and cyclosporine [16, 17]. After the treatment,
pancytopenia resistant to broad spectrum antibiotics and conservative therapies improved. In addition, renal function gradually improved,
and serum creatinine level decreased to a normal range after 6 cycles of the cytotoxic therapy. As we mentioned above, we thought the cause
of TMA was HLH; hence it is possible that the therapies applied in this case effectively controlled cytokine burst and blocked vascular
endothelial cell injury, resulting not only in the improvement of symptoms related to HLH, but also in the improvement of AKI associated
with renal TMA. In this case, we report TMA associated HLH which was successfully treated with cytotoxic therapy targeting HLH. This case
suggests that for acute kidney injury in patients with underlying HLH, underlying renal TMA may be considered as the cause of AKI. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Acid-fast bacillus Acute kidney injury Activated partial thromboplastin times
Acute tubular necrosis Bone marrow Computerized tomography Hemodialysis Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia Natural killer Prothrombin times Thrombotic microangiopathy Tumor necrosis factor Thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors
treated the patient and provided data about the history and laboratory results in this report. The manuscript was prepared by MNB and BHC.
All authors participated in discussions about the manuscript and approved the final version. Authors’ information MNB is a fellow in the
Division of Nephrology of the Department of Internal Medicine at the Catholic University of Korea. DHK and SJP are a nephrology residents at
the Catholic University of Korea. BSC, CWP, CWY, YSK and BHC are Clinical professors in the Division of Nephrology of the Department of
Internal Medicine at the Catholic University of Korea. YJC is a Professor in the Department of Hospital Pathology of the College of Medicine
at the Catholic University of Korea. JWL is a Clinical Professor in the Division of Hematology of the Department of Internal Medicine at the
Catholic University of Korea. This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology(NRF-2013R1A1A1009718). We like to give a special thanks to all the
nephrology and hematology staff in our hospital that took care of this patient and enabled a positive outcome for her.
