O.K. and A.K.N. contributed equally to this work. Isolated central congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) is rare and evades diagnosis on TSH-based
congenital hypothyroidism (CH) screening programs in the United Kingdom. Accordingly, genetic ascertainment facilitates diagnosis and
treatment of familial cases. Recognized causes include TSH β subunit (TSHB) and Ig superfamily member 1 (IGSF1) mutations, with only two
previous reports of biallelic, highly disruptive mutations in the TRH receptor (TRHR) gene. A female infant presenting with prolonged
neonatal jaundice was found to have isolated CCH, with TSH of 2.2 mU/L (Reference range, 0.4–3.5) and free T4 of 7.9 pmol/L (0.61 ng/dL)
(Reference range, 10.7–21.8 pmol/L). Because TSHB or IGSF1 mutations are usually associated with profound or X-linked CCH, TRHR was
sequenced, and a homozygous mutation (p.P81R) was identified, substituting arginine for a highly conserved proline residue in transmembrane
helix 2. Functional studies demonstrated normal cell membrane expression and localization of the mutant TRHR; however, its ability to bind
radio-labelled TRH and signal via Gqα was markedly impaired, likely due to structural distortion of transmembrane helix 2. Two previously
reported biallelic, highly disruptive (nonsense; R17*, in-frame deletion and single amino acid substitution; p.[S115-T117del; A118T]) TRHR
mutations have been associated with CCH; however, we describe the first deleterious, missense TRHR defect associated with this phenotype.
Importantly, the location of the mutated amino acid (proline 81) highlights the functional importance of the second transmembrane helix in
mediating hormone binding and receptor activation. Future identification of other naturally occurring TRHR mutations will likely offer
important insights into the molecular basis of ligand binding and activation of TRHR, which are still poorly understood. Isolated central
congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) occurs when there is inadequate TSH-mediated stimulation of the thyroid gland. To date, genetic disorders
affecting TSH biosynthesis have been restricted to mutations in three genes, namely TSHB, TRHR, and IGSF1 (1). TSH is inappropriately normal
or subnormal, precluding diagnosis on the UK TSH-based congenital hypothyroidism (CH) screening program, and delayed initiation of treatment
with T4 may compromise growth and neurological development. Biallelic TRHR mutations have hitherto been described in only two unrelated
kindreds in which three affected individuals exhibited CCH and absent TSH and prolactin responses to exogenous TRH. In the first kindred,
one affected individual was compound heterozygous for a paternally inherited nonsense mutation (R17*) and a complex combination of mutations
on the maternal allele comprising an in-frame deletion (S115, I116, and T117) with one amino acid substitution (p.A118T). In the second
kindred, two affected individuals were homozygous for the R17* mutation (2, 3). TRH receptor (TRHR) is a G protein-coupled plasma membrane
receptor (GPCR) belonging to the largest subclass (family A, rhodopsin-like 7 transmembrane domain receptors). Hypothalamic TRH signaling
via TRHR primarily involves mobilization of intracellular calcium and activation of protein kinase C through a Gq/11-dependent pathway (4,
5). TRH both mediates transcriptional activation of target genes, eg, TSH α-subunit (CGA) and β-subunit (TSHB), and exerts post-
translational effects, eg, conjugation, glycosylation, and secretion of the α-subunit/TSHβ heterodimer (TSH) in the anterior pituitary (6).
Here, we describe a female Pakistani infant diagnosed with CCH in the neonatal period. Parental consanguinity favored recessive inheritance;
thus, TRHR was the most likely causative gene given her moderate biochemical defect. Sequence analysis revealed a homozygous TRHR missense
mutation (p.P81R), and molecular studies confirmed impaired ligand binding and transcriptional activation by the mutant receptor. All
investigations were ethically approved and/or clinically indicated, being undertaken with patient or parental consent. Hormone measurements
were made using local automated assays (Supplemental Data). Sanger sequencing of TRHR, TSHB, and IGSF1 coding exons was performed after PCR
amplification of genomic DNA using specific primers (Supplemental Data). The TRHR structural model was generated by homology modeling using
the PHYRE server and MacPymol to generate figures. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to generate P81R TRHR cDNA (Supplemental Data). Wild-
type (WT) and P81R TRHR cDNAs were cloned into the eukaryotic expression vectors pcDNA3 and pEGFP-N3 (Clontech) upstream of FLAG and green
fluorescent protein (GFP) epitope tags, respectively. HEK293 cells were transiently transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the
manufacturer's instructions and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% PSF on glass coverslips for cell localization assays,
96-well plates for functional assays, or 10-cm dishes for immunoprecipitation assays. HEK293 cells transfected with TRHR-GFP constructs (50
ng/coverslip) were incubated with CellMask Deep Red Plasma Membrane Stain and DAPI nuclear stain (Life Technologies) and analyzed using a
Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal microscope, and images were processed with ZEN software (Zeiss). HEK293 cells cotransfected with TRHR-FLAG
constructs (10 ng/well), TSHα-LUC reporter (150 ng/well) (7), and internal control plasmid BOS-β-galactosidase (30 ng/well) were incubated
for 24 hours with growth medium containing TRH (0–100 nm) before measurement of luciferase and β-galactosidase activity. TRHR signaling
through Gqα protein was monitored using a secondary messenger inositol phosphate accumulation assay adapted from a published protocol
(Supplemental Data). Receptor binding of TRH was performed according to an adaptation of a published protocol (Supplemental Data). HEK293
cells transfected with TRHR-FLAG constructs (10 μg/dish) were lysed (RIPA buffer) after 24 hours, immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG affinity
gel (F3165; Sigma), and analyzed by Western blotting (AntiFlag, F3165, Sigma; β-actin, Ab8227, Abcam). Our patient, the daughter of
Pakistani parents who were first cousins, was born at 38 weeks of gestation by caesarean section due to placenta previa. She presented at
age 19 days with neonatal jaundice due to isolated hyperbilirubinemia with bilirubin 174 μmol/L (10.2 ng/dL), (Reference range (RR), 0–120
μmol/L), for which she had no identifiable risk factors. The jaundice resolved spontaneously; however, despite a normal neonatal screening
heel prick TSH (1 mU/L), she underwent further endocrine evaluation that revealed CCH with TSH of 2.2 mU/L (RR, 0.4–3.5) and free T4 of 7.9
pmol/L (0.61 ng/dL) (RR, 10.7–21.8 pmol/L). Basal pituitary function was otherwise normal: prolactin, 239 mU/L (11.3 ng/mL) (RR, 27–540
mU/L); cortisol, 220 nmol/L (8 μg/dL) (midday); and IGF-1, 6.7 nmol/L (51.3 ng/mL) (RR, 2.6–17 nmol/L). Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging
was unremarkable. Her birth weight was 2.81 kg (25th centile), and she grew and developed normally before the initiation of levothyroxine
treatment at 2 months of age. Currently aged 4.2 years, her growth and neurological development have remained normal (height SDS, +0.27;
weight SDS, +2.24; age, 3.8 years). Her mother and brother were euthyroid (Figure 1A); her father declined investigation. A, Central
hypothyroidism segregates with homozygosity for the TRHR P81R mutation. Family pedigree showing the following genotypes: white, WT allele;
black, mutant allele; black/white, heterozygous, with bars denoting individuals who have been genotyped. Biochemistry is tabulated at bottom
of panel. NA, not available. B, WT and P81R TRHR both display similar plasma membrane localization. HEK293 cells were transfected with GFP,
or GFP-tagged WT, or P81R TRHR. Nuclei (blue), plasma membrane (red), and GFP fusion (green) were visualized by immunofluorescence, and a
composite merged image was generated. C, P81R mutant TRHR is unable to mediate ligand-dependent transactivation. HEK293 cells were
transfected with empty vector (pcDNA), or FLAG-tagged WT, or P81R TRHR, together with the TRH-responsive TSHα-TKLUC reporter in an assay of
TRH-dependent transactivation. BOS-β-galactosidase was used as an internal control. Data shown are normalized to maximal reporter gene
activation with empty vector and represent the mean and SEM of at least 10 independent experiments. D, TRHR signaling via the Gqα-regulated
cascade is impaired by the P81R mutation. HEK293 cells were transfected with WT, P81R, and empty (pcDNA) expression vectors and stimulated
with increasing concentrations of TRH. TRHR signaling via the Gqα-regulated cascade was assessed by measuring accumulation of radio-labeled
inositol monophosphate (IP-1) in the presence of Li2+, inhibiting its further dephosphorylation. IP-1 was detected with scintillation
proximity assay beads with selective affinity for this secondary messenger. Data shown are normalized to maximal WT response to agonist
stimulation and represent the mean and SEM of three independent experiments. E, Binding of TRH to P81R TRHR is markedly impaired. HEK293
cells were transfected with either empty vector (pcDNA), WT, or P81R TRHR and were incubated with increasing amounts of TRH for 2 hours. A
Western blot (inset) from immunoprecipitated samples confirmed expression of both WT and P81R TRHR. CPM, counts per minute. F, Molecular
modeling of TRHR showing the position of P81 in TM2. The left panel shows TRHR positioned in the cell membrane. Amino acids from the surface
ligand pocket are shown in cyan, and those of the main ligand binding cavity are shown in orange. Superimposed in pink is the position of
TM2 containing the P81R mutation and in purple the position of TM1 when the mutation is present. The right panel shows a superimposition of
WT (green) and mutant (pink) TM2 models, with the position of P81R identified, which is predicted to bring about a change in helix
structure. TRHR sequencing revealed a homozygous single nucleotide substitution (c.242C>G) corresponding to a proline to arginine change at
codon 81 (p.P81R), which is absent from normal genome datasets (dbSNP; Exome Aggregation Consortium , Cambridge, MA;
http://exac.broadinstitute.org, October 2015). Her mother and brother were heterozygous and WT, respectively (Figure 1A). Although the P81R
mutation occurs in transmembrane helix 2 (TM2) of TRHR, the P81R and WT TRHR-GFP fusion proteins demonstrated similar plasma membrane
expression (Figure 1B). Transient transfection assays were used to interrogate: 1) transactivation of the TSH α-subunit promoter region,
using a luciferase reporter construct; and 2) TRHR-coupled Gqα signaling by measuring accumulation of intracellular inositol phosphate. In
both assays, P81R was nonfunctional compared with WT TRHR (Figure 1, C and D). A ligand binding assay using the high-affinity ligand TRH
confirmed absent ligand binding by P81R TRHR, with normal binding to the WT TRHR (Figure 1E). In two previously reported children with
biallelic TRHR mutations, associated clinical manifestations were mild (growth retardation, delayed bone age) despite biochemical evidence
of CCH, with T4 levels ranging from 40 to 88% of the lower limit of normal. Some bioactive TSH was produced, as evidenced by rising T4
levels after T4 withdrawal, and there was ostensibly no attributable neurological deficit despite treatment initiation at ages 9 and 11
years, suggesting sufficient childhood thyroid hormone production to prevent severe developmental delay. However, T4 replacement did improve
growth and quality of life in these individuals (2, 3). Although TRHR is expressed on lactotrophs and mediates prolactin secretion in
response to exogenous TRH, a female homozygote for p.R17* TRHR underwent two pregnancies and lactated normally, suggesting that TRHR is not
obligatory for these functions in humans (3). Our patient exhibits a TRHR missense mutation, which we presume to be homozygous because
parental consanguinity would favor an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance and her mother is heterozygous. Unfortunately, her father
declined genetic or biochemical evaluation, and thus we cannot exclude maternal isodisomy or a paternal deletion involving TRHR. Biochemical
and radiological features in our patient (T4 levels 74% of the lower limit of normal, detectable TSH, normal basal prolactin, and normal
pituitary magnetic resonance imaging) are concordant with previous cases and contrast with the profound hypothyroidism typically seen in
children with TSHB mutations. Our patient's age (30 months) precluded cessation of T4 for TRH testing (2, 3). The molecular mechanisms of
TRH binding and TRHR activation remain poorly understood (8, 9). P81 has no known direct role in TRH binding but underlies a proline kink in
TM2, which is conserved in 80% of GPCRs (Supplemental Figure 1). This is thought to influence ligand binding and signal transduction via an
underlying hydrogen bond network, although its specific role in individual GPCRs may depend on the surrounding amino acids; mutation to
alanine in CCR5 and AT1 receptors also results in impaired receptor activation (9). Our data support a critical functional role of P81 for
ligand binding and thus receptor activation. We hypothesize that the P81R mutation alters the morphology of the proline kink in TM2, thus
potentially affecting the positioning of TM1 and the extracellular loops and thereby altering the surface binding pocket (Figure 1F).
Additional mutagenesis experiments are required to exclude an independent role of P81 in TRHR signal transduction. This is the first report
of a naturally occurring homozygous TRHR missense mutation, with similar clinical features to previous TRHR mutation cases. Despite the
relatively mild reported sequelae of CCH due to TRHR mutations, T4 replacement ameliorates growth retardation and improves quality of life;
additionally, detailed neuropsychological assessment (not undertaken in published cases) could plausibly delineate subtle neurological
benefits (2, 3). Because these patients evade diagnosis in countries such as the United Kingdom that rely on a TSH-based CH screening
program, genetic ascertainment is crucial in enabling early detection and treatment. Alternatively, inclusion of T4 measurement in the
neonatal CH screening protocol (eg, in The Netherlands) enables early diagnosis of CCH, including cases with life-threatening additional
pituitary hormone deficiencies. Identification of novel TRHR point mutations in isolated CCH cases may provide further molecular insights
into TRHR function. Abbreviations: CCHcentral CHCHcongenital hypothyroidismGFPgreen fluorescent proteinGPCRG protein-coupled receptorIGSF1Ig
superfamily member 1RRReference rangeTRHRTRH receptorTM2transmembrane helix 2TSHBTSH βWTwild-type. central CH congenital hypothyroidism
green fluorescent protein G protein-coupled receptor Ig superfamily member 1 Reference range TRH receptor transmembrane helix 2 TSH β wild-
type. This work was supported by Wellcome Trust Grants 100585/Z/12/Z (to N.S.), 098497/Z/12/Z (to I.S.F.), and 095564/Z/11/Z (to V.K.C.);
the National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Center (to O.K., I.S.F., V.K.C., M.G., N.S.); the Evelyn Trust (to
O.K.); the European Research Council (to I.S.F.); and the Bernard Wolfe Health Neuroscience Endowment (to I.S.F.). Disclosure Summary: The
authors have nothing to disclose.
