Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a disease that often affects children, but can also occur in adults and smokers. Oral manifestations
are unusual and are characterized by bone pain, tooth mobility, necrotic ulcers and local edema. The aim of this paper is to describe a
clinical case of LCH in an oral cavity that mimicked oral squamous cell carcinoma. A male, 63 years old, complaining about a “wound in the
mouth” for 6 months, without any pain or spontaneous bleeding. His medical history was free of disease. The patient was a smoker for
33 years. Intraoral examination revealed a destructive ulcerative lesion around the upper left first and second molars that resembled an
oral squamous cell carcinoma. Biopsy of the ulcerative lesion was performed and the microscopic features showed an inflammatory infiltrate
rich in plasma cells. Based on this microscopical finding, the final diagnosis was periodontal disease associated with a proliferative non-
neoplastic lesion. The patient was referred to a specialized dental surgeon and underwent periodontal therapy including surgical procedures.
After that, according to follow-up with the patient, there were no signs of disease remission. The lesion increased in size, although the
patient did not complain of any symptoms. A second biopsy was performed and the microscopic features again showed a rich inflammatory
infiltrate with mononuclear cells and histiocytic cells, characterized by pale histiocytes with lobed nuclei, resembling a bean. A varying
number of eosinophils also were observed, without any evidence of atypical cells present in this infiltrate. An immunohistochemical staining
panel was done to determine the nature of this inflammatory infiltrate by using antibodies S-100, CD1a, CD-68 and CD45RO that were positive.
These immunohistochemical findings were fundamental for the final diagnosis of LCH. The treatment included surgical extraction of all
superior teeth, radiation and systemic corticoid therapies. After 8 years of treatment, the patient is free of disease. Although LCH is an
unusual lesion in an oral cavity, it can be present. Biopsy and a histological exam are essential to establish the diagnosis.
Immunohistochemicals were fundamental to exclude malignant lesion and to confirm the diagnosis of LCH. Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)
is a disease caused by the accumulation and proliferation of abnormal bone marrow-derived Langerhans cells. These dendritic cells,
lymphocytes, eosinophils and non-dendritic histiocytes form the typical infiltrates of LCH. These cells may be found at different degrees in
several organs . The Histiocyte Society proposed the reclassification of histiocytoses after the advent of ultrastructural studies and
immunohistochemical staining [2, 3]. Moreover, proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines play a role in LCH, which suggests that it is an
immune disorder. However, the detection of the oncogenic BRAF mutation in more than half of LCH patients suggests that it is a neoplastic
disorder . The occurrence of LCH in an oral cavity is rare; however, there are reports of LCH in oral mucosa and the most common site in the
oral cavity of adults is the jaw [3, 4]. The purpose of this paper is to describe a rare case of LCH located in upper maxilla and upper oral
mucosa. The clinical findings and the histological criteria were enabled to establish the final diagnosis of LCH, excluding periodontitis
and carcinomatous lesion, and are presented and discussed. A 63-year-old male complaining about a “wound in the mouth” was referred to Goiás
Oral Medicine Center, Federal University of Goiás Dental School, Goiânia, Brasil, for diagnosis and treatment. The patient reported that the
lesion had approximately 6 months of evolution and that he was asymptomatic and had not experienced any bleeding. His medical and dental
history did not show any significance or any relation to his lesion. The patient had been a smoker for 33 years. Intraoral examination
revealed a destructive ulcerative lesion around the upper left first and second molars, which showed mobility and poor dental conditions,
including dental caries, gingival recession and bone loss (Fig. 1a). A panoramic radiograph revealed a radiolucent area in the periapical
region of the upper left first molar, suggesting an osteolytic lesion (Fig. 1b). According to the clinical and radiographic features, the
main diagnostic hypotheses were periodontal disease associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma. The patient reported that there was no
cancer in his family history. The results of laboratory analyses, including blood and urine studies, were within the normal range. We also
performed a biopsy to provide histopathological analysis. At this time, the patient took prescribed antibiotics for 7 days and underwent
surgery of the upper left primary molar. Microscopic findings showed an inflammatory infiltrate rich in plasma cells that is commonly
present in periodontal disease, without the presence of any atypical cell in this specimen of oral mucosa. Based on these findings,
periodontal disease was considered as the diagnosis and the patient underwent periodontal therapy twice without remission of the initial
injury. During follow-up, it was observed that the lesion increased considerably.Fig. 1Intraoral (a) and panoramic radiograph (b) showed a
lesion around the upper left first and second molars Intraoral (a) and panoramic radiograph (b) showed a lesion around the upper left first
and second molars Since the lesion was increasing in size, a second biopsy was performed on a deeper level of histological plan. It showed a
proliferation of cells resembling histiocytes with an occasional pale nucleus edentulous with a lobular, grain bean-like appearance
(Fig. 2). Microscopic findings and the presence of histiocytic cells led to the performance of an immunohistochemical staining panel using
monoclonal antibodies for S-100 (Fig. 3a), CD1a (Fig. 3b), pan-cytokeratin, CD-68, melanoma marker (HMB45) and melanoma A protein. There was
positivity for S-100, CD1a, CD-68 and CD45RO (Table 1). Immunohistochemical analysis led to the diagnosis of LCH. We performed a complete
investigation, including bone scintigraphy bone, abdomen CT scan; hematological exams, including blood glucose (due to diabetes risk) and a
pathological analysis of bone marrow, which was hypercellular without evidence of atypical cells. The liver, spleen and lymph nodes were
free of disease. There was no bone involvement besides upper maxilla. The treatment included surgical extraction of all superior teeth, due
their periodontal involvement, radiation therapy, corticoid therapies and prosthesis. An established radiation protocol of 26 Gy
fractionated over 13 sessions was instituted and well tolerated. We have been following up with the patient for 8 years (2006–2014) without
signs of disease recurrence (Fig. 4a and b). At the last follow-up, the patient was considered “disease-free”. Hematological exams, as well
as abdomen and chest exams, showed normal conditions.Fig. 2Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed basophilic nuclei and eosinophilic cell
plasmaFig. 3Immunohistochemical staining showed cells positive for S-100 protein (a) and CD1a protein (b)Table 1Immunohistochemical panel of
monoclonal antibodies used in this studyAntigenAntibodyDilutionSpecificityResultsS-100Lyophilized polyclonal, biocare1:400Langerhans cells,
cells of the peripheral nervous system, melanocytes and tumor cells derived from these cell lines+CD1aMonoclonal, novocastra1:600Langerhans
cells, cell surfaces of cortical thymocytes and interdigitating dendritic cells+CD-68Monoclonal mouse antibody specificity for human CD-68
antigen, dako1:10,000Langerhans cells, mononuclear phagocyte system+CD45ROMonoclonal mouse antibody specificity for human CD45RO antigen,
dako1:800T lymphocytes, CD4 lymphocytes and thymocytes+Pan-cytokeratinMonoclonal mouse antibody anti-human cytokeratin, novocastra1:400Human
cytokeratin human, identification of cells of simple and stratified epithelial origin−Melanoma marker (HMB45)Lyophilized monoclonal
novocastra1:200Retinal epithelium, melanocytes and non-melanocytic cells−Melanina ALyophilized monoclonal; novocastra1:200Cytotoxic T
lymphocytes− + Positivity − NegativeFig. 4Intraoral (a) view and panoramic radiograph (b) showed no bone disease (8 years later during
follow-up) Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed basophilic nuclei and eosinophilic cell plasma Immunohistochemical staining showed cells
positive for S-100 protein (a) and CD1a protein (b) Immunohistochemical panel of monoclonal antibodies used in this study + Positivity −
Negative Intraoral (a) view and panoramic radiograph (b) showed no bone disease (8 years later during follow-up) Histiocytosis comprises a
diverse group of proliferative disorders characterized by the infiltration and accumulation of histiocytes and other immune effector cells
within various tissues . Historically, the nomenclature regarding this entity has been confused. The disease had been subcategorized based
upon different clinical manifestations, such as Histiocytosis X, Letterer-Siwe disease, Hand-Schuller-Christian syndrome and Eosinophilic
Granuloma of bone. The Histiocyte Society proposed the reclassification of histiocytosis based upon the predominant cell type within the
infiltrate. The classification system includes four divisions: dendritic disorders (including LCH), macrophage-related disorders, malignant
histiocytic disorders and dendritic cell or macrophage-related histiocytic sarcoma [2, 3]. The LCH etiology has been discussed for many
years and its reactive nature is suggested. Clonal proliferation has been reported with the presence of BRAF V600E oncogenic mutation in
more than half of patients with LCH, which suggests a neoplasm [4, 6]. LCH is a rare disease with a wide variety of clinical presentations.
Its course may damage different tissues, including the periodontal bone and gingiva. In addition, one of the types of LCH can lead to death
[4, 5]. In our specific case, the patient had a lesion that mimicked periodontal disease associated with an oral squamous cell carcinoma or
carcinomatous lesion. LCH in adults has been reported at an incidence of 1:1,000,000 and a mean age of presentation of 34 years and is
usually a multisystem disease. Childhood LCH has a reported incidence of 1:200,000, peaking between ages 1–4 years [3, 6]. In children, an
association between high concentrations of salivary IL-1 β and PGE(2) and advanced stages of LCH have been observed, suggesting that the
abnormal amount of these factors in the saliva may be a risk marker for disease progression . Our case was distinct to most reported cases
in the literature, since the patient was a 63-year-old man who did not show any bone or organ involvement other than the maxilla. Despite
the strong possibility of pulmonary manifestation, due to the duration time of time that he had been a smoker, there was no evidence of
pulmonary involvement. The chest x-ray confirmed this fact. However, experimental studies have shown that cigarette exposure is associated
with pulmonary inflammation . Interestingly, most LCH bone lesions that have been described in the literature were present in the skull,
spine, or mandible . In our case, the lesion was located only in the maxilla. Bone scintigraphy was determinant to show the unique bony
involvement. Diabetes insipidus (DI) is the most common endocrine abnormality, reported in 5–50 % of patients with LCH. DI is a result of
the destruction of more than 80 % of the paraventricular-supraoptic neurons [10, 11]. Despite the high frequency of DI reported in prior
literature, in our case, all hematological and biochemical parameters, liver function tests, urine osmolarity and endocrine evaluations were
within the normal limits. It is essential to note that the clinical and radiographic presentation of LCH could mimic an acute or chronic
periodontal or periapical lesion, radicular cysts, osteomyelitis and malignancies. The lesions often appear as sharply punched-out
radiolucent images, and the teeth appear to be “floating” when extensive alveolar involvement occurs . Professionals should consider LCH as
a possible diagnosis in different situations: periodontal lesions recurrent after conventional treatment, the presence of systemic symptoms
previously mentioned and associated with periodontal lesions and after rapid, severe and localized periodontal bone loss. In this specific
case, the lesion resembled a periodontal lesion associated with a carcinomatous lesion; however, the histological findings did not show any
evidence of neoplastic cells. The presence of pale histiocytes was fundamental to decide to do an immunohistochemical panel to investigate
the nature of these cells. Monoclonal antibodies for S-100 (Fig. 3a), CD1a pan-cytokeratin, CD-68, melanoma marker (HMB45) and melanoma A
protein were included in this panel. Positive staining for S-100, CD1a, and CD-68 established the final diagnosis in our case. The CD1a
marker is essential for distinguishing Langerhans cells from other dentritic cells and histiocytes . In our case, this additional
examination by immunohistochemical techniques was critical for the establishment of the correct diagnosis of LCH and treatment planning for
the patient. The first step for the treatment of LCH should be to determine the number of organ systems involved. Then patients who have
single-system disease should be subcategorized based on the number of sites involved. The presence or absence of organ dysfunction is a
subcategory for patients who have multi-organ disease . Curettage is generally sufficient for patients with localized bone lesions. However,
it also possible to employ intralesional steroids or low-dose radiation. Treatment of multiorgan disease is controversial. Some state that
high-dose prednisone should be the first-line therapy, whereas others suggest the use of single-agent chemotherapy [3, 14–17]. A combination
of vinblastine and prednisone is an effective therapy used as the standard regimen for multisystem LCH in children and should be further
explored in adult patients . Other treatments, such as targeted therapy with BRAF inhibitors, has been used in select patients with
encouraging results . Another model indicates both BRAF mutation and IL-1 loop regulation as potential LCH therapeutic targets . In our
case, the patient underwent surgical extraction of all superior teeth, due to their periodontal involvement; curettage of the bone lesion;
local radiation and corticoid therapies and prosthesis. The prognosis of LCH depends on the number of organs involved, as well as the
presence of organ dysfunction and, in minors, on the age of the patient at the disease onset [4, 14–18]. In this specific case reported, the
prognosis was favorable, due to single bone involvement, early diagnosis and proper treatment. Moreover, the patient had no signs of
recurrence after 8 years of follow-up. In summary, we reported an unusual case of LCH in an elderly male patient who had a unique oral
manifestation. LCH is a disease with a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations and a definitive diagnosis relies on biopsy and
immunohistochemical examinations. It is extremely important that the doctor or dentist perform the correct diagnosis to plan the most
appropriate treatment, since LCH clinically resembles other diseases that are treated differently. Moreover, the wrong diagnosis and
treatment may compromise the patient’s life. The patient consented to the publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
langerhans cell histiocytosis CF examined the patient, obtained the data and figures, accompanied the diagnostic process and was the major
contributor in writing the manuscript. MM performed the biopsies, periodontal treatment, dental extractions and helped to write the
manuscript. RC performed the immunohistochemical staining panel. AC performed the histopathologic study and added comments for discussion.
EM investigated the possible involvement of the disease in other organs by complementary imaging tests, led all the diagnostic processes and
reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors acknowledge the Araújo Jorge Hospital, Goiânia,
Goiás, where the immunohistochemical staining panel was prepared. CFG is a PHD student of Health Sciences Graduate Program, University of
Brasília, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil. MOM is a PHD graduate student at the Dental School, Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia,
Brazil. RCGA is a consultant pathologist doctor of Araújo Jorge Hospital, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil. ACB is a consultant professor in the
Department of Stomatology (Oral Pathology and Radiology) at the Dental School, Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil. EFM is a senior
professor in the Department of Stomatology (Oral Pathology and Radiology) at the Dental School, Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil
and responsible for head and neck oncology center of Araújo Jorge Hospital, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests.
