The Ebola virus disease, as a first epidemic in West Africa, stands as the most deadly one throughout history. Guinea, the source of the
epidemic, Sierra Leone and Liberia remain the most strongly affected. That epidemic thoroughly destabilized the health system of those
countries. Following Nigeria, Senegal received its first imported case from the neighboring Republic of Guinea. In that sub regional
psychotic context, such a situation has been handled and managed starting from the potential of a health system that is already suitably
structured. The organization of the response, the management of the communication system and the rigorous monitoring of contacts have been
decisive in the control of the epidemic. Our countries have to be prepared in order to face health threats, and that is the reason why the
need to empower our health systems is important. Since the official declaration of the existence of the Ebola virus disease outbreak in
Guinea by the World Health Organization (WHO) on March 23, 2014 , all West African countries were under jeopardy. Liberia, on March 13 and
Sierra Leone, on May 28 will be the two other seriously affected countries. Nigeria, on July 20 will be the fourth affected country
subsequent to the importation of a case from Liberia . On August 26, the authorities of the Democratic Republic of Congo declared their
first cases . Senegal, the sixth affected country, will confirm its first case imported from Guinea on August 29. The United States of
America, the seventh affected country will diagnose their first imported case from Liberia on September 30 . Senegal, Nigeria and the United
States share the specificity of having cases that are said to be imported, by road way for the first case and by air flight for the two
others. The diagnosis of the first Ebola virus case imported in Senegal was a test for our healthcare system. On August 29, 2014, The
Minister of Health officially announced the First Ebola virus disease case in Senegal. It was related to a 21-year-old national from Guinea,
who had been in contact in Guinea with members of his family who had contracted the disease and eventually passed away. He entered Senegal
by road, before the second restricted access of frontiers on August 22. He had used an overnight public transport vehicle from August 13
through 14 in order to reach Dakar. At that time, and all along his trip, he had presented no single fever-type symptom. Three days after
his arrival, he started showing signs of fever, vomiting and diarrhea with no bleeding, and then decided to consult in a suburban health
centre where he had been taken in charge for three days. Due to persisting symptoms, he approached the infectious diseases service at Fann
University Hospital, where he was subsequently hospitalized. During all those consultations, he had never informed practitioners as regards
the contacts he likely had with other people affected by the Ebola virus disease. Senegal had been alerted by some WHO authorities based in
Guinea that a contact-case had probably travelled to Senegal; the investigation undertaken revealed that it was related to the patient
hospitalized at the Fann Hospital Infectious Disease Service. He was then immediately placed in an isolation room and some fluid samples
were gathered. On August 28, the test operated on the blood sample by the Dakar Pasteur Institute returned as Zaire-Ebola-virus-positive.
The investigations undertaken helped identify 74 individuals who had been in contact with the patient (34 in his family and 40 health
workers). The reopening of the interrogation of both the patient and his caretaker, with a focus on their itinerary, facilitated the
identification of all the family members and the health centre staff. At the level of the hospital, the patient's record was reviewed, along
with the list of all personnel on duty. This helped identify all individuals who had been in contact with the patient or his biological
samples. All the contacts were put in quarantine inside their homes and were monitored twice a day by the medical district teams in their
respective areas, conducting temperature checks and patient questioning. Senegal, since the declaration of the outbreak in Guinea, had
implemented a three-step response plan: pre-epidemic, epidemic and post-epidemic. Since the month of March, the National Committee for
Epidemics Administration has held weekly meetings in order to implement the pre-epidemic phase activities. This is a permanent committee
meeting anytime a threatening epidemic situation occurs in Senegal. During the pre-epidemic phase, all activities essentially deal with the
communication of health workers to populations, the training of healthcare personnel, the capacity-building of healthcare workers and the
reinforcement of frontiers surveillance. As soon as the case was signified, the epidemic phase was launched and ten commissions were
implemented adding to the National Committee for Epidemics Management. A coordination committee supervised by the Healthcare Executive
Director including commission presidents and their reporters, along with some partners would meet every morning. The multi-sectorial
approach was used as a guide for the commissions’ implementation. Epidemiological Investigation and Surveillance Commission: in charge of
the monitoring of the 74 contact cases and alert management; social Intervention and Behavior Commission: in charge of the patient's and
contacts’ psychosocial care; media and Communication Commission: in charge of all aspects dealing with communication; patients’ Clinic Care
and Infection Control Commission: in charge of the monitoring of the patient's care and also the supervision of healthcare structures;
logistics Commission: in charge of the management of all necessary products, facilities and material; security Commission: in charge of
patients and contacts security and frontier surveillance; research and ethical aspects commission: in charge of all research and ethical
issues related to the epidemic: hygiene and Sanitation Commission: in charge of the decontamination and sanitation healthcare sites; fund-
raising Commission: in charge financial resources management. Mobile Intervention Commission: in charge of the transportation and the
sampling of all suspect cases. That first Ebola virus case allowed our services to control and assess the reaction capacity of our
healthcare system to efficiently handle situations of healthcare emergencies. The control of any epidemic requires a well-organized
healthcare system [7, 8]. Senegal had to manage some outbreaks such as cholera or meningitis , but this was the first time the country had
to face a highly lethal pathology that had such a strong social and economic impact. The patient: during his various consultations the
patient had never declared the type of contacts he had had with other affected people. The different interrogations conducted subsequent to
hospitalization contributed to the collection of new elements that had not been initially mentioned. That notion of information retention
stands as a noteworthy fact which is shared with the case imported from Nigeria . Even if the patient never revealed some likely contact
with affected people, the absence of bloody diarrhea hindered the initial diagnosis. That was a compelling sign in our case definition
process, such as specified by the WHO . Following that experience, we were bound to modify our case definition process, while making it
clear that hemorrhage was not always present in suspect cases diarrhea. That imported case raised prevailing indignation among the national
public opinion, ending in the stigmatization of Guinean populations living in the country. The patient was completely healed after a 23-day
hospitalization. Contacts monitoring: as a whole, 74 contacts have been monitored twice a day for 21 days. Over the first 15 days, 67 people
had been identified. On day fifteen, 7 new contacts and healthcare workers identified themselves after they had been trained about Ebola.
Those individuals agreed then that they responded to the definition of contact. All the individuals, amounting to 34, that had shared the
patient's home, had been confined in that place, subsequent to its decontamination. Their food, along with their security, was guaranteed by
the Government. The rest was composed by the healthcare personnel (medical doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians and orderlies), whose
monitoring in the beginning was harder to handle, since some of them were reluctant to allow the agents in charge of their monitoring,
because they did not want the members of their families to be informed of their situation as contacts. After a 21-day monitoring process,
all the contacts were declared healthy, despite a few alerts during the follow-up period. Lessons learned: in order to face an outbreak such
as the Ebola virus disease, it is important to basically benefit from a well-organized healthcare system. The multi-sector approach is also
highly decisive in the implementation of strategies, since the healthcare authorities alone are unable to settle all issues. At higher
level, the state's commitment is extremely important in order to face such a plague. The technical support of partners (WHO, UNICEF, CDC and
MSF) was highly appreciated in the organization's restructuring and the strategies implemented. The support of experts who have the benefit
of some hindsight as regards the country's situation allows to objectively refine any response plan. Our organization system, which is
structured into commissions, facilitated the implication of all actors and sectors concerned. However, at certain times, such organization
seemed very heavy to monitor, due to some issues dealing with decision-making coordination and priority. Even though the pertinence of the
commissions’ implementation is not really questioned, the best approach would be to have a single coordination body that will supervise all
the tasks of those commissions. That body could be in the form of some emergency operations center, as decided in our country, following the
example of the situation drawn from Nigeria or other countries. The main aspect that needs be avoided during those moments: to transform the
Ministry of Health into a Ministry for Ebola and thus paralyze all other health programs. For instance, in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
all programs against malaria have been seriously compromised . The behavior of health workers has been exemplary even though some stress or
panic situation has sometimes been observed. It is important to consider that some attitudes can be unpredictable in face of a real case
even if the person had been theoretically well-trained. The presence and commitment of highly-qualified healthcare professionals help
reassure the personnel, and consequently obtain their adhesion in the handling of cases. The monitoring of healthcare professional contact
cases is at times difficult to handle. They often prove some resistance, either because it is not easy for them to accept their own
situation, or they are able to somatise very quickly. It is imperative for those people to benefit from accurate psychological support. The
contribution of their line manager, as regards this support, is crucial in order to obtain their adhesion. The management of all
communication directed to populations stood as the most sensitive aspect. Even if public-awareness campaigns have been organized before the
epidemic, the manifestation of one single case can definitely alter all information. A situation of panic can quickly settle down and in our
case, the stigmatization of a whole community was the most sensitive aspect observed. The commitment of journalists as regards the
responsible management of the information during the crisis could be obtained after a meeting session with the Minister of Health and all
media editors. The Minister took that opportunity to sensitize journalists on the negative impact of non verified information on the society
and the country more generally, and also she promised to share with them any necessary information. The healing and return of the patient in
his native country helped, in some way, alleviate the social tension it had caused. The involvement of the Minister of Health, from the
beginning of the communication process, while committing herself to provide all existing information, has been noted and highly appreciated.
The option to set up press releases and conferences supervised by the Minister herself, based on the necessity of the moment, was glorified
and acknowledged as a decisive strategy to fight the epidemic away. The Ebola virus disease is an affection that challenges our healthcare
systems. Our states’ main objective should be to build up a performing healthcare system that can help face all sorts of threats. The
experience of Senegal demonstrated the fact that African countries can also benefit from a well-organized healthcare system and competent
personnel who have the capacity to handle the most serious epidemic threats. The implementation of an Emergency Operations Center in our
countries should also stand as a priority in order to benefit from efficient and well-coordinated task and reaction forces. The authors
declare no competing interests. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have equally contributed to its
content and to the management of the case.
