CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared An intriguing yet perplexing case report of a successful pregnancy and live birth with intracytoplasmic
sperm injection using normal testicular sperm, after the finding of azoospermia in the semen analysis and discovering only tail stump
abnormal sperm in the epididymis. A tail stump sperm defect of genetic origin was suspected. However, after obtaining normal testicular
sperm we concluded that obstructive azoospermia, either idiopathic or secondary to multiple minor genital trauma was the plausible scenario.
This has rendered the search of previous reports on a similar condition, but none was found. However, it has raised scientific thoughts for
future research. The importance of reporting this case is to alert urologists performing sperm retrieval that healthy and morphologically
normal sperm may be found in the testis of azoospermic men with 100% tail stump epididymal sperm. Retrieval of normal testicular sperm
obviates the need of a more complex investigation, including sperm electron microscopy. It also offers the possibility of utilizing such
gametes for sperm injections rather than abnormal tail stump sperm that may be associated with a poor reproductive outcome. As many as 186
million people are estimated to be affected by infertility worldwide, of which the male factor accounts for more than 50% of all cases of
childlessness (1). While the introduction of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) has undoubtedly offered opportunities to treat the most
severe cases of male infertility, the advancement and modernization of assisted reproductive technologies (ART), however, still fail to
answer the etiology of some rare and enigmatic conditions, as described in this case report, gearing to future research. A 30-year-old male
and his spouse were seeking treatment for their infertility condition at The Fertility Clinic Skive Regional Hospital. The couple presented
with an infertility history of one year duration and no previous treatments. The male partner had undergone multiple semen analyses, all of
which revealed azoospermia. The patient`s sexual, medical/surgical and family histories were essentially unremarkable. Notably, the patient
was inquired about and confirmed that he had not had any history of sexually transmitted diseases or exposure to gonadotoxins. Childhood and
pubertal development were also normal, but for the fact that he reported being a former goalkeeper playing handball with many hits on his
genitals, which were mostly minor injuries with no need for medical assistance. He was a non-smoker with a normal body mass index, but
reported alcohol consumption to a maximum of 2–4 units per day. His physical examination findings were unremarkable. The genitalia
examination revealed a normal penis and both testes located in the scrotum, measuring approximately 20mL each in volume with no hydrocele.
The epididymis were normal in size and consistency. Examination of the spermatic cord revealed a palpable normal vasa deferentia and absence
of varicocele. Semen analyses were repeated, confirming azoospermia after centrifugation of the liquefied specimens. Further investigations
revealed a normal hormonal profile: FSH level of 1.5IE/L (normal range: 1.2–15.8IE/L), LH level of 4.4IE/L (normal range: 1.7–8.6IE/L),
testosterone level of 17.87nmol/L (normal range: 11–34nmol/L) and prolactin of 274MIE/L (normal range: 90–580MIE/L). The chromosomal
analysis showed a normal karyotyping with no Y chromosome deletion or cystic fibrosis mutations found. A diagnostic percutaneous epididymal
sperm aspiration (PESA) was carried out in the epididymis head, which found all spermatozoa to be morphologically abnormal, even after
repeating the procedure at the contra-lateral side. Of note, all retrieved spermatozoa were immotile and showed the same tail defect, namely
either ‘tail stump’ or no tail (Figures 1 a-c). Sperm viability testing was not performed. With no normal spermatozoa yielded on PESA, a
diagnostic testicular sperm aspiration (TESA) was performed at the same operative time. Surprisingly, normal spermatozoa were obtained
(Figures 1d and 1e). A careful microscopic examination revealed no tail stump spermatozoa in the TESA sample, of which approximately 10%
retrieved spermatozoa exhibited sluggish non-progressive motility. Both PESA and TESA specimens were frozen, using the liquid nitrogen vapor
technique, and stored. Subsequently, the couple underwent an ICSI cycle. The mature retrieved oocytes were micro-inseminated with TESA-
normal and motile spermatozoa from the male partner. The couple successfully conceived and delivered a healthy baby at term. Two years
later, the couple came back for replacement of the remaining embryos that had been stored, however, the attempt was unsuccessful. Recently,
they donated the straws of frozen tail stump spermatozoa obtained from PESA and the normal spermatozoa from TESA for research purpose. Our
initial hypothesis was “tail stump sperm defect of genetic origin” given the observation of 100% abnormal spermatozoa on PESA. However,
after obtaining normal testicular sperm on TESA, of which about 10% were motile, we hypothesized that the patient had obstructive
azoospermia either idiopathic or secondary to multiple minor genital trauma. Although viability studies would add to our report, we have not
carried out viability testing in the PESA and TESA specimens. Given all spermatozoa retrieved from both epididymis were immotile and
exhibited tail stump, our approach was to perform TESA in the same operative time. We retrieved sperm with normal tails by TESA, of which
approximately 10% exhibited sluggish non-progressive motility, thus confirming viability in a proportion of the retrieved testicular
spermatozoa. The importance of reporting this case is to alert urologists performing sperm retrieval that normal sperm may be found in the
testis of men with tail stump epididymal sperm. The finding of normal testicular sperm by TESA will obviate the need of a more complex
investigation including sperm electron microscopy. Also, it offers the possibility of utilizing such normal gametes for sperm injections
rather than the abnormal tail stump sperm that may be associated with a poor reproductive outcome. The excitement of obtaining a successful
pregnancy and healthy offspring by ICSI after an unexpected diagnosis of azoospermia and 100% tail stump epididymal spermatozoa, and the
subsequent finding of normal testicular sperm, was the driving force of reporting this intriguing case. Although anecdotally pregnancies
have been reported in humans with the utilization of tail stump spermatozoa and ICSI, the abnormally shaped sperm may negatively influence
the reproductive outcome (2–4). Moreover, given that a genetic, but still unmapped defect has been postulated to be the cause of such tail
defects, there is a concern of transmitting a genetic abnormality to the male offspring that will render them infertile (5–7). As a matter
of fact, such a genetic linkage, either direct or indirect, has been associated with a number of sperm defects in different species (5, 8).
In humans, the finding of 100% tail stump spermatozoa is rare (9). Although the origin of this defect is unknown, testes sections revealed
that damage might occur during spermiogenesis in the latest stages of flagellum elongation at the spermatid stage, which resulted in a
generalized, blocked formation of the flagellum associated with an absence of axonemes and accessory fibers (9, 10). Electron microscopy
studies revealed that the ‘stump’ category exhibits the sperm tail region organized as uniflagellate, and the extremely short axoneme can
have a ‘9+2’ or ‘9+0’ arrangement generally with dynein arms, while the ‘short tail’ category has a biflagellate arrangement and a ‘9+0’ or
‘9+1’ axoneme almost devoid of dynein arms (5). Although a genetic linkage has been discussed in previous reports involving tail stump sperm
(2–7, 11), there may be other possible explanations. In an earlier study evaluating 247 men with severe asthenozoospermia, Chemes and
colleagues reported that most men presented with nonspecific flagellar anomalies, which were random, secondary alterations that affected a
variable number of spermatozoa in different samples (6). In such cases, there was no familial/genetic inheritance, and the flagellar
anomalies were secondary to different andrological disorders. It has been thus suggested that this aforementioned type of flagellar anomaly
be differentiated from the less common fibrous sheath dysplasia that is associated with genetic abnormalities or familial inheritance (6,
7). In our reported case, azoospermia was found in multiple ejaculates after centrifugation. In such cases, a distinction should be made
between obstructive and non-obstructive azoospermia. When normal genitalia (testes, epididymis and vasa deferentia) and endocrine profile
are found in a normal virilized adult male, the finding of spermatozoa within the epididymis is highly indicative of obstructive azoospermia
(12), as shown in our patient. Obstruction in the male reproductive system can be congenital or acquired. Acquired causes include vasectomy,
infection and genital trauma (13, 14). The most common congenital form of obstructive azoospermia (OA) is congenital bilateral absence of
vas deferens (CBAVD), which is linked to mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane-conductance regulator (CFTR) gene (13). Our patient,
however, neither had a clinical genitourinary infection or surgery, nor were the vasa deferentia absent on physical examination. Therefore,
the possible explanation for his condition would be either genital trauma as noted in his medical history, or a congenital idiopathic
obstruction. The importance of investigating CFTR mutations in a case like ours relies on the fact that such mutations have been implicated
in bilateral epididymal obstruction even in the presence of normal, bilateral palpable vasa (15), as many as 47% patients with idiopathic
bilateral epididymal obstruction carry CFTR mutations (16, 17). The most common identified mutations were IVS8–5T, ΔF508, R117H and L206W,
but none of them were found in our patient. Young syndrome is another rare disease primarily characterized by a bilateral epididymal
obstruction with azoospermia. However, bronchiectasis and chronic sinusitis are common features in patients with this disorder, and
epididymal sperm is normal and motile (15). The reason why all spermatozoa retrieved from the epididymis of our patient had abnormal tails
is unknown. However, given normal sperm were found within the testis it is presumptive that the morphological alterations occurred within
the epididymis after sperm release from the seminiferous tubules. We therefore speculate that the presence of tail stump sperm in our case
scenario might be due to prolonged epididymal stasis resulting in senescent sperm as sometimes seen in post-vasectomy vas and epididymal
fluid aspirates (18–20). Such sperm tail defects may be associated with other concomitant epididymal pathologies, namely subclinical
microbial infections and antisperm antibodies. Lastly, the delivery of a healthy baby is the ultimate goal in assisted reproductive
techniques. This has been achieved in our case with the micro-insemination of oocytes using normal sperm retrieved by TESA. The reproductive
outcome of ICSI, using testicular sperm retrieved from men with OA has been reassuring, and TESA is associated with few complications (14,
21). The chances of achieving a live birth and the profile of neonates born after sperm injection with a so-called normal epididymal or
testicular sperm do not seem to be related to the cause of obstruction. Moreover, ICSI outcomes are comparable using frozen-thawed or fresh
sperm retrieved from men with OA (22). Despite it being an uncommon condition, the finding of azoospermia associated with 100% abnormal tail
stump epididymal sperm may pose many challenges to the treating physicians. We hope the case presented here can help urologists to provide
an even better management of patients, and encourage further research to enlighten the origin of this enigmatic condition. Urologists
performing sperm retrieval should be aware that healthy and morphologically normal sperm may be found in the testis of men with obstructive
azoospermia and 100% tail stump epididymal sperm. We are thankful to Prof. Jaime Gosálbez (Madrid, Spain) for his assistance editing
Figure-1.
