CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared. Adult testicular granulosa cell tumor is a rare, potentially malignant sex cord-stromal tumor, of which
30 cases have been described to date. We report the case of a 43-year-old male who complained of a left testicular swelling. Scrotal
ultrasound showed a cystic lesion, suggestive of hydrocele. However, due to a clinical suspicion of a solid-cystic neoplasm, a high inguinal
orchidectomy was performed, which, on pathological examination, was diagnosed as adult granulosa cell tumor. Adult testicular granulosa cell
tumors have aggressive behaviour as compared to their ovarian counterparts. They may rarely be predominantly cystic and present as
hydrocele. Lymph node and distant metastases have been reported in few cases. Role of MIB-1 labelling index in prognostication is not well
defined. Therefore, their recognition and documentation of their behaviour is important from a diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic point
of view. While granulosa cell tumor represents the most common sex cord-stromal tumor arising in the ovary (1), and juvenile testicular
granulosa cell tumor (TGCT) is the commonest sex cord-stromal tumor seen in male children, adult TGCT remains an enigmatic entity. Due to
its rarity, not much is known about its natural course; however, literature suggests that adult TGCTs are slow-growing neoplasms with
potential for lymph node metastasis, even many years after initial diagnosis. We report a case of this rare tumor which was predominantly
cystic, causing a diagnostic dilemma clinically, and ultimately diagnosed on histopathology. This 43 years old male, under follow-up in the
Urology clinic for stone disease, complained of painless, progressively increasing left testicular swelling for two months. On physical
examination, vitals were stable. No abdominal distension or mass was noted. Peripheral lymphadenopathy was absent. Left testicular
enlargement was identified, caused by a cystic scrotal swelling. Scrotal ultrasound (Figure-1a) showed an anechoic cystic lesion measuring
5.5cm × 3.4cm, with nodular soft tissue shadows at the periphery and only a thin rim of testicular tissue. Based on ultrasonography,
differential diagnoses included intra-testicular cystic neoplasm and a cystic lesion compressing the testis. On investigation, routine
haematological and biochemical parameters, as well as serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), lactate dehydrogenase and human chorionic gonadotropin
levels were within normal limits. The patient was counselled for and submitted to a high-inguinal orchidectomy. Post-operative period was
uneventful. The patient is doing well one year after surgery. CT abdomen revealed no retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy (Figure-1b). Left high
inguinal orchidectomy specimen comprised of testis measuring 8cm × 5.5cm × 4.5cm, with attached spermatic cord measuring 6cm. A
predominantly cystic tumor (Figure-2a) measuring 6cm × 3.5cm × 2.5cm was identified, almost completely replacing the testis, with a thin rim
of compressed normal testicular parenchyma at the lower pole. Cysts varied from 0.5cm to 5cm in diameter, were smooth-walled, and contained
clear fluid. Few solid nodules, 0.4cm to 1cm in maximum dimension, were seen within the cyst walls (Figure-2b). The tumor did not appear to
infiltrate the tunica albuginea. No areas of hemorrhage or necrosis were identified. On microscopic examination (Figure-3), the tumor was
well-circumscribed, unencapsulated, and was composed of monomorphic cells arranged in sheets and trabeculae. Focally, microfollicular
structures (Call-Exner bodies) were seen. Tumor cells had scant cytoplasm, ill-defined cytoplasmic borders, and ovoid medium-sized nuclei
with fine chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. Longitudinal nuclear grooves were seen at places. Frequent mitotic figures (8–10/10 high
power fields) were identified. No necrosis, lymphovascular invasion or pseudosarcomatous areas were present. On immunohistochemistry, tumor
cells were diffusely immunopositive for vimentin, inhibin, MIC2, and calretinin. They were negative for pancytokeratin (CK), epithelial
membrane antigen (EMA), leukocyte common antigen (LCA), AFP, placental alkaline phosphatise (PLAP), CD117 and synaptophysin. MIB-1 labelling
index (LI) was high (18% in highest proliferating areas). Based on histomorphological and immunohistochemical features, a diagnosis of adult
granulosa cell tumor of the testis was made. Section from resected end of spermatic cord was free of tumor. Adult testicular granulosa cell
tumor (TGCT) is a rare sex cord-stromal neoplasm arising in the testes, of which thirty cases have been reported until now (2–15). Majority
of patients present with testicular enlargement which is painless and of variable duration (3). Some may present with features of hormonal
dysregulation, like gynaecomastia (4, 5). In some instances, however, this tumor may be detected incidentally, as in our case (6). The age
range at presentation is wide, varying from 16 to 77 years (2). Adult TGCTs occur as solid, circumscribed tumors, in contrast to the
multicystic juvenile TGCTs. While it is not unusual to identify small cystic foci within adult TGCTs (1), predominantly cystic tumors are
rarely encountered, contributing to lack of suspicion of this diagnosis preoperatively, as in the case under discussion. Only two cases have
been previously documented as presenting with hydrocele on the same side of tumor (7, 8). A variety of microscopic patterns may occur in
adult TGCTs, making differential diagnosis from Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, germ cell tumors, non-Hodgkin lymphoma and neuroendocrine tumors
difficult. Microfollicular, macrofollicular, trabecular, and insular growth patterns are commonly observed (3). Typical Call-Exner bodies
may or may not be present. These tumors are immunopositive for vimentin, inhibin, MIC2, calretinin, and smooth muscle actin (3), and are
usually negative for CK, EMA, LCA, synaptophysin, chromogranin, PLAP, and AFP (9). Morphological features along with immunohistochemistry
help in clinching the correct diagnosis (Table-1). A recent review by Rabban et al. succinctly summarizes the immunohistochemical
differential diagnosis between sex cord stromal tumors and germ cell tumors using newer IHC markers (16). While PLAP is a fairly reliable
marker for germ cell tumors like dysgerminoma, yolk sac tumor, choriocarcinoma, and embryonal carcinoma, SALL4 is a novel marker that has
higher sensitivity for the above-mentioned tumors with the exception of choriocarcinoma. OCT4 is a transcription factor which is expressed
in dysgerminoma and gonadoblastoma. Sex cord-stromal tumours including adult granulosa cell tumours are, however, negative for PLAP, OCT4
and SALL4. Glypican-3 is another new marker with high specificity for yolk sac tumors, and is not expressed in sex cord stromal tumors.
Newer markers for the sex cord stromal family of tumors include SF-1 and FOXL2, which are highly specific and are not expressed by germ cell
tumors. CK = cytokeratin; EMA = Epithelial membrane antigen; PLAP = Placental alkaline phosphatase; AFP = alpha feto protein; LCA =
leukocyte common antigen In contrast to their more common juvenile counterparts that have a benign course and are cured by simple
orchidectomy, adult TGCTs are believed to be potentially malignant tumors, which behave more aggressively than their namesakes in the ovary
(2, 3). Reports of metastases to lymph nodes as well as distant sites, even as late as ten years after initial surgery, have served to
consolidate this opinion (10). Definitive criteria for malignancy are lacking, and identification of aggressive cases remains difficult. Few
features have been proposed by Jimenez-Quintero et al. (10), including size greater than 7cm, lymphovascular invasion, necrosis, and
hemorrhage, while Hanson et al. have suggested that tumors greater than 5cm may behave aggressively (3). However, it is not clear whether
size of the entire tumor should be taken into consideration in tumors that are solid-cystic, or only the solid areas. The role of MIB-1 LI
(proliferation marker) in predicting malignant behavior is not clear and needs to be ascertained. As our case showed high MIB-1 LI, the
patient was followed-up closely, but has remained free of disease one year post-surgery. In conclusion, adult TGCTs are potentially
malignant tumors that may have unusual clinical presentation occasionally. Recognition of these rare neoplasms and documentation of their
behaviour is important from diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic points of view. As delayed lymph nodal and distant metastases have been
reported, patients need to be followed-up over a prolonged period after orchidectomy. Utility of MIB-1 LI in identification of tumors that
may behave aggressively needs further evaluation.
