A 55-year-old woman presented to the emergency services with a history of breathlessness and altered sensorium of 1 day duration. Other than
a history of alcohol and tobacco abuse, her history was noncontributory. On examination, breathing was labored, respiratory rate was 24/min,
heart rate was 110/min, and on pulse oximeter, saturation was 88%. She had no focal neurological deficits. The electrocardiography showed
deep S-wave in lead I with inverted T-waves in lead III with right ventricular strain suggestive of probably pulmonary embolism, and chest
X-ray showed cardiomegaly with right ventricular apex dilated right atrium (RA), ventricle, and pulmonary artery (PA). Arterial blood gas
revealed a pH - 7.24, PO2 - 58 mm of Hg with 6 L of oxygen, PCO2 - 66.4 mm of Hg, and HCO3 - 24.7 suggestive of type II respiratory failure.
Biochemical investigations revealed elevated D-dimer, normal cardiac bio-markers, hypoalbuminemia, thrombocytopenia, and negative
thrombophilia work-up. Liver enzymes were within normal limits. Lower limb venous Doppler did not reveal any thrombus. Ultrasound abdomen
showed coarse echo texture of liver with no evidence of portal hypertension or cirrhosis. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed dilated RA and
right ventricle (RV), RV thrombus, moderate RV dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension (right ventricular systolic pressure -58 mm of Hg), no
regional wall motion abnormalities, and normal left ventricular function. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram revealed thrombus in
the main pulmonary artery (MPA) extending into the left pulmonary artery (LPA) with multiple pulmonary infarcts. CT brain was normal. The
patient was started on anticoagulation and titrated to an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2–3 preoperatively. She was considered
unsuitable for thrombolysis in view of altered mental status and alcoholic liver disease. She developed worsening respiratory failure and
was intubated a week after admission. After a multidisciplinary review, the decision was taken to go ahead with surgical embolectomy.
Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) mid-esophageal five chamber view showed a 2 cm × 3 cm mobile echogenic mass in the RV
cavity [Figure 1 and Video 1], mid-esophageal RV inflow-outflow view [Figure 2 and Video 2], and transgastric RV outflow view [Figure 3 and
Video 3] revealed mobile thrombus 2 cm × 2 cm in the right ventricular outflow tract attached below the pulmonary valve. Transgastric right
ventricular short axis view showed a 2 cm × 3 cm echogenic mass in between the trabeculations of the RV [Figure 4 and Video 4], upper
esophageal ascending aortic short axis view showed organized thrombus in right pulmonary artery (RPA) [Figure 5 and Video 5], mid-esophageal
four chamber view showed dilated RA/RV, moderate RV dysfunction (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion ), severe pulmonary hypertension
(RVSP = 60 mm of Hg), and good left ventricular function. Mid-esophageal bi-caval view showed large (3 cm) ostium secundum atrial septal
defect (ASD) which was shunting predominantly left to right [Video 6]. Mid-esophageal five chamber view, the arrow pointing at 2 cm × 3 cm
mobile echogenic mass in the right ventricular cavity Mid-esophageal right ventricular inflow-outflow view, the arrow pointing at 2 cm × 2
cm mobile echogenic mass probably a thrombus in the right ventricular outflow tract Transgastric right ventricular outflow view, the arrow
pointing at the thrombus in right ventricular outflow tract above the pulmonary valve Transgastric right ventricular basal short axis view
arrow pointing at thrombus between the trabeculations of the right ventricle Upper esophageal ascending aortic short axis view, the arrow
pointing at thrombus in the RPA. RPA: Right pulmonary artery, SVC: Superior vena cava Surgical approach was via a midline sternotomy,
cannulation was standard ascending aortic with bi-caval venous cannulation, and the minimum temperature was 28°C. Intraoperative findings
were free thrombi in the RV, large organized clot load in MPA, LPA and RPA, no thrombi in RA/left atrium/left ventricle, and a large ostium
secundum ASD. Pulmonary thrombectomy was done, and ASD was repaired with an autologous pericardial patch. The patient was weaned of
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with milrinone at 0.5 μg/kg/min, dobutamine at 5 μg/kg/min, adrenaline at 0.1 μg/kg/min, noradrenaline at 0.1
μg/kg/min, and vasopressin at 4 units/h. As nitric oxide is not available in our institute, we used milrinone nebulization 50 μg/kg. Post-
CPB TEE showed no thrombus in MPA, RPA, LPA, and the RV. No residual ASD, mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR), RVSP-26, cardiac output of 4.3
l/min, and impaired RV function (TAPSE-8 mm). An inferior vena cava filter option was given to the relatives due to financial issues; it was
not inserted. The patient was extubated 24 h later. She required noninvasive ventilation over the next 48 h, after which oxygen was
gradually reduced to 2–4 L/min to maintain saturation in the 90s. As she had multiple pulmonary infarcts preoperatively, she required oxygen
to maintain saturation. Inotropes were tapered over 72 h. On day 2, she developed atrial fibrillation which reverted with magnesium and
amiodarone. Postoperative echo showed RA/RV/MPA dilated, no residual ASD, mild TR, RVSP-36, mild pericardial effusion, and impaired RV
function. RV dysfunction was treated with digoxin, diuretics, and sildenafil. She was started on dalteparin 6 h after surgery, and oral
anticoagulation was started to reach therapeutic INR. She was mobilized out of bed on the 4th postoperative day and was fully ambulated.
Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen was reported as thrombus. By the 10th postoperative day, it was determined that the
patient could be discharged on home oxygen, and plans were made for rehabilitation. A few hours before planned discharge, she suffered a
sudden cardiac arrest and succumbed. The cause of death could not be determined, as the autopsy was denied by the family. This patient had
an unusual combination of massive pulmonary embolism, large ASD, absent deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and no paradoxical embolism. Acute
pulmonary embolism occurs without documented DVT in about 6–7% of patients. These patients have an increased incidence of malignancy as
compared to those with a documented DVT. The other possibilities are complete dislodgement of peripheral venous thrombus, false-negative
venous duplex, venous thromboembolism from pelvic veins, and in situ formation of thrombus in the RV and pulmonary arteries. Right
ventricular thrombi are extremely rare, especially when not associated with thrombus in the left ventricle. Moderator band, papillary
muscle, and coarse trabeculations in RV make the diagnosis of right ventricular thrombus very challenging. They have been described in the
setting of autoimmune diseases (such as Behçet disease), hypercoagulability states (Factor V Leiden deficiency), in patients with right
ventricular pacing leads, PA catheters, dilated or alcoholic cardiomyopathy, right ventricular infarction, and right ventricular
arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. Interestingly, in this case, in spite of a large RA, large ASD, pulmonary hypertension, and moderate TR, she
did not show any evidence of paradoxical embolism. In this case, whether to close the ASD or not and the right ventricular thrombus origin
was a diagnostic dilemma, is it thrombus in transit or originating in situ in the RV due to the right ventricular dysfunction secondary to a
large ASD and severe pulmonary arterial hypertension? In 1989, the European Working Group on Echocardiography identified three patterns of
right heart thrombi. Type A thrombi are morphologically serpiginous, highly mobile masses moving within the RA, or ventricle, which often
prolapse into the tricuspid or pulmonic valve. A point of attachment is often unseen or is visualized as a thin stalk. It is associated with
DVT and pulmonary embolism. It is hypothesized that these clots embolize from large veins and are captured in-transit within the right heart
in their path to pulmonary tree. Predisposing factors for this thromboembolism include prominent Eustachian valves, TR, low cardiac output,
and pulmonary hypertension. Type B thrombi are nonmobile, mural, and believed to form in situ, in association with underlying cardiac
abnormalities. Echocardiographically, these mural thrombi are less mobile, with a broad-based attachment to the heart wall, and occasional
focal calcification. Type C thrombi are rare, share a similar appearance to a myxoma, and are highly mobile. Type B has a more favorable
outcome and thrombolysis is not indicated. Thrombolytics are life-saving in type A. Therapeutic options for acute massive pulmonary embolism
include anticoagulation, thrombolysis and catheter, or surgical embolectomy. The International Co-operative Pulmonary Embolism registry
noted a mortality of 52% in patients with massive pulmonary embolism and a strong correlation with RV thrombi, RV dysfunction, and
congestive heart failure. In most institutions, the first line of treatment is usually thrombolysis (systemic or catheter directed). The
contraindications for thrombolysis include recent stroke, surgery, or other possible sources of active bleeding. Thrombolysis can also cause
thrombus fragmentation and distal embolization leading to chronic pulmonary hypertension. Indications for surgical pulmonary embolectomy in
this patient were the presence of a large free floating right ventricular thrombus, large clot burden, right ventricular dysfunction, the
presence of an ASD, and worsening respiratory failure while on adequate doses of anticoagulation. The principal causes of postoperative
mortality after pulmonary embolectomy are cardiac failure, CVA, and sepsis. Possible causes in this patient could be cardiac arrhythmia,
hypoxic arrest, or recurrent pulmonary embolism. Right ventricular thrombosis constitutes a rare, yet potentially fatal situation, whose
optimal management remains to be evaluated. The differential diagnosis are tumors such as myxoma, carcinoid syndrome, and normal structures
in the RV such as moderator band, trabeculation, and papillary muscles. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
