A 66-year-old female was transferred from an outside hospital for possible ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). The patient
reported feeling poorly for the last day, with epigastric pain, nausea, and multiple episodes of vomiting. Patient’s medical history was
significant for diabetes mellitus, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and multiple sclerosis. Electrocardiogram (EKG) was as noted (Figure).
Initial troponin was 0.14 (<0.03ng/mL). The patient was taken emergently to the cardiac cath lab for possible posterior STEMI. Angiogram
demonstrated no significant evidence of coronary artery disease, with an EF of 75%. Digoxin concentration subsequently returned at 8.8ng/mL
(reference range 0.5–1ng/mL). The ST segment changes gradually improved as the digoxin concentration declined. An echocardiogram
demonstrated moderate concentric left-ventricular hypertrophy with estimated ejection fraction of 80%, rheumatic heart disease, and possible
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy physiology. Troponin peaked at 0.29ng/mL and then returned to baseline. Creatine kinase remained
within normal limits. Digoxin may cause a multitude of EKG changes including ST depression and numerous cardiac dysrhythmias. 1,2
Differentiation of ST depression in patients with ischemic heart disease and digoxin presence may be feasible in patients undergoing stress
testing using heart rate analysis, 2 but the critical nature of a potential acute myocardial infarction patient likely prohibits this in-
depth analysis. ST depression may appear indistinguishable from ischemic changes, and the history of digoxin use or digoxin concentration
testing should be considered in a patient with nausea and vomiting and signs or symptoms of acute coronary syndrome with marked ST
depression. Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Initial
electrocardiogram of patient with elevated digoxin concentration
