A 35-year-old male presented with lower gum pain associated with fever, chills, and sore throat. His medical history included intravenous
drug use, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and hepatitis C. Physical exam revealed tachycardia, a temperature of 38.9°C, anterior
cervical lymphadenopathy, halitosis, an edematous lower lip, and purulent ulcers anterior and posterior to lower central incisors with
marked tenderness and erythema (Figure). His laboratory work was notable for a low white blood cell count (2.6 thousand/μl), neutropenia
(0.11 thousand/μl), a low absolute CD4 lymphocyte count (0.5 thousand/μl), and elevated C-reactive protein (129mg/L) and sedimentation rate
(23mm/hr). A computed tomography study showed a 0.5×1.3×0.3cm abscess anterior to the mandibular symphysis. Intravenous vancomycin,
piperacillin/tazobactam, and fluconazole were initiated. Oral-maxillofacial surgery was consulted and performed debridement. Continued
intravenous antibiotics and chlorhexidine rinses were recommended. The patient was admitted to the medicine service for three days. Herpes
simplex and syphilis studies, sent to rule out other causes of the patient’s ulcers, were negative. His oral infection improved and his
absolute neutrophil count, ultimately thought to be low due to acute infection, normalized. He was discharged with outpatient oral
antimicrobial therapy and was ultimately lost to follow up. Necrotizing periodontal disease presents as interdental necrosis with “punched
out” ulcerative papilla, gingival bleeding, and pain. It usually affects young adults, commonly military and college students.1,2 Secondary
features of disease include foul-smelling breath, yellowish-white or grayish “pseudomembrane,” lymphadenopathy, and fever.1 Risk factors
include immunosuppression, psychological stress, smoking, poor oral hygiene, and poor nutrition.1 Common organisms include Bacteriodes,
Prevotella, Fusebacterium, and Selenomonas but fungal infections also occur.2 Treatment usually involves debridement, oral antimicrobial
rinses, and antibiotics for any signs of systemic involvement.1 Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open
access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are
required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential
sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Lower lip and gums with inflammation and ulceration.
