A 41-year-old female presented to the emergency department with nausea, vomiting and foreign body sensation in her throat. The patient had
multiple co-morbidities including hypertension, diabetes, cervical cancer and gastroparesis with gastrojejunostomy (GJ) tube. The patient
had stable vitals, was in no respiratory distress, and her only complaint was mild throat pain and abdominal pain at the GJ tube insertion
site. Physical exam revealed a foreign object in the oropharynx (Figure 1). Abdominal exam showed a soft, non-distended, non-tender abdomen
with GJ-tube and colostomy in place. Abdominal series and upright chest radiograph were obtained (Figure 2). Mal-positioned GJ tube. Oral
exam showed the distal end of the GJ tube protruding into the oropharynx (Figure 1). Upright chest radiograph showed the GJ tube extending
superiorly up the esophagus into the oropharynx (Figure 2). A GJ tube is a percutaneous device that provides access to both the stomach and
jejunum1,2. This tube is positioned at the same location as a gastric feeding tube but is longer in order to reach the jejunum. Its purpose
is to provide decompression of the stomach and enteric feeding to patients with poor caloric intake.3 The rate of complications of GJ tubes
vary between 1–13%.4,5 Many of these complications are considered minor with <1% causing mortality.6–9 In patients with vomiting there is a
chance that the GJ tube is displaced from the jejunum and can enter into the esophagus. This can be confirmed with chest radiograph or CT
chest.10,11 Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Photograph
demonstrating visible gastrojejunostomy tube in patient’s oropharynx. Upright chest radiograph with visible gastrojejunostomy tube
superiorly displaced up the esophagus.
