A 37-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) in police custody for “medical clearance” before being taken to jail. The
patient was approached by police officers for suspicion of selling illicit drugs. When approached by police he ran away and was witnessed to
swallow several small plastic baggies suspected to contain heroin. He was apprehended and brought to the ED. On arrival, he was asymptomatic
with a blood pressure 144/83mmHg, heart rate 67bpm, respiratory rate of 19bpm, oxygen saturation of 99% on room air and afebrile. A Glasgow
coma score was 15 and he was alert and oriented to person, place and time. Patient had a negative review of systems. On physical examination
pupils were 4mm and reactive to light, lungs clear to auscultation and had normal respiratory rate with normal cardiovascular exam. Abdomen
was soft, non-tender and non-distended with present bowel sounds. The patient admitted to ingesting approximately 20 packets of heroin to
avoid being charged with possession. The patient declined activated charcoal and whole bowel irrigation (WBI) with polyethylene glycol-
electrolyte solution (PEG-ELS). The patient declined a urine toxicology immunoassay screen. A computed tomography (CT) of his abdomen with
contrast was obtained and read as normal except for a cluster of foreign bodies within the distal stomach likely contained within a plastic
bag (Figures 1 and 2). Ingesting illicit substances generally falls into two broad categories: “body packing” where illicit substances are
deliberately ingested as a means for transporting illicit drugs, and “body stuffing.”1,2 Body stuffing as in case presented is hastily
ingesting drugs as means of evading possession charges from law enforcement. The major differences between body packing and body stuffing
are the amount ingested, which is usually a large amount with body packing and also the wrapping of the illicit substance itself. With body
packing the illicit drug is usually well wrapped often with double layers of condoms or balloons to prevent inadvertent rupture of the
packets.1,2 As body stuffing is not usually pre-planned, the packets are often poorly wrapped and contained in the plastic baggies measured
out in the amount by which they are generally sold. As such, body stuffers can be at increased risk for acute poisonings compared to body
packers. Body packers may present with bowel obstruction. 1 However, due to the large amount of drug contained in body packers, if they do
rupture it can be fatal, particularly with cocaine or methamphetamine.1 The patient presented ingested heroin by history. Heroin is somewhat
easier to manage; if the patient had developed respiratory depression the opioid-specific reversal agent naloxone would have been
administered, including continuous naloxone infusion.1 Plain abdominal radiographs are often negative following body stuffing and even
packing, and as such a negative radiograph cannot exclude ingestion particularly with smaller number of packets ingested.1,2 Multi-detector
CTs are much better at detecting drug packets than conventional radiology with a reported sensitivity and specificity of 95 to 100% but may
not detect all packets.2,3 Consideration of CT abdominal imaging can be considered following plain abdominal radiographs, particularly if
negative and high clinical suspicion. Anticipation of clinical signs of toxicity should be monitored for, as there may be a delay in the
onset of toxicity from late opening of ingested packets. The role of WBI with PEG-ELS is better described with body packers than body
stuffers but was considered in this case based on the large amount of packets ingested.1,3 Activated charcoal also may have a role with the
goal of binding up leaking contents of packets before they reach systemic circulation.1 In patients who remain asymptomatic the general
recommendation is to allow spontaneous passage.1 He was admitted to a monitored setting and observed until the packets were passed in the
stool. The patient remained asymptomatic throughout his hospital course and was discharged to jail. Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD
Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Coronal view of abdomen. Arrow denoting multiple drug packets in distal
stomach. Axial view identifying multiple drug packets (arrow).
