Friedreich Ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by gait and balance abnormalities, sensory loss, weakness, loss of
reflexes, and ataxia. Previously, two cases of FRDA and Nephrotic Syndrome (NS) have been reported. Here we report two additional
individuals with NS and FRDA, providing further evidence for a possible connection between the two diseases and focusing on the
neuromuscular responsiveness of one individual to corticosteroid treatment, an effect not previously described in FRDA. We describe two
patients with FRDA also presenting with NS. The first patient was diagnosed with FRDA at age 5 and NS at age 7 following the development of
periorbital edema, abdominal swelling, problems with urination, and weight gain. The second patient was diagnosed with NS at age 2 after
presenting with periorbital edema, lethargy, and abdominal swelling. He was diagnosed with FRDA at age 10. Nephrotic syndrome was confirmed
by laboratory testing in both cases and both individuals were treated with corticosteroids. Nephrotic syndrome may occur in individuals with
FRDA, but was not associated with myoclonic epilepsy in our patients as previously described. It is unlikely that this association is
coincidental given the rarity of both conditions and the association of NS with mitochondrial disease in model systems, though coincidental
coexistence is possible. One patient showed neurological improvement following steroid treatment. Although neurological improvement could be
attributed to the treatment of NS, we also identified some degree of steroid responsiveness in a series of patients with FRDA but without
NS. Friedreich Ataxia (FRDA) is a neurological disease resulting in gait and balance abnormalities, sensory loss, weakness, loss of
reflexes, and ataxia. A recessive disorder, FRDA can also result in scoliosis, urinary dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy,
hearing loss, sleep apnea, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . The disease is caused by expanded guanine-adenine-adenine (GAA) repeats on both
alleles of the FXN gene (FXN) in 98 % of patients. The remaining 2 % of individuals with FRDA have an expanded triplet repeat on one allele
and a point mutation or deletion on the other. FRDA is a mitochondrial disease, as the deficient protein in FRDA (frataxin) is crucial for
mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster containing enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and the Krebs cycle . There is currently no
therapy for FRDA, though several clinical trials are ongoing [13, 14]. Although few manifestations outside of the typical features have been
identified in FRDA, one previous report suggests an association of nephrotic syndrome (NS) with FRDA . In addition, related ataxias with
coenzyme Q deficiency are associated with NS as are other mitochondrial disorders [16, 17]. Here we report 2 more individuals with NS and
FRDA, providing further evidence for a possible connection between the two diseases and focusing on the responsiveness of one individual to
corticosteroid treatment, an effect not previously described in FRDA. Patient 1: The patient is a 13 year old female of European descent
(GAA repeat lengths = 650, 1000). She presented with gait and balance difficulties at age 4 and was diagnosed with FRDA at age 5. At age 7,
she developed periorbital edema, abdominal swelling, problems with urination, and a weight gain of 10 lbs over 9 months. She was diagnosed
with idiopathic NS after laboratory testing revealing a urine protein of 2854 mg/dl and albumin of 2.2 g/dL. Though renal biopsy was not
performed, specific causes of secondary nephrotic syndrome were ruled out by clinical criteria and serological testing. She received
prednisone pulse therapy at 30 mg daily, which was tapered after 4 weeks. Her NS responded rapidly and urine protein levels normalized. She
had 5 relapses of NS over the next 5 years, characterized by urine protein levels >100 mg/dL, all treated with 30–60 mg daily of prednisone
pulse therapy. Clinical manifestations and laboratory parameters (proteinuria) of NS resolved following steroid treatment; surprisingly,
neurologic improvements were also noted by her caregiver and physical therapist. Specifically, after her first treatment with prednisolone,
the patient’s physical therapist noted that she had maintained range of motion in her heel cords and hamstrings and retained her skill level
in balance as related to single leg stance over the course of a year. In the year following a second steroid treatment, the patient
demonstrated decreased balance, coordination and range of motion. Subjectively her sense of fatigue decreased and her endurance improved.
Objectively, her gait improved with a narrower base and fewer falls. The effect was most prominent in a worsening of her neurologic
abilities following scoliosis surgery. Following surgery she again developed NS and became unable to walk. Corticosteroid treatment led to
recovery of renal function as well as ambulation. However, as her steroids were tapered, she lost ambulatory ability. This improved with
another pulse of steroid treatment in the absence of NS. Patient 2: The patient is a 25 year old male of Indian descent with FRDA (GAA
repeats lengths = 650, 850). At age 2, the patient presented with periorbital edema, lethargy, and abdominal swelling. Idiopathic NS was
confirmed following urine protein testing. He developed gait difficulties at age 9 and was diagnosed with FRDA at age 10. He had been
treated with chronic steroids from age 2 to age 10, with doses ranging from 15 mg every other day to 60 mg per day during episodic flares.
In response to the onset of gait problems, the patient’s nephrologist switched him from steroid treatment to 100 mg of cyclophosphamide for
3 months. He has not had any relapses of NS since then. However, the patient’s ataxia worsened after the discontinuation of steroids. Given
the improvement of the first subject on corticosteroid treatment, we examined the records of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP)
and the Collaborative Clinical Research Network (CCRN) for other individuals reporting responses to corticosteroids prescribed for other
indications in a retrospective review (Table 1) . Nine people with FRDA experienced improved balance, gait or speech with corticosteroid or
other immunomodulatory therapy, and no individuals were identified with significant steroid dependent worsening. One other patient treated
with steroids showed improvement, although it is unclear whether improvement was due to corticosteroids or other medications initiated at
the same time. All patients besides patients 1 and 2 described had normal kidney function.Table 1Patients with FRDA treated with
steroidsPatient No. GAA repeatsAge of FRDA onsetClinical coursePhenotypea ImmunomodulatorDoseDurationReason for steroid treatmentResponseAge
of steroid treatmentPatient 1 described650, 10004Began using wheelchair at age 10; scoliosis surgery at age 13Ataxia, loss of balance, loss
of sensation, leg cramps, tremors, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, scoliosis, fatiguePrednisolone, oral30 BID-50 QD26 months over
6 yearsNephrotic syndromeRecurrent neurologic improvement coincident with steroid dosing8–14Patient 2 described650, 95010Began using
wheelchair at age 12Ataxia, loss of balance, loss of sensation, spasms, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, scoliosisPrednisone,
oralunknown8 yearsNephrotic syndromePossible delay in presentation2–10Patient 3500, 57015Began using cane at 23, wheelchair at 29Ataxia,
loss of balance, loss of sensation, leg spasms, restless legs, scoliosis, sleep apneaPrednisone and Medrol, oral8 QAM4–5 monthsChronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (likely misdiagnosis)Mild improvements in gait, eventual progression18Patient 4725, presumed point
mutation7Began using wheelchair at 17Ataxia, loss of balance, loss of sensation, leg spasms, restless legs, sleep apnea, fatigue,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, scoliosisPrednisone, oral15–30 mg BID7 monthsChronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (likely
misdiagnosis)Improvements in balance, eventual progression12Patient 5unknownunknownUnknownUnknownPrednisoneunknownunknownRib
fracturesImprovement in GaitunknownPatient 61000, 10003Began using wheelchair at age 7Ataxia, loss of balance, loss of sensation, leg
spasms, restless legs, increased tone, tremor, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, scoliosisPrednisoloneunknownunknownChronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (likely misdiagnosis)Improvement in gait and strength, eventual progression3Patient 71113, point mutation2Began
using walker at age 5Ataxia, loss of balance, loss of sensation, leg spasms, sleep apnea, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
scoliosisMethylprednisolone, pulse therapy30 mg QD5 daysPneumonitisNo change in gait, balance, improved energy6Patient 8766, 10007Able to
walk without assistive deviceMinimal ataxia, loss of balance, no scoliosis or cardiac screeningSolumedrol, oral5 mg
TID5 monthsUnclearSustained improvements in balance, eventual progression9Patient 941, 69643Began using a walker at age 58Ataxia, loss of
balance, loss of sensation, leg spasms, increased toneDepomedrone, injection80 mg QD7–9 yearsSciatic painImprovements in gait and
speech49Patient 10966, 10992Able to walk without assistive deviceAtaxia, loss of balance, loss of sensation, fatiguePrednisolone, oral30 mg
OPD3 daysAcute laryngotra-cheitisImprovements in falling and fatigue8 aPhenotype at closest exam to steroid use Patients with FRDA treated
with steroids aPhenotype at closest exam to steroid use There are several limitations to this study. Improvement in the context of
corticosteroid treatment often occurred in the context of significant clinical changes, such as NS in the case of the two cases presented
and surgery or trauma in other FRDA patients treated with steroids. Furthermore, in two cases, steroid treatment was initiated following
intravenous immunoglobulin G treatment prescribed for chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy and Guillain-Barre syndrome, both
likely misdiagnoses for Friedreich Ataxia. This raises the possibility that in these cases concomitant intravenous immunoglobulin G
treatment was at least partially responsible for noted improvements. We describe two patients with FRDA and NS, one of whom demonstrated
significant improvement with corticosteroid treatment. An association between FRDA and NS was initially reported in a single family in
association with myoclonic epilepsy. Epilepsy was not identified in our subject, thus dissociating such findings (as predicted previously).
As NS and FRDA are both rare, the present association in multiple unrelated subjects is unlikely to be coincidental. Furthermore, nephrotic
syndrome has been documented in a variety of mitochondrial cytopathies and mutations in the synthesis of Coenzyme Q10 cause a subset of
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome cases [19, 20]. Mitochondrial dysfunction is central to the pathophysiology of Friedreich Ataxia . Lack
of frataxin disrupts the production of iron-sulfur clusters and increases levels of intracellular ROS in animal models,patient biopsies and
FRDA fibroblasts, suggesting increased oxidative stress in FRDA cells [10, 22–24]. Although the typical symptomatology of FRDA results from
mitochondrial dysfunction in the spine, cerebellum and heart, we hypothesize that the cases of nephrotic syndrome in FRDA described result
from mitochondrial involvement in renal cells. Interestingly one of our subjects showed substantial neurological improvement following
steroid treatment. No improvement in the non-neurological symptoms of FRDA were noted. Although this might represent a secondary event
associated with improvement in her NS, we identified some degree of steroid responsiveness in her independent of NS and in other patients
with FRDA. This could represent an anti-inflammatory effect (as two other patients responded transiently to intravenous immunoglobulin G) or
could be the result of other effects of corticosteroids such as increased strength as a compensatory mechanism for balance dysfunction. The
former possibility seems most likely, as a secondary inflammatory response in FRDA has been revealed in autopsy studies and in alterations
of immune pathways in microarray analysis [11, 12]. This is felt to be the mechanism behind the well-documented response of Duchenne
muscular dystrophy to corticosteroids [25, 26]. On the molecular level, it is possible that steroids modify the oxidative stress caused by
frataxin deficiency and subsequent mitochondrial disease. This change in oxidative stress was hypothesized to be a cause for neurological
improvement following steroid treatment in ataxia-telangiectasia . The catabolic effect of steroids could provide a mechanism for the
improvements seen in FRDA, as altered lipid metabolism has been documented in rat myocytes with diminished frataxin levels and in
Drosophilia melanogaster [28, 29]. The present patient, taken with previous basic and scientific research, suggests the importance of pilot
studies examining the efficacy of pulse steroid treatment as a potential therapy in FRDA. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patients for review of their records for publications. A copy of the written consent is available for review. Friedreich’s Ataxia Guanine-
Adenine-Adenine Nephrotic Syndrome Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Collaborative Clinical Research Network Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JS compiled case series data and drafted manuscript; CI
compiled case series data; SV provided physical therapy notes and interpretation; KS contributed to case series data and provided critical
direction for the paper; DL contributed to manuscript and provided critical direction for the paper. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Authors’ information DL is professor of Pediatrics and Neurology at the Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
and founding physician in the Penn Medicine/CHOP Friedreich’s Ataxia Center of Excellence. KS is the nurse practitioner for the Friedreich’s
Ataxia clinic at CHOP. This work was supported by grants from the Friedreich Ataxia Research Alliance. This study was sponsored by a grant
from the Friedreich Ataxia Research Alliance. The funding body did not contribute to the design of the study; collection, analysis, and
interpretation of data; or the writing of the manuscript.
