Angiomyolipoma is a benign mesenchymal tumor composed of variable amounts of smooth muscle, adipose tissue and thick-walled blood vessels,
and usually named PEComas (perivascular epithelioid cell tumors). PEComas share overlapping histopathological features with epithelioid
cells along a perivascular distribution and characteristic immunohistochemistry with coexpression of myoid and melanocytic markers (HMB-45
/or Melan-A). We report the first case of primary orbital angiomyolipoma with negative melanocytic marker. An 80-year-old Asian woman had a
2-year history of progressive swelling in the left upper eyelid. External examination revealed 3 cm of relative proptosis of the left eye
and a palpable mass in the left superonasal orbit. Computed tomographic scan demonstrated a circumscribed, heterogeneous orbital mass.
Excision biopsy was done and the histological finding demonstrated the orbital mass was composed of mature adipocytes, intermingled with
spindle or oval-shaped cells, and accompanied by thick-walled blood vessels. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were positive for CD34 and
HHF-35, but negative for cytokeratin, HMB-45 and Melan-A. The diagnosis of angiomyolipoma was made. No recurrence was noted at 2-year
follow-up. In our case, the HMB-45 negativity may be explained by the rarity of the epithelioid cells, and the HMB-45 positivity is often
weaker or absent in spindle cells. Angiomyolipoma, although rare, should be added to the differential diagnosis of space-occupying orbital
lesion. Angiomyolipoma, originally thought to be a hamartoma, is a benign mesenchymal tumor composed of variable amounts of smooth muscle,
adipose tissue and thick-walled blood vessels, and usually named PEComas (perivascular epithelioid cell tumors). It occurs most commonly in
the kidney as a sporadic case or as part of the tuberous sclerosis complex . We presented the first case of primary orbital angiomyolipoma
with negative melanocytic markers. An 80-year-old woman had a 2-year history of progressive fullness in the left upper eyelid. External
examination revealed 3 mm of relative proptosis of the left eye and a nontender palpable firm mass in the left superonasal orbit (Fig. 1a).
The remainder of the ocular examination was within normal limit. Past medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Computed tomographic scan
demonstrated a circumscribed, heterogeneous orbital mass displacing the left globe laterally (Fig. 1b, c and d). Surgical removal of the
tumor was performed through anterior orbitotomy in an en bloc fashion. At the time of surgery, the 1.8 × 1.8 × 1.3 cm yellowish mass was
encapsulated and solid (Fig. 2a). Histologically, the orbital mass was composed of mature adipocytes, intermingled with spindle or oval-
shaped cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, accompanied by thick-walled blood vessels (Fig. 2b). Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were
positive for CD34 and HHF-35 (Fig. 2c and d), but negative for cytokeratin, HMB-45 and Melan-A. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of
angiomyolipoma. Systemic check-up was unremarkable. No recurrence was noted at 2-year follow-up.Fig. 1Preoperative photograph shows a
palpable mass on left superonasal orbit (a, arrow). Axial (b) and coronal (c) planes of computed tomographic scan show a circumscribed soft
tissue mass on the left superonasal orbit with heterogenic density containing areas of fat attenuation. The mass demonstrates heterogenous
enhancement (d)Fig. 2Grossly, the tumor is a 1.8 × 1.8 × 1.3 cm yellowish, encapsulated, solid mass (a). Microscopic features of the tumor
shows it is comprised of spindle to ovoid-shaped muscle cells interspersed with irregular vascular channels and mature adipocytes (b,
hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification, ×100). Immunohistochemical staining reveals that the proliferating vessels are positive
for CD34 (c) and smooth muscle cells are positive for HHF-35 (d) (original magnification, ×100) Preoperative photograph shows a palpable
mass on left superonasal orbit (a, arrow). Axial (b) and coronal (c) planes of computed tomographic scan show a circumscribed soft tissue
mass on the left superonasal orbit with heterogenic density containing areas of fat attenuation. The mass demonstrates heterogenous
enhancement (d) Grossly, the tumor is a 1.8 × 1.8 × 1.3 cm yellowish, encapsulated, solid mass (a). Microscopic features of the tumor shows
it is comprised of spindle to ovoid-shaped muscle cells interspersed with irregular vascular channels and mature adipocytes (b, hematoxylin
and eosin stain, original magnification, ×100). Immunohistochemical staining reveals that the proliferating vessels are positive for CD34
(c) and smooth muscle cells are positive for HHF-35 (d) (original magnification, ×100) Primary orbital angiomyolipoma is a rare entity of
orbital tumor. Until now, only 4 cases of ocular perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa) have been reported, and all had positive
melanocytic markers . All reported 4 cases of ocular PEComas were female and their tumor location was eyelid (2 cases), ciliary body (1
case), and orbit (1 case) respectively. PEComas often share overlapping histopathological features with epithelioid cells along a
perivascular distribution and characteristic immunohistochemistry with coexpression of myoid and melanocytic markers (HMB-45 /or Melan-A) .
Current case is unique in that the tumor lacked reactivity for melanin-associated antigens HMB-45 and Melan-A, which is similar to some
angiomyolipomas from skin, head and neck . The HMB-45 negativity may be explained by the rarity of the epithelioid cells in these cases, and
the HMB-45 positivity is often weaker or absent in spindle cells . In addition, these angiomyolipomas are usually relative small, contrary
to what happens to kidney and liver tumors, which are often large. However, because of the small number of reported cases, whether these
HMB-negative angiomyolipoma is a new variant of PEComas require further investigation. Differential diagnosis should include giant cell
angiofibroma which is a highly vascular tumor comprising a spindle-cell proliferation with numerous multinucleated giant cells and
pseudovascular spaces, and immunohistochemically positive for CD34, CD99, and vimentin . Approximately one third of renal angiomyolipomas
occur in patients with tuberous sclerosis. However, this association has been rarely reported in extrarenal angiomyolipoma, including of
ocular angiomyolipoma. Because most angiomyolipomas contain varied amounts of adipose tissue, image features of fat attenuation at
unenhanced CT may help in diagnosis. Although most angiomyolipomas show a benign course, some reports have suggested that histologically
atypical angiomyolipomas are potentially malignancy. Therefore, wide excision and regular follow-up are warranted. In summary, we report a
case of primary orbital angiomyolipoma, which showed different immunohistochemical features from prior reported ocular PEComa. Although
rare, angiomyolipoma should be added to the differential diagnosis of space-occupying orbital lesion. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the editor of this journal. Perivascular epithelioid cell tumors Muscle actin antibody Melanosome specific antigen Melanoma antigen Computed
tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CYL and HCK drafted this
manuscript, collected the data, and reviewed the literature. WKY and SCK reviewed the literature. CCT interpreted the data, and critically
reviewed the manuscript. CJLL critically reviewed the manuscript finally. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was
partially supported by a grant (V104-C-092) from Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, and a grant (104-2314-B-075 -056 -MY2)
from Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan.
