Many years following transplantation, heart transplant recipients may require noncardiac major surgeries. Anesthesia in such patients may be
challenging due to physiological and pharmacological problems regarding allograft denervation and difficult immunosuppressive management.
Massive hemorrhage, hypoperfusion, renal, respiratory failure, and infections are some of the most frequent complications related to
thoracic aorta aneurysm repair. Understanding how to optimize hemodynamic and infectious risks may have a substantial impact on the outcome.
This case report aims at discussing risk stratification and anesthetic management of a 54-year-old heart transplant female recipient,
affected by Marfan syndrome, undergoing thoracic aorta aneurysm repair. Non-cardiac surgical procedures in heart transplant recipients are
becoming more numerous. Reported below is the first management description of a heart transplant recipient undergoing thoraco-abdominal
aortic aneurysm repair, a procedure at high risk of morbidity and mortality. The anaesthetist's management together with a thorough
knowledge of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are key aspects for an effective outcome. We took the cue from this individual
patient to analyze tips and tricks for future anaesthesiologists facing such challenging cases. A 54-year-old Marfan syndrome female was
admitted to our department due to large (>7 cm) symptomatic dissecting aneurysm involving the thoracic aorta. Her history reveals acute type
A aortic dissection 9 years earlier, with consequent aortic valve and ascending aorta replacement. Myocardial infarction and end-stage heart
failure rapidly developed leading to orthotopic heart transplantation 2 years later. The patient was not a candidate for endovascular
repair, lacking an adequate proximal aneurysm neck, and was listed for an open procedure [Figure 1]. Parasagittal angio-computed tomography
of a 55-year-old Marfan patient with previous repair of type A dissection and orthotropic heart transplantation. The residual dissection of
the descending thoracic aorta underwent gross aneurysmatic dilatation which is now over 7 cm in diameter and tender. There is no suitable
neck for endovascular repair Preoperative assessment included echocardiographic evaluation which reported mild left ventricular hypertrophy,
normal function but altered diastolic pattern (ventricular septum 11 mm, posterior wall 10 mm, end-diastolic dimension 44 mm, end-systolic
dimension 29 mm, tissue Doppler velocity 110 mL, telesystolic volume 48 mL, and left ventricular ejection fraction 56%); severe left atrial
dilation (volume 100 mL); mild mitral regurgitation due to annular dilation and leaflet fibrosis; right atrial dilation, mild tricuspid
insufficiency, normal right ventricular function (24 mm), and pulmonary pressures (30 mmHg). Coronary angiography was performed with 60%
stenosis of the left anterior descending artery. No other coronary artery had significant stenoses. Functional impact of the stenosis was
not assessed, with dobutamine stress-test or computed tomography (CT), due to lack of adequate timing before surgery and overall assessment
as not hemodynamically severe. Brain CT, chest X-ray, functional respiratory evaluation, and carotid duplex scan were all negative. A
thoracic epidural catheter was placed (T7-8) for analgesia; an arterial access was gained cannulating the right humeral artery. General
anesthesia was induced using propofol 200 mg, fentanyl 200 mcg, and cis-atracurium 20 mg. Intubation was performed via direct laryngoscopy
using a double-lumen orotracheal tube (DLT) (robertshaw 37). A high-flow catheter (Fr12) was placed in the right internal jugular vein,
together with a pulmonary arterial catheter (PAC) sheath (Fr8.5), and a quadri-lumen catheter in the right subclavian vein. Transesophageal
echocardiographic (TEE) probe was also inserted. Anesthesia maintenance was obtained with desflurane, Et 6–7%, and top-up 2 mg cis-
atracurium every 60 min. Fenoldopam was infused for kidney protection and low-dose epinephrine, in the postclamp period, to maintain
adequate cardiovascular performance. Thoracic aorta aneurysm (TAA) repair was performed with left heart bypass (LHB) (biomedics centrifugal
pump, superior left pulmonary vein to left femoral artery); the aorta was clamped proximally between left common carotid and left subclavian
arteries. A 24 mm Dacron tube graft was used to replace the aneurysmal aorta. Total intraoperative blood loss was 5500 mL, replaced by blood
salvage and transfusion of packed red blood cells (800 mL) and fresh frozen plasma (1500 mL). No adverse events were recorded. Due to
significant blood loss (2000 mL), on the first postoperative day, from the left thoracic drainage, the patient was reopened, a hematoma was
removed and all surgical anastomoses and possible bleeding sites were thoroughly checked. The patient then required low-dose epinephrine
(maximum 0.02 mcg/kg/min) for approximately 18 h, and upon weaning transthoracic echocardiography was performed confirming good bi-
ventricular function. Weaning from mechanical ventilation occurred 43 h from first intensive care unit (ICU) admission. A clinical picture
of acute-on-chronic kidney injury developed in the first few days, with spontaneous normalization of serum creatinine and a constantly
maintained urinary output. Overall, the patient spent 3 days in ICU, was then sent to the vascular surgery ward, and on the eighth
postoperative day was transferred to a rehabilitation center. At 6 months from the surgical procedure, the patient is alive and well. Heart
transplant recipients are greatly increasing worldwide with reported 90% and 50% survival at 1 and 5 years, respectively. The prolonged life
expectancy, linked to new pharmacological and interventional approaches, creates a new category of patients at increased risk of requiring
noncardiac surgical procedures. Cardiac transplant recipients represent a unique challenge to nontransplant anesthesiologists for the
altered physiology and increased complication rate. Heart-transplant patients develop cardiac allograft vasculopathy, due to progressive and
diffuse intimal hyperplasia that leads to coronary artery disease. It is, therefore, advisable to perform adequate evaluation in the
preoperative setting, with coronary angiography and functional tests. Brain CT is strongly suggested when, as in the present report, a
history of neurological events is present. Chest X-ray is routinely performed to check the presence of tracheal distortion, which can lead
to difficult orotrcheal intubation, atelectasis, or pneumonia. Functional respiratory evaluation can predict difficult oxygenation during
one-lung ventilation. The findings of preoperative carotid stenosis, usually detected with carotid duplex scan, require higher mean arterial
pressure during surgery, and improving brain perfusion. A transplanted heart loses sympathetic, parasympathetic, and sensory innervation
while preserving intrinsic cardiac mechanisms, making the heart strictly dependent on starling's pressure-volume relationship. Therefore,
optimization of preload is essential to counteract vasodilation and maintain adequate stroke volume, as performed in our setting, with 1000
mL of crystalloid. During TAA surgery, large volume shifts are expected and invasive hemodynamic monitoring and constant TEE imaging control
are mandatory. For these reasons, we cannulated the humeral artery for invasive blood pressure measurement and an expert anesthesiologist in
TEE was present during the surgery. We strongly recommend adding TEE monitoring to PAC in TAA repair with LHB because it allows more
accurate assessment of biventricular function, new regional wall motion abnormalities, and optimized preload. A DLT was used to avoid
intraprocedural dislocations. One-lung ventilation in TAA repair improves surgical exposure and decreases pulmonary contusion due to lung
retraction, which may progress to hemorrhage during heparin administration. However, large TAAs may cause distortion of the left main
bronchus rendering DLT placement difficult; in such cases a bronchial blocker or right-sided DLT can be possible options, and require
correct positioning assessment with fiber-optic bronchoscope. Loss of vagal influence results in increased resting heart values, 90–110 bpm
approximately; on the contrary, tachycardia in response to stressful stimuli (tracheal intubation, inadequate anesthetic depth, pain, and
hypovolemia) is weakened, therefore adequate analgesic coverage throughout the entire procedure is of maximal importance. In the present
report, we adopted epidural analgesia with the aim of achieving excellent analgesia both during surgery and postoperatively. A few concerns
regarding the altered pharmacodynamics: Reinnervation of transplanted heart muscle may occur, in a casual manner, leading to an altered and
unpredictable response to some drugs. This is the case of epinephrine and norepinephrine that have enhanced inotropic effect with respect to
vasoconstrictor one. Therefore, epinephrine is effective in such patients with heart failure to improve contractility; in our patient low-
dose epinephrine was administered for moderate left ventricular dysfunction. On the contrary, atropine is not effective in increasing heart
rate, and when neostigmine is administered as neuromuscular blocker (NMB) reversal agent, at the end of surgery, it can lead to bradycardia
and asystole. This seems to be due to allograft parasympathetic reinnervation, intrinsic sinoatrial node dysfunction, and denervation
hypersensitivity of muscarinic myocardial receptors to neostigmine. Thus, the use of rocuronium and subsequent NMB reversal with sugammadex
should be considered when an early extubation is planned. In our patient, we decided for cis-atracurium during surgery because of chronic
renal failure, and the admission to ICU after TAA without NMB reversal. Furthermore, in these patients, the risk of arrhythmias remains high
related both to denervation and intrinsic conduction abnormalities, especially atrioventricular blocks and right bundle branch block.
Therefore, in our patient, a temporary pacemaker was inserted via the femoral vein to treat possible brady-arrhythmias. Immunosuppressive
therapy requires appropriate management, gaining an acceptable equilibrium between the risk of rejection and the risk of developing
infections. To conclude, the following aspects should be taken into consideration for a positive and straightforward perioperative outcome:
Preoperative risk stratification of allograft vasculopathyIntraoperative TEE-directed hemodynamic optimizationPrevention and prompt
treatment of brady- arrhythmias using both intracardiac and epicardial temporary pacemakersMinimization of immunosuppressive regimen
interruption and careful evaluation of early signs of infection (temperature and white blood cells count). Preoperative risk stratification
of allograft vasculopathy Intraoperative TEE-directed hemodynamic optimization Prevention and prompt treatment of brady- arrhythmias using
both intracardiac and epicardial temporary pacemakers Minimization of immunosuppressive regimen interruption and careful evaluation of early
signs of infection (temperature and white blood cells count). Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
