Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) are currently used to prevent and treat asthma and recurrent wheezing attacks in children. Fluticasone
propionate (FP) is one of the most commonly prescribed ICSs because it is considered effective and well tolerated. A male infant of
approximately 1 year of age, who was born to parents without relevant clinical problems or family histories including diabetes, was brought
to our attention for recurrent wheezing. When he was approximately 2 years old, a regular daily inhaled treatment with FP given using a
spacer was prescribed. With this therapy, the child obtained good control of his symptoms with no further recurrences, but after
approximately 2 months of treatment he was admitted to the emergency room because he was whining and agitated and exhibited increased
diuresis and water intake. Laboratory tests revealed hyperglycaemia (181 mg/dL), mild glycosuria, blood alkalosis (pH 7.49), a bicarbonate
level of 31 mmol/L, a pCO2 level of 39 mmHg, a serum sodium level of 135 mEq/L and a serum potassium level of 3.5 mEq/L. The parents
confirmed that the recommended dose of FP had been administered with no increase in the amount of drug. The child was immediately treated
with endovenous infusion of physiological saline for 24 h, and his glycaemic levels as well as venous blood gas analysis returned to normal,
with an absence of glucose in the urine. Oral glucose tolerance test results and glycated haemoglobin levels were normal. Monitoring of
blood glucose levels before and after meals for three consecutive days did not reveal any further increase above normal levels. He was
discharged with a diagnosis of transient symptomatic hyperglycaemia during ICS therapy and the suggestion to replace his inhaled FP therapy
with oral montelukast. Montelukast was continued for 6 months; during this time, the child did not present any other hyperglycaemia
episodes. Although there is no evidence of causation, this case report represents an interesting and unusual description of paediatric
transient symptomatic hyperglycaemia after treatment with inhaled FP and highlights the importance of considering this potential adverse
event and the necessity of informing parents of the possible clinically relevant risks associated with this drug. As in adults, inhaled
corticosteroids (ICSs) are currently used in children to prevent and treat asthma and recurrent wheezing attacks. Fluticasone propionate
(FP), either alone or in association with other bronchodilators, is one of the most commonly prescribed ICSs because it is considered
effective and well tolerated . Due to its low systemic bioavailability, FP has been associated with a lower rate of adverse reactions in
comparison to other ICSs including budesonide . Moreover, at the recommended doses of 100–200 μg/day FP administration can significantly
reduce the incidence of wheezing exacerbation and improve respiratory symptoms during acute attack without any relevant adverse effects even
in young children . Only long-term treatment with significantly higher than recommended dosages has been associated with clinical
complications, including growth retardation, bone osteoporosis, and acute adrenal crisis with hypoglycaemia [3, 4]. Moreover, although a
number of studies have reported that adults receiving ICS, including FP, can develop diabetes or experience the progression of already
diagnosed diabetes , no case of symptomatic hyperglycaemia has been reported in children (Table 1). Recently, we diagnosed the first known
case of transient symptomatic hyperglycaemia in a child with recurrent wheezing and no predisposing factor for poor glucose tolerance who
was treated with FP. We report this case to highlight the importance of considering this potential adverse event during FP treatment in
children.Table 1Main characteristics of a child who developed transient symptomatic hyperglycaemia during treatment with a moderate dose of
inhaled fluticasone propionate (FP)CharacteristicPatientAge2 yearsGenderMalePrevious personal historyRecurrent asthmatic bronchitis and
atopic dermatitisFamilial historyFather with allergic asthma induced by inhaled allergens, uncle with coeliac disease, no other history of
immune-mediated disease in the familyAllergic testsIgE levels of 124 KU/L, skin prick testing negative for standard food and inhaled
allergensTherapies in the past yearRepeated courses of 100 μg inhaled FP twice a day for 7 days and then 50 μg twice a week for 3 days
during acute events; oral corticosteroids in three casesTherapy at hyperglycaemia onset100 μg inhaled FP twice a day from October 1, 2014,
to November 27, 2014Symptoms at emergency room admissionWhining and agitation with increased diuresis and water intakeClinical signs at
admissionWhining and agitation, no sign suggestive of acute infection, normal respiratory evaluationLaboratory
evaluationGlycaemia181 mg/dLGlycosuriaPresentBlood gas analysispH 7.49, bicarbonates 31 mmol/L, pCO2 39 mmHg, sodium 135 mEq/L, potassium of
3.5 mEq/LOral glucose tolerance testNormalGlycated haemoglobin7 %TreatmentEndovenous infusion of physiological saline for 48 hPersistence of
symptoms6 hOutcomeReplacement of inhaled FP therapy with oral 4 mg montelukast once a day, no further hyperglycaemia episodes after 6 months
Main characteristics of a child who developed transient symptomatic hyperglycaemia during treatment with a moderate dose of inhaled
fluticasone propionate (FP) A male infant of approximately 1 year of age, who was born to parents without relevant clinical problems or
family histories including diabetes, was brought to the Outpatient Clinic for Pediatric Infectious Diseases of the University of Milan,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, for recurrent wheezing. Staring from the age of 6 months, he had
suffered from monthly episodes of upper respiratory infection associated with severe wheezing at every occasion. At admission, his general
condition was good, and there were no signs or symptoms of infection or bronchial obstruction. Laboratory tests revealed increased IgE
levels (124 KU/L), and skin prick testing for standard food and inhaled allergens was negative. Serum immunoglobulins (Ig and IgG
subclasses) were within normal ranges. On the basis of the patient’s clinical history, in case of an acute event, the administration of
100 μg of inhaled FP administered using a spacer twice a day for 7 days and then 50 μg twice a week for 3 days was suggested, with inhaled
salbutamol as needed. However, despite this protocol, over the following 12 months the child experienced 6 additional episodes of wheezing,
3 of which were severe enough to require oral corticosteroid administration to be controlled. Consequently, at the beginning of the
following fall season (i.e., 6 months after the last administration of oral corticosteroids), when he was approximately 2 years old, a
regular daily inhaled treatment with FP given using a spacer was prescribed. He received 100 μg of inhaled FP twice a day starting on
October 1, 2014, and the indication was to continue this treatment up until February 28, 2015. With this therapy, the child obtained good
control of his symptoms with no further recurrences, but after approximately 2 months of treatment he was admitted to the emergency room
because he was whining and agitated and exhibited increased diuresis and water intake. Laboratory tests revealed hyperglycaemia (181 mg/dL),
mild glycosuria, blood alkalosis (pH 7.49), a bicarbonate level of 31 mmol/L, a pCO2 level of 39 mmHg, a serum sodium level of 135 mEq/L and
a serum potassium level of 3.5 mEq/L. The parents confirmed that the recommended dose of FP had been administered with no increase in the
amount of drug. The child was immediately treated with endovenous infusion of physiological saline for 24 h, and his glycaemic levels as
well as venous blood gas analysis returned to normal, with an absence of glucose in the urine. Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) results
were normal and glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) level was 7 %. Monitoring of blood glucose levels before and after meals for three consecutive
days did not reveal any further increase above normal levels. He was discharged with a diagnosis of transient symptomatic hyperglycaemia
during ICS therapy and the suggestion to replace his inhaled FP therapy with 4 mg oral montelukast once a day. Montelukast was continued for
6 months; during this time, the child did not present any other hyperglycaemia episodes. Because of their topical application, ICSs have a
substantially better therapeutic index than oral corticosteroids and have almost entirely replaced these drugs in the prevention and
treatment of asthma and wheezing in both children and adults [1, 5]. FP pharmacokinetic characteristics suggest a very low risk of systemic
adverse events . In normal subjects, FP bioavailability is limited to approximately 1 %, the lowest value among all of the commonly used
ICSs, and its high first-pass metabolism ensures a prompt inactivation of the amount of drug that is swallowed during administration.
Practically, the risk of systemic adverse events with doses useful to control bronchial obstruction is marginal and is probably even lower
in patients with moderate or severe asthma, in whom factors such as airflow obstruction and ventilation-perfusion mismatch could alter drug
deposition in the lung and change systemic absorption. Previous studies on ICSs efficacy have also included evaluation of their safety with
routine blood chemistry assessment and haematological testing (that include blood glucose levels), showing that doses used for wheezing
prevention (including FP at 200 μg/day) have no clinically relevant side effects in pediatric age . In children, problems regarding glucose
metabolism have been reported only when significantly higher than recommended FP doses were used. Todd et al. have described three children
ranging in age from 7 to 9 years old who received inhaled FP at a dosage of 500–2000 μg/day for between 5 months and 5 years and who were
admitted to the hospital for seizures secondary to severe hypoglycaemia (blood glucose between 23.4 and 32.4 mg/dL) . A similar finding has
been reported by Drake et al. in four children treated with FP at a dose of 500–1500 μg/day for between 15 months and 5 years . In all
cases, hypoglycaemia was a consequence of iatrogenic adrenal suppression [3, 4]. Increased blood glucose concentration is a common
complication of oral corticosteroid administration because these drugs increase gluconeogenesis and decrease glucose uptake in the liver and
adipocytes by decreasing insulin binding . In adults, ICS administration has been associated with a moderate risk of increased blood glucose
concentrations only when administered at higher than recommended doses or when administered to patients already diagnosed as diabetic . The
child in the current report had no predisposing factor for poor glucose tolerance, as evidenced by normal values of OGTT and HbA1c, which
were assessed within a few days after hospital admission. The development of symptomatic hyperglycaemia is surprising and difficult to
explain. The patient did not receive oral corticosteroids close to the administration of FP. Due to the presence of glycosuria, blood
alkalosis and clinical symptoms, the hypothesis is that in the month prior to admission his blood glucose levels were even higher than those
detected by us at admission in the Emergency Room. However, we did not evaluate blood glucose and HbA1c concentrations prior to the
initiation of FP and we did not know whether these values were in the higher normal range before the beginning of FP treatment. Moreover, FP
was prescribed at an adequate dose and it was administered for a relatively short period of time. The parents confirmed that FP was
administered according to recommendations, but the reported level of compliance of parents has a very low accuracy. However, although there
is no evidence of causation, this interesting and unusual case report highlights the importance of informing parents of the possible
clinically relevant risks associated with the use of this drug. This case report has been approved by the Ethics Committee of Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for
publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review from the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Inhaled
corticosteroids Fluticasone propionate Oral glucose tolerance test Glycated haemoglobin Competing interests The authors have no competing
interests to declare. Authors’ contributions ML and SE drafted the manuscript. NP revised the manuscript and made substantial scientific
contributions. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. The authors thank the patient and his parents for
allowing us to publish this case report.
