Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), or Lynch syndrome, accounts for 3 % of newly diagnosed cases of colorectal cancer. While
a partial or subtotal colectomy is indicated for early stage disease, there is a paucity of data addressing locally advanced disease
involving the foregut. We report two patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer presenting with locally advanced colon cancer
surgically managed by pancreaticoduodenectomy with en bloc partial colectomy and a review of the literature. Locally advanced colorectal
cancer in HNPCC is a rare clinical entity that requires special surgical consideration. Multidisciplinary treatment, including multi-
visceral resection, offers the best long-term outcome. Colorectal cancer (CRC) associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
(HNPCC) accounts for 3 % of newly diagnosed cases. It is genetically driven by an autosomal dominant mutation of DNA mismatch repair (MMR)
genes and has a phenotypic penetrance of 70–80 % . While a partial or subtotal colectomy may be indicated in early stage cancers, there is a
paucity of data addressing locally advanced disease involving the foregut. We report two cases and review the literature in the management
of this rare clinical entity. A healthy 56-year-old male presented with a 6-month history of early satiety, fatigue, and 80-pound weight
loss. His mother and brother died from CRC at ages 36 and 44, respectively, and sister died from endometrial cancer. Physical exam revealed
a firm, right upper quadrant mass. Laboratory data included a hematocrit level of 32.7 % (normal 40–52 %) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
level of 50.28 ng/dL (normal <3.0 ng/dL). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed a 13.0 × 10.0 cm localized
right upper quadrant mass arising from the ascending colon proximal to the hepatic flexure, indistinguishable from the duodenum, and
invading the right lateral abdominal wall. Colonoscopy revealed a large, nearly obstructing mass proximal to the hepatic flexure, and
esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a mass in the duodenum. Biopsies from both endoscopies revealed mucinous lesions suspicious but not
diagnostic of adenocarcinoma. Neither the positron emission tomography (PET) nor the pre-operative laparoscopy showed evidence of metastatic
disease. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not pursued due to lack of histologic confirmation of malignancy. Prior to surgery, he was admitted
with a lower extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT), for which he received an inferior vena cava (IVC) filter and therapeutic anticoagulation
with enoxaparin. The patient underwent a right hemicolectomy with en bloc classic pancreaticoduodenectomy and resection and reconstruction
of the anterior abdominal wall. Reconstruction involved an end-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy, hepaticojejunostomy, gastrojejunostomy, and
ileocolostomy. He had an unremarkable post-operative course. Histopathology of the surgical specimen revealed moderately differentiated
mucinous adenocarcinoma arising from the hepatic flexure of the colon with focal invasion into a segment of the adjacent small bowel,
peripancreatic soft tissues, and duodenum. Seventy-six lymph nodes and all surgical resection margins were negative for tumor.
Immunohistochemistry of the surgical specimen showed absence of DNA mismatch repair enzymes hMLH1 and hPMS2 with retention of normal hMSH2
and hMSH6. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was consistent with high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) in the tumor. Genetic testing of
peripheral blood leukocytes was consistent with mutated hMLH1. He underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with 12 cycles of oxaliplatin,
fluorouracil, and folinic acid (FOLFOX) chemotherapy. He remains free of disease 4.5 years after surgery. A healthy 36-year-old male
presented with fatigue, vague abdominal pain, diarrhea, and unintentional 40-pound weight loss. He was profoundly anemic with hemoglobin
4.2 g/dL (normal 13.0–18.0 g/dL), and CT demonstrated a 14-cm heterogeneous mass in the right hemi-abdomen (Fig. 1). Colonoscopy revealed a
partially obstructing tumor near the hepatic flexure (Fig. 2a), biopsies were consistent with adenocarcinoma, and immunohistochemistry
revealed the absence of DNA mismatch repair enzymes hMSH2 and hMSH6 with retention of normal hMLH1 and hPMS2. Upper endoscopy revealed a
7-cm partially obstructing ulcerated mass in the second part of the duodenum (Fig. 2b); biopsies revealed a well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma with immunostains suggesting a colonic primary (CK20/CDX2-positive, CK7-negative). Tumor markers were remarkable for an
elevated CEA level of 46.3 ng/dL (normal <3.0 ng/dL). Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, iniontecan, and leucovorin
(FOLFIRINOX) was administered but the patient only received 3 cycles. This treatment was complicated by gastrointestinal bleeding and
bilateral pulmonary emboli after bilateral lower extremity DVTs. Anticoagulation was initially contraindicated, so an IVC filter was placed.
The third cycle of chemotherapy was complicated by a perirectal abscess requiring drainage. Poor nutritional parameters prompted aggressive
enteral feeds via a nasojejunal feeding tube (pre-albumin 16 mg/dL (normal 18.5–35.8 mg/dL), albumin 2.8 g/dL (normal 3.4-5.4 g/dL)). His
CEA level decreased to 22.7 ng/dL (normal <3.0 ng/dL).Fig. 1Computed tomography with intravenous and oral contrast from case 2. Coronal
section of the abdomen and pelvis. Arrow points to 14.0 × 9.8 × 10.8 cm heterogeneous mass in the right upper quadrant abutting the
ascending colon and duodenum. Oral contrast is seen within the mass. The fat plane between the mass and the second segment of the duodenum
is obscuredFig. 2Endoscopy images, gross pathology, and histopathology from case 2. a Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerated, partially
obstructing, large mass in the transverse colon (marked by asterisk). The pediatric colonoscope could not completely traverse this large
mass due to tumor obstruction and alteration in the normal colon anatomy. b Upper endoscopy showed a large malignant ulcerated mass (marked
by asterisk) with no bleeding in the second part of the duodenum. c Part of the surgical specimen including colon (marked by single arrow),
duodenum (marked by double arrow), with the mass (marked by asterisk) with a diffusely mucinous appearance. d Hematoxylin and eosin stain of
primary colonic adenocarcinoma (viewed at ×40) with large pools of mucin evident. The tumor was 14 cm, low grade mucinous adenocarcinoma of
the colon with loss of mismatch repair proteins and high microsatellite instability. There was mild to moderate intratumoral lymphocytes,
mild to moderate peritumor lymphocytes, with low grade tumor budding, and no lymphovascular invasion. Margins were negative and 22 lymph
nodes were negative (not shown) Computed tomography with intravenous and oral contrast from case 2. Coronal section of the abdomen and
pelvis. Arrow points to 14.0 × 9.8 × 10.8 cm heterogeneous mass in the right upper quadrant abutting the ascending colon and duodenum. Oral
contrast is seen within the mass. The fat plane between the mass and the second segment of the duodenum is obscured Endoscopy images, gross
pathology, and histopathology from case 2. a Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerated, partially obstructing, large mass in the transverse colon
(marked by asterisk). The pediatric colonoscope could not completely traverse this large mass due to tumor obstruction and alteration in the
normal colon anatomy. b Upper endoscopy showed a large malignant ulcerated mass (marked by asterisk) with no bleeding in the second part of
the duodenum. c Part of the surgical specimen including colon (marked by single arrow), duodenum (marked by double arrow), with the mass
(marked by asterisk) with a diffusely mucinous appearance. d Hematoxylin and eosin stain of primary colonic adenocarcinoma (viewed at ×40)
with large pools of mucin evident. The tumor was 14 cm, low grade mucinous adenocarcinoma of the colon with loss of mismatch repair proteins
and high microsatellite instability. There was mild to moderate intratumoral lymphocytes, mild to moderate peritumor lymphocytes, with low
grade tumor budding, and no lymphovascular invasion. Margins were negative and 22 lymph nodes were negative (not shown) The patient
underwent a pylorus sparing pancreaticoduodenectomy with en bloc right hemicolectomy. Reconstruction involved an end-to-side
pancreaticojejunostomy, end-to-side hepaticojejunostomy, end-to-side duodenojejunostomy, and anatomical side-to-side and functional end-to-
end ileocolostomy. Examination of the specimen revealed mucinous adenocarcinoma arising from the right colon with direct extension to the
duodenal mucosa (Fig. 2c, d), and histopathology showed absence of DNA mismatch repair and high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Twenty-
two lymph nodes and all surgical resection margins were negative for tumor. There was no definitive tumor response to treatment. Post-
operative course was remarkable only for a grade A pancreatic fistula that was successfully managed by percutaneous drainage and
subcutaneous octreotide. He was discharged on post-operative day 8 on rivaroxaban in light of his continued need for anticoagulation. The
patient completed 4 months of adjuvant chemotherapy and remains well without evidence of recurrence 2 years after surgery. Colorectal cancer
(CRC) is the third most common malignancy and third leading cause of cancer death in the USA, with around 136,830 estimated new cases in
2013. There are several well-defined inherited CRC syndromes that include HNPCC, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), MutY human homologue-
associated polyposis (MAP), Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and Juvenile polyposis syndrome . These syndromes are the result of highly penetrant
germ line mutations that predispose to an early age onset and high lifetime risk of developing CRC. HNPCC is the most common of all
identified hereditary CRC syndromes with a mean age of colon cancer diagnosis of 61 years. Loss of expression of mismatch repair genes
(MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) secondary to mutations is a characteristic of HNPCC and accounts for over 97 % of mutations . Recently, germ line
mutations in the EPCAM gene that inactivate MSH2 have also been identified in families of HNPCC patients [3, 4]. These genetic abnormalities
are characterized by amplifications of microsatellite loci throughout the genome resulting in microsatellite high instability (MSI-H). MSI-H
is histologically characterized by tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, Crohn’s like lymphocytic reaction, and mucin; tumors are unique in that
they are predominantly proximal to the splenic flexure, have a low likelihood for regional and distant metastasis, and the adenoma-to-
carcinoma sequence is accelerated to 2–3 years compared to 7–10 year progression seen in sporadic cases . Furthermore, HNPCC is also
associated with a predisposition to the development of extra-colonic malignancies arising from intra-peritoneal organs, as well as the brain
and skin. Therefore, appropriate management of locally advanced CRC in the context of HNPCC requires special consideration. For diagnosis,
according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, all patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer under the age of 70,
or over the age of 70 and who also meet the Bethesda Guidelines, should undergo tumor testing by immunohistochemistry or MSI testing.
Greater than 90 % of HNPCC tumors are MSI-H and/or lack expression of at least one mismatch repair protein, so while positive screening
tests increase the possibility of HNPCC in younger patients, a definitive diagnosis cannot be made without identifying a germ line mutation
. Workup of newly suspected HNPCC cases should be similar to all newly diagnosed cases of colon cancer. This includes a complete colonoscopy
to rule out synchronous lesions, staging CTs of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and serum CEA to guide post-resection surveillance. Though
not recommended for sporadic colon cancer, strong consideration for an upper endoscopy and transvaginal ultrasound should be made because of
heightened risks for the development of upper gastrointestinal malignancies and gynecologic malignancies, respectively. With regard to
surgical management, a subtotal colectomy or segmental resection should be offered to patients. Given the measurable compromises to long-
term bowel function and quality of life, without clear survival advantage, our group favors a segmental colectomy and regional
lymphadenectomy as opposed to subtotal colectomy [5, 6]. In the cases presented in this paper, genetic testing and confirmation of HNPCC was
performed post-operatively, so while there was a high suspicion for HNPCC during pre-operative evaluation, surgical decision-making was
performed in the context of locally advanced CRC with potentially curative resection. For these cases, much has been written about locally
advanced, sporadic CRC with invasion into the pancreatic head or duodenum requiring pancreaticoduodenectomy. Multi-visceral resection
achieves an oncologically sound operation associated with prolonged overall survival, reduced local recurrence rates, and acceptable
perioperative morbidity and mortality when performed by experienced surgeons [7, 8]. Recently, investigators have reported that a more
extensive en bloc pancreaticoduodenectomy compared to an en bloc local resection is associated with an improved 5-year overall survival .
However, few reports address this surgical scenario in the context of HNPCC. While the basic oncologic principles of primary resection still
apply, 25 % of HNPCC patients who undergo a segmental colectomy will develop metachronous CRC after the index diagnosis . This is why some
surgeons advocate for an upfront total abdominal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis, but there has yet to be any data demonstrating an
improvement in survival in patients undergoing such an approach . A prophylactic total or subtotal colectomy in the context of a multi-
visceral resection would seem unnecessary. Regardless, in non-emergent cases, the benefits and risks of local vs extended resection should
be discussed with patients who are MMR deficient with confirmatory genetic testing, keeping in consideration patient preference, the effect
of bowel function on quality of life, and the predicted post-operative compliance to surveillance. The current standard for adequate staging
of right-sided colon cancers remains at least 12 lymph nodes, as espoused by the NCCN . Interestingly, MSI-H is associated with higher lymph
node yields in a prospective study of 204 patients with colon cancer, stages I–III (67 % of patients had ≥12 lymph nodes sampled, while 79 %
of patients with microsatellite instability had ≥12 lymph nodes sampled (OR 2.5, p = 0.007)); 5.6 % of the total lymph nodes were positive
for metastasis compared with 46 % of microsatellite stable (MSS) CRC resections in a separate study . This raises the question of whether
the proportion of positive lymph nodes may be a better prognosticator than the absolute number . However, the significant values for such
lymph node ratios are still under investigation and even with a ratio, there will still need to be an absolute minimum of lymph nodes
recommended for retrieval. The paradigm of chemotherapy for locally advanced CRC is changing. Recommendations for the use of pre-operative
neoadjuvant chemotherapy to provide better local control for R0 resection have been increasing, citing the theoretical eradication of
micrometastases and reduced perioperative tumor shedding, as well as downstaging with better progression-free and overall survival. More
recently, there is evidence of added benefit in combining neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment for CRC, as was performed in case 2 . However,
the benefit of chemotherapy in patients with HNPCC, regardless of timing, is unclear. Because of the distinct molecular background of MSI-H
tumors, it has been suggested that they may be less responsive to traditional CRC chemotherapeutic agents. In a retrospective study from the
Netherlands, there was no difference in 5-year overall survival in patients with stage III colon cancer of HNPCC families in comparing
patients treated with and without adjuvant 5FU (70 % 5-year survival for both the group that received adjuvant therapy and the group that
did not) . The benefit of chemotherapy in MSI-H CRC in HNPCC requires further investigation. Our two cases have several striking
similarities that highlight important issues in the surgical management of HNPCC. Each patient presented with proximal, locally advanced,
non-metastatic CRC. Careful pre-operative planning was required to perform multi-organ, en bloc resections with negative surgical margins.
Despite aggressive lymphadenectomies, neither patient had lymph node metastases arising from their MSI-H tumor. After completing adjuvant
chemotherapy, each patient remains disease free at 4.5 and 2.0 years from surgery, respectively. Intriguingly, both patients were also
diagnosed with DVTs prior to surgery. However, there is little information available on whether HNPCC confers a risk of hypercoagulability.
Locally advanced CRC involving the foregut is a rare presentation of HNPCC. A well-planned, multi-modality treatment approach is necessary
for treatment. A review of the literature, summarized in Table 1, supports that a pancreaticoduodenectomy with en bloc segmental colectomy
and regional lymphadenectomy provides patients with the potential for cure.Table 1Comparison of studies with regards to interventions for
colorectal cancerAuthorsYearNumber of patientsIntervention evaluatedMain conclusionsYou et al.2008522Quality of life (QOL) after extended
(201) vs segmental (321) colon resectionExtended resection yielded compromised bowel function, with decreased QOLZhang et al.201314En bloc
pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) and right hemicolectomy in right colon cancerOutcomes no worse than stage-matched patients without adjacent
organ involvementTemple et al.2014635PD (607) vs PD with colon resection (28)No significant difference in post-operative mortalityCirocchi
et al.201453En bloc (39) vs local resection (14) in locally advanced right colon cancerEn bloc resection improved overall 5-year
survivalKalady et al.2010296Segmental (253) vs total colectomy (43) in HNPCCSegmental resection increases the risk of metachronous colon
cancerBerg et al.2013204Impact of tumor genetics on lymph node harvest in stage I–III colon cancerNode harvest was greatest for cancers with
MSI but without KRAS/BRAFSamdani et al.2015256Effect of mismatch repair deficiency on lymph node yield in colorectal cancerMismatch repair
deficiency did not predict lymph node yieldSugimoto et al.20154172Prognostic value of lymph node ratio in stage III colon cancerLymph node
ratio, with a cutoff value of 0.18, was a significant independent prognostic factorHong et al.2014321Comparison of adjuvant chemotherapy
(fluorouracil and leucovorin (161) vs FOLFOX (160)) in stage II–III rectal cancer after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and resectionAdjuvant
FOLFOX improved survival compared to adjuvant fluorouracil and leucovorinde Vos tot Nederveen Cappel et al.200492Effect of adjuvant therapy
with 5-FU (28) vs no adjuvant therapy (64) in stage III colon cancer of HNPCC5-year survival did not differ Comparison of studies with
regards to interventions for colorectal cancer We have consent to publish from the individual patients whose cases were presented in this
report. carcinoembryonic antigen colorectal cancer computed tomography deep vein thrombosis familial adenomatous polyposis oxaliplatin,
fluorouracil, and folinic acid hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer inferior vena cava MutY human homologue-associated polyposis
mismatch repair microsatellite instability high microsatellite instability microsatellite stability National Comprehensive Cancer Network
Odds ratio polymerase chain reaction pancreaticoduodenectomy positron emission tomography quality of life Rebecca Zhu and Gabriella Grisotti
are co-first authors. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RZ and GG
described the case presentations, conducted the literature review, and drafted the manuscript. SAK and RRS conceived of the case
presentations and literature review, designed the literature review, and helped to draft and review the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
