Sir, Cavernous hemangiomas are benign vascular lesions of the brain and other organs that affect approximately 0.4-0.8% of the population.
Though symptoms are usually noted in the third or fourth decade; some cases have been reported in childhood. A 24-year-old Caucasian female
initially presented to our hospital at the age of 16 years with loss of consciousness following extensive physical activity. Brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the presence of a right parietal cavernous hemangioma associated with a tiny bleed [Figure 1].
Electroencephalography (EEG) was normal. A cerebral angiogram ruled out an arteriovenous malformation and aneurysmal dilatation. T2 MRI
image showing a cavernoma in the right peritrigonal white matter measuring 8.5 × 7.5 mm2 Three years after diagnosis, a follow-up MRI showed
no recent bleed in the cavernous hemangioma but revealed an enlarged pituitary gland. Magnetic resonance imaging of the sella was obtained
which showed the presence of a Rathke's cleft cyst between the anterior and posterior pituitary, 1.4 × 0.7 × 0.6 cm3 in size and deviating
the pituitary stalk superiorly [Figure 2]. We found no evidence in literature that addressed co-existence of a Rathke's cleft cyst with a
cavernous hemangioma. A Rathke's cyst is derived from remnants of Rathke's pouch; sellar or suprasellar cystic lesions lined by epithelium.
The incidence is 11-33% on postmortem examination. The cyst may compress the pituitary stalk, resulting in hyperprolactinemia. Hormonal work
up revealed high prolactin, with normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and cortisol. The patient denied having any symptoms that could be associated with
hyperprolactinemia despite a prolactin level of 156 ng/mL. She was started on a treatment with a dopamine receptor agonist, cabergoline, for
a total duration of 6 weeks. The repeat prolactin level was normal at 6 weeks after the treatment. At this point, we carried out a physical
examination where a non tender, mobile, node that was less than 1 cm was palpated in the left hemi thyroid. It was less than 1 cm in size,
mobile, and nontender. Serum TSH and free thyroxine (T4) were normal. Ultrasound of the thyroid revealed agenesis of the right hemi thyroid
and prominent left hemithyroid that contained cysts [Figure 3]. MR sella showing an enlargement of the pituitary gland, which contains a
cyst located between the anterior and posterior pituitary. The cyst shows hyperintense signal on T1 (a) and shows no enhancement post
gadolinium (b) Thyroid ultrasound: (a) Reconstructed image comparing the left and right thyroid lobes, showing absence of thyroid tissue on
the right. The left hemithyroid contains multiple cysts (b) Absence of the right thyroid lobe Thyroid hemiagenesis is the congenital absence
of one of the thyroid lobes, estimated to affect 0.02-0.16% of the population, with around 300 cases reported in literature. This condition
tends to occur in females more than in males, the left lobe is more often affected than the right lobe, and it predisposes the affected
patient to associated thyroid pathologies such as hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, nodular goiter, Hashimoto thyroiditis, Graves's disease,
and papillary thyroid carcinoma. We believe that the occurrence of all three pathologies in a single patient may have a genetic basis, but
are unclear at the moment as to what it could be.
