We report on a stroke patient who showed recovery of hypersomnia concurrent with the recovery of an injured ascending reticular activating
system (ARAS), which was demonstrated by diffusion tensor tractography (DTT). A 70-year-old female patient underwent coiling of the left
ruptured posterior communicating artery after subarachnoid hemorrhage and both extraventricular drainage for management of an
intraventricular hemorrhage. At 2 months after onset, when she started rehabilitation, she exhibited intact consciousness, with the full
score on the Glasgow Coma Scale: 15. However, she showed severe hypersomnia: she always fell asleep without external stimulation and the
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (EPS) score was 24 (full score: 24, cut off for hypersomnia: 10). She underwent comprehensive rehabilitative
therapy, including neurotropic drugs, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. Her hypersomnia has shown improvement as 14 (3 months
after onset), 11 (4 months after onset), 7 (12 months after onset), and 6 (24 months after onset), respectively. On 2-month DTT, narrowing
of both lower dorsal and ventral ARASs was observed on both sides: in particular, among 4 neural tracts of the lower ARAS, the right lower
ventral ARAS was the narrowest. By contrast, on 24-month DTT, the 4 narrowed neural tracts of both lower dorsal and ventral ARASs were
thickened compared with those of 2-month DTT. Recovery of hypersomnia with recovery of an injured lower ARAS on DTT was observed in a stroke
patient. Our results suggest that evaluation of the lower ARAS using DTT might be useful for stroke patients with hypersomnia. Hypersomnia
(excessive daytime sleepiness) is a common sequela following stroke: persistent hypersomnia was reported in ∼5% of stroke patients.1
Hypersomnia in stroke patients is related to poor outcome; therefore elucidation of its pathogenetic mechanism is clinically important.1
Many previous studies have suggested that involvement of the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) might be a pathogenetic mechanism
of hypersomnia in stroke patients.2–5 Introduction of diffusion tensor tractography (DTT), derived from diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), has
enabled 3-dimensional reconstruction and estimation of the ARAS in the live human brain.6 A few studies using DTT have reported that injury
of the ARAS was the cause of hypersomnia in patients with brain injury.7,8 However, no study on the recovery of hypersomnia along with the
recovery of an injured ARAS has been reported. In the present study, we report on a stroke patient who showed recovery of hypersomnia
concurrent with the recovery of an injured ARAS, which was demonstrated by DTT. A 70-year-old female patient underwent coiling of the left
ruptured posterior communicating artery after subarachnoid hemorrhage and both extraventricular drainage for management of intraventricular
hemorrhage and hydrocephalus at the neurosurgery department of a university hospital (Figure 1A). At 2 months after onset, she was
transferred to the rehabilitation department of the same university hospital in order to undergo rehabilitation. The patient exhibited
intact consciousness, with a full score on the Glasgow Coma Scale: 15. However, she showed severe hypersomnia: she always fell asleep
without external stimulation and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (EPS) score was 24 (full score: 24, cut off for hypersomnia: 10). She
underwent comprehensive rehabilitative therapy, including neurotropic drugs, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. Her hypersomnia has
shown improvement as 14 (3 months after onset), 11 (4 months after onset), 7 (12 months after onset), and 6 (24 months after onset),
respectively.9 The patient provided signed, informed consent, and the study protocol was approved by Yeungnam University hospital
Institutional Review Board. (A) Brain CT images at onset show a subarachnoid hemorrhage and intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus.
(B) Brain MR images at 2 months after onset show a leukomalactic lesion in both fronto-parietal lobes. (C) Results of diffusion tensor
tractography (DTT) for both lower dorsal and ventral ascending reticular activating system (ARAS). On 2-month DTT, narrowing (arrows) of
both lower dorsal and ventral ARASs was observed on both sides: in particular, among 4 neural tracts of the lower ARAS, the right lower
ventral ARAS was narrowest. By contrast, on 24-month DTT, the 4 narrowed neural tracts of both lower dorsal and ventral ARASs were thickened
compared with those of 2-month DTT (arrows). (D) DTTs of the lower dorsal and ventral lower ARAS of a normal subject (65-year-old woman).
ARAS = ascending reticular activating system, CT = computed tomography, DTT = diffusion tensor tractography, MR = magnetic resonance. DTI
data were acquired 2 times (2 and 24 months after onset) using a 6-channel head coil on a 1.5 T Philips Gyroscan Intera (Philips, Best,
Netherlands) with single-shot echo-planar imaging. For each of the 32 noncollinear diffusion sensitizing gradients, 67 contiguous slices
were acquired parallel to the anterior commissure-posterior commissure line. Imaging parameters were as follows: acquisition
matrix = 96 × 96; reconstructed matrix = 192 × 192; field of view = 240 × 240 mm2; TR = 10,726 ms; TE = 76 ms; b = 1000 s/mm2; NEX = 1; and
a slice thickness of 2.5 mm with no gap. The Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library
was used for analysis of the diffusion-weighted imaging data. Affine multiscale 2-dimensional registration was used for correction of head
motion effect and image distortion due to eddy current. FMRIB Diffusion Software with routines option (0.5 mm step lengths, 5000 streamline
samples, curvature thresholds = 0.2) was used for fiber tracking.10,11 Two portions of the ARAS were reconstructed by selection of fibers
passing through regions of interest (ROI). For analysis of the lower dorsal ARAS, the seed ROI was placed on the pontine reticular formation
(RF) and the target ROI was placed on the intralaminar thalamic nucleus.12 For reconstruction of the lower ventral ARAS, the seed ROI was
placed on the pontine RF and the target ROI was placed on the hypothalamus.13 Out of 5000 samples generated from a seed voxel, results were
visualized at the threshold of 2 streamlines through each voxel for analysis. On 2-month DTT, narrowing of both lower dorsal and ventral
ARASs was observed on both sides: in particular, among 4 neural tracts of the lower ARAS, the right lower ventral ARAS was narrowest. By
contrast, on 24-month DTT, the 4 narrowed neural tracts of both lower dorsal and ventral ARASs were thickened compared with those of 2-month
DTT. In the present study, 4 neural tracts of the lower dorsal and ventral lower ARAS were evaluated using DTT: the lower dorsal ARAS
between the pontine RF and the thalamic ILN, and the lower ventral ARAS between the pontine RF and the hypothalamus. Narrowing of the 4
neural tracts of the lower dorsal and ventral ARAS was observed on 2-month DTT and these were thickened on 24-month DTT compared with those
of 2-month DTT concurrent with the recovery of hypersomnia. The change of findings indicated recovery of 4 injured neural tracts of the
lower dorsal and ventral ARAS. Many studies have reported close association of the hypothalamus with hypersomnia; thus it appeared that the
recovery of this patient's hypersomnia was attributed to the recovery of an injured lower ARAS, particularly the recovery of an injured
right ventral lower ARAS which appeared to be most severely injured on 2-month DTT.5,14,15 Previous studies have demonstrated injury of the
lower ARAS by intraventricular hemorrhage and subarachnoid hemorrhage, respectively, using DTT.16,17 A few studies using DTT have reported
on the association of injury of the ARAS with hypersomnia in patients with brain injury.7,8 In 2015, Jang et al reported on injury of the
lower ARAS, particularly injury of the ventral lower ARAS in a patient with a pontine hemorrhage. A recent case study reported that
narcolepsy was ascribed to injury of the ventral ARAS in a patient with mild traumatic brain injury.8 Therefore, our results appear to be
consistent with those of the above-mentioned previous studies in terms of the pathogenetic mechanism of injury of the lower ARAS by
intraventricular hemorrhage and subarachnoid hemorrhage, and the association of injury of the ventral ARAS with hypersomnia.7,8,16,17 In
addition, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate recovery of hypersomnia concurrent with recovery of an
injured lower ARAS in stroke patients. In conclusion, recovery of hypersomnia with recovery of an injured lower ARAS was demonstrated in a
stroke patient using DTT. Our results suggest that evaluation of the lower ARAS using DTT might be useful for stroke patients with
hypersomnia. This study is limited because it is a case report; therefore, conduct of further studies comprising a large number of patients
would be necessary. In addition, the critical region of the ARAS for hypersomnia should be elucidated by further studies. Abbreviations:
ARAS = ascending reticular activating system; DTI = diffusion tensor imaging; DTT = diffusion tensor tractography; EPS = Epworth sleepiness
Scale; RF = reticular formation; ROI = region of interest. Funding: this work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of
Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIP) (2015R1A2A2A01004073). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
