The purpose of this study was to present a case of paraneoplastic systemic hypertension and fever in an undiagnosed primary ciliary body
carcinoma arising in a painful blind eye. A 37-year-old white man with a history of blindness since childhood was enucleated for neovascular
glaucoma because of intractable pain in his right eye. A histopathological examination revealed a ciliary body carcinoma. One year later, an
invasive recurrence of his orbit and ethmoid was detected and a debulking procedure was performed. He had untreatable fever and multidrug-
resistant systemic hypertension for 3 months before the neoplasm diagnosis. He recovered from fever and systemic hypertension only after
tumor excision and relapsed 1 year later when synchronous tumor dissemination was shown through a computed tomography scan. Tumor
metastases, despite surgery and chemotherapy, caused his death. Paraneoplastic symptoms such as fever and hypertension may be due to
unrecognized ocular malignancy. This case report intends to emphasize the importance of histopathological examination of an enucleated
phthisical painful blind eye. Alterations of visual function as a paraneoplastic manifestation of extraocular tumors have been described in
the literature. Carcinoma and melanoma-associated retinopathy, cancer-associated cone dysfunction and bilateral uveal melanocytic
proliferation are considered paraneoplastic syndromes due to circulating anti-retinal auto-antibodies and immune toxic factors released by
the primitive tumors . In this case report we describe a case of paraneoplastic symptoms associated with a primitive ciliary body carcinoma.
Intractable fever and hypertension have not been reported as paraneoplastic signs related to ocular malignancy. A 37-year-old white man came
under our observation 8 years ago (2007) because of pain and increasing intraocular pressure despite maximal drug therapy in diagnosis of
neovascular glaucoma in his right eye (RE). His medical history included blindness since childhood, polar posterior cataract and strabismus
surgery in his RE at the age of 5 years. He has always had general good health, his left eye visual acuity was 20/20 and no ocular
abnormality was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his orbit and A-scan ultrasonography showed bulbar subatrophy, vitreous
haemorrhage, and choroidal calcifications (Fig. 1a). He had systemic multidrug-resistant hypertension and a fever resistant to
multiantibiotic therapy for 3 months before presentation.Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging scans showing a the atrophic right eye and b a
large mass occupying the entire right socket displacing the prosthesis, reaching the optic foramen and eroding the bone wall of orbit and
ethmoid Magnetic resonance imaging scans showing a the atrophic right eye and b a large mass occupying the entire right socket displacing
the prosthesis, reaching the optic foramen and eroding the bone wall of orbit and ethmoid After 1 month he underwent enucleation to relieve
the pain and a hydroxyapatite prosthesis, 18 mm in size, was implanted. A histopathological examination disclosed an undifferentiated
carcinoma arising from the ciliary body. An immunohistochemical study was positive for cytokeratin pool and negative for S-100, HMB45,
Melan-a, CD34, CD45, CD3, and CD20 (Fig. 2). A total body computed tomography (CT) scan, head and neck MRI were performed and no signs of
metastatic disease were detected. A longitudinal follow-up was carried out revealing no remarkable signs. Since June 2008 (1 year after the
enucleation procedure) he again had severe head and neck pain, fever and systemic hypertension. A new CT scan and MRI demonstrated a mass
involving his entire orbital cavity displacing the prosthesis, which reached his optic foramen and medially eroded the bone wall of his
orbit and ethmoid (Fig. 1b). He underwent a debulking procedure followed by three chemotherapy cycles (cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil). After
the surgery his blood pressure improved significantly and remained controlled with single therapy and without fever. In September 2008 a new
head and neck CT scan and MRI showed a relapse. We decided to perform a resection of the tumor involving front and middle skull base and his
fronto-orbito-ethmoidal area. The following year a CT total body scan showed bone, lung, adrenal, and retroperitoneal metastases and he died
5 years ago, despite radiotherapy and six chemotherapy cycles: Taxotere (docetaxel), cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil.Fig. 2Tumoral specimen.
Immunohistochemical staining for cytokeratin pool in the setting of solid proliferation of undifferentiated large cells with eosinophilic
cytoplasm, atypical nuclei with prominent nucleoli and high mitotic activity with atypical figures Tumoral specimen. Immunohistochemical
staining for cytokeratin pool in the setting of solid proliferation of undifferentiated large cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, atypical
nuclei with prominent nucleoli and high mitotic activity with atypical figures Paraneoplastic syndromes may be the first signs of
malignancy. They are defined as systemic tumor-associated signs and symptoms not directly related to the site of a malignant tumor or its
metastases. The symptoms may be endocrine, neuromuscular or musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, coetaneous, hematologic, gastrointestinal,
renal, ocular, or miscellaneous. These phenomena are mediated by humoral factors (hormones or cytokines) excreted by tumor cells or by an
immune response against the tumor and they could occur in a variety of malignant neoplasms . Paraneoplastic clinical signs are not directly
related to the site or local manifestations of a malignant tumor or its metastases. Ocular paraneoplastic syndromes have been described as
being due to circulating anti-retinal auto-antibodies and immune toxic factors released by the extraocular primitive tumors. Carcinoma-
associated retinopathy, melanoma-associated retinopathy, cancer-associated cone dysfunction and bilateral uveal melanocytic proliferation
are considered paraneoplastic syndromes . We report a case of systemic hypertension and fever as paraneoplastic manifestations in a patient
affected by primary body ciliary neoplasm. Rare paraneoplastic syndromes, which can produce systemic hypertension, may be associated with
hepatocarcinoma or renal malignancies, while it is usually alleged that more than half of patients with cancer will experience fever during
the course of their disease . The reasons for cancer-related fever are multiple but the most frequent and severe causes include
opportunistic infections, venous thromboembolic disease or, more rarely, the fever is tumor-treatment related . To the best of our
knowledge, paraneoplastic untreatable fever and systemic hypertension have not been related to ocular malignancy. Moreover, previous
accurate examinations and radiological imaging failed to show an orbital mass whereas a histopathological examination revealed a primitive
ciliary body carcinoma. These tumors arising from the pigment epithelium of the ciliary body are exceptionally rare and benign, but their
extension beyond the globe leads to a worse prognosis. It has been previously reported that in phthisical eyes, with or without a history of
trauma or inflammation, a malignant transformation may occur probably due to reactive hyperplasia of the ciliary epithelium . In this case
we did not consider our patient’s antibiotic-resistant fever and intractable systemic hypertension to be paraneoplastic syndrome which
resolved after total surgical removal of the primitive tumor and relapsed with neoplastic recurrences. Physicians should be aware of
systemic symptoms such as systemic hypertension unresponsive to drugs and fever in phthisic eye: they may be paraneoplastic signs of ocular
malignancy because they are related to paraneoplastic or tumor necrosis. Furthermore, in the presence of a painful blind eye the
differential diagnosis between neovascular glaucoma and any form of bulbar tumor has to be considered and histopathological examination
should always be performed in order to prevent any malignant dissemination. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next-
of-kin for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging right eye Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions PV diagnosed the cancer, interpreted patient data and provided critical intellectual content.
ADM and LB treated the patient and prepared the figures. RP and MR drafted the manuscript, interpreted patient data, wrote the manuscript
and provided critical intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors did not receive any funding for
publication.
