Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR; OMIM 146255) syndrome is a rare disease, inherited dominantly and found to be
related with GATA3 (GATA binding protein 3) gene mutations. A 13-year and 8-month-old boy who presented with hypocalcemia was diagnosed with
hypoparathyroidism. He also had dysmorphic facial features, renal anomaly (pelvic kidney), and mild sensorineural hearing loss. His cranial
computed tomography revealed multiple calcifications in bilateral centrum semiovale, corona radiata, and basal ganglions suggesting a
persistent hypoparathyroidism. Thus, the presence of triad of HDR syndrome was considered, and genetic analysis using a next-generation
sequencer identified a novel de novo missense mutation in exon 4 p.R276Q (c.827G>A) of GATA3 gene. This is the second patient who was
reported to have a mutation in GATA3 gene from Turkey. In conclusion, although HDR syndrome is a rare condition, it should be kept in mind
in patients with hypoparathyroidism. Classical triad can easily be identified if patients diagnosed with hypoparathyroidism are also
evaluated with a urinary tract ultrasound and an audiometer. Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia is a rare syndrome, generally
inherited dominantly and characterized with classic triad of hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia. It is usually related to
GATA3 (GATA binding protein 3) gene mutations. A novel heterozygous missense mutation p.R276Q(c.827G>A) in exon 4 of GATA3 gene was
identified by DNA sequencing. The lack of this mutation in family members suggests that this is a de novo mutation, however, presence of
renal anomaly in the mother suggested plausible mosaic somatic mutation in her ovaries and kidneys. Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal
dysplasia (HDR; OMIM 146255) syndrome is a rare disease which is first defined by Barakat et al (1) in 1977. It is characterized by
hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia, inherited dominantly, and is found to be related with GATA3 (GATA binding
protein 3) gene mutations. This gene is located on 10p15 and is essential in the embryonic development of the parathyroid glands, auditory
system, and kidneys (2). DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is also characterized by hypoparathyroidism. The locus related with DGS 2 is along with
GATA3, and deletions of distal 10 p region lead to phenotypic findings of DGS in addition to HDR syndrome (3). A patient clinically
diagnosed with HDR syndrome having a novel mutation on the GATA3 gene is presented in this case report. A 13-year and 8-month-old boy was
admitted because of spasm of the hands for approximately two weeks. Hypocalcemia was detected, and the patient was referred to pediatric
endocrinology clinic. He was a full-term infant born from non-consanguineous parents with a birth weight of 2,400 gr. Neuromotor development
was delayed and school performance was poor. He did not have a history of chronic disease, medication, or surgery. Family history did not
reveal mental retardation, hypocalcemia, renal disease, and deafness. He appeared well and conscious in physical examination. The heart rate
was 94/min, the blood pressure was 120/75 mmHg, and Chvostek sign was present. His height was 165.9 cm (50-75 p), weight was 57.5 kg (50-75
p). He had facial dysmorphism characterized by hypertelorism (Figure 1), low-set ears, and highly-arched palate. Thyroid gland was non-
palpable, and pubertal stage was Tanner stage 5. Cataract was not detected in ophthalmologic examination. Laboratory findings were as
follows: serum calcium (Ca) was 6.7 mg/dL, phosphorus (P): 9.5 mg/dL, parathyroid hormone (PTH): 20 pg/mL, 25 hydroxy-vitamin D (25OHD): 27
ng/mL, magnesium: 1.8 mg/dL, Ca/creatinin ratio in spot urine: 0.05. Serum albumin, glucose, electrolytes, renal functions, and complete
blood count were normal. Early morning cortisol was 14.7 mcg/dL, thyroid functions were normal, and thyroid antibodies were negative. The
patient was diagnosed to have hypoparathyroidism. Oral calcitriol and Ca replacement treatment was commenced. Renal ultrasonography (USG)
revealed that the right kidney was 96x57 mm in normal localization, while the left kidney was ectopic and significantly smaller than the
right one. Decreased renal function in the ectopic kidney was detected by dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan. Multiple calcifications in
bilateral centrum semiovale, corona radiate, and basal ganglions were shown by cranial computed tomography (CT) (Figure 2), echocardiography
was normal, and audiometer revealed bilateral mild sensorineural hearing loss. Intelligence quotient (IQ) score was reported as 57 in
Weschler Intelligence Scale For Children test, suggesting mild mental retardation. Clinical and laboratory findings were supporting the
diagnosis of HDR syndrome. Family members were also evaluated in terms of hypocalcemia, hearing loss, and renal dysgenesis. His mother had
horse-shoe kidney, but others did not have any of the suspected findings. The karyotype of this patient was 46, XY. Genetic analysis using a
next-generation sequencer identified a missense mutation in exon 4 p.R276Q (c.827G>A) of GATA3 gene (Figure 3). This mutation was confirmed
by Sanger direct sequencing. The mutation was not detected in his parents, brother, or sister. Since HDR syndrome (Barakat syndrome) is a
very rare disorder, its prevalence is not known exactly. A limited number of patients were reported in the literature (4). Nearly 90% of
patients with HDR syndrome have hypoparathyroidism and hearing loss, while 80% have renal dysplasia. Occurrence of findings is variable in
reported cases. Some of the patients present with neuromuscular irritability and convulsions (5), while some of them are asymptomatic for
many years despite severe hypocalcemia (6). This patient had symptomatic hypocalcemia for two weeks, however, the presence of cerebral
calcifications on CT suggested a longer time of disease duration in our case. Although the etiopathogenesis of intracranial calcifications
is not well-defined, calcifications are thought to be due to hyperphosphatemia rather than hypoparathyroidism itself. Interestingly, ectopic
calcifications due to hyperphosphatemia are located on the vascular structure if it is caused by renal failure, while they are located in
brain tissue if caused by hypoparathyroidism (7). Intracranial calcifications associated with HDR have been previously reported in the
literature (6,8). Renal disorders, which are the most heterogeneous component of this syndrome, include either functional or structural
abnormalities. Renal hypoplasia, dysplasia, cystic kidneys, vesicoureteric reflux, nephritic syndrome, pelvicalyceal abnormality, hematuria,
proteinuria, proximal and distal renal tubular acidosis with nephrocalcinosis were reported in association with HDR. Our patient had a
pelvic kidney which has been previously reported in one patient (9). Mental disabilities in the HDR syndrome are not common.
Neuropsychiatric symptoms are thought to be related with calcifications of basal ganglia. The neurologic examination of our patient was
completely normal despite the intracranial calcifications. Gaynor et al (9) similarly reported one case with HDR having motor and mental
retardation. No typical facial appearance has been described for this syndrome. Hypertelorism was the most prominent dysmorphic finding in
our patient. There are few HDR cases with hypertelorism which were reported in the literature. These cases were found to have deletion in
the chromosome 10 (3,10,26). Despite having only a single nucleotide change, our patient interestingly have dysmorphic appearance similar to
these cases. This condition does not support a genotype-phenotype correlation in HDR syndrome. The phenotypical features of the cases with
HDR syndrome reported in the literature are summarized in Table 1. A heterozygous missense mutation p.R276Q (c.827G>A) in exon 4 of GATA3
gene was identified by DNA sequencing. This mutation resided within the first zinc finger domain. This mutation has not been identified in
patients with HDR syndrome, however, Nesbit et al (20) previously performed in vitro analysis of artificially generated p.R276Q mutant and
found that this mutant could not stabilize DNA binding. The lack of this mutation in family members of the present case suggests that this
is a de novo mutation, although HDR syndrome cases are generally reported to be inherited dominantly (3). The GATA3 mutation was absent in
the proband’s mother with horse-shoe kidney. Our results indicate that the kidney malformation in the mother is unrelated to the GATA3
mutation. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that the mother has a mosaic somatic GATA3 mutation in the kidney and ovary, but not in
peripheral lymphocytes. Although somatic mosaicism of GATA3 mutations has not been reported so far, such phenomenon was reported in several
congenital diseases such as osteogenesis imperfecta type 2 (27). There are also some examples of somatic mosaic mutations in PIK3CA and FMR1
genes that were only detected in relevant tissues but not in the blood (28,29). Unfortunately, we could not perform the GATA3 gene mutation
analysis in the peripheral tissues of the parents. This is the second case with HDR syndrome and GATA3 mutation that was reported from
Turkey. The first patient was a 4-month-old infant who had a previously known mutation (p.R367X) in GATA3 gene (5). In conclusion, although
HDR syndrome is a rare condition, it should be in patients with hypoparathyroidism. Classical triad can easily be identified if patients
diagnosed with hypoparathyroidism are also evaluated with a urinary tract USG and an audiometer. Ethical approval: All procedures performed
were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later
amendments or comparable ethical standards. This study approved by the Local Ethics Committee of Zeynep Kamil Gynecologic and Pediatric
Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey, and written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient. The authors are
grateful to the patient and his parents for supporting this work. Informed Consent: It was taken, Concept: Gül Yeşiltepe Mutlu, Design: Gül
Yeşiltepe Mutlu, Data Collection or Processing: Gül Yeşiltepe Mutlu, Heves Kırmızıbekmez, Analysis or Interpretation (Genetic analysis):
Akie Nakamura, Maki Fukami, Literature Search: Gül Yeşiltepe Mutlu, Writing: Gül Yeşiltepe Mutlu, Heves Kırmızıbekmez, Şükrü Hatun, Peer-
review: Externally peer-reviewed, Financial Disclosure: The authors declared that this study has received no financial support.
