Despite their broadly recommended use as chemotherapeutic agents, the porphyrogenicity of methotrexate and actinomycin D have not been
confirmed. Accordingly, it is not known whether these agents are safe for use in patients with porphyria. In this report, we present a case
of an invasive mole with lung metastasis in a 49-year-old Japanese woman who had previously been diagnosed with acute intermittent porphyria
at 27 years of age but had no recent history of acute intermittent porphyria attacks. Her serum human chorionic gonadotropin level was
elevated 1 month after hysterectomy, and she was referred to our center for chemotherapy. After she received 100 mg of methotrexate, drug
eruptions were observed starting on day 3 and grew progressively worse. Erythema and mucosal erosion spread throughout her body, whereupon
she was administered prednisolone. In addition, our patient experienced febrile neutropenia and required granulocyte colony- stimulating
factor treatment. No changes in our patient’s urinary coproporphyrin or uroporphyrin levels were detected during this entire episode.
Methotrexate was replaced by actinomycin D (0.5 mg/body intravenously on days 1–5 every 2 weeks). After five uneventful cycles of
actinomycin D, our patient achieved and maintained a normal serum human chorionic gonadotropin level for 3 years. Methotrexate and
actinomycin D did not induce acute porphyric attacks in this patient with acute intermittent porphyria; however, severe adverse effects were
noted with methotrexate. Although further investigation is required, our data suggest that these agents are nonporphyrinogenic and can
therefore be used to treat patients with comorbid porphyria. In 2002, the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) 2000
staging and risk factor scoring system, which recommends chemotherapy regimens for gestational neoplasia, were published by the FIGO
Oncology Committee . Among the recommendations, methotrexate (MTX) and actinomycin D (ACT-D) were the most commonly suggested
chemotherapeutic drugs in various regimens. The folic acid antagonist MTX is most frequently used to treat gestational trophoblastic disease
(GTD) , as well as leukemia and other cancers such as breast cancer and urothelial carcinoma. In addition, different doses of MTX can be
used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis vulgaris. However, MTX has been known to induce various toxicities, including interstitial
pneumonia, hepatopathy, bone marrow suppression, bone destruction, stomatitis, and gastric ulcer. In addition to GTD treatment, ACT-D is
used to treat Wilms’ tumor, Ewing sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma; however, this agent has been reported to induce hepatic vein obstruction.
Porphyrias comprise a collection of seven disorders that result from genetic defects in heme biosynthesis. The clinical management
priorities for patients with porphyria include the prevention of acute attacks and avoidance of skin lesions. Many factors have been
identified to induce acute attacks, including porphyrinogenic drug use, fasting, smoking, alcohol consumption, and infection, as well as
emotional and physical stress . Accordingly, specific precautions must be taken when treating porphyric patients with malignant diseases in
order to minimize the risk of an acute porphyric attack and to ensure optimal therapeutic effects against the malignancy. However, the
porphyrinogenic or nonporphyrinogenic statuses of many chemotherapeutic drugs, including MTX and ACT-D, have not yet been established since
the association of each chemotherapeutic drug and acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is very rare. Therefore, it is essential that such data
be accumulated and reported. The present report details our experience with the treatment of an invasive mole with lung metastasis in a
Japanese patient with AIP. Although a severe drug eruption as well as febrile neutropenia occurred in response to MTX treatment, our patient
successfully completed chemotherapy without experiencing a porphyric crisis. A 49-year-old Japanese woman (gravida 4, para 3) was diagnosed
with AIP at the age of 27. Our patient had repeatedly visited the hospital for stomachaches beforehand; however, approximately 2 years of
consultations passed before she was accurately diagnosed. Afterwards, she avoided elements known to precipitate acute attacks, and had not
experienced an acute porphyria attack since she was 33 years of age. In addition, she began hypertension treatment with amlodipine besylate
at the age of 40 years, and her last pregnancy had spontaneously aborted 4 years prior to the present event. In July 2011, this patient
visited a local private clinic for atypical vaginal bleeding and was referred to a general hospital because of suspected spontaneous
abortion. She was subsequently diagnosed with a acute intermittent porphyria hydatidiform mole via dilatation and curettage (D&C). One month
after D&C, our patient presented with an elevated serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level (Fig. 1). As fertility preservation was
deemed impossible, she underwent an abdominal total hysterectomy. Pathological study of the resected specimen revealed an invasive mole, but
no metastasis was observed. However, our patient’s serum hCG level was again elevated 1 month after hysterectomy, and she was referred to
Saitama Medical Center for chemotherapy to address expected AIP-associated complications. An X-ray computed tomography scan of her chest,
performed at our institution, revealed a lung metastasis. The FIGO 2000 staging and risk factor scoring system indicated a stage III:41
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) (Tables 1 and 2), and our patient was accordingly diagnosed with a low-risk GTN. Her treatment
strategy included intramuscular MTX administration at a dose of 20 mg/day for 5 days every 2 weeks.Fig. 1Changes in serum human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) levels, urinary 8-carboxyl porphyrin (URO) and urinary 4-carboxyl porphyrin (COPRO) during treatment. ACT-D actinomycin
D, ATH abdominal total hysterectomy, D&C dilatation and curettage, MTX methotrexateTable 1FIGO 2000 risk factor scoring system for
gestational trophoblastic neoplasiaPrognostic factorsScore0124Age (years)<40≥40Antecedent pregnancyMoleAbortionTermInterval from index
pregnancy (months)<44–77–13>13Pretreatment serum hCG (IU/mL)<103103–104104–105>105Largest tumor size (including the uterus)
(cm)<33−5≥5Metastatic siteLungSpleen, kidneyGastrointestinal tractLiver, brainNumber of metastases1−45−8>8Previous failed chemotherapySingle
drug≥2 drugsTotal score: ≤6, low risk; >7, high riskFIGO International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics, hCG human chorionic
gonadotropin, IU international unitTable 2FIGO 2000 staging for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)FIGO stagingStage IDisease confined
to the uterusStage IIGTN extends outside of the uterus, but is limited to genital structures (adnexa, vagina, and broad ligament)Stage
IIIGTN extends to the lungs, with or without known genital tract involvementStage IVMetastasis to other organ sitesFIGO International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Changes in serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels, urinary 8-carboxyl porphyrin (URO) and
urinary 4-carboxyl porphyrin (COPRO) during treatment. ACT-D actinomycin D, ATH abdominal total hysterectomy, D&C dilatation and curettage,
MTX methotrexate FIGO 2000 risk factor scoring system for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia Total score: ≤6, low risk; >7, high risk FIGO
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics, hCG human chorionic gonadotropin, IU international unit FIGO 2000 staging for
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) FIGO International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics MTX chemotherapy was initiated after
our patient provided informed consent, which included an understanding that MTX had not been implicated as either porphyrinogenic or
nonporphyrinogenic. Our patient experienced small eruptions on the hands and epigastric region on day 3 of chemotherapy. However, a
dermatologist did not interpret these eruptions as drug-related, and thus treatment was continued. On day 5, the eruptions expanded over her
whole body and worsened, with ulcers developing on the oral mucosa (Fig. 2). Our patient was unable to eat or drink owing to the severe pain
caused by mucosal erosion; moreover, she complained of painful micturition because of a sore on her vulva. A skin biopsy revealed drug
eruption instead of a porphyric skin lesion. In particular, microabscesses had formed under the stratum corneum, with neutrophilic and
eosinophilic invasion, and neutrophilic exocytosis was observed in the epidermis. Liquefaction was also observed between the epidermis and
dermis, and eosinophilic, neutrophilic, and lymphocytic invasion from the layer between the epidermis and dermis to the superficial layer of
the dermis was noted (Fig. 3). No changes in our patient’s urinary coproporphyrin or uroporphyrin levels were observed despite the
appearance of skin lesions (Fig. 1). She received intravenous prednisolone at 60 mg/day beginning on day 5 to treat the drug eruption.Fig.
2Progress of eruption. On day 6, erythema with infiltration appeared on the trunk (upper panel); blisters containing bloody serum developed
on our patient’s hands (middle panel), and erosive lesions and a furred tongue were observed in her mouth (lower panel). On day 8, the
erythema became brown (upper panel); bullous lesions were observed on her hands (middle panel), and mucosal erosion of her mouth continued
(lower panel). On day 18, the erythema improved, leaving only pigmentation (upper panel); the bullous rash was epithelialized with scaling
(middle panel), and some erosive lesions became blood-filled blisters (lower panel)Fig. 3Abdominal skin biopsy. Microabscesses formed under
the stratum corneum, with neutrophilic and eosinophilic invasion, and neutrophilic exocytosis was observed in the epidermis (hematoxylin and
eosin staining, ×20 and ×40 magnification) Progress of eruption. On day 6, erythema with infiltration appeared on the trunk (upper panel);
blisters containing bloody serum developed on our patient’s hands (middle panel), and erosive lesions and a furred tongue were observed in
her mouth (lower panel). On day 8, the erythema became brown (upper panel); bullous lesions were observed on her hands (middle panel), and
mucosal erosion of her mouth continued (lower panel). On day 18, the erythema improved, leaving only pigmentation (upper panel); the bullous
rash was epithelialized with scaling (middle panel), and some erosive lesions became blood-filled blisters (lower panel) Abdominal skin
biopsy. Microabscesses formed under the stratum corneum, with neutrophilic and eosinophilic invasion, and neutrophilic exocytosis was
observed in the epidermis (hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×20 and ×40 magnification) On day 11, our patient experienced febrile neutropenia
(absolute neutrophil count on day 8 was 1,380/μL but decreased to 12/μL on day 11) and was treated subcutaneously with 75 μg/day of
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) for 3 days beginning on day 11. However, as she was unable to recover from neutropenia (ANC
remained at 12/μL on day 13), additional subcutaneous G-CSF at 150 μg/day was administered for 2 days beginning on day 13, and her
neutropenia finally resolved on day 15 (ANC, 1598/μL). During that time, her skin lesions and stomatitis also began to improve, and the
prednisolone dose was reduced to 40 mg/day. As she was able to eat on day 17, oral prednisolone administration at 20 mg/day was started on
day 20 and tapered on day 24. She was discharged on day 25. Although our patient’s serum hCG level decreased with MTX treatment, it became
elevated during treatment interruption. Chemotherapy with ACT-D was therefore considered. After providing informed consent to ACT-D
treatment and acknowledging that ACT-D was not implicated as either porphyrinogenic or nonporphyrinogenic, our patient received intravenous
ACT-D at a dose of 1.5 mg/day on days 1–5 of every 2-week period, starting on day 70 of her clinical course. As shown in Fig. 1, her serum
hCG level effectively decreased, and the lung metastasis disappeared without any porphyric attacks. After five cycles of ACT-D, her serum
hCG level stabilized at 3.2 mIU/mL. Although other chemotherapeutic drugs were considered, a negative serum hCG level was achieved and
maintained for the following 3 years. Porphyrias represent a collection of seven disorders caused by inherent or acquired defects in genes
related to heme biosynthesis. The accumulation of intermediate products such as porphobilinogen in the liver or skin induces porphyric
symptoms. Partial deficiency of any of the seven enzymes in heme biosynthesis pathway results in characteristic clinical and biochemical
features (Table 3), which are used to classify porphyrias into dermatological, neuropsychiatric, and mixed forms. Porphyria cutanea tarda
(PCT) is the most common form, with characteristic predominant cutaneous manifestations such as photosensitivity. Neuropsychiatric (acute)
porphyria is seen in AIP and plumboporphyria, and has various manifestations, including acute attacks. Such acute attacks are the most
concerning manifestation of porphyria and are known to be induced by certain drugs, infection, alcohol consumption, smoking, fasting, and
stress.Table 3Porphyria classificationType of porphyriaEnzyme inheritanceInheritanceClinical manifestationUrine
concentrationSkinNeuropsychiatricPlumboporphyriaPorphobilinogen synthaseAR, 9q34-++ALA COPRO-gen IIIAcute intermittent
porphyriaHydroxymethylbilane synthaseAD, 11q23-++Abdominal pain, neuropathy, mental changes, and tachycardiaPBG σ-ALACongenital
erythropoieticUroporphyrinogen III synthaseAR, 10q26+-Skin lesion and hepatopathy in early childhoodUPG I COPRO-gen IPorphyria cutanea
tardaUroporphyrinogen decarboxylaseAD, 1q34++-Dark urine, occurring after middle ageUPGHereditary coproporphyriaCoproporphyrinogen
oxidaseAD, 9++Abdominal pain and peripheral, neuropathyPBG>ALA COPRO-gen IIIVariegate porphyriaProtoporphyrinogen oxidase1q14++PBG>ALA
COPRO-gen IIIErythropoietic protoporphyriaFerrochelatase18q21, 3+-Skin lesion and hepatopathy in early childhoodNot increased (PP in
erythrocyte)AR autosomal recessive, ALA aminolevulinic acid, COPRO-gen coproporphyrinogen, AD autosomal dominant, PBG porphobilinogen, UPG
uroporphyrinogen, PP protoporphyrin Porphyria classification AR autosomal recessive, ALA aminolevulinic acid, COPRO-gen coproporphyrinogen,
AD autosomal dominant, PBG porphobilinogen, UPG uroporphyrinogen, PP protoporphyrin To date, many porphyrinogenic drugs have been identified
(Table 4) [4, 5]. Safe treatment of concomitant diseases with nonporphyrinogenic drugs is the most important aspect of preventing acute
attacks. However, some porphyrinogenic chemotherapeutic drugs without alternative options might be required for malignant diseases. A list
of drugs known to be porphyrinogenic or nonporphyrinogenic according to animal studies and case reports is shown in Table 5 . However,
contradicting reports exist for a number of chemotherapeutic agents, including MTX.Table 4Contraindicated medications in
porphyriaAntimigraine agents: ergot preparationAntipsychotic drugs: ethchlorvynol, glutethimide, hydroxyzineCardiocirculatory drugs:
hydralazine, lidocaine, methyldopa, spironolactoneHormonal agents: danazol, progesteroneAnalgesic drug: diclofenacAnesthetic agent:
barbiturate sedativeAntiseizure drugs: barbituric acid, carbamazepine, phenytoin, sodium valproateAntibiotic: chloramphenicol, clindamycin,
erythromycin, rifampicin, ketoconazoleMuscle relaxants: carisoprodol, orphenadrineRespiratory drugs: clemastine, dimenhydrinateTable
5Carcinostatic medications and porphyriaPorphyrinogenic (chick studies):Cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, 5-fluorouracil, busulfan,
procarbazine, hexamethylmelaminePorphyrinogenic (case reports):Cyclophosphamide, busulfan, methotrexateNonporphyrinogenic (chick
studies):Dacarbazine, chlorambucil, melphalanNonporphyrinogenic (case reports):Mitomycin C, cyclophosphamide, mitoxantrone, 5-fluorouracil,
cytosine arabinoside, doxorubicin, 6-thioguanine, vincristine, procarbazine, methotrexate, actinomycin D, cisplatin Contraindicated
medications in porphyria Carcinostatic medications and porphyria Several case studies have reported an association between PCT and MTX
therapy . Most porphyria-related drugs are thought to induce cytochrome P450 activity and thus increase the demand for hepatic heme
biosynthesis, leading to increased porphyrin formation. However, as hepatic MTX metabolism does not involve cytochrome P450, the association
between MTX and PCT cannot be explained by this mechanism. Additionally, PCT lesions were reported to disappear despite continued MTX
therapy in at least one study . Furthermore, experimental studies of chick embryos, which are believed to reflect the human susceptibility
to drug-induced porphyria exacerbation, found no effects of MTX on porphyrin metabolism . In our case, MTX induced severe cutaneous lesions
that were histopathologically diagnosed as a drug eruption rather than porphyria. Drug eruption is a common adverse effect of various types
of nonchemotherapeutic drugs, and it was highly unlikely that there was any relationship between cutaneous symptoms and porphyria in our
patient because no changes in her urinary coproporphyrin or uroporphyrin levels were observed throughout her episode. Thus, MTX appeared to
be nonporphyrinogenic in our case. In contrast, ACT-D has been reported to be safe in AIP patients . No case reports have indicated an
association between this agent and porphyric attacks, and ACT-D was safely used in the case presented herein. Although more evidence from
experimental studies and case reports is needed for a definitive conclusion, we believe that ACT-D is a potentially nonporphyrinogenic drug.
In cases not involving potentially porphyrinogenic chemotherapeutic agents, stresses such as sepsis from neutropenia and long fasting
related to gastrointestinal toxicity or pain could also induce acute attacks. Hematologic growth factors, including G-CSF, have been
reported to be safe for porphyria patients , and this was true in our experience. Our results thus indicate that G-CSF can help to prevent
acute attacks resulting from sepsis. Among commonly prescribed antiemetics, the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor antagonist ondansetron and
glucocorticoid are also considered safe for patients with porphyria [4, 5]. Additionally, dexamethasone can be used safely, but no evidence
is available regarding aprepitant. Although alcohol consumption can induce a porphyric attack, there are no reports on the safety of taxane
therapy in patients with porphyria. In conclusion, given the rare nature of porphyrias, knowledge regarding the safe use of chemotherapeutic
agents in these patients will require evidence from additional case reports. We believe that our case contributes to this knowledge and
supports the use of MTX and ACT-D as potentially nonporphyrinogenic chemotherapeutic agents. I write the following to provide support for
the case report written about my treatment. I have no medical knowledge or background so I can only write from my own perspective and
experience. I was diagnosed with acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) at 27 years of age. Prior to that, I had been treated in ambulatory
centers and hospitals many times for abdominal pain, but the clinicians could not diagnose the cause of this pain. Although I experienced
very severe pain, sometimes this was doubted and thought to be caused by a mental disorder. After I was diagnosed with AIP, the doctors told
me that many factors had been identified to induce acute attacks, and I avoided these factors. I did not experience any more abdominal pain
attacks beginning at 33 years of age; however, I felt uneasy about receiving chemotherapy. The doctors at Saitama Medical Center told me
that methotrexate (MTX) was most commonly used to treat my disease (invasive mole with lung metastasis) but had not been implicated as
either porphyrinogenic or nonporphyrinogenic, and therefore, they carefully treated me with MTX. On day 3 of the first chemotherapy course,
I noticed small eruptions on my hands and stomach, and reported this to the doctors in charge. Next, the dermatology specialist visited me
for an examination; he judged my skin lesions to be mild drug-caused eruptions and allowed the treatment to continue. On day 5, the
eruptions expanded over my whole body, and ulcers developed on my oral mucosa. I could not eat or drink anything, not even my own saliva.
Each day, I discharged saliva onto paper because I could not swallow it. For me, this period when I could not drink and had a fever was the
hardest. Fortunately, however, I did not experience abdominal pain similar to that in an AIP attack. Two weeks after the initiation of
chemotherapy, my skin symptoms improved and I was gradually able to eat a meal. My doctors said I would need to be treated with another
chemotherapeutic drug because my serum hCG levels were elevated, but I wanted to go home at once instead. Therefore, I was discharged from
the hospital after I became able to eat adequately. My husband and I listened to an explanation about another anticancer agent from a doctor
in the outpatient department 1 week later. She told us that the next medicine, actinomycin D, had also not been evaluated for use in
patients with AIP. However, we understood the need for chemotherapy, and we agreed to its use. I was hospitalized again and received the new
chemotherapy regimen. In contrast to my fear, it did not cause any side effects. I continued to receive this therapy, being hospitalized and
discharged again. My husband and I were very happy to learn that my serum hCG levels had decreased and the lung metastasis had disappeared.
After five rounds of chemotherapy with actinomycin D, my serum hCG level plateaued at 3.2 mIU/mL. My doctors told me about another
chemotherapy, and I was very disappointed. However, because I had been able to receive the second chemotherapy with few side effects, I
convinced myself that I might survive the next chemotherapy. While the doctors prepared a new chemotherapeutic drug, my serum hCG value fell
below the cutoff value. The doctor told me that I would usually need to receive three additional courses of chemotherapy after the serum hCG
level fell below the cutoff level, but my serum hCG level remained under the cutoff level 1 month after stopping the second chemotherapy. I
had a long conversation with my doctor, and we decided to finish the chemotherapy at that time. I began to work at an office 1 year after I
finished this treatment. I am currently living well. I felt uneasy about using medicines for which the safety in patients with AIP was
unknown, so I will be very happy if my experience will help other patients with porphyria. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. actinomycin D acute intermittent porphyria absolute neutrophil count dilatation and curettage granulocyte-
colony stimulating factor gestational trophoblastic disease gestational trophoblastic neoplasia human chorionic gonadotropin methotrexate
Porphyria cutanea tarda Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YM obtained
patient consent and was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. YG participated in the actual treatment of the patient and took the
images in Figs. 2 and 3. TN and YT contributed to the study concept and design and were involved in drafting and revising the manuscript. MS
and KB were involved in revising the manuscript. HS contributed to the study concept and design. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We would like to thank Editage (http://www.editage.jp/) for English language editing.
