Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related disease is an autoimmune disease that forms tumorous lesions. Several cases involving various organs are
reported, however, IgG4-related disease involving appendix has not been reported yet. In this report, we presented a case of IgG4-related
disease of appendix, which raised a suspicion of appendiceal tumor or usual appendicitis and, therefore, led to unnecessary surgical
resection. IgG4-related disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis for a mass-like swelling of the appendix, in order to
avoid unnecessary surgery. Gastrointestinal tract involvement of immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related disease is rare. To the best of our
knowledge, IgG4-related disease that mimics appendiceal pathology such as appendiceal tumor or usual appendicitis has never been reported.
We reported a case of IgG4-related disease of the appendix that was misdiagnosed as appendiceal tumor or usual appendicitis and, thus, led
to surgical resection. The review of this report was exempted by the Institutional Review Board of our institution. A 51-year-old man
visited the emergency room of our institution with right lower quadrant abdominal pain that 58had persisted for 2 days without fever.
Initial blood tests showed no abnormalities other than mild elevation of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (22 mm/h) and C-reactive protein
(19.01 mg/L). However, abdominal CT scan showed a solid mass-like swelling at the appendiceal tip. The mass was approximately 3.6 cm in size
and well enhanced. Accompanying perimesenteric fat haziness suggested that the mass could be inflammatory (Fig. 1A), but malignancy could
not entirely be ruled out. After 3 days of antibiotics therapy, the patient was symptom-free and discharged. During the follow-up, the
patient suffered another episode of abdominal pain and a second abdominal CT scan was done at 21 days after the first scan. The second CT
scan did not show a significant change in the solid mass at the appendiceal tip, but the periappendiceal mesenteric fat haziness was
aggravated (Fig. 1B). After 3 days of antibiotics use, the patient underwent surgery. Right hemicolectomy was done because malignancy could
not be ruled out. Resected appendix measured 4.3 × 2.8 × 1.7 cm forming a mass consistent with CT findings (Fig. 1C). Microscopically, there
was no evidence of acute appendicitis. Muscle layer of the appendix was intact, but subserosal inflammatory cell infiltration was noted
(Fig. 1D). Magnification of inflammatory cells showed that they were mostly plasmacytes. Storiform fibrosis or obliterative phlebitis was
absent; however, immunohistochemical (Fig. 1E) revealed that > 50% of IgG cells were IgG4 cells, consistent with IgG4-related disease.
Immunoglobulin G4-related disease is a newly recognized immune-mediated condition that can involve various sites (1). Inflammatory-cell
infiltration leads to tumorous lesions of the affected organ. Autoimmunity is regarded as the initial trigger of a type 2 helper T cell
immune response. Activated type 2 helper T cells produce interleukin-5, which stimulates eosinophils to proliferate, as observed in our
case. Type 2 helper T cells also directly activate regulatory T cells. Activated regulatory T cells produce tumor growth factor β, which
leads to fibrosis. Regulatory T cells also stimulate B cells to differentiate into plasma cells, followed by excessive secretion of IgG4
antibodies. The inflammatory cell infiltrate results in tumefactive enlargement of the affected site. IgG4 antibodies produced in this
process behave as tissue-destructive immunoglobulins (1). Immunoglobulin G4-related disease is described in almost every organ system (1).
The pancreas was the first organ reported to be involved in IgG4-related disease, and is perhaps the most frequently involved site reported
in the literature (2). Involvement of biliary tree is the second most frequent, followed by the major salivary glands, kidney, gall bladder,
and retroperitoneum (2). Although IgG4-related disease involving the gastrointestinal tract is very rare, there are reports of IgG4-related
disease involving the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, ileum, and colon (345). Gastrointestinal IgG4-related lesions are difficult to diagnose
because symptoms vary and CT findings are nonspecific (345). Two cases involving the esophagus presented with esophageal wall thickening
(67). Several case studies have reported involvement of the gastric mucosa associated with autoimmune pancreatitis, but not all cases showed
dense fibrosis or obliterative phlebitis with a high serum IgG4 level (5). Cases consistent with IgG4-related disease either presented as a
well-circumscribed nodular mass (3 cases) or ulcer (2 cases) (5). IgG4-positive plasma cells sometimes infiltrate the colonic mucosa in
ulcerative colitis patients, but the mechanisms are unknown (8). Two cases involving the sigmoid flexure and cecum without associated
autoimmune pancreatitis are reported. These 2 cases presented as a well-circumscribed fibrous nodular lesion in the gastro-intestinal tract
(9). There are 3 previously reported cases of IgG4-related disease involving the small bowel. Two presented as bowel wall thickening (410),
and 1 as multiple pelvic masses obstructing the bowel lumens (3). Despite the few reports of IgG4-related disease involving the
gastrointestinal tract, there appear to be 2 types of IgG4-related gastrointestinal disease. One is a gastrointestinal lesion showing marked
thickening of the wall of the esophagus and stomach, consisting of dense fibrosis with abundant infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells
that usually show submucosal spreading. The other is an IgG4-related pseudotumor that occurs in gastrointestinal regions such as the
stomach, colon, and major duodenal papilla, appearing as a polypoid or mass-like lesion (5). In our case, an appendiceal mass-like lesion
with an increase in periappendiceal fatty strands was observed on abdominal CT scan. Greater fat infiltration than bowel wall thickening
implies that the main pathology lies in the mesentery rather than the gastrointestinal tract (11). Subserosal plasmacyte infiltration also
indicates that the disease originates from the mesentery and involves the gastrointestinal tract (10). In this case, these factors may have
collectively caused periappendiceal fatty strands. Symptoms vary according to the organs affected. Aggressive treatment including
endovascular intervention is needed in life-threatening conditions (12), but the mainstay of treatment is pharmaceutical (1). In our case,
unnecessary surgery was performed. Immunoglobulin G4-related disease is a rare disease, especially involving the gastrointestinal tract.
Although only a handful of cases are reported, IgG4-related disease involving the gastrointestinal tract either spreads through the
submucosa or forms tumorous lesions (5). In our case, IgG4-related disease presented as perilesional fat infiltrations in CT scans due to
the inflammatory nature of the disease. IgG4-related disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis for a mass-like swelling of
the appendix. A. Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows 3.6 cm solid mass at appendiceal tip (arrows). Associated periappendiceal fat
infiltrations suggest that mass is inflammatory. B. Axial contrast-enhanced CT taken 21 days after initial CT (A). No significant change in
mass is noted. However, periappendiceal fat haziness is aggravated (arrows). C. Right hemicolectomy includes 29 cm of ascending colon and 21
cm of ileum. Appendix forms mass sized 4.3 × 2.8 × 1.7 cm with fat proliferations on surface (arrow). D. Hematoxylin-eosin staining shows
plasmacytic infiltration in subserosa of appendix (black arrows). Mucosal layer and muscle layer of appendix (white arrows) are intact
suggesting that main pathology lies in mesentery rather than appendix (× 12.5). E. Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) stain shows IgG4-positive
plasmacytes. Brown pigmented cells (arrows) are IgG4-positive cells. On IgG staining, > 50% of IgG-positive cells are IgG4 positive (not
presented) (× 400).
