Radiologic findings of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), a novel coronavirus infection, have been rarely reported. We report a
30-year-old male presented with fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, who was diagnosed with MERS. A chest computed tomographic scan revealed
rapidly developed multifocal nodular consolidations with ground-glass opacity halo and mixed consolidation, mainly in the dependent and
peripheral areas. After treatment, follow-up imaging showed that these abnormalities markedly decreased but fibrotic changes developed. The
first case of novel coronavirus (CoV) infection known as Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) was reported in Saudi Arabia, September
2012 (1). To date, there have been few reports of chest computed tomographic (CT) findings of MERS patients (23). In this article, we report
the findings of initial and serial follow-up CT images and radiographs correlated with the clinical course of a 30-year-old male patient
confirmed as MERS. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of serial imaging findings of chest CT and radiographs in a
patient with MERS in South Korea. This report was approved by our Institutional Review Board, and the requirement of patient informed
consent was waived. A 30-year-old male (height: 175 cm, body weight: 105 kg) presented with fever for 6 days, and abdominal pain and
diarrhea for 2 days. He was admitted to the gastroenterology department of an outside hospital. He did not have any history of underlying
disease and had recently stopped smoking. He worked for 2 weeks at another hospital where a patient diagnosed with MERS. His initial vital
signs and results of initial laboratory examination were unavailable to us, because he was admitted to an outside hospital. However,
according to information from that hospital, physical examination on admission to that hospital revealed normal vital signs (except for
fever) and initial laboratory examination showed mild elevation of liver enzymes. In that hospital, he firstly underwent chest and abdominal
radiographs and abdominal CT for further evaluation of abdominal pain. The initial chest radiograph, which was taken 6 days after the onset
of fever, showed a patchy increased opacity in the left lower lung zone, retrocardiac area (Fig. 1A). Abdominal CT showed no specific
finding in abdominal and pelvic organs; however, a patchy area of consolidation with an air-bronchogram was detected in the left lower lobe
of the lung, which was mainly peripherally located (Fig. 1B). Conservative treatment with intravenous fluid was used for abdominal pain.
Although he did not initially have any respiratory symptoms, he began coughing 9 days after the onset of fever. Because of this new
respiratory symptom, occupational history, and a recent MERS outbreak in Korea, he underwent laboratory examination for MERS. A follow-up
chest radiograph, which was taken 10 days after the onset of fever, showed newly developed patchy areas of ill-defined increased opacity in
the right upper lung zone and increased extent of the previously detected consolidation in the left lower lung zone (Fig. 1C). A chest CT
scan performed on the same day showed multifocal patchy areas of nodular consolidations orgwith ground-glass opacity (GGO) halo and nodular
GGO lesions in both upper lobes, which were mainly slightly peripherally located (Fig. 1D). Moreover, this scan also demonstrated increased
extent of mixed consolidations and GGOs with air-bronchograms in both lower lobes, mainly in the dependent area (Fig. 1E). There was no
pleural effusion or significant lymph node enlargement. Finally, he was diagnosed with MERS by testing the sputum by real-time reverse-
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) (4). For intensive care and management of MERS, he was transferred to a negative pressure
room of our hospital on the day of diagnosis. Physical examination in our hospital showed fever (38.4℃) and elevated blood pressure (154/106
mm Hg). His vital signs on admission are summarized in Table 1. Laboratory examination on admission of our hospital showed normal white
blood cell counts (5640/µL), and elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 155 international unit /L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT,
77 IU/L), lactate dehydrogenase (904 IU/L), and C-reactive protein (CRP, 9.39 mg/dL). He was administered antiviral agents (ribavirin,
kaletra [ritonavir + lopinavir], and interferon-alpha) and antibiotics (tabaxin [piperacillin + tazobactam] and cravit ). Daily follow-up
radiographs were taken to evaluate disease progression. Fever disappeared after 2 days of treatment; although radiologic abnormalities
remained on early follow-up radiographs, then their extent decreased after 5 days of treatment. After a week of treatment, he showed no
symptom. Follow-up laboratory examination showed normalization of CRP (0.14 mg/dL), slightly deceased but remained elevated AST (131 IU/L),
whereas increased ALT (142 IU/L). Finally, follow-up sputum tests by rRT-PCR (conducted twice) showed negative results, and he was
discharged after 13 days in our hospital. On the day of discharge (23 days after the onset of fever) he underwent chest radiograph and chest
CT scan. The chest radiograph depicted markedly decreased extent of previous increased opacities in the right upper and left lower lung
zones (Fig. 1F). The chest CT scan showed markedly decreased extent of previously detected lesions with residual nodules or GGOs in both
lungs, and developed traction bronchiectasis within retracted consolidation with volume loss in the left lower lobe, which suggested
fibrosis (Fig. 1G, H). Middle East respiratory syndrome is a disease caused by infection of a new coronavirus, which is currently named
MERS-CoV. The source of MERS-CoV is not yet clear, but dromedary camels are thought to be the primary animal host (5). Human-to-human
transmission can occur; possible modes include droplet and contact transmission (6). As of 22 June 2015, 172 confirmed cases of MERS have
been reported among hospital contacts in South Korea, of which 27 were dead (7). Our patient showed fever at first, followed by abdominal
pain and diarrhea without respiratory symptom, which precluded early consideration of respiratory infection. According to previous report
(8), common MERS symptoms at presentation are fever (98%), fever with chills or rigors, cough (83%), shortness of breath, and myalgia.
Gastrointestinal symptoms are not infrequent and include diarrhea (26%), vomiting, and abdominal pain (17%). The major findings in our
patient were mixed consolidations and GGOs, which are slightly less common findings according to a previous study (2) that demonstrated
bilateral predominantly subpleural and basilar airspace changes with more extensive GGOs than consolidation, and another study (3) that
reported GGO (53%), a combination of GGO and consolidation (33%), pleural effusion (33%), and interlobular septal thickening. However, the
peripheral and lower zonal location of the lesions was in line with the findings of the latter study (3). A recent study by Das et al. (9)
described lung changes on serial chest radiographs of 55 patients with MERS (19 deceased and 36 recovered). They reported that pleural
effusion, pneumothorax, a higher chest radiographic score at the time of peak radiographic deterioration, and a high number of comorbidities
were associated with a poor prognosis. However, they did not describe detailed changes of radiologic abnormalities, especially on CT scans,
according to the clinical course of MERS. We report detailed serial imaging findings including radiographs and CT scans, over the whole
clinical course. Our patient showed rapid progression of radiologic abnormalities during a short time interval (4 days). During antiviral
and antibiotic treatment, the improvement of clinical symptoms occurred slightly faster than radiologic improvement. After 2 weeks of
treatment, the last follow-up radiograph and CT showed markedly decreased extent of previous radiologic abnormalities and quick development
of fibrotic changes suggesting organizing process of pneumonia, which was a somewhat uncommon finding in a patient with viral infection,
according to our clinical experience. In conclusion, we report serial imaging findings (chest CT and radiographs) correlated with the
clinical course of MERS in a young man. A chest CT scan showed rapidly developed multifocal nodular consolidations with GGO halo and mixed
consolidation, mainly in the dependent and peripheral areas of the lung. Follow-up imaging showed marked decreased extent of previously
detected lesions with remaining fibrotic changes. To our knowledge, this is the first case report that includes serial imaging findings of
chest CT and radiographs in a patient confirmed as MERS in South Korea. A, B. Initial posteroanterior chest radiograph and abdominal
computed tomography (CT) scan were performed in outside hospital on day of admission (6 days after onset of fever). Chest radiograph (A)
shows patchy increased opacity (black arrow) in left lower lung zone, retrocardiac area. Axial CT scan (B) shows patchy area of
consolidation with air-bronchogram in left lower lobe, which was mainly peripherally located (black arrow). C-E. Follow-up anteroposterior
chest radiograph and chest CT scan were taken in outside hospital 4 days after admission (10 days after onset of fever). Chest radiograph
(C) shows newly developed patchy area of ill-defined increased opacity in right upper lung zone (black arrowhead) and increased extent of
consolidation in left lower lung zone (black arrow). Upper lung CT scan (D) shows multifocal patchy areas of consolidation (white arrows)
with ground glass opacity (GGO) halo and nodular GGO lesions (black arrowheads) in both upper lobes, which were mainly slightly peripherally
located. Lower lung CT scan (E) shows larger areas of mixed consolidations and GGOs with air-bronchograms (black arrows) in both lower
lobes, mainly in dependent area and newly detected focal consolidation in lingular segment of left upper lobe (white arrow). F-H. Last
follow-up anteroposterior chest radiograph and chest CT scan were performed on day of discharge (13 days after admission to our hospital; 23
days after onset of fever). Chest radiograph (F) depicts markedly decreased extent of previous consolidations in right upper and left lower
lung zones but residual small increased opacity in right upper lung zone (black arrowhead) and left lower lung zone (black arrow). Upper
lung CT scan (G) shows markedly reduced extent of previous multifocal patchy areas of consolidation and nodular ground-glass opacity (GGO)
lesions in both upper lobes, but also demonstrates residual GGO lesions (black arrowheads). Lower lung CT scan (H) demonstrates markedly
decreased extent of previous mixed consolidations and GGOs with air-bronchograms (black arrow), and developed traction bronchiectasis (white
arrowheads) with volume loss in left lower lobe, which suggested fibrosis.
