Primary pancreatic paraganglioma is an extremely rare extra-adrenal paraganglioma. We report a case of primary pancreatic paraganglioma
undergoing middle segment pancreatectomy in a 42-year-old woman. Histological examination showed that the tumor was composed of well-defined
nests of cuboidal cells separated by vascular fibrous septa, forming the classic Zellballen pattern. The chief cells showed positive
staining to neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and the chief cells were surrounded by S-100 protein-positive
sustentacular cells. The patient has remained tumor free for 12 months after surgery. A brief discussion about the histopathological
features, clinical behavior, and treatment of primary pancreatic paraganglioma, and review of the relevant literature is presented. Primary
pancreatic paraganglioma is a rare clinical entity, its diagnosis mainly depends on histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations.
Complete surgical resection is the first choice of treatment and close postoperative follow-up is necessnary. Paragangliomas are rare
neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) that arise from the extra-adrenal chromaffin cells of the autonomic nervous system, with an average annual
incidence rate of only 2 to 8 per 1 million adults. Paragangliomas could derive from the extra-adrenal chromaffin cells of the sympathetic
paravertebral ganglia of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis, also arise from the parasympathetic ganglia located along the glossopharyngeal and
vagal nerves in the neck and at the base of the skull. However, primary pancreatic paraganglioma is extremely rare. Herein, we present a
case of primary pancreatic paraganglioma and review of the literature. A 42-year-old woman presented in September 2014 with recurrent upper
abdominal pain for 3 months. She had no history of hypertension, headache, and palpitation. A physical examination revealed slight upper
abdominal tenderness. Laboratory test results including liver function, renal function, and blood glucose were within normal ranges. Serum
levels of CEA, CA19-9, and CA125 were normal. The level of 24-h urinary norepinephrine excretion was also normal. Unenhanced computed
tomography (CT) revealed a 5.2 cm × 6.3 cm, solid, low density tumor on the body of the pancreas. On contrast-enhanced CT, the tumor
demonstrated marked enhancement in the arterial phase (Fig. 1). Dilation of the pancreatic duct was noted at the tail of pancreas. No
biliary dilation or liver lesions were detected. A diagnosis suspicion of a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor was made before operation. The
patient underwent middle segment pancreatectomy. The proximal pancreas was transected using a linear stapler and continuous suture using 4-0
prolene, the stump of the distal pancreas was anastomosis to the jejunum with duct-to-mucosa pancreaticojejunostomy. The two resection
margins were frozen section to confirm tumor-free. During the operation, the patient’s blood pressure remained stable. Histological
examination showed that the tumor was composed of well-defined nests of cuboidal cells separated by vascular fibrous septa, forming the
classic Zellballen pattern (Fig. 2a). The chief cells showed positive staining to neuron-specific enolase (NSE) (Fig. 2b), chromogranin A
(CgA), synaptophysin (Syn) (Fig. 2c), but showed negative response to vimentin (Vim), endomysial (EMA), cytokeratin (CK), insulin, and
glucagon. The chief cells were surrounded by S-100 protein-positive sustentacular cells (Fig. 2d). The Ki67 labeling index was 1 % where no
mitoses were observed. Region lymph nodes and the resected margins were free of tumor cells. Taking the morphological and
immunohistochemical features into account, the diagnosis of primary pancreatic paraganglioma was confirmed. The patient’s postoperative
course was uneventful and discharged on the 8th postoperative day. The patient received no subsequent adjuvant treatment, and had remained
tumor free for 12 months after surgery.Fig. 1On contrast-enhanced CT, the tumor demonstrated marked enhancement in the arterial phaseFig.
2Pathology slides of the resected specimen with different stains. a Hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrating the classic Zellballen
pattern of paraganglioma (HE, ×400). b The chief cells showed positive staining to NSE (IHC, ×400). c The chief cells showed positive
staining to Syn (IHC, ×400). d The sustentacular cells showed positive staining to S-100 (IHC, ×400) On contrast-enhanced CT, the tumor
demonstrated marked enhancement in the arterial phase Pathology slides of the resected specimen with different stains. a Hematoxylin and
eosin staining demonstrating the classic Zellballen pattern of paraganglioma (HE, ×400). b The chief cells showed positive staining to NSE
(IHC, ×400). c The chief cells showed positive staining to Syn (IHC, ×400). d The sustentacular cells showed positive staining to S-100
(IHC, ×400) Primary paraganglioma that arises in the pancreas is rare. Whether this tumor type is an extension of a retroperitoneal tumor of
true visceral origin, derived from ectopic paraganglia, remains unknown. To the best of our knowledge, only 21 cases of pancreatic
paraganglioma having been reported from 1943 to the present in the literature (Table 1) . The mean age of the 21 cases reported in the
literature was 57.6 years ranging from 19 to 85 years. Of those patients, 16 were women and five were men with the ratio of 3.2:1. The tumor
was located in the head of the pancreas in 15 patients, 2 in the body, and 4 in the tail. The mean size of the tumors was 6.1 cm. Four cases
were considered malignant, and six cases showed functional activity. Herein, we presented a 42-year-old woman with primary pancreatic
paraganglioma, which located in the body of the pancreas. The patient had no symptoms of catecholamine excess, and the blood pressure
remained stable during the operation, the norepinephrine levels was normal, therefore nonfunctional pancreatic paraganglioma was
diagnosed.Table 1Twenty-one cases of pancreatic paraganglioma in the literatureAuthorYearAge (y)SexLocationSize (cm)Cystic or
SolidFunctionMalignantTreatmentSurvivalGoodo 194362MBody1.5SolidNoNo–AutopsyBartley 196675FTailGoose eggCysticYesNoDPNMBartley
196670FHeadWalnutCysticYesNoTRNMCope 197472FHead13CysticNoNoTR2Y(A)Zamir 198447MBody10CysticNoNoTR6Y(A)Fujino
199861MHead2.5SolidNoNoPD5Y(A)Parithivel 200085MHead6CysticNoNoTR3Y(A)Ohkawara 200572FHead4CysticNoNoTRNMPerrot
200741FTail4.2SolidYesNoTR18 M(A)Tsukada 200857FHead2SolidNoNoTR4Y(A)Kim 200857FHead6.5SolidNoNoPPPDNMPaik 200970FTail4.2SolidNoYesDPNMHe
201140FHead4.5SolidNoNoNMNMHiga 201265FHead2SolidNoYesPD10 M(A)AI-Jiffry 201319FHead9.5SolidYesYesPD3Y(A)Zhang
201450FHead6SolidYesYesLaparotomy4Y(D)Zhang 201463MHead4SolidYesNoTR3 M(A)Borgohain 201455FTail19SolidNoNoTR10 M(A)Straka
201453FHead8.5SolidNoNoPPPD49 M(A)Meng 201554FHead3SolidNoNoTRNMMeng 201541FHead6SolidNoNoTRNM F female, M male, NM not mentioned, DP diatal
pancreatectomy, PD pancreaticoduodenectomy, TR tumor resection, PPPD pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, Y years, M months, A alive,
D dead Twenty-one cases of pancreatic paraganglioma in the literature F female, M male, NM not mentioned, DP diatal pancreatectomy, PD
pancreaticoduodenectomy, TR tumor resection, PPPD pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, Y years, M months, A alive, D dead The
location of pancreatic paragangliomas can usually be identified by abdominal ultrasonography, CT, or magnetic resonance imaging. In our
current case, the pancreatic paraganglioma appeared as a solid mass on the body of the pancreas on CT scans, and marked enhancement was
found on contrast-enhanced CT. The preoperative diagnosis of pancreatic paraganglioma is difficult, especially in nonfunctional cases.
Functional cases are easier to diagnose because having symptoms of catecholamine excess such as hypertension, headache, and palpitation, and
the urinary catecholamines are elevated. The confirmed diagnosis of paraganglioma mainly depends on histopathological and
immunohistochemical findings as following (i) the classic Zellballen pattern composed of chief cells and sustentacular cells within the
tumor; (ii) the chief cells showed positive staining to NSE, CgA, Syn, and negative for CK; and (iii) the sustentacular cells showed
positive staining to S-100 or GFAP. Pancreatic paragangliomas are potential to be malignant , but factors predictive of malignant behaviors
have not been well characterized. In general, malignant paragangliomas are defined as those that metastasize, recur, or show evidence of
local invasion. The first choice of treatment for primary pancreatic paraganglioma is complete surgical resection. Postoperative
I131-metaiodobenzylaguanidine (I131-MIBG) radiotherapy has been advocated in cases proven to be malignant , chemotherapy and novel
biologically targeted drugs could be the other reasonable choice. Although pancreaticoduodenectomy or pylorus preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy is recommended for paraganglioma of the pancreatic head, and distal pancreatectomy for tumors of the pancreatic body
or tail, simple tumor enucleation also showed an equally good outcome. In the present case, middle segment pancreatectomy was performed
being the tumor located in the body of the pancreas. Middle segment pancreatectomy procedure has the advantage of preserving normal
pancreatic parenchyma to the most extent and consequently long-term endocrine and exocrine pancreatic function. The patient had an
uneventful postoperative course. Being have no evidence of tumor invasion and metastases, the patient received no subsequent adjuvant
treatment, and has been tumor free for 12 months after surgery. The long-term outcome is still in follow-up. We report a case of primary
nonfunctional paraganglioma on the body of the pancreas. Middle segment pancreatectomy could be a reasonable procedure for such tumor.
Pancreatic paraganglioma has malignant potential, and requiring close postoperative follow-up. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent form is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. chromogranin A cytokeratin computed tomography endomysial middle segment pancreatectomy neuroendocrine
tumors neuron-specific enolase synaptophysin vimentin Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions XWD designed the study; LSR analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript; PL collected the data and presented the
clinical features; LY, XWD, and LSR performed the operation; HS made the pathologic diagnosis. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
