Tapia’s syndrome is an uncommon disease described in 1904 by Antonio Garcia Tapia, a Spanish otolaryngologist. It is characterized by
concomitant paralysis of the hypoglossal (XIIth) and pneumogastric (Xth) nerves. Only 69 cases have been described in the literature.
Typically, the reported patients presented with a history of orotracheal intubation. Common symptoms are dysphonia, tongue deviation toward
the affected side, lingual motility disturbance, and swallowing difficulty. In the report, we describe three cases of Tapia’s syndrome in
three Caucasian patients who underwent surgery with general anesthesia. Two of these patients underwent neck abscess drainage, and the third
had an open reduction of a shoulder fracture. The clinical symptoms of Tapia’s syndrome appeared after extubation. All three of our patients
recovered their lost function at 3 months after diagnosis. We underline the importance of performing airway endoscopy and a specific program
of swallowing rehabilitation for the proper management of Tapia’s syndrome. Tapia’s syndrome is known as a rare complication of airway
manipulation. It can occur after any type of surgery that is performed while the patient is under general anesthesia and orotracheally
intubated . This syndrome is characterized by neurologic deficits involving the hypoglossal nerve (XII) and recurrent laryngeal branch of
the vagal nerve (X). Typical signs and symptoms are dysphonia and swallowing difficulty. The simultaneous emergence of these symptoms in a
patient who has undergone orotracheal intubation requires the establishment of a correct diagnostic process to exclude Tapia’s syndrome.
Most studies have emphasized that the recovery of nerve function is usually completed within 6 months . However, from our point of view, the
establishment of a proper swallowing rehabilitation program is essential to reducing recovery time. In fact, all the patients described in
this report were included in a specific rehabilitation program. Each of these programs was coordinated in the dysphagia unit of our
hospital. In addition, we highlight that all patients achieved a complete recovery of lost function within 3 months after diagnosis. A
36-year-old Caucasian man underwent surgical drainage of a neck abscess (dental origin, 47–48) with general anesthesia and orotracheal
intubation. A cervical approach was used to reach the submandibular space (right size). The intubation was difficult because of the cervical
tumefaction, and it was not possible to perform nasotracheal intubation. The patient woke up with dysphonia, tongue deviation toward the
affected side (right size), lingual motility disturbance, and swallowing difficulty. Treatment with barium swallow radiograph excluded the
presence of tracheoesophageal fistula. A meticulous neurologic examination and a fibroscopy with swallowing test confirmed nerve paralysis
(Figs. 1 and 2).Fig. 1Pyriform sinus retaining salivaFig. 2Pharyngoepiglottic muscle hypotonia Pyriform sinus retaining saliva
Pharyngoepiglottic muscle hypotonia A 61-year-old Caucasian man underwent surgical neck abscess drainage with general anesthesia and
orotracheal intubation. A cervical approach to reach the cervical space (right side) was carried out. No problems during the anesthetic
procedures were reported. The patient woke up with dysphonia, tongue deviation toward the affected side (right side), lingual motility
disturbance, and swallowing difficulty. A meticulous neurologic examination and fibroscopy with a swallowing test confirmed the patient’s
nerve paralysis (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Tongue and epiglottal incompetence Tongue and epiglottal incompetence A 42-year-old Caucasian man underwent
open reduction of a shoulder fracture with general anesthesia and orotracheal intubation. A direct anterolateral approach to reach the
fracture was used. The patient woke up with dysphonia, tongue deviation toward the affected side (right side), lingual motility disturbance,
swallowing difficulty, insensibility of the lateral border of the tongue, and lingual bite wounds. An accurate neurologic examination and
fibroscopy with a swallowing test confirmed the patient’s nerve paralysis. In this patient, the Xth and XIIth cranial nerve injuries
coexisted with paralysis of the lingual branch of trigeminal nerve (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Pyriform sinus retaining saliva Pyriform sinus retaining
saliva Tapia’s syndrome is a rare combination of Xth and XIIth cranial nerve palsy. Many of these patients have a clinical history of
surgical intervention under general anesthesia and orotracheal intubation. However, different types of surgical intervention could cause
Tapia’s syndrome. In fact, the syndrome has been described as a complication of intubation in the intensive care unit , after arthroscopic
shoulder stabilization , and after posterior cervical spine surgery . Specifically, the nerve damage might be caused by the stretching and
compressing of the nerves during the orotracheal intubation . Excessive flexion of the head during anesthetic procedures could also be
related to the nerve damage . This report raises four central points. First is the correlation between Tapia’s syndrome and anesthetic
procedures. In fact, the onset of this disease during the repair of a fractured shoulder reinforces this theory. Second, adequate
multidisciplinary support is imperative to ensure a proper diagnosis. Neurology, rehabilitation, and maxillofacial services must work
together to make a correct diagnosis and treat the patient optimally. Third, we emphasize that it is essential to perform airway endoscopy
to obtain a reliable diagnosis. We think that it is the most useful diagnostic test. In fact, the combination of a meticulous clinical
examination and airway endoscopy avoids the use of other diagnostic tests, such as magnetic resonance imaging, electromyography, and
treatment with barium swallow radiograph. Fourth, prompt establishment of a swallowing rehabilitation program reduces patient recovery time.
It is important to note that all patients reported here were treated in collaboration with the dysphagia unit of our hospital. All three
patients recovered lost function at 3 months after diagnosis (Table 1).Table 1Differences between our patients and other patients reported
in the literatureOur three patientsCases previously reported in the literatureDiagnostic airway endoscopyCarried out in all
patientsNoneRecovery timeAll patients recovered lost function within 3 months after diagnosis6 months Swallowing rehabilitation
programCarried out in all patientsNoneMultidisciplinary approachNeurology, rehabilitation, and maxillofacial services worked
togetherNoneDemonstrable anesthetic traumaYesYes MRI used for diagnosisNoneYes Nerve palsy confirmed by neurology service of our
hospitalYesNot reportedPatient recovery confirmed by rehabilitation service of our hospitalYesNot ReportedFailure of epiglottis and pyriform
sinus confirmed by video endoscopyYesNone MRI magnetic resonance imaging Differences between our patients and other patients reported in the
literature MRI magnetic resonance imaging We strongly believe that a multidisciplinary approach is required for correct management of this
pathology. In fact, we emphasize that, in our three patients, the neurology, rehabilitation (dysphagia unit), and maxillofacial services
worked together to guarantee proper management. Moreover, we highlight that establishment of a proper swallowing rehabilitation program
reduced the patients’ recovery time. In addition, we stress that airway endoscopy can be the most useful diagnostic test in the management
of this syndrome. Indeed, it could avoid the performance of more expensive tests. Finally, we suggest that the incidence of this disorder
might be underestimated when it occurs in the head and neck regions. In fact, particularly in the mild forms, the symptoms of Tapia’s
syndrome can be confused with discomfort triggered by surgery. This is particularly relevant when surgery includes anatomic areas located
close to the Xth and XIIth nerve anatomic routes. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. magnetic
resonance imaging Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions PC and BGM carried
out the diagnosis of the cases. PG and ACS reviewed the literature. PG and ACS also collaborated with rehabilitation services during the
follow-up of these patients. BGM and DSL carried out the airway endoscopy which allowed us to reach an accurate diagnosis. PC and DSL wrote
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We acknowledge the efforts that Dr. Carrion made to help us in the
management of patients’ symptoms, especially in the swallowing clinic. We convey our special gratitude to Dr. Martinez Lara, who performed
the airway endoscopies during follow-up of the patients.
