We reported two rare cases of congenital diaphragmatic hernia with abdominal wall closure defect, which were not associated with septum
transversum diaphragmatic defects or Fryns syndrome. Case 1: a Japanese baby boy was delivered at 37 weeks’ gestation by urgent cesarean
section because of the diagnosis of severe fetal distress. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia with omphalocele was prenatally diagnosed with
fetal ultrasound. A ruptured omphalocele was confirmed at delivery. A silo was established on the day of his birth; direct closure of his
diaphragmatic defect and abdominal wall closure was performed on the fifth day after his birth. Trisomy 13 was confirmed by genetic
examination. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged 5 months postnatally with home oxygen therapy. He was readmitted
because of heart failure and died at 6 months. Case 2: a Japanese baby boy, who was prenatally diagnosed with gastroschisis, was delivered
at 35 weeks’ gestation by urgent cesarean section because of the diagnosis of fetal distress. Silo construction using a wound retractor was
performed on the day of his birth and direct abdominal closure was performed on the tenth day after his birth. Trisomy 21 was confirmed by
genetic examination. Treatment for his respiratory distress was continued after surgery. A retrosternal hernia was revealed at 6 months and
direct closure of retrosternal diaphragm with the resection of hernia sac was performed. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was
discharged with home oxygen therapy. Attention should be paid to chromosomal abnormality in cases in which the coexistence of congenital
diaphragmatic hernia and abdominal wall closure defect are observed. Malformations associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) can
influence the morbidity and prognosis of the affected neonate . The combination of CDH and an abdominal wall defect (omphalocele or
gastroschisis) is rare; some babies with this combination have been reported to have a poor prognosis [2, 3]. This combination can be
associated with syndromes [4, 5], but cases in which the etiology is unclear have also been reported [2, 3]. We encountered two cases of CDH
combined with an abdominal wall defect. This report describes their clinical features, which are unlike those reported previously, and our
surgical management. Our two patients did not fit the syndromes previously reported, but both had chromosomal anomalies. A Japanese baby boy
was delivered at 37 weeks’ gestation by emergent cesarean section because of the diagnosis of severe fetal distress. At 33 to 34 weeks’
gestation, fetal CDH and omphalocele had been detected by fetal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. 1a). Immediately
after delivery, he was intubated and mechanical ventilation was started. His birth body weight was approximately 2700 g. His Apgar score was
four at 1 minute and eight at 5 minutes. Left CDH was confirmed by radiography. Multiple associated malformations (coarctation of aorta,
left ventricular hypoplasia, left multicystic kidney, micropenis, right anophthalmia and left microphthalmia) were observed. Trisomy 13 was
suspected and the diagnosis was confirmed by genetic testing.Fig. 1Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (a) and photograph at surgery (b) of
Case 1. a Herniation of abdominal organs into the left pleural cavity (➩) and intestine into the umbilical cord (↓) were detected by
magnetic resonance imaging at 34 weeks of gestation. b The spleen and small intestine were removed from the left pleural cavity and reduced
into the abdomen (↓). Anterior, posterior, and left lateral posterior sides of diaphragm were formed but mediastinal side, especially around
the esophageal hiatus of diaphragm, was defective (▼) Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (a) and photograph at surgery (b) of Case 1. a
Herniation of abdominal organs into the left pleural cavity (➩) and intestine into the umbilical cord (↓) were detected by magnetic
resonance imaging at 34 weeks of gestation. b The spleen and small intestine were removed from the left pleural cavity and reduced into the
abdomen (↓). Anterior, posterior, and left lateral posterior sides of diaphragm were formed but mediastinal side, especially around the
esophageal hiatus of diaphragm, was defective (▼) Construction of a silo using a wound retractor was urgently performed on the first day of
his life because his hernial sac ruptured at delivery. The defect size of his abdominal wall was approximately 3×4 cm diameter. His entire
small intestine and two thirds of his colon were outside his abdominal cavity. After his condition was stabilized, repair of the
diaphragmatic hernia and closure of his abdominal wall were successfully performed on day 5. A hernial sac containing his spleen, two thirds
of his stomach, and his polycystic left kidney had entered his chest cavity through a 2×2 cm defect in his diaphragm. The posterior,
anterior, and lateral borders of the defect consisted of diaphragmatic muscle, but the medial border was formed by the esophageal hiatus
(Fig. 1b). Direct closure of the defect was performed after resection of the hernial sac and then his abdominal wall was also closed
primarily. A postoperative surgical complication, such as wound infection or recurrence of CDH, was not observed. Although his respiratory
and circulative conditions were unstable, his parents did not allow surgical treatment for coarctation of aorta and left ventricular
hypoplasia. Conservative intensive treatments were performed by a neonatologist. Mechanical ventilation with intratracheal intubation was
continued until day 22 after birth; then, nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) support was performed because hypoxia, which
might have been due to congenital cardiovascular disease and apnea due to trisomy 13, was observed. He was discharged 5 months postnatally
with home oxygen therapy. However, he was readmitted because of heart failure and died at 6 months. A Japanese baby boy was delivered at 35
weeks’ gestation by emergent cesarean section because of the diagnosis of fetal distress. At 21 weeks’ gestation, fetal gastroschisis had
been detected by fetal ultrasonography. Five minutes after delivery, he was intubated and mechanical ventilation was started because of
hypoxia. His birth weight was 1892 g and his Apgar score was seven at 1 minute and eight at 5 minutes. His entire small intestine, part of
his colon, and the greater curvature of his stomach were outside his abdomen, so a silo was constructed using a wound retractor . He had
severe generalized edema and hypovolemia, requiring intensive management. On day 10 of his life, direct closure of his abdominal defect was
performed. After silo establishment, severe systemic edema and intravenous hypovolemia were observed and intensive neonatal care was
performed by a neonatologist. Although he recovered from abdominal distention soon after abdominal closure, his respiratory condition was
unstable and intensive care was continued. Trisomy 21 was confirmed by genetic examination. Mechanical ventilation with intratracheal
intubation was continued until day 16 after birth, and then nasal CPAP respiratory support was performed because of his prolonged
hypercapnea which might have been due to trisomy 21. Chest X-ray examinations were performed periodically. On day 161 after his birth,
intestinal gas in his mediastinum was detected radiographically (Fig. 2a), although his respiratory condition was unchanged. Direct closure
of a retrosternal defect in his diaphragm measuring 2.5×3.5 cm (Fig. 2b) was performed along with resection of his hernial sac. His
postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged.Fig. 2Radiograph on day 161 of life (a) and photograph during direct closure of
the diaphragm (b) in Case 2. a On day 161, intestinal gas was detected in the mediastinum (➩). b A retrosternal hernial orifice (▼) was
observed at operation and the defect was closed directly Radiograph on day 161 of life (a) and photograph during direct closure of the
diaphragm (b) in Case 2. a On day 161, intestinal gas was detected in the mediastinum (➩). b A retrosternal hernial orifice (▼) was observed
at operation and the defect was closed directly Coexistence of CDH and an abdominal wall defect is considered to be rare and our case 2 is
the first report of gastroschisis associated with a retrosternal hernia. Borys and Taxy performed a 10-year review of autopsy records and
reported that the incidence of CDH associated with omphalocele was 0.077 % , while others have reported that the incidence of CDH combined
with an abdominal wall defect is 1.16 % , 1.87 % , and 3.1 % . In 2006, Harmath et al. reported a 9 to 11 % incidence of CDH associated with
an abdominal wall defect (gastroschisis in two out of 71 cases and omphalocele in four cases) that was higher than the frequencies given in
the reports just cited . Coexistence of CDH with abdominal defects has previously been reported in neonates with a septum transversum
diaphragmatic defect, which leads to midline anomalies such as the pentalogy of Cantrell or CDH plus a large epigastric omphalocele without
sterna or cardiac anomalies, or neonates who have omphalocele associated with a congenital intrapericardial diaphragmatic hernia [4, 11,
12]. CDH is also associated with abdominal wall defects in Fryns syndrome: an autosomal recessive syndrome that features multiple congenital
anomalies including distal digital hypoplasia, coarse facies, abnormalities of the ears, and CDH [5, 13]. Coexistence of CDH with abdominal
wall defects has also been reported in non-syndromic patients. In these patients, the diaphragmatic defect was not a typical left
posterolateral Bochdalek defect, but was found on the right side or in the left anterolateral region , or else the intestine was seen in the
right thorax with bilateral hypoplastic lungs on fetal magnetic resonance imaging . Our two cases were considered to be non-syndromal
because both did not have a typical Bochdalek defect in the diaphragm (the medial border of the defect was formed by the esophageal hiatus
in case 1 and case 2 had a retrosternal defect). However, both of our patients had chromosomal abnormalities (trisomy 13 in case 1 and
trisomy 21 in case 2). Harmath et al. reported the association of CDH and omphalocele in a patient with trisomy 18 , so an accumulation of
more cases is needed for further analysis of the coexistence of CDH and abdominal wall defects. Other anomalies associated with CDH may have
an important influence on survival and it was recently reported that pulmonary hypoplasia is critical [2, 3]. Accurate diagnosis of both CDH
and the abdominal wall defect is required because the timing of surgical treatment for CDH is important. In patients with both anomalies,
underestimation of CDH or overestimation of the abdominal cavity volume can occur. There have been reports on diagnosis of CDH after
abdominal wall closure or of CDH causing symptoms such as severe respiratory distress or circulatory instability after the abdominal wall
defect is treated [11, 13, 14]. In our case 1, accurate prenatal diagnosis allowed successful treatment by establishing a silo at delivery,
followed by surgical closure of the defects in the diaphragm and abdominal wall after stabilization of the patient’s general condition. In
case 2, CDH was asymptomatic at delivery and emerged after approximately 6 months. Thus, the position of the defect in the diaphragm also
affects the clinical course. We treated two cases of CDH associated with an abdominal wall defect. Coexistence of these anomalies is rare
and may be associated with septum transversum diaphragmatic defects or Fryns syndrome. Our cases did not feature such anomalies, but both
babies had chromosomal abnormalities. In neonates with abdominal wall defects and chromosomal abnormalities, we need to pay attention to the
possible coexistence of CDH (which may be concealed). Accumulation of more cases is required to determine whether this rare combination is
due to multiple malformation syndromes and defects of midline development or occurs by chance. Written informed consent was obtained from
the parents of the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consents is available for
review by the Editor-in Chief of this journal. congenital diaphragmatic hernia continuous positive airway pressure Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions SI performed the surgical treatment of patients and was a
major contributor in writing this manuscript. AO and YM performed the pediatric surgical treatment. AO and YB contributed and helped to
draft this manuscript. HS and MT performed the neonatal intensive treatment of the patients and helped to draft this manuscript. All authors
approved the final manuscript. The authors have special thanks to Dr. Masayo Kanai and Dr. Sumie Fujinuma for their special support for the
neonatal clinical intensive treatment as neonatologists.
