Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare, progressive, fatal vascular disorder. Genetic predisposition plays vital roles in the
development of PAH, with most mutations being identified in genes involved in the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) signaling
pathways. Defects in the BMP9 gene have been documented in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), the most common inherited vascular
disorder, which is occasionally associated with PAH. Selective enhancement of endothelial BMPR2 with BMP9 reverses pulmonary arterial
hypertension. We report the case of a 5-year-old Hispanic boy who was diagnosed with severe PAH and right heart failure at 3 years of age.
During his stay in the pediatric intensive care unit, treatment was initiated with inhaled nitric oxide and intravenous epoprostenol; he
subsequently was transitioned to treprostinil, sildenafil, and prophylactic enoxaparin. Now, two years later, the child is asymptomatic on
sildenafil, bosentan, subcutaneous treprostinil, and warfarin. Genetic screening revealed a novel homozygous nonsense mutation in the BMP9
gene (c.76C > T; p.Gln26Ter). The child had no telangiectasias or arteriovenous malformations; family history also was negative. Subsequent
parental testing showed both parents were heterozygous for the same mutation, indicating that the child inherited the BMP9 mutant allele
from each parent. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a BMP9 mutation in a patient with PAH. The homozygous nonsense mutation may
account for the early onset and severity of PAH in this patient and also fit the ‘two-hit’ model we proposed previously. The absence of
clinical symptoms for PAH in the parents may be due to incomplete penetrance or various expressivities of the BMP9 mutations. Our study
expands the spectrum of phenotypes related to BMP9 mutations. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12890-016-0183-7) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease characterized
by elevated mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of 25 mm Hg or more and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 15 mm Hg or less. In
the current guideline, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) greater than 3 wood units was added as part of the hemodynamic definition of PAH
. The etiology of PAH is heterogeneous and incompletely understood. Gene mutations that have been described as promoters of PAH include
mutations in the gene coding BMPR2 (bone morphogenetic protein receptor type II), a member of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β)
signaling pathway, which has been identified in approximately 70 % of familial and up to 25 % of sporadic cases . Other TGF-β signaling
pathway partners, such as ACVRL1 (ALK1:activin receptor-like kinase type 1), ENG (endoglin), SMAD8, and SMAD4, are also reported to be
involved in the pathogenesis of PAH . Besides, potassium channel genes KCNA5 and KCNK3, NOTCH1, NOTCH3, TOPBP1 and EIF2AK4 (eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2) were documented as PAH disease causing genes . BMP9/GDF2 may also be responsible for PAH by specifically
activating the ALK1/BMPR2/ENG pathway and stimulating ET-1 (endothelin 1) via several SMAD pathways . This present study is the first to
identify a homozygous nonsense mutation in BMP9 in a patient with PAH and expands the spectrum of phenotypes related to BMP9 mutations. The
proband, a 5-year-old boy, and his family members were enrolled in the study after informed written consent was obtained and this study was
approved by the institutional review board. This former full-term child presented at 3 years of age with worsening dyspnea and exercise
intolerance. He was noted to have perioral cyanosis, a new murmur, and cardiomegaly on chest X-ray. Echocardiogram showed a severely dilated
main pulmonary artery and branch pulmonary arteries and dilated right atrium and right ventricle without any evidence of congenital heart
disease. The predicted right ventricular systolic pressure was ~104 mmHg + right atrial pressure (simultaneous systemic blood pressure
102/78 mmHg), and the predicted pulmonary artery end-diastolic pressure was ~44 mmHg + RVEDP (right ventricular end-diastolic pressure).
Brain-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) at admission was 4241 pg/mL (reference range, 0–100 pg/mL). He was diagnosed with PAH and started on
subcutaneous infusion of 2 ng/kg/min of epoprostenol that was titrated upwards to a goal of 40 ng/kg/min, then transitioned to treprostinil
of 80 ng/kg/min. During the admission, he was also started on sildenafil (1 mg/kg/dose) and prophylactic enoxaparin. Echocardiogram at
discharge showed a right ventricular systolic pressure of ~59 mmHg (systemic blood pressure 90/50 mmHg). The right ventricle remained
severely dilated with qualitatively moderate to severely depressed right ventricular systolic function. No pericardial effusion was noted.
BNP was 650 pg/mL. Cardiac catheterization was done three months later on dual therapy and showed mild-moderate PH (Table 1). The cardiac
catheterization data revealed that at rest, he had normal saturations and therefore there was no evidence of shunting or a mixing lesion.
The blood was also oxygenated appropriately as it passed through the lungs. Mean artery pressures were elevated (>25 mmHg), capillary wedge
pressure was normal (< 15 mmHg) and vascular resistance was elevated (> 2 WU/m2), consistent with diagnosis of PAH.Table 1Cardiac
catheterization dataSaturations (%)RARPALFASysREST8081100On O2 (80 %)91100 %On NO89100Pressures (mm
Hg)RARVRPARPCWLFAREST6/6/638/2/742/20/307/7/788/46/61Isoproterenol 2mcg60/25/439/9/8101/45/64On O2 (80 %)6/5/542/20/297/7/789/42/60On
NO7/6/643/18/297/7/785/41ThermodilutionCO (ml/min)CI (ml/min/m2)REST3.24.55O2 3.14.43NO3.34.07Using the above values including an assumed
VO2 of 155 ml/min/m2 and Hgb 11.4 g/dL, calculations were the following: Qp = 5.2 L/min/m2, Qs = 5.2 L/min/m2; Qp:Qs = 1:1, PVR 4.4 WU/m2.
No significant changes noted in pressures while on O2, NO or during administration of isoproterenol Abbreviations: RPA right pulmonary
artery, LFA left femoral artery, S/D/M systolic, diastolic, mean artery pressures, RA right atrium, RV right ventricle, RPCW right pulmonary
capillary wedge, CO cardiac output, CI cardiac index, Qp pulmonary blood flow, Qs systemic blood flow, PVR pulmonary vascular resistance
Cardiac catheterization data Using the above values including an assumed VO2 of 155 ml/min/m2 and Hgb 11.4 g/dL, calculations were the
following: Qp = 5.2 L/min/m2, Qs = 5.2 L/min/m2; Qp:Qs = 1:1, PVR 4.4 WU/m2. No significant changes noted in pressures while on O2, NO or
during administration of isoproterenol Abbreviations: RPA right pulmonary artery, LFA left femoral artery, S/D/M systolic, diastolic, mean
artery pressures, RA right atrium, RV right ventricle, RPCW right pulmonary capillary wedge, CO cardiac output, CI cardiac index, Qp
pulmonary blood flow, Qs systemic blood flow, PVR pulmonary vascular resistance Two years after his initial diagnosis, the child was doing
well and was New York Heart Association functional class I. He is maintained on sildenafil (20 mg three times daily), bosentan (62.5 mg
twice daily), treprostinil (121 ng/kg/min subcutaneously), and warfarin (3 mg daily). Echocardiogram showed trace tricuspid and pulmonary
regurgitation and a mildly dilated main pulmonary artery. The right ventricle was moderately dilated with normal function. The family
history is otherwise negative. No signs or symptoms of PAH or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) showed in either parent. They are
from the same town in Mexico and denied any known consanguinity. Grandparents did not have HHT, nor did they have prolonged bleeding or PAH.
Paternal grandmother was alive at time of case report; remaining grandparents were already deceased. For genetic analysis, DNA extraction,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequence analysis were performed according to our protocols . Genomic primer pairs were designed to
amplify all of the coding regions and the intron-exon boundaries of known PAH-associated genes including BMPR2 , ACVRL1 , ENG , SMAD8 ,
SMAD4 , CAV1 , BMP9/GDF2 , KCNK3 , KCNA5 , EIF2AK4 , TOPBP1 , NOTCH1 , and NOTCH3 . We identified a homozygous nonsense mutation (c.76C > T)
of the BMP9/GDF2 gene (Fig. 1). This is a novel mutation that causes change from glutamine to terminator at amino acid position 26
(p.Gln26Ter). The parents are both heterozygotes for the same mutation, indicating that the child inherited a copy from each parent. Besides
the mutation, we also found a number of polymorphisms (Additional file 1: Table S1).Fig. 1Genetic screening of the PAH-causing genes in the
index patient and the parent. Panel (a) shows normal nucleotide fragment of BMP9 with corresponding amino acids underneath. Panel (b)
identifies the homozygous nonsense mutation at nucleotide position 76 (c.76C > T) in the exon 1 of the BMP9 gene (NM_0016204.1), which
causes the amino acid change from glutamine to tryptophan at peptide position of 26 (p.Gln26Ter) in the index patient. Panel (c) shows the
heterozygous nonsense mutation at nucleotide position 76 (c.76C > T) in the exon 1 of the BMP9 gene (NM_0016204.1) found in the parent
Genetic screening of the PAH-causing genes in the index patient and the parent. Panel (a) shows normal nucleotide fragment of BMP9 with
corresponding amino acids underneath. Panel (b) identifies the homozygous nonsense mutation at nucleotide position 76 (c.76C > T) in the
exon 1 of the BMP9 gene (NM_0016204.1), which causes the amino acid change from glutamine to tryptophan at peptide position of 26
(p.Gln26Ter) in the index patient. Panel (c) shows the heterozygous nonsense mutation at nucleotide position 76 (c.76C > T) in the exon 1 of
the BMP9 gene (NM_0016204.1) found in the parent Various factors have been documented in the pathogenesis of PAH, and genetic mutations of
genes involved in the TGF-β signaling pathway play essential roles in it. Herein we report a novel homozygous nonsense mutation in BMP9,
another member of the TGF-β signaling pathway, in a patient with PAH. As a member of the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), BMP9 has been
identified to be actively involved in the TGF-β signaling pathway by specifically binding to ALK-1, BMPR2, and ENG, which are causally
related to PAH and HHT. The endothelial ALK1/BMPR2 pathway is constitutively activated by circulating BMP9, and BMP9 induces BMPR2
expression in endothelial cells in an ALK1-dependent manner . In HHT pathogenesis, missense mutations within the orphan domain of ENG
disrupt the high affinity interaction between ENG and BMP-9 . BMP9-specific mutations were identified in patients with HHT , which is
associated with a precapillary pattern of pulmonary hypertension that is histologically indistinguishable from idiopathic PAH. Moreover, a
recent study showed that selective enhancement of endothelial BMPR2 with BMP9 reverses PAH . These data clearly indicate that the
BMP-9/ALK-1/BMPR2/ENG pathway is critical in the vascular pathogenesis of PAH/HHT. Disruption of BMP9/ALK-1/BMPR2/ENG pathway may,
therefore, be important in the development of PAH/HHT-related vascular changes. Also, various studies have shown that BMP9 stimulates
release of ET-1 in vascular endothelial cells via several SMAD pathways to regulate endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis . In our
patient, the homozygous nonsense mutation resulted in a premature truncation (c.76C > T, p.Gln26Ter). This truncated BMP9 may cause abnormal
remodeling of pulmonary arterioles, which resulted in PAH due to the loss of function of BMP9. Loss of function of BMP9 may reduce the
expression of BMPR2 and ALK-1 and disrupt its interaction with ENG, both of which may contribute to PAH pathogenesis. The homozygous
nonsense mutation may account for the early onset and severity of PAH in this patient and also fit the ‘two-hit’ model we proposed . The
absence of clinical symptoms in the parents may be due to incomplete penetrance or various expressivities of the BMP9 mutations. We believe
that our study has expanded the spectrum of phenotypes related to BMP9 mutations. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and
his parents for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal.
Additional file 1: Table S1. DNA alterations identified in the 13 PAH-associated genes. (DOC 40 kb) DNA alterations identified in the 13
PAH-associated genes. (DOC 40 kb) bone morphogenetic protein receptor type II hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia mean pulmonary artery
pressure pulmonary arterial hypertension pulmonary capillary wedge pressure pulmonary vascular resistance transforming growth factor beta
Guoliang Wang and Rui Fan contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions GW and RF: carried out the data collection, data analysis, drafted the initial manuscript, and approved the final
manuscript as submitted. RJ and WZ: carried out the data collection, data analysis, critically reviewed the manuscript, and approved the
final manuscript as submitted. DP, NV and YF: conceptualized and designed the study, coordinated and supervised data collection, critically
reviewed the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. All authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree to
be accountable for all aspects of the work. This study was sponsored by the internal research funding from Section of Cardiology, Department
of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine
