We encountered a rare patient with lens luxation in which the lens had become stuck on the optic disc. Findings obtained during vitreous
surgery suggested that the luxated lens had become stuck on the optic disc via residual vitreous gel. An 88-year-old Japanese man
experienced lens luxation into the inferior vitreous cavity while undergoing treatment for glaucoma in his left eye. Because no inflammation
was present upon examination, we observed the patient without prescribing any additional medications except for the eye drop treatment for
glaucoma. Two years later, the patient revisited our clinic after suddenly noticing a visual disturbance in his left eye. A fundus
examination revealed that the luxated lens had become stuck on the optic disc and displayed no changes in relation to the patient’s head
position or eye movement. Subsequently, vitreous surgery was performed to remove the luxated lens. During the surgery, we observed an
aggregation of vitreous gel between the luxated lens and the optic disc. The luxated lens was successfully mobilized by pushing with a
vitreous cutter and then extracted through a corneoscleral incision using perfluorocarbon liquid. At 4 months after surgery, the patient’s
visual acuity had improved to 20/25. The findings of this study suggest that the luxated lens had become stuck on the optic disc via
residual vitreous gel on the optic disc. The surgical procedure of extracting the luxated lens through a corneoscleral incision using
perfluorocarbon liquid was found to be both safe and effective. In patients with lens luxation into the vitreous cavity, lensectomy
(intracapsular lens extraction or intravitreal phacoemulsification), vitrectomy, and intraocular lens ciliary sulcus fixation are often
performed as treatment . However, some patients who show no complications, such as decreased visual acuity (VA) or lens-induced
endophthalmitis, are followed conservatively . A luxated lens is usually located in the inferior vitreous cavity without adherence to the
retina in the posterior pole . In this report, we describe a rare case in which the luxated lens in the vitreous cavity became stuck on the
optic disc and obstructed the macular region, thus causing a marked visual disturbance. Our patient was an 88-year-old Japanese man who had
been undergoing eye drop treatment for angle-closure glaucoma in his left eye since 2003. In February 2008, he experienced lens luxation
into the inferior vitreous cavity. He had no ocular trauma at that time, and he also had no ocular abnormalities such as pseudoexfoliation
or lens subluxation. Because the lens capsule was intact and inflammation such as lens-induced endophthalmitis was not present, we observed
the patient without prescribing additional medications except for the eye drop treatment for glaucoma. The patient had had phthisis bulbi of
unknown origin in the fellow eye since childhood. Hence, eyeglasses were prescribed to improve his corrected VA, and he was followed
conservatively. During the follow-up period, his corrected VA remained at 20/20, and intraocular pressure (IOP) was controlled to
approximately 12 mmHg in his left eye. He had no systemic medical history and was taking no medication except the eye drop treatment for
glaucoma. Moreover, there was nothing particular of note in regard to the patient’s family history. In April 2010, the patient revisited our
clinic after suddenly noticing a visual disturbance in his left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed the absence of crystalline lens and deep
anterior chamber (Fig. 1a). A fundus examination revealed that the patient’s luxated lens had become stuck on the optic disc and obstructed
the macular region, thus causing a marked visual disturbance (Fig. 1b). The corrected VA in his left eye decreased to 20/400, but the IOP in
that eye remained at 12 mmHg. B-mode ultrasonography showed no movement of the luxated lens in the vitreous cavity in relation to changes in
the patient’s head position or eye movement (Fig. 1c).Fig. 1 a Preoperative anterior segment of the patient’s left eye. Slit-lamp
examination revealed absence of the crystalline lens and deep anterior chamber. b Preoperative fundus image of the left eye. The luxated
lens in the vitreous cavity can be seen stuck to the optic disc. The patient’s visual acuity in that eye was 20/400. c B-mode
ultrasonography findings. No movement of the luxated lens was observed in relation to changes in the patient’s head position or eye movement
a Preoperative anterior segment of the patient’s left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed absence of the crystalline lens and deep anterior
chamber. b Preoperative fundus image of the left eye. The luxated lens in the vitreous cavity can be seen stuck to the optic disc. The
patient’s visual acuity in that eye was 20/400. c B-mode ultrasonography findings. No movement of the luxated lens was observed in relation
to changes in the patient’s head position or eye movement At 7 days after the onset of decreased VA, pars plana vitrectomy was indicated to
remove the luxated lens. During the surgery, posterior vitreous detachment appeared to occur. However, we observed an aggregation of
vitreous gel between the luxated lens and the optic disc (Fig. 2a and b). The luxated lens was successfully mobilized by pushing it with a
vitreous cutter, which eliminated the adhesion of the luxated lens to the optic disc without any difficulties or problems. The luxated lens
was then floated upward using liquid perfluorocarbon and extracted through a superior 130-degree corneoscleral incision. We selected that
technique on the basis of our presumption that the dislocated crystalline lens was quite hard. Following surgery the macula could be
visualized, and by 4 months after surgery the corrected VA in that eye had improved to 20/25 and the IOP remained at approximately 16 mmHg
without additional treatment. In addition, slit-lamp examination revealed no new changes (Fig. 3a). A funduscopic examination revealed a
slightly small optic disc (disc macula to disc diameter ratio 0.3), but no congenital anomalies such as an optic disc pit or morning glory
syndrome (Fig. 3b).Fig. 2 a Image showing the intraoperative findings. An aggregation of vitreous gel (arrows) on the optic disc was found.
The luxated lens probably became stuck on the optic disc via this residual vitreous gel. b An illustration depicting this mechanismFig. 3 a
Postoperative anterior segment of the patient’s left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed no new changes. b Postoperative funduscopic image
of the left eye. Following vitreous surgery, the macula could be visualized and the corrected visual acuity in that eye had improved to
20/25 a Image showing the intraoperative findings. An aggregation of vitreous gel (arrows) on the optic disc was found. The luxated lens
probably became stuck on the optic disc via this residual vitreous gel. b An illustration depicting this mechanism a Postoperative anterior
segment of the patient’s left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed no new changes. b Postoperative funduscopic image of the left eye.
Following vitreous surgery, the macula could be visualized and the corrected visual acuity in that eye had improved to 20/25
Ophthalmologists sometimes encounter patients with lens luxation into the vitreous cavity, but cases in which the luxated lens becomes stuck
to the optic disc are extremely rare. In our patient, lens adhesion to the optic disc occurred approximately 2 years after complete lens
luxation. The lens adhesion found in this patient may have occurred for one of the following three reasons: (1) tissue changes (such as
those associated with intraocular inflammation), (2) negative pressure on the optic disc, or (3) other physical factors. In regard to the
first possibility, it has been reported that damage to the lens capsule can cause leakage of lens proteins into the vitreous cavity and
elicit lens-induced endophthalmitis . In such cases, cyclitic membrane formation can occur as a result of the granulomatous inflammation,
and adhesions can form between the luxated lens and the optic disc. However, the gross pathological appearance of the extracted lens in our
patient, other than showing cataract-related changes, exhibited no findings indicative of inflammation. A preoperative examination also
revealed no inflammation of the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity. Thus, adhesion due to intraocular inflammation was ruled out. In
regard to the second possibility, if pressure in the subarachnoid space surrounding the optic nerve is decreased, negative pressure on the
optic disc reportedly can occur [8, 9]. This type of negative pressure may occur in congenital anomalies of the optic disc, such as optic
disc pits and morning glory syndrome. In such cases, migration of silicone oil from the vitreous cavity into the brain and migration of air
and silicone oil in the vitreous cavity into the subretinal space have occasionally been reported . However, although our patient had a
small optic disc, no congenital anomalies were observed. Thus, adhesion of the luxated lens due to negative pressure on the optic disc was
deemed unlikely. In regard to the third possibility, physical factors such as residual vitreous cortex were associated with the pathological
condition in our patient. Intraoperative findings revealed the occurrence of posterior vitreous detachment; however, we observed an
aggregation of vitreous gel between the luxated lens and optic disc. The adhesion between the optic disc and vitreous is anatomically
strong, so even if posterior vitreous detachment occurs, some remnant vitreous gel may be present. In fact, this aggregation of vitreous gel
on the optic disc appeared to play the role of an interpositional material between the luxated lens and the optic disc in our patient. Fetal
vitreous tissue, such as the Cloquet’s canal, is reportedly occasionally seen in congenital anomalies of the optic disc . In our patient, no
abnormality of the optic disc was found, but the possibility that a similar tissue was present cannot be ruled out. Our findings in this
case suggest that the luxated lens had become stuck on the optic disc via residual vitreous gel on the disc. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. intraocular pressure visual acuity Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions SM, MF, HS, TSa, TK, MU, TSu, and TI gathered and interpreted data regarding the disease. EI
helped analyze the data. TK helped obtain histological images and with interpretation. JS helped analyze images and contributed to the
manuscript preparation. TI was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
authors thank John Bush for reviewing the manuscript.
