An 85-year-old man was hospitalized with infero-lateral myocardial infarction (MI). The time interval from onset to reperfusion was 8 h.
During angiography, the patient suddenly developed cardiogenic shock. Moderate size pericardial effusion and oozing through a posterior wall
rupture of left ventricle (LV) were detected on echocardiography (Panel A, arrow). Since the risk of surgery was extremely high, a surgical
treatment was not undertaken in agreement with the surgical team. After an angioplasty for a total occlusion of left circumflex artery,
different imaging techniques were performed to detect impending cardiac rerupture. Serial echocardiography revealed gradual dilatation at
the site of myocardial rupture and, on the 7th day, a pseudoaneurysm (Panel B, arrow). Three-dimensional echocardiogram revealed a
pseudoaneurysm at the root of the posteromedial papillary muscle (PPM) (Panel C, arrow). Computed tomography (CT) showed that the
pseudoaneurysm, which was measured as 12 × 12 × 14 mm, slightly protruded into the pericardial cavity (Panel D, arrow and Supplementary data
online, Movie S1). Left ventricular endocavitary view illustrated the three-dimensional relationship between the orifice of the rupture site
(Panel E, arrows) and the PPM. Combined cardiac CT and scintigraphic imaging, using 123I-β-methyl-iodophenyl pentadecanoic acid, which could
visualize the myocardial metabolic defect, showed a rupture site away from the border between infarcted and viable myocardium (Panel F,
arrows). The patient died of sepsis on Day 26 after admission. Post mortem examination showed that haematoma was found on the surface of the
pseudoaneurysm (Panel G, arrows). The posterior endocardial tear spread towards the basal inferior wall, forming the pseudoaneurysm (Panel
H, arrow), the wall of which was a mixture of fibrous and fat tissue without myocytes (Panel I) unlike the other infarcted area (Panel J).
Supplementary data are available at European Heart Journal – Cardiovascular Imaging online. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by Takao Konishi.
