Costello syndrome is a rare syndrome of multiple congenital anomalies. The typical clinical traits include dysmorphic craniofacial features,
skin hyperpigmentation and excess, feeding difficulties leading to severe postnatal growth retardation, short stature, joint hypermobility,
and delayed psychomotor development. Additionally, Costello syndrome may present with an increased incidence of congenital heart disease,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and increased risk of both benign and malignant tumors. Furthermore, cases of patients with endocrine disorders
such as adrenal insufficiency and endogenous growth hormone deficiency have also been documented. We present a patient with Costello
syndrome who has been successfully treated with recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) for almost 4 years. The possibility of growth
hormone (GH) treatment can be considered in cases of documented GH deficiency in patients with Costello syndrome, but only under close
oncologic and cardiologic supervision. Costello syndrome (CS, OMIM #218040) is caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the proto-
oncogene HRAS that cause dysfunction of the Ras-MAPK signaling pathway. To date, 15 mutations in HRAS have been identified. The birth
prevalence of this disease is estimated at 1:1,230,000 to 1:300,000 . Clinically, CS is characterized by polyhydramnios, high birth weight,
postnatal growth retardation, relative macrocephaly, coarse facial features, loose skin, especially of the hands and feet,
hyperpigmentation, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrial arrhythmias, papillomata, developmental delay or mental retardation, and
predisposition to malignancies. In the newborn and neonatal periods, the presence of suggestive facies and severe feeding difficulties
leading to failure to thrive and hypoglycemia help make the correct diagnosis . Furthermore, cases of Costello syndrome patients with
endocrine disorders such as adrenal insufficiency and endogenous growth hormone deficiency have also been documented in the literature . Due
to the complex nature of the discussed syndrome, patients require multidisciplinary care (provided by cardiologists, speech therapists,
gastroenterologists, orthopedic surgeons) along with early stimulation and developmental support. Because of the short stature and growth
hormone deficiency in this condition, growth hormone therapy is often considered. For decades there has been great debate on the anticipated
risk of carcinogenesis and cardiomyopathy weighted against the potential benefits resulting from recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH)
therapy. To date, there are no conclusive data showing a negative role of rhGH therapy in the development of these diseases. Here we report
a six-year-old patient with Costello syndrome, who has been successfully treated with rhGH for 42 months. AM, was born at 40 weeks gestation
by caesarean section (due to large fetal mass) as the first baby of healthy and nonconsanguineous parents with a birth weight of 4270 g (>97
c), length of 55 cm (50 c) and head circumference of 38 cm (>97c). Her Apgar score was 7/7/8 points. The pregnancy was complicated by
polyhydramnios and impaired glucose tolerance in the mother. In the neonatal period, generalized edema, hypoglycemia, and hypocalcaemia were
observed. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed thickened muscles of both ventricles and septum, although follow-up cardiac examinations
revealed no evidence of cardiomyopathy. During the first two years of life the child was repeatedly hospitalized due to a number of problems
(the clinical symptoms observed in the patient are presented in Table 1). At the age of 8 weeks the girl was evaluated due to failure to
thrive. Physical examination revealed: poorly developed subcutaneous tissue with excess skin (this was attributed to resolution of edema),
reduced muscle tone, and enlarged liver. Laboratory tests did not find evidence of hypothyroidism or inborn errors of metabolism.
Ultrasonography followed by gastric scintiscan and upper GI series revealed hiatal hernia and gastric endoscopy, the latter being the base
for a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux. Additionally, the 24-h esophageal pH study was conducted, to further help with diagnosis,
yielding inconsistent results that were borderline normal. At the age of four months the patient manifested psychomotor delay, joint laxity,
variable muscle tone, and hyperactive knee reflexes. Follow-up cardiac examinations revealed no signs of cardiomyopathy, but complex
premature ventricular and supraventricular contractions and sinus arrest were present. She required treatment with amiodarone, which was
withdrawn after one month. No cardiac arrhythmias were shown in subsequent 24-h-Holter monitoring.Table 1Symptoms in consecutive months of
lifeChild’s ageClinical symptomsLack of appetiteVomiting, spitting upDysphagiaEsophagitisUnderweightHepatomegalyNeurological
abnormalitiesDelayed speech developmentLoose skinCoarse facial featuresArrhythmiasHypertrophic cardiomyopathyExcessive joint laxityAchilles
tendon contracturesShort stature1 month a +b 2−3 months++++++4−6 months++++++d ++c +7−9 months++++++d +++11−24 months++++++++++24−36
months++++++>3 years of life++++++Key aEdema bSuspicion, later studies did not confirm hypertrophic cardiomyopathy cTransient dReduced
muscle tone, periodic spasticity of the lower limbs Symptoms in consecutive months of life Key aEdema bSuspicion, later studies did not
confirm hypertrophic cardiomyopathy cTransient dReduced muscle tone, periodic spasticity of the lower limbs The treatment of
gastroesophageal reflux, which involved proton pump inhibitors and prokinetic agents, was ineffective. During eight months, her weight gain
had been only 1000 g. At the age of nine months the patient weighed 5300 g (SD: −4.92). Due to persistent feeding difficulties she was
referred for surgical treatment and Nissen fundoplication was performed at the age of 11 months. The improvement after abovementioned
procedure was very brief, with feeding difficulties quickly reoccurring. Due to lack of improvement after pharmacological treatment, and
persistent signs of gastroesophageal reflux in performed endoscopy our patient was qualified for second operation. Finally the decision
about surgical treatment was abandoned due to slow spontaneous improvement in feeding and apetite after the patient was 3 years old. At the
age of 2 years and 9 months Costello syndrome was suspected on the basis of phenotypic traits (large mouth, wide lips, short nasal bridge,
loose skin deeply fissured on the palms and soles of the feet, joint laxity, and abnormal feet position, Fig. 1) and case history. The
diagnosis was confirmed by molecular tests, which identified c.35G > C (p.G12A) substitution in the HRAS gene, the second most common
mutation responsible for Costello syndrome. Molecular studies in both parents revealed that this mutation occurred de novo [3, 4].Fig. 1The
presented 6-year-old girl with Costello syndrome after 30 months of treatment with rhGH. The pictures show typical phenotypic features of
the syndrome: loose skin with deep palmar creases (a); abnormal feet position as a result of excessive joint laxity (b) The presented
6-year-old girl with Costello syndrome after 30 months of treatment with rhGH. The pictures show typical phenotypic features of the
syndrome: loose skin with deep palmar creases (a); abnormal feet position as a result of excessive joint laxity (b) The investigation of
delayed growth was performed at the age of 3 years and 2 months. Physical examination noted significantly short stature, i.e., a height of
84 cm (SD: −4.33), and underweight, 10.7 kg (SD: −2.86). Routine laboratory tests did not show any abnormalities. Electrocardiographic
examination and abdominal ultrasound were normal. Hormone analysis revealed normal thyroid function, normal daily cortisol profile and
rhythm. Reduced levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 in relation to chronological age were detected (26,3 ng/ml, normal level range at
this age 49–289 ng/ml). Bone age was found to be consistent with the chronological age. Growth hormone levels did not reach normal values in
the nocturnal secretion test or in L-Dopa and clonidine stimulation tests (maximum secretion: 8 ng/ml), see Table 2 for details. Based on
the above findings and clinical observations, partial endogenous growth hormone deficiency was established.Table 2Growth hormone secretion
in nocturnal and stimulation tests0’30’60’90’120’150’Nocturnal GH excretion 4,42,10,81,72,01,9GH after L-dopa 0,940,991,11,31,20,88GH after
clonidine 0,910,965,28,04,02,5 Growth hormone secretion in nocturnal and stimulation tests At the age of 3 years and 9 months the girl was
qualified for growth hormone therapy, following careful considerations of the risks and benefits and discussion of the issue with the
child’s parents. Growth hormone was administered by subcutaneous injection once daily, in the evening, at a dose of 0.031 mg/kg/day.
Initially, the check-up visits in the Department were held every three months, and then every six months. The following issues were
evaluated: response to treatment, tolerability, and laboratory test results, with particular emphasis on carbohydrate metabolism and bone
age progression (Table 3).Table 3Selected auxological parameters of the patient during rhGH treatmentAge [years and months]Body height Body
height SDSGrowth rate Body weight Body weight SDSBMI BMI SDSBone age [years and months]3 years and
2 months84−4.942.1010.7−2.8615.2−0.5043 years 9 months (start of rhGH
treatment)84.7−4.920.8012.1−2.6016.91.0053 years4 years88.9−3.4816.8012.1−2.5815.30.024 years 5 months92−3.297.4413.3−2.4115.70.4964 years
8 months93.3−3.317.4014−2.2816.10.5084 years 2 months5 years 2 months97.8−2.845.2015.4−1.8016.10.5075 years
6 months103−2.029.0016−1.7715.10.4755 years – 5 years 9 months6 years 1 month107.5−1.6713.0019−0.9216.40.5116 years 8 months109−1.782.57 a
18.4−1.4615.50.4807 years 10 months7 years 2 months115−1.6112.0020.3−1.2815.30.466 aInterruptions in rhGH administration caused by
orthopedic treatment Selected auxological parameters of the patient during rhGH treatment aInterruptions in rhGH administration caused by
orthopedic treatment During the initial check-ups, significant acceleration of growth was recorded. Throughout the first year of treatment,
her growth rate was 9.49 cm/year, and in the next two years it was 12.36 cm/year and 7.71 cm/year, respectively, while during the
pretreatment period her average growth rate was 4.28 cm/year. The curves of the patient's body weight and height gain before and during rhGH
treatment are shown in Fig. 2a and b.Fig. 2The course of growth (a) and weight gain (b) in the patient before and during rhGH treatment The
course of growth (a) and weight gain (b) in the patient before and during rhGH treatment During the treatment, progression of the
abnormalities within the ligaments of the ankles and hip joints (right club foot, left plano-valgus foot, shortening of the Achilles tendon,
dislocation of the right hip) was observed. At the age of 5 years and 6 months, surgical correction of both feet was necessary due to
further progression of mobility impairment, and plasty of the hip joint was performed in the following year. At present, the patient is
recovering after the last intervention. Currently, after 42 months of rhGH treatment, the girl has grown 30.3 cm, reaching a body height
above the 3rd percentile (115 cm; SD: −1.61), her weight gain has been 10.4 kg. Her current weight is 20.3 kg (10–25 percentile; SD: −1.28).
So far, no serious adverse events have been observed. The patient tolerates daily injections of growth hormone well, she receives
comprehensive speech therapy and rehabilitation, and attends kindergarten. Her parents have observed a significant improvement in her
psychomotor development, especially with respect to speech. Costello syndrome was first described in 1977 by Jack Costello, a New Zealand
pediatrician, in two unrelated children who presented similar phenotypic characteristics. The molecular etiology of this syndrome (germline
mutations in the HRAS gene) was identified in 2005 . Among many dysfunctions associated with this condition, impaired growth is one of the
most challenging clinical problems [8, 12, 13]. The average final height in Costello syndrome patients, without growth-stimulating therapy,
reaches about 138 cm (118–148 cm) . The pathogenesis of short stature associated with this condition has been studied in recent decades. The
first cases diagnosed with partial/total endogenous growth hormone deficiency and treated with rhGH were described in the 1990s . To date,
there are few studies in the scientific literature that assess the safety and efficacy of rhGH therapy in individual patients [14, 15]. As
the syndrome is extremely rare, evaluating a larger group of patients iseems to be a very difficult task. Increased incidence of cancer and
increased risk of development of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are serious clinical problems that should be taken into account when
considering treatment with rhGH [1, 7, 8, 15]. Gripp et al. estimated that the risk of developing tumors in patients with Costello syndrome
reaches 17 %, most of which are rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, papilloma, and bladder cancer. Interestingly, the p.G12A mutation detected
in our patient is the main mutation associated with the higher risk of cancer in CS, which correlates with an up to 57 % risk in affected
patients (2, 3). However, no occurrence of malignancy has been noted in the patient so far. Growth hormones promote cell divisions, which
may generate a potential hazard. However, existing research in this area has given inconclusive results [14, 15]. Stein et al. presented
long-term observations involving three patients with endogenous growth hormone deficiency successfully treated with rhGH with no severe
adverse events. On the other hand, cases of patients with unsatisfactory response to rhGH therapy and complications during the treatment
have also been documented. There are reports describing a case of a 16-year-old girl diagnosed with bladder cancer after 7 years of rhGH
therapy , a 26-month-old boy diagnosed with rhabdomyosarcoma after one year of treatment , and progression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in
a 6-year-old boy treated with rhGH . However, in all of these cases it is difficult to assess whether the administration of growth hormone
actually influenced the development of these diseases and to what extent. During 3.5 years of follow-up, we have observed accelerated growth
in our rhGH-treated patient, and no serious health complications have yet occurred. In infancy the girl was diagnosed with supraventricular
arrhythmias and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which was not confirmed in subsequent echocardiography. However, because of the risk of
recurrence she remains under the systematic control of a cardiologist. The observed motor-system problems, resulting from the excessive
ligamentous laxity associated with Costello syndrome, were already present before the initiation of growth hormone therapy. It seems that
their progression was associated with significant growth acceleration resulting from GH supply, but the impact of rhGH therapy alone is
difficult to assess. The available data, based on a small number of reported cases of Costello syndrome treated with recombinant growth
hormone, do not allow drawing general conclusions. The very good response to the treatment, demonstrated in our case, improved her body
height prognosis and eliminated the disability related to extreme short stature. The 3.5-year observation revealed no serious side effects.
However, reports of the otherauthors regarding the development and progression of cancer and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in children with
Costello syndrome treated with rhGH indicate that these patients require special oncologic and cardiologic supervision. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Growth hormone Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog Mitogen-activated
protein kinases Recombinant human growth hormone Standard deviation Gastrointestinal Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Authors’ contributions EP and EB conceived the study, participated in its design and coordination, and helped to
draft the manuscript. MKW and AS diagnosed the patient with Costello syndrome and MP carried out the molecular genetic studies,
additionally, all three of them helped to draft the manuscript. MW participated in the sequence alignment. EP and EB participated in the
design of the study and performed the statistical analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The research was partially
supported by the National Science Center Project UMO-2011/03/N/NZ2/00516 and MNiSW Project PB 0056/B/P01/2008/35. The technical and language
assistance was provided by Proper Medical Writing Sp. z o.o., Warsaw, Poland.
