Hypereosinophilia, defined by an absolute eosinophil count of more than 1500/mm3, is rarely observed in patients treated for cancer, and
rarely imputable to anti-cancer agents. Drug-induced hypereosinophilia usually appears within a few weeks of the start of treatment and
resolves after discontinuation of the medication. We report here a first case of hypereosinophilia with digestive allergic reaction
imputable to docetaxel in a woman treated for breast cancer. This patient, with a history of childhood atopic dermatitis and asthma,
underwent surgery for breast lobular carcinoma, followed with chemotherapy including 3 cycles of the FEC100 protocol and 3 cycles of
docetaxel. Ten days after the second cycle of docetaxel, she had abdominal pain with diarrhea, which increased after the third cycle of
docetaxel at the same dose. The blood eosinophil count increased up to 4685/mm3 at day 92. All biological tests were normal, except elevated
seric IgE. The systematic biopsies of the upper and lower digestive tract showed diffuse edema of the lamina propria, lymphocytic infiltrate
and CD117-expressing cells both in the epithelium and in the lamina propria. Electron microscopy showed a large number of degranulating mast
cells, while the number of tissue eosinophils was small. The blood eosinophil count decreased after day 96, three months after the last
injection of docetaxel. After day 182, the hypereosinophilia and symptoms resolved. This spontaneous evolution, the history of atopic
dermatitis and asthma, and the negativity of all biological tests performed led us to hypothesize a diagnosis of a systemic digestive Type 1
drug-induced hypersensitivity reaction. Using two validated pharmacovigilance scales, we found that docetaxel had the highest imputability
score compared to the other drugs. Recognition of allergic reactions imputable to docetaxel is important because it requires the drug to be
discontinued. In the difficult setting of anti-cancer treatment, if reintroduction of the drug is needed, a close collaboration between
oncologists, gastroenterologists and allergologists is required. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12885-015-2008-0) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Hypereosinophilia, defined by an absolute eosinophil count of more than
1500/mm3, is rarely observed in patients treated for cancer . The main drugs responsible for hyperesosinophilia are penicillins,
cephalosporins, sulfas, quinolones, and non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs , but hypereosinophilia is rarely imputable to anti-cancer
agents (see Additional file 1: Methods M1 for details on search strategy, and Additional file 2: Table S1 for the results of the systematic
literature search). Drug-induced blood hypereosinophilia usually appears within a 2 to 10 weeks of the start of treatment and resolves after
discontinuation of the medication (Additional file 2: Table S1). Blood hypereosinophilia is associated with potentially lethal clinical
complications, mainly cardiac, cutaneous, neurologic or pulmonary . We report here a first case of hypereosinophilia with systemic digestive
allergic reaction imputable to docetaxel in a woman treated for a localized breast cancer. This 40-years-old Caucasian woman, with a history
of childhood atopic dermatitis and asthma, underwent surgery for breast lobular carcinoma of 30 mm, histological grade III, expressing
estrogen and progesterone receptors, with no lymph node involvement. In accordance with French guidelines, she received post-surgery
chemotherapy including 3 cycles of the FEC100 protocol – 5Fluoro-Uracile 500 mg/m2/cycle (Accord, France), epirubicin 100 mg/m2/cycle
(Mylan, France) cyclophosphamid 500 mg/m2/cycle (Baxter, France) – and 3 cycles of docetaxel 100 mg/m2/cycle (Docetaxel Kabi © (ATC-Code
L01CD02), Fresenius, France). Ten days after the second cycle of docetaxel, she had abdominal pain with diarrhea (2–5 stools/day), which
increased after the third cycle of docetaxel at the same dose. The eosinophil count was 2001/mm3 at day 60, and 4685/mm3 at day 92
(Fig. 1).Fig. 1Event time-line and blood eosinophil count curve. C1, C2, C3: first, second and third cycles of docetaxel Event time-line and
blood eosinophil count curve. C1, C2, C3: first, second and third cycles of docetaxel Systematic biological tests and digestive biopsies
were performed at day 92. No parasitological, bacteriological, virological, immunological or hematological cause was found; only seric IgE
were elevated (Additional file 3: Table S2). The systematic biopsies of the upper and lower digestive tract showed similarities in the gut
and colonic biopsies. All four biopsies had diffuse edema of the lamina propria, lymphocytic infiltrate and CD117-expressing cells both in
the epithelium and in the lamina propria (see Additional file 1: Methods and Fig. 2a). We used electron microscopy, and anti-tryptase and
anti-eosinophil peroxidase antibodies to differentiate and count mast cells and eosinophils in the two compartments (see Additional file 1:
Methods and Fig. 2b, c, and Tables 1, 2). The diagnosis of eosinophilic gastro-enteritis was excluded because of the small number of tissue
eosinophils . Electron microscopy showed a large number of degranulating mast cells. No sign of thrombosis, necrosis or vascular-wall damage
was found.Fig. 2Characterization of cell infiltrates in the epithelium and lamina propria of the duodenum. Duodenal biopsies with
CD117-expressing cells (a), which include eosinophils expressing eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) and containing specific granules (b); and mast
cells (M) expressing tryptase and located in the lamina propria and epithelium (arrows, c). Mast cells in the lamina propria coexpress
tryptase and chymase (d). Mast cells in the epithelium (arrows) coexpress tryptase and carboxypeptidase A3 (e)Table 1Inflammatory cell
counts in gut and colonDigestive samplesEpitheliumLymphocytesMast
cellsEosinophilsDuodenum10.2 ± 4.14.4 ± 0.82.4 ± 0.7Jejunum12.4 ± 3.12.3 ± 0.51.2 ± 0.5Right colon7.8 ± 1.22.5 ± 0.30.4 ± 0.1Left
colon8.4 ± 0.93.2 ± 1.11.3 ± 0.4Table 2Inflammatory cell counts in gut and colonDigestive samplesLamina propriaLymphocytesPlasma cellsMast
cellsEosinophilsDuodenum66.3 ± 9.228.7 ± 5.112.3 ± 2.14.8 ± 0.9Jejunum70.8 ± 10.126.4 ± 4.59.6 ± 2.54.2 ± 1.1Right
colon65.5 ± 7.527.9 ± 5.38.2 ± 1.63.5 ± 0.6Left colon58.0 ± 6.724.3 ± 3.99.5 ± 1.02.0 ± 0.3 Characterization of cell infiltrates in the
epithelium and lamina propria of the duodenum. Duodenal biopsies with CD117-expressing cells (a), which include eosinophils expressing
eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) and containing specific granules (b); and mast cells (M) expressing tryptase and located in the lamina propria
and epithelium (arrows, c). Mast cells in the lamina propria coexpress tryptase and chymase (d). Mast cells in the epithelium (arrows)
coexpress tryptase and carboxypeptidase A3 (e) Inflammatory cell counts in gut and colon Inflammatory cell counts in gut and colon The blood
eosinophil count decreased after day 96, three months after the last injection of docetaxel. Despite 4 months of hypereosinophilia, we did
not detect cardiac, respiratory, liver or renal complications. After day 182, the hypereosinophilia and symptoms resolved. This spontaneous
evolution, the history of atopic dermatitis and asthma, and the negativity of all biological tests performed led us to hypothesize a
diagnosis of a drug-induced hypersensitivity reaction (HSR). Using two validated pharmacovigilance scales, we found that docetaxel had the
highest imputability score compared to the other drugs (Additional file 4: Figure S1 and Table 3).Table 3Drug imputability scoresAdverse
Drug Reaction probability scale a French imputability score b DrugsScoreISCSIntrinsic
imputabilityDocetaxel723316Ondansetrone421212Diosmectite−120110Paracetamol−120110Fluconazole−120110Racecadotril−120110Metoclopramide−120110Omeprazole−120110Phloroglucinol−120110Prednisone−120110
IS Informativeness score, C chronology, S semiology aNaranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM, et al. A method for estimating the probability of
adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981;30:239–45 bArimone Y, Bidault I, Dutertre JP, et al. Updating the French method for the
causality assessment of adverse drug reactions. Therapie 2013;68:69–76 Drug imputability scores IS Informativeness score, C chronology, S
semiology aNaranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM, et al. A method for estimating the probability of adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1981;30:239–45 bArimone Y, Bidault I, Dutertre JP, et al. Updating the French method for the causality assessment of adverse drug reactions.
Therapie 2013;68:69–76 Docetaxel, a semi-synthetic taxoid that inhibits depolymerization of microtubules, is currently approved for the
treatment of breast, lung and prostate cancers. The most frequent adverse effects of docetaxel are hematological (pancytopenia) and
digestive. Diarrhea is reported in 30 to 60 % of patients (Additional file 5: Table S3), often associated with severe oral mucositis. These
toxic lesions (Type A adverse drug reaction) are predictable, dose-dependent reactions linked to prolonged or daily exposure to the drug ,
whereas HSR under docetaxel treatment (Type B immunologically-mediated adverse drug reaction according to Gell-Coombs classification, ref )
is dose-independent . Severe HSR to docetaxel is observed in 3 % to 7.7 % of patients (Additional file 3: Table S2, and Reference for
review). Lethal drug-induced HSR has been reported in 0.05 % of 36,983 pati ents . In the case of our patient who developed diarrhea and
severe hypereosinophilia after the second injection of docetaxel, the two available pharmacovigilance scales concluded to docetaxel
imputability. Since our patient had neither pancytopenia nor oral mucositis, and since docetaxel had not been administered daily or for a
prolonged period, we concluded that the diarrhea was not related to a classic digestive toxicity but to Type B immune-mediated adverse drug
reaction. The digestive symptoms occurred after the second injection of docetaxel, and the blood hypereosinophilia after the third injection
concomitantly with elevated seric IgE. The digestive biopsies showed that the whole digestive tract was involved, with edema, large numbers
of mast cells, and few eosinophils. Under electron microscopy, both eosinophils and mast cells were degranulated. Overall, these findings
are in favor of a systemic digestive Type 1 hypersensitivity reaction. Using specific antibodies (see Additional file 1: Methods), we showed
that mast cells and eosinophils were distributed within the epithelium and the lamina propria. In bronchial biopsies of mild to moderate
TH2-high asthma associated with blood eosinophilia , intra-epithelial mast cells co-expressed tryptase and carboxypeptidase A3, whereas mast
cells of the lamina propria co-expressed tryptase and chymase. We also found these differential enzymatic co-expressions in epithelial and
lamina propria mast cells in the digestive biopsies of our patient (Fig. 2d, e). In asthmatic and atopic patients, a similar
immunoreactivity for IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF has also been found in bronchial and gut mucosa . We here report a case of severe HSR with
hypereosinophilia imputable to docetaxel. While this condition is rare, it is important to recognize it, since it requires the drug to be
discontinued. Since blood hypereosinophilia over 1500/μL and lasting more than 1 month entails a risk of major organ dysfunction [1, 11],
including death through cardiac failure , therapy discontinuation can be recommended if these conditions are observed. In the field of
adverse reactions to anti-cancer drugs, this is particularly relevant for docetaxel treatment, which can be prolonged for several months in
case of good response for metastatic breast, lung or prostate cancers. If reintroduction of this anti-cancer agent is needed, a close
collaboration between oncologists, gastroenterologists and allergologists is required. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor
of this journal. Additional file 1: Methods M1. (DOCX 18 kb) Additional file 2: Table S1. Published cases of blood hypereosinophilia
imputable to anti-cancer drugs. (DOCX 15 kb) Additional file 3: Table S2. Laboratory tests (DOCX 18 kb) Additional file 4: Figure S1. Drug
intake between day 0 (D0) and D182. D0 is the time of the first injection of docetaxel and D182 the time when all drugs were stopped. For
drugs administered continuously like omeprazole, the period of drug intake is symbolized by a straight line between the first day and the
last day of treatment. (JPG 81 kb) Additional file 5: Table S3. Adverse events in clinical trials using docetaxel monotherapy. (DOCX 16 kb)
Methods M1. (DOCX 18 kb) Published cases of blood hypereosinophilia imputable to anti-cancer drugs. (DOCX 15 kb) Laboratory tests (DOCX 18
kb) Drug intake between day 0 (D0) and D182. D0 is the time of the first injection of docetaxel and D182 the time when all drugs were
stopped. For drugs administered continuously like omeprazole, the period of drug intake is symbolized by a straight line between the first
day and the last day of treatment. (JPG 81 kb) Adverse events in clinical trials using docetaxel monotherapy. (DOCX 16 kb) hypersensitivity
reaction Anne Janin and Guilhem Bousquet are co-senior authors Competing interests The authors do not have any conflict of interest Authors’
contributions DH, GB and AJ conceived and designed the study; DH and GB collected clinical data. CP performed electron microscopy. CL
performed immunostainings. DH, CL, NJ, GB and AJ did analysis and interpretation of data. DH, GB and AJ wrote the manuscript. LV made a
critical revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. This work was supported by
University-Paris-Diderot, INSERM. We thank Massimiliano Orri for the algorithm design of literature search. Ms Angela Swaine reviewed the
English language.
