Traumatic intracranial pseudoaneurysm is a rare complication of blunt trauma. It is even more rare when it presents as epistaxis. Massive
epistaxis of a ruptured intracranial internal carotid artery pseudoaneurysm is a major cause of mortality, which requires emergency
intervention. We report a case of traumatic intracranial internal carotid artery pseudoaneurysm secondary to skull base fracture, which
presented with delayed onset of epistaxis. This was successfully treated by primary endovascular coil embolization. We discuss endovascular
treatment options and review the literature. Epistaxis is mostly a self-limiting medical condition.1 Traumatic intracranial pseudoaneurysm
is a rare complication of blunt trauma. It is even more rare to present as epistaxis. Unfortunately, massive, even fatal epistaxis can occur
secondary to the rupture of pseudoaneurysms of major intracranial vessels.2 The timely treatment of these lesions is necessary for the
safety of these patients. There are several modalities of treatment of these lesions with varying degrees of complexity and inherent
morbidity that needs to be tailored to the patients’ condition and access to specialized care. We report a case of traumatic intracranial
internal carotid artery pseudoaneurysm secondary to skull base fracture, which presented by delayed onset of epistaxis. This was
successfully treated by primary endovascular coils embolization, as a stand-alone therapy given the peculiarity of the patient presentation
and logistical aspects of his care. We discuss endovascular treatment options and literatures review. A 28-year-old man was transferred from
another institution with uncontrolled intermittent epistaxis. He had a history of road traffic accident 9 months earlier with mild traumatic
brain injury associated with multiple skull base fractures, from which he was stabilized and recovered completely. Two weeks prior to
arrival, he developed torrential nasal bleeds that stopped spontaneously the first time, but required nasal packing the next time it
occurred a few days later. The bleeds were becoming more frequent and heavier, thus he was transferred for urgent intervention. His
evaluation included a CT of the brain that showed multiple areas of encephalomalacia (Figure 1). The sphenoid sinuses showed complete
opacification with hyperdensity on both sides denoting hemosinus (Figure 2). Multiple non-displaced skull fractures were seen with a small
bony defect at the superior aspect body the sphenoid bone on the left side (Figure 3). Computer tomography of the brain showing multiple
areas of encephalomalacia with no evidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage. The sphenoid sinuses show complete opacification with hyperdensity on
both sides denoting hemosinus. Multiple non-displaced skull fractures are seen with a small bony defect at the superior aspect body of
sphenoid bone on the left side. The CT angiogram of the brain demonstrated the presence of a large arterial out-pouching arising from the
cavernous part of the left internal carotid artery protruding through a defect at the left superior-lateral aspect of the sphenoid sinus
representing pseudoaneurysm, with its tip projecting well into the right side of the sphenoid sinus measuring 16 x 8 mm (Figure 4). He was
shifted to the angiographic suite for embolization. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation to
protect the airway in case of rebleeding during the procedure. Computer tomography angiogram of the brain demonstrating the presence of a
large arterial out-pouching arising from the cavernous part of the left internal carotid artery protruding through a defect at the left
superior-lateral aspect of the sphenoid sinus representing pseudoaneurysm, with its tip projecting well into the right side of sphenoid
sinus measuring 16 x 8 mm. A left internal carotid artery cerebral angiogram was performed using the standard projections, as well as
oblique projections, and showed an aneurysm arising from the paraophthalmic segment of the internal carotid artery that projects anteriorly
and medially into the sphenoid sinus (Figure 5). The aneurysm was multilobulated with multiple daughter sacs. It had a small neck to dome
ratio. We decided to proceed with primary coiling. The aneurysm was cannulated using Echelon 14 microcatheter (eV3, Irvine, MN, USA) over
0.014” Silverspeed microguidewire (eV3, Irvine, MN, USA). Multiple detachable bare metal coils were deployed into the aneurysm to pack it
tightly in sequential “baskets” distal first then proximal using 9 mm diameter coils for each to obviate the need for an adjunctive device.
A completion angiogram showed near complete obliteration of the pseudoaneurysm with small residual flow into the neck with preservation of
the origin, and flow into the ophthalmic artery (Figure 6). He tolerated the procedure and was extubated upon completion. There was no
immediate complications and he received the post coiling heparinization protocol for 24 hours as is the usual practice at our institution
when the coil mass is close to the origin of an important vessel, in this case, the ophthalmic artery. He was discharged from the hospital
few days later. He was then followed up clinically at the outpatient and seen in the outpatient clinic with no further episodes of nasal
bleeding or new neurologic deficit. A one-year follow up showed a stable coil mass with no evidence of recanalization. Left internal carotid
artery oblique cerebral angiogram showing an aneurysm arising from the paraophthalmic segment of the internal carotid artery that projects
anteriorly and medially into the sphenoid sinus. Completion angiogram showing near complete obliteration of the pseudoaneurysm with small
residual flow into the neck with preservation of the origin and flow into the ophthalmic artery. Epistaxis is a common medical condition
mainly arising from the anterior nasal cavity and self limited with compression. The causes of epistaxis include but not limited to dryness
of the nasal mucosa, digital trauma, coagulopathy, hypertension, and blood dyscrasias. These are, for the most part, managed conservatively
or with nasal packing.1 In cases where epistaxis is difficult to control or in the presence of risk factors, such as head trauma, radiation
therapy, or head and neck tumors, a pseudoaneurysms should be considered as the cause of epistaxis. A trauma patient can have epistaxis
during presentation to the emergency department from injury of either the internal or external carotid artery branches. Injury to the
external carotid artery branches is the most injury common cause of epistaxis, especially, the internal maxillary artery.2 Sometimes the
injury will affect the skull base segments of the internal carotid artery due to the fracture edge injuring the artery during the
deceleration of the head, as in our case with multiple skull base fractures.3 It can present as epistaxis immediately at the time of injury
or in a delayed manner. If CT failed to show the site of injury leading to epistaxis, conventional angiography is indicated, which is the
gold standard in evaluating these patients.4 If both CT angiography and digital subtraction angiography fails to show the site of injury and
the patient continues to have epistaxis, repeat imaging in 3 weeks is advised; as 90% of patients with pseudoaneurysm will present in 3
weeks after injury, some of which have been reported to be fatal.5 Prompt treatment of pseudoaneurysms is warranted due to the high
morbidity and mortality if not recognized and treated. The mortality rate if ruptured is up to 50%.6 An open surgical approach is geared
towards exclusion of the aneurysm with parent vessel preservation of the artery or occlusion if necessary to allow for flow-reversal to heal
the aneurysmal segment. Exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm is the definite treatment with the best long-term outcome, however, this is not
always an option. The patient must have good collateral supply and pass the balloon occlusion test if feasible. Having good collaterals and
passing the balloon occlusion test is not a guarantee for the patient to have no complications after parent vessel occlusion. It is
important in this context to keep in mind that 22% of patients who passed the BTO developed complication after sacrificing the artery.7 With
the advances in endovascular techniques and equipment, these have replaced the previous use of the open surgical technique for both parent
vessel occlusion and preservation of the artery. The same requirements and risks apply for parent vessel occlusion by the endovascular
method as the open surgical technique with the risk of strokes. The choice of endovascular technique is variable and is individualized on a
case by case basis according to the anatomy and clinical status of the patient. Packing of the pseudoaneurysm with coils is achievable, but
it has risks of rupture in the acute phase when it is contained by the hematoma only.8 This option is sufficient in most cases where the
neck of the pseudoaneurysm is narrow as in our case. If the neck is wide, coiling can be performed with balloon remodeling. The advantage of
these 2 techniques is sparing the patient the need for antiplatelets therapy post procedure in case a stent is deployed. If the vessel wall
is dysplastic and the neck is wide, treatment can be performed with the stent assistance prior or after placement of the coils to
reconstruct the vessel and contain the coil mass. This can be performed with the use of single stent or with a stent within stent
technique.9 If the operator feels the pseudoaneurysm is small or too fragile to hold the coils, treatment can be performed with stents only.
Pseudoaneurysms were reported to heal after placement of 2-3 overlapping intracranial stents to divert the flow away from the aneurysm, and
to help reconstruct the wall of the artery by neointima formation on the stents struts.9 Recently, several articles were published on the
use of flow diverting stents and covered stents as the sole treatment, or with coils as the treatment for the pseudoaneurysms.10 Covered
stents show limited success compared with flow diverting stents due to the stiffness of the delivery system, which needs to be pushed
through a diseased and tortuous anatomy risking complications of another dissection or vasospasm. The other risk of covered stents is the
occlusion of adjacent branches, such as the posterior communicating or the ophthalmic arteries.11 In conclusion, patients who presents with
massive epistaxis following a history of head trauma, no matter how recent or remote, should be evaluated for the presence of pseudoaneurysm
as the cause, especially of the internal carotid artery. Treatment should be prompt due to the high mortality if not recognized.
Endovascular techniques are the treatment method of choice, which should be individualized to the patient’s condition, risk factors, and
anticipated compliance with medical treatment and follow up plans. DisclosureAuthors have no conflict of interest, and the work was not
supported or funded by any drug company. Authors have no conflict of interest, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company.
