To evaluate the feasibility of NOTES for thyroid by the transvestibule approach. Six patients diagnosed with benign thyroid diseases were
enrolled and underwent transvestibule endoscopic thyroidectomy in our hospital from October 2013 to September 2014. All 6 patients completed
transvestibule endoscopic thyroidectomy successfully with no conversion to open surgery. The mean operation time was 122 minutes (100 to 150
min). The average blood loss during surgery was 30 mL (10 to 40 mL). The pathologic diagnosis coincided with the preoperative diagnosis,
which was 1 case of thyroid adenoma and 5 cases of thyroid goiters. The mean length of hospital stay was 8.2 days (8 to 10 d). No severe
complications were reported during the 3 to 13 months’ follow-up. Transvestibule endoscopic thyroidectomy is feasible, with a satisfactory
cosmetic effect; yet, further improvement of surgical techniques are required on account of the complexity of the surgical procedure and the
prolonged operation time. NOTES is a microinvasive endoscopic surgical technique using a natural orifice (eg, stomach, colon, vagina,
urethra, etc.) as the access.1 From October 2013, we have conducted 6 cases of transvestibule thyroidectomy successfully for patients
diagnosed with benign thyroid tumors, as reported here. We included 6 patients, 1 male and 5 female, in our group. The range of age was from
19 to 45 years. with a mean age of 34.3±5.6 years. Preoperative thyroid function tests were normal in all patients. All lesions were
solitary nodules under B-ultrasonography, with 3 cases in the right lobe and 3 cases in the left lobe. Among the 6 cases, 1 was a cystic
nodule, 5 were solid nodules, and 1 contained a mixed mass; the nodule diameter ranged from 1 to 4 cm. The preoperative diagnosis showed 1
case of thyroid adenoma and 5 cases of nodular goiters. There was no clinical diagnosis of thyroid malignancy. All cases were in line with
the indications of endoscopic thyroid surgery,2 and no surgical contradictions were violated. All patients underwent general anesthesia with
nasotracheal intubation. The patient was placed in the supine position, with the affected shoulder elevated by 15 degrees and the head
tilted back; after the routine disinfection and draping, the mouth was disinfected twice with chlorhexidine. The expansion solution was
injected (1 mg adrenaline diluted with 300 mL 0.9% saline) from the midline of the vestibule and both sides of the buccal cavity to the neck
to inflate the local tissue (Fig. 1). A 10-mm transverse incision in the mucosa of the vestibule was made parallel to the front teeth. Using
a glass rod, the submental space was dissected bluntly up to the lower layer of the platysma; a 10-mm trocar was placed and an endoscope was
inserted at 30 degrees for observation. Two lateral incisions were then made in the vestibule near the premolars, and a 5-mm trocar each was
inserted (Fig. 2) after dissection with a blunt instrument. A forcep and a harmonic scalpel were placed, respectively, through 2 lateral
trocars. The CO2 pressure was maintained below 6 mm Hg during surgery. The subplatysmal plane was expanded with a harmonic scalpel and
proceeded to the sternal notch inferiorly and to both sternocleidomastoid muscles laterally under endoscopy. The linea alba was carved and
the strap muscles were bluntly retracted laterally to expose the thyroid. The thyroid was separated before the trachea, and the isthmus of
the thyroid was intersected with a harmonic scalpel. After the trachea was revealed, the thyroid was dissected laterally to expose the
middle thyroid vessels and severed afterwards with a harmonic scalpel. Next, the thyroid was dissected downwards from the lateral side, and
the inferior thyroid veins were severed. The thyroid was retroflected medially with an atraumatic grasping forcep to expose the superior
thyroid veins and then coagulated with a harmonic scalpel. To preserve the dorsal part of thyroid tissue and prevent damage of the
parathyroid and recurrent laryngeal nerves, the superior and the inferior thyroid vessels were dissected as close as possible to the thyroid
capsule. The lesion and the surrounding gland were removed and put into a pouch; then, the specimen and the trocar were retrieved together
from the middle incision. When the tumor size was large, the specimen was cut within the pouch under direct visualization . The resected
tissue was sent for frozen-section examination routinely for pathologic diagnosis. The surgical field was rinsed and the bleeding was
stanched carefully. Finally, the incision was closed with a 3-0 absorbable suture; drainage was not necessary. The surgical region was
compressed with a bandage. Antibiotics were administrated for 3 to 5 days, and mouthwashes were prescribed to keep the oral cavity sanitary.
Injection of the “expansion solution.” Positions of the 3 trocars in the vestibule: the middle one for observation, and the lateral 2 for
operation. All 6 patients completed transvestibule endoscopic thyroidectomy successfully, with no conversion to open surgery; among them, 5
patients underwent partial thyroidectomy and 1 patient underwent unilateral subtotal thyroidectomy. The mean operation time was 122 minutes
(100 to 150 min). The average blood loss during surgery was 30 mL (10 to 40 mL). The pathologic diagnosis coincided with the preoperative
diagnosis, which was 1 case of thyroid adenoma and 5 cases of thyroid goiters. The mean length of hospital stay was 8.2 days (8 to 10 d). No
severe complications such as nerve damage or parathyroid injury were reported. One patient had a postoperative wound infection, but
recovered thoroughly after symptomatic treatment. No local recurrence was reported during the follow-up of 3 to 13 months, and patients were
satisfied with the cosmetic outcome (Fig. 3). Postoperative outcomes: no scar on the surface of the neck. Previous surgical manners of
endoscopic thyroid surgeries included the supraclavicular approach, minimally invasive video-assisted thyroidectomy by anterior cervical
incision, the subclavicular approach, the transaxillary approach, the areola and cleavage approach, the axillo-breast approa approach, and
the fully areola approach.3 However, each of the above surgical approaches result in considerable scars on the skin surface that may bring
about consequent psychological burden on patients. It is for the first time in 2009 that Wilhelm and Metzig4 conducted the first transoral
thyriodectomy successfully and realized an absolute scarless effect. The transoral approach follows the anatomic characteristics of
embryonic thyroid and achieved authentic minimal invasiveness and is also in line with NOTES principles.5 Nevertheless, the transoral
approach of endoscopic thyriodectomy allows only a small incision of about 5 mm. Besides, this approach poses potential threats for damage
of the sublingual gland, the submaxillary gland, the deep lingual vessels, etc. Moreover, small incisions also constrain the tumor size.
Three of the 8 cases reported by Wilhelm were converted to open surgery due to difficult retrieval of specimens from the incision. On the
basis of this approach, Wang et al6 ameliorated it and designed a thoroughly transvestibule approach for Chinese people, who are generally
characterized by a flat mandible and mental region and a strong repair ability of the oral mucosa. Unlike the transoral approach, the
transvestibule approach moves the observation port to vestibule and consequently lowers the risk of damaging important structures
surrounding the transoral channel and increases the safety of the surgery. In conclusion, this operational manner widened indications of
NOTES for thyroid diseases owing to its convenience in handling bilateral lesions and feasibility with relatively large lesions (Fig. 4).
Wounds in the buccal cavity healed. We have performed 6 transvestibule endoscopic thyroidectomies on patients with benign tumors of thyroid
since September 2013, and summarized several features of NOTES for thyroid by the transvestibule approach. (1) Absolute scarless results are
realized with incisions located in the buccal cavity. (2) Clear vision of anatomic structures is obtained with magnification of lens and
angled tip of endoscopy.7 (3) Easy recognition of recurrent laryngeal nerves under endoscopy resulted in less injury of recurrent laryngeal
nerves compared with open surgery. (4) Correct distinction of loose membranous structures in the deep surface of the superficial fascia
under endoscopy helps surgeons loosen and separate at this anatomic level to establish operating space under the platysma, which can
effectively ensure the postoperative anterior “flat” look.8 (5) Effective hemostasis: the harmonic scalpel can not only stanch bleeding
during thyroid vascular dissection, but can also cut the thyroid gland directly. This instrument can facilitate surgeons to control bleeding
effectively and allow the surgery to be performed without interruption, thereby reducing blood loss significantly.9 (6) The perspective is
the same as with open surgery from the cephalic to the foot side. (7) Proper pressure for postoperative bandage can be achieved easily for
surgical areas located outside the mandibular. (8) Good outcomes: this surgery method is safe and feasible with better recovery and fewer
complications. To lower the conversion rate, patients should be selected strictly according to surgeons’ technique and availability of
devices to avoid unnecessary conversion due to improper patient selection, for example, a large tumor size, malignant lesions,
intraoperative bleeding, etc. Because this is our first attempt to use the NOTES technique on thyroid surgery, we selected patients with
unilateral solitary benign thyroid nodules in this group. In 2005, the Chinese Medical Association of Surgery, Laparoscopic and Endoscopic
Surgery drafted surgical indications for endoscopic thyroid surgery as follows: (1) thyroid adenoma, (2) thyroid cyst, (3) nodular goiter
(single or multiple, tumor diameter <5 cm), (4) solitary toxic nodules, and (5) low-grade malignant thyroid carcinoma. Surgical indications
suggested by Wilhelm and Metzig10 for NOTES of thyroid: thyroid volume <30 mL; diameter of solitary nodule <2 cm. In our study, the
eligibility criteria were as follows: (1) patients who comply with conventional endoscopic thyroid surgical indications; (2) patients
without hyperthyroidism or parathyroid diseases; (3) tumor with the maximum diameter <5 cm (for cystic lesions >5 cm, apply suction first11;
(4) I or II degree thyroid enlargement due to primary or secondary hyperthyroidism; (5) good mobility under palpation, clear boundary
without significant adhesion with the surrounding benign tissue; (6) no history of neck surgery. To enable the smooth implementation of the
operation, and to minimize the occurrence of postoperative complications, attention should be paid perioperatively. (1) Prevent infection:
this approach has altered the incision of thyroid surgery from type I to type II with the absence of drainage; therefore, the chance of
effusion and postoperative wound infection could be increased, to prevent infection; perioperative antibiotics should be administrated. In
our group, 1 patient had postoperative wound infection, but was cured after timely treatment with antibiotics and supportive treatments. (2)
Protect the mental nerve: the chin hole, where mental nerves and blood vessels pass through (Fig. 5), is located beneath the gingival sulcus
between the first and the second premolar on each side of the buccal cavity, and so the incision should be made between the 2 first
premolars. It is beneficial for the preservation of the mental nerve function. (3) Identify the anatomic level: place the first trocar
adjacent to the anterior muscle fascia and dissect as close to the muscle as possible. Identify the gap under the deep fascia, and dissect
bluntly with a good grasp of the anatomic plane to make sure that it is not too shallow to avoid flap necrosis in the neck or too deep to
cause muscular damage. (4) Proper use of the ultrasonic scalpel: good manipulation of the harmonic scalpel is vital: the longer the heating,
the greater the thermal damage. Therefore, when dealing with tissues adjacent to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, use it intermittently with
the distance >5 mm.12 Continuous usage of the harmonic scalpel should be avoided; the head temperature should be lowered by cleaning the
ultrasonic head frequently to avoid damage to nerves, glands, and other tissues13; when performing in the area of the recurrent laryngeal
nerve, blunt dissection is wiser. Exposure of the mental nerve. Transvestibule endoscopic thyroidectomy as a new minimally invasive surgical
approach brings vitality to the industry of minimally invasive surgery on thyroid14; however, we still face many problems awaiting urgent
solutions such as the operational difficulty,15 the long operative time due to the narrow operative space, large areas of soft tissue tear,
leakage of small thyroid lesions, potential metal nerve damage, and consequent malfunction of expression muscles. Besides, whether this
endoscopic surgical manner could apply to thyroid malignancies without violating tumor principles still requires careful considerations.
However, we believe that with the development and the improvement of endoscopic surgical techniques and instruments, surgical indications
for NOTES on thyroid will increase gradually; postoperative complications will be further reduced, and its development will lead to a new
era of minimally invasive thyroid surgery. Supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81172298).
