Clinical data: Heart murmur was identified at auscultation in childhood, but the diagnosis of aortic coarctation associated with atrial
septal defect was attained when the patient was 15 years old. The patient practiced regular physical activity and did not report symptoms
for up to 5 years, when he became sedentary. He received specific anti-hypertensive medication. Physical examination: patient was eupneic,
acyanotic, obese, ample pulses in the upper limbs and decreased in the lower limbs. Weight: 113 kg; height: 177 cm; Body Mass Index (BMI):
36.1 kg/m2; RUL BP was the same in the LUL, 149/89 mmHg; right inferior limb BP = 113/77 mmHg; Heart rate (HR): 82 bpm; oxygen saturation of
95%. The aorta was clearly palpable at the suprasternal notch. The apex beat was not palpable in the precordium and there were no systolic
impulses in the left sternal border (LSB). Normal heart sounds; constant split second sound and rough systolic murmur + / ++ / 4, was heard
in the upper LSB. The liver was not palpable. The Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, first-degree atrioventricular block and complete
right bundle-branch block. A P: +50º, AQRS: +115º, AT: 0º. QRS Duration: 0.14", PR 0.21 ms (Figure 1). Figure 1Chest X-ray showing an
enlarged cardiac silhouette at the expense of the right ventricular border, with increased pulmonary vasculature, especially in the
pulmonary hila. The aorta is not bulging despite the coarctation, but there is hyperrefringency on the edge of the ribs. The
electrocardiogram highlights signs of first-degree atrioventricular block and complete right bundle-branch block. Chest X-ray showing an
enlarged cardiac silhouette at the expense of the right ventricular border, with increased pulmonary vasculature, especially in the
pulmonary hila. The aorta is not bulging despite the coarctation, but there is hyperrefringency on the edge of the ribs. The
electrocardiogram highlights signs of first-degree atrioventricular block and complete right bundle-branch block. Chest x-ray showed a
slightly enlarged cardiac area (cardiothoracic index of 0.61) at the expense of the right ventricular border. Pulmonary vasculature was
increased and the medial border was rectified. There was no aortic dilatation, but hyperrefringency on the lower edges of the ribs was
observed (Figure 1). The echocardiogram showed marked right heart chamber dilation (right ventricle - RV 52 mm), a slight increase of the
left atrium (45 mm), systolic blood pressure of 44 mmHg in the RV. The ascending aorta was normal (37 mm) and showed no myocardial
hypertrophy (septum/posterior wall of 11 mm). Left ventricular function (75%) and size (39 mm) were normal. TEE showed major discontinuity
of the atrial septum at two points, of 8 and 26 mm each, with edges present in the entire contour. No abnormalities were identified in the
aorta. CT angiography of the aorta, performed after clinical suspicion of aortic coarctation, confirmed the diagnosis, immediately distal to
the left subclavian artery, with paravertebral, mediastinal and intercostal artery collaterals, which caused opacification of the descending
aorta, with 16 mm in diameter. The internal thoracic arteries and the supra-aortic trunks were enlarged. Marked right chambers and pulmonary
trunk enlargement was also observed (Figure 2). Figure 2Transesophageal echocardiography shows two ASDs, measuring 8 and 26 mm, in A.
Magnetic resonance imaging clearly depicts, in B and C, the aortic coarctation after the left subclavian artery with exuberant collateral
circulation into the descending aorta; at the angiography in D, extreme aortic coarctation showing actual aortic disruption after the left
subclavian artery and the 15 x 40 mm stent placed at this site, in E; and closure of the ASD using the CERA(™) device in F, together with
stent implant in the aorta (arrows). Transesophageal echocardiography shows two ASDs, measuring 8 and 26 mm, in A. Magnetic resonance
imaging clearly depicts, in B and C, the aortic coarctation after the left subclavian artery with exuberant collateral circulation into the
descending aorta; at the angiography in D, extreme aortic coarctation showing actual aortic disruption after the left subclavian artery and
the 15 x 40 mm stent placed at this site, in E; and closure of the ASD using the CERA(™) device in F, together with stent implant in the
aorta (arrows). Clinical diagnosis: large atrial septal defect and marked aortic coarctation at the isthmus region, adjacent to the left
subclavian artery, without ascending aortic dilatation, with no myocardial hypertrophy and with exuberant collateral circulation. Clinical
reasoning: the clinical elements of aortic coarctation and ASD are easily identifiable, represented by contrast of pulses and blood pressure
between limbs in the first abnormality, and in the second, high murmur at the LSB, right bundle-branch block and increased pulmonary
vasculature. It is evident that, even in heart disease with long-term pressure overload, there is no myocardial hypertrophy, or signs of
electrical overload and with few symptoms. These aspects originate from the evolutionary development of efficient collateral circulation.
Differential Diagnosis: the association of the two defects is unusual, making clinical reasoning difficult, even though the abovementioned
elements are indicative of the defects. Aortic obstruction in an adult patient, in general, also result from prior aortitis, as seen in
Takayasu's disease, Kawasaki, in connective tissue diseases and infectious diseases such as syphilis. Conduct: Considering the long-standing
systolic effects of arterial hypertension, even without myocardial hypertrophy, surgical indication is mandatory, aimed at relieving
arterial obstruction, which leads to the onset of myocardial fibrosis, heart failure, arrhythmias and early death. It was decided to perform
dilation of the isthmus region through interventional catheterization from the right femoral artery using a 40 x 15 mm stent, encompassing
the left subclavian artery origin. The pressures before the procedure, were 30/12 in the RV; in the PT, 30/15-20; ascending aorta, 140/
80-100; descending aorta, 90/60-70. There was immediate BP normalization and equalization in the ascending and descending aorta (128/88-101
mmHg) after adequate dilation of the region (Figure 2). The patient reported easier breathing and well-being. The systolic murmur of the
relative pulmonary stenosis decreased in intensity after the subsequent ASD closure using a 36 CERA(tm) device. Comments: aortic coarctation
can manifest later in life, in adulthood, in view of the collateral circulation development that supplies the descending aorta, therefore
lowering blood pressure in the upper limbs and preventing progression to myocardial hypertrophy. Similarly, the atrial septal defect, being
an abnormality with right cavity volume overload, becomes so tolerable that the discovery of the disorder in adulthood becomes even
incidental, even after uncomplicated pregnancies. The association of these defects is unusual and develops independently without significant
interference from each other. The percutaneous therapeutic approach has become a reality to the point that, in this patient, it was
enthusiastically performed in spite of the blind-end aortic coarctation contiguous to the left subclavian artery. The simultaneity of the
percutaneous procedures has been scarcely reported in the literature.1 This case exemplifies a successful simultaneous percutaneous
procedure.
