Because statins markedly reduce cardiovascular risk, poor persistence with them is an important clinical problem. If statins were stopped
for valid reasons, there may be no opportunity for improvement. However, there are many invalid reasons why patients stop medication, often
for symptoms that, although not causally related, are listed in package inserts. Physicians also stop statin therapy for invalid reasons.
Several consensus statements, from the Canadian Cardiology Society,1 the European Atherosclerosis Society,2 and the National Lipid
Association,3 have reviewed aspects of the adverse effects of statins from various perspectives. In this narrative review, we discuss
approaches to helping patients continue needed therapy with statins, based on experience with >50 000 patients attending our vascular
prevention clinics over many years and from the perspective of clinical pharmacology, including pharmacokinetic and pharmacogenomic factors
that impair persistence by worsening causally related effects of statins. Adherence markedly affects outcomes in high‐risk patients. In a
recent study of guideline‐based treatment in peripheral vascular disease,4 patients adhering to all 4 therapies had a nearly 40% reduction
in major cardiovascular events and a 45% reduction in adverse limb events. Inhibitors of hydroxymethylglutaryl–coenzyme A reductase (HMG‐CoA
) markedly reduce cardiovascular risk, particularly in high‐risk patients. In a large meta‐analysis of clinical trials, each 1‐mmol/L
reduction of low‐density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol reduced cardiovascular events by just over 20%5; importantly, this benefit was
independent of the baseline LDL cholesterol. The authors concluded that “reduction of LDL cholesterol by 2 to 3 mmol/L would reduce
occlusive vascular events by about 40% to 50%.” Stopping a medication that reduces risk by half is equivalent to doubling risk; it is,
therefore, an important problem that so many patients stop statins. Evidence now supports statin treatment in primary prevention,6 and
recent revision of guidelines on treatment of cholesterol7 will result in statin treatment of many more patients,8 so persistence with
statin therapy is an issue that is increasing in importance. In discussion with patients who believe they are having adverse effects of
statins, it is important to evaluate the likelihood that the symptoms are caused by statins or to some other cause. A history of probably
causal adverse effects (myalgia, cramps, weakness), particularly with repeat occurrence of adverse effects after re‐trial of statin
following a drug holiday or after a recent increase in dose or potency of statin, will be convincing evidence that the statin is causing the
adverse effect; this may be supported by increased blood levels of creatine kinase. Less convincing will a history of symptoms attributed to
statin that are unlikely to be causally related, as described later, particularly when the new symptoms arose after a long period of
well‐tolerated statin. In real‐world practice, as opposed to clinical trials, persistence drops off rapidly; after 3 years, <40% of patients
persist in taking statins for primary prevention,9 and for secondary prevention, only 45% are persistent at 3 years.10 This is the case all
over the world.11, 12 Even in high‐risk patients such as diabetics, persistence is only ≈50% at 2 years.13 Haukka et al,14 in a nationwide
study in Finland, observed a 5% decrease in mortality from coronary heart disease for every 10% increase in persistence with statins. In
Italy, a study of >19 000 patients showed that the 41% of patients with high adherence had a 40% reduction in risk of cardiovascular events,
compared with those who had low adherence.15 If nonpersistence were unavoidable—for example, if patients stopped statins for good reason or
if physicians discontinued statins for good reason, such as causally related adverse effects—there might be little reason to try to improve
on it. However, there are many reasons why patients and physicians mistakenly stop these medications. There are probably only 2 important
causally related adverse effects of statins—myopathy and impairment of insulin resistance—and as discussed later, both are probably related
to impaired mitochondrial function and are treatable or avoidable in most cases. Yet, as shown in Table 1, adapted from a study by Zhang
et al,16 most patients stop statins for other reasons, and most patients who stopped them because of adverse effects attributed to statins
were able to continue them when rechallenged. Reasons for Discontinuation of Statins Based on data from 107 835 patients in routine care
from Zhang et al.16 One important reason for patient discontinuation of statins is that too often package inserts provide misleading
information. They commonly list not just causally related adverse effects of statins but also mythical adverse effects and, in too many
cases, simply all symptoms known to humankind,17 whether they were caused by the medication, cancer, a flulike illness, a hangover, or any
other cause. Patients read such lists and often stop their medication when they have a symptom they find on the list. Perhaps the worst word
on such lists is “dizziness,” a word that has so many meanings it is worse than useless. There are drugs, such as α‐blockers and tricyclic
antidepressants, that can cause postural hypotension, but there is probably no drug that causes vertigo. Busy physicians who respond to
patients' concerns by simply changing medications (rather than discussing the issue of causality) merely feed into the patients' belief that
the symptoms were causally related to the drug. In some patients, this may result in long lists of drugs that “cause” adverse effects, most
of which are not causally related. What is needed is useful information about causality—such as a table showing the frequency of symptoms on
active drug versus placebo. Such lists make it obvious that, in most cases, common symptoms such as fatigue, headache, nausea, diarrhea,
constipation, and so on are just as common when taking placebo as when taking active drug. In extreme cases, it may be useful to carry out a
blinded “n‐of‐1” crossover study to determine the likelihood of causality.17 This may seem difficult to carry out, but we have used it in
clinical practice. Unfortunately, some patients convinced of causality may not accept a negative result. Reasons why physicians
inappropriately discontinue or limit the dose of statins include commonly held myths about statin adverse effects including hepatotoxicity,
nephrotoxicity, cognitive decline, cataracts, and intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). In some cases, this may be driven by concern about
litigation, when guidelines specify, for example, monitoring of liver function. Although rare cases of true hepatotoxicity may exist,1
statins probably do not cause hepatotoxicity, as stated in the 2013 International Atherosclerosis Society guideline.18 Fluctuations in blood
levels of transaminase enzymes that are often blamed on statins (“transaminitis”) are more likely to be caused by fatty liver or by release
of enzymes from muscle in patients with statin myopathy.19, 20 In the Heart Protection Study, in which >20 000 high‐risk patients were
randomized to simvastatin 40 mg versus placebo and were followed for 5 years, hepatotoxicity was undetectable.21 Athyros et al22 compared
patients with and without abnormal liver function tests in the Greek Atorvastatin and Coronary Heart Disease Evaluation (GREACE) study. They
found that liver function tests actually improved among patients given statins, whereas they worsened in patients not given statins.
Further, the cardiovascular benefit of statins was greater among patients with abnormal liver function tests than among patients with normal
liver function tests at baseline. Their conclusion22 was that “Statin treatment is safe and can improve liver tests and reduce
cardiovascular morbidity in patients with mild‐to‐moderately abnormal liver tests that are potentially attributable to non‐alcoholic fatty
liver disease.” Guidelines regarding monitoring of liver function in patients taking statins should be revised accordingly. The myth of ICH
from statins23 arose mainly from the Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) trial24 and resulted from
intention‐to‐treat analyses that did not take into account the high rate of crossover of patients from placebo to active therapy or the high
dropout rate. Patients in that study were randomized to atorvastatin 80 mg daily versus placebo, so patients taking atorvastatin had much
lower levels of LDL cholesterol. However, patients with ICH in that study did not have lower levels of LDL; a more likely interpretation of
the reason for the observed increased risk of ICH is that they stopped their antihypertensive medication when they went off their study
medication.25 Recent studies from a stroke registry,26 a population‐based study,27 a meta‐analysis,28 and studies in patients treated with
thrombolysis29, 30, 31 confirmed that low levels of LDL cholesterol or statins do not increase the risk of ICH. Statins also probably do not
cause cataracts.32 Despite anecdotes and 2 suggestive small studies,33, 34 statins probably do not cause cognitive decline. There was no
association of statins with dementia in the Cardiovascular Health Study,35 the Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory Study,36 or the Reasons for
Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study.37 In the Rotterdam Study, statins reduced the occurrence of dementia.38 There
are good reasons to think that therapies that reduce the risk of stroke should also reduce the risk of dementia.39 Indeed, a meta‐analysis
showed in 2013 that statins reduced the risk of dementia.40 There may be a difference between dementia and reversible cognitive dysfunction
attributed by some patients to statin therapy; however, the burden of the evidence suggests that statins probably do not impair cognitive
function.41, 42, 43, 44 While it seems unlikely that reversible cognitive impairment would be causally related to statin, a blinded n‐of‐1
crossover trial (described later) may be helpful in establishing whether a patient's complaint is truly related to statin therapy.
Unfortunately, patients convinced of adverse effects that are probably not causal are extremely difficult to persuade otherwise. There is no
doubt that rhabdomyolysis from statin myopathy can cause renal failure. This is particularly a problem when statins that are metabolized
during absorption by intestinal cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A4 are coprescribed with drugs that inhibit that mechanism45 or, as discussed later,
when patients taking such statins consume grapefruit. However, independent of rhabdomyolysis, the myth of nephrotoxicity from statins
probably arose from reports of proteinuria after initiation of statins, particularly rosuvastatin.46 Such reports were based on dipstick
assessment of proteinuria and were probably not caused by nephrotoxicity but rather by changes in tubular secretion of low‐molecular‐weight
proteins.47 It is possible that increases in serum creatine released from damaged muscle may cause a falsely low estimated glomerular
filtration rate, when calculated from serum creatinine. It is now clear that statins actually slow the decline in renal function48, 49, 50,
51 or improve renal function.52 The most common causally related adverse effect of statins is myopathy. Even without myopathic symptoms,
simvastatin 40 mg daily impaired adaptation to exercise training and muscle mitochondrial content in participants with metabolic syndrome.53
In real‐world practice, myalgias and cramps are more common than estimated from clinical trials; in a cardiology clinic in the Netherlands,
one‐third of patients reported such problems.54 Bruckert et al55 reported in a study of 7924 outpatients taking high‐dose statins that 38%
had limitation of even moderate exertion by muscle pain. Rosenbaum et al56 reported that among 1074 patients taking statins, 62% complained
of stiffness, 67% of cramps, and 50% of weakness or a loss of strength during exertion; 42% of patients had major disruption to their
everyday life. However, weakness and wasting are less common (≈1%), and rhabdomyolysis is rare (≈0.1%).57 Vaklavas et al58 reviewed
molecular mechanisms for statin myopathy. One possibility discussed in their review was protein modification. Statins can affect protein
prenylation, an important posttranslational modification of membrane‐bound proteins, and can adversely affect synthesis of selenoprotein and
dolichols, which are involved in the process of protein glycosylation. Phillips and Haas59 have argued that lipid lowering per se may cause
statin myopathy, but an alternative and more likely explanation is that inhibition of HMG‐CoA reductase reduces formation of isoprenoids
farnesyl pyrophosphate and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, resulting in reduced prenylation of small GTPase proteins involved in cell growth
and maintenance60; this also results in decreased formation of ubiquinone (Coenzyme Q10 ). Much of statin myopathy may be caused by
depletion of muscle levels of ubiquinone (CoQ10) and resultant impairment of mitochondrial function61, 62, 63 (Figure 1).64 Mechanisms were
reviewed by Needham and Mastaglia60 and by the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel.2 Vladutiu found that muscle levels of CoQ10
in patients with statin myopathy were 3 to 4 SDs below normal.65 This effect is directly related to potency of statins, although
lipophilicity may aggravate the problem, with a theoretical advantage of the more hydrophilic rosuvastatin and pravastatin. Brewer66
reported that for a given reduction in LDL cholesterol, rosuvastatin increased plasma levels of creatine kinase less than other statins.
Illustration of the proposed theory explaining statin myopathy as related to cellular ubiquinone depletion. Statins inhibit
hydroxy‐methylglutaryl‐coenzyme A (HMG‐CoA) reductase, leading to reduced production of mevalonate pathway metabolites, including ubiquinone
or CoQ10. Ubiquinone is an essential coenzyme in the process of mitochondrial respiration, facilitating the transfer of electrons between
complex I and II of the respiratory chain. Consequently, depletion of ubiquinone may impair mitochondrial respiration and cellular energy
production within skeletal muscle. ADP indicates adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; NAD1, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(reduced form); NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (oxidized form); P, phosphate. Reproduced by permission of the publisher from Parker
et al.64 There are a number of mechanisms that affect drug exposure in individual patients; these are integral to and associated with risk
of adverse events that exhibit dose dependence (notably myopathy). They include pharmacokinetic interactions, and pharmacogenomic factors
that result in higher levels of statins in the blood and in hepatic and muscle tissue. Two main classes of drug interactions will account
for most of the important interactions of statins with other drugs: drugs that affect CYP3A4/5 and drugs that affect transport proteins. An
additional mechanism, affected by gemfibrozil, is glucuronidation.67 Tables 2 and 3 summarize statin metabolism and interactions.68, 69, 70,
71, 72, 73, 74, 75 For reasons discussed later, simvastatin and lovastatin are particularly susceptible to huge drug interactions. Indeed,
in considering the clinical relevance of polymorphisms of SLCO1B1 affecting statins, the Clinical Pharmacogenomics Implementation Consortium
restricted its concerns to simvastatin.67 Summary of Relevant Pharmacokinetic Determinants of Disposition for Selected HMG‐CoA Reductase
Inhibitors68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75 Major Pharmacokinetic Interactions and Magnitude of Effect68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75 The effect
of grapefruit on drug metabolism was first described by our group in 198976 and further elucidated in 1991.77 The discovery was
serendipitous; we used grapefruit to mask the flavor of ethanol in a study of interaction between ethanol and felodipine.76, 78 Almost
immediately, drug manufacturers sought to downplay the magnitude and importance of this interaction, and this may possibly account for the
important underestimation of this problem. Contrary to the statement by Egan and Colman,79 large quantities of grapefruit are not required
to have an important effect on drug metabolism. Grapefruit juice, probably mainly through the effect of cyanocoumarins, is a suicide
inhibitor of gut wall CYP3A4; only a single glass of grapefruit juice80 or a single fruit daily81 is required to have the effect, and it
persists for >24 hours, so it is not safe to take the drug in the evening if the grapefruit is taken in the morning, as is so often stated.
This is a particular problem with drugs that have low bioavailability caused by inactivation during absorption by intestinal CYP3A4. Because
simvastatin and lovastatin are only 5% bioavailable as a result of this mechanism, grapefruit and other inhibitors of CYP3A4 have the
theoretical potential to increase blood levels 20‐fold, and indeed grapefruit increases the area under the curve of the levels of both
simvastatin80 and lovastatin82 by 15‐fold. Atorvastatin area under the curve only doubles with grapefruit,83 and pravastatin and
rosuvastatin are not affected.83, 84 Although pharmacists will often detect potential drug interactions, grocers seldom inquire about
medication history when dispensing grapefruit.85 For this reason, a case report from Germany illustrates why particular caution is needed
with simvastatin and lovastatin. A woman taking 80 mg of simvastatin daily developed rhabdomyolysis 4 days after beginning to consume one
grapefruit daily.81 In the past several years, it has become evident that statins increase the risk of incident diabetes, by ≈9% to 28%.86,
87, 88, 89 For this reason, among others, we tend to use low‐moderate doses of statins in combination with ezetimibe. Because statins and
ezetimibe affect different mechanisms, they are synergistic: 10 mg of atorvastatin with 10 mg of ezetimibe lowers the LDL to the same extent
as 80 mg of atorvastatin90 but, in our experience, with fewer adverse effects. It seems likely from meta‐analyses that most of the benefit
of statins is the result of the reduction in LDL cholesterol.91 Putative benefits such as lowering of C‐reactive protein are unlikely to be
important, since Mendelian randomization studies92, 93 and some large clinical trials94, 95 indicate that lowering of C‐reactive protein is
probably not important in vascular prevention. The results of the Improved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial
(IMPROVE‐IT) trial96 support this approach. Despite the increase in incident diabetes, the cardiovascular risk reduction with statins is of
similar magnitude in diabetics to that in nondiabetics,87, 88 and because diabetics are at high risk of cardiovascular events, they should
be treated with statins.97 What is less well known is that supplementation with l‐carnitine can prevent the adverse effects of statins on
diabetes98, 99 and insulin resistance.100 Further, in diabetics taking statins, supplementation with l‐carnitine improves the effect of the
statin on LDL cholesterol, high‐density lipoprotein cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), and LDL particle size.98 l‐Carnitine is required for entry
of fatty acids into mitochondria and thus has a central role in energy metabolism and mitochondrial function.101 All of the foregoing
therefore supports the hypothesis that the adverse effects of statins may be largely caused by mitochondrial dysfunction. It is likely that
patients who develop statin myopathy are predisposed genetically.62, 65, 102 There appear to be 2 main mechanisms by which patients may be
genetically predisposed to statin myopathy. One is pharmacogenomic—mutations affecting absorption, metabolism, transport, and removal of
statins that result in higher blood levels and higher tissue levels of statins.84 Another is mutations affecting mitochondrial function62,
65, 102; the latter could affect either mitochondrial genes103 or somatic genes affecting mitochondrial function.104 A third category is
disorders of muscle metabolism independent of mitochondrial function, including a polymorphism of glycine amidinotransferase that encodes
the rate‐limiting enzyme in creatine synthesis.105 Other mechanisms include genetic variants affecting glucose metabolism, synthesis of
CoQ10, lactic acid metabolism, and sensitivity to pain. Table 4, 65, 102, 106 summarizes the genes involved. Genetic Predisposition to
Statin Adverse Effects65, 102, 106 In the pharmacogenomic category, a polymorphism of SCLO1B1, which encodes organic anion transport protein
B1, was shown to be associated with statin myopathy in a genome‐wide association study.107 Because several statins are metabolized to
inactive forms during absorption in the intestinal wall by CYP3A4, as discussed later, it can be expected that polymorphisms or copy number
variants of CYP3A4 might also affect blood levels of statins. With regard to tissue levels of drugs, and in particular muscle levels of
statins, Knauer et al108 found that the uptake transporter human organic anion transporting polypeptide 2B1 and the efflux transporters,
multidrug resistance–associated protein 1, 4, and 5, are expressed on the sarcolemmal membrane of human skeletal muscle fibers and that
atorvastatin and rosuvastatin are substrates of these transporters. Thus, variants of these transport proteins might also predispose to
statin myopathy. The main causally related adverse effects of statins, myopathy and aggravation of insulin resistance, can be minimized by
several maneuvers. First, in patients who experience myopathic symptoms and in patients with insulin resistance and/or diabetes, it may be
useful to limit or reduce the dose of statin, with the addition of ezetimibe, bile acid sequestrants, niacin, and/or fibrates, to maintain
the LDL‐lowering effect. Ezetimibe, which blocks absorption of cholesterol at the intestinal lining, is synergistic with statins. Concerns
about possible adverse effects of ezetimibe on atherosclerosis were probably misplaced and were based on measurement of carotid intima‐media
thickness, which is not atherosclerosis.109, 110, 111 The IMPROVE‐IT96 showed a reduction of cardiovascular events with ezetimibe among
patients with acute coronary syndromes, and the Plaque Regression With Cholesterol Absorption Inhibitor or Synthesis Inhibitor Evaluated by
Intravascular Ultrasound (PRECISE‐IVUS)112 showed regression of coronary plaque with ezetimibe added to atorvastatin. It may useful to give
supplements of CoQ10.1, 113 However, the doses required may need to be higher than in most of the clinical trials (200–400 mg twice a day,
or perhaps more), as illustrated in the case report that follows. Although it is commonly stated that the effects of CoQ10 supplementation
are contradictory and unproved114 and a meta‐analysis indicated that it is not beneficial,115 the authors of the meta‐analysis concluded
that “Larger, well‐designed trials are necessary to confirm the findings from this meta‐analysis.” There may be problems with small trials,
including patients who do not have true statin myopathy. A related meta‐analysis116 concluded that statins do lower levels of CoQ10 in
plasma. Higher doses of ubiquinone such as 300 mg twice daily are more effective in improving muscle fatigue.117, 118 The negative trial of
Bookstaver et al119 used only 60 mg twice daily. Fedacko et al120 found a significant improvement of statin myopathy with CoQ10 200 mg daily
in a factorial designed trial in which selenium was not efficacious. Ubiquinone does improve mitochondrial function in an animal model of
statin myopathy.121 It may also be useful to add supplements of l‐carnitine (500–1000 mg twice a day).122, 123 In diabetics taking
simvastatin, l‐carnitine not only prevented the rise of blood sugar but improved the effect of statin on LDL cholesterol, high‐density
lipoprotein cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), and LDL particle size.98, 99 l‐Carnitine was effective in an animal model of statin myopathy.124
However, effects of l‐carnitine on production of trimethylamine‐N‐oxide by intestinal bacteria125 may limit the usefulness of l‐carnitine
supplements for this purpose; this will require further study. The issues have recently been reviewed.126 Table 5 summarizes approaches to
minimizing adverse effects of statins. Approaches to Minimizing Adverse Effects of Statins The truly causal adverse effects of statins are
probably related to efficacy in inhibition of HMG‐CoA reductase and therefore entirely attributable to intensity of statin therapy.
Switching statins probably will not help reduce adverse effects except when weaker statins or lower doses of statins are used. A useful
maneuver may be alternate‐day low‐dose statin in combination with ezetimibe. A case report illustrates this. The patient was a 63‐year‐old
physician with a mitochondrial disorder (multiple lipomatosis) and moderately severe statin myopathy. He had severe nocturnal leg cramps
that abated during drug holidays from statins and recurred reproducibly on reinitiation of statins; they were only partly relieved with
CoQ10 150 mg daily. He had proximal muscle weakness in the hip girdle, and creatine kinase levels were repeatedly elevated to 4 to 5 times
the upper normal limit for the laboratory, despite reducing his dose of rosuvastatin to 5 mg daily in combination with ezetimibe. Because of
these difficulties, he stopped statin therapy despite a coronary calcium score of 300 and a family history of premature cardiovascular
death. At that time, his carotid total plaque area (a strong predictor of cardiovascular risk127, 128, 129) was only 20 mm2, so he felt
somewhat reassured about the safety of stopping statin, while continuing ezetimibe. However, by April 2009, his plaque area had progressed
to 29 mm2, a matter of concern since Spence et al reported in 2002127 that plaque progression was associated with a doubling of risk. (This
was the basis for developing a new approach to managing atherosclerosis, “treating arteries instead of treating risk factors,”130 which
markedly reduced risk among high‐risk patients.131) Because of the plaque progression, he began taking rosuvastatin 5 mg on alternate days
with an increased dose of CoQ10 (200 mg daily). As shown in Figure 2,130 the plaque area regressed in just over 3 months to 19 mm2. In later
years he continued ezetimibe 10 mg daily and a Mediterranean diet, but his myopathic symptoms and high creatine kinase levels persisted. He
therefore reduced the dose of rosuvastatin to 2.5 mg on alternate days, and increased the dose of CoQ10 to 400 mg twice daily to tolerate
it, but the plaque regression persisted; in August 2015, the plaque area was only 15 mm2. Plaque regression with alternate‐day statin and
daily ezetimibe. A, A soft plaque is shown at the origin of the left external carotid in a 63‐year‐old man using ezetimibe alone, having
stopped statin because of statin myopathy. His plaque area had progressed from 20 mm2 6 months earlier, to 28 mm2. B, After adding back
rosuvastatin 5 mg daily with CoQ10 200 mg daily to prevent myalgias, the plaque area regressed to 0.19 mm2 in just over 3 months. The plaque
had also become denser, with regression of the soft plaque and more calcification. Reproduced by permission of the publisher from Spence and
Hackam.130 Some patients, particularly those with mitochondrial disorders, are entirely unable to tolerate even small doses of statins. For
such patients, continuation of ezetimibe, addition of fibrates, perhaps slow‐release niacin preparations if tolerated, and strict adherence
to a Mediterranean or perhaps vegan diet may be indicated. Antibodies to proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9132 are recently available
on the market, and offer a substitute or add‐on to low‐dose statins for patients with myopathy or diabetes. Unfortunately, their high cost
may limit their usefulness.133 In the future, the problem of statin adverse effects may be solved by the availability of new alternatives
such as inhibitors of cholesterol ester transfer protein134 or siRNA silencing135 or other approaches to blocking proprotein convertase
subtilisin/kexin 9, and other new therapies in development.136, 137, 138 Inhibitors of squalene synthase139 should increase levels of CoQ10
by shunting, but it appears that this class of drug may not reach the market. Poor persistence with statin therapy is an important and
common problem that can be mitigated. Many common reasons for stopping statins are invalid. Pharmacists need to provide better information
to patients receiving statins, and physicians need to be better able to help their high‐risk patients persist with therapy. The main
causally related adverse effect of statins is impaired insulin resistance, with a risk of diabetes and myopathy. Both of these problems are
probably largely caused by impaired mitochondrial function, from depletion of ubiquinone. Although new therapies to lower LDL cholesterol
are in development, statins will still be needed for some time, and statin adverse effects can be minimized by several maneuvers. Dr Spence
wrote the initial draft of the manuscript; both authors contributed to revisions. Dr Spence has received grants from the Canadian Institutes
for Health Research, the Heart & Stroke Foundation of Canada, and NIH/NINDS; lecture honoraria/travel support/consulting fees from Sanofi,
Bayer, Merck, and Boehringer‐Ingelheim; research support for investigator‐initiated projects from Pfizer (substantial—donation in kind of
eplerenone and matching placebo to support a grant from the Canadian Heart & Stroke Foundation for a clinical trial) and Merck
(minor—support for a summer student). During the past 30 years, he has performed contract research with many pharma/device companies: all of
the above, plus Takeda, BMS, Servier, Wyeth, Miles, Roussel, NMT, AGA, and Gore. He is an officer and shareholder of Vascularis Inc. He is a
member of the editorial boards of Hypertension, Stroke, and Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology and receives royalties on
books from Vanderbilt University Press and McGraw‐Hill Medical Publishers. Dr Dresser has received payment for lectures, including service
on speaker bureaus from Aventis, Astra Zeneca Canada, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Merck Canada, and Servier.
