Although deleterious mutations in interleukin-10 and its receptor molecules cause severe infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease, there
are no reports of mutations affecting this signaling pathway in Japanese patients. Here we report a novel exonic mutation in the IL10RA gene
that caused unique splicing aberrations in a Japanese patient with infantile-onset of inflammatory bowel disease in association with immune
thrombocytopenic purpura and a transient clinical syndrome mimicking juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. A Japanese boy, who was the first
child of non-consanguineous healthy parents, developed bloody diarrhea, perianal fistula, and folliculitis in early infancy and was
diagnosed with inflammatory bowel disease. He also developed immune thrombocytopenic purpura and transient features mimicking juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia. The patient failed to respond to various treatments, including elemental diet, salazosulfapyridine, metronidazole,
corticosteroid, infliximab, and adalimumab. We identified a novel mutation (c.537G > A, p.T179T) in exon 4 of the IL10RA gene causing unique
splicing aberrations and resulting in lack of signaling through the interleukin-10 receptor. At 21 months of age, the patient underwent
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and achieved clinical remission. We describe a novel exonic mutation in the IL10RA gene
resulting in infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease. This mutation might also be involved in his early-onset hematologic disorders.
Physicians should be familiar with the clinical phenotype of IL-10 signaling defects in order to enable prompt diagnosis at an early age and
referral for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12876-016-0424-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Interleukin-10 (IL-10), an anti-inflammatory cytokine, binds to 2 receptors,
namely 2 alpha molecules (IL-10RA/IL-10R1) and 2 beta molecules (IL-10RB/IL-10R2) [1, 2]. IL-10 signaling plays a key role in maintaining
immune homeostasis in the gastrointestinal tract. Accordingly, defects of IL10, IL10RA, or IL10RB genes cause very early-onset inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) including infantile-onset IBD (IOIBD) . Patients with mutations in IL10 or IL10 receptor (IL10R) genes present with
severe colitis, perianal disease and folliculitis manifesting in the first months of life. These patients are refractory to
immunosuppressive therapies such as corticosteroids, methotrexate, thalidomide, and anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) antibodies,
yet, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been shown to be curative in these conditions . To date over 40 patients
of various ethnicities with IL10/IL10R deficiency have been reported . However, reports on IL-10 signaling pathway defects in the Japanese
population are lacking. Here we describe a Japanese IOIBD patient with a novel exonic mutation in the IL10RA gene causing unique splicing
aberrations. Interestingly, this patient also developed immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and transient abnormalities mimicking juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) in early infancy. A Japanese boy was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery at 41 weeks of gestation, with a
birth weight of 2834 g. He was the first child of non-consanguineous healthy parents. At 2 months of age, he presented with
hepatosplenomegaly, purpura, leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 2.5 × 1010 /L), monocytosis (monocytes, 2.0 × 109 /L), anemia
(hemoglobin, 87 g/L), and thrombocytopenia (platelets, 3.6 × 1010 /L). Bone marrow examination disclosed hypercellularity without excessive
blasts or abnormal appearance of megakaryocytes. Cytogenetic analysis indicated a normal male karyotype, and colony assay of bone marrow
mononuclear cells showed spontaneous colony formation and high sensitivity to granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor. Genetic
analysis revealed no reported mutations in PTPN11, NRAS, KRAS, or CBL genes. While his clinical manifestations met diagnostic criteria for
JMML , his symptoms and blood test results normalized spontaneously. At 6 months of age he developed bloody diarrhea, perianal fistula, and
folliculitis. Endoscopy showed erosive changes, multiple aphthous ulcers, and longitudinal ulcerations of the colon. Elevated C-reactive
protein and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate suggested the presence of a chronic inflammatory disorder. Immune work-up was normal,
including T and B lymphocytes numbers, proliferative response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to phytohemagglutinin, serum
immunoglobulin concentrations, neutrophil phagocytic capacity and microbicidal activity. The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein was expressed
normally in PBMCs. Based on clinical, laboratory, and endoscopic findings, the patient was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease, which was treated
with an elemental diet, salazosulfapyridine, metronidazole, and a corticosteroid. At the same time, he again developed thrombocytopenia
(platelets, 3.2 × 1010 /L) and was diagnosed with ITP since megakaryocytes in the bone marrow were normal and platelet-associated
immunoglobulin G was elevated (90 ng/107 cells) . Treatment with high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin G led to prompt normalization of
platelets count, but did not lead to any improvement in bloody diarrhea, fistula, or folliculitis. The patient also had recurrent fevers and
was treated with systemic antibiotics. Given lack of colitis improvement, at 9 months of age, he began treatment with infliximab (IFX),
achieving partial response of bloody diarrhea, perianal fistula, and folliculitis. At the age of 14 months, adalimumab (ADA) was substituted
for IFX because of an allergic reaction to infusions. From that point he was treated with a maintenance regimen of ADA, an elemental diet,
and salazosulfapyridine. Growth and development then entered the normal range, although bloody diarrhea and folliculitis persisted. Given
his clinical features, an IL-10 signaling defect was suspected and targeted sequencing confirmed an IL10RA mutation. At 21 months of age,
the patient underwent allogeneic HSCT using umbilical cord blood from a matched unrelated donor at Kyushu University Hospital, achieving
rapid and sustained complete chimerism and clinical remission. Currently, at the age of 24 months, the patient is in sustained clinical
remission since 2 months after HSCT. To detect mutations of IL10RA and IL10RB, we performed direct sequence analysis using genomic DNA
isolated from PBMCs from the patient and his parents (see Additional files 1 and 2). We identified a novel homozygous and heterozygous
mutation (c.537G > A, p.T179T) at the 3' end of exon 4 of IL10RA in the patient and his parents, respectively (Fig. 1a). Because the
nucleotides at the end of the exon are involved in the splicing process, we examined whether the c.537G > A mutation generated splicing
variants by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis using 3 primer sets: set A, to amplify exons 2 and 3 as a
control; set B, to detect deletion or insertion near the boundary between exons 4 and 5; and set C, to amplify exons 3 and 4 (upper panel in
Fig. 1b). We detected an additional small PCR product in the patient, as well as the product of expected size using set B (compare band #3
with #2, lower panel in Fig. 1b). Moreover, we found a much smaller product in the patient using set C (band #4, lower panel in Fig. 1b).
These results suggested that the exonic c.537G > A mutation generated at least 2 abnormal transcripts of the IL10RA gene. We further
investigated the nucleotide sequence of these PCR products. As shown in Fig. 1c, product #2, which showed expected size, possessed a
c.537G > A mutation but indicated intact splicing between exon 4 and 5. However, product #3 showed an 18-base deletion at the 3' end of exon
4, which was generated by activation of a nearby cryptic splice donor site. This 18-base deletion was predicted to cause loss of 6 amino
acids (174-VPGNFT-179) from the IL-10RA molecule. Moreover, product #4 showed complete deletion of exon 4 (170 bases). This exon 4 skipping
caused a frameshift, with translational arrest at a site 7 amino acids distant. Thus, the exonic c.537G > A mutation induced aberrant
splicing in the IL10RA gene, which would cause loss of function.Fig. 1Identification of the IL10RA mutation associated with infantile-onset
inflammatory bowel disease (IOIBD). a A c.537G > A mutation at the 3' end of exon 4 of the IL10RA gene in the family of our patient with
IOIBD. Arrows indicate site of mutation. Parts of sequences of exon 4 and intron 4 are shown in upper case and lower case, respectively. b
RT-PCR analysis for the IL10RA gene in the patient with c.537G > A mutation. Schematic representation of positions of the primers for RT-PCR
and the c.537G > A mutation is given in the upper panel. RT-PCR products from the c.537G > A mutation of the IL10RA gene are shown in the
lower panel. The expected 216-bp and 495-bp products of the IL10RA exons 4-5 and exons 2-5, respectively, were detected in a healthy control
and the patient, while additional shorter products were observed in the patient (bands 3 and 4). c Sequence analysis of RT-PCR products
indicated that the c.537G > A mutation caused 2 kinds of splicing variants; an 18 bp deletion of the 3' end of exon 4 and skipping of exon 4
(170 bp) Identification of the IL10RA mutation associated with infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease (IOIBD). a A c.537G > A mutation
at the 3' end of exon 4 of the IL10RA gene in the family of our patient with IOIBD. Arrows indicate site of mutation. Parts of sequences of
exon 4 and intron 4 are shown in upper case and lower case, respectively. b RT-PCR analysis for the IL10RA gene in the patient with
c.537G > A mutation. Schematic representation of positions of the primers for RT-PCR and the c.537G > A mutation is given in the upper
panel. RT-PCR products from the c.537G > A mutation of the IL10RA gene are shown in the lower panel. The expected 216-bp and 495-bp products
of the IL10RA exons 4-5 and exons 2-5, respectively, were detected in a healthy control and the patient, while additional shorter products
were observed in the patient (bands 3 and 4). c Sequence analysis of RT-PCR products indicated that the c.537G > A mutation caused 2 kinds
of splicing variants; an 18 bp deletion of the 3' end of exon 4 and skipping of exon 4 (170 bp) To determine whether the novel mutation
identified in the patient resulted in defective signaling function involving the IL-10R, PBMCs obtained from the patient were compared with
those from his father, who served as a healthy control. Cells were stimulated with IL-10 as previously described (see Additional file 3).
IL-10 stimulation of the patient’s PBMCs failed to induce phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pSTAT3),
which is a key transcription factor downstream of the IL-10R. IL-6-induced pSTAT3, which served as an internal positive control, was intact
(right panel in Fig. 2). In contrast, both IL-10 stimulation and IL-6 stimulation of the control cells led to pSTAT3 formation (left panel
in Fig. 2). These results suggest that the mutation resulted in loss of normal function of the IL-10R.Fig. 2Loss of function of the IL-10
receptor. Functional analysis of IL-10 receptor complex was performed by determining signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) phosphorylation using flow cytometry. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from the patient (right panel) and his father (left panel)
were stimulated for 15 minutes with IL-10 (20 ng/mL) or IL-6 (20 ng/mL) or kept unstimulated, and later fixed, permeabilized and stained for
phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), which is downstream of the IL-10 and IL-6 receptor complexes Loss of function of the IL-10 receptor.
Functional analysis of IL-10 receptor complex was performed by determining signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
phosphorylation using flow cytometry. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from the patient (right panel) and his father (left panel) were
stimulated for 15 minutes with IL-10 (20 ng/mL) or IL-6 (20 ng/mL) or kept unstimulated, and later fixed, permeabilized and stained for
phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), which is downstream of the IL-10 and IL-6 receptor complexes Loss of function of IL-10 and IL-10R molecules
causes refractory colitis with folliculitis and perianal disease, manifesting very early in infancy . Here we report a Japanese IOIBD
patient with a novel exonic mutation (c.537G > A, p.T179T) in exon 4 of the IL10RA gene that produced uniquely abnormal transcripts. Also in
early infancy, the patient developed ITP and a transient clinical syndrome with features mimicking JMML. From early infancy, the patient
manifested refractory colitis, perianal disease and folliculitis, in addition to associated hematologic disorders, which may also be the
result of the IL10RA genetic defect. Expression of IL-10 in PBMCs has been reported to correlate to some extent with disease activity in
children with chronic active ITP . IL-10 normally exerts negative feedback control that limits activation of Th1 cells as well as monocytes
and macrophages . In vitro, IL-10 has been found to inhibit cell growth and granulocyte/macrophage colony stimulating factor production in
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia cells, as well as inhibiting cytokine production and growth in JMML cells [19, 20]. Neven et al and Shouval
et al reported that patients with IL-10R deficiency tend to develop non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphomas [13, 21]. These findings suggest that IL-10
signaling defects might lead not only to development of lymphoma but also to ITP and JMML-like states. However, there is a possibility that
there may be another gene involved here as the remainder of this patient’s genes have not been tested. We identified a point mutation,
c.537G > A, in the exon adjacent to a splice donor site whose consensus sequence is MAG|GURAGU (M represents A or C, while R represents a
purine), extending from position -3 to position +6 relative to the exon–intron junction. Within the consensus sequence, mutations affecting
GU residues at positions +1 and +2 are most common followed by mutations at position +5 . In our patient, a relatively rare -1G > -1A
homozygous mutation resulted in aberrant splicing manifest as disease. The AG|GURAGU motif is recognized by the U1 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) to define the exon-intron boundary in the first step of splicing process . When the motif is changed, U1 snRNP
would not recognize the exon-intron junction properly and would bind to other regions with similar sequence. In the exon 4 of IL10RA, there
is AGGTGCCA sequence at 18 bases upstream of exon 4-intron 4 boundary where c.537G > A is located. This sequence might be recognized by U1
snRNP, and the splicing variant of 18-base deletion at the 3' end of exon 4 was generated in our patient. However, the AGGTGCCA sequence in
exon 4 is not completely matched to the conserved AGGURAGU motif, so that another splicing variant, exon 4 skipping, might occur
alternatively. This type of splicing aberration is not specific to the case in this study because we obtained similar results in the
patients affected with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis previously [24, 25]. According to the database which predicts splice-
altering single nucleotide variants (dbscSNV: https://www.solvebio.com/library/dbscSNV), the IL10RA c.537G > A substitution shows high
probability of affecting splicing (the Ada score = 0.99996). This in silico analysis strongly supports our results that the c.537G > A
mutation generated splicing variants. Although the c.537G > A nucleotide change is not found in the three databases (1000 Genome:
http://www.1000genomes.org/, ExAC: http://exac.broadinstitute.org/, or NHLBI Exome Variant Server: http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/), the
frequency of this variant is shown to be 0.0019 in the Human Genetic Variation Database which contains genetic variations determined by
exome sequencing of 1208 Japanese (http://www.genome.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp/SnpDB/). This suggests that the c.537G > A mutation would be detected
in other Japanese IOIBD patients in future. The c.537G > A mutation caused an in-frame deletion of 18 bp of exon 4 in the IL10RA gene that
leads to loss of 6 amino acids (174-VPGNFT-179). Structural analysis of the IL-10/IL-10RA/IL-10RB complex suggests that these amino acids
compose a hydrophobic area that could importantly influence crucial interactions with IL-10RB molecules . Because sequential assembly of
IL10-RA and IL-10RB is required for IL-10 cellular response , disruption of stable interactions between these molecules could lead to a loss
of IL-10 signaling, resulting in IOIBD in our patient. Although we also identified the normal splicing PCR product in our patient, we
speculated that the normal splicing produces a small amount of IL-10RA and cannot rescue the IL-10 signaling in his macrophages and T cells.
We identified a novel exonic mutation (c.537G > A, p.T179T) in the IL10RA gene that caused unique splicing aberrations likely to lead to
IOIBD. IL-10R genetic defects also might be involved in hematologic disorders during infancy such as ITP and JMML-like disorders. Physicians
should be familiar with the clinical phenotype of IL-10 signaling defects in order to enable prompt diagnosis at an early age and referral
for allogeneic HSCT, before later complication occur, such as development of lymphoma. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient’s parents for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Kurume University, Japan and the Boston Children’s
Hospital, MA. Additional file 1: Genetic analysis of the IL10RA and IL10RB genes. (DOCX 13 kb) Additional file 2: Primer sets for mutation
screening of IL10RA and IL10RB genes. (DOCX 15 kb) Additional file 3: Functional assay of the IL-10 receptor. (DOCX 14 kb) Genetic analysis
of the IL10RA and IL10RB genes. (DOCX 13 kb) Primer sets for mutation screening of IL10RA and IL10RB genes. (DOCX 15 kb) Functional assay of
the IL-10 receptor. (DOCX 14 kb) interleukin-10 IL-10 receptor alpha subunit IL-10 receptor beta subunit inflammatory bowel disease
interleukin-10 receptor infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease tumor necrosis factor-alpha hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
immune thrombocytopenic purpura juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia peripheral blood mononuclear cells infliximab adalimumab reverse-
transcription polymerase chain reaction phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TY, TM, MI, HT, SS,
and KY contributed to the concept and design of the study. TY, TM, YT, KE, KM, MI, HT, and YY contributed to treatment of the patient. TY,
TM, YT, KE, DS, AG, SS, and KY contributed to analysis and interpretation of the data. TY, TM, KM, MI, HT, DS, SS, YY, and KY contributed to
writing the manuscript. All authors contributed to the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the patient
and his parents for their cooperation, as well as Ms. Miki Sonoda at Kurume University School of Medicine (for technical help of genetic
analysis), Dr. Masahiro Migita at the Japanese Red Cross Kumamoto Hospital (for providing early-infancy patient information), and Drs.
Hideki Muramatsu and Seiji Kojima at Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine (for carrying out the colony assay and genetic analysis
related to JMML).
