A 64-year-old woman presented to the emergency department after falling when she tripped on a rock while doing yard work. Physical
examination revealed an open deformity of the left forearm (Figure 1). Radial pulse was palpable, sensation was intact, and she had normal
range of motion of the fingers. While awaiting radiographs, bedside ultrasound was performed (Video). Ultrasound revealed intact radius and
ulna and a large linear foreign body. The wooden foreign body was removed at the bedside (Figure 2) and patient was admitted for observation
and intravenous antibiotics. Wounds containing foreign bodies are at increased risk of delayed healing and infection. Wood, in particular,
is extremely inflammatory and should be removed.1 Although radiopaque materials (metal, glass) are often visualized on plain radiography,
radiolucent objects such as wood are often not.2 Sensitivity of plain films for the detection of wooden foreign bodies is estimated as low
as 15%.3 The accuracy and availability of sonography make it an excellent modality for evaluation of foreign bodies.4 Sensitivity of
ultrasound for the detection of foreign bodies is estimated between 50% to 100%, increasing when clinical information is available.5,6 The
linear, high-frequency transducer is best for examining the superficial soft tissues. Most foreign bodies are hyperechoic with a surrounding
hypoechoic area corresponding to granulation tissue, edema, or hemorrhage.7 Foreign body size estimation is often dependent on its
orientation in relation to the ultrasound beam and can be affected by local tissue reaction.5 Multiple tissue planes may disguise a foreign
body or give the appearance of one when none is there. Air can limit the penetration of ultrasound waves or itself masquerade as a foreign
body.5 Literature supports ultrasound’s effectiveness in evaluating for fracture, and our case demonstrates the potential of emergency
physician-performed ultrasound in the evaluation of all injured extremities.8,9 Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available
through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all
authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as
potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Open left forearm deformity with sagittal ultrasound image of the left forearm
demonstrating a foreign body (A) radial to the ulna (B). Wooden foreign body removed from the left forearm. Ultrasound of the patient’s left
forearm performed with a linear probe in the sagittal view demonstrating an intact radius and ulna and a large linear foreign body.
