Wei Luo and Ya-Lun Li contributed equally to this work. To the Editor: Meperidine, also known as pethidine, is one of the most commonly
prescribed opioid analgesics. Meperidine exerts high central nervous system depressant effects through producing prolonged activation of
opioid receptors (µ-receptor). We described a rare case of generalized tonic–clonic seizures after intravenous (IV) injection of meperidine
for bronchoscopy premedication in a patient with a lung lesion who lacked a prior history of seizures. A 59-year-old woman with a productive
cough for more than 1 month was admitted to undergo bronchoscopy because of lung lesions found by the computed tomography (CT) scan. The
patient's past medical history was unremarkable. Physical examination was unremarkable, except for coarse crackles in the right basal lobe.
Her updated medications included ceftizoxime and mucosolvan. Before the bronchoscopy, nebulization with 2% lidocaine was applied for 15 min,
followed by IV meperidine (30 mg), which was administered at least 15 min later. Almost immediately after the injection of meperidine, the
patient experienced a generalized tonic–clonic seizure, which was successfully treated with IV diazepam (20 mg). At the same time, the
patient was intubated and then transferred to the Respiratory Intensive Care Unit. A head CT revealed no significant cerebral lesions
[Figure 1], in addition, blood tests, liver chemistry, cardiac enzymes, electrolytes, and electrocardiogram were all normal. She has not
experienced any subsequent seizures. One day later, the patient was extubated and then transferred to a normal unit. Computed tomography
scan of the head shows no significant lesions. Because of the successively use of lidocaine nebulization and IV meperidine injection for
bronchoscopy, it could be difficult to discern which drug-induced the seizure. We may exclude the possibility of lidocaine for two reasons.
Firstly, there was no report of nebulization with lidocaine inducing a seizure. We performed a PubMed and Chinese database searched for
lidocaine combined with the following terms: Seizure, epilepsy, epileptogenic, toxicity, overdose, seizure threshold, and convulsion. The
final updated search occurred on September 1, 2015. Only three case reports were found, which were direct injection of lidocaine into the
internal carotid artery [Table 1]. Secondly, the duration between nebulization and the onset of seizure was at least 15 min, suggesting it
was not from lidocaine nebulization. However, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that lidocaine accounts for the findings, the
likelihood is extremely low. Three case reports of lidocaine injection induced seizures With respect to the possible culprit, meperidine,
there was a close relationship between meperidine injection and seizure as the patient began seizing almost immediately after the IV
injection of meperidine. We searched the same database as that mentioned above for the terms pethidine, meperidine, normeperidine, and
norpethidine; each search term was combined with the same terms as for lidocaine. To our surprise, there was substantial evidence supporting
meperidine-associated seizures. Schlick et al. wrote an excellent review about meperidine-induced seizures. Based on their work and combined
with the latest search results, we identified 35 clinically relevant studies of meperidine-associated seizures discussing a total of 52
patients. The majority of the studies were case reports, whereas prospective research, retrospective research, chart reviews and cohort
studies were included. The delivery route was IV, intramuscular, oral or intrathecal. Comorbidities were prevalent in the studies reviewed.
The leading cause was renal impairment, and then liver impairment while other confounding conditions included alcohol abuse, infection, and
drug addiction, etc. The postulated mechanism of meperidine-associated seizures is related to its active metabolite normeperidine that has
half of the activity of meperidine and a longer elimination half-life (8–12 h), therefore, cause excitation of the central nervous system
and lead to nervousness, hyper-reflexia, myoclonus, and seizures. The risk of meperidine-induced seizure is increased when it is used in
patients with renal insufficiency or hepatic impairment because of the accumulation of normeperidine in serum. Meperidine dose may have
contributed to seizure likelihood. Schlick et al. defined using meperidine 100 mg, 100–500 mg, >500 mg in adult in 24 h as low, medium, and
high doses respectively. In their research, only two patients had reported seizure complications at low doses. In this regard, our case is
even rarer. The use of meperidine as an analgesic has markedly declined in recent years because alternate opioids have demonstrated similar
or even superior analgesic efficacy compared with meperidine. Various guidelines for pain management exclude meperidine from their treatment
algorithms; others specifically recommend against using meperidine for pain treatment. However, according to the Chinese bronchoscopy
guidelines, intramuscular injection of meperidine is recommended as part of the preparation for the procedure; therefore, this protocol may
merits revision properly. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by the National Key Clinical Specialist
Construction Programs of China ( NO. 649). Edited by: Peng Lyu
