A 25 year old female presented to the department of Orthopedics, Lok Nayak Hospital, Delhi, India in June 2013 with pain and flexion
deformity in her right knee. On examination, small nodular tender swelling (3×4 cm) was palpable below patellar tendon. There was no joint
line tenderness. Fixed flexion deformity of knee (40 degree) was present. Tests for instability of knee were negative. X-ray knee revealed
stippled calcification with loose bodies (Fig. 1a, b). MRI shows an abnormal moderate size nodular mass with low to intermediate signal
changes on T1 and T2 weighted images which suggests synovial chondromatosis (Fig. 2a–d). On arthroscopy, the mass was appeared to be
originating from synovium surrounding the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tibial footprint (Fig. 3a). Gross examination after excising the
mass (Fig. 3b) showed conglomerated tissue of size 3×2 cm, constituting numerous nodules of white-gray, translucent hyaline cartilage.
Histopathological examination revealed synovial chondromatosis. At one year follow up, patient was asymptomatic, without evidence of
recurrence. Synovial chondromatosis is a synovial proliferative disease in which osteocartilaginous metaplasia occurs within the synovial
membrane of joints, bursae or tendon sheaths. Chondromatosis arising from ACL synovium is a rare occurrence. (a). Preoperative X-ray knee
anteroposterior view showing stippled calcification in loose bodies (arrow). 1(b). Preoperative X-ray knee lateral view showing stippled
calcification in loose bodies (arrow). (a). Preoperative MRI scan T1 weighted image (sagittal cut) showing low to intermediate signal
nodular mass (arrow). (b). Preoperative MRI scan T2 weighted image (sagittal cut) showing low signal nodular mass (arrow). (c). Preoperative
MRI scan stir (short T1 inversion recovery) (d). Preoperative MRI scan post gadolinium enhancement image (sagittal cut) - Heterogenous
enhancing nodular mass (arrow). (a). Intraoperative arthroscopy photograph showing excision mass. 3(b). Photograph of mass after excision.
