To the Editor: Epidermoid cyst, was first described by an artist in a French medical school in 1807, is a kind of congenital disease
characterized by a stratified epithelial capsule and laminated keratin debris contents. It accounts for approximately 1% of all intracranial
tumors and commonly locates in the cerebellopontine angle, parasellar region, and the fourth ventricle. Cerebrospinal fluid density on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with nonenhancing is their typical images. However, epidermoid cysts occurring in an uncommon location with
atypical MRI may cause the difficult diagnosis. While the radiological and pathological features of atypical epidermoid cysts have still
been unclear, we reported an epidermoid cyst that was located in facies convexa cerebri and presented with atypical images. A 17-year-old
girl was experienced for few minutes’ unconsciousness, three times in recent 3 months. Each time before faint, she could feel intermittent
numbness in both lower limbs, developing from distal to proximal, following some moderate to intense exercise. No positive family history
was obtained. Physical examination revealed that the only neurological positive sign was hypoesthesia in her left lower extremity. Lesion
showed block mass in parietal lobe closed to the parietal bone with iso- or hypo-intensity on T1-weighted MRI, and hyperintensity on
T2-weighted MRI. There was no empty shadow in the lesion due to the absence of vascular flow and the boundary remained clear. Middle
structure shifting was not found. Simultaneously, remarkable enhancing was not discovered after Gd-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid
administration [Figure 1a–1c]. Lesion also showed the hyperintense signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). Meanwhile, magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) showed low creatine, choline, N-acetylaspartate (creatine and N-acetylaspartate were obvious), and inverted peak of
lactate. (a) Axial view showed lesion in parietal lobe with iso- or hypo-intensity on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, (b)
Hyperintensity on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. (c) No remarkable contrast enhancement on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
after contrast-medium administration. (d) Remarkable keratosis and squamous epithelium with hemorrhage in tumor as arrows pointing in
routine pathology (H and E staining, magnification, ×20). The patient underwent surgery by right parietal approach to the parietal lobe.
Tumor with pearly appearance, approximately 3 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm, was in facies convexa cerebri. Taking attention to protecting superior
sagittal sinus and avoiding rupture of the cyst, the neurosurgeon totally resected the tumor. Yellow and cheese-like cyst contents emerged
after splitting the tumor. Intraoperative frozen pathology declared keratosis and squamous epithelium with the consideration of epidermoid
cyst. Slight numbness in the left leg was left over without any other neurological deficits after operation. During the hospitalization,
unconsciousness was not relieved. The patient was discharged on the 7th day after surgery without any neurological deterioration. On the day
of discharge, postoperative pathology also confirmed diagnosis of epidermoid cyst according to remarkable keratosis and squamous epithelium.
Moreover, it showed hemorrhage in tumor as arrows pointing [Figure 1d]. Followed up for 6 months, the symptom of the patient had improved
without any unconsciousness. Intracranial epidermoid cysts are slow-growing benign tumors, arising from the inclusion of ectodermal tissue
during the neural tube closure or formation of the secondary cerebral vesicles. So far, this is the first case of epidermoid cyst that was
located in the facies convexa cerebri with atypical images. In preoperative MRI, iso- or hypo-intensity on T1-weighted and hyperintensity on
T2-weighted without conspicuous enhance offered little hint of actual diagnosis. Nevertheless, with the help of histopathology, we
speculated that atypical MRI was due to hemorrhage in the epidermoid cyst. In general, atypical MRI in intracranial epidermoid cysts may be
attributed to factors of high proteinaceous content or abundance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the cyst, creamy texture or nonsolid of
the cyst contents, and calcification and hemorrhage within the cyst. Hemorrhage of epidermoid cyst can lead to atypical images in the form
of variable signal intensity on MRI, according to the age of the bleed. In 2013, Ren et al. verified hemorrhage in 21 patients of 24
atypical intracranial epidermoid cysts. Accordingly, we confirmed that atypical MRI rests ascribable to spontaneous hemorrhage in the case.
Moreover, we also conducted MRS and DWI before operation. DWI images showed markedly restricted diffusion with high signal intensity, the
same as typical DWI findings. MRS images demonstrated low creatine, choline, N-acetylaspartate (creatine and N-acetylaspartate were
obvious), and inverted peak of lactate, differing with widely accepted typical spectrum of an intracranial epidermoid cyst, which presents
with a high lactate peak at 1.3 ppm with a virtual absence of the normal brain metabolites (N-acetylaspartate, creatine, and choline). In
2013, Schoors et al. described that glycolysis had influence on activating and restraining pathological neovascularization. As MRS images
prompted reduced glycolysis, we inferred the lesion had pathological neovascularization in the progress of this case. In intracranial
epidermoid cyst, total removal of lesion is the definitive and ideal treatment. Simultaneously, to reach none chemical inflammation and
better outcome, clearing free pieces of tumor and protecting important vessels and functional region become indispensable. As a result, a
good outcome of our patient was affirmed in follow-up. In brief, epidermoid cyst presenting with atypical images located in facies convexa
cerebri is very rare. Atypical magnetic resonance findings can be caused by hemorrhage within epidermoid cysts. Fluctuation of lactate in
lesion gives hint of pathological neovascularization. To achieve good outcome, thorough preoperative magnetic resonance examination and
intraoperative total resection become necessary in similar cases. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Peng Lyu
