In patients undergoing transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve implantation, previous endovascular interventions bear a risk for the valve
frame to get stucked to the aortic stents. We report on a 75-year-old frail patient with severe aortic stenosis and a rapid increase of an
infra-renal aneurysm. He had a history of multiple endovascular interventions on the aorta. Due to his frail preoperative status we decided
to perform a transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve implantation in combination with a simultaneous surgical abdominal aneurysm repair. To
allow an atraumatic passage of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve across the endovascular stents we used a special technique. The transfemoral
approach in patients with previous endovascular stenting can be performed successfully by a partial inflation of the distal balloon. In
patients precluded for conventional aortic valve replacement due to advanced age and multiple comorbidities, transcatheter aortic valve
implantation (TAVI) is the standard of care . Regarding the transfemoral (TF) approach there have been concerns in patients with aorto-iliac
aneurysms, occlusive disease and excessive vessel tortuosity, which may complicate a safe TF access . Some centers avoid TF TAVI in patients
with aorto-iliac disease or aortic aneurysms due to exclusion of these patients from PARTNER trial and the risk of vascular complications .
Furthermore previous endovascular interventions bear a risk for the valve frame to get stucked to the aortic stents. Published experience of
techniques to establish adequate TF access in these patients is limited. A 75-year-old patient with a history of multiple endovascular and
surgical interventions on the aorta was admitted to our clinic due to a rapid infra-renal aneurysm enlargement (10 cm × 9,5 cm) following
endovascular aorto-bi-iliac stenting with a GORE Excluder stentgraft (W. L. Gore & Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, Arizona, USA) in September
2009 (Fig. 1). Furthermore, he was already treated with an endovascular stenting of an aneurysm in the descending thoracic aorta (2004) and
an hybrid operation of a new developed aortic arch aneurysm with a combined endovascular stenting of the aortic arch (Gore TAG stentgraft
(45 × 200mm)) and an aorto-truncal, aorto-subclavian and leftsided aorto-carotic bypass (Fig. 2).Fig. 1CT showing 10x9.5 cm infra-renal
aortic aneurysm with a new para-aortic hematomaFig. 2Sagittal CT angiogram three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction showing aortic arch and
descending aortic stenting and aorto-bi-iliac prosthesis CT showing 10x9.5 cm infra-renal aortic aneurysm with a new para-aortic hematoma
Sagittal CT angiogram three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction showing aortic arch and descending aortic stenting and aorto-bi-iliac prosthesis
Computed tomography (CT) showed an enlargement of the endovascularly excluded abdominal aortic aneurysm and a conspicuous new para-aortic
hematoma and contrast agent enrichment in the aneurysm sac (Fig. 1). Preoperative transesophageal echocardiography revealed a critical
aortic stenosis with a tri-leaflet heavily calcified valve, with an aortic valve area of 0.8 cm2 and a low-flow/low-gradient stenosis with a
peak velocity of 2.3 m/s, a mean gradient of 11 mmHg and a severe reduced left ventricular function (LVEF 20 %). After discussion in our
multidisciplinary heart team we decided to perform a TF TAVI in combination with a simultaneous surgical abdominal aneurysm repair. However,
in a patient with previous aortic endovascular interventions, there is a risk for the balloon expandable Edwards Sapien valve frame to get
stucked to the aortic stents. Hence, we used a special technique to facilitate easy device passage through the stents. Under general
anesthesia TF TAVI procedure was performed in standard manner using a surgical cut-down to the ilio-femoral vessels and transcatheter aortic
valve (Edwards SAPIEN 3 Transcatheter Heart Valve, 26 mm) was delivered using a 14 Fr Edwards eSheath Introducer Set (Edwards Lifesciences,
Irvine, CA, USA). Balloon dilation of the stenotic aortic valve was performed with a 23 mm balloon, under rapid pacing using a temporary
pacing. The critical part of the approach was the transition of the delivery system through the metal scaffold of the endovascular stents as
it bears the risk that the uncovered Edwards valve frame gets stuck to the stent. Therefore we performed a partial inflation of the distal
section of the balloon to minimize the contact between valve frame and endovascular stent and to allow an unimpaired passage of the valve
(Fig. 3). This is achieved by injecting sufficient volume to inflate the balloon without flaring the TAVI device. The usual volume required
is 2 to 3 ml. Once this is done the inflation device is locked. The whole system is then advanced with the distal balloon semi-inflated.
After crossing the native valve and optimal placement, the inflation was continued and the SAPIEN 3 valve deployed in the usual manner.Fig.
3 a Deployment of prosthesis in a patient with multiple endovascular stents. b + c Partial inflation of the distal balloon to minimize
contact between valve frame and metal scaffold of endovascular stent a Deployment of prosthesis in a patient with multiple endovascular
stents. b + c Partial inflation of the distal balloon to minimize contact between valve frame and metal scaffold of endovascular stent
Subsequent transesophageal echocardiography revealed an appropriate position of the implanted valve with an aortic valve area of 1.6 cm2 ,
no relevant gradient or paravalvular leakage. Concomitant transperitoneal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair was then performed via median
laparotomy. Inspection of the aneurysm offered no type I or type II endoleak. The aorto-bi-iliac stent was gently pulled out and infrarenal
aortic reconstruction was performed by Dacron tube graft interposition. Patients postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged
in stable condition after 8 days. A control CT demonstrated patent surgical anastomoses, endovascular grafts without endoleaks and
echocardiography documented well-seated and well-functioning aortic valve prosthesis. In our case the presence of multiple endovascular
stents aggravates the transfemoral approach due to the risk of getting the valve stuck to the metal scaffold of the stent. To achieve a
distance between valve frame and endovascular stent we performed a partial inflation of the distal balloon and thus could pass the
endovascular stents safely. This technique has been described by Davies et al. for eliminating balloon aortic valvuloplasty prior to
transcatheter valve placement . This has been shown to be effective in allowing accurate placement of a balloon-expandable device without
the need for prior balloon aortic valvuloplasty. In this case surgical infra-renal aortic aneurysm repair was chosen over endovascular
aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) due to the prior history of multiple interventions and the conspicuous preoperative CT suggesting the
possibility of an endoleak and showing an additional para-aortic hematoma. To our knowledge this is the first report of hybrid TAVI and
surgical aortic aneurysm repair in a patient with prior multiple aortic interventions. There have been a few cases reporting on simultaneous
TAVI and EVAR. Drury-Smith et al. report on simultaneous TAVI in combination with an EVAR of an infra-renal aneurysm , whereas others
describe a simultaneous approach with TAVI and EVAR of a thoracic or abdominal aneurysm [5, 6]. There have also been reports on sequential
procedures in patients with aortic stenosis and aortic aneurysm performing TF or transapical TAVI followed by EVAR a few weeks later. Komlo
et al. describe a special case, in which they combine transaortic TAVI and EVAR . We conclude that a partial inflation of the distal balloon
in patients with TF TAVI and endovascular stenting minimizes the contact between valve frame and endovascular stent and leads to an easy
passage of the valve through the stent. Hence the transfemoral approach in patients with former endovascular stenting can be performed
successfully in a multidisciplinary approach. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography
endovascular aortic aneurysm repair left ventricular ejection fraction transcatheter aortic valve implantation transfemoral Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CW made contributions to the conception and
design, to the interpretation of data and drafted the manuscript; ACD, KE and MS have revised it critically for important intellectual
content and made contributions to the conception and design. PM provided 3D CT scans and was involved in drafting the manuscript. MG and DG
contributed to the conception of the technique, performed abdominal aortic aneurysm repair and provided CT scans. SR and TR were involved in
the conception of the technique and contributed to the TAVI procedure. NM made contributions to the development of technique and
methodology, performed the distal balloon inflating technique and has been involved in drafting the manuscript. TW contributed to the study
design, developement of methodology and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
