Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a rare disease in humans and animals, which is caused by the lack of production, malfunction or dysfunction of
the distal nephron to the antidiuretic effect of the antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Diagnosis requires a thorough medical history, clinical
examination and further laboratory confirmation. This case report describes the appearance of DI in five Duroc boars in Switzerland. Two
purebred intact Duroc boars at the age of 8 months and 1.5 years, respectively, with a history of polyuric and polydipsic symptoms had been
referred to the Swine Clinic in Berne. Based on the case history, the results of clinical examination and the analysis of blood and urine, a
tentative diagnosis of DI was concluded. Finally, the diagnosis was confirmed by findings from a modified water deprivation test,
macroscopic examinations and histopathology. Following the diagnosis, three genes known to be involved in inherited DI in humans were
analyzed in order to explore a possible genetic background of the affected boars. The etiology of DI in pigs is supposed to be the same as
in humans, although this disease has never been described in pigs before. Thus, although occurring only on rare occasions, DI should be
considered as a differential diagnosis in pigs with polyuria and polydipsia. It seems that a modified water deprivation test may be a
helpful tool for confirming a diagnosis in pigs. Since hereditary forms of DI have been described in humans, the occurrence of DI in pigs
should be considered in breeding programs although we were not able to identify a disease associated mutation. Primary disorders of water
balance, such as diabetes insipidus (DI) or psychogenic polydipsia, belong to the ‘polyuric and polydipsic complex’. DI is characterized by
polyuria, a markedly decreased urine specific gravity and compensatory polydipsia without other findings. Combining a thorough clinical
examination with specific laboratory testing for particular causes (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, pyelonephritis, chronic renal
failure), the diagnosis can be established and several other differential diagnoses can be ruled out [1, 2]. In order to verify a
presumptive diagnosis, a water deprivation test, an antidiuretic hormone (ADH) stimulation test as well as measurement of endogenous ADH
have been described . DI is caused by an inadequate secretion, release or activity of ADH . The ADH, also known as vasopressin, is a
neurohypophyseal peptide hormone and its most important function, maintained through interaction with the V2-receptor in the kidney, is to
increase water reabsorption . Any distinction of the several forms of DI cannot solely relay on clinical examination, because symptoms are
rather unspecific. A central DI (CDI) occurs due the inadequate secretion of ADH, whereas nephrogenic DI (NDI) is characterized by an
insufficient or absent response of the distal nephron to the antidiuretic effect of vasopressin [6–8, 10]. The gestational DI (GDI) is
caused by the enzyme ‘cysteine aminopeptidase’, which is produced in the placenta and degrades ADH . DI has rarely been reported in pets and
farm animals [10, 11]. In humans the disease occurs with a prevalence of 1:25,000 . From these cases less than 10 % can be attributed to a
hereditary background. In this context, three different genes are often analyzed in order to identify the form of DI : the arginine
vasopressin gene (AVP), the arginine vasopressin receptor 2 gene (AVPR2) and the vasopressin-sensitive water channel gene (AQP2). In most of
the human CDI cases the disease is acquired and can have various underlying etiologies, such as tumors, trauma, infections or central
nervous system malformations [12, 13]. There are also familial forms caused by mutations in AVP. Most of these mutations are inherited in a
dominant manner though recessive cases have been reported . The time of onset of first clinical symptoms in familial CDI shows huge
variation and it usually occurs after one year of age . The acquired forms of NDI are often secondary diseases following other metabolic
disorders (e.g. diabetes mellitus), urinary tract diseases or drug abuse . Familial NDI can either be caused by mutations in the AVPR2 or
AQP2 gene [10, 14]. In both circumstances, symptoms usually manifest themselves in the first weeks after birth . Two particular AVPR2
mutations are responsible for about 90 % of familial NDI cases , they cause an X-linked recessive form of NDI and therefore mainly affect
male individuals with a frequency of 4–8 per 1 million man born alive . Furthermore, there are autosomal dominant and recessive variants of
NDI . Mutations in AQP2 are the least frequent cause of familial DI. In most of the cases it is inherited in an autosomal recessive way .
This case report describes the findings in Duroc boars with DI. The clinical symptoms were partly in accordance with case reports in other
animal species. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report of the DI in pigs and specifically in Duroc boars. Two purebred Duroc
boars were referred to the Swine Clinic Berne, Vetsuisse-Faculty, for further investigation of polyuric and polydipsic symptoms combined
with reduced growth despite maintenance of appetite. Owners of the Duroc boars were informed about the possible examinations in written form
and they agreed upon Terms of Services that include the intention to publish descriptions of clinical cases in reports. Both animals had a
significant drop of semen quality and were excluded from the semen collection process in a boar stud. The first symptoms appeared around a
month before referral to the clinic and no other relevant medical history was reported. No treatment was administered by the herd attending
veterinarian or animal care taker prior to presentation of the case in the clinic. The boars were kept in individual pens interspersed with
straw. In the boar stud, the animals were fed with commercial feed and were provided with fresh water from the public supplier. Water was
freely available through a nipple drinker system. The vaccination program included an immunization against Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
twice and porcine parvovirus once a year. A yearly deworming of all boars was not conducted, because of negative results from regular
examinations of faeces. According to the EU-regulations the boar stud was also tested for Classical swine fever, Brucella spp. and Foot-and-
mouth disease virus and in addition for Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, Porcine herpesvirus 1 and African swine fever
virus. During the interview with the herd attending veterinarian and the thorough clinical history three very similar cases were further
identified, where some years ago Duroc boars had shown identical signs. In these three cases the herd attending veterinarian had performed
on-farm necropsies. Furthermore, samples from each boar had been sent to a laboratory for diagnostic purpose including the histopathology
and bacteriological investigation of the urinary tract system. Also a physical-chemical urinalysis was conducted. At necropsy and the
histopathological examination no distinctive gross lesions were found that could explain the polyuric and polydipsic disorders. Apart from
this, pathogens not specific for urinary tract infection were found with low quantity in culture, likely due to environmental contamination.
All of the urine samples from these three pigs showed a highly decreased specific gravity without other abnormalities. Case #1 was a
1.5 year old intact Duroc boar with a body weight of 172 kg. Clinical examination revealed the boar was alert and in a moderate body
condition. The boar showed a dull, ruffled bristled coat and the integument had multiple superficial skin wounds. The boar had several
lesions with an exudative inflammatory process on the ears as well as lateral to the left carpal joint and lateral to the right tarsus. The
rectal body temperature was 38.6 °C. The heart rate was 116 beats per minute and the heart sound was slightly muffled. The respiratory rate
was 16 breaths per minute, with the animal showing a costoabdominal, abdominal breathing type and a moderate expiratory as well as a slight
inspiratory respiratory noise. Based on the examination of the mucous membrane there was currently no evidence that the animal had a
circulatory insufficiency. The neurological examination revealed no pathological findings. During abdominal ultrasonography, the cranial
part of the urinary bladder could not be identified, because the vesica urinaria extended below the ribs. The bladder was completely
distended with echogenic urine. No sediment was observed in the urine. The thickness, the regularity of the bladder wall and mucosal relief,
all dependent on the bladder’s volume, i.e. filling, were evaluated and assessed as being physiological. During the clinical examination no
urination could be observed. The genitals were evaluated visually, by digital palpation and by ultrasound examination. The two testes were
located in and freely moveable within the scrotum. The scrotum had several skin abrasions and a hard thickening of the skin around 10×4cm on
the left lateral side. There was a physiological asymmetry of the testes with both being around 1.5 fists big, but one being slightly bigger
than the other one. The tissue was soft and elastic and no pain reaction could be recognized by palpation. No abnormality was found during
the ultrasound scan. Results from the concurrent blood examination and the urine analysis are listed in Tables 1 and 2.Table 1Blood
parameters of case #1ParameterUnitPatient’s valueReference valueHematocritel/L0.330.33–0.45Erythrocytes10e12/L6.246.3–8.8Leukocytes10e9/L
18.74 7.9–18.5Sodiummmol/L127129–150Potassiummmol/L4.544.26–6.99Chloridemmol/L 87 96–110Calciummmol/L2.352.32–2.92Phosphorusmmol/L 1.59
2.06–3.25Magnesiummmol/L 0.75 0.86–1.21Ironμmol/L17.29.5–29.1Glucosemmol/L6.014.0–6.6Total
proteing/L66.454–83Albuming/L36.627.3–39.5Ureammol/L5.473.15–8.07Creatinineμmol/L9539–130Bilirubinμmol/L1.11.0–6.4ALAT
(GPT)IU10241–160ALPIU2050–303ASAT (GOT)IU37 °30–139CKIU10200–2687GLDHIU 1 °2–11LDHIU1172909–2172SQRIU0 °0–8°possible interference due to
haemolysisValues not within the physiological range are marked in boldTable 2Urine parameters of case #1ParameterPatient’s
valueColourdilutedTransparencyclearSpecific weight1002NitritenegativpH-Value6.0ProteinnegativGlucosenegativKetone
bodiesnegativUrobilinogennegativBilirubinnegativBloodnegativSquamous epithelium(+) Blood parameters of case #1 °possible interference due to
haemolysis Values not within the physiological range are marked in bold Urine parameters of case #1 Macroscopic examination and
histopathology were performed and are described in the section ‘gross examination and histopathological findings’. Case #2 was an 8 months
old intact Duroc boar with a body weight of 133 kg. The clinical examination revealed the boar was alert and in a moderate body condition.
The bristles and integument were in a good condition, although there were multiple marble sized, firm nodules on both ears and decubitus
ulcerations on both carpi and the left tarsus. The rectal body temperature was 37.8 °C. The heart rate was 100 beats per minute and the
heart sound was slightly muffled. The respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, with the animal showing a costoabdominal, abdominal
breathing type and a moderate expiratory respiratory noise. Based on the examination of the mucous membrane there was currently no evidence
that the animal had a circulatory insufficiency. The animal showed a slightly arched back and tripling in hindquarters. The neurological
examination revealed no pathological findings, except of proprioceptive deficits in hindquarters. Moreover, the panniculus reflex was
slightly decreased from pelvis until thorax and thereafter moderately increased. During abdominal ultrasonography, the cranial part of the
urinary bladder could not be identified, because the vesica urinaria extended into the ribcage. The bladder was completely distended with
echogenic urine and no sediment was observed in the urine. The thickness, regularity of the bladder wall and mucosal relief, all dependent
on bladder’s volume, were evaluated and assessed as being physiological. During the clinical examination urination could be observed nearly
every half hour. The genitals were evaluated visually, by digital palpation and by ultrasound examination. Both testes were located and
freely moveable within the scrotum. There was a physiological asymmetry of the two fist-sized testes. The tissue was soft and elastic and no
pain reaction could be recognized by palpation. No abnormality was found during the ultrasound examination. The caudal part of the paired
bulbourethral gland was manually palpated. The consistency and the size of the gland revealed no pathological findings. A blood sample was
taken and a complete blood count was performed. Furthermore, the concentration of Thyroxin (T4) was determined in order to exclude
hyperthyroidism. The results are listed in Table 3. For further diagnostic examinations and as a support for the final diagnosis an ‘abrupt
water deprivation test’ was conducted. The body weight was measured and a urine sample was taken and examined immediately prior to the trial
(Table 4). Then the animal was completely deprived of water and food for 6 h. During the test, the general condition was monitored every
30 min. After the water deprivation test a 6.7 % loss of body weight was assessed and the urine specific gravity was marginally increased
from 1.001 to 1.008.Table 3Blood parameter of case #2 including Thyroxin (T4)ParameterUnitPatient’s valueReference
valueHematocritel/L0.330.33–0.45Erythrocytes10e12/L6.606.3–8.8Leukocytes10e9/L 20.98
7.9–18.5Sodiummmol/L140129–150Potassiummmol/L4.534.26–6.99ChloridemmolL10096–110Calciummmol/L2.442.32–2.92Phosphorusmmol/L 1.93
2.06–3.25Magnesiummmol/L 0.76 0.86–1.21Ironμmol/L17.59.5–29.1Glucosemmol/L 7.37 4.0–6.6Total
proteing/L68.354–83Albuming/L37.127.3–39.5Ureammol/L3.883.15–8.07Creatinineμmol/L7939–130Bilirubinμmol/L 0.8 1.0–6.4ALAT
(GPT)IU7541–160ALPIU 34 50–303ASAT (GOT)IU46 °30–139CKIU2780–2687GLDHIU2 °2–11LDHIU 900 °909–2172SQRIU 1 °0–8Thyroxin (T4)ug/L4442–66
*°possible interference due to haemolysis*reference range from Anderson et al. Values not within the physiological range are marked in
boldTable 4Comparing urine parameter before and after the water deprivation testParameter Before water deprivation test After water
deprivation test Body weight (kg)133124Colourdilutedbright yellowTransparencyclearturbidSpecific weight1.0011.008NitritenegativnegativpH-
Value5.86.1ProteinnegativnegativGlucosenegativnegativKetone
bodiesnegativnegativUrobilinogennegativnegativBilirubinnegativnegativBlood0-1negativSquamous epithelium++++Round cell(+)+Amorphic
crystal-+++ Blood parameter of case #2 including Thyroxin (T4) °possible interference due to haemolysis *reference range from Anderson et
al. Values not within the physiological range are marked in bold Comparing urine parameter before and after the water deprivation test Based
on the results of the abrupt water deprivation test it was decided to try a therapy with 3-5 drops of Desmopressinacetat (Minirin® solution
for intranasal application) into the conjunctival sac every 8 h for 5 days. During the treatment period a clinical examination and
measurement of the urine specific gravity was conducted daily. Just a slightly increase of the urine specific gravity was observed (Fig. 1).
Five days after the last treatment with Desmopressinacetat, a blood sample was taken and analyzed for Copeptin with an immunoassay for
humans. The concentration of Copeptin was lower than 0.8 pmol/l in the serum.Fig. 1Line diagram displaying the development of the urine
specific gravity over treatment time. Data were obtained during desmopressin administration with a Duroc boar suffering from polydipsia and
polyuria Line diagram displaying the development of the urine specific gravity over treatment time. Data were obtained during desmopressin
administration with a Duroc boar suffering from polydipsia and polyuria For further diagnostics a necropsy was performed and completed by
histopathological examinations. The results are described in the section below. The boar showed multiple skin abrasions on various parts of
the body. The soles of all claws showed fissures. Bilateral the cranial lung lobes were affected by a chronic suppurative bronchopneumonia
and about 20 % of the lung tissue was affected. The pericardium contained 0.1 l (L) of clear, serous fluid. The urinary bladder contained
approximately 9 L of clear yellowish urine (Fig. 2). The mucosal lining of the urinary bladder was intact and the lumen of the urethra was
free from obstruction. The testes were softer than normal on palpation.Fig. 2Macroscopic examination of a Duroc boar suffering from
polydipsia and polyuria: enlarged urinary bladder Macroscopic examination of a Duroc boar suffering from polydipsia and polyuria: enlarged
urinary bladder Like the first animal, the boar showed multiple skin abrasions and the claws showed fissures. The boar also suffered from a
bilateral chronic suppurative bronchopneumonia which affected about 20 % of the lung tissue. The pericard contained about 1 L of serous and
clear fluid. The boar had multiple renal cysts in both kidneys of up to 0.5 cm in diameter. The urinary bladder was filled with 3 L of clear
yellowish urine and the mucosa was without changes. The lumen of the urethra was free. Both testes were softer than normal on palpation. The
macroscopically affected parts of the lung showed a severe infiltration with degenerated neutrophils into the lumen of bronchi and
bronchioli and extending into the alveoli. Additionally, there was exudation of fibrin admixed with necrotic debris and proliferation of
fibroblasts. In both pigs the tubuli seminiferi were mostly devoid of mature spermatids and contained a reduced amount of spermatogonia.
Additionally, there was also a multifocal reduced amount of sertoli cells. The interstitium of the testes contained few foci of lymphocytes
with a mild amount of edema. In the gray and white matter of the spinal cord of case #1, there were multiple swollen and hypereosinophilic
axons (spheroids). Additionally, in the white substance along the whole length of the spinal cord there were few glial nodules. In the
interstitium of the kidneys of boar 1, there were few foci composed of lymphocytes and a lesser amount of macrophages. Some renal tubuli of
case #1 contained a small amount of eosinophilic proteinaceous material. Few tubuli of case #2 showed mild multifocal degeneration of
epithelial cells. The corpus of the urinary bladder showed no histological changes. Multifocal in the hypophysis there were small amounts of
mineralized colloid. No special findings were present in the hypothalamus. A bacteriological examination of the affected lung from case #1
yielded a moderate to high concentration of Trueperella pyogenes and Pasteurella multocida subsp. multocida. With the aim of examining a
possible genetic background of the disease, the pedigrees of the five affected boars were analyzed. All cases can be traced back to a total
of 101 common ancestors, the closest of them 3, to 6 generations away from the affected animals (Fig. 3). According to the knowledge about
the genetic causes of DI in humans, the annotated exons of the three functional candidate genes AVP, AVPR2 and AQP2 were sequenced in
material obtained from the affected boars and from healthy animals serving as controls, which have been collected in our laboratory in the
course of other ongoing studies. The DNA was isolated either from EDTA-blood using the Nucleon Bacc2 kit (GE Healthcare) or from ear punch
biopsies using QIAGEN’s DNeasy spin kit according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Exon-spanning primers (Table 5) were designed using
Primer3 software after masking of repetitive sequences with RepeatMasker . PCR reactions were carried out in 10 μl volumes with 5 pmol
primer, 5 μl Amlitaq Gold 360 Master Mix (LifeTechnologies), 1 μl 360 GC Enhancer (LifeTechnologies) and ~20 ng of genomic DNA. PCR-products
were amplified using GeneAmp 9700 thermocycler (LifeTechnologies), the amplification conditions were 10 min at 95 °C, 32 cycles of 30 s
denaturation at 95 °C, 30 s annealing at 60 °C and 1 min elongation at 72 °C, followed by a 7 min hold at 72 °C. To remove redundant primers
and nucleotides PCR-products were purified with 1 unit exonuclease I (Roche) and 0.5 units of shrimp alkaline phosphatase (New England
BioLabs) in a 30 min incubation step at 37 °C, followed by a 15 min inactivation step at 80 °C. Subsequently the PCR-products were sequenced
with the BigDye Terminator v.3.1 cycle sequencing kit (LifeTechnologies) at the following conditions: a hold of 96 °C, followed by 25 cycles
of 10 s at 96 °C, 5 s at 50 °C and 2 min at 60 °C. Sequencing-products were resolved on an ABI 3730 capillary sequencer (LifeTechnologies)
and the obtained sequence data was analyzed with Sequencher 5.1 software. The sequences were compared to the pig reference sequence and
deviations from the reference (variants) were searched for in the affected animals (Table 6). As the mode of inheritance is not defined,
both homozygous and heterozygous variants were considered. Subsequently, variants, which were present in the healthy controls, were
excluded. In AVP three exonic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were found in the cases, but all of them were also present in
homozygous state in control animals. In AVPR2 two exonic SNPs were found in four of the cases but all of them were present in healthy
control animals as well. In AQP2 no variants were found in the cases.Fig. 3Pedigree of five Duroc boars affected by polydipsia and polyuria.
All the cases (shown in black) can be traced back to a particular number of common ancestors. The closest common ancestor is shown in the
figure (labelled with an arrow). It’s a boar which is 3, 4, 4, 5 and 6 generations away respectivelyTable 5Primer used for sequencing of DNA
from Duroc boars affected by polydipsia and polyuria and from negative controlsGeneChrPosition exonsExonForward primerReverse primerLength
AVP
1736950915-369510781CATCTTGACCACACCACTGCTGTCCTAGTCCACCCGACA576 bp36952271-369524722CCGAGCGAATCAGTAGCTTTTCGGTCACGCAGCTCTCT546 bp36952626-369528263GCTGCCAGGAGGAGAACTACATCGCTTCCCCTACAGGATT628 bp
AVPR2
X142203295-1422033301CAGGAAGGGAAGCAGAGGACTACGCTCCTCTCGGGACT390 bp142203810-1422038592CAAACCTGGTCAGGCTAAGGCTGCCAGCAGAACACACATC496 bp142204155-1422050393aGCCTCTCCCCAGTAAGATGAGCTGAGAAGCAGCGAGAAG747 bp3bGTGGCTCTGTTCCAAGTGCTCGTAGATCCAGGGGTTGGTA848 bp142205173-1422056954GAAGGTGGGTGTGGCTGTACTGCTCAAGGCCAGCTC848 bp
AQP2
516095902-160955411AACTCCACCTCCAACTCACGATGTGTCTGGCTCCAGCATT683 bp16092242-160920782CAGGAAGAAGGCATCCGTAGCCCCAGGAGGAGGACTGT828 bp16091774-16091694316091033-160908214TTACATGGATGCGCCTTTGCTCAGGGCAGGGGATCTT497 bpTable
6Sequence variants detected in two candidate genes from Duroc boars suffering from polydipsia and polyuriaGeneChrPositiondbSNP
NCBI_ss#Genotypes casesGenotypes controlsref/refref/varvar/varref/refref/varvar/var AVP
1736952357A > G19664140182136952471 T > C1966414019321136952785 T > C19664140203211 AVPR2
X142204712A > C1966414021142142205642C > T196641402214911The positions of the variants are given based on the current assembly (SGSC
Sscrofa10.2/susScr3). All the variants are single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) whereas the first letter represents the reference
nucleotide and the second letter represents the variant (e.g. A > G means a nucleotide exchange from an adenine to a guanine). The SNPs were
submitted to dbSNP (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/) and the submitted SNP (ss) number is reported and will be publicly available with the dbSNP
Build 147 release. The genotypes of the cases are displayed separately from the genotypes of the control animals, whereas the number of
animals carrying a specific genotype is given. Ref/ref means homozygous for the reference allele, ref/var heterozygous and var/var
homozygous for the variant/SNP Pedigree of five Duroc boars affected by polydipsia and polyuria. All the cases (shown in black) can be
traced back to a particular number of common ancestors. The closest common ancestor is shown in the figure (labelled with an arrow). It’s a
boar which is 3, 4, 4, 5 and 6 generations away respectively Primer used for sequencing of DNA from Duroc boars affected by polydipsia and
polyuria and from negative controls Sequence variants detected in two candidate genes from Duroc boars suffering from polydipsia and
polyuria The positions of the variants are given based on the current assembly (SGSC Sscrofa10.2/susScr3). All the variants are single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) whereas the first letter represents the reference nucleotide and the second letter represents the variant
(e.g. A > G means a nucleotide exchange from an adenine to a guanine). The SNPs were submitted to dbSNP (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/) and the
submitted SNP (ss) number is reported and will be publicly available with the dbSNP Build 147 release. The genotypes of the cases are
displayed separately from the genotypes of the control animals, whereas the number of animals carrying a specific genotype is given. Ref/ref
means homozygous for the reference allele, ref/var heterozygous and var/var homozygous for the variant/SNP Clinical signs, findings of the
physical examination and results of further diagnostic methods confirmed the diagnosis of DI in two Duroc boars originating from a semen
collection centre. There are several forms of DI described, but in the present study it was not possible to classify the type of DI
accurately, as there are some limitations in diagnostics for pigs. With a clinical history characterized by polyuria and polydipsia in pigs
several differential diagnoses have to be kept in mind and each one has to be excluded from the list of differential diagnosis. Therefore,
clinical examination and further tests are essential and need to be performed sequentially. During the physical examination the urinary
bladder of both boars were extremely full and distended, but dehydration, which is often reported in DI , could not be observed. It is
noteworthy that in pigs there is no adequate method to measure the hydration status and therefore experimental studies in DI use diuretic
medication or fluid restricted pigs for evaluation. As a next step, analysis of the urine was performed and revealed a hyposthenuria with a
specific gravity of 1.001 in one boar and 1.002 in the other boar. The specific gravity in pigs, which is the lowest among animals, usually
is 1.020 on average and can range between 1.010 and 1.050 [22, 23]. No further abnormalities such as glucosuria or inflammatory signs were
detected. Several blood compounds are able to provoke dysfunction of the renal system, hence a complete blood count was conducted and showed
a slight chronic inflammation, which might have been caused by the pneumonia. As a further diagnostic approach a modified water deprivation
test was performed. The test is designed to determine, whether ADH is released in response to dehydration and if the kidneys are able to
respond normally to the hormone . The aim of the test is to achieve maximal ADH secretion and thereby higher concentrated urine. This
commonly occurs after a 3 to 5 % loss of body weight due to water loss, which makes it necessary to measure the body weight several times.
Additionally, emptying of the bladder with a catheter is required . Due to the characteristic anatomy of the urethra of male pigs,
transurethral catheterization of the bladder is impossible . The endpoint of the water deprivation test is a loss of body weight greater
than 5 % or a specific gravity of the urine higher than 1.030 . A more accurate measurement is the assessment of the urine’s osmolality .
Unfortunately, this was not feasible throughout the whole water deprivation test, because of logistical and financial reasons. The
osmolality of urine can also be approximated by multiplying the last two digits of the urine specific gravity by 36 . There was one single
measurement of urine’s osmolality of case #2, which was performed during the trial and revealed a result of 32.5 mOsm/Kg. Comparing the
measured value with the calculated urine osmolality of 36 mOsm/Kg, there was a good correlation, which can also be observed in other
species, e.g. in dogs. The pig is a good model for renal research. The ratio between urine and serum osmolality in healthy pigs and healthy
humans is 3.3 . In the literature, there are numerous different equations described to calculate serum osmolarity in humans. One group
reported an equation (Eq. 1) derived from results of an experiment in pigs, where concentrations are expressed in mEq/L . Equation
1:\documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$ \mathrm{Serum}\ \mathrm{osmolarity}\
\left(\mathrm{mEq}/\mathrm{l}\right) = 1.8177\ *\ \left\ \left(\mathrm{mEq}/\mathrm{L}\right) + \left\ \left(\mathrm{mEq}/\mathrm{L}\right)
+ \left\ \left(\mathrm{mEq}/\mathrm{L}\right) + 26.05 $$\end{document}SerumosmolaritymEq/l=1.8177*NamEq/L+UreamEq/L+GlucosemEq/L+26.05 A
baseline of 294.9 with a SD of ± 1.8 mOsm/Kg in 10–40 kg femal Yorkshire-Duroc crossbred pigs was reported . Furthermore, in fattening pigs
284.74 ± 5.73 mOsm/Kg was described. In order to get an indication for serum osmolarity in boars, additional three Duroc boars at the age of
8 month to 1.1 year from the semen collecting centre were tested. A reference range from 321 to 326 was measured. The calculated value of
serum osmolarity in case #2 was 290.9 mOsm/Kg and, thus, within the above mentioned reference values taken from the literature. In contrast,
the calculated value was significantly lower than those measured in the control boars. However, the result generally must be interpreted
with caution, because there is a significant bias by food and water intake , which can have an impact on the level of osmolarity. If we
compare the ratio of serum osmolarity with urine osmolality it is almost three times higher than the average value of healthy pigs. After
the water restriction test a therapeutic attempt was tried, as it is commonly performed with small animals and also with horses. The animals
are treated with desmopressin acetate (DDAVP), a synthetic analogue of ADH. There are several routes of administration available, but most
often the conjunctival route is chosen. Therefore, one to two drops are applied into the conjunctival sac of both eyes every 12 to 24 h [3,
29]. The eye drop method is a non-invasive, practical and effective way of hormone administration . An oral application of desmopressin is
possible, but the bioavailability is lower compared to the afore mentioned method [19, 31]. The duration of the effect of DDAVP varies from
eight to 24 h . Since no specific dosage regime was available for pigs, a treatment of the boar 2-3 times per day with 3–5 drops in the
conjunctival sac of one eye was proposed. Only a slight decrease of the urine specific gravity was observed. In small animals this result
would lead to diagnosis of primary NDI. However, the porcine vasopressin contains a lysine residue in position 8 (lysine-vasopressin), which
makes the pig quite different from other mammalian species, where vasopressin contains an arginine residue in position 8 (arginine-
vasopressin) . Therefore the porcine V2 receptor has less sensitivity to desmopressin than human V2 receptors. In the literature a two
hundred times lower affinity of desmopressin on porcine V2 receptor is described . Even in high doses desmopressin did not induce any
hematological response . The authors clinical interpretation is that desmopressin cannot be recommended for diagnostics or treatment in pigs
due to the implications mentioned above. Unfortunately, we performed both diagnostic approaches, therapeutic attempt and modified water
deprivation test, only in one boar, because it was only possible to keep one boar in our facilities, regarding to Swiss legislation. To
prove the efficiency for both tests in a larger number of pigs with DI, warrants further investigation. Another diagnostic tool for the
confirmation of the disease’s aetiology is the measurement of endogenous ADH in plasma, where in case of diseases osmotic and cardiovascular
homeostasis are disturbed . However, the reliability of assessments of plasma ADH levels is poor because the hormone is unstable, largely
attached to platelets, and rapidly cleared from plasma [34, 35]. Therefore, the level of a precursor of ADH, Copeptin, which is stable for
days, is usually measured in plasma samples . Test kits, specifically designed for pigs, are available for the purpose of clinical research,
but they are rarely used and in the presented case the authors could not find a laboratory offering the determination of Copeptin in swine
plasma. The genetic analysis revealed that all the candidate variants in the three DI candidate genes were obviously not associated with the
disease and therefore no genetic explanation of the phenotype was found by sequencing of these three genes. Pedigree analysis showed a large
number of common ancestors among the affected cases indicating inbreeding. But these shared ancestors are some generations ago which
decreases the likelihood of a common inherited simple recessive mutation. Nevertheless, a dominantly inherited mutation with a late onset of
clinical signs could also be the cause of the disease, as for example human CDI is caused by dominant mutations of AVP . A recessive
inheritance analogue to AQP2 mutations in humans with inbreeding loops further behind in the pedigree is possible as well as an X-linked
disease like NDI caused by AVPR2 mutations in humans . Even though, both types of mutations usually manifest in the first weeks after birth
in humans. As the phenotype in the boars was recognized later in life one can also hypothesize that a dominant mutation in one of these
three genes which is located in the upstream, intronic, or downstream regions affecting the expression level is causing the disease. The
used approach is only appropriate to detect variants in the coding region and therefore other more comprehensive methods like genome-wide-
association mapping in combination with sequencing of the genome of one case could be useful to map the responsible locus in the swine
genome and finally to find the causative mutation. This case report provides a description of a diagnostic approach to confirm DI in pigs.
The report also addresses the limitations and pitfalls while diagnosing DI due to the limited availability of different tests and methods
for pigs. To the author’s knowledge, this report is the first describing DI in Duroc boars. Severe polyuria and polydipsia as major clinical
signs indicated an inclusion of Diabetes insipidus in the differential diagnosis. Failure to differentiate polyuric syndromes from other
conditions may lead to an incorrect or inconclusive diagnosis of DI. Importantly, a response to ADH administration cannot be used as a
diagnostic approach in pigs, because the chemical structure of the product commonly used in humans, cats and dogs is not stimulating the V2
receptors in swine. The observed relationship of the affected animals suggest a possible genetic cause. Although coding mutations in three
DI candidate genes can be excluded a genetic background of the disease could not be ruled out and should be carefully investigated in future
using more comprehensive methods. Competing interests There are no competing interests of any of the authors that could inappropriately
influence or bias the content of the paper. Authors’ contributions AG performed the clinical examination, developed the diagnosis, designed
the treatment of the boars, summarized the results of the cases and drafted the manuscript. NW planned and performed the genetic analysis
and drafted parts of the manuscript. CG conducted the macroscopic examination and the histopathology. HN and CD supervised and coordinated
the project. All authors contributed to the development and the revisions of the manuscript and approved the final version. The authors
gratefully acknowledge Dr. Thierry Francey, Small Animal Clinic, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Berne, for his continuous support during
this study. The authors also thank the veterinarians from the boar stud for the provision of data.
