Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare mesenchymal malignancy. ASPS usually occurs most commonly in the deep soft tissues of the thigh
and buttock or the head and neck regions. ASPS that originate from the uterine corpus are even more rare, with only 10 previous cases
reported in the English literature. In our case, the alveolar features were completely lost and the tumour shows a solid, non-alveolar
pattern and the nuclei have marked variation in nuclear size, and multinucleation. The correct pathological diagnosis has been made by
immuno- histochemical and ultrastructural features, which rvealed overexpression of TFE3 and peculiar cytoplasmic crystalline inclusions. In
this paper, an additional case of primary ASPS of uterine corpus is reported with immunohistochemical, ultrastructural study and review of
literature in the effort to delineate its clinical and pathological features. In this unusual site, the diagnosis can be problematic because
ASPS can mimic other primary or metastatic uterine neoplasms. Thus, in this unusual presentation an essential diagnostic marker is the
nuclear over-expression of TFE3 as well as ultrastructural study, which reveals the presence of peculiar cytoplasmic crystalline inclusions.
Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare mesenchymal malignancy with distinctive histologic and ultrastructural appearance. ASPS was
first described in 1952 by Christopherson et al. as a neoplasm with of uncertain histogenesis whose cells were arranged in a pattern
mimicking the small air sacks (alveoli) of the lung . In fact, this neoplasm usually shows uniform, organoid nests of polygonal cells,
separated by fibrovascular septa and delicate capillary-sized vascular channels. A prominent cellular dyscohesion within the nests results
in a distinctive pseudo-alveolar pattern. Sometimes, the alveolar features can be completely lost and the tumour may show a solid, “non-
alveolar” pattern . Usually, the nuclei are round-to-polygonal and vesicular, with prominent nucleoli, but cells with marked variation in
nuclear size, nuclear-cytoplasmatic inclusions, and multinucleation have been reported . The cytoplasms are abundant granular and may
contain periodic acid-Schiff-(PAS) positive, diastase (D)-resistant crystalline structures, rhomboid or rod-like in shape . The first
ultrastructural analysis of ASPS, made by Shipkey et al. in 1964 and following studies confirmed the presence of distinctive cytoplasmic
crystals which typically were intermingled with dense granules . More recently, Ladanyi et al., by a combined ultrastructural and
immunohistochemistry study, have demonstrated that these crystals consist of aggregates of the monocarboxylate transporter protein MCT1 and
its cellular chaperone CD147 . Recent cytogenetic studies revealed that ASPSs are characterized by specific chromosomal translocation
der(17)t(X;17) (p11;q25) that fuses the transcription factor 3 (TFE3) gene at Xp11 to the ASPL gene at 17q25, producing an ASPL–TFE3 fusion
protein . This results in the aberrant and strong nuclear expression of TFE3 which is seen almost exclusively in tumours harbouring the TFE3
gene fusions, such as ASPSs and rare paediatric renal carcinomas . ASPS usually affects adolescents and young adults in the second and third
decades with slight female predominance . In adults, this malignancy occurs most commonly in the deep soft tissues of the thigh or buttock,
while in children and infants, the head and neck regions are often involved . However, many reports have demonstrated that ASPS can be
observed in unusual sites such as the mediastinum, stomach, breast, bone, and urinary bladder . This neoplasm has been reported also in the
female genital tract . As far as we are aware, only 10 cases of ASPS of uterine corpus have been previously reported [4, 5, 27–32]. In these
unusual sites, the diagnosis can be problematic because ASPS can mimic other primary or metastatic neoplasms. In this paper, an additional
case of primary ASPS of uterine corpus is reported with immunohistochemical, ultrastructural study and review of literature in the effort to
delineate its clinical and pathological features. A 66-year-old female was hospitalized for atypical vaginal bleeding and anaemia. On
gynecologic examination, the uterus was enlarged and the cervix was prolapsed. Transvaginal ultrasound identified a well-circumscribed,
intramural nodule measuring 5 cm in diameter, located in the uterine corpus. The patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy and
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Intraoperatively, no ascites or adhesions were seen surrounding the uterus, ovaries, and salpinges. No
enlarged pelvic lymph nodes were noted neither peritoneal lesions were found. Gross pathologic examination revealed thickening of the
cervical mucosa and an intramural, sharply circumscribed, round, firm, grey-white nodule with trabeculated cut surface located in the
endocervix. The uterine corpus was enlarged and deformed because of an intramural nodule, measuring 5 cm in diameter. On cut section, this
lesion was well circumscribed, soft, with irregular border, colour varying from yellow, brownish and grey and a large haemorrhagic zone
centrally located (Fig. 1). The ovaries and salpinges were macroscopically unremarkable.Fig. 1On cut sections, the tumour was well
circumscribed, soft, with irregular border and showed areas which varied from yellow, brownish and grey, with a central haemorrhagic area On
cut sections, the tumour was well circumscribed, soft, with irregular border and showed areas which varied from yellow, brownish and grey,
with a central haemorrhagic area Histologically, the cervix showed atrophic epithelium and an intramural leiomyoma. The nodule of the
uterine corpus was characterized by neoplastic cells arranged in an organoid pattern (Fig. 2a), with nests surrounded by a delicate
fibrovascular septa highlighted by PASD and anti-CD34 stains. Extensive degenerative changes, such as hyalinization, haemorrhage and
hemosiderin deposits were observed (Fig. 2b). Most cells had abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, distinct border and vesicular nuclei
with prominent nucleolus (Fig. 2a). Other cells were large, with clear vacuolated cytoplasms (Fig. 2c). In some areas, the organoid pattern
was lost and the tumour showed solid growth; in these areas, the cells were more spindled and showed nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromasia
and pseudo-inclusions and multinucleation (Fig. 2d). Necrosis and mitoses were absent.Fig. 2Histologically, the tumour showed nests of
neoplastic cells with abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, distinct borders and vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli (a
haematoxylin and eosin stain ×400). Extensive degenerative changes, such as hyalinization with haemorrhagic and hemosiderin deposits, were
observed (b haematoxylin and eosin stain ×200). Other cells were large with clear vacuolated cytoplasms (c haematoxylin and eosin stain
×400). In some areas, the organoid pattern was lost and the tumour showed solid growth, made spindle cells with nuclear, pleomorphism,
hyperchromasia, pseudo-inclusions and multinucleations (d haematoxylin and eosin stain ×200) Histologically, the tumour showed nests of
neoplastic cells with abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, distinct borders and vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli (a
haematoxylin and eosin stain ×400). Extensive degenerative changes, such as hyalinization with haemorrhagic and hemosiderin deposits, were
observed (b haematoxylin and eosin stain ×200). Other cells were large with clear vacuolated cytoplasms (c haematoxylin and eosin stain
×400). In some areas, the organoid pattern was lost and the tumour showed solid growth, made spindle cells with nuclear, pleomorphism,
hyperchromasia, pseudo-inclusions and multinucleations (d haematoxylin and eosin stain ×200) On immunohistochemical analysis, the neoplasm
showed focal immunoreactivity to muscle-specific actin, caldesmon and caldesmin. Ki 67 index was very low (Fig. 3a). Strong nuclear
positivity to TFE3 was observed in all neoplastic cells (Fig. 3b). Immunostains for CD 34, CD10, microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF),
myoglobin, S-100 protein, HMB-45, neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, chromogranin, cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA),
cyclin D1 and alpha-inhibin were negative. Electron microscopy (EM) examination revealed cytoplasmic crystal inclusions showing periodic
pattern of about 10 nm in channels resembling dilated sacs of endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 4).Fig. 3Ki 67 index was very low (a ×200). Strong
nuclear positivity to TFE3 was observed in all cells (b ×200)Fig. 4In an ultrastructural study, neoplastic cells had cytoplasmic crystalline
inclusions (arrows) showing unidirectional periodicity Ki 67 index was very low (a ×200). Strong nuclear positivity to TFE3 was observed in
all cells (b ×200) In an ultrastructural study, neoplastic cells had cytoplasmic crystalline inclusions (arrows) showing unidirectional
periodicity Because of immunohistochemical and ultrastructural features, such as focal immunoreactivity to muscle-specific markers (actin,
desmin, caldesmin), negativity to other makers, strong and diffuse nuclear positivity to TFE3 and the presence of cytoplasmic crystal
inclusions, the final pathologic diagnosis was primary uterine alveolar soft part sarcoma of uterine corpus. No images suggestive of other
primary or metastatic lesions were observed on abdominal ultrasound, chest X-ray, total computed tomography or bone scan. Seven months after
surgery, the patient was free of disease. In fact, when she was readmitted for further examination, no abnormalities were found in both
physical examination and imaging studies. ASPS is a rare malignant neoplasm, accounting for 0.5–1 % of all soft part sarcomas . ASPS that
originate from the uterine corpus is even more rare, with only 10 previous cases reported in the English literature [4, 5, 27–32]. The main
clinical and morphological features of 11 cases (including our present case) are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.Table 1R1: clinical features
of ASPS of the uterus corpusAuthors and yearsAgeClinical symptomsTherapyFollow-upGray et al. (1986) 43MetromenorrhagiaTotal hysterectomyNED
9 MoNolan et al. (1990) 14Menorrhagia and expulsion of a necrotic mass per vaginaHBSONED 80 MoGuillou et al. (1991) 40Abdominal pelvic pain,
intermenstrual bleedingTotal hysterectomyNED 48 MoBurch et al. (1994) 47Intermenstrual bleedingHBSONED12 Mo37HypermenorrheaTotal
hysterectomyNED 66 MoNielsen et al. (1995) 30MenometrorrhagiaTotal hysterectomyNED 66 MoRadig et al. (1998) 50Abnormal uterine
bleedingHBSONED 84 Mo36Intermenstrual spotting, dysmenorrhoeaHysterectomyNED 8 MoKasashima et al. (2007) 50Abnormal uterine bleedingHBSO,
lymphNED 38 MoZhang et al. (2012) 57Abnormal uterine bleedingHBSO, lymph chemNED 1 MoPresent case66Abnormal uterine bleedingHBSONED 7 Mo
ASPS alveolar soft part sarcoma, HBSO hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, NED not evidence of disease, Mo monthsTable
2Pathological findings of ASPS of the uterus corpusAuthors and yearsMacroscopic findingsMicroscopic findingsImmunohistochemical
findingsElectron microscopyGray et al. (1986) Uncapsulated, circumscribed intramyometrial nodule, 0.4 cmLarge cell, arranged in organoid
appearance separated by delicate fibrovascular stromaNDMembrane bound crystalline granule inclusions in the cytoplasmNolan and Gaffney
(1990) Mass of 7 cm, bulging into endometrial cavityLarge cells with granular and vacuolated cytoplasms, organoid arrangement, separated by
fibrovascular septae.PASDR crystalsNDIntracytoplasmic crystalline inclusionsGuillou et al. (1991) 3 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm well-circumscribed
intramyometrial noduleUncapsulated lesion pushing border delineated by endometrium, large cells with organoid arrangement, separated by
fibrovascular septae, granular cytoplasms with crystals. Areas with nuclear pleomorphismPOS Vim, focal POS HMB45, NKI/C3, patchy dot-like
cytokeratin lw POSNDBurch et al. (1994) 3-cm endometrial polypLarge cells with granular cytoplasm, crystals on PAS DNDIntracytoplasmic
crystalline inclusionsNielsen et al. (1995) 1-cm intramural noduleLarge cell, arranged in organoid appearance separated by delicate
fibrovascular stroma crystals on PAS DNDND3.5-cm submucosal noduleLarge cell, arranged in organoid appearance separated by delicate
fibrovascular stroma, crystals on PAS DNDNDRadig K et al. (1998) 3-cm well-circumscribed yellow-whitish, intramural nodulePseudoalveolar and
trabecular pattern, polygonal and round cells vesicular nuclei, with nucleoli, crystals on PAS DNEG for S100, Ck, EMA, POS
caldesIntracytoplasmic crystalline inclusions4.5-cm well-circumscribed, intramural nodulePseudoalveolar pattern, granularNDIntracytoplasmic
crystalline inclusions absentKasashima S et al. (2007) 1.9 × 1.9 × 1.0 cm greyish, endometrial exophytic noduleLarge cells with organoid
arrangement, separated by fibrovascular septae, granular cytoplasms with crystalsNuclear POS: TFE3, PGR, ER, CD10NDVesicular nuclei and
pleomorphic nuclei and multinucleated cells. Mitoses very rare. No M LymNEG: Vim, caldes, Sma, Myo, HMB45, S100, EMA, Chrom, Syn, Myoge,
MyoglZhang et al. (2012) 2.4 × 2.0 × 1.8 cm yellow-whitish exophytic tumour, sub-endometrium of the lower uterine segmentLarge cells with
organoid arrangement, separated by delicate fibrovascular septae, granular cytoplasms with crystalsM lymphNEG: Ae1/AE3, EMA, Sma, Des,
S-100, CD10, Synapt, ChromNDKi67: 5 % diffuse POS Nuclear TFE3Present case5-cm intramural nodule, well-circumscribed, with irregular border
, soft yellow, brownish and grey, with a large haemorrhagic zone centrally locatedSolid “non-organoid” pattern, abundant eosinophilic
granular cytoplasm, with distinct border, and vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleolusFocal POS to Sma, desm, Caldes and diffuse and strong
nuclear POS to TFE3 NEG: Ae1/AE3, EMA, Sma, Des, S-100, CD10, NSE, Synapt, Chrom, inh, MiTFIntracytoplasmic crystalline inclusionsAreas with
spindle elements with nuclear, pleomorphism, hyperchromasia, nuclear cytoplasmic pseudo-inclusions and multinucleationsDiffuse POS nuclear
TFE3 ASPS alveolar soft part sarcoma, Caldes caldesmin, Chrom chromogranin, CK cytokeratin, EMA epithelial membrane antigen, ER oestrogen
receptor, caldes caldesmon, Immu immunohistochemistry, inh alpha-inhibin, Lym lymph node, lw low weight, MLymph lymphonodal metastasis, MITF
microphthalmia transcription factor, Mo months, Myoge myogenin, Myogl myoglobin, ND not done, NSE neuron-specific enolase, PASDR periodic
acid-Schiff diastase resistant, PGR progesterone receptor, POS positivity, Sma muscle-specific actin, Synapt synaptophysin, TFE3
transcription factor 3, Vim vimentin R1: clinical features of ASPS of the uterus corpus ASPS alveolar soft part sarcoma, HBSO hysterectomy
with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, NED not evidence of disease, Mo months Pathological findings of ASPS of the uterus corpus ASPS
alveolar soft part sarcoma, Caldes caldesmin, Chrom chromogranin, CK cytokeratin, EMA epithelial membrane antigen, ER oestrogen receptor,
caldes caldesmon, Immu immunohistochemistry, inh alpha-inhibin, Lym lymph node, lw low weight, MLymph lymphonodal metastasis, MITF
microphthalmia transcription factor, Mo months, Myoge myogenin, Myogl myoglobin, ND not done, NSE neuron-specific enolase, PASDR periodic
acid-Schiff diastase resistant, PGR progesterone receptor, POS positivity, Sma muscle-specific actin, Synapt synaptophysin, TFE3
transcription factor 3, Vim vimentin The age at diagnosis ranged from 14 to 66 years (median, 43 years). Abnormal uterine bleeding was
present in all patients. The size of the neoplasm varied from 0.4 to 7 cm (median, 3 cm) in diameter. In the majority of cases, the neoplasm
was an intramural nodule. The diagnosis of ASPS in all cases was supported by histologic and EM examination, which revealed an alveolar
pattern and the presence of cytoplasmic crystalline inclusions (Table 2). Usually, the tumour nuclei were round-to-polygonal and vesicular,
with prominent nucleoli, but cells with marked variation in nuclear size, nuclear cytoplasmatic inclusions and multinucleation, with very
few mitoses have been observed in our case and in other ASPSs in the uterine corpus [4, 5] and extragenital sites . In our case, the
alveolar features were completely lost and the tumour show a solid, non-alveolar pattern and the nuclei have marked variation in nuclear
size, nuclear-cytoplasmatic inclusions and multinucleation. The correct pathological diagnosis has been made by immunohistochemical and
ultrastructural features, which revealed focal immunoreactivity to muscle-specific markers (actin, desmin, caldesmon), negativity to other
makers, strong and diffuse nuclear positivity to TFE3 and the presence of cytoplasmic crystal inclusions. Moreover, the lesion was
considered primary uterine alveolar soft part sarcoma because no images suggestive of other primary or metastatic lesions were observed on
abdominal ultrasound, chest X-ray, total computed tomography or bone scan. On the contrary, the review of literature revealed an
immunohistochemical profile not very consistent with variable staining using other markers such as vimentin, desmin, myoglobin, muscle-
specific actin, S-100 protein, HMB-45, neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, chromogranin, cytokeratin, EMA and NK1-C3 (melanoma-specific
antibody) (Table 2). Thus, in our case, nuclear over-expression of TFE3 can be considered as an essential diagnostic marker for a correct
pathological diagnosis. It has been demonstrated that aberrant and strong nuclear expression of TFE3 is seen exclusively in tumours which
contain the TFE3 gene fusions , such as ASPS and rare paediatric renal carcinomas . TFE3 immunoreactivity was first tested in the female
genital tract in a case of ASPS located in the uterine cervix by Roma et al. in 2005 . TFE3 immunoreactivity in cases of uterine corpus of
ASPSs was evaluated only in our case and in the examples reported by Kasashima et al. and by Zhang L et al. [5, 32] (Table 2). The presence
of crystalline inclusions on electron microscopy further supports the diagnosis of uterine ASPS. ASPS of the uterine corpus enters in the
differential diagnosis with other neoplasms presenting an admixture of spindle-to-epithelioid cells with eosinophilic-to-clear cytoplasm
such as epithelioid smooth muscle tumours, epithelioid endometrial stromal tumours, perivascular epithelioid cell tumours (PECOMAs), uterine
rhabdoid tumours, carcinomas, melanoma and malignant paraganglioma. These tumours characteristically do not show expression of TFE3 on
immunohistochemical analysis and have other peculiar morphologic and immunohistochemical features. Epithelioid smooth muscle tumours are
composed by mixtures of epithelioid, clear cell. A transition to typical smooth muscle cells in most instances confirms the smooth muscle
nature of these tumours and are diffuse immunoreactive for actin and desmin. Endometrial stromal tumours with a prominent component of
epithelioid cells and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm usually show areas with fusiform cells, characteristic arterioles and strong diffuse
cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for vimentin and for CD10 . PECOMAs can arise in the uterus and are characterized by varying amounts of spindle
and epithelioid cells with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, with immunoreactivity for melanocytic markers, most frequently HMB-45 .
Malignant rhabdoid tumour is a highly aggressive tumour in adults and rapidly fatal and was first reported to have been found in the uterus
in 1989 . Histologically, this rare neoplasm shows solid sheets of large cells with deep eosinophilic cytoplasm, eosinophilic hyaline
cytoplasmic inclusions, eccentric vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. On immunohistochemical analysis, neoplastic cells reveal
cytoplasmic staining for vimentin and keratins [38, 39]. Melanoma and carcinoma can be differentiated from ASPS because of greater cytologic
atypia, pleomorphism, higher mitotic activity and immunoreactivity, respectively, for epithelial makers and for melanoma-specific
antibodies. Malignant paraganglioma is characterized by polygonal to oval cells arranged in distinctive cell balls, called Zellballen, and
shows more pronounced cell pleomorphism and immunoreactivity for neuroendocrine markers, such as neuron-specific enolase, protein gene
product 9.5, synaptophysin and the presence of neurosecretory granules on EM examination . In extragenital sites, ASPS presents an indolent
clinical course with unpredictable prognosis. Metastases to the lungs, bone and brain are the main cause of death [41, 42]. Lesions with
size less than 5 cm in diameter seem to be correlated with a more favourable outcome . ASPS in the uterine corpus has a better prognosis
than ASPSs in the soft tissues and other cases located in the vagina. All patients with ASPS located in the uterine corpus were alive and
well at the time of the last follow-up (Table 1). In contrast, one of six patients with vaginal ASPS died as a result of the tumour.
Initially, this patient had a recurrence 4 months after local excision and external radiation therapy and then died of the disease with
pulmonary metastases 25 months later [23, 24]. Another patient with vaginal ASPS had a recurrent 1.5-cm mass, 4 months after the initial
diagnosis . The more favourable prognosis in ASPS located in the uterine corpus may be due to small tumour size, anatomical location or
relative short duration of follow-up. Indeed, in all patients, the ASPS of the uterine corpus, except for the present case and the case
reported by Nolan and Gaffney, measured less than 5 cm (Table 2). Only in the case reported by Zhang et al. was the pelvic and para-aortic
lymph node metastasis observed at diagnosis, but the duration of follow-up in this case was short (9 months) and it is not possible to
establish its outcome . An essential diagnostic marker in this unusual presentation of neoplasm is the nuclear over-expression of TFE3 as
well as ultrastructural study, which reveals the presence of peculiar cytoplasmic crystalline inclusions. Moreover, in our opinion, a larger
number of cases of ASPS in the female genital tract with longer follow-up and pathological findings including sizes should help to better
define the biological nature of ASPS in the uterine corpus. In addition, although lymph nodes metastasis was observed only in the case of
Zhang et al., surgical staging with complete pelvic lymph nodes sampling could be useful to evaluate therapy and prognosis of this rare
neoplasm. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. alveolar
soft part sarcoma caldesmon chromogranin cytokeratin electron microscopy epithelial membrane antigen oestrogen receptor desmin hysterectomy
with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy immunohistochemistry alpha-inhibin lymph node low weight lymphonodal metastasis microphthalmia
transcription factor months myogenin myoglobin not evidence of disease not done neuron-specific enolase periodic acid-Schiff diastase
resistant progesterone receptor positivity muscle-specific actin synaptophysin transcription factor 3 vimentin Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions GG and ES carried out the study design and writing. TD did the
electron microscopy study. EV participated in the literature search. GC performed the operation of the patient. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors wish to thank Mrs Emilia Corradini and Mrs Gabriella Becchi for the technical assistance.
