Posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) represents a special clinicoradiologic syndrome characterized by progressive visuospatial and
visuoperceptual deficits. PCA and corticobasal syndrome (CBS) may share similar pathogenetic mechanisms. We report the clinical,
neuropsychological, imaging, and genetic features of a patient with initial visual problems, who further developed other cognitive
impairments and asymmetric extrapyramidal signs fitting into the diagnosis of CBS. Genetic testing revealed homozygous for the T allele of
the rs5848 GRN variant. This study provided an evidence for CBS belonging to the clinical spectrum of GRN genetic variant and demonstrated
CBS may initially present with symptoms of PCA in rare cases. Letters to the Editor: Posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) is a neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by progressive visuospatial and visuoperceptual deficits . The dynamics of its progression and clinical outcome are
not well known. Pathological studies have shown that Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common underlying etiology of PCA. However, a
small number of cases are also reported with other degeneration diseases . The exact genetic basis of PCA remains unclear, however,
mutations have been reported in the prion protein gene (PRNP) , presenilin 1 and 2 genes (PSEN1 and PSEN2) , microtubule-associated protein
tau gene (MAPT) , and progranulin gene (GRN) , suggesting heterogeneity of its genetic mechanism. Here, we describe a case of a PCA patient
with initial visual problems, who developed further cognitive impairments and asymmetric extrapyramidal signs that fitted with a diagnosis
of corticobasal syndrome (CBS). The patient’s initial symptoms were discovered in early 2009 at the age of 52, as it was noted that he took
longer time to return home alone than before. He also began to complain of blurred vision, but it did not affect his daily life. Two years
later, he began to suffer from progressive spatial disorientation. He was unable to fetch objects with either arm by visual guidance. His
memory also began to decline and sometimes he spoke not fluently. In 2012, he exhibited problems in writing simple words, calculating and
discerning fingers. He walked more slowly and sometimes exhibited tremor and myoclonus of his upper limbs, especially his right side. In May
2013, he complained of deterioration and difficulty in tracking specific objects in his visual field. He also had difficulty in riding,
dressing himself, and distinguishing coats from pants. He urinated anywhere as he could not find the bathroom, and he even occasionally
defecated on himself. Structural brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a local hospital revealed cerebral atrophy, particularly in the
posterior cortex (Fig. 1a, b). He was diagnosed with AD. After 6 months, he stopped donepezil treatment since his symptoms got more
severe.Fig. 1The clinical materials of the case. a-b Axial sections, T1-weighted sequences of MRI 4 years after disease onset (at 56 years
of age) revealed cerebral atrophy, particularly in the posterior cortex. c-d One and a half years later, the secondary MRI revealed much
more extensive atrophy within the frontal and occipital-parietal lobes, and bilateral partial parietal lobe. e-f 18F-FDG-PET showed diffuse
bilateral hypometabolism in the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes, particularly in the parieto-occipital regions. g Bilateral
fundus examinations were normal. h Genetic testing showed a single nucleotide polymorphism rs5848 (c.*78C > T), located in the 3′-UTR of GRN
The clinical materials of the case. a-b Axial sections, T1-weighted sequences of MRI 4 years after disease onset (at 56 years of age)
revealed cerebral atrophy, particularly in the posterior cortex. c-d One and a half years later, the secondary MRI revealed much more
extensive atrophy within the frontal and occipital-parietal lobes, and bilateral partial parietal lobe. e-f 18F-FDG-PET showed diffuse
bilateral hypometabolism in the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes, particularly in the parieto-occipital regions. g Bilateral
fundus examinations were normal. h Genetic testing showed a single nucleotide polymorphism rs5848 (c.*78C > T), located in the 3′-UTR of GRN
Positive neurological system signs included reduced facial expression, increased muscle tone and bradykinesia especially on the right side
and a little resting tremor on his right side. His performance in neuropsychological evaluations (Table 1) suggested that he had problems in
visual spatial, memory, language, and motor functions. He had no significant past medical history and no family history of dementia.Table
1Neuropsychological profile of the patientTestsPatient’s score/Maximal scoreMini-mental State Examination (MMSE) scores6/30 Time and
location (orientation)1/10 Immediate recall1/3 Repetition1/1 Naming2/2 Executive function1/3Montreal Cognitive assessment Scale (MoCA)
ScoresUnfinished (noncooperation)Boston naming test (30 items)6/30Clock drawing test0/4Forward digit-span task4Backward digit-span
task2Plane copy0Three dimensional copy0Rey complex figure test0Trail making test AUnfinishedTrail making test BUnfinishedHamilton Anxiety
Scale (HAMA)-17 items25/68Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD)-17 items24/68Activities of Daily living (ADL) scale-14 items48/64Hachinski
Ischemic Scale (HIS)3/18 Neuropsychological profile of the patient Secondary MRI revealed marked cortical atrophy within the frontal and
occipito-parietal lobes, and partial atrophy in the bilateral parietal lobes (Fig. 1c, d). 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography (18F-FDG-PET) showed diffuse bilateral hypometabolism in the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes, particularly in
the occipito-parietal regions (Fig. 1e, f). Ophthalmology examination found that his fundus (Fig. 1g) and intraocular pressure were normal.
His visual evoked potential was nearly normal, while his visual field and visual acuity examinations were not completed because of
noncooperation. A laboratory blood screening test for reversible dementia was unremarkable. Lumber puncture showed normal cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) pressure, glucose, chlorine, cell number, and protein levels. Normal total-tau, phosphorylated-tau, and amyloid-β (Aβ) 1–42
levels were also reported in CSF. No pathogenic mutations in early-onset AD-associated genes (including APP, PS1, PS2, BACE1, and PRNP) were
found. The patient’s APOE genotype was E3/E3. However, testing for frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) -associated gene (GRN, CHMP2B,
FUS, MAPT, PSEN1, TARDBP and VCP) mutations revealed a T allele of rs5848, locating in the 3′-UTR of GRN (Fig. 1h). Posterior cortical
atrophy is a rare clinicoradiologic neurodegenerative syndrome, and two sets of clinical diagnostic criteria for PCA have been proposed [7,
8]. The core features of disease onset, progress forms, and main clinical manifestations are consistent, but do not illustrate its
underlying pathological, genetic, or biomarker standards. In the initial phase of our case, the symptoms were visual problems, specifically,
of disorientation and blurred vision. Over time he manifested additional symptoms including optic ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, right-left
disorientation, acalculia, dressing apraxia, and agraphia, fitting into the dorsal subtype of PCA. His first cerebral MRI revealed posterior
cortical atrophy, also supporting his initial clinical diagnosis. As the disease progressed, the patient developed further asymmetric
extrapyramidal signs and progressive global cognitive impairment, but without vertical ophthalmoplegia or apparent hallucinations. The
second MRI revealed much more extensive cerebral atrophy and FDG-PET confirmed hypometabolism of those cortical regions. Given the history,
clinical findings, and supporting examinations, a diagnosis of CBS was then made . Besides corticobasal degeneration, CBS can also be caused
by such as progressive supranuclear palsy, AD, Pick’s disease, FTLD with TDP-43 inclusions, mutations in GRN or MAPT, DLB, and CJD .
Considering current clinical criteria and various pathological etiologies for PCA and CBS, there is considerable overlap, meaning that some
patients may fulfill criteria for both syndromes, or develop from one syndrome to the other . Special biomarkers such as the CSF tau:Aβ
ratio may predict pathology in CBS patients . In our case, CSF analysis revealed normal tau and Aβ1-42 levels, which suggests low
probability of AD pathology. In addition, genetic tests identified no reported pathogenic genetic mutations for early-onset AD, and an APOE
E3/E3 genotype. FTLD-associated gene testing revealed a genetic variant, rs5848 (c.*78C > T) in the 3′-UTR of the GRN gene, which has been
reported as a risk factor for TDP-43-positive frontotemporal dementia and other neurodegenerative diseases such as AD. The GRN rs5848 TT
genotype is reported to improve microRNA binding efficiency to the 3′-UTR of GRN, leading to enhanced suppression of GRN translation and
reduced GRN expression . Tartaglia et al. reported a typical patient with sporadic CBS, who was homozygous for this GRN variant (rs5848),
and without mutations in MAPT or GRN genes. Recently, Caroppo et al., reported a visual/ventral variant in a PCA patient carrying a
heterozygous GRN mutation. Whether this PCA patient would develop other symptoms that meet the diagnosis of CBS, like our case, needs
longitudinal follow-up and final autopsy evidence. This study provides evidence for CBS belonging to the GRN genetic variant (rs5848)
clinical spectrum, and demonstrates that in rare cases, CBS may initially present with symptoms of PCA. Longitudinal follow-up is required
to ascertain the most likely etiology and determine the clinical-genetic-pathological mechanism of the T allele of the rs5848 polymorphism
in CBS diagnosis. Posterior cortical atrophy Alzheimer’s disease Dementia with Lewy bodies Prion protein gene Microtubule-associated protein
tau gene Progranulin gene Corticobasal syndrome Magnetic resonance imaging 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography Cerebrospinal
fluid Frontotemporal lobar degeneration Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions Liu Ping and Luo Benyan have carried out the drafting of the manuscript. Peng Guoping is responsible for collecting the
clinical materials of the case and supervising all the data. He Fangping has carried out the preparation of the CSF and DNA specimens for
further analysis. All authors contributed equally in the case study, data analysis and have approved the final manuscript. The authors wish
to thank the patients for participating in this study. This work was supported by the General Project Plan of Zhejiang Medical Technology
(No. 2014RCA007) and the Traditional Chinese Medicine Science and Technology Plan of Zhejiang Province (No.2015ZA048, No.2015ZQ023),
respectively.
