Rebiopsy is highly recommended to identify the mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in advanced lung cancer. Recent advances in
multiplex genotyping based on circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) provide a strong and non-invasive alternative for detection of the resistance
mechanism. Here we report a multiple metastatic NSCLC patient who was detected to have pure EGFR 19 exon deletion (negative for EML4-ALK and
ROS1 in both IHC-based and sequencing assay) in the primary lesion and responded to first-line and second-line EGFR-TKI treatments
(erlotinib then HY-15772). At 8 months, most lesions remained well controlled except for the liver metastases which presented dramatic
progression. Considering the high risk of bleeding in rebiopsy of hepatic lesions, we conducted a multiplex genomic profiling with ctDNA.
Results reported coexistence of EGFR mutation and EML4-ALK gene translocation in plasma which heavily indicated that ALK was the primary
reason for progression of the liver lesions. This deduction was supported by the repeated response to ALK inhibitors (crizotinib then
AP26113) of the hepatic metastases. This is the first report of the existence of ALK rearrangement in metastatic lesions in an EGFR mutated
patient. It highlighted the feasibility and advantages of using ctDNA multiplex genotyping in identifying the heterogeneity across lesions
and the resistance mechanism of targeted treatments. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12885-016-2088-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Advances in geno-typing have changed the clinical practice of treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), especially non-squamous types where driver mutations, e.g. epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations and echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (EML4-ALK) translocation are commonly present.
Agents that target EGFR activating mutations (gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib, etc.) or ALK rearrangement (crizotinib, etc.) derive
significantly greater benefits than cytotoxic chemotherapy in patients who harbor these gene alterations, which is consistently proved by
extensive large-scale randomized controlled trials [1, 2]. In order to deliver an appropriate first-line treatment regimen, detection of
EGFR mutation and ALK rearrangement are recommended as routine genetic profiling for non-squamous NSCLC or non-smoking populations . In
recent years, some selective inhibitors that can overcome the resistance to first generation inhibitors of these driver alterations have
also been developed, e.g., AZD9291 and CO-1686, some more effective inhibitors against both EGFR sensitizing and resistance T790M mutations
; or ceretinib, aletinib and AP26113, the agents that are effective for both ALK fusion and some secondary gatekeeper mutations . Direct
sequencing and amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS)-PCR are the common testing methods for EGFR mutations. FISH, RT-PCR and
Ventana IHC are all currently accepted methods for detection of ALK rearrangement. In recent years, the development and advances in high
throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) have allowed the simultaneous profiling of alterations in multiple genes . Circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) is released or excreted by tumour cells and circulates in the blood of a cancer patient; analysis of the fraction of mutant-alleles
from ctDNA compared to normal-alleles from the patients’ normal genome provides opportunities for minimally-invasive cancer diagnosis and
tumor monitoring . Detection with ctDNA, which originates from all potential lesions, could overcome the disadvantages of single site biopsy
given that the intra-tumoral and inter-lesional heterogeneity is common [6, 8]. Enrichment of plasma ctDNA and incorporation with the next
generation deep sequencing techniques allow us to simultaneously detect the gene alterations of interest, e.g. EGFR/BRAF/HER2 mutations,
ALK/ROS1/RET rearrangements, MET amplification, etc. in NSCLC, especially when it is difficult to obtain sufficient tissue samples. EGFR
mutations and ALK rearrangement are generally considered to be mutually exclusive. However, some recent surveys and case reports showed co-
existence of the two alterations within the same lesion [9, 10]. Here, we report an advanced NSCLC case with EGFR exon 19 deletion who
experienced single-site progression in the liver after primary response to EGFR-TKI treatments and showed good response when adding
crizotinib after the detection of ALK rearrangement signal through ctDNA. This special case highlights the feasibility and necessity of
using ctDNA multiplex genomic profiling as an alternative approach in molecular diagnosis of NSCLC or in the exploration of the underlying
mechanism in resistance to targeted therapies. Moreover, it encourages us to re-evaluate the heterogeneity across lesions of metastatic
NSCLC. A 46-year-old woman with stage IVb lung adenocarcinoma of the left upper lobe and extensive metastases (mediastinal lymph nodes,
bilateral lung, liver, brain, multiple vertebrae, pelvis, adrenal glands, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, etc.) was confirmed to harbor EGFR 19
exon deletion by ARMS-PCR. She was negative for EML4-ALK and ROS1 by ventana IHC staining. Evaluation after 1 month and 3 months of
erlotinib 150 mg Qd treatment showed good partial response across all lesions. However, the patient presented with severe shortness of
breath after 4 months. CT scan showed rapid progression of the distributed pulmonary and hepatic lesions. Based on the imaging features and
clinical symptoms, it was initially difficult to differentiate whether the patient had interstitial pneumonia due to erlotinib, or
lymphangitis carcinomatosa. Thus, we firstly withdrew erlotinib and delivered methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg qd * 5 days).
However, no improvement was observed, which lead us to the diagnosis of lymphangitis carcinomatosa due to disease progression. Pemetrexed
0.8 g plus bevacizumab 300 mg (the tumor board decided to use a platinum-free regimen due to low tolerance to platinum of this patient, ECOG
performance score 2–3), was then administered, but the lesions continued to grow rapidly. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation was
applied when the patient experienced type I respiratory failure. The patient took HY-15772, an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) that
was known for AZD9291, 100 mg qd on her own volition. She recovered from hyoxemia gradually and CT review showed tumor remission at 1 week
after starting HY-15772 API. The patient continued to take HY-15772 API for 2 months. CT-scan showed that all lesions were controlled except
for the liver metastases in the left lobe which underwent dramatic bulky progression. Multidisciplinary consultation suggested that a needle
biopsy of the liver lesions was not preferable due to the high risk of procedure-related bleeding. Thus, we decided to obtain peripheral
blood for ctDNA multiplex genotyping analysis using the capture probe baits sequencing platform (methods and gene list were provided in
Additional file 1). Meanwhile, a dose of gemcitabine chemotherapy 1.4 g on day 1 and day 8 was administered. During the intermission, the
ctDNA analysis reported the existence of both EGFR 19 exon L747S non-shifting deletion (abundance 48.5 %) and EML4-ALK rearrangement
(abundance 10.09 %) in the plasma (No other druggable alteration was found especially in domains of MET). Upon the second cycle the
gemcitabine chemotherapy, the patient complained of an obvious sensation of mass in the upper abdomen and the inability to keep food or
drink down. We suggested the patient add crizotinib and continue HY-15772 API. After 5 days of additional crizotinib treatment, the patient
was able to drink and eat and had the sensation of mass shrinkage. CT scan after 1 month reavealed significant remission of the lesions in
the left lobe of the liver (plasma ALK abundance decreased to 2.79 %). After 2 months of crizotinib, liver metastases especially those in
the left lobe again progressed, which was manifested as abdominal distention and edema of bilareal lower extremity (plasma ALK abundance
increased to 14.59 %). The patient switched the ALK inhibitor to AP26113 API at a dose of 180 mg Qd on her own volition and quickly regained
good remission of the hepatic lesions (plasma ALK abundance decreased to 0.00 %). In addition, plasma ALK fusion was not detected. Figure 1
illustrated the change of the image presentation and treatments. Upon submission of this report, the patient is still receiving a
combination treatment of HY-15772 and AP26113 API without any signs of disease worsening. Re-analysis of the biopsy tissue from the primary
lesion through the same multiplex genomic platform showed pure EGFR exon 19 deletion without any signal for EML4-ALK fusion. In addition,
repeated analyses indicated the presence of TP53 Y236D mutations in 7 exon with more than 50 % abundance. Figure 1 illustrated the flow of
treatments and image evaluation.Fig. 1Changes in image during treatments. API, active pharmaceutical ingredient Changes in image during
treatments. API, active pharmaceutical ingredient The current recommendation for management of single-site regional progression in
resistance to EGFR-TKIs is to perform localized therapies and rebiopsy when available . In this case, the progressed liver metastases were
large, bulky, and scattered. Radiotherapy or radiofrequency ablation was not an appropriate option. Metastatic hepatic lesions were supplied
by portal vein system rather than hepatic artery system. Thus, transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) might not derive significant
benefits. On the other hand, this case progressed dramatically after showing resistance to EGFR-TKIs. In this case, switching to
chemotherapy is suggested according to what IMPRESS trial indicated . Considering the previous evidence of the patients’ insensitivity to
pemetrexed, we decided to use gemcitabine single agent chemotherapy. Meanwhile, we continued the use of HY-15772 API since all extra-hepatic
lesions remained stable or even undetectable in the images, which suggested these lesions remained sensitive to HY-15772 API. Rebiopsy was
another issue worth clarifying. In this case, as the entire left lobe of the liver was occupied by metastatic lesions that were loosened in
structure, multidisciplinary consultation opinions suggested that conducting a fine-needle biopsy would be dangerous due to the high risk of
bleeding. Recent advances in non-invasive rebiopsy approaches such as multiplex genomic profiling of ctDNA provided us an alternative . We
decided to obtain peripheral blood from this patient to perform a NSCLC-related multiplex genotyping, in order to clarify the resistance
mechanism. Surprisingly, in addition to the 19del EGFR mutation that was previously discovered in the primary lesion, EML4-ALK fusion with
relatively high abundance in plasma was detected. Given that the extra-hepatic lesions were all under control, indicating their lasting
response to HY-15772 API, we added Crizotinib, the only approved agent to inhibit ALK-driving tumors, to the regimen without withdrawing the
EGFR suppressor. Previous reports suggested no significant superimposed toxicity in dual treatment with EGFR and ALK inhibitors . In this
case, the patient presented rapid relief without any grade III adverse events. Undoutedly, the timely addition of ALK inhibitors salvaged
the patient as previous gemcitabine showed no efficacy. Though some previous studies reported co-existence of EGFR and ALK in the same
lesions, this is the first report showing ALK rearragement in distant metastatic lesions in a patient potentially harboring pure EGFR
mutations in the primary lesion. Since rebiopsy for the liver metastases in the left lobe was not an option in this case, we had no direct
evidence that the liver progression was driven by ALK fusion. However, the great abundance of EML4-ALK fusion signals in the plasma upon
disease progression and the significant response after adding crizotinib (as well as the AP26113 API after resistance to crizotinib)
strongly supported the existence of ALK fusion in the growing liver metastases. In addition, it was not likely that the primary lesion
harbored concurrent EGFR mutation and ALK fusion because both routine ARMS and NGS re-analysis showed that no ALK fusion was detected and
the pulmonary lesions were all in good control by HY-15772 API when the hepatic metastases progressed. Such heterogeneity might be more
common than we have previously acknowledged, and might have a great impact on treatment strategy. In the past, we could only detect genetic
alterations with site by site tissue samples. It was too difficult to obtain tissues from all lesions; multiplex genotyping with ctDNA might
help address this issue. Thus, with the current technology, we should reevaluate the heterogeneity across different lesions and their
incidence. Of course, the sensitivity of ctDNA examination and the substantial validation require further efforts. We cannot determine
whether the ALK fusion was inherent or if it was an evolvement after treatment. One possibility is the clonal selection mechanism, EML4-ALK
fusion emerged when EGFR mutations were suppressed. However, in both the treatment with erlotinib and subsequent HY-15772 API, the hepatic
lesions showed good response to these EGFR-TKIs, which suggested no or minimal ALK fusion at that point. But some reports have also revealed
responsiveness to EGFR-TKIs in patients with ALK fusion or dual alterations . Another potential reason is the inducement or de novo
activation of EML4-ALK fusion after EGFR-TKI treatments since repeated analyses showed consistent high abundance (over 50 %) of TP53
mutation which heavily indicated to the presence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) phenomena . Genome instability might increase the risk for
inducing other driver gene altrations. Further studies on the mechanism is warranted. In conclusion, this is the first report of the
existence of ALK rearrangement in metastatic lesions in an EGFR mutated patient. It highlighted the feasibility and advantages of using
ctDNA multiplex genotyping in identifying the resistance mechanism of targeted treatments. Further well designed studies on its true
effectiveness and criteria for elegible patient selection are warranted. In addition, ctDNA multiplex genotyping could benifit us in
studying the heterogeneity across lesions of lung cancer. Any additional supporting data involving details of clinical and genetic analysis
can be found in the electronic medical record system of the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University and are available upon
request from the corresponding author. Additional file 1: Platform and Gene-list for the Multiplex Genotyping of Circulating Tumor DNA. (DOC
45 kb) Platform and Gene-list for the Multiplex Genotyping of Circulating Tumor DNA. (DOC 45 kb) Epidermal growth factor receptor Echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase Immunohistochemistry Tyrosine kinase inhibitor Co-first authors are Wenhua
Liang, Qihua He and Ying Chen Competing interest All authors declare no conflict of interests. Authors’ contribution LWH, HQH, CY, ZCC and
HJX desgined the study and collected all clinical data, participated in the interpretation of data and drafted the manuscript. CSK carried
out the sequencing and bioinformatical analysis. YWQ, WW and PGL participated in acquisition and interpretation of data. All authors have
read and approved the manuscript of this case report. We thank Dan Zhou, Fang Luo, Haifang Zheng in Burning Rock Biotechnology Co. Ltd.,
Guangzhou, China for providing sequencing and bioinformatics support, and thank Lindsey Hamblin for language suggestions. This case report
has been approved by the ethics committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University. 1. Guangdong Doctoral Launching
Program, Grant No. 2014A030310460; 2. Doctoral Launching Program of Guangzhou Medical University, Grant No. 2014C27; 3. Guangzhou Health and
Medical Collaborative Innovative Major Special Projects, Grant No. 201400000001–2. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal.
