Competing Interests: There are no conflicts or competing interests to declare relevant to this work. MDP and MGS are supported through
research grants from Cystic Fibrosis Canada and Gilead. MDP, HRR have performed advisory board duties for Gilead, Novartis, Roche and
Vertex. This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. Conceived and designed the
experiments: AH SM MDP MGS. Performed the experiments: AH SP SM GC LR SD. Analyzed the data: AH MDP HRR MGS. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: AH LR SP SM. Wrote the paper: AH MDP MGS. Contributed to both projects' inception and manuscript
development: DGS. Cystic fibrosis (CF) airways are colonized by a polymicrobial community of organisms, termed the CF microbiota. We sought
to define the microbial constituents of the home environment of individuals with CF and determine if it may serve as a latent reservoir for
infection. Six patients with newly identified CF pathogens were included. An investigator collected repeat sputum and multiple environmental
samples from their homes. Bacteria were cultured under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Morphologically distinct colonies were
selected, purified and identified to the genus and species level through 16S rRNA gene sequencing. When concordant organisms were identified
in sputum and environment, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed to determine relatedness. Culture-independent bacterial
profiling of each sample was carried out by Illumina sequencing of the V3 region of the 16s RNA gene. New respiratory pathogens prompting
investigation included: Mycobacterium abscessus(2), Stenotrophomonas maltophilia(3), Pseudomonas aeruginosa(3), Pseudomonas fluorescens(1),
Nocardia spp.(1), and Achromobacter xylosoxidans(1). A median 25 organisms/patient were cultured from sputum. A median 125 organisms/home
were cultured from environmental sites. Several organisms commonly found in the CF lung microbiome were identified within the home
environments of these patients. Concordant species included members of the following genera: Brevibacterium(1), Microbacterium(1),
Staphylococcus(3), Stenotrophomonas(2), Streptococcus(2), Sphingomonas(1), and Pseudomonas(4). PFGE confirmed related strains (one episode
each of Sphinogomonas and P. aeruginosa) from the environment and airways were identified in two patients. Culture-independent assessment
confirmed that many organisms were not identified using culture-dependent techniques. Members of the CF microbiota can be found as
constituents of the home environment in individuals with CF. While the majority of isolates from the home environment were not genetically
related to those isolated from the lower airways of individuals with CF suggesting alternate sources of infection were more common, a few
genetically related isolates were indeed identified. As such, the home environment may rarely serve as either the source of infection or a
persistent reservoir for re-infection after clearance. All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information files. CF has
traditionally been viewed as a disease of limited pathogens. Classical pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) and Haemophilus influenzae, have been well characterized . Increasingly these are being supplemented with
“emerging organisms” such as Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Achromobacter spp, and nontuberculous mycobacteria . Many of these organisms have
been found to develop chronic infection and result in an accelerated clinical decline . However, due to the increasing use of high
throughput culture-independent molecular techniques, scientist have identified a diverse number of “newly appreciated” organisms infecting
the CF lower airways . Many of these organisms are thought to effect clinical outcomes either through direct or indirect pathogenic
potential . The diversity of the organisms colonizing and infecting the lower airways is termed the CF lung microbiota . Where the
constituents of the lung microbiome are derived is relatively unknown. For certain pathogens such as P. aeruginosa and Achromobacter
xylosoxidans they are ubiquitously distributed in natural environments (water, soil, decaying matter) and their infrequent role as human
pathogens (being opportunistic), led to the presumption that most patients acquired these infections from environmental reservoirs . Indeed,
in CF patients with newly identified lower airways infection with P. aeruginosa, a home environmental reservoir with a genotypically
identical strain could be identified in 18% of patients, most frequently identified in the bathroom . In addition, shared strains of
organisms such as P. aeruginosa and S. aureus in unrelated patients have led researchers to identify that limited transmission amongst
patients is possible if adequate infection controls are not in place . A critical innovation within CF care has been the recognition that
chronic infection can be terminated thereby potentially avoiding the resultant clinical sequelae (termed “eradication”) . Indeed, with the
early recognition and treatment of new infections many new pathogens can be eradicated. Unfortunately, success is not always possible and
some patients will fail antibacterial therapy, and others will be re-infected . This is possibly due to repeated exposures from a persistent
latent reservoir that has not been eliminated. The goals of our research were to define the microbiota of the home environment of
individuals with CF and to determine if the microbiota of their home environment shares microbial constituents with the lower airways. In CF
patients who acquire “new” infection, it is possible that the source of these “new” infections exists within their homes. If so, these
sources may potentially serve as a persistent latent reservoir for re-infection, even after successful eradication therapies. CF patients
with new bacterial infections identified from sputum analysis collected during routine quarterly appointments at the Southern Alberta Adult
CF clinic were approached for inclusion. If the patient consented, an investigator organized an appointment to sample the patient’s home
within two weeks of the original sputum sample being collected. During the visit, the investigator would, using aseptic techniques, sample
multiple sites in the patients homes including; showerheads, bathroom/kitchen sink faucets and drains, humidifiers, clothes washers, as well
as CF specific equipment including airway clearance devices, compressors, and nebulizers, as CF pathogens have been previously found to
exist in such niches and where applicable recreational drug equipment (not medically sanctioned) was similarly sampled . An average of 6–8
sites were sampled within the homes of each patient using a COPAN eSwab (Thermo Scientific) anaerobic transport media. A repeat sputum
sample was collected simultaneously in sterile containers and transported to the research laboratory within one hour using GasPak anaerobic
transport systems (BD Diagnostics) (<0.01%,O2, 10% CO2). Ethics for this study was approved by the University of Calgary Conjoint Health
Research Ethics Board (CHREB 14–2462) and each patient provided written informed consent. To be included patients had to meet the
established definition of CF . Stage of lung disease was defined based on spirometery as measured by the forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1); advanced <40%, moderate 40–70%, mild 70–90%, and very mild >90% predicted. Chronically colonizing pathogens were defined
using previously described definitions . If organisms were present in ≥50% of a minimum of four sputum cultures collected from patient in
the preceding year they were consider chronically infected. Organisms deemed newly infecting, thereby prompting investigation, were defined
in individuals who had not previously grown the same organism. Within one hour of collection, traditional microbiological protocols were
used to cultivate organisms. Sputum was physically sheared, vortexed and 100 μL was serially diluted from 10−1 to 10−5 in Brain Heart
Infusion (BHI) broth (Difco) in an anaerobic chamber (5% CO2, 5% H2, balanced N2). Similarly, environmental swabs collected in Amies
transport media were serial diluted in BHI broth. Aliquots of 100 μL of the 10−2 and 10−4 serial dilutions of the environmental, and 10−3
and 10−5 dilutions of the sputum were plated on differentially selective media types. Samples were plated on a range of general and semi-
selective medias including; Fastidious Anaerobe Agar (FAA), Chocolate (CHOC) (Difco), Columbia Blood Agar (CBA) (Difco) with 5% defibrinated
sheep blood (Materials Bio Labs), and incubated for seven days anaerobically at 37°C. Samples were similarly plated on Trypticase Soy agar
(TSY) (Difco), Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) and Colistin supplemented BHI (BHI Co) (Difco), Columbia Naladixic Acid (CNA) (Difco), Mannitol
Salt Agar (MSA) (Difico), Pseudomonas Isolation Agar (PIA) (Difco), McKay Agar, and MacConkey (MAC) (Difico) and grown aerobically with 5%
CO2 at 37°C and incubated for 48 hrs. For the two patients where M. abscessus was identified, an additional culturing step on Middlebrook
7H11j solid medium at 30°C for 12 weeks was performed . Unique isolates were selected for based on differences in colony morphologies and
purified in triplicate, assigned a study ID and stored in 10% Skim milk (Difico) at -80°C for later assessment. Cells from uniquely
identified isolates were grown under appropriate conditions for at least 24 hours, and then re-suspended in 200 μL of sterile water and
boiled for 20 min. PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA gene was carried out using the boil preparation from the target isolate (2 μL of the
supernatant was used as template for PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA gene) . The oligonucleotide primers used, 8F and 926R, were
previously described by Sibley et al., . Samples were sent for Sanger sequencing to Macrogen (Seoul, Korea). Taxonomic assignment of
cultured organisms was achieved using a combination of databases including, NCBI BLAST, Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) classifier, and
Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD) . If match ID was ≥ 97% organisms were identified to the species level . Organisms with sequence
identity >95% but <97% to known or well characterized 16S rRNA sequences were resolved to the genus level, 90–95% to the family level,
85–90% to the order level, 80–85% to the class level, and 77–80% to the level of phyla . Where concordant positive cultures for organisms
within the home environment and sputum were identified, bacterial strain typing was performed using pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).
Strains were incubated from frozen stocks onto TSY agar and cultured at 37°C for 24 hours. PFGE protocols were performed as per Parkins et
al., and Workentine et al. ,. Cell suspensions were made in a cell suspension buffer (CSB) (1M NaCl, 10mM Tris-HCl, pH7.6). Next PFGE plugs
were made by adding equal volume of 1% (w/v) SeaKem Gold Agarose in TE1 buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, 1mM EDTA, pH 7.6) to 150uL of CSB in a plug
mold (BioRad). Plugs were left to solidify in cast at room temperature (RT) for 15 minutes and then incubate at 37°C for 4 hours in a tube
containing 1mL of cell lysis buffer (CLB) (1M NaCl, 100mM EDTA[pH 7.5],0.5% Brij-58, 0.5% Sarcosyl, 0.2%Deoxycholate, 6mM Tris-HCL[pH 7.6],
l mg/mL lysozyme powder, 20ug/mL RNase A). Next plugs were transferred to a tube containing 1 mL ESP solution (0.5M EDTA [pH 9], 1%
sarcosyl, 70 μg/mL proteinase K) and incubated in a water bath at 50°C overnight. Plugs were then washed 6 times using TE0.1 buffer (T10 mM
Tris-HCl, 0.1mM EDTA, pH 7.6) and stored in the TE0.1 buffer at 4°C. This was followed by restriction digestion of the isolates. Plugs were
rinsed with 1X reaction buffer (NEBuffer Cutsmart) for 15 min at RT, then digested with specific restriction enzymes (New England Biolabs)
for 4 hours at 37°C. Different restriction enzymes were used for the various organisms being studied based on a review of previously
published work with few modifications . Assessment of strain relatedness was performed using the CHEF Mapper system (BioRad). Lambda ladder
PFG Marker (New England Biolabs) was used as a standard. Strains that had banding patterns that were ≥80% identical were considered related,
conforming to the Tenover criteria, where isolates with up to 3 band differences are still considered related. PFGE profiles were compared
using BioNumerics, version 7.0 (Applied Maths, Austin, TX) . PFGE banding profiles were compared using the Dice coefficient, allowing for 2%
tolerance in band matching. Microbial community profiling of environmental and sputum samples was conducted as previously described In
brief, 300 μL of sputum sample was suspended in 800 μL of 200 mM NaPO4, 100 μL of guanidine thiocyanate–ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid–Sarkosyl. Similarly for samples collected from environmental reservoirs a COPAN eSwab containing 1 mL of liquid amies solution, was
used to collect these samples. These samples were rigorously vortexed and 300 μL of this solution was suspended in 800 μL of 200 mM NaPO4,
100 μL of guanidine thiocyanate–ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid–Sarkosyl. The solutions were then homogenized using 0.1-mm zirconia/silica
beads (BioSpec Products Inc.).Enzymatic lysis was performed in two steps. Firstly, 50 μL lysozyme (100 mg/mL), 50 μL mutanolysin (10 U/ μL),
10 μL RNase A (10 mg/ml), was added to each sample followed by an incubation at 37°C for 1.5 hours. In the second lysis step 25 μL 25%
sodium dodecyl sulfate, 25 μL proteinase K, and 62.5 μL 5 M NaCl was added to each sample followed by an incubation at 65°C for 1.5 hours.
Samples were then pelleted via centrifugation at 12 000 × rpm. Next 900 μL of the supernatant was transferred to a tube containing 900 μL
phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 10 min. The aqueous solution was transferred to a tube containing
200 μL of DNA binding buffer (Zymo). The solution was then transferred to a DNA column (Zymo), washed, and DNA eluted using ultra pure H2O.
Next, amplification of the V3 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was carried out using reverse and forward barcoded primers using the
Illumina MiSeq technology at the McMaster Genome Facility (Hamilton, ON) . Sequencing reads were analyzed using custom Perl scripts .
Sequences with low quality reads were trimmed using Cutadapt . Next, PANDAseq was used to assemble paired-end reads . Operational taxonomic
units (OTUs) were picked using AbundantOTU1 for OTUs with >97% identity . The RDP classifier was used to assign taxonomy against the
Greengenes reference database . Next, analysis was carried out using QIIME and Phyloseq R package . A total of five samples with <1500
reads/sample were considered low quality and were excluded from the study. As per the a priori defined study cap, a total of six patients
with CF and new lower airways infection were enrolled. Patient demographics are detailed in Table 1. Sputum and environmental samples were
collected from moist sites in patient’s homes including kitchen/bathroom sink faucets and drains, showerheads, outside faucets, respiratory
care equipment, humidifiers and any relevant recreational drug equipment (Table 2). The total number of cultured, morphologically distinct
individual bacterial isolates collected from the home environment of each of the six patients using Sanger sequencing ranged from 64–168
(Table 2). By far, sink faucets and drains were the sites with the greatest burden of different microorganisms found in the home environment
for all six patients ranging from (53–85%) of the morphologically distinct organisms found in each home (Table 2). Humidifiers were less
likely to be contaminated with cultured bacterial organisms compared to other environmental sites, with only (4–5%) of organisms collected
coming from that particular sample type. The percentage of organisms found in showerheads varied from patient-to-patient ranging from 1–30%
of environmental organisms (Table 2). Between 8 and 32 macroscopically differentiable organisms were identified in each of the six sputum
samples (Table 2). Multiple concordant organisms were found to exist in both home and sputum samples (Fig 1 and Table 3). Legend shows a
color representation of the taxonomic identification at the various taxonomic ranks from Sanger sequencing of the 16S rRNA DNA of the
organisms. Organisms that were cultured in ≥ 6% of the total cultured organisms across all patients are included. MSSA = Methicillin
sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, HI = Haemophilus influenzae, PA = Pseudomonas aeruginosa, NC = Nocardia cyriacigeorgica, MA = Mycobacterium
abscessus, SM = Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, AX = Achromobacter xylosoxidans, PF = Pseudomonas fluorescens, M = male, F = Female (*)
Represents various sites of sink faucets and drains throughout the homes of patients. N/A indicates site was not sampled for particular
patient. (n) = total number of bacteria organisms cultured from home environment. (^) Recreational drug equipment represented a hashish
pipe. A total of 122 isolates were screened to determine if isolates are clonally related using pulse field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).
Organisms that were concordantly identified in both sputum and home environmental isolates and the corresponding number of isolates that
were screened. Blank cells represents organisms that were not concordant in a particular patient. P1-P6 refers to patient identification in
the study. PFGE was done on each of the concordant isolates using the restrictions enzymes listed. A large number of organisms from 60
different genera across the six patients were identified (S1 Table). A variety of Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms with varying
oxygen requirements were found to exist in both the home environment and lower airways microbiome (Fig 1 and S1 Table). Not surprisingly,
previously unidentified organisms were commonly found in environmental reservoirs (Fig 1 and S1 Table). The most prevalent organism cultured
from the home environmental samples by percentage belonged to the Sphingomonas genus 15% for patient 1, Family Micrococcaceae 19% for
patient 2, Agrococcus and Streptococcus genera—17% of each for patient 3, Stenotrophomonas genus 16% for patient 4, Family Micrococcaceae
13% for patient 5, Family Micrococcaceae 12% for patient 6 (Fig 1 and S1 Table). Various organisms commonly regarded as normal oropharyngeal
flora were cultured from sputum (Fig 1). The most prevalent organisms cultured from sputum samples of patients were common CF microbiota
belonging to the Stenotrophomonas genus 24% for patient 1, Streptococcus genus 35% & 67% for patients 2 and 3 respectively, Pseudomonas
genus 50% for patient 4, Staphylococcus genus 47% for patient 5, and Streptococcus genus 41% for patient 6 (Fig 1). The majority of
organisms identified from patients 4 and 5 sputum were consistent with chronic P. aeruginosa and S. aureus infection, respectively. A total
of 122 isolates from ten species across the six patients were found to be concordant in both home environment and sputum (Table 3). PFGE was
carried out using organism specific protocols on all of the concordant isolates collected from sputum and the home environment to determine
if environmental strains were genetically related to isolates collected from the lower airways. We identified two situations in which the
PFGE patterns demonstrated strain relatedness between environment and lower airways (Fig 2A and 2B). It was impossible to determine based on
the retrospective study design if these isolates were the source of lower airways infection, or a consequence of patient related
environmental contamination. For Patient 1, three Sphingomonas isolates coming from two different environmental sites (sink faucet & shower
head) were genetically related to an isolate collected from the lower airways of this patient (Fig 2A). Interestingly, these data also show
us that other Sphingomonas isolates collected from the various sites of this patient’s home are quite heterogeneous suggesting that there is
a wide variety of strains persisting in the home environment. Similarly in Patient 4, the P. aeruginosa isolates collected from this
patient’s sputum was genetically related to the isolate found in the basement sink faucet which they reported to be their principle bathroom
(Fig 2B). Despite several concordant species being found between home environments and lower airways, the majority of PFGE patterns did not
demonstrate strain relatedness between environment and lower airways (data not shown). (A) The home environment of patient one (P1) contains
genotypically related strains of Sphingomonas species as those found in lower airways. (B) The home environment of patient four (P4) also
contained an isolate of P. aeruginosa similar to two morphologically distinct isolates collected from their sputum. Genotypically related
isolates are highlighted in red. Samples are named as follows Patient ID:S = Sputum isolate /E = environmental isolates:Strain ID number. To
assess for the uncultured microbial community of the home, a total of 39 samples taken from the home environment and sputum (from patients
1,3, 5, and 6) were sent for Illumina MiSeq sequencing of the V3 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene. Samples from patients 2 and 4
were not available for assessment in the culture-independent studies. A total of 3,965,211 reads (an average of 116,623.8 reads/sample) for
all the samples included in the analysis. Five of the 39 samples were excluded from assessment as they had <1500 reads/sample. Results show
that there were 289 uniquely identified genera across all samples from all patients (Fig 3). Samples taken from the home environment and
sputum collected from patients 1, 3, 5, and 6 suggest that bathrooms are contaminated by a greater percentage of Pseudomonas species
compared to other environmental sites. Interestingly, many organisms were not identified by culture and were found using the culture-
independent technique, however, in some instances the opposite was also true (Table 4). We speculate that those organisms that were missed
in the culture-independent assessments are low abundance organisms that require culture enrichment in order to be detected. This is in
accordance with previous findings suggesting that both culture-dependent and culture-independent techniques are required to enhance
sensitivity of identifying organisms present in a given sample . For example, using culture-dependent techniques only 9 organisms were
cultured from Nebulizers for patients 5 and only 2 organisms were cultured from patient 6. However, using culture independent techniques
7–13 taxa with greater than 1000 reads each were observed (Fig 3 and Table 4). This suggests that perhaps some of the organisms are not
stable in this type of environment and the reads represent residual bacterial DNA rather than viable organisms. Indeed, we used a variety of
culture conditions to ensure to maximal recovery of potential viable organisms. Numeric identification on x-axis refers to patient number.
Bar plots have been grouped according to sample type. Samples taken from bathroom include bathroom sinks, faucets, drains, and shower
heads/hoses. Samples taken from kitchen include sinks, faucets, and drains. Respiratory equipment includes samples taken from patient’s
nebulizers and airways clearance device (FLUTTER®, Aptalis). Other samples include samples taken from other respiratory equipment, outside
faucets, high efficiency washer, and an aerator. For culture-independent studies only taxa with greater than 1000 reads were included in
this assessment. Taxa with lower quality reads are not included in this table. M. abscessus subsp. abscessus was one of the organisms that
prompted investigation in patients 1 and 3, interestingly we were not able to culture this organism from either patients repeat sputum
sample or environmental samples. We were however, able to identify a few M. gordonae isolates in showerheads of both patients. Similarly in
our culture-independent assessments we were able to detect organisms from the Mycobacterium genus in both patients homes, however, in low
abundance. Similarly, the newly isolated organisms that prompted investigation in Patient 5 were P. fluorescens and S. maltophilia (Table 1)
interestingly neither of these organisms were found using culture-dependent techniques in the repeat sputum sample at the time of
investigation. However there were four morphologically distinct S. maltophilia isolates cultured from samples taken from this patient’s
home. Likewise, A. xylosoxidans was the new organism that prompted investigation in Patient 6, however, this organism was not cultured from
either the home environment or the patients repeat sputum assessment. The data herein suggest transient carriage of these organisms could
have occurred. Indeed, such transient carriage is reported commonly . However, the presence of S. maltophilia isolates in Patient five’s
home suggests that this may be a source for re-infection. Our understanding of the microbial communities that infect the lower airways in CF
remains limited. Whereas clinical microbiology labs have traditionally focused solely on the identification and characterization of a
several classical CF pathogens, the adaption of 16s rDNA community sequencing technologies and more extensive culturing approaches have
suggested a much greater diversity of organisms infect CF airways . The originating source of lower airways infecting organisms remains
poorly understood. Infections can be acquired from a number of possible routes which may be nosocomial; infections acquired from within a
healthcare environment through either patient-to-patient or healthcare provider/health care environment-to-patient, or community acquired;
infection transmitted from person-to-person outside of the healthcare setting or from an environmental intermediary . Mechanisms by which
transmission have occurred may be through droplet, aerosol or contact either directly or through fomites . Given its role as the archetypal
CF pathogen, environmental sources of acquisition of P. aeruginosa have been extensively studied.. Schelstraete et al., demonstrated that
72% of bathrooms in the homes of CF patients who were recently identified to have new P. aeruginosa lower airways infection were also
culture positive . However, only 9 of 50 newly infected patients (18%) were identified to have the same colonizing strain of P. aeruginosa
within the bathroom through genotypic analysis . Similar to previous findings our results have shown that sink faucets and drains were sites
commonly contaminated by P. aeruginosa . We were able to demonstrate genotypic concordance with lower airways of a single isolate of P.
aeruginosa in a newly infected patient suggesting that environmental acquisition of P. aeruginosa is a rare event. As such, it is likely
that specific conditions with respect to the pathogen and host must be met in order to culminate in infection. In addition, the physical
conditions of the home environmental sites screened are quite different than the lower airways of CF patients; therefore it is possible that
the patients lower airways acts as a selective growth environment for strains that may not be the most abundant in other environmental
niches. When assessed using culture-independent technologies, Pseudomonas spp. could be identified in the home of every patient provided
enough samples were taken. Latent reservoirs of P. aeruginosa may be important in CF. In particular, it may be that the approximately 20% of
patients that fail to respond to early P. aeruginosa eradication may be due to re-infection through exposure to a persistent environmental
niche . If this were true, it may be that clinical outcomes of eradication therapy for P. aeruginosa may be improved with targeted
environmental treatment to reduce P. aeruginosa burden simultaneous to medical treatment of patients. Regardless of whether the infection
originated from the patient or the environment, a persistent untreated environmental source may serve as a residual reservoir enabling re-
infection following successful medical therapy of the patient. Furthermore, data from our study and the work of others suggests that the
home environment of CF patients does indeed harbor potentially pathogenic organisms beyond just P. aeruginosa. Organisms such as S.
maltophila, S. aureus, Streptococcus spp., and Sphingomonas spp. were also commonly found in patient homes . In order to reduce risk of
reinfection, strategies of environmental cleaning to remove latent reservoirs of infection may be considered as viable strategies. Such
treatments could prospectively be incorporated into early eradication strategies. If targeted treatments were to be routinely advocated,
current evidence would suggest that cleaning/replacement of showerheads, and sink faucets would be the highest yield. It is possible in this
pilot study that we weren’t able to identify all cases of clonally related isolates in the home environment and lower airway of CF patients
due to limitations of sequencing and sampling depth. Perhaps if thousands of isolates were screened from each patients home using even more
enhanced culturing conditions clonally linked isolates may have been found at a higher prevalence, although practically this is not
feasible. Less is known about potential sources of other established CF pathogens such as Stenotrophomonas maltophilia or Achromobacter spp.
Results from our culture-independent assessment suggest that there are organisms from the Stenotrophomonas genus in high abundance
contaminating respiratory equipment of CF patients that were missed in the culture-dependent studies despite a multitude of conditions being
attempted. These results are similar to previous findings comparing Sanger sequencing results to deep sequencing results in polymicrobial
infections showing that deep sequencing was more discriminating. However, the disadvantage of culture-independent assessments is that
bacterial viability cannot be verified. Although we are able to sequence and identify many more organisms using this technique, it is
possible that this is actually just bacterial DNA present in the environment rather than viable organisms. With increasing evidence to
support the polymicrobial nature of CF lung disease we took a more broad perspective looking at whether other members of CF lung microbiome
may also exist in the home environment. Our results show that other members of the CF lung microbiome including species from the following
genera, Brevibacterium, Enterobacter, Mycobacterium, Neisseria, Sphingomonas, Staphylococcus and Streptococcus amongst others, are also
ubiquitously found in moist sites of the home environment. These organisms may play an important role in CF pathogenesis. For instance
Sibley et al. found that the emergence of the Streptococcus anginosus group (S. milleri group) as the numerically dominant organism in
sputum was associated with bronchopulmonary exacerbations . While members of CF microbiome were identified in the home environment based on
our PFGE results we were only able to identify two instances in which environmental strains were identical to strains collected from the
patients sputum samples, suggesting that the majority of these strains are genetically distinct. This again provides support that organisms
infecting the airways in CF have specific airway adaptations enabling colonization and persistence, and that not all strains of putative CF
pathogens may be capable of causing airways disease in CF. Precedence exists to suggest that living environment may impact lower airways
microbiota in CF. In a recent study done by Hampton et al., they observed that CF siblings residing together had a lower airway microbiota
that was much more similar than those living apart . Whereas shared environment is just one factor associated with cohabitating (i.e.
intensity of patient-patient exposure, similar diet, similar natural environmental exposure etc.) their findings combined with our own might
suggest that home environment may serve as a patient-patient intermediary for microbiota. However, to the best of our knowledge,
environmental sources of acquiring bacterial infection in CF have been explored only in regards to specific pathogens and never from a
microbiome perspective prior to this work. Our study has a number of notable limitations, most notably the fact that only six patients were
included. However, even in the much larger patient population of 50 patients Schelstraete et al. which focused only on P. aeruginosa, rarely
was a home environmental isolate genotypically related to the respiratory isolate identified Given the frequent identification of CF lung
microbiome constituents in the home environment (and the tremendous efforts involved in doing so) and the fact that we were only able to
identify genetic similarity in two of the 13 concordant genera assessed it would seem larger scale studies would be impractical. Since our
methods of identifying the isolates relied on culture-based techniques and morphological identifiable differences between isolates a
sampling bias could have occurred. Furthermore, a broader range of media types could have been used, however, it is unlikely inclusion of
more culture conditions beyond the 12 attempted would further increase the recovery of organisms. Our comparison of the microbiota of the
home environment and lower airways was performed on only one occasion in each patient–something that may have missed organisms existing
transiently in either environment. Using complementary culture-independent studies we did note a significant increase in burden of potential
organisms within the environment. However, these culture-independent modalities lack specificity as they are capable of amplification of
either free, or dead bacterial DNA, in addition to viable organisms and they thereby potentially overestimate the degree of diversity.
Furthermore an exclusive culture-independent approach does not allow for determination of strain relatedness. Finally, we must point out—we
were not able to determine the order of infection; did the patient acquire infection from the home, or did the patient contaminate their
home environment? Such criticism exists in all similar studies. However, regardless of the order of infection, an environmental niche of
infection was occasionally identified which may serve to re-infect the patient after a successful eradication regimen. Where the
constituents of the lung microbiota of newly infected CF patients originate remains relatively unknown. We identified that the home
environment of CF patients harbors classical CF pathogens such as P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, S. maltophilia, and Achromobacter spp, as well
as those organisms only recently considered to potentially have a role including members of the genera Bacteroides, Gemella, Prevotella,
Sphingobacterium, Streptococcus, and Veillonella. However, the majority of those environmental organisms represent different strains based
on PFGE patterns, suggesting that it is rare that the home environment serve as a source of infection within the confines of those
reservoirs assessed. (XLSX) Click here for additional data file. We would like to thank the patients that participated in this study. We
would also like to thank all the staff at the Southern Alberta CF Clinic for their contribution with patient care and sputum sample
collection. We gratefully acknowledge the efforts of Dr. Monica Faria-Crowder for her initial assistance in collection of environmental
isolates. We would like to thank to thank Bryanne Crago for her technical support in helping culture environmental mycobacteria. In
addition, we would like to thank Dr. Paula Nicole Acosta, Barbara Waddell and Dr. Matthew Workentine for their insightful discussions,
support and guidance with the figures.
