Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a rare autosomal recessive sterol storage disease caused by a mutated sterol 27-hydroxylase
(CYP27A1) gene. Patients with typical CTX show neurological dysfunction including bilateral cataracts, paresis, cerebral ataxia, dementia,
and psychiatric disorders, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has revealed symmetrical lesions in the cerebellar white matter. We report
the case of a patient with late-onset spinal form CTX without brain lesion. He showed pyramidal tract signs, and impaired joint position and
vibration sensation in the lower limbs. Cervical sagittal MRI demonstrated a longitudinally extensive white matter abnormality in the dorsal
column of the C2-C7 spinal cord; however, a brain MRI revealed an absence of lesions, including in the cerebellar white matter. Genetic
analysis of CYP27A1 revealed that the patient was compound heterozygous for p.Gln85Arg in exon 1, a novel mutation, and p.Arg405Gln in exon
7, a previously reported mutation. This is the first report of late-onset spinal form CTX without typical neurological symptoms, and the
first report of p.Gln85Arg in CYP27A1. We speculate that spinal form CTX without brain lesion is a clinically and radiologically rare
variation of CTX. Therefore, spinal xanthomatosis should be included in the differential diagnosis of chronic myelopathy even with late-
onset and/or no other typical neurological findings. Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by a
deficiency in sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1), a key enzyme in the synthesis of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), a primary bile acid.
Deficiency of CYP27A1 and a lack of CDCA leads to the accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol . Typical clinical manifestations of CTX
include bilateral cataracts and diarrhea in childhood and progressive neurologic dysfunction (cerebral ataxia, paresis, dementia, low
intelligence, and psychiatric disorder), tendon xanthoma, and atherosclerosis in adolescence and early adulthood . Brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) typically reveals symmetrical lesions in the cerebellar white matter; however, white matter lesion restricted to the spinal
cord are rare [4, 5]. In this paper, we report the case of a patient with predominantly spinal form of CTX, who had a clinical course,
radiological pattern, and genetic background distinct from that of typical CTX. A 77-year-old Japanese man with no particular medical
history had observed thickening of the Achilles tendon bilaterally and patellar tendon enlargement (Fig. 1) from the age of 40. He reported
paresthesia that began in the legs and later spread to the arms. He was admitted to Toho University Omori Medical Center for diagnosis a
progressively unsteady gait from the age of 65 years, which was considered due to spinal ataxia. His father had died of lung cancer and his
mother of renal failure. There was no family history (parents, siblings, or children) of CTX and his parents’ marriage was not
consanguineous. He was born in Japan and worked as a public employee after graduating high school.Fig. 1Thickening of bilateral Achilles
tendon and patellar tendon enlargement Thickening of bilateral Achilles tendon and patellar tendon enlargement The deep tendon reflex in the
lower limbs was hyperactive, and the Babinski reflex was present bilaterally. Pain and temperature sensation was normal; however, joint
positioning and vibration sensation were impaired in the lower extremities, and the Romberg sign was present. General physical examination
revealed no abnormalities, and he did not show signs of either dementia (his mini-mental state examination score was 29) or any psychiatric
disorder. Cataracts were not observed upon ophthalmologic examination. Serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels were normal, while
cholestanol levels were elevated (10.4 μg/ml; normal, 3.3–5.6 μg/ml). Serum antinuclear antibody, anti-SSA antibody, vitamins B12 and E,
folate, copper, lactic acid were normal, syphilis and anti-aquaporin 4 antibody were negative and cerebrospinal fluid examinations were
normal. Brain MRI, including the images of the cerebellar white matter, was normal; however, cervical sagittal T2-weighted MRI revealed a
high intensity area in the dorsal columns of the C2–C7 cervical cord (Fig. 2). Knee axial and sagittal gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI
showed a low intensity area in the fringes and an unbalance enhanced area in the center (Fig. 3). A nerve conduction study and visual evoked
potential were normal, but somatosensory evoked potential was absent in the lower extremities. After diagnosing spinal form CTX, the patient
was treated with 750 mg/day CDCA.Fig. 2Magnetic resonance imaging of the patient. Brain axial MRI was normal, including images of the
cerebellar white matter. However, cervical sagittal (arrows) and axial (arrow head) T2-weighted MRI revealed a high intensity area in dorsal
columns of the C2-C7 spinal cordFig. 3Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging Knee gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI
showed a low-intensity area in the outer regions (arrows) and a heterogeneously enhanced area in the central region (arrow heads) Magnetic
resonance imaging of the patient. Brain axial MRI was normal, including images of the cerebellar white matter. However, cervical sagittal
(arrows) and axial (arrow head) T2-weighted MRI revealed a high intensity area in dorsal columns of the C2-C7 spinal cord Gadolinium-
enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging Knee gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI showed a low-intensity area in the outer regions
(arrows) and a heterogeneously enhanced area in the central region (arrow heads) Genomic DNA was isolated from the peripheral blood
leukocytes using a DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions, and was used as a
template for polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All 9 exons of CYP27A1 were separately amplified by PCR and their nucleotide sequences were
ascertained by direct nucleotide sequence analysis. CYP27A1 analysis revealed two point mutations. One was an A-to-G mutation in exon 1,
resulting in an amino acid substitution of Gln (CAG) to Arg (CGG) at codon 254 (Q85R) (Fig. 4a), and the other was a G-to-A mutation in exon
7, resulting in an amino acid substitution of Arg (CGG) to Gln (CAG) at codon 1214 (R405Q) (Fig. 4b). p.R405Q in CYP27A1 had previously been
reported in three siblings with CTX , and in several Japanese CTX patients [5, 8]. p.Q85R had previously been reported as the first mutation
identified in all variations of CTX.Fig. 4 CYP27A1 contained two point mutations. a. A-to-G mutation in exon 1, resulting in an amino acid
substitution of Gln (CAG) to Arg (CGG) at codon 254 (Q85R). b. G-to-A mutation in exon 7, resulting in an amino acid substitution of Arg
(CGG) to Gln (CAG) at codon 1214 (R405Q) CYP27A1 contained two point mutations. a. A-to-G mutation in exon 1, resulting in an amino acid
substitution of Gln (CAG) to Arg (CGG) at codon 254 (Q85R). b. G-to-A mutation in exon 7, resulting in an amino acid substitution of Arg
(CGG) to Gln (CAG) at codon 1214 (R405Q) This spinal variant of CTX has a relatively mild course as compared with the classic form of CTX,
which shows cerebellar involvement, dementia, tendon xanthoma formation, and peripheral neuropathy early in the disease process. Although
neurological symptoms in CTX are often highly variable, most patients demonstrate cerebellar signs and mental retardation from a young age,
as well as familial history, dementia, juvenile cataracts, and pyramidal tract lesion. However, in this case, it was important to exclude
other diseases (Table 1) causing only myelopathy as no cerebral involvement was observed. The spinal cord pathology was different from that
seen in multiple sclerosis, where a patchy, irregularly distributed involvement of the white matter is found, rather than a symmetrical
distribution as seen in this case. Neuromyelitis optica is one of the differential diagnoses in this case; however, the anti-aquaporin 4
antibody tests were negative and optic neuritis was not observed. Hereditary spastic paraparesis is another differential diagnosis, and
genetic testing would be needed if our case did not show any abnormal spine lesions .Table 1Differential diagnosis of chronic myelopathy
(Intramedullary) based on MRIImmune-mediatedBehcet’s diseaseMixed connective tissue diseaseMultiple sclerosisNeuro-
sarcoidosisParaneoplasticSjogren diseaseSolitary sclerosisSystemic lupus
erythematosusInfectiousCysticercosisEchinococcosisFungalHTLVHIV/AIDSSchistosomiasisSyphilisTuberculosisWhipple’s diseaseVascularCavernous
malformationSpinal arteriovenous malformationCongenitalArachnoid cystEpidermoid cystHypomyelination with brain stem and spinal cord
involvement and leg spasticitySpinal xanthomatosisToxic/metabolicCopper deficiencyFolic acidHeroinKonzo (cassava)NeurolathyrismNitrous oxide
toxicityRadiation-inducedVitamin B12 deficiencyVitamin E deficiency toxicityDegenerativePost-traumaticSpondylotic
myelopathyTumor/neoplasmAstrocytomaEpendymomaHemangioblastomaIntravascular lymphomaMetastasesSchwannomaSpinal lymphomaOtherSyringomyelia
Differential diagnosis of chronic myelopathy (Intramedullary) based on MRI The spinal form CTX without cerebral involvement is quite rare.
Verrips et al. reported seven Dutch patients from six families with a slowly progressing clinical course. Post-mortem examination of one of
the patients showed extensive loss in the lateral and dorsal columns. The onset in these patients was between the ages of 20 and 35 years.
Abe et al. also reported a Japanese young-onset spinal form CTX. However, our patient showed late-onset, and did not show any cerebral
involvement in brain MRI findings even at the age of 77 years old. Early diagnosis of xanthomatosis is crucial as treatment with
chenodeoxycholic acid can reduce plasma cholestanol level and may prevent disease progression , or even reverse some of the neurological
disabilities . A relatively high prevalence of CTX has been noticed in Japan, compared to that in other countries . When we performed
mutational analysis of all 9 exons of CYP27A1 in our Japanese patient with late-onset xanthomatosis with longitudinally extensive spinal
cord lesion, we found one novel (Q85R) and one previously reported CTX-associated missense mutation (R405Q). None of the patient’s immediate
family members showed similar symptoms, and his parents were not consanguineous. As they had not demonstrated a similar condition prior to
their deaths, and as the patient’s siblings were not affected, we assume that the patient’s parents were each heterozygous for one of the
two mutations. Residue Q85 in CYP27A1 is a well-conserved amino acid, similar to R405, according to multiple sequence alignments analysis
(Consurf Server http://consurf.tau.ac.il/). The effect of the novel p.Q85R mutation on the function of CYP27A1 was predicted to be damaging
as assessed a missence prediction tool, Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (PolyPhen-2 http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/). Indeed, Q85 in
CYP27A1 plays an important role in protein folding and binding with substrates, such as vitamin D3 . Considering the impact of p.Q85R and
p.R405Q on clinical features, the compound heterozygosity of these two mutations may have resulted in a mild pathological change and late-
onset of CTX, as compared to other missense mutations in CYP27A1. Moreover, p.R405Q may be associated with spinal form CTX, as a patient
with homozygous mutations of p.R405Q presented with spinal form CTX . Genetic testing in not readily available for diagnosing spinal form
CTX; therefore, the presence of xanthoma in tendons and serum cholestenol levels should be assessed when the patient presents with chronic
myelopathy. CTX is treated with CDCA and/or competitive inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase to reverse the
metabolic defect and prevent neurological dysfunction. Previous reports have shown that this treatment results in reduction of the serum
cholestenol level to less than 50 % of the pretreatment levels . Lewis et al. reported that mevinolin normalizes serum cholestenol level
within 4 days and reduces the size of the xanthoma. However, whether these therapies will be effective for long-term prevention remains to
be established. Our results suggest that spinal form CTX should be considered in the differential diagnosis of chronic myelopathy, and
clinicians should check for the presence of xanthomatosis in the tendons in such cases. We obtained written informed consent from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Chenodeoxycholic acid Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis Sterol 27-hydroxylase Magnetic resonance imaging
Polymerase chain reaction Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Study
concept and design: MY, OK. Acquisition of data: TT, MY, OK. Analysis and interpretation of data: OK, TT, YK, SH, SM, YI, KI, YI. Drafting
of the manuscript: MY, OK, TT. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. None.
