The etiology of cerebral cavernous malformation hemorrhage is not well understood. Causative physiologic parameters preceding hemorrhagic
cavernous malformation events are often not reported. We present a case of an individual with sequential simultaneous hemorrhages in
multiple cerebral cavernous malformations with a new onset diagnosis of hypertension. A 42-year-old white man was admitted to our facility
with worsening headache, left facial and tongue numbness, dizziness, diplopia, and elevated blood pressure. His past medical history was
significant for new onset diagnosis of hypertension and chronic seasonal allergies. Serial imaging over the ensuing 8 days revealed
sequential hemorrhagic lesions. He underwent suboccipital craniotomy for resection of the lesions located in the fourth ventricle and right
cerebellum. One month after surgery, he had near complete resolution of his symptoms with mild residual vertigo but symptomatic chronic
hypertension. Many studies have focused on genetic and inflammatory mechanisms contributing to cerebral cavernous malformation rupture, but
few have reported on the potential of hemodynamic changes contributing to cerebral cavernous malformation rupture. Systemic blood pressure
changes clearly have an effect on angioma pressures. When considering the histopathological features of cerebral cavernous malformation
architecture, changes in arterial pressure could cause meaningful alterations in hemorrhage propensity and patterns. Cerebral cavernous
malformations (CCMs), also known as cavernomas or cavernous angiomas, are classically defined as low pressure hamartomatous berrylike
vascular lesions with minimal to no intervening brain parenchyma composed of thin-walled endothelial-lined sinusoidal spaces devoid of
smooth muscle . It has been suggested that CCMs arise from failure of vascular stabilization in angiogenesis which promotes the development
of capillary dysplasia, weak intercellular junctions, and defective smooth muscle recruitment . An estimated 0.5 % of the population has
CCMs [3, 6]. While many patients remain asymptomatic, others tend to develop epilepsy, neurological deficits, or hemorrhage [1, 4, 6].
Sporadic and inherited forms of CCM have been described. The sporadic form often results in single isolated lesions while the inherited form
is associated with multiple lesions and mutations of the endothelial genes CCM1, CCM2 or CCM3 [5, 7]. The etiology of CCM rupture is not
well understood. It has been demonstrated that CCM lesions elicit inflammatory responses that involve tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)
and interleukins (ILs). Upregulation of angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have also been described. These
processes are implicated in the promotion of angiogenesis and breakdown of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) leading to the progression and
rupture of CCM . CCM2 and CCM3 mutations have also been linked to higher hemorrhage rates [1, 8]. Simultaneous hemorrhages of multiple CCM
lesions are anecdotally common but few have been reported [7, 9, 10]. Causative physiologic parameters preceding hemorrhagic CCM events are
often not described even in case reports. We present a case of an individual with simultaneous and sequential hemorrhages in multiple CCMs
with a new onset diagnosis of hypertension. We describe the case of a 42-year-old white man who was transferred to our facility due to
worsening headache of 6 months evolution and new onset left facial and tongue numbness with dizziness. A head computed tomography indicated
two areas suspicious for acute hemorrhage: one within the fourth ventricle and the other adjacent to the calvarium in his right cerebellum
(Fig. 1a). His past medical history was significant for acute sinusitis and recent onset of hypertension. A physical examination at the time
of presentation revealed blood pressure of 161/98 mmHg, ataxia, dysmetria, vertigo, and a positive Romberg’s test. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) was obtained with and without contrast.Fig. 1Cranial imaging of multiple cerebral cavernous malformations. a Computed
tomography scan indicating two areas suspicious for acute hemorrhage: one within the fourth ventricle and the other adjacent to the
calvarium in the patient’s right cerebellum. b Gradient echo magnetic resonance imaging showing lesion in left lateral cerebellar
hemisphere. c Magnetic resonance imaging with contrast showing heterogeneous enhancement in the right cerebellar mass. d Computed tomography
scan demonstrating increased hemorrhage and size within the ventricular lesion and the new hemorrhagic hyperdensity within the left medial
temporal location. e Computed tomography scan displaying further hemorrhagic enlargement of the intraventricular and temporal lesions with
development of hydrocephalus. f Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging showing complete resection of fourth ventricular and right
cerebellar masses Cranial imaging of multiple cerebral cavernous malformations. a Computed tomography scan indicating two areas suspicious
for acute hemorrhage: one within the fourth ventricle and the other adjacent to the calvarium in the patient’s right cerebellum. b Gradient
echo magnetic resonance imaging showing lesion in left lateral cerebellar hemisphere. c Magnetic resonance imaging with contrast showing
heterogeneous enhancement in the right cerebellar mass. d Computed tomography scan demonstrating increased hemorrhage and size within the
ventricular lesion and the new hemorrhagic hyperdensity within the left medial temporal location. e Computed tomography scan displaying
further hemorrhagic enlargement of the intraventricular and temporal lesions with development of hydrocephalus. f Postoperative magnetic
resonance imaging showing complete resection of fourth ventricular and right cerebellar masses The MRI showed two additional lesions: one in
his left lateral cerebellar hemisphere and the other in his medial posterior left temporal lobe (Fig. 1b). All lesions exhibited significant
signal dropout on gradient echo sequences. Heterogeneous enhancement was noted in the right cerebellar mass (Fig. 1c). The differential
diagnosis included multiple cavernous malformations or hemorrhagic metastatic lesions. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein,
carbohydrate antigen 19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen, and a chest X-ray were ordered and found to be within normal limits. A computed
tomography (CT) scan performed the next day showed increased hemorrhage size within the ventricular lesion and a new hemorrhagic
hyperdensity within the left medial temporal location (Fig. 1d). The patient symptomatically improved over his 2-day hospital course with
complete resolution of his dizziness and ataxia. He was discharged with orders for a repeat MRI after hemorrhage resolution and further
testing. Surgical resection was delayed due to his presenting symptoms, uncertainty of etiology, and specific reports suggesting resection
of CCMs after two bleeding incidents in eloquent brain regions or single hemorrhage in non-eloquent area accompanied by deteriorating
neurological deficit . The patient was readmitted 1 week later with headache, nausea, worsening dizziness, new onset diplopia and elevated
blood pressure. He was found to have a fourth cranial nerve palsy, mild decrease in the right nasolabial fold, hypophonia and continued left
facial and tongue numbness. A CT scan displayed further hemorrhagic enlargement of the intraventricular and temporal lesions with
development of hydrocephalus (Fig. 1e). The patient underwent a suboccipital craniotomy and the right cerebellar lesion was resected first.
The lesion demonstrated hemosiderin deposition with a gliotic margin. The telovelar approach was then used to access the fourth ventricle.
The ventricular mass was well-circumscribed, pearly red and easily delineated from the ventral wall of the fourth ventricle. The mass was
centrally debulked and the walls circumferentially collapsed. The gliotic margin adjacent to the brainstem was carefully delineated and
gross total resection was achieved. Immediately after surgery, the patient developed new onset mild left third nerve palsy. MRI showed
complete resection of fourth ventricular and right cerebellar masses (Fig. 1f). Pathology confirmed diagnosis of CCM. He was discharged on
postoperative day six with improved cranial nerve functioning and resolution of ataxia but continued vertigo. Approximately 1 month after
surgery, his course was complicated by culture-negative bacterial meningitis and development of pseudomeningocele that resolved with
aspiration and proper antibiotics treatment. He demonstrated complete resolution of ocular cranial nerve dysfunction but exhibited mild
horizontal nystagmus with rotational challenge that resolved by 6 months. Cerebral cavernomas are estimated to occur in 1 out of every 200
individuals in the general population [3, 6, 7]. They are hypothesized to develop due to failure of vascular stabilization in angiogenesis
of cerebral blood vessels . In a large series studying the natural history of cavernomas, 18.7 to 20 % of patients had multiple lesions [9,
12, 13]. Multiple lesions are mostly seen in familial CCM (FCCM) forms . FCCM has been associated with mutations of CCM1, CCM2 and CCM3
genes. Nevertheless, 22 % of multiple lesions occur without any evidence of gene mutation . CCMs have a hemorrhage rate of 0.7 to 1.1 % per
lesion per year [4, 7]. Most cases of hemorrhages reported in the literature tend to involve one lesion, even in patients with multiple
CCMs. Personal communication from Issam Awad suggests that multiple simultaneously hemorrhagic CCM lesions are more common (July 2015).
However, to date there have been a total of only three reports on simultaneous hemorrhages of multiple cavernomas (Table 1). Our report is
different in that the presented case exhibited simultaneous and sequential rupture patterns in the setting of new onset hypertension. What
would lead to such a phenomenon remains an enigma, as the exact cause of CCM hemorrhage has yet to be determined. Many studies have focused
on the genetic and inflammatory mechanisms contributing to CCM rupture, but few have investigated the potential role chronic hypertension
may play in this complex multifactorial disease process.Table 1Details of the three published cases of simultaneous multiple cavernoma
hemorrhages (and the present case)Authors, year and reference numberAge (years), sexTotal number of cavernomasLocation of hemorrhagic
cavernomasSymptoms at time of presentationForm of cavernomaSurgical treatmentFollow-upPanciani et al., 2012, 46, F3+1-Right posterior
superior frontal gyrus2-Left anterior cingulate gyrusHA, NV and LUE paresisNon-familialResection of frontal gyrus and cingulate gyrus
lesions10 days postoperative: residual hypostheniaChanda and Nanda, 2002, 52, F21-Dorsal midbrain region2-Left occipital regionAtaxia,
diplopia, and dysarthriaNot reportedResection of midbrain lesionNot reportedEl Asri et al., 2014, 46, F2+1-Left occipital lobe2-Right
cerebellar hemisphereHANot reportedResection of left occipital and right cerebellar lesionsNot reportedCurrent case42, M41-Fourth
ventricle2-Right cerebellum3-Medial posterior left temporal lobeHTN, HA, dizziness, ataxia, left facial and tongue numbness, and diplopiaNot
reportedResection of ventricular and right cerebellar lesions6 months postoperative: no residual deficit F female, HA headache, HTN
hypertension, LUE left upper extremity, M male, NV nausea and vomiting Details of the three published cases of simultaneous multiple
cavernoma hemorrhages (and the present case) F female, HA headache, HTN hypertension, LUE left upper extremity, M male, NV nausea and
vomiting Genetic and inflammatory causes have clearly been shown to influence CCM hemorrhage. In mouse model experiments, Cunningham et al.
observed that conditional inactivation of the CCM2 gene in adult mice produced a cerebral hemorrhage similar to that observed in adult human
CCMs . Mutation of the CCM3 gene in humans has been linked to a hereditary variant of CCM and demonstrates early-onset cerebral hemorrhage
patterns . Shi et al. have reported CCMs to be active inflammation sites infiltrated with B cells and plasma cells . Our patient did not
have any familial past medical history of intracerebral hemorrhage or relatives with a diagnosis of CCM. However, he was being treated for
sinusitis and it is possible that there was an increased release of inflammatory cytokines, TNF-α and ILs. These inflammation mediators
stimulate angiogenesis and BBB breakdown and are thought to contribute to CCM rupture . It is also possible that rupture of one of the CCMs
enhanced recruitment of the inflammatory processes that contributed to the sequential pattern that was observed in our patient. However,
inflammation and genetics may be only part of this complex multifactorial disease process and hypertension may play a role. The studies that
have addressed hemodynamic effects on CCMs are narrowly focused and limited. A recent study on the association of cardiovascular risk
factors with CCM severity in 185 Hispanic individuals with CCM1 mutation failed to find any positive correlation between CCM rupture and
cardiovascular risks, including hypertension . However, an experiment by Little et al. demonstrated that cavernomas are affected by changes
in mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) and venous pressure. Direct angioma pressure measurements showed that a mean reduction of 14.7±2.1
mmHg in MABP resulted in a 7.0±0.5 mmHg drop in angioma pressure. Mechanical jugular compression induced real measurable changes in CCM
pressure up to 9 mmHg . Although the study did not investigate changes caused by increased MABP, the data clearly demonstrate that systemic
blood pressure changes significantly affect CCM pressures. Few studies to date have directly measured cerebral capillary pressure or
determined the direct effects of systemic blood pressure on capillary physiology. Classical studies of cerebral blood flow show that the
pial arterioles autoregulate until systolic blood pressure exceeds approximately 160 mmHg above which smaller pial arterioles are
differentially affected, become dilated, and lose regulatory control; this results in increases in blood flow [16, 17]. Direct measurement
of cerebral capillary pressure is problematic but pressure characteristics can be extrapolated from peripheral limb vasculature experiments
which demonstrate that significantly higher apex pressures are measured in patients with essential hypertension when compared to age-matched
and sex-matched normotensive controls [18, 19]. Structural abnormalities can also occur in peripheral capillaries as a result of essential
hypertension with loss or reduction in the density of vessels per volume of tissue, which is a process known as rarefaction [18, 20]. When
considering the histopathological features of CCM architecture, chronic hypertensive changes alter arterial flow and vessel physiology,
which could cause meaningful alterations in capillary anatomy as well as hemorrhage propensity and patterns. Many vascular disease processes
are influenced by multifactorial systemic corporeal changes. An example of this is the development and rupture of cerebral aneurysms.
Inflammation, genetics, hypertension, smoking, and age are known risk factors that contribute to the development of aneurysm rupture and
hemorrhage . Models have been developed to describe the pathophysiology for aneurysm induction and progression and include endothelial
damage and degeneration of the elastic lamina, inflammatory cell recruitment and infiltration, and chronic remodeling of vascular wall .
Similarly, we argue that chronic high blood pressure may be a factor in capillary physiology that alters architectural features of abnormal
capillary anatomy in CCM which increases the propensity for hemorrhage. This case report is unusual in that hypertension may have played a
role in the simultaneous and sequential hemorrhage pattern noted in this individual. Notwithstanding the many advances made in understanding
the structure, formation and evolution of CCMs, there is still a lack of understanding concerning the effect of hemodynamic changes on
cerebral capillary physiology and cavernomas. Investigative work focusing on the role of hypertension and other hemodynamic factors in CCM
rupture is much needed, especially experiments in order to better determine if blood pressure changes affect the incidence of CCM
hemorrhage. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have
no competing interests concerning this case report. Authors’ contributions NL and RM equally contributed to the creation of this manuscript.
Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
