Laparoscopic hepatectomy has been widely performed for patients with benign liver tumors such as hepatic hemangioma, focal nodular
hyperplasia, and hepatic adenoma. We here present a case of a 78-year-old female patient who was initially admitted to our department due to
fever and jaundice for 2 days. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography scan showed intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct dilatation with
liver atrophy of left lobe. Unenhanced nodules were seen within the left intrahepatic bile duct. Ultrasonography revealed intrahepatic and
extrahepatic bile duct dilatation with viscous fluid, tubular adenoma? Tumor markers including alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen,
and CA19-9 were normal. Preoperative total bilirubin was 64.4 mmol/L. Laparoscopic anatomical left hepatectomy and common bile duct
exploration were performed. In this procedure, a lot of mucus was seen within the common bile duct and left intrahepatic bile duct. No bile
duct stones were found after the exploration. During parenchymal transection, intraoperative hemorrhage from middle hepatic vein was met,
and we repaired middle hepatic vein by laparoscopic suture (5-0 Prolene). No air embolism and hypotension were met. This operation took 232
minutes and estimated blood loss was 300 mL. Postoperative ultrasonography indicated a normal outflow of middle hepatic vein and there was
no stricture. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful and was discharged on the 6th day after surgery. Postoperative pathological
diagnosis was intrahepatic bile duct papillary mucinous cystadenoma. Laparoscopic hepatectomy (LH) has now been widely performed in
experienced centers.1–6 Benign liver tumors such as hepatic hemangioma, focal nodular hyperplasia, and hepatic adenoma are thought to be
good indications of LH. However, there are still technical difficulties with LH related to liver mobilization, hemorrhage controlling, and
unexpected vessels injuries. Among them, hepatic vein injury (HVI) during LH is especially dangerous, because it may cause conversion, air
embolization, fatal hemorrhage, or even death. We here present a case of a 78-year-old female patient who was initially admitted to our
department due to fever and jaundice for 2 days. Preoperative abdominal enhanced computed tomography scan showed intrahepatic and
extrahepatic bile duct dilatation with liver atrophy of left lobe. Unenhanced nodules were seen within the left intrahepatic bile duct.
Ultrasonography revealed intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct dilatation with viscous fluid, tubular adenoma? Tumor markers including
alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and CA19-9 were normal. Preoperative total bilirubin was 64.4 mmol/L. A laparoscopic left
hepatectomy and bile duct exploration were performed for this patient due to its left lobe atrophy and bile duct dilation. Laparoscopy was
performed under CO2 pneumoperitoneum. This patient was placed in the reversed Trendelenburg position, with the surgeon standing by the
patient's right side. Three 12 mm and two 5 mm trocars (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) were usually inserted. The whole left lobe was
mobilized by an ultrasonic shears. The common bile duct was dilated significantly. After cholecystectomy was completed, the left bile duct,
left hepatic artery, and left portal vein were meticulously dissected and transected. The exact transection line was marked by electric
cautery. The liver parenchyma was transected by ultrasonic shears. The hepatic vein branches of segment II and III were dissected and
clamped by Hem-o-lok. And the transection line was along the left side of middle hepatic vein. A 5-0 Prolene running suturing was used to
fix the middle hepatic vein hemorrhage. The left hepatic pedicle tissue and left hepatic vein were transected by laparoscopic linear stapler
(Endopath Endocutter; Ethicon Endosurgery) with 60 mm white cartridge. The common bile duct was explored and a #26 T tube was placed from
the distal of left bile duct. All clinical investigations were in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Ethical approval was obtained from the Committee of Ethics in West China Hospital of Sichuan University. Written informed consent was
obtained from both patient and her family in this study. During operation, a lot of mucus was seen within the common bile duct and left
intrahepatic bile duct. No bile duct stones were found after exploration. During liver parenchymal transection, intraoperative hemorrhage
from middle hepatic vein was met, and we repaired middle hepatic vein by laparoscopic suture (5-0 Prolene) No complication including air
embolization, hypotension, or oxygen saturation decreasing was met during and after surgery. This operation took 232 minutes and estimated
blood loss was 300 mL. Postoperative ultrasonography indicated a normal outflow of middle hepatic vein and there was no stricture. The
patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and was discharged on the 6th day after surgery. Postoperative pathological diagnosis was
intrahepatic bile duct papillary mucinous cystadenoma. LH has gained worldwide acceptance and use over the past decade. Although control of
the hepatic vein can be laparoscopically obtained, this is not always possible.7 As a result, intraoperative hemorrhage is extremely
dangerous. In this case, the patient who underwent LH suffered intraoperative HVI. Several causes were included: wrongly ultrasonic shears
manipulating; wrong anatomical recognizing. Ultrasonic shears were supposed to be a safe method for blunt dissection. However, the lack of
complete view on surgical field always mistook local structures from their right anatomy. A good camera manipulating and general observation
were very important to identify the right anatomy of hepatic vein. In this case, when intraoperative hepatic vein bleeding occurred, the
first assistant used a forceps to retract the left lobe to the left side by one hand and used an aspirator to clean the surgical site
bleeding by the other hand. The scopist changed the camera angle (zoom out) and showed a complete view of surgical site to identify where
the bleeding came from. Then, the scopist zoomed in the camera when the precise stitching and HVI repairing were performed. This case was
successfully treated by laparoscopic stitching. No air embolization, hypotension, or oxygen saturation decreasing was met during and after
LH. Three factors might contribute to it: good exposure of bleeding site by an experienced first assistant; skillful stitching for HVI; and
good communications among surgeon, anesthetist, and nurse. Air embolization might be the most concerned risk for surgeons. Generally
speaking, it was thought that air embolism could possibly occur due to the pneumoperitoneum.8 However, because of the higher solubility rate
of carbon dioxide in the blood than in the air, although carbon dioxide gas embolism frequently occurs throughout laparoscopic liver
surgery, it is not clinically significant.8 As a result, the risk of air embolism may be less with the laparoscopic approach than with the
open approach because pneumoperitoneum is obtained with carbon dioxide gas rather than air.8 In conclusion, this is the first case about
laparoscopic anatomical left hepatectomy for intrahepatic bile duct papillary mucinous cystadenoma. And we should pay more attention to the
details when performing LH, to avoid HVI. Skillful stitching, experienced surgeons, and smooth cooperation can effectively handle HVI.
Abbreviations: HVI = hepatic vein injury, LH = laparoscopic hepatectomy. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
