Fusarium species are ubiquitous environmental fungi that occasionally provoke serious invasive infections in immunocompromised hosts. Among
Fusarium species, Fusarium ramigenum, belonging to the Fusarium fujikuroi species complex, has thus far never been found to cause human
infections. Here we describe the first case of invasive fusariosis caused by Fusarium ramigenum in a human and also identify immunological
deficiencies that most likely contributed to invasiveness. A 32-year-old Caucasian male with a seemingly insignificant medical history of
mild respiratory illness during the preceding two years, developed invasive pulmonary fusariosis. Detailed immunological assessment revealed
the presence of common variable immunodeficiency, complicated by a severe impairment of the capacity of T-cells to produce both gamma-
interferon and interleukin-17. In-depth microbiological assessment identified the novel human opportunistic pathogen Fusarium ramigenum as
cause of the infection. This report demonstrated that an opportunistic invasive fungal infection may indicate an underlying cellular immune
impairment of the host. The unexpected invasive infection with Fusarium ramigenum in this case unmasked a complex combined humoral and
cellular immunological deficiency. Fusarium species are common saprophytic fungi that globally represent the third cause of invasive mould
infection in humans, after Aspergillus and after Mucorales. This opportunistic infection is common in Brazil but rare in other parts of the
world. The important Fusarium species implicated in human pathology belong to the F. solani, F. oxysporum, and F. fujikuroi species
complexes . In immunocompetent hosts, clinical manifestations are relatively mild and mostly result from accidental trauma (e.g. keratitis
and contact lens-related infections, onychomycosis, osteo-arthritis, but also peritonitis after peritoneal dialysis). Invasive infections
are almost exclusively found in immunodeficient hosts, particularly those with severe dysfunction of cellular immunity [2, 3]. In those
patients, infections of the respiratory tract are commonly encountered. Mortality due to invasive fusariosis can be above 50 %, even when
appropriate and intensive therapeutic management is applied [1, 4]. Here we describe a case of invasive fusariosis caused by a hitherto
unknown opportunist, Fusarium ramigenum, and report on the immunological causes most likely contributing to this infection. A 32-year-old
Caucasian male, an outdoor worker (border guard), with mild, recurrent respiratory infections during two preceding years was admitted to the
infectious diseases clinic with a 5-day history of high fever, chills, chest pain, dry cough and myalgia. Physical examination showed a good
general condition, 38.5 °C fever, no crackles on auscultation, and a palpable spleen (15 cm length). Pulmonary imaging (chest X-ray and lung
CT-scan) demonstrated bilateral pulmonary micro-nodular infiltrations and satellite mediastinal lymphadenopathies with a maximum diameter of
16 mm (Fig. 1). Laboratory investigations revealed leukocytosis (15000/mm3) with neutrophilia (11700/mm3), mild thrombocytopenia
(120000/mm3), and elevated inflammatory markers (CRP 51 mg/L, ESR 17 mm/h, fibrinogen 416 mg/dl). Serological tests for atypical pathogens
(Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, Coxiella, Legionella) and Quantiferon for tuberculosis were negative. Blood cultures were also negative.Fig. 1 a
Chest X-ray: bilateral micro-nodular alveolar infiltrates, predominantly in inferior areas; b Chest CT-scan: same aspects a Chest X-ray:
bilateral micro-nodular alveolar infiltrates, predominantly in inferior areas; b Chest CT-scan: same aspects The initial empirical therapy
consisted of moxifloxacin for 2 weeks and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The clinical course was unsatisfactory except for a partial
decline of fever in the first days but a persistent low-grade fever remained. A broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed 10 days after
admission. Cytology of the BAL fluid was consistent with hemorrhagic lymphocytic alveolitis. No microorganisms were observed during direct
microscopical examination. However on the Sabouraud’s glucose agar (SGA) there was a growth of colonies with cottony aerial hyphae which
were white, with a light shade of purple and which grew from a pinkish submerged mycelium. The colonies were phenotypically identified as
Fusarium spp. on the basis of curved, septate conidia (Fig. 2). At this point, invasive fungal infection was not demonstrated and the
positive Fusarium culture was interpreted as fungal colonization in an apparently immunocompetent patient. Subsequent examination of the
patient’s immune system showed a severe hypogammaglobulinemia (0.13 g/l) involving all three analyzed lines: IgM < 0.17, IgG < 0.89, and
IgA < 0.24 (g/l). CD4 T-cells were moderately decreased to 468 per cubic mm (33 %), while CD8 T-cells were 745 per cubic mm (53 %), with a
low CD4/CD8 ratio (0.63).Fig. 2 a Culture on SGA plate: Fusarium colonies; b Direct microscopic examination of Fusarium with segmented
hyphae and conidia x200; c Methylene blue stained slide from Fusarium culture with banana-shaped conidia, x1200 a Culture on SGA plate:
Fusarium colonies; b Direct microscopic examination of Fusarium with segmented hyphae and conidia x200; c Methylene blue stained slide from
Fusarium culture with banana-shaped conidia, x1200 Investigations regarding a possible acquired hypogammaglobulinemia (autoimmune diseases,
viral infections including HIV, hematologic malignancies) failed to give a clue, suggesting the final clinical diagnosis as being common
variable immunodeficiency (CVID). Bone marrow biopsy was normal. The patient was substituted intravenously with immunoglobulins (25 g/day,
5 days). The diagnosis of the patient’s immune deficiency changed the medical judgment of the case, and now an invasive fungal disease being
taken into account. Subsequently, voriconazole was added to the therapeutic plan at day 14 after admission (6 mg/kg IV q12h for first 24 h,
then 4 mg/kg IV q12h for 2 weeks, then 200 mg orally q12h, with a total duration of six weeks). A voriconazole E test showed an MIC of
2 mg/L. The patient responded with an initial good clinical improvement. Three weeks after cessation of voriconazole, the patient was re-
admitted with productive cough, without fever. Physical examination revealed bilateral, rough vesicular murmurs and a CT-scan showed
progressive pulmonary lesions. A significant increase of alveolar infiltrates with extension to the superior regions of the lungs and
multiple new spherical dense masses (<5 mm diameter) were observed. A new BAL was performed and the cytology showed the same aspect as few
weeks previously (hemorrhagic alveolitis), while the culture was again positive for a Fusarium species. IgA, IgG and IgM had again very low
values and needed substitution. A second antifungal treatment course with voriconazole was started (same protocol as first course). A lung
biopsy was performed at day 8 after voriconazole reinitiation (3 months after first admission). Immunohistochemical examination excluded
lung lymphoma and confirmed a reactive cell pattern (interstitial lymphoid infiltrate). Hyaline hyphae were detected in smears from lung
tissue imprints (Fig. 3), suggesting an invasive pulmonary fungal disease.Fig. 3 a Inflammatory lymphocytic nodular and focal infiltrate
with fibrosis (HE stain × 100); b Inflammatory reaction and hyphae on pulmonary biopsy smear (Gram stain × 1200) a Inflammatory lymphocytic
nodular and focal infiltrate with fibrosis (HE stain × 100); b Inflammatory reaction and hyphae on pulmonary biopsy smear (Gram
stain × 1200) The patient’s immunological status, i.e. the CVID, is a humoral deficit and even in severe forms invasive fungal diseases are
rare. Therefore the cellular immune profile was further analyzed and an important qualitative cellular deficiency was additionally found: a
defective production of both gamma-interferon- γ (IFN-γ) and IL-17. Deficient cytokine production was demonstrated using a method of whole
blood stimulation with specific antigens . The patient’s whole blood IFN-γ production, 72 h after stimulation with heat-killed Candida
albicans yeast cells (CA), phytohemagglutinin (PHA) and staphylococcal antigen (SA), was 16, 1000 and 12 pg/ml, respectively, and was much
lower than the production of 7160, >10000 and 1620 pg/ml of healthy volunteers. IL-17 production after stimulation with PHA was 465 and
300 pg/ml in the volunteers, while values were below detection limit in our patient in both in-duplo stimulations. Candida albicans and S.
aureus did not stimulate IL-17 production in the whole blood stimulation system (Table 1).Table 1Cytokine production after whole blood
stimulation at 24 h (for TNF and for IL-6) and at 72 h (for IFNγ and
IL-17)24 hIFNγContr.1Contr.2Pat.1Pat.2RPMI<78<78<78<78CA327031301120890PHA9601360170220SA481074802430256024 hIL
6contr.1contr.2pat.1pat.2RPMI32634826CA4700410017301560PHA15351900265325SA12500140009500870072 hIFNγcontr.1contr.2pat.1pat.2RPMI1099<8CA8940716016<8PHA8300>100001000834SA1280162012872 hIL
17contr.1contr.2pat.1pat.2RPMI<40<40<40<40CA<40<40<40<40PHA300465<40<40SA<40<40<40<40Whole blood was stimulated either with RPMI culture
medium (unstimulated control), with heat-killed C. albicans (CA), phytohemagluttinine (PHA) or heat-killed S. aureus (SA). Concentrations of
the cytokine produced are expressed as pg/mL Cytokine production after whole blood stimulation at 24 h (for TNF and for IL-6) and at 72 h
(for IFNγ and IL-17) Whole blood was stimulated either with RPMI culture medium (unstimulated control), with heat-killed C. albicans (CA),
phytohemagluttinine (PHA) or heat-killed S. aureus (SA). Concentrations of the cytokine produced are expressed as pg/mL The evolution was
favorable under prolonged antifungal therapy with voriconazole for 6 months and continuous immunoglobulin substitution with 25 g/day, 5 days
per month. A CT-scan after 6 months showed regression of the pulmonary lesions. The subsequent BAL was culture-negative for Fusarium and no
signs of hemorrhagic lymphocytic alveolitis were seen. Antifungal treatment was stopped and during two years of follow-up (CT-scan,
respiratory functional tests) no further progression was noted. Further identification of the fungus was undertaken at the CBS-KNAW Fungal
Biodiversity Centre in Utrecht, The Netherlands, under accession number CBS 140388. Sequencing of partial elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF1)
and beta-tubulin (BT2) genes was performed. Blast results with sequences in GenBank revealed that this fungus belonged to the Fusarium
fujikuroi complex. In order to establish the phylogenetic position of this clinical isolate, a general tree was made with MrBayes v. 3.1.2
on the Cipres Portal based on the sequenced BT2 (500 bp) and TEF-1 (600 bp) regions. Thirty-six species within the Fusarium fujikuroi
species complex were selected for phylogenetic analyses of combined BT2 and TEF1 fragments. Our strain was nested with a F. ramigenum
subclade (Fig. 4). Sequences of this novel human opportunistic fungus (CBS 140388) were deposited in GenBank with accession numbers KT794172
for BT2 and KT794175 for TEF1, respectively.Fig. 4Phylogenetic analysis of Fusarium ramigenum. Phylogenetic reconstruction obtained from
Bayesian inference of two combined loci (TEF1 and BT2) using MrBayes v. 3.1.2. Values at branch node indicate branch support with posterior
probabilities (PP; values ≥ 0.80 shown) and branches in boldface = bootstrapping percentages based on Maximum Likelihood (ML). The tree was
rooted with two strains of F. inflexum NRRL20433 and F. oxysporum NRRL22902 Phylogenetic analysis of Fusarium ramigenum. Phylogenetic
reconstruction obtained from Bayesian inference of two combined loci (TEF1 and BT2) using MrBayes v. 3.1.2. Values at branch node indicate
branch support with posterior probabilities (PP; values ≥ 0.80 shown) and branches in boldface = bootstrapping percentages based on Maximum
Likelihood (ML). The tree was rooted with two strains of F. inflexum NRRL20433 and F. oxysporum NRRL22902 Antifungal susceptibility testing
performed with broth microdilution according to CLSI M38A resulted in the following MICs/MECs: amphotericin B, 1 mg/L; posaconazole, 1 mg/L;
itraconazole, >16 mg/L; voriconazole, 2 mg/L; isavuconazole, 4 mg/L and anidulafungin and micafungin both > 8 mg/L. We describe a patient
with CVID and cellular T-helper-defects who developed an invasive infection with Fusarium ramigenum. After long-term treatment with
voriconazole (6 months) and immunoglobulin substitution, the patient recovered from this opportunistic infection. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first case in which F. ramigenum was described as a cause of invasive infection in a human patient, reinforcing the
significance of the F. fujikuroi species complex as opportunistic pathogens in immunocompromised hosts. The fungus cultured from BAL
specimens of this patient with atypical pneumonia and no significant medical history first suggested fungal colonization rather than
infection. Moreover, the observed BAL cytology, indicating hemorrhagic lymphocytic alveolitis, could neither prove nor exclude a fungus
induced inflammatory reaction. However, the relapse of Fusarium infection after a short 6-week course of antimycotic therapy (6 weeks)
raised the suspicion of an invasive infection. The microscopic findings of hyaline hyphae in the lung biopsy confirmed the invasive
fusariosis. This was further supported by the identification of combined humoral (severe pan-hypogammaglobulinemia) and cellular (defective
IFN- γ and IL-17 production capacity) immune defects that are known to be crucial for antifungal host defense [6, 7]. The initial humoral
immunological deficit identified, i.e. severe pan-hypogammaglobulinemia, was not consistent with an invasive fungal infection. The slightly
lowered CD4 T-cell counts, combined with a reduced T-cell CD4:CD8 ratio, could not explain this opportunistic infection either, and
therefore we embarked on functional assays to test the T-helper functions. Subsequent analysis revealed an important deficiency, with very
low levels of IFN-γ and a deficit in IL-17 production capacity. Cellular defects in CVID patients have been reported previously, and this is
the most likely explanation of the observed infection [8, 9]. The results are in consensus with the latest data in the literature,
describing the possibility of complex T-cell abnormalities in association with CVID. T-cell abnormalities associated with CVID generate a
slight quantitative deficit of CD4 lymphocytes, an abnormal CD4/CD8 ratio, and a qualitative deficit in cytokine production . The exact
mechanisms and genetic causes of these defects in CVID remain to be elucidated. Alternatively, a different explanation may be represented by
defects in genes known to be crucial for antifungal host defense, such as the CARD9 adaptor [6, 7]. An important aspect of this clinical
case is the first identification of a novel human opportunistic fungus, F. ramigenum as cause of the infection. This fungus belongs to the
relatively frequently encountered F. fujikuroi complex, but molecular analysis identified F. ramigenum, a species not figuring on the list
of species known to occur in human or animal infections . Fusarium ramigenum was first described in 1998 from inedible wild Capri figs in
California, U.S.A. . The species produced fusaric acid, beauvericin and fumonisin . Its pattern of susceptibility to antimycotic therapy
showed potential activity of amphotericin B, voriconazole and posaconazole and no activity of itraconazole and the echinocandins which is
similar to a previous study . The relevance of these in vitro data is not clear because a correlation between MICs/MECs and clinical outcome
has not been documented for fusariosis . The MIC of voriconazole of 2 mg/L is below the mode of 4 mg/L as described for F. fujikuroi and a
retrospective analysis of 73 patients with invasive fusariosis showed a 47 % success rate . Indeed recently published guidelines recommend
voriconazole (AII) or amphotericin B (BII) as treatment option for invasive fusariosis . In summary, this report demonstrated that an
opportunistic invasive fungal infection may indicate an underlying cellular immune impairment of the host. The unexpected invasive infection
with F. ramigenum in this case unmasked complex combined humoral and cellular immunological deficiencies. Moreover, this paper provides
evidence indicating F. ramigenum as a potential human opportunist especially in immunocompromised patients. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor of this journal. The phylogenetic tree supporting the results of this article is available in the repository, .
Computed tomography C-reactive protein Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Broncho-alveolar lavage Sabouraud’s glucose agar Immunoglobulin M
Immunoglobulin G Immunoglobulin A Cluster of differentiation 4 Cluster of differentiation 8 Human immunodeficiency virus Common variable
immunodeficiency Candida albicans yeasts Phytohemagglutinin Staphylococcal antigen Interleukin 17 Translation elongation factor1 Beta-
tubulin Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute CLSI microtiter mould testing standard methods for antifungal susceptibility Minimum
inhibitory concentration Gamma-interferon Caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 9 Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RVM was implied in the patient’s data collection, indirectly in the patient’s care and
drafting the manuscript; VG is the patient’s physician and provided the patient’s data and was involved in drafting the manuscript; AMSA
performed molecular identification and was involved in drafting the manuscript; GSH supervised the molecular identification and was involved
in drafting the manuscript; JFM supervised the whole process of Fusarium identification and performed phenotypic identification and
susceptibility, also coordinated the writing of the manuscript; MGN judged the whole case, mainly from the immunological point of view, in
succession performed immunological analyses and revised crucially the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We
thank Dr. Florin Alexandru Caruntu, the Chief of Adults I Department Matei Bals Institute, where the patient is in care. We thank also Dr.
Mona Popoiu and Dr. Daniela Talapan, from Bacteriology Department – Matei Bals Institute, who provided technical support. MGN was supported
by an ERC Consolidator Grant (#310372). The work of Abdullah M. S. Al-Hatmi was financially supported for his PhD study by Ministry of
Health, Oman (formal Agreement no. 28/2014).
