This is to report a case of 16-year-old girl with transient right lower limb monoplegia as a result of femoral artery ischemia detected by
multimodal intraoperative spinal cord neuromonitoring (MISNM) during posterior correction surgery of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. A
patient with a marfanoid body habitus and LENKE IA type scoliosis with the right thoracic curve of 48° of Cobb angle was admitted for
posterior spinal fusion from Th6 to L2. After selective pedicle screws instrumentation and corrective maneuvers motor evoked potentials
(MEP) began to decrease with no concomitant changes in somato-sensory evoked potentials recordings. The instrumentation was released first
partially than completely with rod removal but the patient demonstrated constantly increasing serious neurological motor deficit of the
whole right lower limb. Every technical cause of the MEP changes was eliminated and during the wake-up test the right foot was found to be
pale and cold with no popliteal and dorsalis pedis pulses palpable. The patient was repositioned and the pelvic pad was placed more
cranially. Instantly, the pulse and color returned to the patient's foot. Following MEP recordings showed gradual return of motor function
up to the baseline at the end of the surgery, whereas somato-sensory evoked potentials were within normal range through the whole procedure.
This case emphasizes the importance of the proper pelvic pad positioning during the complex spine surgeries performed in prone position of
the patient. A few cases of neurological complications have been described which were the result of vascular occlusion after prolonged
pressure in the inguinal area during posterior scoliosis surgery when the patient was in prone position. If incorrectly interpreted, they
would have a significant impact on the course of scoliosis surgery. The surgical correction of scoliosis bears the risk of one of the most
catastrophic surgical complications such as neurological impairment.1 The incidence of this complication is estimated to be 0.3%
approximately.2 The etiology of spinal cord lesion in scoliosis surgery is considered to be multifactorial with the dominance of mechanical
and vascular ground.3,4 Early detection of neurological compromise and immediate response during scoliosis surgery may reduce the risk of
permanent spinal cord injury.4 The first test used to detect and address problems before they become irreversible was Stagnara wake-up test,
which was the “gold standard” for many years.5,6 At present, a multimodal intraoperative spinal neuromonitoring (MISNM) is used routinely
during spinal deformity surgery.5,7–11 The earliest form of spinal cord neuromonitoring was somato-sensory evoked potentials (SSEP)
recording, reserved only for the dorsal columns of the spinal cord and evaluated the integrity of the sensory pathways.4,12 Many factors can
influence the latency and amplitude of the recorded SSEP. The occurrence of misleading-evoked potentials can lead to false-negative
outcomes.4,5,13–15 It has led to the development of motor evoked potentials (MEP) that evaluate the descending lateral motor pathways of the
spinal cord. MEP recording is much less variable than SSEP but on the other hand more sensitive to anesthetic drugs, particularly the
neuromuscular blocking agents.16,17 At present, SSEP along with MEP recordings are obligatory and provide the surgeon with a feedback on the
neurological state of the patient. The most crucial point of the spinal deformity surgery is correction. If the signal of MISNM is altered
after the corrective maneuvers, immediate release of the correction is mandatory for the potentials to recover to the regular neurologic
state. In questionable cases the Stagnara wake-up test can be helpful. A few cases of neurological complications have been described which
were the result of vascular occlusion after prolonged pressure in the inguinal area during posterior scoliosis surgery when the patient was
in prone position.18–20 These and similar situations may suggest that neurological impairment is associated with the operative technique. If
incorrectly interpreted, they would have a significant impact on the course of scoliosis surgery. Written informed consent for publication
of this case report and all images was obtained from the patient and the patient's mother. Because this is a case report ethical approval
was not applicable. A 16-year-old girl with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) was admitted to our Department for Posterior Scoliosis
Surgery (PSS). Preoperative radiograph revealed LENKE IA type of the right thoracic curve of 48° of Cobb angle. The patient demonstrated a
proper preoperative balance (Figure 1). Posterior spinal fusion was planned for Th6 to L2. She presented a marfanoid body habitus (weight
51 kg, height 174 cm, and BMI = 16.8) and typical AIS symptoms (Figure 2) without any abnormalities in genetic evaluation. Preoperative
spinal MRI was within normal limits as well as preoperative neurological evaluation revealed no pathology except scoliosis. General
anesthesia was performed with the standard scheme. Intravenous loading dose of Propofol 3 mg/kg and Remifentanyl 75 μg/kg were used for the
induction. For the anesthesia maintenance continuous infusion of Propofol 4 mg/kg/h and Remifentanyl 100 μg/ml according to weight table was
used. Concentrations of drugs infusion were customized to the patient's vital parameters. Because the multimodal spinal cord monitoring was
used administration of neuromuscular blocking agents was avoided to prevent any deterioration in the MEP recordings.16,17 After the
induction patient was turned to the prone position on the operative radiolucent table carefully with cushions under the chest and pelvis
considering the proper saggital balance. Arms and legs were accurately positioned with slightly extended hips, minimally flexed knees, and
feet in neutral position. Cushions were placed under knees, feet, elbows, and forehead (Figure 3). Multimodal Intraoperative spinal cord
neuromonitoring (MISNM) with ISSIS software (Inomed, Medizintechnik GmbH, Germany) was used. Disposable subdermal electrodes were used for
SSEP and MEP recordings. Posterior tibial nerve was stimulated bilaterally automatically and in the typical way for SSEP recording with
40-mA current at the rate of 4.7 Hz. A baseline was set from 300 trials with the use of signal averaging technique. A bandpass from 5 to
2500 Hz was used. Corkscrew electrodes were implanted over the cortical motor areas (C2 and C4) for transcranial motor evoked potentials
(TC-MEP) induction. A stimulation protocol covered multiple pulse stimulation with 300 V and 155-mA current of 0.2 frequency with 5 stimuli-
train. The intervals were set on 4 ms between stimuli that were monitored from tibialis anterior, triceps surrae, and quadriceps muscle with
a bandpass of 160 Hz. Warning criteria for TC-MEP were set typically as: 50% loss of amplitude and 10% loss of latency. SSEP recording was
permanently generated through the whole surgery from the skin incision until the wound was closed (0–186 min) (Figure 4A). TC-MEP recording
was performed 3 times before corrective maneuvers and 7 times after that (0, 2, 18, 89, 101, 114, 138, 145, 155, and 186 minutes). A, B,
Posterior–anterior and lateral preoperative standing radiographs of the patient demonstrating the right thoracic scoliosis of 48° of Cobb
angle. A, B, The patient's preoperative clinical views with a marfanoid body habitus and typical AIS symptoms. The example of patient's
prone positioning on the operative radiolucent table with cushions under the chest and pelvis. Arms and legs positioned with slightly
extended hips, minimally flexed knees, and feet in neutral position. A, B, Posterior–anterior and lateral postoperative standing radiographs
of the patient. Selective pedicle screw instrumentation from Th6 to L2 was performed. A posterior approach to the spine was performed and
posterior spinal structures were exposed and released from Th6 to L2. Pedicle screws were instrumented selectively with AP fluoroscopic view
guidance according to the preoperative plan (Figure 5). The proper screw placement was confirmed with intraoperative computed tomography
(ICT) (Figure 6). Simultaneous correction was performed with single concave rod rotation (SCRR) and direct vertebral rotation (DVR)
maneuvers (Figure 7). Before correction all 3 transcranial MEP recordings did not show any signs of spinal cord injury (Figure 4B).
Immediately after corrective maneuvers (89 minutes) more than 80% loss of TC-MEPs was detected in all recording sites of the right lower
extremity (Figure 4C). Simultaneously there were no changes in SSEP recordings. Therefore, the curve correction was released of 50% without
rod removal immediately and after a few minutes following MEP recording was performed. Simultaneously the patient was evaluated with ICT,
which confirmed the unaltered position of screws and a lack of any impression to neural structures. During the next MEP evaluation
(101 minutes) there was no improvement, but on contrary the SSEPs were unchanged from the baseline recordings (Figure 4D). Due to this fact
the instrumentation was released completely with rod removal leaving only the pedicle screws in place. The next TC-MEPs (114 minutes) showed
a serious neurological motor deficit of the whole right lower limb (Figure 4E). Every possible technical error, which could be the cause of
TC-MEPs decrease, was eliminated by neurophysiologist at that moment, so we decided that the wake-up test should be done. There was no
voluntary movement possible for the right lower extremity with intact motor function on the contralateral side. On palpation the right foot
was pale and cold and the left was normal. Dorsalis pedis and popliteal pulses were palpable only on the left unaffected side. An assumption
was made that the possible cause for neurologic deficit of the right lower extremity would be the vascular occlusion of the right femoral
artery through the cushion placed under the inguinal area. The cutaneous oxygen saturation on the right great toe was significantly lower
than on the right side. The patient's position on the operative table was changed and the thigh cushion was positioned more cranially.
Instantly, the pulse and color returned to the patient's foot. The cutaneous oxygen saturation on the right great toe increased and became
equal with the left side. The next TC-MEP recording (138 minutes) showed the return of motor function mainly of the quadriceps femoris
muscle, whereas SSEPs were within the normal range (Figure 4F). All following TC-MEP recordings monitored after the patients’ positioning
returned to the baseline (145, 155, and 186 minutes) (Figure 4G). After TC-MEP potentials became normal the rod was implanted again on the
concave side and full correction (simultaneous SCRR and DVR maneuvers) and fusion of the deformity were completed without troubles. After
extubation the neurological state of the patient was within normal limits. Up till the second postoperative day an extensive diagnostic
workup on the patient was performed. Both Doppler sonography and CT-angio did not show any abnormalities (Figure 8). Full neurological
examination was performed without any pathological findings. The proper screw placement confirmed by intraoperative computed tomography.
Simultaneous correction performed with single concave rod rotation and direct vertebral rotation. A, Somatosensory evoked potentials
recorded from both posterior tibial nerves remained perfectly normal during the whole surgery (0–186 min). B, TC-MEP recording in 18 minutes
of the surgery—unchanged from the baseline. C, Immediately after corrective maneuvers (89 min) more than 80% loss of TC-MEPs was detected in
tibialis anterior, triceps surrae, and quadriceps femoris recording sites of the right lower extremity. D, 101 minutes of the surgery—the
curve correction was released of 50%—no improvement of TC-MEP recording. E, 114 minutes of the surgery—instrumentation released
completely—TC-MEPs either did not improve but showed a serious neurological deficit of the whole right lower limb. F, 138 minutes of the
surgery—the change of the thigh cushion position more cranially under the patient. The TC-MEP recording showed the return of motor function
mainly of the quadriceps femoris muscle and partial return (10% of the baseline) of tibialis anterior and triceps surrae. G, 145 minutes of
the surgery—TC-MEP potentials returned to the baseline. Postoperative angio–CT with no abnormalities. Considering the patient's welfare,
intraoperative monitoring of the functional integrity of spinal cord is the fundamental element of complex therapeutic planning in posterior
corrective scoliosis surgery. The corrective maneuvers bear the risk of one of the most catastrophic complications such as neurological
impairment. At present, multimodal intraoperative spinal cord neuromonitoring is used routinely during spinal deformity surgery for the
early and accurate detection of impending spinal cord injury.21 MISNM can be sensitive not only for the surgical maneuvers performed on
spine but also for the other factors such as anesthetic drugs, neuromuscular blocking agents, hypotension, hypo perfusion, hypothermia,
hypoxemia, blood rheology, and finally the patients positioning.4,5,13–15 Even the proper positioning of the patient on the operative table
can be associated with vascular occlusion of upper and lower limbs as well as the central retinal artery what leads to blindness.18–20 To
our knowledge, there are 2 case reports in the literature describing vascular occlusion of femoral artery in thin patients with marphanoid
type of body habitus.18,20 The presented patient had marphanoid phenotype but genetic evaluation did not show any abnormalities. Akagi et
al19 suggest some other risk factors for vascular occlusion of the femoral artery during posterior spinal surgery such as systemic lupus
erythematosus, obesity, long time of the surgery, and thrombosis. It has been reported in the literature that the safe and reversible period
of ischemia of the limb should not exceed 180 minutes.22 Therefore in case of severe scoliosis posterior surgery with long operative time
the presence of MISNM cannot be overemphasized and its lack can lead not only to neurological complications but also misdiagnosed limb
ischemia and its permanent catastrophic sequelae for the patient. There have also been reports on SSEP sensitivity on limb ischemia.23
Vossler et al have shown neurologic complication due to the lower limb vascular ischemia detected by SSEP decrease. What is worth to comment
they used only SSEP recordings for spinal neuromonitoring. Tseng et al described the case of bilateral lower limb ischemia due to the
femoral arteries vascular occlusion detected by multimodal spinal neuromonitoring with SSEPs and TC-MEPs decrease. The case was 15-year-old
boy with idiopathic scoliosis operated with PSS. The exact cause of ischemia similarly to our case was the inappropriately placed pad under
the inguinal area what pressed directly on the femoral arteries.18 In the present case, the diagnosis of right side monoplegia was based on
TC-MEP recordings only with SSEPs unchanged. It should also be emphasized that the wake-up test that was performed to verify an unexpected
neurological complication given the false-positive outcome of MISNM since the SSEP and TC-MEP recordings were unchanged from the baseline.
The SSEP monitoring during PSS detects mainly intraoperative direct surgeon's maneuvers performed on the spine and it is reserved only for
the dorsal columns of spinal cord with sensory pathways integrity evaluation. The SSEPs do not evaluate the descending lateral motor
pathways of the spinal cord what can lead in consequence that this serious complication is undetected during surgery. It has been described
in the literature as false negatives since the SSEP monitoring was unchanged in these cases.24 TC-MEP intraoperative monitoring evaluates
descending lateral motor pathways of the spinal cord and serves as a control for the SSEP recordings. Another advantage of TC-MEPs is that
they can be updated multiple times during the particular part of the surgery. Our previous experience indicates much greater significance of
TC-MEP potentials for the patient's clinical state prognosis than SSEP's.25 The presented case proved it right because SSEP was constantly
unchanged during the whole procedure. Because the decrease of TC-MEPs coincided with the critical portion of correction of the deformity, we
supposed that the neurological impairment was due to the implant loosening with the possible spinal cord impression on the convex side.
However, in ICT evaluation all pedicle screws had the proper and unchanged placement the same as before correction. The unilateral character
of the ischemia in the presented case can be striking due to the fact that the pad is in a shape of a symmetrical rectangular cube. It
possibly could be placed asymmetrically under the pelvis and it could be bolstered with the effect of the trunk deformity due to the right
side thoracic curve. Although we think that MISNM is an essential method of the functional integrity of the spinal cord monitoring and
should be used in every case of scoliosis surgery, it should be also taken into account that the MISNM outcome should be always analyzed
individually with consideration to the different causes of the change of potentials. Moreover, Stagnara's wake-up test seems to be still up
to date as an additional evaluation of the neurological state of the patient when MISNM is inconsistent as well as the patient's lower limb
ischemia is possible to detect this way. If we misinterpret the neuromonitoring outcome and do not verify it with additional physical
examination during wake-up test, it would lead in consequence to the wrong decision on postponement of scoliosis correction and
spondylodesis delayed to the revision surgery in few weeks time. Furthermore, the following diagnostic workout would not detect the cause of
neurological impairment during the surgery. This case emphasizes the importance of the proper pelvic pad positioning during complex spine
surgeries performed in prone position of the patient. A few cases of neurological complications have been described which were the result of
vascular occlusion after prolonged pressure in the inguinal area during posterior scoliosis surgery when the patient was in a prone
position. If incorrectly interpreted, they would have a significant impact on the course of scoliosis surgery. Abbreviations: AIS =
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, DVR = direct vertebral rotation, ICT = intraoperative computed tomography, MEP = motor evoked potentials,
MISNM = multimodal intraoperative spinal cord neuromonitoring, PSS = posterior scoliosis surgery, SCRR = single concave rod rotation, SSEP =
somato-sensory evoked potentials, TC-MEP = transcranial motor evoked potentials. All authors contributed equally to this work. RP, MR, MC,
MM, and KD participated in the design of the study. RP and MR drafted the manuscript. TM and WK conceived of the study and participated in
its coordination. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
