Euthyroid multinodular goiters may lead to acute respiratory failure caused by airway obstruction or laryngotracheal compression. Here, we
present a case admitted to the nephrologist with multinodular goiter spontaneous hemorrhage along with respiratory failure and end-stage
renal disease (ESRD), which required urgent surgical intervention. We report the case of a 63-year-old woman with ESRD who presented with a
rapidly enlarging nodular goiter resulting in acute respiratory failure. Endotracheal intubation and emergency partial thyroidectomy were
performed, revealing multinodular goiter spontaneous hemorrhage by postoperative histopathology. Several cases of benign goiters
necessitating endotracheal intubation have been reported. Goiters are among the rare diagnoses in patients consulting at our institution's
Nephrology. This case illustrates that ESRD patients with benign goiter may lead to acute respiratory failure due to airway obstruction or
laryngotracheal compression. It was found in agreement with previous reports. This case highlights that ESRD patient at risk of this life
threatening complication such as multinodular goiter hemorrhage should be managed with elective thyroidectomy to reduce morbidity and
mortality. The differential diagnoses of massive, rapidly growing anterior neck masses are mainly malignant tumor such as lymphomas or
thyroid carcinomas.1,2 This is an uncommon case of an end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patient presenting with a history and clinical findings
suggestive of malignancy, but revealed a benign goiter hemorrhage into a thyroid nodule leads to a rapidly expanding haematoma on
histological examination. Multinodular goiter hemorrhage is an uncommon finding in ESRD patients. In this article, we report a case of
benign goiter spontaneous hemorrhage leading to airway obstruction which was treated with urgent surgical intervention. In April 2015, a
63-year-old woman with ESRD hemodialysis for 6 years presented to nephrologist with a 1-day history of large neck swelling, hoarseness, and
progressive dysphagia. Review of history revealed a 1-year history of nodular goiter, initially grape-sized on either lobe with no
hyperthyroid or hypothyroid symptoms. The patients had a history of undergoing hemodialysis for 6 years. The primary renal diseases were IgA
nephropathy. She did not take any anticoagulant or aspirin. The patient had no other remarkable medical history, and had no family history
of thyroid malignancies or goiters. Arterial blood gas analysis (ABGA) was performed and respiratory acidosis was detected due to hypoxia
with pH of 7.29, oxygen partial pressure (pO2) of 65, carbon dioxide partial pressure (pCO2) of 65 mmHg, oxygen saturation of blood (sO2) of
80%, and bicarbonate (HCO3) concentration of 30.1 mEq/L. The patient had difficulties for swallowing and stable vital signs when admitted to
hospital. Pertinent physical examination findings included a markedly large nodular goiter without any cervical or axillary
lymphadenopathies; respiratory sounds were normal on chest auscultation. The blood platelet and coagulation function was normal. Thyroid
function tests (free T4 and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)) were also normal. Initial analyses of complete blood cell count, arterial
blood gas, electrolyte levels were normal. Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland revealed multiple thyroid nodules and a well-defined mass
behind the trachea (Figure 1). The mass was consistent with computed tomographic (CT) scan of the neck (Figure 2). The patient was given
advice for surgery immediately considering of the danger of upper airways obstruction. But the patient and family refused thyroid surgery.
Ultrasonography illustrated a well-defined mass. CT showed a well-defined mass compressing the trachea and esophagus. Twenty-four hours
after being admitted to the hospital, the patients began to have a symptom of worsening shortness of breath and dysphagia. Arterial blood
gas analysis was performed and respiratory acidosis was detected due to hypoxia with pH of 7.28, oxygen partial pressure (pO2) of 67 mm Hg,
carbon dioxide partial pressure (pCO2) of 55 mm Hg, oxygen saturation of blood (SaO2) of 82%. Contrast-enhanced CT scans were used to check
the mass behind tracheal. On arterial phase contrast-enhanced computed tomography image, the mass had enlarged and was nonenhancing. The CT
demonstrated that the mass was compressing both her airway and esophagus (Figure 3). Endotracheal intubation was performed immediately. On
intubation, the larynx was compressed and a 6.0 Fr endotracheal tube (ET) was passed. With the aforementioned history and presentation,
primary consideration prior to surgery was a neck abscess or thyroid malignancy, with the patient's sex, massive and relatively rapid
increase in goiter size and severe airway compromise. Despite operational risks to the end-stage renal disease patient, an urgent partial
thyroidectomy was performed successfully. Multinodular goiter spontaneous hemorrhage was confirmed by postoperative histopathology (Figures
4 and 5). CT scans demonstrated the mass had enlarged and was nonenhancing. Multinodular goiter was confirmed by postoperative
histopathology (EvG stain, original magnification ×100). Pathological outcomes showed sludged blood and infiltration of inflammatory cells
(EvG stain, original magnification ×100). Her intraoperative course was unremarkable. Postoperative CT scan showed the left thyroid lobe and
the haematoma was excised. She was weaned off mechanical ventilation and extubated on the fourth postoperative day. The patient was
discharged on postoperative day 10. On follow-up, the patient had complete resolution of compressive symptoms and hoarseness. The blood
calcium results were in normal ranges after the partial thyroidectomy. Repeat neck ultrasonography after 1 month showed no mass in the neck.
Informed consent was given by the patient for using her clinical data. Goiters are among the most common diagnoses in patients consulting at
institution's endocrinology and otorhinolaryngology outpatient clinics. Prevalence rates vary widely among populations probably due to
differences in iodine sufficiency, genetics, and even the method of diagnosis used. A review of 624 thyroidectomies shows that multinodular
goiter (MNG) was common in females and MNG appears to be associated with long standing of iodine deficiency.3 Some literature4 reported that
a high altitude area and environmental, urinary iodine status was associated with goiter and goiter prevalence. It has been reported5,6 a
high incidence of goiter and nodules on thyroid ultrasonography in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Jusufovic and Hodzic7 also
reported HD patients were with an increased thyroid volume and thyroid diseases are much more common in patients on HD compared with the
general population. This may be due to the decreased clearance of the inorganic iodides, causing a hypertrophic effect on the thyroid gland
tissue leading to goiter.8 So screening for abnormal thyroid morphology is important for HD patients.9,10 In such patients with goiters, it
is generally believed that goiter affects the oesophagus as well as the trachea in a considerable number of people. Benign goiter with acute
respiratory failure is a common situation. Several cases of goiters lead to respiratory failure had been reported before.11–17 However, a
limited number of cases18,19 reported that significant hemorrhage into a thyroid cyst or nodule can lead to a rapidly expanding haematoma
with subsequent airway compromise. Some literature reports that hemorrhage into a thyroid nodule does not commonly cause severe symptoms and
extensive hemorrhage is relatively rare.20,21 The goite Hemorrhage commonly occur after exertion or trauma (such as fine needle
aspiration).19 But in this case, multinodular goiter hemorrhage was found to be the result of spontaneous hemorrhage by postoperative
histopathology. In the spontaneous thyroid hemorrhage, however, the mechanism is unclear. Venous bleeding is the most likely explanation for
hemorrhage in goiters.22 The literature reported23 that Valsalva maneuver may lead to thyroid hemorrhage as it increased venous pressure.
Therefore, an associated external event is often found in spontaneous hemorrhage cases, such as seemingly insignificant straining at
defecation, coughing, and crying. In the present case, dialysis patients have several platelet defects and receive heparin during their
dialysis treatment that contributes to their coagulopathy may increase the risk of hemorrhage in the patient. Further studies are needed to
understand more about the multinodular goiter hemorrhage in ESRD patients. What is more, the patient was first presented to the
nephrologist, so it is easy for the nephrologist to neglect the potential danger of goiter hemorrhage leading to respiratory failure.
Securing the sustained airway opening of the patient has a priority in the treatment of the multinodular goiter hemorrhage which causes
respiratory failure. Surgical intervention should be planned after the endotracheal intubation was completed. However, we believe that a
conservative treatment could be a safe way to treat the patient if the thyroid gland hematoma is stable without airway compromise. However,
when an airway obstruction appears, emergency surgery or early intubation is recommended,24 as in the present case. ESRD patients with MNG
hemorrhage are just rare cases in nephrology department. In this case, it highlights that ESRD patients at risk of life-threatening
complications of thyroid disease, such as tracheal compression and airway obstruction, should be managed with early surgical intervention.
Thus, in chronic hemodialysis (HD) patients with neck swelling and acute respiratory failure, if other common causes are not identified
spontaneous hemorrhage in multinodular goiter should be kept in mind. Surgery is our preferred treatment because of the diagnostic dilemma
of tumors and the potential mortality of massive hematomas in ESRD patients. In summary, this case study reports a successful surgical
intervention on respiratory failure secondary to MNG spontaneous hemorrhage in ESRD patients. However, life-threatening complications caused
by MNG hemorrhage in ESRD patients is a rare case in nephrology department. Thus, it is important for the nephrologist to take into account
the potential danger of MNG spontaneous hemorrhage leading to respiratory failure in ESRD patients. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography,
ESRD = end-stage renal disease, ET = endotracheal tube, MNG = multinodular goiter, TSH = thyroid stimulating hormone. Lie Jin, Chu-xiao Shao
and Xue-ping Yu are co-corresponding author. W-HL, LJ, JL, and M-FM planned the article and contributed to data collection, discussing
content, writing, and reviewing the article. CS, XY and JX, conceived the study and participated in its design, study supervision, and
helping to writing the article. Informed patient consent was obtained for publication of this case report. The authors have no funding and
conflicts of interest to disclose.
