Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KH) is a rare vascular tumor of intermediate malignancy that occurs mainly in the childhood. Adult patients
with KH are rare. Imaging findings of KH have rarely been reported before. We present magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography
(CT), and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT findings in an adult patient with KH associated
with lymphangiomatosis involving mesentery and ileum. A 22-year-old female complained of a 9-month history of intermittent melena, weakness,
and palpitation. Laboratory tests revealed anemia and hypoproteinemia. Fecal occult blood test was positive. Abdominal enhanced MRI and CT
showed a large abdominal mass involving mesentery and ileum. On enhanced MRI, there were many hypervascular nodules in the mass. On FDG
PET/CT, the mass and the nodules showed slight FDG uptake. Small bowel capsule endoscopy showed numerous grape-shaped red nodules in the
luminal wall of the involved ileum. The patient underwent resection of the abdominal mass and a segment of the ileum invaded by the
abdominal mass. KH arising within lymphangiomatosis involving mesentery and ileum was confirmed by pathology. After surgery, the patient's
symptoms improved. This is the first case of KH associated with lymphangiomatosis involving mesentery and ileum. In this case, the
lymphangiomatosis overshadowed the small tumor nodules resulting in unusual imaging findings. Familiarity with these imaging findings is
helpful for diagnosis and differential diagnosis of KH. Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KH) is a rare vascular tumor of intermediate
malignancy that occurs mainly in the childhood and is often associated with Kasabach–Merritt phenomenon or lymphangiomatosis or both.1–4
Histopathologically, KHs consist of irregular, infiltrating nodules of compressed vessels with resemblance to Kaposi sarcoma.1 About 82% of
KHs occur in patients within the first decade of life and 45% within the first year.1 Adult patients with KH are rare. Most of KHs present
as a superficial or deep extremity mass.1 Occasionally, KHs may involve chest and abdominal wall, retroperitoneum, mediastinum, scrotum,
tongue, spleen, lung, heart, liver, and stamoch.1–9 Multifocal KH in multiple visceral organs have been reported.7,8 Complete surgical
excision is the most effective treatment of KH.1 Approximately 42% to 58% of patients present with Kasabach–Merritt phenomenon marked by
severe thrombocytopenia and a variable degree of anemia1,2 and two-thirds of KHs exhibit lymphatic abnormalities.1 Imaging findings of KH
have rarely been reported before.10–12 In this paper, we present magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and
fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT findings in an adult patient with KH associated with
lymphangiomatosis involving mesentery and ileum. A 22-year-old female was admitted to our hospital because of a 9-month history of
intermittent melena, weakness, and palpitation. She had undergone treatment for anemia, but had no significant improvement. On clinical
examination, the patient presented with pale skin and a tender abdomen. Her past medical history was unremarkable. Laboratory tests revealed
anemia and hypoproteinemia. Fecal occult blood test was positive. Abdominal T2-weighted MR images showed a large hyperintense mass in the
middle and lower abdomen (Figure 1A). This mass showed hypointensity on unenhanced T1-weighted MR images. Enhanced T1-weighted MR images
showed many hypervascular nodules scattered in the mass (Figure 1B and C). Abdominal unenhanced CT showed this mass was hypodense involving
mesentery and ileum. There were multiple relatively hyperdense nodules in the mass. The mass and the nodules showed slight enhancement on
enhanced CT (Figure 1D). For further evaluation of the patient, 18F-FDG FDG PET/CT was performed showing slightly increased FDG uptake of
the mass and the small nodules (Figure 2). Mesenteric panniculitis was suspected. Small bowel capsule endoscopy showed grape-shaped red
nodules in the luminal wall of the ileum (Figure 3A). Abdominal coronal T2-weighted MR image (A) showed a large hyperintense mass (arrows)
in the middle and lower abdomen. Transverse (B) and coronal (C) enhanced T1-weighted MR images showed many hypervascular nodules (arrows)
scattered in the mass. Coronal enhanced CT (D) showed the mass involved mesentery and ileum (arrow). Maximum intensity projection PET (A),
coronal (B) and transverse (C) CT, corresponding PET (D and E), and fused (F and G) images showed slightly increased FDG uptake of the mass
(arrows). Mesenteric panniculitis was suspected. Small bowel capsule endoscopy showed grape-shaped red nodules in the luminal wall of the
ileum (A). Photomicrograph (C, hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×20) showed proliferation and dilation of the mucosal
lymphatics of the ileum, containing a large amount of red blood cells. In the abdominal mass, there are many irregular tumor nodules (arrow)
(B, hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×20). Marked lymphatic proliferation containing red blood cells (arrow) encircled the
tumor nodules (D, hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×100). The patient underwent resection of the abdominal mass and a segment
of the ileum (length: 60 cm) invaded by the abdominal mass. Photomicrograph of the resected specimen showed proliferation and dilation of
the mucosal lymphatics in the ileum, containing a large amount of red blood cells (Figure 3B). In the abdominal mass, there are many
irregular tumor nodules (Figure 3C). Scattered throughout the tumor nodules were epithelioid or glomeruloid areas with abundant capillary
sized vessels of attenuated lumina. There was dense hyaline sclerosis in the tumor nodules. The tumor cells were positive for CD31, CD34,
and D2-40. Ki-67 staining showed the proportion of the positive tumor cells was about 1%. Marked lymphatic proliferation containing red
blood cells encircled the tumor nodules (Figure 3D). The imaging and histopathologic findings were consistent with KH associated with
lymphangiomatosis involving mesentery and ileum. After surgery, the patient's symptoms improved. Follow-up laboratory tests showed normal
red blood cell count and hemoglobin level. KHs occur mainly in children and rarely in adults. About 82% of these tumors occur within the
first decade of life and 45% within the first year.1 The most common locations are superficial or deep soft tissues of the extremities
followed by head and neck.1 Approximately half of the KH patients can develop Kasabach–Merritt phenomenon marked by severe thrombocytopenia
and a variable degree of anemia.1,2 Patients with Kasabach–Merritt phenomenon tended to be younger.1 Why Kasabach–Merritt phenomenon
develops in the setting of KH is unclear. One explanation is that unique architectural and/or endothelial differences in KH that may promote
consumption coagulopathy.1 In KH, small convoluted capillaries arise directly from large vessels in a serial or linear fashion, arguably
creating a situation that results in turbulence leading to platelet activation and aggregation.1 This patient only had anemia and no
thrombocytopenia. Numerous grape-shaped red nodules in the luminal wall of the ileum revealed by the small bowel capsule endoscopy were
dilated lymphatics containing red blood cells. Intestinal bleeding and subsequent anemia may result from the ruptured lymphatics. Where was
the blood of the dilated lymphatics came from was unclear. It may be from the tumor vessels. Further investigation is needed. Approximately
two-thirds of KHs exhibit lymphatic abnormalities.1 Like this case, the lymphatic proliferation can result in a mass lesion which supporting
for the idea that lymphatic abnormalities are not simply the result of lymphatic obstruction with lymphangiectasis but represent an
intrinsic part of the lesion.1 One hypothesis is that KH begins as a lymphatic malformation onto which a vascular component is engrafted.1
Another hypothesis is that KH actually produces lymphatic endothelial growth factors, which incite proliferation of adjacent lymphatics.1,2
CT and MRI findings of KH associated with lymphangiomatosis have rarely been reported before.8–12 On CT or MRI, KHs tend to demonstrate ill-
defined margins and involvement of multiple tissue planes. KHs show hypointensity similar to that of muscle on T1-weighted images,
heterogeneously hyperintense relative to that of muscle on T2-weighted images and heterogeneous enhancement.12 In this case, the
lymphangiomatosis overshadowed the small tumor nodules resulting in unusual imaging findings. Enhanced CT clearly showed the border of the
abdominal lymphangiomatosis and the involved organs, but unable showed the small tumor nodules in the lymphangiomatosis. Compared with
enhanced CT, enhanced MRI clearly detected the hypervascular tumor nodules on the lower signal background of the lymphangiomatosis. The
lymphangiomatosis was better demonstrated on T2-weighted images with remarkable hyperintensity. We searched the electronic database of
PubMed with terms of “fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose,” “positron emission tomography,” and “kaposiform hemangioendothelioma.” To our
knowledge, 18F-FDG PET/CT findings of KH have not been reported before. In this case, the tumor nodules showed slight FDG uptake mimicking
benign lymph nodes. The lymphangiomatosis also showed mild FDG uptake, which may be due to accumulation of FDG in the lymphatics. This case
indicates, although rare, KH associated with lymphangiomatosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of abnormal mesenteric FDG
accumulation, including lymphangioma,13 mesenteric panniculitis,14–16 and mesenteric malignancies with mesenteric panniculitis.16 In
conclusion, this is a rare case of KH associated with lymphangiomatosis involving mesentery and ileum. This case indicates finding
hypervascular nodules on the background of lymphangiomatosis may be helpful for diagnosis of KH. Ethical approval was obtained from the
Ethics Committee of Changhai Hospital, Shanghai, China. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. Abbreviations: 18F-FDG = fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose, CT = computed tomography, KH = kaposiform
hemangioendothelioma, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET = positron emission tomography. AD and LZ contributed equally to the study. The
authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
