Recurrent manic-like episodes can be induced by hyponatremia possibly due to empty sella syndrome. In the present case, the patient was
proven to have syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion with manic symptoms that resolved after the normalization of
the plasma sodium level. To our knowledge, this is the first case of hyponatremia-induced manic symptoms in a patient with empty sella
syndrome. More attention should be paid to late-onset mania, because it may be the sign of a more serious medical problem. Empty sella
syndrome is a condition in which the pituitary fossa appears to be largely empty of tissues and filled by cerebrospinal fluid. Between 20%
and 50% of empty sella patients have endocrinologic dysfunction,1 and hypopituitarism is one of the most common symptoms. Recurrent
hyponatremia may be a presenting feature of empty sella resulting from hypopituitarism and may cause various psychiatric symptoms such as
anxiety, depression, mania, and even psychosis. Here, we describe a case of empty sella with recurrent hyponatremia and manic episodes
mimicking late-onset bipolar disorder. Mrs C is a 69-year-old married and retired Taiwanese woman who lives with her husband. She was
referred to our acute psychiatric department because of her manic symptoms including elation and irritability, more talkativeness than
usual, decreased need for sleep, and grandiosity for 2 days. We performed mental status examination to the patient and found that she was
oriented and alert, but garrulous with pressured speech, expansive mood, flight of ideas, and delusions of grandeur. On Young Mania Rating
Scale, her total score is 24 (scores 4 in elevated mood, 4 in increased motor activity-energy, 1 in sexual interest, 3 in sleep, 2 in
irritability, 4 in speech, 1 in language-thought disorder, 2 in content, 0 in disruptive-aggressive behavior, 0 in appearance, and 3 in
insight). There is no waxing or waning of cognitive functioning. About the results of the Mini-Mental State Examination, she had intact
short-term memory and judgment and no obvious deficit in abstract thinking, and was well oriented and able to perform all activities of
daily living without assistance, even with manic symptoms. She was euvolemic with a plasma sodium level of 116 mmol/L, serum osmolality of
268 mOsm/kg, urine osmolality of 328 mOsm/kg, urine sodium of 62 mmol/L, normal serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels of
0.43 mg/dL and 10 mg/dL, respectively, 7 AM serum cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels of 12.5 μg/dL and 14.4 μg/dL,
respectively, and thyroid stimulating hormone and free T4 blood levels of 1.12 μIU/mL and 9.97 pg/mL, respectively. All characteristics
indicated were sufficient to make the diagnosis of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion without the need to
determine antidiuretic hormone (ADH) levels. She had normal plasma growth hormone and prolactin levels, but below normal plasma luteinizing
hormone, progesterone, and follicle stimulating hormone levels. She denied having a history of alcohol and other substance use. Brain
magnetic resonance imaging revealed an empty sella and intrasphenoidal meningocele formation (Figure 1). Because the patient had never
undergone any previous head surgery or radiotherapy, primary empty sella was the preferred diagnosis. Her plasma sodium level had returned
to 132 mmol/L by 48 hours after treatment with 300 mL of 3% intravenous NaCl, and her mood became euthymic with no residual mood symptoms.
She was then discharged. Empty sella combined with intrasphenoidal meningocele formation in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of brain.
Sagittal T1-weighted. Huge cystic structure from pituitary sella herniated into sphenoid sinuses causing sellar floor destruction and wall
of sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses remodeling is found. This case report does not need ethical approval from ethics committee or institutional
review board. The inform consent by the patient is obtained. We already informed the patient about the report during the admission course
and after the acute treatment. The case report has been fully explained to the patient and her daughter. They have agreed to participate in
this case report. There have been 3 previously reported cases of hyponatremia induced mania.2–4 To our knowledge, this is the first case of
hyponatremia-induced manic symptoms in a patient with empty sella syndrome. In this case, the patient was proven to have SIADH, and the
manic symptoms resolved after normalization of plasma sodium level. Hyponatremia is one of the most frequently occurring electrolyte
imbalances seen in psychiatric patients. Severe hyponatremia may cause different symptoms that resemble mental illness. According to Ekblom
et al,5 up to 80% of primary empty sella syndrome patients have some degree of hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. Panhypopituitarism,
isolated secondary hypogonadism, hyperprolactinemia, and isolated ACTH insufficiency are documented in another case.6 Severe hyponatremia
due to hypopituitarism and adrenal insufficiency is not a very rare situation. Petridis et al7 reported a case of hyponatremia in empty
sella caused by hypocortisolism. The most accepted hypothesis is that the decrease in serum cortisol due to panhypopituitarism fails to
inhibit expression of ADH, with secondary adrenal insufficiency leading to hyponatremia. However, in our case, the serum cortisol level at 7
AM was 12.5 μg/dL, thus not low enough for the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency. Nevertheless, stress may elevate basal cortisol level and
possibly explain why ADH expression was not inhibited in a manic patient with higher cortisol level. ADH and ACTH stimulation tests might
have helped clarify the relation between empty sella and hyponatremia, but neither test was conducted in the present case. The serum ADH
level was not obtained because our laboratory lacked the appropriate kit. However, we had sufficient evidence from clinical features and
other laboratory data to make the diagnosis. Steroids may be used to treat low cortisol levels but none was given to our patient because her
cortisol level was normal; therefore, insufficient cortisol as a cause of SIADH cannot be ruled out.8 Bipolar disorder is a chronic illness
with recurring episodes of mania and depression that can last from 1 day to months. The mean age of onset for bipolar I disorder is 18
years.9 Yassa et al10 selected 50 as the cutoff age for late onset bipolar disorder. About 25% of all bipolar patients are older adults.11
In geriatric patients, rather than bipolar disorder, new onset manic symptoms may be due to other medical conditions.12 These medical
conditions may include multiple sclerosis, stroke, brain tumors, traumatic brain injury, systemic infection with the human immunodeficiency
virus, hyperthyroidism, epilepsy, vitamin deficiencies, dementia, and medication adverse effect. Our laboratory examination, brain magnetic
resonance imaging survey, history taking, and physical examination excluded most of the possible causes mentioned above. Human
immunodeficiency virus testing, electroencephalography, and further dementia survey were warranted to rule out other etiologies, although
she had no recent history of sexual exposure, seizures, or dementia. This case provides evidence for hyponatremia as a possible cause of
recurrent manic-like episodes. In our case, the hyponatremia was possibly caused by empty sella. Attention should be paid to late-onset
manic symptoms, which might indicate the presence of secondary organic etiologies. Further study of the relationship between empty sella and
hyponatremia-induced mania is warranted. Abbreviations: ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone, ADH = antidiuretic hormone, SIADH = syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
