An estimated 100,000 cases of congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) occur worldwide each year. The reported mortality rate for infants with CRS
is up to 33%. The cellular mechanisms responsible for the multiple congenital defects in CRS are presently unknown. Here we identify cell
types positive for rubella virus (RV) in CRS infants. Cells and organs involved in RV replication were identified in paraffin-embedded
autopsy tissues from three fatal case-patients by histopathologic examination and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining using a rabbit
polyclonal RV antibody. Normal rabbit antisera and RV antisera preabsorbed with highly purified RV served as negative controls. RV antigen
was found in interstitial fibroblasts in the heart, adventitial fibroblasts of large blood vessels, alveolar macrophages, progenitor cells
of the outer granular layer of the brain, and in capillary endothelium and basal plate in the placenta. The antibody specificity was
verified by IHC staining of multiple tissue sections from other infectious disease cases. RV infection of each cell type is consistent with
abnormalities which have been identified in patients with CRS, in the heart, large blood vessels, and brain. Antigen distribution was
consistent with inflammatory response to vascular injury and systemic spread of RV. The identification of RV positive cell types in CRS is
important to better understand the pathology and pathogenesis of CRS. • Autopsy tissues from three fatal CRS cases were analyzed
immunohistochemically. • Rigorous negative controls were used to verify the specificity of immunostaining. • Rubella antigen was detected in
cardiac fibroblasts, alveolar macrophages, neuronal progenitor cells and endothelial cells. • Rubella antigen localization was consistent
with CRS pathology. Wild type rubella virus (RV) transferred from mothers with rubella to their unborn children results in
100,000 infants/year worldwide born with birth defects collectively known as congenital rubella syndrome (CRS). Indeed, RV is the most
teratogenic infectious agent known. Identifying cell types involved in RV infection of infants with CRS was possible using tissues from
three Romanian infants, who unfortunately died, and using a very specific antiserum to RV. The cell types involved in RV infection which
were identified were consistent with the pathology of CRS. Additional studies further enumerating the cell types involved in CRS are needed.
Autopsy tissues from three fatal CRS cases were analyzed immunohistochemically. Rigorous negative controls were used to verify the
specificity of immunostaining. Rubella antigen was detected in cardiac fibroblasts, alveolar macrophages, neuronal progenitor cells and
endothelial cells. Rubella antigen localization was consistent with CRS pathology. Wild type rubella virus (RV) transferred from mothers
with rubella to their unborn children results in 100,000 infants/year worldwide born with birth defects collectively known as congenital
rubella syndrome (CRS). Indeed, RV is the most teratogenic infectious agent known. Identifying cell types involved in RV infection of
infants with CRS was possible using tissues from three Romanian infants, who unfortunately died, and using a very specific antiserum to RV.
The cell types involved in RV infection which were identified were consistent with the pathology of CRS. Additional studies further
enumerating the cell types involved in CRS are needed. Rubella virus (RV) is an enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus of the
genus Rubivirus, the family Togaviridae. Congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) is a serious disease caused by RV infection in utero (Plotkin et
al., 2011). During the period of maternal viremia, RV may infect the placenta, pass the placental barrier and enter the fetal bloodstream,
possibly through emboli of necrotic endothelial cells originating from infected chorion (Tondury and Smith, 1966, Driscoll, 1969, Ornoy et
al., 1973, Lima et al., 1977). If the fetus is infected during the first trimester of pregnancy, the virus usually persists until term in
multiple fetal organs causing a spectrum of birth defects that includes hearing impairment, and ocular and cardiovascular abnormalities
(Rawls, 1968, Singer et al., 1967, Esterly and Oppenheimer, 1973). Birth defects in individual cases can be minor or severe, affecting many
organs or only a few (Lindquist et al., 1965, Rosenberg et al., 1981). Gestational age at the time of maternal infection is the most
important determinant of fetal damage. The risk of fetal infection with congenital anomalies is highest during the first 11–12 weeks of
gestation, but then sharply decreases with increasing gestational age (Alford et al., 1964, Sheridan, 1964, Miller et al., 1982). Fetal
infection after 16 weeks of gestation typically results in an infant without clinical signs of CRS and such cases are classified as
congenital rubella infection (CRI) if laboratory confirmed by IgM ELISA or virus detection. A significant non-CRS manifestation of in utero
rubella virus infection is spontaneous abortion which occurs in about 20% of rubella infections acquired during pregnancy. The limited fetal
damage after the first trimester is presumably because organogenesis is complete, maternal IgG is transferred to the fetus, and a fetal
immune response is present. Late manifestations of CRS have also been recognized. Ocular consequences of CRS are observed after the neonatal
period and CRS has recently been associated with Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis (Winchester et al., 2013, de Groot-Mijnes et al., 2006).
A rare disability associated with CRS is progressive rubella panencephalitis (Townsend et al., 1976). Another late onset disability is
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus; in a follow-up study, 40% of CRS patients developed evidence of overt or latent diabetes (Menser et
al., 1974). Children with CRS may be infectious for the entire first year of life, rarely even longer (Cooper and Krugman, 1967, Rawls et
al., 1967), and can transmit the virus causing infection in non-immune individuals (Hardy et al., 1965, Greaves et al., 1982, Schiff and
Dine, 1965). The infant mortality rate for CRS can be as high as 33% (Cooper et al., 1965, Toizumi et al., 2014). Disability-adjusted life
years (DALY) lost per CRS case was estimated to be between 19 and 38 depending on the country income and health care resources (Simons et
al., 2014). Rubella and CRS are rare in most developed countries but are still a significant risk for non-immune pregnant women in
developing regions and an estimated 100,000 CRS cases occur worldwide each year (Cutts and Vynnycky, 1999). In the absence of vaccination,
rubella is an endemic disease with epidemics every 6 to 9 years (Horstmann, 1971). The pathology of CRS was comprehensively documented
following the major rubella pandemic in 1963–1965. Histopathologic investigations of fetal CRS cases revealed tissue damage in multiple
fetal organs such as the heart, blood vessels, crystalline lens, ears, brain, teeth, and liver (Tondury and Smith, 1966, Driscoll, 1969,
Esterly and Oppenheimer, 1969). Based on the localization of lesions, it was suggested that endothelial cells, myocardial cells, skeletal
muscle cells and particular epithelial cells of the developing lens and inner ear were infected with RV (Tondury and Smith, 1966). Only one
study demonstrated the presence of RV antigen in tissue sections of the heart and skeletal muscle of a single CRS case; each focus of RV
infection involved only a few cells, which were histologically entirely normal (Woods et al., 1966). However, modern techniques and reagents
should provide more precise identification of cell types infected by RV. A recent study of three aborted fetuses with congenital rubella
infection identified RV antigen in multiple organs, including the lung, kidney, brain, spleen, heart and ciliary body (Nguyen et al., 2015).
Epithelial cells and mononuclear progenitor cells in multiple organs and neuronal cells in cerebral cortex were reported to be the
predominant cell types, in which RV capsid protein was detected by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. However, the precise cell types in
which RV replicates and persists in infants carried to term or born with CRS have remained largely uncharacterized. A nationwide rubella
outbreak occurred in Romania in 2011–2012 with more than 20,000 rubella cases in unvaccinated individuals, and 22 laboratory confirmed CRS
cases, including ten deaths and one stillbirth reported by the end of 2012 (Janta et al., 2012). Rubella virus genotype 2B was associated
with this outbreak (unpublished data). Here, we describe the clinical manifestations, laboratory investigations, and histopathologic changes
in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens obtained from three children with fatal congenital rubella, and the application
of an IHC assay for the detection and localization of rubella virus antigens. We assert implications of the IHC results for CRS
pathogenesis. These three cases were all carried to or almost to term and thus this study describes RV antigen positive cell types in CRS,
rather than cells that were transiently infected during pre-term pathogenesis. FFPE autopsy tissues of three CRS case-patients with serology
or RT-PCR confirmed RV infection were submitted to the CDC for histopathologic and immunohistopathologic evaluation. No other potential
causes of defects in these infants (e.g. environmental exposures or genetic mutations) were noted. Case 1 A premature girl (33 gestation
weeks) was born on November 13, 2012. The course of pregnancy was not medically supervised. The APGAR (Appearance, Pulse, Grimace, Activity,
Respiration) score was 7 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min after birth. Scores of 7 and above indicate that a newborn is healthy and does not require
immediate medical interventions. The girl weighed 2050 g and had pulmonary hypertension. CRS diagnosis was laboratory confirmed by a
positive test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM ELISA) from serum collected on the 24th day of life. She died after 96 days. Immunological
tests were negative for other teratogenic pathogens (cytomegalovirus (CMV), mycoplasma pneumonia, and herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and
2). Examination and autopsy revealed bilateral congenital cataracts, liver dystrophy, cardiomegaly and multiple cardiac anomalies including
atrial septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and patent foramen ovale. FFPE tissue samples were available from the cerebral hemisphere,
cerebellum, myocardium, aorta, lung, liver, pancreas, intestine, kidney, spleen and thymus. Case 2 A girl (35 gestation weeks) was stillborn
on November 23, 2012. The mother was serologically confirmed (IgM ELISA) to have had rubella in the first trimester of pregnancy (week 13).
Autopsy revealed a globular heart with a single atrium, primary pulmonary atelectasis, and cerebral edema. FFPE blocks were prepared from
the placenta, myocardium, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, and umbilical cord. Note that CRS is by definition a syndrome which must be found in
a live infant. We have considered this term stillbirth a CRS case for the purposes of this study. Case 3 A boy was born on December 12, 2012
after 39 weeks gestation period having birth weight of 1160 g, consistent with small for gestational age. APGAR score was 4 at 5 min. The
course of pregnancy for this case was not medically supervised. The clinical signs included respiratory distress, congenital pneumonia,
cataract, glaucoma, hearing loss, congenital heart disease, patent ductus arteriosus, splenomegaly, microcephaly, developmental delay,
radiolucent bone disease, and jaundice within 24 h. Serum and nasopharyngeal swab were collected 5 days after the birth. The serum was IgM-
positive and rubella virus was detected in nasopharyngeal swab by real-time RT-PCR. The baby died when 21 days old after cardiorespiratory
failure. FFPE blocks from the liver, lung, kidney, spleen, pulmonary artery, brain, and skeletal muscle were available. A premature girl (33
gestation weeks) was born on November 13, 2012. The course of pregnancy was not medically supervised. The APGAR (Appearance, Pulse, Grimace,
Activity, Respiration) score was 7 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min after birth. Scores of 7 and above indicate that a newborn is healthy and does
not require immediate medical interventions. The girl weighed 2050 g and had pulmonary hypertension. CRS diagnosis was laboratory confirmed
by a positive test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM ELISA) from serum collected on the 24th day of life. She died after 96 days.
Immunological tests were negative for other teratogenic pathogens (cytomegalovirus (CMV), mycoplasma pneumonia, and herpes simplex virus
(HSV) types 1 and 2). Examination and autopsy revealed bilateral congenital cataracts, liver dystrophy, cardiomegaly and multiple cardiac
anomalies including atrial septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and patent foramen ovale. FFPE tissue samples were available from the
cerebral hemisphere, cerebellum, myocardium, aorta, lung, liver, pancreas, intestine, kidney, spleen and thymus. A girl (35 gestation weeks)
was stillborn on November 23, 2012. The mother was serologically confirmed (IgM ELISA) to have had rubella in the first trimester of
pregnancy (week 13). Autopsy revealed a globular heart with a single atrium, primary pulmonary atelectasis, and cerebral edema. FFPE blocks
were prepared from the placenta, myocardium, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, and umbilical cord. Note that CRS is by definition a syndrome
which must be found in a live infant. We have considered this term stillbirth a CRS case for the purposes of this study. A boy was born on
December 12, 2012 after 39 weeks gestation period having birth weight of 1160 g, consistent with small for gestational age. APGAR score was
4 at 5 min. The course of pregnancy for this case was not medically supervised. The clinical signs included respiratory distress, congenital
pneumonia, cataract, glaucoma, hearing loss, congenital heart disease, patent ductus arteriosus, splenomegaly, microcephaly, developmental
delay, radiolucent bone disease, and jaundice within 24 h. Serum and nasopharyngeal swab were collected 5 days after the birth. The serum
was IgM-positive and rubella virus was detected in nasopharyngeal swab by real-time RT-PCR. The baby died when 21 days old after
cardiorespiratory failure. FFPE blocks from the liver, lung, kidney, spleen, pulmonary artery, brain, and skeletal muscle were available.
The detection of rubella IgM was performed using Enzygnost Anti-Rubella Virus/IgM kit (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Products GmbH) and
Rubella virus IgM micro-capture kit (IBL International). Fresh tissue samples from the lung, kidney, spleen, lens, liver, brain, thymus, and
heart were collected only for Case 3. All tested samples were positive by real-time RT-PCR assay, which was previously described in detail
(Abernathy et al., 2009) using the SuperScript™ III Platinum® One-Step Quantitative RT-PCR System (Invitrogen, United States). Skeletal
muscle and myocardium samples were negative. Subsequent genotyping based on the standard genotyping window (nt 8731–9469) was performed by
conventional RT-PCR reactions (QIAGEN OneStep RT PCR Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), using the protocol recommended by the Global Measles and
Rubella Laboratory Network with minor modifications (Standardization of the nomenclature for genetic characteris, Namuwulya et al., 2014).
For sequencing PRISM BigDye Terminator v3.1 Ready Reaction Cycle Sequencing kit was used (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California) and
sequences were determined on a PRISM 3100-Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California). The genotype of rubella
virus was identified as 2B (GenBank Acc. # KR021370). Rabbit polyclonal anti-rubella antibody was raised against purified rubella virions
(strain HPV77, Meridian Life Science) by the CDC core facility. The specificity of the antibody was documented with Western blotting and
immunofluorescence assays using RV infected and mock infected cell cultures (data not shown) and verified immunohistochemically by testing
the antibody against cases or cell controls positive for other infections associated with congenital abnormalities (Toxoplasma gondii,
varicella zoster virus, parvovirus B19, CMV, HSV-1) and measles virus. Hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) staining was performed for histopathological
evaluation. The IHC assay for RV antigen was performed on 3-μm sections of FFPE tissues. Deparaffinized and rehydrated tissue sections were
placed in a LAB Vision autostainer and digested in 0.1 mg/ml proteinase K (Roche Diagnostics GmbH Mannheim, Germany). The staining process
was done with a LabVision System on IntelliPATH Autostainer 2 × Secondary using UltraVision LPValue Large Volume Detection System AP Polymer
kit (Thermo Scientific, UK) according to the kit instructions. Tissue sections were incubated with a rabbit anti-RV polyclonal antibody for
30 min followed by sequential incubations with enhancer, polymer and fast red substrate (Dako Corporation). Sections were then
counterstained in Meyer's hematoxylin (Fisher Scientific) using the Sakura Automatic Slide Stainer and mounted with aqueous mounting medium
(Lerner Laboratories, Pittsburg, PA). The optimal dilution of the anti-rubella antibody for the IHC assay was determined (1:500) by using a
series of titrations applied to sections from FFPE blocks with RV-infected A549 human lung carcinoma cells (ATCC#CCL-185) mixed with normal
human tissues, such sections also served as a positive control in each IHC assay. Negative controls were run in parallel and consisted of
sequential tissue sections of case patients each incubated with either normal rabbit serum or the rubella antibody pre-absorbed with
purified rubella. Interpretation of IHC assay results for rubella virus included determination of the location of the positive reaction in a
cell (nuclear or cytoplasmic staining), the type of cells infected and the intensity of staining. Histopathologic changes and IHC evidence
for the presence of RV antigens were documented in some organs from all cases. Microscopic examination of all lungs from cases showed
congestion, intra-alveolar edema, and interstitial inflammation (Fig. 1a–c). The inflammation was mild and consisted predominantly of
mononuclear cells. Histopathological changes of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) including edema, hyaline membranes, and inflammation were seen
in only one case (Case 1). Mild medial arterial hypertrophy was seen in some vessels in Case 1, Case 2, however luminal vascular occlusion
or arterial thrombi were not identified. Immunohistochemical staining exhibited viral antigens in alveolar macrophages. Globular aggregates
of rubella antigens were seen (Fig. 1d). In Cases 2 and 3, no significant histopathologic findings were observed. Morphologic myocardial
damage in the CRS autopsy cases was not significant. In some areas the heart showed reactive myocytes with plump nuclei and interstitial
inflammation (Fig. 2a). No evidence of myocarditis was observed in Case 2. Heart tissue was not available for Case 3. Viral immunostaining
was seen in fibroblasts in Case 1 (Fig. 2b) and Case 2 (not shown). Multiple sections of the aorta (Fig. 3a) and pulmonary artery (not
shown) were examined and no morphological features were seen. However, numerous fibroblasts strongly positive for RV antigens were detected
in adventitia of aorta (Case 1) and in the pulmonary artery (Case 3) (Fig. 3b). No histopathological evidence of encephalitis was observed
in any of case-patients with brain samples (Fig. 4a, c). Small areas of calcification were observed. Focal staining of progenitor cells in
the external granular cell layer was seen in the cerebellum of Case 1, but not in Case 3 (Fig. 4b, d). A placenta FFPE block was available
only for Case 2. The chorionic villi of the placenta were mature and with abundant blood vessels. The decidua showed focal area of necrosis.
No evidence of inflammation was observed. Viral antigens were seen primarily in endothelial cells (Fig. 5a, b) and the basal plate of the
placenta (Fig. 5c). Histopathological findings in other organs were nonspecific. The liver in Case 1 showed diffuse small droplet
macrovesicular steatosis without significant inflammation, while in Case 2 there was marked hepatocyte swelling, cholestasis, congestion,
and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Case 3 showed mid-zonal bridging necrosis, marked cholestasis and scattered dystrophic calcifications. No
immunohistochemical RV staining was identified in other organs. This report presents histopathological and immunohistochemical studies on
autopsy samples from three fatal CRS patients that occurred in 2012 in Romania. This study identified new target cells for rubella virus in
the tissues of these infants. One of the important findings was localization of RV antigen in cardiac fibroblasts in the myocardium of two
patients and adventitia fibroblasts of large blood vessels (aorta and pulmonary artery). Consistent with descriptions of focal localization
of lesions in cardiovascular tissues (Tondury and Smith, 1966), RV antigen staining was found to be focal. The one previous IHC study of an
infant with CRS identified very compact scattered foci of rubella infected cells in cardiac muscle fibers (Woods et al., 1966). In cases
presented here we did not observe IHC staining in cardiomyocytes. However, areas of histopathology involving only a few cardiomyocytes were
often seen near IHC positive fibroblasts. Perhaps the cases we studied had healed lesions after rubella virus was cleared from
cardiomyocytes. Cardiac fibroblasts play a critical role in development of the cardiovascular system and maintaining normal cardiac
function, while adventitia fibroblasts are important players in inflammatory response to vascular injury (Deb and Ubil, 2014). Infection of
these cell types could have significant involvement in the congenital cardiovascular malformations seen in CRS patients. Another novel
finding was the identification of RV antigen in progenitor cells of outer granular layer of the brain. This cell type in the brain of CRS
patients has not been previously known to be infected with rubella virus. However, the presence of unresolved outer granular layer and
underdeveloped internal granular layer in a CRS case has been reported (Kemper et al., 1973). Mental retardation and microcephaly are
frequently seen in infants with congenital rubella syndrome. In vitro studies suggested that the main cell type permissive to RV infection
in developing brain tissue is the astrocyte (Chantler et al., 1995). Pathology studies of the brain of infants with congenital rubella
syndrome revealed extensive degenerative changes in leptomeningeal and intrinsic arteries and veins of the cerebrum. Vascular damage was
associated with foci of necrosis localized in the deep white matter and gray nuclei, but no developmental malformations or significant
inflammation of the nervous system was found (Rorke and Spiro, 1967, Rorke, 1973). During CNS development, multipotent neural stem cells
give rise first to various kinds of specified precursor cells, which proliferate extensively before terminally differentiating into either
neurons or glial cells. These progenitor cells migrate to different areas of the brain and are involved in normal development of the CNS.
Thus, RV infection of progenitor cells could lead to a variety of malformations of the CNS, such as those found in CRS patients. Reports of
congenital infection with other pathogens support the hypothesis that immature cells are apt to be target cells for infection in the
developing brain (Feuer et al., 2003, Dietrich et al., 2004, Tsutsui et al., 2008). HSV, CMV, toxoplasmosis, and other infections are potent
disrupters of fetal neurodevelopment leading to abnormalities in brain structure (e.g., hypoplasia of brain regions) and behavior disorders,
including mental retardation and learning disabilities (Brown and Derkits, 2010). In a mouse model of fetal CMV infection neural stem
progenitor cells in developing brains are the cell type that is most susceptible to CMV infection. The resulting disturbance of cellular
events such as proliferation, differentiation and migration was suggested to be the main cause of CMV brain disorders (Tsutsui et al.,
2008). Further studies are necessary to determine whether RV infection of neural progenitor cells has any effects on their proliferation,
regeneration and differentiation. The histopathologic changes of DAD were observed only in Case 1. This infant had interstitial pneumonia
and pulmonary hypertension, which frequently occur in CRS cases (Singer et al., 1967, Boner et al., 1983, Franklin and Kelley, 2001).
Pulmonary arterial hypertension has been recently identified as the major contributor to mortality in CRS cases (Toizumi et al., 2014). We
detected intense IHC staining in alveolar macrophages. We did not observe staining of alveolar epithelial cells, which were shown to be IHC
positive in the rubella infected fetuses examined by Nguyen et al. (2015). Since RV infection in tissues is focal, and RV antigen is
typically detected in a limited number of cells, the lack of immunostaining of alveolar epithelial cells in the present study might simply
be due to the absence of infected cells in those lung sections that we were able to analyze. Another possibility is RV infection in alveolar
epithelial cells or other cell types in the lung have been cleared, but RV antigen was still present in alveolar macrophages. It is
currently unclear whether rubella virus replicates in macrophages. This study also identified capillary endothelial cells and the basal
plate as the primary targets in the placenta. These data are in agreement with the results of one large study of placentas from CRS cases,
in which rubella-specific immunofluorescence was detected in epithelial cells of chorionic blood vessels and amniotic epithelium;
intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (virions) were described in decidual cells in the basal plate and cytotrophoblasts (Garcia et al., 1985).
Infection of endothelial cells can result in capillary necrosis and blockage of capillaries impacting placenta functions and leading to
growth retardation of the fetus. Infection of endothelial cells may account for some of the vascular anomalies and viral spread, whereas
infection of cells in the basal plate may lead to placental pathologies and thus account for the multitude of congenital malformations in
CRS patients. One of the overall purposes of this work was to catalogue the cell types with evidence of rubella infection in CRS cases. This
study extends the description of the pathology of CRS by IHC beyond the single previous report of RV infected cells in specimens from a
single CRS case almost 50 years ago. A complimentary study to catalogue the cell types with evidence of rubella infection from fetuses
addressed which RV infected cell types were found during the development of CRS (Nguyen et al., 2015). The only RV positive cell type that
was found in the study of fetuses and the current study was neuronal cells. This is not unexpected because the positive cells during
progression to CRS and the positive cells in CRS (term babies) may well be different due to transiently infected cells during the
progression to CRS. We expect that additional studies of RV positive cell types in RV infected fetuses and in fatal CRS cases will be
necessary to fully describe and to understand the molecular pathogenesis and the pathology of CRS. However, as global elimination targets
are met, opportunities to conduct such additional studies in the future will diminish (Andrus et al., 2011). This work was supported by core
funding from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The authors do not have a commercial or other association that might pose a
conflict of interest. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the view of the
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We thank Dr. Mick N. Mulders, Scientist, Global VPD Laboratory Networks, World
Health Organization, for facilitating the initial collaborations which led to this study. We thank Dominique Rollin for help with control
slide preparation. We thank Public Health Districts, Brasov and Salaj counties and Filantropia Hospital, for collection of autopsy tissues
and preparation of FFPE tissue blocks. We thank Dr. Gillian L. Hale, a pathologist in Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch, for help in
preparing responses to the reviewers' comments. Pulmonary histopathologic and immunohistochemical features in a fatal CRS case (Case 1).
Low-power image of lung (a) shows congestion, edema, mild interstitial inflammation and hyaline membrane formation. Diffuse alveolar damage
and interstitial pneumonitis (b). High-power image (c) shows intra-alveolar macrophages. Rubella virus antigens in intra-alveolar
macrophages (d). Note immunostaining of globular inclusions. Cardiac histopathologic and immunohistochemical features in fatal cases of CRS.
Higher-power magnification of the heart (a) showing reactive myocytes with plump nuclei and focal inflammatory cells, but no clinically
significant inflammation (H&E staining). Abundant immunostaining of interstitial fibroblasts (b). Aortic histopathologic and
immunohistochemical features in a fatal case of CRS (Case 1). Low-power magnification of the aorta (a) shows the lack of pathologic changes
(H&E staining). Immunostaining of mesenchymal cells (between myocytes) and numerous fibroblasts in a section of the aorta (b). Central
nervous system histopathologic and immunohistochemical features in a fatal case of CRS (Case 1). Low-power (a) and high-power (b) images of
the cerebellum show meninges with no evidence of inflammation. Immunostaining of neuronal cells (c and d) in external granular cell layer of
the cerebellum. Immunohistopathologic features in the placenta of Case 2. Low-power (a) and high-power (b) images of sections of chorionic
villi show immunostaining of endothelial cells. (c) Section of the placenta (maternal plate) shows extracellular immunostaining throughout
the basal plate.
