Several species of trichomonads are intestinal or urogenital parasites of humans and animals, with only a few species typically being
located in the oral cavity. The prevalence of oral trichomoniasis in dogs is approximately 15–25 %, although the prevalence varies among
different populations and depends on age, sex and the health of the oral cavity. A case of mandibular gland infestation by trichomonads in a
13-year-old female Dachshund with advanced periodontal disease and oral trichomoniasis is reported. The dog was referred due to a history of
a painless swelling over the left submandibular region that increased in size over time. Based on physical and ultrasound examinations, a
final diagnosis of mandibular gland cyst was established and transcutaneous needle aspiration was carried out. Numerous mobile trophozoites
of trichomonads were found by microscopy and culturing for trichomonas was performed. The species was finally characterized as Trichomonas
tenax by polymerase chain reaction and sequencing. Studies have shown that T. tenax can be found in humans in atypical locations such as the
salivary glands and upper and lower respiratory tracts. According to our knowledge this is the first report of T. tenax being present in the
salivary glands of a dog. Because of the relatively high prevalence of trichomoniasis in dogs with periodontal diseases, these parasites
should be considered together with bacterial and viral agents in salivary gland infections, especially in individuals with compromised oral
health. Trichomonadea, commonly known as trichomonads, comprises a class of amitochondriate flagellated protists belonging to the phylum
Parabasalia. They are morphologically characterized by multiple anterior flagella and a single recurrent flagellum that functions as support
for the undulating membrane . Several species are considered to be intestinal or urogenital parasites of humans and animals. Only a few
species are typically present in the oral cavity of animals and to date, oral infestation caused by trichomonads in domestic carnivores have
been reported rarely. The first report on oral trichomoniasis in dogs was done by Hegner and Ratcliffe , who described the species
Trichomonas canistomae. Later, oral trichomoniasis was recorded by Beelitz et al. and Breuker . Recently, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
based molecular characterization of the various trichomonad species isolated from the oral cavity of dogs (mostly from Europe) confirmed the
presence of Trichomonas tenax, Trichomonas canistomae and other Trichomonas sp., . The prevalence of oral trichomoniasis in dogs is
approximately 15–25 %, although the prevalence varies in different populations depending on age, sex and the clinical condition of the oral
cavity [4, 5, 8]. Here we report the infestation of a salivary gland by T. tenax in a 13-year-old dog having advanced periodontal disease. A
13-year-old female Dachshund was presented to the veterinary clinic at the University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland with a history of a
soft painless oval-shaped swelling over the left side of the submandibular area that had gradually increased in size over time (Fig. 1a).
The overlying skin was normal and there was no history of trauma or previous surgery in this region. Regional lymphadenopathy was not
detected by palpation. According to the owner, the dog had suffered from persistent halitosis due to chronic periodontitis for several
years. The dog had been treated with antibiotics or received enhanced treatment for periodontitis such as instrumental debridement and
ultrasonic scaling several times during this period. An intraoral examination confirmed the existence of numerous lesions of the oral mucosa
and advanced periodontal disease (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1Clinical findings in a case of Trichomonas tenax infestation. a Swelling of the
submandibular area. b Periodontitis and lesions of the oral mucosa Clinical findings in a case of Trichomonas tenax infestation. a Swelling
of the submandibular area. b Periodontitis and lesions of the oral mucosa An ultrasound examination of the neck region was performed with
the use of a linear 7.5 MHz transducer. The examination revealed the presence of an anechogenic cystic lesion in the left mandibular
salivary gland measuring approximately 2.5 × 1.3 cm. Normal mandibular tissue was only partially visible. Changes were not observed in the
right mandibular gland or in other neck tissues, including the lymph nodes, which were oval in shape and hypoechoic to the adjacent tissue.
Next, abdominal and thorax radiography was performed in dorsoventral and lateral recumbency, as well as abdominal ultrasonographic
examination. These examinations did not reveal any significant changes. Based on the history and the physical and ultrasound examinations, a
preliminary diagnosis of a mandibular gland cyst was established. Transcutaneous needle aspiration of the left mandibular gland was carried
out and a saliva-like fluid obtained. Microscopic evaluation of fluid revealed numerous, mobile trophozoites of trichomonads, mucus and
aggregation of eosinophils. Swabs were also taken from gingival pockets and revealed the presence of trichomonads and a mixed bacterial
flora. The aspirated fluid was examined bacteriologically for aerobic and anaerobic growth and for yeast cultures but was found to be
without growth. The aspirated cystic content as well as swabs from gingival pockets were inoculated on a diphasic medium for cultivation of
trichomonads: solid phase composition: 9 ml heat-inactivated horse serum, 1 ml 3 % beef extract, and 0.2 g glucose; liquid phase
composition: 0.59 g Na2HPO4, 0.45 g KH2PO4, 8.0 g NaCl, dissolved in 1000 ml distilled water. The complete medium was allocated in sterile
10 ml tubes, supplemented with rice starch and 0.5 ml heat-inactivated horse serum. The media were cultivated at 37 °C and examined under
light microscope every 24 h. Positive cultures were used for morphological characterization based on scanning electron microscopy.
Trophozoites were prepared according to standard procedure for protozoa cells modified according to Szczepaniak . In brief, trichomonads
were isolated by centrifugation 2500×g for 5 min and fixed with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.2 for 2.5 h.
Afterwards, the trichomonads were washed in phosphate-buffer saline and allowed to adhere to glass coverslips precoated with 0.1 % poly-l-
lysine and post-fixed for 2 h with 1 % OsO4. Fixed samples were dehydrated in ethanol and acetone, dried in a critical point using a Polaron
CPD 7501 critical-point dryer and coated with gold/palladium (Au/Pd) in a Polaron Range SC7620 sputter coater. Examinations were carried out
using a ZEISS Ultra Plus scanning electron microscope. Periodontal pocket swabs showed significant growth of trichomonads in the xenic
culture in contrast to the cyst aspirate, which showed slow and poor growth. Undoubtedly, there are factors, which may influence the growth
of trichomonads in vitro, such as low numbers of cells in the inoculum; but in the present study many trophozoites were found by direct
microscopy of the aspirate. Because the aspirate was negative for bacteria and fungi, we hypothesise that the growth of trichomonads from
the aspirate was compromised by the lack of bacteria. While some trichomonads such a T. vaginalis can be established directly into axenic
cultures, others species (especially from alimentary track) require adaptation in monoxenic or polyxenic cultures, which is usually time
consuming and laborious process [10, 11]. Observation of trichomonads from a positive culture (5 days after inoculation) by light microscopy
and scanning electron microscopy revealed numerous trophozoites and a single spherical, non-flagellated pseudocyst. The trophozoites varied
in shape from piriform to spherical with four anterior flagella and a fifth recurrent undulating membrane and axostyle (Fig. 2). Accurate
assessment of flagella size was difficult due to the large number of starch granules and bacteria. The major morphological features were
typical for genera trichomonas or tetratrichomonas . As detection and identification of trichomonads by conventional techniques are
noticeably less reliable than PCR [12, 13], we chose to use molecular methods for taxonomical identification. The analyses were performed on
the aspirate and the classification was based on the analysis of the partial sequence of the gene encoding in the SSU rDNA and the ITS
region (ITS1, 5.8S rDNA, ITS2), after performing PCR with the primers TFR1 (5′-TGC TTC AGT TCA GCG GGT CTT CC-3′) and TFR2 (5′-CGG TAG GTG
AAC CTG CCG TTG G-3′) according to the protocol described by Felleisen . PCR products of approximately 370 bp were obtained from both
samples (cystic content and gingival packet).Fig. 2Scanning electron microscopy of the trophozoites of Trichomonas tenax isolated from the
gingival pocket in a xenic culture. Note the four anterior flagella (AF), recurrent flagellum (RF) and the undulating membrane, axostyle
(Ax) Scanning electron microscopy of the trophozoites of Trichomonas tenax isolated from the gingival pocket in a xenic culture. Note the
four anterior flagella (AF), recurrent flagellum (RF) and the undulating membrane, axostyle (Ax) The DNA sequence was determined directly
from the PCR products on both strands using the same primers employed for PCR at a DNA sequencing core facility (Genomed S.A., Warsaw,
Poland). The obtained sequences were analysed using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool program (BLASTn) and compared with those deposited
at GenBank. The 368 bp fragment showed complete shared identity (100 %) with a sequence of T. tenax (strain—Hs-4:NIH,USA; ATCC 30207) with
accession No. U86615.1 The owner decided not to bear the costs of treatment and the dog was euthanized by the wish of the owner. The dog was
not necropsied. The most common salivary gland diseases in dogs are mucocele, sialocele and sialadenitis . The underlying cause is often not
established, but these conditions may be caused by blunt trauma, foreign bodies, sialoliths, autoimmune diseases or neoplasia. Canine
sialadenitis has most often been related to bacterial invasions from the oral cavity as a secondary event to gingivitis/paradontosis or to
specific viral diseases such as distemper or rabies [17, 18]. A parasitic aetiology of salivary disorders in dogs is uncommon; however,
according to van der Merwe et al. canine spirocercosis occurs frequently in dogs with salivary gland enlargement. The present study is
apparently the first report of infestation of the salivary glands by T. tenax in a dog. Trichomonas tenax is considered specific to humans
and knowledge on its zoonotic potential is limited . However, the isolation of T. tenax from various domestic animals such as dogs, cats and
horses sheds new light on its narrow specificity and host range [6, 8]. Opinions about the pathogenicity of T. tenax are divided. It is
frequently found in humans with poor oral hygiene and in individuals with advanced stages of periodontal disease . A significant correlation
between the occurrence of T. tenax and periodontal diseases has been demonstrated in dogs ; however, the roles of T. tenax in canine
periodontal disease is still not fully understood. Proteolytic and collagenolytic activities as well as cytotoxicity abilities of T. tenax
were observed in in vitro studies, the results suggest, that this organism should be considered more as parasite than a commensal of oral
cavity . Although, T. tenax has a tropism for the oral cavity, infections in other locations such as salivary glands , lymph nodes and upper
and lower respiratory tracts have been reported. Such infections usually tend to be associated with concurrent diseases or with
immunosuppression due to long-term corticosteroid therapy. In the present case, the only additional condition seen was a chronic
periodontitis and it is likely that the infestation of a mandibular gland by T. tenax was secondary to the oral infection with T. tenax
found in gingival pockets. Because of the relatively high prevalence of trichomonads in dogs with periodontal diseases, these parasites
should be considered as a potential aetiological agent in salivary gland infections, especially in individuals with poor oral hygiene. KS
was responsible for the clinical management of the cases. AŁ-S and BL coordinated the ultrasonographic and radiological examinations. KS and
ZA organised all sampling and coordinated the laboratory work. KS made the initial diagnosis based on light microscopy examination. KS and
KT coordinated the trichomonads cultures and molecular identification of the parasite species. TS performed the scanning electron microscopy
examinations. The manuscript was drafted by KS and KT, and finalized jointly by all authors. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
