Cavernous Hemangioma of the Bladder (CHB) is benign and rare lesions. Clinical presentation has no pathognomonic signs although gross
painless hematuria is the most frequent complain. CHB is suspected by cystoscopy and radiologic findings and confirmed by pathologic
examinations. Management is controversial due to the bleeding risk of this highly vascularized lesion. Partial cystectomy is the treatment
of choice for surgically accessible lesions. However, it appears that small lesions could be treated using transurethral resection. Since
CHB is a rare case, we report another case treated successfully with a partial cystectomy associated with an augmentation cystoplasy. CHB is
an uncommon benign tumor that accounts for 0.6% of bladder tumors . It most likely is congenital in origin, arising from embryonic
angioblastic stem cells . BCH is a rare cause of hematuria. It may appear in every part of the urinary tract and presents mostly in
childhood. The treatment differs from partial cystectomy and endoscopic removal or laser-therapy. We report the case of a 60 years old
patient without significant medical history, who presented a macroscopic haematuria. The etiology was a cavernous hemangioma of the bladder
confirmed by histological examination of transurethral endoscopic resection chips. Two years later, irritative lower urinary tract symptoms
led to the realization of an ultrasound that reveals an echogen mass in the dome of the bladder. The same hypervascular mass was indicated
at the same side in abdominal pelvic MRI. It contains fluid central areas that can correspond either to necrosis or vascular ectasia. There
is an extra-bladder invasion but no ganglions. The upper urinary tract was normal (Figure 1, and Figure 2). Bimanual examinations were
performed. There was no adhesion to the pelvic wall. An open supra-trigonal partial cystectomy with a safe margin was performed by an
intraperitoneal approach associated with an augmentation cystoplasty. The postoperative follow-up was favorable. Histopathological study
confirmed the angiomatous nature of the tumoral mass (Figure 3). Sagittal section in MRI T2 showing the CHB Transverse section in MRI of the
CHB: T1 gadolinium injection Pathology result after partial cystectomy: large and dilated vessels which are engorged with blood and covered
with a thin wall Bladder hemangioma is a rare cause of hematuria. Although cavernous hemangioma is mostly developed in derma and epidermis,
it is rarely reported in the mucosal parts. A review of the literature in 1942 revealed 40 cases of CHB had been reported up to that time .
Generally, there is a congenital cause for CHB. It occurs in all age groups and usually is observed in patient's age ≤ 30 years, with a
slight male predominance. The most common symptom is macroscopic hematuria; other symptoms include irritative voiding symptoms and abdominal
pain. It may coexist with cutaneous hemangioma or be associated with the Sturge-Weber syndrome or the Klippel-TrenaunayWeber syndrome . The
majority of hemangiomas are solitary, small (≤3 cm), and cavernous, with a predilection for the dome, posterior wall, and trigone of the
bladder. Capillary and arteriovenous hemangiomas are rare [7, 8]. The endoscopic findings of a sessile, blue, raised mass in a young patient
who presents with macroscopic hematuria are highly suggestive of hemangioma. The endoscopic differential diagnostic considerations for
pigmented raised lesions include endometriosis, melanoma, and sarcoma. Accurate diagnosis requires confirmation by biopsy. Histologically,
CHB has the same characteristics of usual hemangioma except for its dilated, big, and full blood vessels covered by flat endothelium. It is
distinguished from angiosarcoma and Kaposi sarcoma by its lack of cytologic atypia. Exuberant vascular proliferation may be observed in
papillary polypoid cystitis and granulation tissue; however, these lesions contain prominent inflammation, which usually is not observed in
hemangioma. The pressure of CHB may cause a destructive effect on its close tissues. Thus, in most cases surgical removal is needed. It
rarely becomes malignant. Thrombocytopenic purpura, in addition to hemorrhage, is one of the major complications of CHB, which occurs most
often in infancy and secondary to the rapid enlargement of the hemangioma . Imaging studies, such as ultrasonography, pelvic arteriography,
computed tomography scan, and magnetic resonance imaging, are helpful in defining the extent and location of the tumor. For small lesions,
surveillance is sufficient. The treatment is only necessary when the lesions threaten the organ function or the patient′s performans status.
The management of patients with hemangioma is controversial. Numerous therapeutic approaches are available, including trans-urethral
resection and electrocoagulation, partial or complete cystectomy, sclerosing agent injection, irradiation, systemic steroids, and
interferon-a-2 therapy, and, more recently, YAG-laser therapy . Partial cystectomy is the treatment of choice for large and accessible
lesions. It is limited by the diffuse lesions which are found in the bladder floor. Regarding to transurethral resection, the risk of
uncontrollable bleeding is insignificant when the lesion is small (≤3 cm). Monopolar or bipolar electrocoagulation is effective . Neodymium
YAG laser becomes more and more as a first-line therapy. It allows a complete coagulation of the whole bladder thickness . Selective
arterial embolization has been used successfully for twice hemangiomas bladder and urethra . Radiotherapy is indicated in non-surgical
lesions. Some successes have been achieved, but also failures and recurrences . Cavernous hemangioma of bladder is rare. Electrocoagulation
or YAG Laser is effective the lesion is small. Partial cystectomy is the standard treatment of voluminous and isolated lesions of the
movable portion of the bladder especially in cases of local invasion Although CHB have a benign course and favorable outcome, follow up is
mandatory to detect recurrence or residual disease. The authors declare no competing interest. All authors mentioned have contributed to the
development of this manuscript. All authors also declare to have read and approved the final manuscript.
