Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 43 Final Diagnosis: Primary breast lymphoma Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: CT scan • PET • chemotherapy • radiotherapy Specialty: Oncology Rare disease Primary breast lymphoma (PBL) is an unusual
clinical entity accounting for 0.4–0.5% of all breast neoplasms. The usual presentation includes a painless palpable mass similar to that of
breast carcinoma. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common identifiable type of PBL based on the histopathological
examination. We report an unusual case of a 43-year-old Indonesian woman who presented with a 7-month history of a painless mass in the left
breast. A core needle biopsy revealed diffuse infiltration of large atypical lymphoid cells. The immunohistochemical biomarkers confirmed
the diagnosis of a DLBCL. A bone scan showed no evidence of bone metastasis. It was treated non-surgically, based on the decision of the
breast multidisciplinary team (MDT). The patient was treated with 4 cycles of combination chemotherapy with R-CODOX/IVAC. A follow-up PET
scan revealed non-significant mild F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake at the periphery of the residual left breast mass, indicating a
radiologically favorable response. Early and accurate diagnosis of PBL is crucial for selecting the appropriate MDT treatment strategies to
avert potentially harmful surgical interventions. Primary breast lymphoma (PBL) is an unusual tumor accounting for 0.4–0.5% of all breast
carcinomas . It is a rare neoplasm because lymphoid tissue is absent in the breast region. The neoplasm can develop in both sexes, but it is
more frequent among females. Breast lymphoma has been classified into primary and secondary types. PBL is defined as the presence of both
mammary tissue and lymphoid infiltrate in close association with no evidence of widespread lymphoma or preceding extra-mammary lymphoma . It
has been reported that high-grade lymphomas commonly manifest as diffuse breast enlargement, whereas low and intermediate-grade tumors often
have nodular patterns . PBL is usually non-Hodgkin’s B-cell type, which accounts for around half of breast lymphomas, and the diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most frequent subtype . The usual presentation of PBL is painless palpable mass similar to that of breast
carcinoma. Patients with PBL infrequently present with signs of skin edema, retraction, erythema, and nipple involvement . The confirmed
diagnosis of PBL is mainly based on findings of the initial biopsy or postoperative pathology results . The treatment options for PBL vary
from surgical intervention to chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy . Herein, we report a rare case of primary non-Hodgkin lymphoma of the
breast, with B-cell phenotype, diagnosed by mammography and computed tomography and confirmed by histopathological examination. It was
successfully treated non-surgically according to the breast multidisciplinary team (MDT). A 43-year-old Indonesian woman, previously
healthy, presented with a left breast lump that became noticeable 7 months before. The mass had rapidly increased in size. She had no pain
or retraction, no skin changes, and no nipple discharge. Her family history was negative for breast cancer. She was married, menstruating,
and had 2 children. Physical examination revealed a hard, non-tender mass involving the whole left breast with a 2×1.5 cm palpable left
axillary node. Radiological imaging (mammogram and ultrasound) and histopathological investigation (fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and core
biopsy) were performed. The mass was staged with computerized tomography (CT) scan chest/abdomen, and bone scanning. The ultrasonography
findings revealed a large, ill-defined, dense mass with internal increased vascularity in color Doppler imaging and multiple enlarged,
hypoechoic, axillary lymph nodes (Figure 1). These findings were highly suggestive of breast carcinoma with metastatic axillary lymph nodes.
Mammography findings were also suggestive of breast cancer with metastatic axillary lymph nodes; BI-RADS 5 (Figure 2). A bone scan showed no
evidence of bone metastasis. The positron emission tomography (PET) scan demonstrated intense hypermetabolism in the left breast, indicating
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Fine-needle aspiration of the left axillary lymph node showed atypical lymphoid cells suggestive of
malignancy. The histopathology findings confirmed the diagnosis with stage IV BEx DLBCL; active B-cell type. Hematoxylin and eosin staining
showed large atypical lymphoid cells in sheets (Figure 3). Figures 4 and 5 demonstrate the immunohistochemistry profile. The lymphoid cells
showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining for CD20, CD79, and BCL2. There was nuclear staining for BCL6 and MUM-1. Staining for CD10 was weak and
uncertain. The neoplastic cells were negative for CD3 and CD5, which highlight scattered small T-cells in the background. The proliferation
index was approximately 70%. In summary, the patient had diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, stage IV B, with bulky disease (multiple enlarged
lymph nodes at left axillary, left subclavicular, splenic hilum, retroperitoneal, and mesenteric regions) and multiple extranodal
localization (breast, muscle, and lung). The case was discussed in the breast MDT meeting which recommended the treatment with 4 cycles of
combination chemotherapy with R-CODOX/IVAC. R-CODOX-M regimen included rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and doxorubicin. The R-IVAC
regimen consisted of rituximab, etoposide, ifosfamide, and cytarabine. After chemotherapy, there was a persistent left breast mass, but a
PET/CT scan showed no significant uptake. Breast biopsy showed myxomatous and fibrous tissue. The patient was then scheduled for
radiotherapy (20 fractions). Two months post-treatment, PET/CT showed a favorable response, resolution of PDG avid lymphadenopathy, and
around 90% decrease in PDG avidity of the breast. Intrathecal cytarabine was given as a CNS prophylaxis. By completing the recommended
chemo- and radiotherapy, the patient remained in a remission status. The patient had 3 PET scans: at presentation, after the 2nd therapy
course, and 3 weeks after the 4th course. Figure 6 shows a follow-up PET scan that revealed a radiologically favorable response in terms of
non-significant mild F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake at the periphery of the residual left breast mass. Primary breast lymphoma (PBL)
remains an infrequent neoplasm, so clinicians treating breast carcinomas should be aware of this entity in order to distinguish its clinical
presentation, management, and prognosis from breast carcinoma cases . With the development of newer diagnostic modalities, the incidence of
PBL is increasing, which substantiates the importance of clinical information and awareness of this rare disease. It is predominantly
(95%–100%) reported among female patients and is very rare in males . Single-breast involvement is more common, particularly in the upper
quadrant of the right side . Approximately 1% to 14% of all PBL cases have bilateral breast lymphomas . In our patient, the breast lump was
detected on the left side. PBL can be classified based on the presenting symptoms as type A (atypical symptoms) and type B (fever, night
sweats, 10% weight loss within half a year) . The investigational findings of our case showed large B-cell lymphoma (non-germinal center
type). However, the lower incidence and atypical clinical manifestations makes it difficult to discriminate from breast carcinoma without
confirmation by pathological biopsy and immunohistochemical staining . Of note, the rapid increase in the breast mass size should be first
considered as PBL. Based on the histopathological findings, breast tumors can be categorized as large cell B-cell lymphomas, monocytoid
B-cell lymphomas (MBCL), and undifferentiated . It has been reported that the majority of PBL cases have a B-cell lineage and diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), which accounts for 40–70% of all breast lymphomas with features of non-germinal center cells . The assessment of
our case revealed DLBCL of the breast with multiple extranodal presentations, which is consistent with the current literature. The
diagnostic approach of PBL cases includes radiological investigation (mammography, ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron
emission tomography), fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), and immunohistochemical biomarkers . In the present case, FNA of the left
axillary lymph node showed atypical lymphoid cells suggestive of malignancy. The immunohistochemistry profile was consistent with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, non-germinal center-type. The malignant lymphoid cells were positive for the B-cell markers CD20 and CD79 and
negative for T-cell markers CD3 and CD5. FNAC is ideal for the primary diagnosis of PBL as it helps in early detection and treatment.
However, the differential diagnosis of PBL should be made according to the pathological findings , which is crucial for understanding the
typing and staging of these tumors. To distinguish PBL based on its origin from the immune tissues, these tumors can be accurately
classified as originating from the hematopoietic lymphatic or epithelial systems. Moreover, lymphoma evaluation and management are
dramatically improving due to the rapidly growing database on gene expression patterns and protein expression . Recently, Ondrejka and Hsi
summarized the essential data on pathogenesis, clonal or tumoral evolution, and identification of the biomarkers that may be useful for
prognostic or therapeutic strategy in lymphomas patients . The management strategies for PBL vary broadly, from surgical intervention to
combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy . However, there is no up to date standard guideline for PBL treatment. Mastectomy for PBL is not
well-supported be-cause it shows neither improved survival nor reduced risk of recurrence . Several studies have recommended that surgery
should be offered for diagnosis only and that minimally invasive surgery is the preferable option because extensive surgery may carry a high
risk of morbidity. Also, axillary dissection adds no therapeutic advantage . At present, early stages of PBL can be successfully treated
with combination therapy, in which CHOP regimen is the most common chemotherapeutic agent . Several investigators have recommended a
treatment regimen involving combination chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy . Consistent with these studies, our patient was
treated with 4 cycles of combination chemotherapy with R-CODOX/IVAC along with radiotherapy . The patient presentation was aggressive with a
stage IV BE (PET scan at presentation showed lesions in the lung, spleen, and multiple lesions in the bone). The size of the mass was 7 cm
and lactate dehydrogenase level was high. The age-adjusted international prognostic index (aaIPI) was high (score=3). Therefore, our patient
was at high risk because 3 prognostic factors were present (LDH, performance, and staging). It is well known that CNS relapse is common in
this type of lymphoma. Therefore, our MDT decided to start with an aggressive chemotherapy regimen (R-CODOX-M/RIVAC) containing high-dose
methotrexate, which can penetrate the blood-brain barrier, followed by involved-field radiotherapy (IFRx). There is currently no consensus
on the treatment of this subtype of lymphoma; however, combining radiotherapy with chemotherapy is considered the most successful therapy.
The risk of CNS involvement and relapse are high; most authors believe that addition of CNS-directed treatment is essential . Many authors
believe that this subtype of disease is associated with poor prognosis and is considered an unfavorable primary site. This is a novel case
report from our region in the Middle East, as no studies have been published yet regarding breast lymphoma and its frequency in this part of
the world. With the recent implementation of the breast MDT and discussion of breast cancer cases in a weekly MDT involving all the relevant
specialties, we have started to investigate many aspects of breast cancer in Qatar. Therefore, this case report paves the way to explore
breast lymphoma management, outcomes, and prognosis. This is an unusual case of non-germinal (activated B-cell type) breast lymphoma in a
woman with a painless mass in the left breast. Screening and diagnosis of PBL based on advanced radiological investigations are useful for
identification of this unusual neoplasm. Moreover, early and accurate diagnosis of PBL is crucial for selecting the appropriate treatment
strategies to avert potentially harmful surgical interventions. This case report opens the way for early diagnosis, appropriate treatment
and favorable outcomes of breast lymphoma. The authors thank all the general surgery staff for their cooperation. Statement The authors have
no conflict of interests and no financial issues to disclose. This case report has been approved by the Medical Research Center (IRB
#15270/15), Hamad Medical corporation, Doha, Qatar. (A, B) Ultrasonography revealed a large ill-defined dense mass lesion with internal
increased vascularity in color Doppler imaging. Mammography findings are suggestive of breast cancer with metastatic axillary lymph nodes.
Core biopsy (A) low power magnification (100 H&E stain) showed diffuse cellular infiltrate. (B) High power magnification (400 H&E stain)
showed large lymphocyte cells with prominent nuclei. (C) Pankeratin AE1/AE3 (epithelial marker) showed normal duct in the section (central
plastic) diffuse large cell. Immunohistochemistry. (A) CD20 (positive); (B) CD79a (posititive); (C) CD10 (weak/negative).
Immunohistochemistry. (A) BCL6 (positive); (B) MUM-1 (posititive). PET scan (A) initial scan showed intense hypermetabolism in the left
breast DLBCL (B) follow-up PET scan revealed non-significant mild FDG uptake at the periphery of the residual left breast mass after
treatment.
