Pancreatic panniculitis is a rare condition, which has only been described in relation with pancreatic diseases up to now. It is
characterized by necrotizing subcutaneous inflammation and is thought to be triggered by adipocyte necrosis due to systemic release of
pancreatic enzymes with consecutive infiltration of neutrophils. We present the first case of a patient with pancreatic panniculitis caused
by pancreatic-type primary acinar cell carcinoma (ACC) of the liver and without underlying pancreatic disease. A 73-year old Caucasian
female patient was referred to our department with painful cutaneous nodules persisting for eight weeks and with marked lipasemia (~15000
U/l; normal range <60 U/l). Four weeks prior, several liver lesions had been detected. Empiric treatment with steroids did not show any
effect. A biopsy of the skin nodules revealed “pancreatic” panniculitis, while abdominal imaging with ultrasound, computed tomography and
magnetic resonance imaging detected no abnormal pancreatic findings. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the liver lesions showed infiltrates of an
ACC. The patient died soon thereafter. Autopsy failed to reveal any other primary for the ACC, so that a pancreatic-type ACC of the liver
was diagnosed by exclusion. One hundred thirty cases of pancreatic panniculitis published within the last 20 years are reviewed. ACC of the
pancreas is the most common underlying neoplastic condition. Patients with associated neoplasm are significantly older, take longer to be
diagnosed and have higher lipase levels than patients with underlying pancreatitis. Extrapancreatic pancreatic-type ACC is very rare, but
shows the same biological features as ACC of the pancreas. It is believed to develop from metaplastic or ectopic pancreatic tissue. Up to
now, no pancreatic panniculitis in extrapancreatic ACC has been described. Pancreatic panniculitis should always be included in the
differential diagnosis of lipolytic panniculitic lesions. It can be regarded as a facultative paraneoplastic phenomenon. When suspected, a
thorough work-up for identification of the underlying disease is mandatory and extrapancreatic lesions (e.g. liver) should also be
considered. While administration of octreotide or steroids can sometimes alleviate symptoms, immediate treatment of the associated condition
is the only effective management option. Chiari was the first to describe the development of panniculitic lesions in patients with
pancreatitis in 1883 . Since then, several case reports and small case series have reported focal or generalized panniculitis in association
with pancreatic diseases like acute or chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic carcinoma (ductal adenocarcinoma, acinar cell carcinoma,
neuroendocrine carcinoma) or intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) . Up to 45 % of patients with pancreatic panniculitis show
subcutaneous panniculitic nodules before the causal disease is recognized . Therefore, these nodules can serve as an early and valuable clue
to diagnosis of the underlying condition and trigger measurement of serum pancreatic enzymes, abdominal imaging or biopsy procedures.
Histologic evaluation of the cutaneous lesions will typically reveal lobular neutrophilic necrotizing panniculitis intermingled with
specific necrotic anucleate adipocytes called “ghost cells” . The mechanism underlying the formation of panniculitic nodules in pancreatic
panniculitis is poorly understood. However, it is commonly believed that systemically released pancreatic enzymes such as lipase and amylase
cause distant lipolysis and fat necrosis with consecutive inflammatory reaction . This is supported by the finding that the necrotic tissue
stains positive for lipase . However, serum levels of pancreatic enzymes do not correlate with clinical findings and similarly, in vitro
experiments suggest that this explanation is not sufficient . In addition to the cutaneous manifestation, arthritis is often found in
patients with pancreatic panniculitis, clinically referred to as pancreatitis panniculitis polyarthritis (PPP) syndrome. It is thought that
pancreatic enzymes are also able to trigger necrosis and inflammation in the synovium . Furthermore, there are reports about panniculitis in
the bone marrow, at submucosal sites or within the thoracic or peritoneal cavity [2, 11, 12]. Acinar cell carcinoma (ACC) is a rare
pancreatic malignancy, representing about 1 % of all primary pancreatic neoplasms . ACC is the most common malignancy found in patients with
pancreatic panniculitis and symptoms of pancreatic panniculitis can be found in up to 16 % of ACC patients . On very rare occasions,
pancreatic-type ACC can also arise as a primary neoplasm at extrapancreatic locations, such as liver, stomach, jejunum and colon . In such
cases, extrapancreatic ACC is believed to originate from either ectopic, metaplastic of transdifferentiated pancreatic tissue and shares
biologic features with primary pancreatic ACC . Here, we report the first case of pancreatic panniculitis in association with a primary
pancreatic-type ACC of the liver without underlying pancreatic disease. Moreover, we present a review of case reports and case series of
pancreatic panniculitis from the last 20 years, summarizing important knowledge and data about this disease entity. A 73-year-old Caucasian
female patient was referred to our department for further work-up of painful cutaneous lesions (Fig. 1) and several masses within her
liver.Fig. 1Several panniculitic lesions on the right leg of the patient, one of them (→) shortly after having spontaneously drained
brownish-oily fluid Several panniculitic lesions on the right leg of the patient, one of them (→) shortly after having spontaneously drained
brownish-oily fluid Eight weeks prior, she had observed an erythematous nodule on her right chest. Subsequently, similar cutaneous lesions
had developed on her arms and legs, and later also on her buttocks and back. She did not report any abdominal complaints. Outpatient
treatment with topical and systemic steroids based on a suspicion of erythema nodosum (EN) did not yield substantial effect. Four weeks
prior, several liver lesions had been detected by ultrasound and were interpreted as metastases of a previously treated breast cancer.
Additional imaging with computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) had been carried out (Fig. 2) and confirmed the liver
lesions.Fig. 2Imaging of the liver lesions (→) with ultrasound (a) and CT (b) Imaging of the liver lesions (→) with ultrasound (a) and CT
(b) As the nodules on her skin continued to spread and became increasingly painful, she was presented to the Department of Dermatology in
our clinic. There, another attempt of steroids and an intensified local therapy resulted in no improvement of her clinical condition. Due to
raising inflammatory parameters a work-up for possible infectious causes and an antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam, and later
with meropenem were initiated. A colonoscopy revealed two small polyps, which were completely removed. Pancreatic enzymes were markedly
elevated. A punch biopsy of one of the skin lesions was obtained showing a lobular necrotizing panniculitis with “ghost cells” compatible
with pancreatic panniculitis (Fig. 3). CT, MRI and repeated ultrasound examinations (Fig. 4) did not reveal any pathological findings in the
pancreas. In contrast enhanced CT multiple sharply-bounded liver lesions were visualized in both liver lobes. Compared with the CT obtained
during outpatient care, the lesions had progressed in size and measured from 1 cm to 6 cm. The perfusion pattern was non-hypervascular and
the density was hypointense, partly comparable with the density of water. No necrotic areas were described within the lesions.Fig. 3Biopsy
from a skin lesion showing lobular neutrophilic, necrotizing panniculitis and so called “ghost cells” (→)Fig. 4Abdominal imaging showing no
evidence of pancreatic pathology. a CT. b MRI. c ultrasound Biopsy from a skin lesion showing lobular neutrophilic, necrotizing panniculitis
and so called “ghost cells” (→) Abdominal imaging showing no evidence of pancreatic pathology. a CT. b MRI. c ultrasound Because of a
progressive worsening of her clinical condition and increasing laboratory markers of inflammation, the patient was referred to our
Department of Internal Medicine. She complained about intensive pain all over her skin and required increasing dose rates of opioid
analgetics. She did not report any weight loss, night sweats, fever, nausea or vomiting, abdominal pain or problems with food intake. Her
past medical history was remarkable for invasive ductal breast cancer diagnosed in 1982 with local recurrences in 1990 and 2008. Moreover, a
superficial spreading malignant melanoma had been treated in 2011 and a coronary artery disease with percutaneous coronary intervention in
2008 was reported. Family history was significant for malignant melanomas in all siblings and her mother. Continuous medication included
acetyl salicylic acid, lercanidipine, metoprolol, enalapril and pravastatin with no recent change. No allergic condition was known. On
examination she was in poor general condition (ECOG performance status 4), tachycardic (102 bpm), slightly tachypnoeic (22/min) and
normotensive (128/78 mmHg). Her temperature was 36.9 °C. Subcutaneous erythematous and painful nodules of 2–5 cm size were noticed
throughout her integument. Some of them were spontaneously draining a brownish oily fluid. Moreover, more than 200 melanocytic nevi were
observed on her skin. Examination of the head, especially focusing on the salivary glands was unremarkable. There was no pain on abdominal
palpation, the liver was palpable 2 cm under the right costal arch and bowel sounds were normal. There was a positive tap sign on both
patellae. Laboratory results of interest were: leukocyte count 21.5 * 10^3/μl (ref. 4–10 * 10^3/μl), hemoglobin 10.0 g/dl (ref. 12–16 g/dl),
ASAT 52 U/l (ref. < 35U/l), GGT 235 U/l (ref. <40 U/l), AP 186 U/l (ref. 35–105 U/l), lipase 14747 U/l (ref. < 60 U/l) and CRP 237 mg/l
(ref. < 5 mg/l). Alpha-Amylase, uric acid, ACE, CEA, CA19-9 and AFP were within normal range. Serology for Yersinia enterocolitica and
pseudotuberculosis was negative, as well as testing for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and atypical mycobacteria. Rheumatologic testing
including ANAs and ANCAs was unremarkable. Screening for possible infectious foci did not reveal any other source explaining the elevated
CRP. Therefore, it was attributed to the skin lesions, which displayed clinical signs of inflammation and were partly draining pus in the
further course. However, as microbiological evaluation was not able to prove any causative organism and inflammation markers were not
substantially declining despite escalation of antibiotic treatment with additional vancomycin, skin lesions were classified as sterile.
Leukocytosis was explained by concomitant steroid therapy. Ultrasound displayed several liver lesions in both lobes with a maximum size of
53 mm. The pancreas was homogeneous and free of focal lesions. The pancreatic duct was not dilated and no avascular areas could be detected
upon administration of ultrasound contrast agent. Ultrasound-guided puncture of one of the liver masses was performed leading to the
histopathological diagnosis of a pancreatic-type ACC. Unfortunately, the condition of the patient had severely deteriorated in the meantime
with further exacerbation of pain, increasing tachycardia and hypotension. Therefore, no tumor-specific treatment could be initiated. The
patient died ten days after admission to our ward. Histopathological analysis of the core biopsy obtained from the liver mass revealed a
cellular epithelial neoplasm composed of monomorphic polygonal or rounded cells arranged in compact acinar and trabecular structures
(Fig. 5a, b). Immunohistochemical study revealed strong expression of pancytokeratin (KL-1) with variable expression of CK7 and diffuse
strong cytoplasmic expression of trypsin (Fig. 5c), but lipase and amylase were negative. All other markers in the differential diagnosis
were negative (CK5, CK20, HepPar-1, Synaptophysin, Chromogranin A, NSE, CD56, TTF1, ER, PR, protein S100, GATA3 and PAX8). These findings
including in particular the strong and specific expression of trypsin confirmed the diagnosis of pancreatic-type ACC in the liver.Fig.
5Histomorphology and immunohistochemistry of the liver tumor (from core biopsy). a core biopsy of the liver showing liver tissue adjacent to
the acinar cell carcinoma, haematoxylin/eosin staining, 10-fold magnification. b compact acinar structures and trabeculae seen at higher
magnification, haematoxylin/eosin staining, 40-fold magnification. c The tumor cells stained strongly for trypsin, 40-fold magnification
Histomorphology and immunohistochemistry of the liver tumor (from core biopsy). a core biopsy of the liver showing liver tissue adjacent to
the acinar cell carcinoma, haematoxylin/eosin staining, 10-fold magnification. b compact acinar structures and trabeculae seen at higher
magnification, haematoxylin/eosin staining, 40-fold magnification. c The tumor cells stained strongly for trypsin, 40-fold magnification
Autopsy confirmed several liver masses measuring up to six centimeters in size. There was no evidence of a salivary gland tumor or a primary
pancreatic tumor. Additionally, review of the slides from the patient’s previous breast cancer confirmed a breast cancer of no special type
and excluded the possibility of acinar-like differentiation. Thus, the previous breast cancer was also unrelated to the patient's ACC. Cause
of her death was attributed to multiorgan failure due to severe systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Final diagnosis was pancreatic
panniculitis due to primary pancreatic-type acinar cell carcinoma of the liver. Taking into account the conspicuous accumulation of
malignancies in our patient and her family, genetic analysis for familial atypical multiple mole-melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome was recommended
to her relatives. In addition to the presented case, 130 reports on pancreatic panniculitis were identified in the English literature
between January 1994 and November 2014 by using the search terms “pancreatic panniculitis”, “subcutaneous fat necrosis AND pancreas” and
“lipase hypersecretion syndrome” in PubMed and by checking results for appropriate cross-references. Including the above case, all 131 cases
(Table 1) were analyzed in respect to available data on age and gender of the patients, the underlying condition, additional symptoms, the
sequence of the appearance of panniculitis and the diagnosis of the underlying disease, laboratory values and the outcome. The stated
percentages refer to the respective number of cases including data on the analyzed parameter. Statistical analysis was performed with IBM
SPSS Statistics (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) using Student’s T-test or Fisher’s exact test where applicable. p < 0.05 was considered significant.
Graphs were generated with SigmaPlot (Systat, San Jose, CA, USA).Table 1Overview of pancreatic panniculitides described in English
literature between January 1994 and November 2014PatientRef.AgeSexUnderlying conditionOutcome of skin lesions/follow-up1our pat.73fACC of
the liverdeath ten weeks after first skin lesion255mmetastatic pancreatic NECn.r.338macute pancreatitisresolution463macute
pancreatitisresolution581fhemosuccus pancreaticusdeath 19 weeks after first skin lesion626facute pancreatitisresolution727facute
pancreatitisresolution834mchronic pancreatitisn.r.963facute pancreatitisresolution1083mpancreatic ACCresolution of skin lesions after
surgery, death 34 months after first skin lesion1175mAcute pancreatitisresolution1260mLarge pancreatic neoplasmn.r.1368fmetastatic
pancreatic ACCdeath six months after first skin lesion1461facute pancreatitisresolution1563facute pancreatitisresolution1649macute
pancreatitisresolution1769mhepatic metastasis of previous-ly resected pancreatic ACCresolution after metastasectomy, follow-up
n.r.1871fchronic pancreatitis with pseudocystn.r.1966fserous cystadenoma of the pancreasn.r.2039mchronic pancreatitisdeath six weeks after
first skin lesion2120fpseudopapillary pancreatic tumor, chronic pancreatitisdeath eleven weeks after first skin lesion2238facute
pancreatitisresolution2356facute pancreatitisdeath within a few days2479mpancreatic ACCn.r.2517facute pancreatitisresolution2654mpancreatic
ACCResponse to octreotide, regression of skin lesions after resection, follow-up two months (i.e. eleven months after first skin
lesion)2781fpancreatic tumor with hepatic metastasesn.r.2864manastomotic leakage after Whipple proceduredeath 50 days after first skin
lesion2979fpancreatic ACCregression after resection, follow-up 14 months after resection (i.e. 16 months after first skin
lesion)3060fpancreatic adenocarcinoman.r.3158mmalignant neoplasia of the tail of the pancreasn.r.3244fpancreas transplant
rejectionresolution3363fmetastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoman.r.3438mpancreatic pseudocyst-inferior vena cava fistularesolution after Roux-
en-Y pseudocyst-jejunostomy3582mpancreatic ACCdeath 2.5 months after first skin lesion3679mpancreatic ACCdeath two months after first skin
lesion372,5macute pancreatitis with pseudocystn.r.3845mchronic pancreatitisresolution after placement of endoprothesis3918wacute
pancreatitisresolution4010wacute pancreatitis with pseudocystresolution after endosonographic cysto-gastrostomy4169mgastric adenocarcinoma
with pancreas metastasisdeath 14 weeks after first skin lesion4258mpancreatic pseudocyst-portal vein fistuladeath five days after
admission4384mpancreatic tumordeath two months after first skin lesion4440mchronic pancreatitisn.r.4584facute pancreatitis, liver lesions
ten years after resection of colonic carcinomainitially resolution, death three months later4665facute pancreatitisdeath from gangrenous
cholecystitis4764facute pancreatitisresolution4870fpancreatic carcinomadeath4958mpancreatic carcinomadeath5021fpancreatic
carcinomadeath5175macute pancreatitisdeath5275facute pancreatitisresolution5344mchronic pancreatitisresolution5463mpancreatic
carcinomadeath5572mpancreatic carcinomadeath5660mpancreatic carcinoman.r.5735mchronic pancreatitisn.r.587macute
pancreatitisresolution5961mmetastatic NEC of unknown primary sitedeath a few weeks after first skin lesion6050fmetastatic ACCregression of
skin lesions and tumor under octreotide, gemcitabine, streptozocin and doxorubicin; return after discontinuation; response to restart of
therapy; follow-up 9 months after first skin lesion6174mpancreatic ACCdeath 3.75 months after first skin lesion6261mmetastatic
ACCn.r.6379mmetastatic pancreatic NECRegression under cefazolin, dexamethasone and NSAID; death 13 months after first skin lesion6450macute
pancreatitisdeath 38 days after first skin lesion654macute pancreatitisresolution6645macute pancreatitisRegression under NSAID and
prednisone6772macute pancreatitisresolution6852fpancreatic carcinomadeath six months after first skin lesion6929macute
pancreatitisresolution7075fhepatic metastases of adeno-carcinoma of unknown origindeath 15 weeks after first skin lesion7178mmetastatic
pancreatic NECdeath two months after first skin lesion7275mpancreatic adenocarcinomaregression under irradiation, follow-up
n.r.7367fIPMNpartial pancreatectomy, follow-up n.r.7451mchronic pancreatitisregression of skin lesions under conservative
treatment7549fpancreas transplant rejectionresolution7689facute pancreatitisresolution7759mhepatic metastases of pre-viously resected
pancreatic ACCdeath several weeks after first skin lesion7867mmetastatic pancreatic adenocarcinomaregression under irinotecan, cisplatin,
mito-mycin; death twelve months after first skin lesion7962fIPMNresection, follow-up n.r.8060mmetastatic pancreatic acinar cell
cystadenocarcinomadeath seven weeks after admission8113mchronic pancreatitis with pseudocystregression after cystogastrostomy8272mpancreatic
NECregression after resection, no reappearance with liver metastases, death 15 months after first skin lesion8358mHCCdeath four months after
first skin lesion8488mmetastatic pancreatic NECDeath eight weeks after first skin lesion8542facute pancreatitisresolution8663mchronic
pancreatitisresolution after distal pancreatectomy and pancreatic duct dilation8734macute pancreatitisresolution8821facute pancreatitisdeath
from retroperitoneal hemorrhage8961fmetastatic pancreatic ACCdeath one year after first skin lesion9070fIPMNresolution after
resection9153fIPMNresolution after resection9237facute pancreatitis with pseudocystresolution after surgery9350macute pancreatitis with
pseudocystresolution after stone extraction from the pancreatic duct9471mpancreatic adenocarcinoman.r.9560fpancreatic ACCregression after
distal pancreatectomy, follow-up 28 months after first skin lesion9654mpancreatic ACCdeath six weeks after first skin lesion9756mchronic
pancreatitisn.r.9853mactue pancreatitisresolution9967mmetastatic pancreatic ACCRegression after TACE of four liver metasta-ses, death
14 weeks after first skin lesion100n.r.n.r.chronic pancreatitisresolution after placement of pancreatic duct stent10131macute
pancreatitisresolution10257facute pancreatitisresolution10360fpancreatic ACCresolution after resection, follow-up n.r.10441macute
pancreatitisdeath 22 days after admission10579fmetastatic pancreatic ACCDeath 20 weeks after first skin lesion10645mchronic
pancreatitisresolution10759facute pancreatitisresolution10881mpancreatic ACCn.r.10969mpancreatic ACCn.r.11015facute pancreatitisdeath nine
days after first skin lesion11149macute pancreatitisregression under antibiotic treatment, then slight progression, follow-up seven
weeks11266mpancreatic ACCresolution after resection, follow-up n.r.11367mchronic pancreatitisdeath two months after first skin
lesion11469mpancreatic ACCresolution after distal pancreatectomy and adjuvant radio-chemotherapy, follow-up 6 months11529facute
pancreatitisresolution11629mpancreatic pseudocyst-portal vein fistulano new lesions after surgery11775mpancreatic tumorDeath several months
after first skin lesion11839mchronic pancreatitis with pseudocystn.r.11962macute pancreatitisresolution12077fpancreatic tumordeath five
months after first skin lesion12154fchronic pancreatitisresolution after ESWL and endoscopic dilation of the pancreatic duct12247facute
pancreatitisresolution1237macute pancreatitisn.r.12469mchronic pancreatitis with pseudocystresolution12533facute
pancreatitisn.r.12646fchronic pancreatitisdeath four months after first skin lesion12755mchronic pancreatitisn.r.12862macute
pancreatitisresolution12961fmetastatic ACCresolution after surgery, follow-up n.r.13080mpancreatic ACCresolution after surgery, death from
metastatic disease after 18 months131n.r.mpancreatic ACCn.r. Overview of pancreatic panniculitides described in English literature between
January 1994 and November 2014 Overall, 65 cases (49.6 %) were due to acute or chronic pancreatitis and 60 cases (45.8 %) had an underlying
neoplastic condition. In six cases (4.6 %) other reasons were present, e.g. pancreas transplant rejection or pancreaticovascular fistula
(Table 2).Table 2Etiology of pancreatic panniculitisPancreatitisNeoplastic conditionsOtherAcute34.4 %pancreatic
ACC19.8 %fistula2.3 %Chronic15.3 %n. r.9.9 %transplant rejection1.5 %NEC4.6 %adeno-carcinoma3.8 %anastomotic
leakage0.8 %IPMN3.1 %other4.6 %Total49.6 %total45.8 %total4.6 %While near half of the cases are caused by acute or chronic pancreatitis,
another 45.8 % are associated with neoplastic conditions (other: acinar cystadenocarcinoma, ACC of the liver, serous cystadenoma, HCC,
gastric carcinoma with pancreatic infiltration, adenocarcinoma of unknown primary) Etiology of pancreatic panniculitis While near half of
the cases are caused by acute or chronic pancreatitis, another 45.8 % are associated with neoplastic conditions (other: acinar
cystadenocarcinoma, ACC of the liver, serous cystadenoma, HCC, gastric carcinoma with pancreatic infiltration, adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary) Patients with pancreatic panniculitis had a mean age of 54.8 years. Yet, patients with neoplastic causes were significantly older
than individuals with pancreatitis (Fig. 6a). 57.4 % of the patients were male with no difference in sex distribution between underlying
pancreatitis and malignancy.Fig. 6Comparison of patients with pancreatitis and neoplasm underlying pancreatic panniculitis (a-c): a Patients
with neoplastic conditions are significantly older than patients with pancreatitis (66.0 +/− 13.0 years vs. 44.7 +/− 20.5 years, p < 0.001).
b Underlying malignancy is diagnosed significantly later than underlying pancreatitis (134 +/− 135 days vs. 20 +/− 26 days, p < 0.001). c
Tumor patients have significantly higher lipase levels than pancreatitis patients (16611 +/− 20772 vs. 5324 +/− 14436 U/l, p < 0.01). d
Kaplan-Meier plot of survival after appearance of the first panniculitis lesion in patients with pancreatic panniculitis associated with
malignancy. Median survival is 4.75 months (n = 29) Comparison of patients with pancreatitis and neoplasm underlying pancreatic panniculitis
(a-c): a Patients with neoplastic conditions are significantly older than patients with pancreatitis (66.0 +/− 13.0 years vs. 44.7 +/−
20.5 years, p < 0.001). b Underlying malignancy is diagnosed significantly later than underlying pancreatitis (134 +/− 135 days vs. 20 +/−
26 days, p < 0.001). c Tumor patients have significantly higher lipase levels than pancreatitis patients (16611 +/− 20772 vs. 5324 +/− 14436
U/l, p < 0.01). d Kaplan-Meier plot of survival after appearance of the first panniculitis lesion in patients with pancreatic panniculitis
associated with malignancy. Median survival is 4.75 months (n = 29) In 48.9 %, cutaneous lesions were noted prior to the diagnosis of the
underlying disease. The mean duration from appearance of the first lesion to diagnosis was 85 days +/− 110 days (range: 2–540 days; median
42 days). This period was significantly longer when pancreatic panniculitis was due to a neoplasm than when a pancreatitis was present
(Fig. 6b). Moreover, the portion of patients developing panniculitis before the diagnosis of the underlying condition was by trend higher in
patients with neoplastic disease (66.7 %) than in patients with pancreatitis (48.3 %; p = 0.06). A PPP syndrome with additional signs of
arthritis was present in 49 cases (37.4 %). One hundred twelve case reports (85.5 %) contained information on the serum levels of at least
one pancreatic enzyme. In all but two of these reports (1.8 %) either amylase or lipase were elevated – in one of these two cases only
amylase had been measured. The mean level of lipase was 11560 U/l +/− 19010 U/l (range 7–89700 U/l, median 3942.5 U/l). Again, patients with
pancreatitis and neoplastic conditions differed markedly with tumor patients having significantly higher lipase levels (Fig. 6c). ROC
analysis identified a lipase level of 4414 U/l as best cut-off value with higher values having a sensitivity of 73.0 % and a specificity of
82.1 % for the diagnosis of a neoplastic cause (AUC = 0.785, 95 % CI 0.68 to 0.89). Only limited data was available concerning survival and
follow-up. 12 patients with pancreatitis (21.4 %) died from complications. For underlying malignancy, follow-up data was available for 29
patients. A Kaplan-Meier plot of survival was computed, yielding a median survival of 4.75 months after appearance of the first skin lesion
(Fig. 6d). Panniculitis is a clinical finding, which can be caused by various etiologic factors including infectious, immunologic and
neoplastic conditions . In our case, numerous causes could be excluded, while others were very unlikely: No infectious organism could be
detected directly or indirectly. Continuous medication was unchanged and unsuspicious for causing erythema nodosum. Imaging had not yielded
any evidence of malignancy other than the finally diagnosed ACC. Rheumatologic disease was judged unlikely based on consultation with a
rheumatologist. Therefore, regarding laboratory data and histologic results pancreatic panniculitis was the only possible diagnosis. Our
case of pancreatic panniculitis is noteworthy for two reasons: The absence of pancreatic disease and the extrapancreatic manifestation of
pancreatic-type ACC. The combination of both has not been previously described in the literature. Pancreatic panniculitis without definite
proof of pancreatic disease is found in four cases in the literature: Beltraminelli et al. report a case of acinar cell cystadenocarcinoma
of presumably pancreatic origin metastatic to the liver. However, clear evidence of a pancreatic primary tumor was absent on imaging.
Freireich-Astmann et al. describe the history of a patient with hepatic metastases of an adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. CT did not show
any pancreatic lesion and immunohistochemistry was negative for CA19-9 and CK19. Aznar-Oroval et al. present a case of gastric
adenocarcinoma with hepatic metastases in association with pancreatic panniculitis, but without clinical or radiologic findings of
pancreatic disease . And finally, Corazza et al. report about a patient with multifocal hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and missing
pancreatic lesions in CT. However, in all cases, no autopsy for definite verification of the absence of pancreatic disease was performed.
Amylase or lipase were elevated in each of the cases, but could not be explained by clinical, radiologic or histological findings in all but
Beltraminelli et al.’s case. While existence of a primary hepatic acinar cell cystadenocarcinoma should have been discussed in this case,
findings are inconclusive in the other three. The HCC described by Corazza showed “trabecular structures and acinar aspects”, features
suggestive of or consistent with ACC . As immunohistochemistry is not reported, the possibility of a pancreatic-type ACC of the liver cannot
be fully excluded in that case. Primary extrapancreatic ACC is extremely rare and only six cases of ACC originating in the liver have been
described to date [15, 26, 27]. Diagnosis of pancreatic-type ACC originating from the liver requires exclusion not only of an occult
pancreatic primary, but also of primaries at other possible sites, such as breast or salivary glands . In our case, neither clinical nor
radiological evidence for another primary was present, which was finally verified by autopsy findings. Moreover, re-analysis of the samples
of the previously treated breast cancer excluded a hitherto undiscovered acinar cell carcinoma of the breast. Because of the rarity of
primary ACC of the liver, no typical pattern can be specified in the different imaging modalities up to now. So far, most of the cases
described were initially misclassified as one of the most common primary liver malignancies, such as HCC or cholangiocellular carcinoma
(CCC), due to their imaging appearance. Moreover, a recent study on imaging findings in pancreatic ACC also reported a high variability in
several parameters analyzed . Thus, a thorough histological work-up of specimens after a resection or core biopsy is required to ensure the
correct diagnosis [15, 26, 27]. What could be objected to the diagnosis of an ACC of the liver in our case is the multifocality of the liver
lesions, which is suggestive for metastatic disease. However, despite thorough work-up no other primary was found. Furthermore, it is worth
noting that ACC is normally relatively large in size by the time of diagnosis , which makes an occult primary rather unlikely. In addition,
multifocal growth of primary liver tumors is not unusual, e.g. in intrahepatic CCC [31, 32] and HCC [33, 34]. Indeed, primary hepatic ACC
might originate from acinar trans-differentiation of biliary progenitor cells, thus representing the acinar counterpart of hepatic
cholangiocarcinoma . In an analysis of more than 130 cases of pancreatic panniculitis described in the last 20 years, we could show that
nearly half of the cases are associated with an internal malignancy. Current concepts of the pathogenesis of pancreatic panniculitis suggest
a role of pancreatic enzymes produced or released by these tumors [8, 9]. Therefore – though only rarely so named – pancreatic panniculitis
should be regarded as facultative paraneoplastic condition and a tumor screening, especially for pancreatic tumors, should always be
included in the diagnostic work-up. The analysis of different parameters of these cases revealed significant differences between patients
with pancreatic panniculitis and associated neoplasm or pancreatitis. On average, patients with a tumor are older and have higher lipase
levels. Moreover, it takes longer until a diagnosis is made in these cases. A lipase cut-off value of 4414 U/l is able to differentiate
between underlying pancreatitis and neoplasm with a sensitivity and specificity comparable with CA 19–9 in ductal adenocarcinoma vs. benign
pancreatic disease . Regarding the epidemiology and the natural course of malignancy and pancreatitis these results are not very surprising.
However, these items can provide a first orientation, which etiology has to be primarily suspected. Like this, they may trigger a
particularly intensive search for tumors in older patients with high lipase levels and a long-lasting history of panniculitis. This is even
more important as pancreatic panniculitis seems to be a hallmark of poor prognosis in tumor patients. Median survival in the cases with
underlying malignancy and included follow-up data was 4.75 months after appearance of the first skin lesion. Of course, this retrospective
analysis has significant limitations as it is exclusively based on case reports. Though, it is the first systematic evaluation of survival
in pancreatic panniculitis and poor outcome is remarkable, because over 50 % of the included cases were ACC patients, which otherwise have
considerably better survival [38, 39]. Due to the rarity of the disease, clear therapeutic algorithms for ACC are missing. Since most of the
cases present with distant metastases only a subset of patients qualifies for resection . Therefore, cancer therapy is often limited to
palliative approaches like chemotherapy or ablative treatment. As in our case, patients often suffer heavily from the pain caused by their
skin lesions and analgetic therapy is frequently not sufficiently able to reduce pain [12, 14, 22, 40, 41]. Thus, palliative treatment
strategies are very important for symptom control as well. Octreotide has been reported to alleviate symptoms in some cases .
Chemotherapeutic agents reported to be used in patients with pancreatic panniculitis and underlying ACC include gemcitabine and the FOLFIRI
regime [45, 46]. Furthermore, one case with resolution of panniculitis following metastasectomy and one case with marked symptom reduction
after transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) of hepatic metastases are described in literature. Some success in the treatment of pancreatic
ACC has been reported with the use of FOLFOX , FOLFIRINOX , cisplatin/etoposide and gemcitabine in various combinations including erlotinib
. To our best knowledge, this is the first report of pancreatic panniculitis in a patient with primary ACC of the liver. The possibility of
pancreatic panniculitis should always be included in diagnostic considerations regarding panniculitic lesions. Therefore, a cutaneous biopsy
should be obtained, pancreatic enzymes should be measured and abdominal imaging should be performed as early as possible. When diagnosed,
pancreatic panniculitis has to be regarded as a facultative paraneoplastic syndrome and appropriate tumor screening or biopsy procedures
have to be undertaken. This is especially important in older patients with high lipase levels and long-lasting symptoms. Regarding the
presented case, tumors of extrapancreatic primary must also be considered. Pancreatic-type ACC is the malignancy most often associated with
pancreatic panniculitis. It can not only originate from the pancreas but also from the liver, which can be diagnosed, when other primary
sites have been excluded. Pancreatic panniculitis in association with malignancy seems to be linked with poor prognosis. Thus, early
diagnosis is necessary to improve survival and ease symptoms, e.g. by resection or chemotherapy. Symptomatic therapy with octreotide seems
worth trying. Further studies are required to define standard therapeutic strategies for unresectable ACC. During her lifetime, the patient
consented orally to the use of her patient history and all the related images and information for scientific purposes. After the patient’s
death her daughter gave written consent for the publication of the case. acinar cell carcinoma angiotensin-converting enzyme alpha
fetoprotein anti-nuclear antibody anti-neutrophil cytoplasmatic antibody alkaline phosphatase aspartate transaminase carbohydrate antigen
19–9 cholangiocellular carcinoma carcinoembryonic antigen cytokeratin c-reactive protein computed tomography Eastern cooperative oncology
group erythema nodosum extracorporal shock wave lithotripsy female folinic acid, 5-fluoruracil, irinotecan folinic acid, 5-fluoruracil,
irinotecan, oxaliplatin folinic acid, 5-fluoruracil, oxaliplatin gamma glutamyl transferase hepatocellular carcinoma intraductal papillar
mucinous neoplasm male magnetic resonance imaging not reported neuroendocrine carcinoma non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs pancreatitis
panniculitis polyarthritis syndrome transarterial chemoembolization Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions SZ, DS, MFN and DW were involved in the clinical treatment of the patient. RE, AA, AH and FK performed the
histological and pathological diagnostic investigations. All authors contributed to interdisciplinary interpretation of clinical,
radiological and pathological findings. SZ performed the statistical analyses and wrote the paper. All authors edited the manuscript for
important intellectual content and approved the final version. We acknowledge support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and Friedrich-
Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU) within the funding programme Open Access Publishing.
