Benign ectopia of prostatic glandular tissue in the seminal vesicles is rare with only three prior cases reported in the literature.
Prostate cancer, arising within prostatic ectopia in the seminal vesicles, has never been described and therefore presents a challenge in
both diagnosis and management. Herein, we report a rare case of prostatic adenocarcinoma in ectopic prostate tissue in the left seminal
vesicle, without evidence of prostatic glandular involvement. This case was diagnosed on multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging and
confirmed with magnetic resonance imaging-transrectal ultrasound fusion biopsy. Awareness of this unusual phenomenon is significant because
of the potential occurrence of malignancy to arise in unexpected, extra-glandular locations, which are not routinely sampled on routine
transrectal ultrasound biopsy. However attention to lesions with characteristic multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging features of
prostate cancer, regardless of extra-glandular location, will help direct tissue sampling, facilitate a timely diagnosis and ensure
appropriate management. An 80 year-old male, with a past medical history of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), presented to Urology with a
rising serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) level of 13.1 ng/mL. In 2008 and again in 2012, the patient underwent two 12-core TRUS
biopsies, which yielded negative results. Given his rising PSA level, the patient subsequently underwent diagnostic multi-parametric
prostate MR imaging to localize any potentially malignant lesions that may have been missed on biopsies. Multi-parametric prostate MR
imaging revealed no abnormality in the central, transitional or peripheral zones of the prostate gland. However, in the left seminal vesicle
and non-contiguous with the adjacent prostate gland or capsule, there was an abnormal 1.5 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm lesion with conspicuous hypointense
T2-weighted (T2W) signal intensity seen on high-resolution axial imaging (Fig. 1a). High-resolution coronal and sagittal T2W images show, to
advantage, this lesion within the left seminal vesicle (Fig. 1b-c), external to the prostate gland capsule, which is maintained with normal
signal intensity and morphology. No T2W signal intensity abnormality is seen in the adjacent left prostate gland base related to the left
seminal vesicular abnormality. Moreover, there is no exophytic hyperplastic nodule or contiguous extension of prostatic glandular tissue
related to the abnormality in the left seminal vesicle. On high b-value diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient
(ADC) map, this lesion features significantly diminished diffusivity with low ADC mean value of 0.5 × 10−3 mm2/s (Fig. 1d-e). There is no
abnormal diffusivity in the adjacent or regional left prostate gland base peripheral or transitional zone related to the left seminal
vesicular abnormality. Pre- and post-contrast fat-saturated T1-weighted (T1W) imaging obtained prior to and following the infusion of
intravenous gadolinium contrast show abnormal perfusion of this lesion (Fig. 2a-b). Abnormal perfusion pattern of this lesion is confirmed
with CAD, which demonstrates early enhancement with partial washout and colorimetric stratification of ‘green’ and ‘red’:
indeterminate/suspicious (‘green’) and highly suspicious (‘red’) (Fig. 2c dashed arrow and solid arrow). The hyperperfused lesion in the
left central zone with highly suspicious enhancement (Fig. 2c asterisk) demonstrated relative hypointensity on T2W imaging with thin,
circumscribed hypointense periphery, and no diminished diffusivity, compatible with a hyperplastic (BPH) stromal nodule that was later
confirmed on MR imaging-TRUS fusion biopsy with no malignancy on tissue histopathological sampling. This lesion was reported as clinically
significant cancer is highly likely to be present; it was subsequently targeted on MR imaging-TRUS software-based fusion biopsy. Repeat
14-core TRUS biopsy, supplemented with targeted MR imaging-ultrasound fusion-guidance, was performed of the prostate gland and left seminal
vesicle. Ultrasound gray-scale imaging from the fusion biopsy confirms an abnormal hypoechoic lesion in the left seminal vesicle
(Fig. 3).Fig. 1Multi-parametric magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the prostate gland demonstrates normal prostate gland however an abnormal
lesion in the left seminal vesicle features classical imaging features of prostate carcinoma. a High-resolution axial T2-weighted (T2W)
image demonstrates an abnormal 1.5 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm lesion with relative hypointensity (arrow) subjacent to an enlarged prostate gland
(arrowhead). The capsule is maintained without trans-capsular extension. b–c High-resolution multi-planar T2W images in the sagittal and
coronal planes show, to advantage, this lesion within the left seminal vesicle (arrow), external to the capsule of the prostate gland
(arrowhead). No T2W signal intensity abnormality is in the adjacent left prostate gland base peripheral or transitional zone. Moreover,
there is no exophytic hyperplastic nodule or contiguous extension of prostatic glandular tissue related to the abnormality in the left
seminal vesicle. Normal right seminal vesicle denoted for comparison (asterisk). d High b-value diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows that
this lesion demonstrates significantly diminished diffusivity (arrow). e Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map confirms significantly
diminished diffusivity in this lesion (arrow) with low ADC mean value of 0.5 × 10−3 mm2/s (region of interest). No diminished diffusivity
was seen in the prostate gland (arrowhead)Fig. 2 a-b Pre- and post-contrast fat-saturated T1-weighted (T1W) imaging of the prostate gland
(arrowhead) and left seminal vesicle (arrow) reveal that this lesion demonstrated abnormal perfusion on dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE).
c Computer-aided detection (CAD) confirms abnormal perfusion pattern of the lesion in the left seminal vesicle, which demonstrates early
enhancement with partial washout and colorimetric stratification of both indeterminate/suspicious (‘green’) (dashed arrow) and highly
suspicious patterns (‘red’) (solid arrow). The hyperperfused lesion in the left central zone with highly suspicious enhancement on CAD
(asterisk) demonstrated relative hypointensity on T2W imaging with thin, circumscribed hypointense periphery, and no diminished diffusivity,
compatible with a hyperplastic (BPH) stromal nodule that was later confirmed as benign on MR imaging-TRUS fusion biopsyFig. 3Gray-scale
ultrasound image from MR imaging-TRUS fusion biopsy demonstrates the abnormal, hypoechoic lesion in the left seminal vesicle (arrow); normal
right seminal vesicle for comparison (asterisk) and prostate gland (cross-hairs) Multi-parametric magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the
prostate gland demonstrates normal prostate gland however an abnormal lesion in the left seminal vesicle features classical imaging features
of prostate carcinoma. a High-resolution axial T2-weighted (T2W) image demonstrates an abnormal 1.5 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm lesion with relative
hypointensity (arrow) subjacent to an enlarged prostate gland (arrowhead). The capsule is maintained without trans-capsular extension. b–c
High-resolution multi-planar T2W images in the sagittal and coronal planes show, to advantage, this lesion within the left seminal vesicle
(arrow), external to the capsule of the prostate gland (arrowhead). No T2W signal intensity abnormality is in the adjacent left prostate
gland base peripheral or transitional zone. Moreover, there is no exophytic hyperplastic nodule or contiguous extension of prostatic
glandular tissue related to the abnormality in the left seminal vesicle. Normal right seminal vesicle denoted for comparison (asterisk). d
High b-value diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows that this lesion demonstrates significantly diminished diffusivity (arrow). e Apparent
diffusion coefficient (ADC) map confirms significantly diminished diffusivity in this lesion (arrow) with low ADC mean value of 0.5 × 10−3
mm2/s (region of interest). No diminished diffusivity was seen in the prostate gland (arrowhead) a-b Pre- and post-contrast fat-saturated
T1-weighted (T1W) imaging of the prostate gland (arrowhead) and left seminal vesicle (arrow) reveal that this lesion demonstrated abnormal
perfusion on dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE). c Computer-aided detection (CAD) confirms abnormal perfusion pattern of the lesion in the
left seminal vesicle, which demonstrates early enhancement with partial washout and colorimetric stratification of both
indeterminate/suspicious (‘green’) (dashed arrow) and highly suspicious patterns (‘red’) (solid arrow). The hyperperfused lesion in the left
central zone with highly suspicious enhancement on CAD (asterisk) demonstrated relative hypointensity on T2W imaging with thin,
circumscribed hypointense periphery, and no diminished diffusivity, compatible with a hyperplastic (BPH) stromal nodule that was later
confirmed as benign on MR imaging-TRUS fusion biopsy Gray-scale ultrasound image from MR imaging-TRUS fusion biopsy demonstrates the
abnormal, hypoechoic lesion in the left seminal vesicle (arrow); normal right seminal vesicle for comparison (asterisk) and prostate gland
(cross-hairs) Tissue histology from the repeat 14-core biopsies revealed benign prostatic tissue in all prostate gland sextants (12 cores),
particularly in the left prostate base (3 total cores). However core biopsies of the lesion in the left seminal vesicle revealed both
malignant and benign prostatic tissue. Fusion-guided targeted core biopsy of the left seminal vesicular lesion demonstrated prostate
adenocarcinoma with a predominant Gleason four pattern, characterized by collections of neoplastic cells with minimal gland formation,
surrounded by benign prostatic glandular elements within benign seminal vesicular tissue (Fig. 4a). A secondary Gleason three pattern is
identified with recognizable neoplastic glands (Fig. 4b). The carcinoma involves approximately 60 % of the submitted core biopsy fragments
(Fig. 5). The presence of benign prostatic glandular elements in seminal vesicular tissues is abnormal, confirming the presence of prostatic
ectopia. Moreover, alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase over-expression confirms the presence of prostate carcinoma. Multiple fusion-guided
targeted biopsies of the adjacent left prostate gland base peripheral and transition zones revealed only benign prostatic tissue with no
malignancy. Following complete diagnostic workup, staging, and multi-disciplinary discussion of therapeutic options with the Departments of
Urology, Radiation Oncology, and Pathology, the patient was treated as stage III disease (T3bN0M0) and underwent external beam radiation
therapy (EBRT) and hormonal therapy.Fig. 4 a Photomicrographs from tissue histopathological examination reveals prostate adenocarcinoma,
Gleason 4 pattern (left of image), characterized by collections of neoplastic cells with minimal gland formation, with benign prostatic
glandular elements and seminal vesicular tissue (right of image), H&E stain image, 10× magnification. b Prostate adenocarcinoma, predominant
Gleason 4 pattern and secondary Gleason 3 pattern, H&E stain image, 10× magnification. The carcinoma involves approximately 60 % of the
submitted core biopsy fragmentsFig. 5Prostate adenocarcinoma, predominant Gleason 4 pattern and secondary Gleason 3 pattern (Gleason
4 + 3 = 7), H&E stain image, 400× magnification a Photomicrographs from tissue histopathological examination reveals prostate
adenocarcinoma, Gleason 4 pattern (left of image), characterized by collections of neoplastic cells with minimal gland formation, with
benign prostatic glandular elements and seminal vesicular tissue (right of image), H&E stain image, 10× magnification. b Prostate
adenocarcinoma, predominant Gleason 4 pattern and secondary Gleason 3 pattern, H&E stain image, 10× magnification. The carcinoma involves
approximately 60 % of the submitted core biopsy fragments Prostate adenocarcinoma, predominant Gleason 4 pattern and secondary Gleason 3
pattern (Gleason 4 + 3 = 7), H&E stain image, 400× magnification While the phenomenon of ectopic prostatic glandular tissue in the
genitourinary tract is rare, it is not entirely uncommon. While the majority of cases of benign prostatic ectopia have been reported in the
urinary bladder [1, 2] and urethra , cases have also been described in the retro-vesicular space [4, 5], seminal vesicles , epididymis ,
testis , and rectum . Cancer arising in prostatic ectopia has only been reported four times in the literature, all in the urinary bladder
and urethra . However we report a case of primary prostate adenocarcinoma arising in the seminal vesicle, without glandular or trans-
capsular involvement, which to our knowledge, has never been described. Due to its infrequency, malignancy arising within prostatic ectopia
in the seminal vesicles has never been described and therefore presents a challenge in both diagnosis and management. Awareness of this
unusual phenomenon is significant because of the potential occurrence of malignancy to arise in unexpected, extra-glandular locations, which
are not routinely sampled on routine transrectal ultrasound biopsy. However attention to lesions with characteristic multi-parametric
magnetic resonance imaging features of prostate cancer, regardless of extra-glandular location, will help direct tissue sampling, facilitate
a timely diagnosis and ensure appropriate management. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. apparent
diffusion coefficient benign prostatic hyperplasia computer-aided detection diffusion weighted-imaging external beam radiation therapy
extra-capsular extension magnetic resonance prostate-specific antigen T1-wieghted T2-weighted transrectal ultrasound Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AS interpreted the medical imaging and directed image-guided
diagnosis that resulted in the composition of this case report. AS performed the background literature review, organized radiological-
pathological correlation, drafted the manuscript and performed manuscript revisions. DA performed with histopathological specimen analysis,
presentation and manuscript preparation. AZ assisted with image selection, image presentation, manuscript preparation and manuscript
revisions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information AS: is an assistant professor in the Department
Radiology at MedStar Georgetown University Hospital. He completed his fellowship in genitourinary and gastrointestinal imaging at Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions. As faculty at Georgetown University, he is actively involved in research and education and believes in a
multidisciplinary approach for evaluation of disease. He is a lead interpreter of prostate MR imaging and has presented his academic and
research work at the national level. He is a member of the America College of Radiology, Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound, and Society
of Abdominal Radiology and Uroradiology. DA: is chief resident in the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at MedStar Georgetown
University Hospital. He completed his Ph.D. training in Microbiology and Immunology at Georgetown University. In 2010, he was appointed one
of 15 international advisors for The Lancet Student, a subsidiary of the Lancet journal. His areas of academic and research interest include
advances in molecular testing. He will pursue a fellowship in molecular genetic pathology at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center next
year. AZ: is an associate professor in the Department of Radiology at the Johns Hopkins University. He is clinically active in cross-
sectional imaging of the body using computed tomography, MR imaging and ultrasound. He is involved in the multidisciplinary conferences for
prostate, liver, and pancreas. He is also the medical director of the e-Radiology learning, an interactive program which provides radiology
residents and practicing radiologists around the world a radiology lecture series designed to address core knowledge of normal anatomy,
pathology and background physics required for successful practice of the field. The authors have no acknowledgments. The authors received no
funding.
