Aneurysms of the lenticulostriate artery (LSA) are rare lesions that are categorized into either proximal (at the junction of the middle
cerebral artery trunk) or distal (within the basal ganglia). These lesions have been reported against the background of a diverse array of
pathologies including hypertension, vascular malformations, moyamoya disease, substance abuse, systemic lupus erythematosus, ventricular
neurocytoma, and Sneddon's syndrome; however, most cases are idiopathic. Ruptured aneurysm has a high risk of re-bleeding with a consequent
marked decreased risk of patient survival and functional independence, for proximal LSA aneurysm, neurosurgery has been the mainstay of
treatment, but its efficacy remains controversial. Development of devices and improved operator experience have rendered endovascular
coiling an alternative and acceptable option for such patients. In this case report, we illustrated the feasibility of a tailored
endovascular coiling for a patient with a subarachnoid hemorrhage due to a left proximal LSA aneurysm. A 40-year-old right-handed African-
descent woman from Tobago, with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension, presented initially with loss of consciousness and
seizures. The duration of loss of consciousness and seizures were uncertain. The patient subsequently developed a headache upon recovery,
remained alert and orientated for 3 days, following which the headaches ceased. No neurological deficits were reported. The patient went to
Port of Spain General Hospital for treatment on April 21, 2015. Brain computer tomography (CT, April 22, 2015) images showed diffuse
subarachnoid hemorrhage [Figure 1]. She presented with a Hunt and Hess grade III at the onset. The following CT arteriography (April 22,
2015) revealed a patent circle of Willis without any evident aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or other vascular anomaly. Digital
subtraction angiography (DSA, April 22, 2015) demonstrated a 2 mm × 3 mm fusiform aneurysm with a visualized 0.2 mm neck located at the
proximal segment of the left lateral LSA [Figure 2a]. The risks and benefits of conservative medical treatment, surgical clipping, and
noninvasive endovascular coiling were individually discussed with the patient and her family. In light of risk of re-rupture by conservative
medical treatment and of postoperative basal ganglia infarction by clipping, endovascular coiling of left LSA aneurysm was chosen. (a)
Noncontrasted head computer tomography demonstrating diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage at slice of cisterna ambiens. (b) At slice of cistern
of lateral sulcus, the hemorrhage of the left side is a little more serious than that of the right side. (a) Diagnostic angiogram with a
proximal lenticulostriate artery aneurysm, with the perforator artery arising from the base of the aneurysm. (b) The angiogram after the
first coiling with partial embolization of aneurysm and good antegrade flow to the lateral lenticulostriate artery. (c and d) The final
angiograms after embolization with complete obliteration of the aneurysm and preservation of the lateral lenticulostriate artery. The
operation was implemented on April 29, 2015. Under general anesthesia, a 6 French Neuron Guiding Catheter (Penumbra Inc., San Leandro,
California, USA) was placed at the C1 segment of the left common carotid artery via guide catheter, a co-axial assembly of a 0.014-in
diameter X-pedion-14 microguidewire (Covidien/ev3, Irvine, CA, USA) and Headway-17 microcatheter (MicroVention Inc., Tustin, CA, USA) were
used. While the microcatheter was positioned at the origin of the lateral LSA, the microguidewire was then withdrawn, a 2 mm × 3 cm Axium™
Helix Platinum Coil (Covidien/ev3, Irvine, CA, USA) was tried but failed into the aneurysm. After removal of the coil, the microcatheter was
gently placed between half-way to two-thirds of the way into the aneurysm dome after several attempts with the help of the microguidewire.
Then, a new 2 mm × 3 cm Axium Helix Platinum Coil was inserted into the aneurysm. A subsequent angiogram demonstrated partial embolization
of aneurysm and good antegrade flow to the lateral LSA [Figure 2b]. A second 2 mm × 1.5 cm Axium Helix Platinum Coil was then placed into
the aneurysm which on final check angiograms, demonstrating complete aneurysm obliteration while preserving the LSA [Figure 2c and 2d].
Considering a complete embolization of aneurysm may cause occlusion of the ostium of the lateral LSA, the procedure was decided to be
finished at this stage. During the procedure, 4000 U bolus heparin was used followed by 1500 U an hour later. Nimodipine was used
perioperatively as a continuous intravenous infusion to reduce the risk of vasospasm. The patient displayed no periprocedural neurological
complications. Three days after the intervention, the patient was discharged with no neurological deficit. In this case, the aneurysm was
classified as the proximal type of LSA aneurysm. The preoperative angiogram showed the aneurysm neck that was incorporated into the origin
of the perforating artery. For proximal LSA aneurysm, the optimal treatment remains controversial. Both surgical and endovascular treatment
have been described primarily through case reports and small case series representing the experience of individual interventional
neurosurgeons or neuroradiologists. Surgical challenges often faced were related to small size, deep location, and complex surrounding
vasculature of these aneurysms, making intraoperative localization difficult with added postprocedure risks. Moreover, isolated clipping of
the aneurysm neck is seldom possible and generally, sacrifice of the parent vessel is required. Endovascular coiling thus provides a
promising alternative approach to treat proximal LSA aneurysms. Based on individual features of this aneurysm, several tailored skills were
utilized to reduce and avoid complications of noninvasive coiling. The following strategies resulted in a feasible and safe procedure. First
because of sparse and delicate collateral supply to the lateral striatal tissues, sparing of the parent artery is crucial to avoid
symptomatic postoperative infarctions. Securing a stable microcatheter tip position followed by a near-complete embolization was chosen to
reduce the potential occlusion of the origin of the lateral LSA, with yet allowing some antegrade flow of blood supply to the relevant
tissues. The literature mentions a protective technique using a second microcatheter to preserve the parent vessel. However in this case,
placing another microcatheter into the distal LSA was not only technically difficult but would have also prolonged the procedure
considerably due to the aneurysm's 0.2-mm small caliber, acute-angled origin, and tortuous course shortly after its origin. Second, great
care must be taken in monitoring the position of the microcatheter tip as it enters the aneurysm with subsequent coil placements in
embolization stage. Aneurysm perforation due to manipulation of microwave and microcatheter tip or insertion of coils is a potentially
serious complication. However, the incidence of aneurysm perforation in this case may be lower than that of a pseudoaneurysm, mycotic
aneurysm, or distal aneurysm of LSA because the walls of the latter in general are more fragile and easily prone to perforation. Third,
nimodipine was used in the prevention of the vasospasm. Vasospasm is a common complication that follows embolization of aneurysm located at
small sized parent vessels. Nimodipine is a dihydropyridine that blocks calcium influx through the L-type calcium channels, which is
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of vasospasm. The additional risk and difficulty of dealing with vasospasm
was thus not encountered in this procedure. It should be mentioned that endovascular embolization of LSA aneurysms with glue was also
suggested by several literatures. This option was not chosen for this proximal lesion as it was considered to be attached with a higher risk
of glue reflux into the parent artery, leading to increased thromboembolic complications. In addition, the CT angiography was unable to
definitively demonstrate the aneurysm in this case. Recently, CT angiography has emerged as a promising image modality for the detection of
underlying structural abnormalities in intracranial hemorrhage. However, even with higher-resolution multidetector CT scanners, the
sensitivity for smaller aneurysms <3–4 mm is in the range of 74–92%. The teaching point here is that diagnostic cerebral angiography in
patients with high clinical suspicion of aneurysm should still be pursued despite negative CT angiography. In summary, we want to emphasize
that the mainstay treatment for patients with ruptured proximal LSA aneurysm is endovascular coiling. It provides satisfactory immediate and
short-term outcome. Long-term efficacy of this procedure can be evaluated with a follow-up DSA technique. Endovascular embolization in
patients with ruptured proximal LSA aneurysm is technically feasible. Tailored endovascular techniques based on individual aneurysm features
may be well advised to reduce and completely avoid major complications. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. We thank Dr. Maurice
Fortune, at Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex, the Departments of Radiology, for his help in arrangement of the procedure. We thank Dr.
Zhong-Rong Miao, Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University, China National Clinical
Research Center, for his technical support. We thank the members of the Second China Medical Team in Trinidad and Tobago for their logistics
support. Edited by: Xin Chen
