Carcinoma and adenoma of the duodenum, including the papilla of Vater, are problematic diseases in patients with familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP). A 36-year-old man underwent a periodic medical examination for early colon cancer originating from FAP for which
laparoscopic-assisted subtotal colectomy with a J-shaped ileal pouch-rectal anastomosis was performed 3 years earlier. A tumor was detected
at the papilla of Vater along with elevation of total bilirubin and hepatobiliary enzymes. Although cytology did not determine the tumor to
be an adenocarcinoma, we suspected adenocarcinoma due to its hypervascularity shown by contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Pylorus-
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with modified Imanaga reconstruction and regional lymph node dissection (D2) was performed. The
pathological study showed that the tumor was a papillary and moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The patient is currently in
good health without recurrence, weight loss, or severe diarrhea at 12 months after surgery. Awareness of biliary-pancreatic symptoms and
periodic gastroduodenoscopy might contribute both to the early detection of duodenal or periampullary polyps and cancer and to the radical
treatment of FAP. Modified Imanaga reconstruction has the potential to become one of the more effective procedures for providing good
quality of life to FAP patients with duodenal or periampullary cancer. Carcinoma and adenoma of the duodenum, including the papilla of
Vater, are problematic diseases in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), especially as duodenal polyps were detected in 65 %
of FAP patients with a median age of 38 years . Duodenal adenoma changes to adenocarcinoma via the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, but the
incidence rate is only approximately 5 % of all polyps . The establishment of endoscopic management and treatment of patients with FAP based
on the Spigelman scoring system contributes to surveillance alone or to endoscopic mini-invasive treatment of stage 0–III patients, although
even now, almost all patients with stage IV disease and cancer require short-term surveillance or endoscopic treatment or surgery . For
stage IV patients, several treatments, including endoscopic mucosal resection, ampullectomy, and pancreas-preserving duodenectomy
(PpD)/pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PpPD), have been discussed and recommended ; however, the patients managed with endoscopic
resection of adenomas continue to be at substantial risk of developing recurrent adenomas . For patients with duodenal or ampullary cancer,
PpD/PpPD is selected in most cases [6, 8, 9]. We report a case of the onset of cancer of the papilla of Vater in a young man after subtotal
colectomy for FAP. The available diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for surgical treatment are also discussed in light of the experience
with the present case and in reference to previously reported cases. A 36-year-old man underwent a periodic medical examination for early
colon cancer originating from classical FAP (adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in 5q21 analysis, codon 1–1800: exon 15, codon 795, 1 bp
deletion of C: CTC→CT) for which laparoscopic-assisted subtotal colectomy with a J-shaped ileal pouch-rectal anastomosis was performed
3 years earlier. His mother also has FAP and the same gene mutation as with his subtype and gene and underwent the same operation 13 years
earlier and resection of an intra-abdominal desmoid tumor 10 years earlier (Fig. 1).Fig. 1The patient’s family tree The patient’s family
tree Enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a hypervascular tumor, 10 mm in diameter, at the papilla of Vater and dilation of the common
bile duct (CBD) and the intrahepatic bile duct (Fig. 2a–c), and therefore, detailed studies were performed. Results of laboratory blood
tests showed high values of aspartate aminotransferase (169 IU/l), alanine aminotransferase (164 IU/l), alkaline phosphatase (755 IU/l),
γ-glutamyltransferase (452 IU/l), total bilirubin (1.96 mg/dl), and pancreatic amylase (382 IU/l).Fig. 2Enhanced CT image showed a
hypervascular tumor, 10 mm in diameter, at the papilla of Vater (arrow) (a) and dilation of the common and intrahepatic bile ducts (arrow)
(b, c) Enhanced CT image showed a hypervascular tumor, 10 mm in diameter, at the papilla of Vater (arrow) (a) and dilation of the common and
intrahepatic bile ducts (arrow) (b, c) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed the
tumor as a defect present from the papilla of Vater to the lower CBD (Fig. 3a, b). Gastroduodenoscopy showed a large number of gastric and
duodenal polyps and a duodenal ulcer nearby the papilla of Vater, which were suspected to be tumor invasion (Fig. 4a, b). Moreover,
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography detected the same findings as those of the MRI and MRCP, and intraductal ultrasonography
(IDUS) detected a torose lesion at the lower CBD (Fig. 5a, b). Although a biopsy of the lesion did not reveal any apparent cancer cells, we
suspected the tumor to be a malignant tumor of the papilla of Vater because of the hypervascularity shown by CT. No regional lymph node
swelling, metastases, or direct invasion to adjacent organs was detected on the chest and abdominal CT images, and there were no other FAP-
related findings in other organs. PpPD with modified Imanaga reconstruction, which consists of end-to-side duodenojejunostomy, end-to-side
pancreatojejunostomy and choledochojejunostomy, and regional lymph node dissection (D2), were performed.Fig. 3An MRI and MRCP showed the
tumor as a defect from the papilla of Vater to the lower CBD (arrow) (a, b)Fig. 4Gastroduodenoscopy revealed a duodenal ulcer nearby the
papilla of Vater (arrow), which was suspected as the site of tumor invasion (a), and a large number of duodenal polyps (dotted arrows)
(b)Fig. 5Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography detected findings similar to those of the MRI and MRCP (arrow) (a), and IDUS
detected a torose lesion (dotted arrow) at the lower CBD (b) An MRI and MRCP showed the tumor as a defect from the papilla of Vater to the
lower CBD (arrow) (a, b) Gastroduodenoscopy revealed a duodenal ulcer nearby the papilla of Vater (arrow), which was suspected as the site
of tumor invasion (a), and a large number of duodenal polyps (dotted arrows) (b) Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography detected
findings similar to those of the MRI and MRCP (arrow) (a), and IDUS detected a torose lesion (dotted arrow) at the lower CBD (b) The
specimen obtained showed a circular infiltrating papillary tumor 10 mm in diameter with a shallow ulcer at the papilla of Vater and a large
number of polyps in the duodenal second portion (Fig. 6a). The pathological study indicated that the tumor was a papillary and moderately
differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (pStage: II, invasion level: duodenum alone (T2), lymphatic duct invasion: mild, vessel invasion:
mild, neural invasion: not detected) (Fig. 6b). Although a large number of adenomas were found in the portion of the duodenum, regional
lymph node, liver, and distant metastasis and peritoneal dissemination were not noted (pN0, H0, M0, P0). The patient is currently in good
health without recurrence, weight loss, or severe diarrhea at 12 months after surgery.Fig. 6The resected specimen showed a 10-mm circular
infiltrating papillary tumor (arrow) with a shallow ulcer (dotted arrow) at the papilla of Vater and polyps (arrowheads) in the duodenal
second portion (a). The pathological study showed that the tumor was a papillary and moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (b)
The resected specimen showed a 10-mm circular infiltrating papillary tumor (arrow) with a shallow ulcer (dotted arrow) at the papilla of
Vater and polyps (arrowheads) in the duodenal second portion (a). The pathological study showed that the tumor was a papillary and
moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (b) Cancer of the duodenum and the papilla of Vater affects the prognosis of patients with
FAP. Many of these patients have adenomatous polyps in the second and third portions of the duodenum, and although the polyps remain
adenomatous in many cases, 5 % of the polyps change from adenoma to carcinoma via the adenoma-carcinoma sequence [2, 4, 8, 10].
Interestingly, Kadmon et al. reported that no clear association between the number of colon polyps and the number of upper gastrointestinal
polyps has been identified , whereas the presence of colorectal cancer is related to the increase in duodenal or periampullary cancer in
patients with FAP . Therefore, patients with FAP independently need to undergo periodic gastroduodenoscopy and side-viewing endoscopy such
as colonoscopy. Polyps in the periampullary area can cause obstruction of the biliary and pancreatic ducts, resulting in elevation of
bilirubin and hepatobiliary pancreatic enzymes, jaundice, or pancreatitis as in our case , which suggests that awareness of biliary-
pancreatic symptoms yields an opportunity to check for periampullary polyps in patients with FAP along with periodic gastroduodenoscopy.
However, this does not diminish the primary importance of periodic medical surveillance for FAP patients. According to the Spigelman scoring
system, several treatments, among which are endoscopic mucosal resection, endoscopic ampullectomy, and prophylactic PpD/PpPD, are applicable
to stage IV patients; however more invasive treatments, such as surgical procedures including PpPD, are applicable to cancer patients . The
risk of recurrence of both stage IV disease and cancer remains substantial. Especially, less invasive treatments result in high rates of
recurrence of adenomas/cancer: rates following ampullectomy for early ampullary cancer range from 10 to 12.8 %, and that following PpD for
duodenal adenomas/cancer is 50 % [7, 12–14]. Therefore, individual patient characteristics need to be carefully considered when adopting a
less invasive treatment. For duodenal or periampullary cancer, there would be no objection to performing pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD), and
thus in many cases, PpPD is performed. Several authors have reported no difference in perioperative morbidity, long-term survival, and other
factors between PD and PpPD. However, except for the incidence of delayed gastric emptying, PpPD is better than PD in terms of operating
time, blood loss, nutritional status, and capacity to work at 6 months after surgery . The Whipple or child reconstruction procedure is
usually performed to avoid complications of pancreatic fistula (PF), abdominal abscess, or hemorrhage. However, these procedures do not
create a physiological route; the modified Imanaga reconstruction is a physiological procedure that offers good long-term nutritional status
and allows easier postoperative observation and treatment of the pancreatic/biliary duct . The weak point of the modified Imanaga
reconstruction is that it occasionally intensifies the severity of PF or cholangitis more than that by the Whipple or child procedure, and
it delays ingestion when PF occurs. Nevertheless, there are at least two benefits of the modified Imanaga reconstruction in FAP: ease of
endoscopic intestinal observation/treatment and maintenance of nutritional status after subtotal colectomy for colorectal lesions of FAP.
Therefore, we selected the modified Imanaga procedure for our patient. However, after performing the PpPD in our patient, we experienced a
patient with duodenal cancer arising from the remaining duodenum after PpPD for ampullary cancer in FAP , suggesting that resection of the
pylorus and the duodenal bulb with pylorus-resecting PD (PrPD) can remove all of the duodenum and contributes to the prevention of any
remaining duodenal cancer in patients with FAP. Moreover, long-term outcomes of PrPD are similar to those of PpPD, and PrPD reduces the
incidence of delayed gastric emptying compared with PpPD . Thus, PrPD with the modified Imanaga procedure might be a better option in
patients with FAP. Further evaluation with high-quality prospective studies is necessary. In the future, expanded oncological, pathological,
and surgical knowledge of duodenal or periampullary polyps and cancer associated with FAP might bring many FAP patients more relevant
treatment than they receive at present. Although more study is necessary, PrPD with the modified Imanaga reconstruction has the potential to
become one of the more effective procedures for the treatment of FAP. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on
request. common bile duct computed tomography familial adenomatous polyposis intraductal ultrasonography magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography magnetic resonance imaging pancreaticoduodenectomy pancreatic fistula pancreas-preserving duodenectomy pylorus-
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy pylorus-resecting pancreaticoduodenectomy Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions Shuji K wrote the manuscript. Shuji K, MK, and TN performed the surgery. Shuji K, KM, CS, MK,
YS, MF, YA, MT, Shigeru K, CT, YN, and NN acquired the data. Shuji K interpreted the data and drafted the manuscript. Shuji K, MK, TN, and
KK performed critical revision of the manuscript. Rise Japan (rise-japan.rulez.jp) reviewed the English language of the original manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
