Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome (CCS) is a rare non-inherited disease characterized by gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal abnormalities,
the estimated incidence is about one per million. Recognizing and curing the disorder face great challenge. This report refers to a Chinese
52 year old man with gastrointestinal symptoms and ectodermal abnormalities. Gastrointestinal symptoms occurred without obvious cause,
followed by ectodermal abnormalities after two months. In several hospitals, endoscopy examinations found numerous polypoid lesions in
various sizes spreading over the stomach and the entire colon and rectum, histopathological examinations showed inflammatory and adenomatous
polyp. In our hospital, both endoscopy and the contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of small intestine showed gastrointestinal
polyposis. Gastric antrum and the colon biopsy samples suggested hyperplastic and inflammatory polyp respectively. Endoscopic
ultrasonography (EUS) suggested gastric wall thickening. Fujinnon intelligent color enhancement (FICE) revealed that the size of gastric
glands pit varied, and vessels were visible. Confocal endoscope showed increased glandular epithelium layers. Magnifying narrow-band imaging
endoscopy (ME-NBI) detected that pit pattern in the mucous of the polyp were regular and type III-IV of microvessels were seen. Biochemical
investigations showed anemia, hypoalbuminemia and electrolyte disturbance. IgG, IgA and C3 decreased. Anti-ribosomal phosphoprotein is weak
positive. The patient was given nutritional support treatment. Gstrointestinal symptoms and hyperpigmentation improved gradually. The
patient was ever hospitalized in four hospitals and was diagnosed with CCS after 8 months of gastrointestinal symptoms. So when encountering
the patient with gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal abnormalities, try to take CCS into consideration. Due to its low incidence, no
standard therapy regimen has been established so far. However, nutritional support treatment is of great significance. CCS is a rare non-
inherited disease characterized by gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal abnormalities including hyperpigmentation, alopecia and
onychodystrophy . The diagnosis of CCS is based on history, physical examination, endoscopic findings of gastrointestinal polyposis and
histopathology . The etiology is not clear so far. The standard therapy regimen has not been established. Current medical therapies include
various antibiotics, anabolic steroids, dietary supplementation, ranitidine, glucocorticoid, immunomodulatory agent, salazosulfapyridine,
anti-tumor necrosis factor antibody and anti- Helicobacter pylori regimen , surgery is necessary when complications occur . Its incidence is
low whereas mortality is high. A 52-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with 8-month history of diarrhea (4-5 loose stools
actions per day, sometimes up to more than ten times), bloody stools, abdominal distension, nausea, vomiting, appetite loss and weight loss
of 10 kg in the recent 8 months. Two months after the onset of gastrointestinal symptoms, skin hyperpigmentation, fragile nails and scalp
hair loss occurred. In other hospitals, endoscopy examinations suggested numerous polypoid lesions in various sizes spreading over the
stomach and the entire colon and rectum, repeated histopathological examinations showed inflammatory and adenomatous polyp. The patient was
once considered to be lymphoma whereas was not diagnosed definitely, antibiotics and symptomatic treatments were applied, the
gastrointestinal symptoms did not alleviated. The patient’s occupation was farmer and past history was unremarkable. There was no family
history of gastrointestinal polyposis. Physical examination exhibited alopecia, atrophic nail changes, diffuse hyperpigmentation of the skin
(Fig. 1). There were no positive findings on heart, lung, abdomen and limbs.Fig. 1Physical findings of the CCS patient. Hyperpigmentation
(a), onychodystrophy (a) and alopecia (b) were seen on the patient Physical findings of the CCS patient. Hyperpigmentation (a),
onychodystrophy (a) and alopecia (b) were seen on the patient Biochemical investigations detected several abnormalities: a peripheral blood
hemoglobin level of 115g/l (normal range 130-175g/l), a serum total protein level of 30.6 g/l (normal range 64–83 g/l) and a serum albumin
level of 9.4g/l (normal range 20-30 g/dl). The level of serum sodium, potassium, chloride and calcium decreased. IgG, IgA and C3 decreased.
Anti-ribosomal phosphoprotein is weak positive. Bacterial culture of stool found no salmonella, shigella and fungus. Cortisol secretion
rhythm, CRP, ESR and IgG4 were on normal level. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy found diffuse polyps throughout the stomach (Fig. 2a), EUS
suggested gastric wall thickening (Fig. 2b). FICE revealed that the size of the gastric glands pit varied, and vessels were visible
(Fig. 3a). Confocal endoscope showed increased glandular epithelium layers (Fig. 3b). Colonoscopy found diffuse polyps in the entire colon
and rectum (Fig. 4a). ME-NBI detected that pit pattern of glandular tubes in the mucous of the polyp were regular and type III-IV of
microvessels were seen (Fig. 4b). Gastric antrum and the colon biopsy samples suggested hyperplastic and inflammatory polyp respectively
(Fig. 5). The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of small intestine displayed widespread nodular bumps over distalileum and entire
colon (Fig. 6). Given the diffuse polyps in gastrointestine, the patient tended to be diagnosed with polyposis. Further, combining polyposis
with ectodermal abnormalities, onset age and family history, the final diagnosis of CCS was made. The patient was given nutritional support
treatment including fat emulsion and amino acid for two weeks, diarrhea relieved and hyperpigmentation improved. Then the patient discharged
from the hospital, and took proton pump inhibitor orally. But the patient didn’t respond to treatment, severe diarrhea appeared again.
Unfortunately the patient was died three months later.Fig. 2Endoscopy findings in the stomach. Multiple polyps were seen in the stomach via
gastric endoscopy (a). EUS showed gastric wall thickening (b)Fig. 3The changes of gastric glands, vessels, glandular epithelium in the
stomach mucosa. FICE revealed that the size of gastric glands pit varied, and vessels were visible (a). Confocal endoscope showed increased
glandular epithelium layers (b)Fig. 4Endoscopic findings in the colon. Multiple polyps was seen in the colon via colonoscopy (a). ME-NBI
detected the regular pit pattern of glandular tubes and type III-IV of microvessels in the mucous of the polyp (b)Fig. 5Histopathological
examination of gastric and colon biopsy samples. Gastric antrum biopsy samples suggested hyperplastic polyp (a). Colon biopsy samples
suggested inflammatory polyp (b)Fig. 6The contrast-enhanced computed tomography of small intestine. Nodular bumps spread over distalileum
and entire colon Endoscopy findings in the stomach. Multiple polyps were seen in the stomach via gastric endoscopy (a). EUS showed gastric
wall thickening (b) The changes of gastric glands, vessels, glandular epithelium in the stomach mucosa. FICE revealed that the size of
gastric glands pit varied, and vessels were visible (a). Confocal endoscope showed increased glandular epithelium layers (b) Endoscopic
findings in the colon. Multiple polyps was seen in the colon via colonoscopy (a). ME-NBI detected the regular pit pattern of glandular tubes
and type III-IV of microvessels in the mucous of the polyp (b) Histopathological examination of gastric and colon biopsy samples. Gastric
antrum biopsy samples suggested hyperplastic polyp (a). Colon biopsy samples suggested inflammatory polyp (b) The contrast-enhanced computed
tomography of small intestine. Nodular bumps spread over distalileum and entire colon CCS was first described by Cronkhite and Canada in
1955 . CCS can develop in all ethnic groups, but the most frequently affected populations were European or Asian descent and most of the
cases were reported from Japan . The onset age was mainly between 50 and 70 years old . A slight male predominance was noted , the ratio of
male to female was about 1.3 ~ 2.3:1 . The etiology of CCS remains unclear. Patients with CCS accompanied by vitiligo, systemic lupus
erythematosus, scleroderma, hypothyroidism and membranous glomerulonephritis have been reported in the literature [8, 11–13], as well as CCS
has been seen in association with antinuclear antibodies, which provide evidences to support CCS to be immune-mediated . Histologic findings
of increased autoimmune-related IgG4 antibody in CCS polyps and treatment responses to immunosuppressants are also consistent with an
autoimmune mechanism underlying CCS . Eric ward reported that mast cells were seen on histopathologic analysis of intestinal biopsies and a
combination regimen containing H2-receptorantagonists, cromolyn sodium and loratadine was effective, which indicates the possible role of
mast cell dysfunction in the pathogenesis of CCS . Goto et al reported that stresses, such as excessive physical exertion and mental strain,
may trigger this syndrome. He also reported a frequency (3%) of concurrent psychiatric disorders in patients with CCS . Mental stress may
cause local inflammation in the gastrointestinal mucosa . CCS is characterized by gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal abnormalities.
The polyps are characteristically distributed throughout the entire gastrointestinal tract except esophagus . The histopathologic types of
the polyps have recently been reported as inflammatory, non-neoplastic, or retention polyps . However, gastrointestinal malignancies can be
as high as 15% . The neoplasms develop primarily in the colon and less frequently in the stomach . Whether malignant lesions arise from
preexisting polyps or coincidentally are a doubt. A study showed that serrated adenoma of the polypoid lesions was retrospectively found in
10 (40%) out of 25 CCS cases with colon cancer . Serrated adenoma have potential to be malignant and is often difficult to detect by
endoscopy . Moreover, both serrated adenoma and hyperplastic polyps are of sessile type and possess saw-toothed, elongated, and dilated
crypts. However the latter does not show significant nuclearatypia in histopathological examinations, so serrated adenoma may be considered
to be hyperplastic polyps by mistake. It suggests that CCS associated with colorectal cancer may frequently have polyps containing serrated
adenoma lesions . Ectodermal changes may be secondary to malabsorption . In the case we report, ectodermal changes occurred 2 months after
the onset of gastrointestinal symptoms. With the improvement of diarrhea, hyperpigmentation relieved. However, there are a few reports in
which ectodermal changes preceded the gastrointestinal manifestations. Medical treatment regimens reported in the literature vary.
Corticosteroid, anabolic steroids, various antibiotics, dietary supplementation, ranitidine, and symptomatic treatment have all been used.
Patients commonly have only temporary symptomatic improvement . It is reported that steroid-resistant CCS was successfully treated by
cyclosporine and azathioprine , and a case was successfully treated by anti-tumor necrosis factor antibody after poor therapeutic effect of
corticosteroids, antiplasmin agents, and azathioprine . A CCS patient associated with HP infection achieved remission after treatment with
anti- Helicobacter pylori regimen . SASP was effective in eradication of the inflammatory polyposis . Surgery may be indicated for the
treatment of bowel complications, such as severe protein-losing enteropathy, persistent haematochezia, malignant transformation [1, 8, 17]
and rarely for removing the polyps burden . The progressive course of CCS makes the mortality up to 55% , frequently due to complications
such as anemia, gastrointestinal bleeding, congestive heart failure, and septicemia . Therefore, it is important to be diagnosed early to
provide appropriate treatment and follow up. The treatment outcome in case report is encouraging, but it has been not confirmed by mass of
evidence-based medicine. CCS is a rare disease, physician should have a profound understanding of the characteristics of gastrointestinal
polyposis including heredity factor, onset age, parenteral manifestation and histopathology to try to avoid missed diagnosis and
misdiagnosis. In the aspect of treatment, nutritional support treatment is fundamental, more cases would be needed to get the optimal
therapy regiment. The Ethics Committee of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology; IORG No: IORG0003571. The
Ethics Committee of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (IORG No: IORG0003571) Voted at its meeting on
20/06/2015 to give final APPROVAL for the study Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A rare case report and literature review which is conducted by
Associate Prof. Zhu liangru at Department of Gastroenterology, UnionHospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Cronkhite-Canada syndrome Endoscopic ultrasonography
Computed tomography Fujinon intelligent color enhancement Magnifying narrow-band imaging endoscopy Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LZ and KZ performed the clinical work-up and therapy and made a contribution
and drafted the first manuscript. JZ and Mely participated in designing the report and revised the language and grammar of the manuscript.
LZ, RZ, OB and LC revised the manuscript to get final approval of the current submission. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
