Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 59 Final Diagnosis: Delayed kidney graft function Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Living donor kidney transplantation Specialty: Transplantology Unusual clinical course Delayed graft function is a
clinical term to describe the failure of the transplanted kidney to function immediately after transplantation. A 59-year-old woman suffered
from a rare case of delayed graft function lasting 148 days after unrelated living donor kidney transplantation. Until now, 15 years after
transplantation, organ function is still good, with serum creatinine levels about 1.4 to 2.0 mg/dl. Even after prolonged graft dysfunction,
good graft function can be achieved. Delayed graft function (DGF) after living donor kidney transplantation (LDKT) is reported to be between
1.6% and 7.1% . This is less frequent than in deceased kidney transplantation (20–60%). Reasons for and consequences of DGF in LDKT are
under debate. The main consequence for the patient is long-term dialysis treatment. Regular blood perfusion of the graft and absence of
histological signs of rejection require no specific therapy. In cases in which the causes are unclear, a reduction of the dose of
nephrotoxic medication may be an option. DGF seldom lasts longer than 4 weeks, but prolonged dialysis treatment of up to 4 months is also
reported. The longest published period with DGF and return of graft function after acute tubular necrosis is 131 days . In general, recovery
of kidney function after 3 months is completely unexpected; therefore, the immunosuppressive therapy was reduced step by step and finally
stopped completely. Here, we present a rare case of DGF up to 148 days after LDKT. We present the case of a 59-year-old (at the time of
transplantation) female patient (BMI 30.5 kg/m2) who had suffered from chronic nephritis with consecutive impairment of renal function since
1998. She decided to undergo LDKT with her blood-compatible 58-year-old husband as the donor; he offered donation after 1 year of
hemodialysis. There were no contraindications to living donation. HLA-mismatch was 0–2 – 1 for A-, B-, and DR loci, respectively. Cross-
match was examined twice, while preparation of the graft was performed. Examination of B-lymphocytes and monocytes were both negative. The
recipient was CMV-positive, while the donor did not show CMV-IgG. LDKT was performed in March 2000. Immunosuppressive therapy started a few
days prior to transplantation, with tacrolimus (TAC) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). Preoperatively, 2×250 mg methyl-prednisolone and
single-dose antithymocyte globulin (ATG, 1.25 mg/kgbody weight) were also administered . After a cold ischemic time of approximately 3
hours, a homogenous reperfusion of the graft occurred and the kidney already intraoperatively showed a distinctive diuresis.
Ureterocystostomy was protected by a JJ-stent. Postoperatively, the patient had stable blood pressure. The diuresis was 170 ml/h and serum
creatinine level dropped from 4.4 mg/dl to 2.0 mg/dl at the 2nd postoperative day (POD). From the 3rd POD, diuresis reduced despite
sufficient central venous pressure and adequate blood pressure (median blood pressure >80 mmHg). Because the TAC trough level reached 19.4
ng/ml, the creatinine rise (2.2 mg/dl) was considered as nephrotoxicity and the TAC dosage was reduced trough level orientated (TAC trough
level <15 ng/ml). Given a further rising retention parameter during the following days and a decline of the diuresis (minimum 480 ml/day),
Doppler ultrasonography was performed. Here, a distinctly higher renal arterial resistive index with a reduced flow of the peripheral
(cortical) artery branches was recorded. Neither graft vessel showed any stenosis. An ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy at the 5th POD
revealed tissue with flattened tubular epithelia as a sign of tubular insufficiency. Signs of interstitial or vascular graft rejection were
not observed. Due to clinical parameters, we suspected early rejection. Therefore, ATG (3.5 mg/kgbody weight/day) was added to the
immunosuppressive medication and the TAC dose was adjusted. Despite increased diuresis quantities (1000 ml/day), a further rise of the
creatinine level (7th POD: 4.7 mg/dl) and pulmonary congestion were recorded, requiring first dialysis on the same day. On the following
day, an ultrasound-guided biopsy showed moderate focal-shaped fluoride interstitial rejection with distinct edema. The ATG-therapy was
continued. Under regular dialysis, the retention parameters were not convincing and diuresis ranged between 550 and 950 ml/day. The control
ultrasound-guided biopsy on the 14th POD (7th day of ATG-treatment) showed only potential partly reversible tubular damage, partially of the
calcineurin-inhibitor-associated type. A moderate, focal-shaped rejection, as well as a tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis, were
recorded. Signs of vascular rejection, glomerular disease, or renal CMV infection were not established. Doppler ultrasound, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and renal scintigraphy of the transplanted kidney showed a significant restriction of the blood perfusion of the
peripheral tissue and reduced tubular function. Stenosis or kinking of the graft artery was excluded. The antibody treatment was
administered for 14 days. In spite of dialysis, an increase of the daily urine production (up to 1700 ml) was documented. It was possible to
prolong the intervals of the dialysis to twice a week. Because a further creatinine drop was not noted (between 3.0 and 3.5 mg/dl), it was
possible to change the immunosuppression from TAC to sirolimus (SRL, level 8–12 ng/ml) in the 5th week after transplantation. After 6 weeks
the patient was discharged from the hospital under the conditions described above. Ten weeks after transplantation, the JJ-stent was
removed. A further ultrasound-guided kidney biopsy revealed diffuse tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis with focal infections, mid-level
glomerular scarring, and definite occlusive sclerosis of the larger artery branches. No signs of rejection or a calcineurin effect were
detected. According to histological criteria, improvement of graft function was unlikely. Taking the above results into consideration, MMF
and SRL were stopped, and steroids were down-titrated to 5 mg/day, since there was still remaining urinary production of the graft.
Creatinine level decreased step by step to <2 mg/dl without any intensified therapy in the next 4 months. The dialysis intervals were
prolonged without an increase of the retention parameters. Last dialysis was performed in November 2000, a total of 148 days after LDKT.
Under basic immunosuppression with steroid (5 mg/day) and MMF (3×500 mg/day), serum creatinine levels remained between 1.4 and 2.0 mg/dl.
Fifteen years after transplantation, the patient is still dialysis-free. Criteria for DGF after kidney transplantation are not defined
clearly, so we found few comparable studies. The older, but still often-used, definition is “requirement for dialysis in the first week
after transplantation” . A comprehensive definition for DGF is the “failure of the graft to function properly in the early phase after
transplantation” . Accepted risk factors for LDKT included: older donors (>50 years), higher mismatches, genetically unrelated donors,
prolonged warm ischemia, high recipient body mass index, pre-transplant dialysis, and transplantation of the right kidney . Of these risk
factors, pre-transplant dialysis, donor age >50 years, and possible sex mismatch were relevant for DGF in our patient. All other risk
factors, especially a significantly different BMI or an extra-long warm ischemia time, may be excluded as causes. Acute rejection was
excluded by early biopsy within risk management. Independent thereof, the patient with DGF remains less able to tolerate full doses of
immunosuppressive drugs, therefore increasing the risk of acute rejection . For our patient, the immunosuppressive therapy required
adjustment as well. Course examination on the 8th POD proved an interstitial rejection. However, ATG was already added to immunosuppression
therapy after the first biopsy. The success of the therapy against rejection was verified by a further biopsy. Independent of this
rejection, there may have had a negative impact on the duration of the DGF. The meaning of glutathione S-transferase polymorphism in the
presented case as the cause of DGF remains theoretical; at the time, the investigations regarding this had just started. Even today, little
data is available for the LDKT group , and the same applies to ischemia-reperfusion injury. Although this may also occur in LDKT, it is more
frequent and severe in kidneys from deceased donors . Separate from this, the currently accepted risk factors for ischemia-reperfusion
injury were not relevant in our case . The significance of DGF in long-term graft function is very controversial. DGF alone without a
rejection period showed good long-term graft survival . Nephrotoxic adverse effects of calcineurin inhibitors are well known in kidney
transplantation. By replacing TAC with SRL, the potential nephrotoxic immunosuppression was taken into consideration. In 2000 there was
little experience in the use of SRL after kidney transplantation, but today SRL is more often used, primarily after organ transplantation.
However, some investigations suggest that SRL negatively influences the incidence and duration of DGF . Any additional negative influence of
SRL in our patient is speculative. Nevertheless, after the convalescence of the graft function, the immunosuppression was carried out as
dual therapy with steroids and SRL. The specifications for mTOR inhibitor and DGF mentioned above were not available then; therefore, the
least nephrotoxic therapy with a calcineurin-inhibitor-free regimen was carried out. Retrospectively, it is possible that the core needle
biopsy specimens, taken 10 weeks after transplantation, may have shown non-representative kidney tissue; otherwise, recovery of the kidney
function would have been impossible. Reduction of immunosuppression nearly 3 months after transplantation with missing graft function was an
option under these circumstances. From a retrospective point of view, it was justified. It may be assumed that, even after prolonged graft
dysfunction, good renal function can be achieved. Ceka and Terasaki reported good graft function (creatinine 1.9 mg/dl) over 13 years after
deceased kidney transplantation despite a DGF period up to 90 days . The timeframe of 148 days of DGF duration presented here has to be
considered as extraordinary, but with a positive result for the patient. Conflict of interest None declared.
