Academic Editor: Claude Prigent Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare genetically heterogeneous disorder with a high phenotypic
variability including mental retardation, developmental delay, and limb malformations. The genetic causes in about 30% of patients with CdLS
are still unknown. We report on the functional characterization of two intronic NIPBL mutations in two patients with CdLS that do not affect
a conserved splice-donor or acceptor site. Interestingly, mRNA analyses showed aberrantly spliced transcripts missing exon 28 or 37,
suggesting the loss of the branch site by the c.5329-15A>G transition and a disruption of the polypyrimidine by the c.6344del(-13)_(-8)
deletion. While the loss of exon 28 retains the reading frame of the NIBPL transcript resulting in a shortened protein, the loss of exon 37
shifts the reading frame with the consequence of a premature stop of translation. Subsequent quantitative PCR analysis demonstrated a 30%
decrease of the total NIPBL mRNA levels associated with the frameshift transcript. Consistent with our results, this patient shows a more
severe phenotype compared to the patient with the aberrant transcript that retains its reading frame. Thus, intronic variants identified by
sequencing analysis in CdLS diagnostics should carefully be examined before excluding them as nonrelevant to disease. Cornelia de Lange
syndrome (CdLS; OMIM 1227470, 300590, 610759, 614701, and 300882) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by developmental delay,
typical facial dysmorphism, limb malformations, and gastrointestinal and neurological problems . CdLS is caused by mutations affecting the
cohesin complex, which participates in essential cell processes such as chromosome segregation during cell division, DNA repair and
replication, and gene expression . Mutations have been identified in five different genes (NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, HDAC8, and RAD21), encoding
structural or regulatory components of cohesin . The NIPBL gene is located on chromosome 5p13.2. At least 60% of the patients with the
clinical diagnosis of CdLS show NIPBL mutations . NIPBL spans more than 190 kb and contains 47 exons . In addition to the previously
reported two isoforms, four new shorter transcripts that exclude different combinations of exons 10, 12, 33 + 34, or 45 have been described
recently . Although mutations predicted to affect NIPBL splicing represent about 15% of all known mutations in NIPBL, their functional
consequences on mRNA splicing are often unknown . Accurate mRNA splicing requires several functional DNA elements, including a splice-donor
and acceptor site, a polypyrimidine tract, a branch point, and further regulatory sequences that can either be located within intronic or
exonic regions of the gene body and act as enhancers or silencers of the splicing process and are mostly unknown . Mutations in the highly
conserved AG/GT splice-acceptor and donor dinucleotides almost always result in aberrant splicing , while the pathological consequences of
mutations in the other functional elements are mostly unknown. To distinguish the latter mutations from intronic polymorphisms, extensive in
vitro analyses on mRNA extracted from patient samples are needed . In this paper we report for the first time on the identification and
functional investigation of two intronic NIPBL mutations that do not affect the conserved splice-donor or acceptor sites. Sequencing
analysis of the parents could confirm the de novo status of either mutation in the patients. We used in vitro as well as in vivo analyses to
confirm the functional consequences of both mutations, and we have tried to correlate our findings with the phenotype of the patients. This
study includes two German patients who meet clinical criteria for CdLS according to Kline et al. . The ethical standards of the Declaration
of Helsinki have been followed. Patients' parents have written informed consent to participate in the study. A pool of four cDNAs from
normal individuals was used as a control to perform the experiments. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using the
standard salting out procedure. The exons of the NIPBL gene and their splice junctions were amplified by PCR. The PCR products were purified
with USB ExoSAP-IT PCR Product Cleanup (Affymetrix) following the manufacturer's instructions and subsequently sequenced using an ADN 3130
Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). NIPBL cDNA was numbered according to the NIPBL isoform 1 (GenBank accession number NM_000642). The
mutation nomenclature was designated following the instructions from the Human Genome Variation Society (http://www.hgvs.org/). Total RNA
from blood leukocytes of patients and controls was extracted using the PAXgene Blood RNA Kit (PreAnalytiX) according the manufacturer's
instructions. Single-stranded cDNAs were synthesized from 500 ng of RNA using the First-Strand Synthesis Kit (Fermentas) with random
hexamers. Specific PCRs were performed for each patient. For patient 1, exons 27–32 were amplified with primers sF27
(5′-GGCCGTTTGCCCAGAGCTTTG-3′) and sR32 (5′-AAACCAGTCATATCCAGTATC-3′). For patient 2, exons 35–38 were amplified with primers sF35
(5′-CATCATCAAATATGGCATGAC-3′) and sR38 (5′-CTAGACCAATGATAGCTTTTG-3′). Each reaction contained 2 μL of cDNA in a 20 μL mixture. Products
obtained were analyzed by electrophoresis on a 2% agarose gel. Bands were excised and purified with QIAEX Gel Extraction Kit (QIAGEN), and
their identity was confirmed by sequencing. Minigene constructs were generated using vector pSPL3 (Exon Trapping System, Gibco, BRL,
Carlsbad, CA, kindly provided by Dr. B. Pérez). For patient 1, exon 28 and its intronic flanking regions were amplified by PCR using the
primers NM28F (5′-GGCTACAGGTTCTGCAAATG-3′) and NM28R (5′-CCCATGTGGTTCCTATCATC). For patient 2, exon 37 and its intronic flanking regions
were amplified using the primers NM37F (5′-ATTACCTGAGGTCGGGAGTTC-3′) and NM37R (5′-GCTGTTGATGTCAACAGTGTGC-3′). The same amplifications were
carried out on the genomic DNA from a healthy control. The fragments were inserted into the pCR-2.1-TOPO vector (Invitrogen Corporation)
following the manufacturer's protocol. The inserts were excised with EcoRI (Fermentas) and subsequently inserted into pSPL3. Ligation was
performed at 25°C for 5 min, using T4 DNA ligase (Invitrogen Corporation). Mutations introduced on pSPL3-WT were performed with QuikChange
Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). On pSPL3-28-WT, we disrupted the consensus branch point sequence maintaining
the original A at position c.5329-15 (YYRAY→RRYAR) to generate the mutant BP. On pSPL3-37-WT, the pyrimidines deleted in patient 2 were
turned into purines to disrupt the polypyrimidine tract of exon 37, generating the mutant PUR. Plasmids were isolated using the GeneJET
Plasmid Miniprep Kit (Fermentas) according to manufacturer's instructions and checked by sequencing. HepG2 cells were transfected with
1500 ng of each minigene using JetPEI reagent (Qbiogene Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were
harvested at 48 hours after transfection and RNA was extracted using RNeasy Protect Mini Kit (Qiagen). RT-PCR transcription was carried out
with 1 μg of RNA using the First-Strand Synthesis Kit (Fermentas). PCRs were carried out on 5 μL of cDNA using the pSPL3-specific primers
SD6 and SA2. The amplified products were analyzed by electrophoresis and sequenced. Each experiment was performed in triplicate. Total NIPBL
expression was measured in both patients using primers NIPBL35-36F (5′-GGCATGACTGTAGTGCAAC-3′) and NIPBL 36R (5′-ATTGAAACAAGCCCACACAA-3′).
Real-time quantitative PCR was performed in an ABI Prism 7000 sequence detector system (Applied Biosystems). We used 1xSYBR Green PCR
Mastermix, 25 ng cDNA (total RNA equivalent), and 100 nM primers for each reaction mix. The amplification conditions were 95°C for 10
minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for 1 minute. Melting curve analysis showed a specific amplification. The
same reactions were performed on a pool of four control cDNAs as a reference. All the amplifications were performed in triplicate. We used
standard curves to quantify the expression of NIPBL, as well as GAPDH for normalization. To create the standard curves, NIPBL and GAPDH
cDNAs were inserted into the pCR-2.1-TOPO vector according to the manufacturer's protocol. Plasmids were quantified by spectrophotometric
analysis at 260 nm, and standard curves were based on a 10-fold serial dilution of the different cloned genes. The Ct (cycle threshold)
values of the samples were interpolated to the corresponding standard curve. The expression of NIPBL was normalized to the expression of
GAPDH in the same sample. P values were calculated using Student's t-test. Patient 1 (P1) is an 8-year-old boy who was born after an
uneventful pregnancy at 41 weeks of gestation. Birth weight was 3,260 g (−0.8 SD), length 50 cm (−1.5 SD), and head circumference (HC) 34 cm
(−1.6 SD). The craniofacial features included arched eyebrows, long eyelashes, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, long philtrum, and
thin upper lip. He had small hands with bilateral single palmar crease and short 1st metacarpal (Figure 1(a)). Physical exploration also
demonstrated shawl scrotum, micropenis, and hypospadias. Brain Evoked Auditory Response and abdominal and cardiac ultrasounds were normal.
At the age of 7 years, his weight was 19 kg (median), his height was 112 cm (−2.2 SD), and his HC was 47 cm (−3.8 SD). Developmental
milestones were delayed. More clinical information is provided in Table 1. Patient 2 (P2) is a 7-year-old girl, who was born at 36 weeks of
gestation. Birth weight was 2,130 g (−1.2 SD), length 43 cm (−1.2 SD), and head circumference (HC) 30 cm (−2.2 SD). During the exploration
in the newborn period she showed the following features: brachycephaly, arched eyebrows with synophrys, long eyelashes, ptosis, depressed
nasal bridge with anteverted nostrils, long and smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, low anterior and posterior hairline with a webbed neck,
generalized hirsutism, and cutis marmorata. She had small hands with brachymesophalangy V and restriction of elbow movements (Figure 1(b)).
During the first months of life, she had a feeding and swallowing disorder, which currently is under treatment, and she has underwent
surgery for treatment of gastroesophageal reflux. At the age of one year, her weight was 4630 g (−1.75 SD), height 63 cm (−4.8 SD), and HC
39 cm (−4.8 SD). More clinical information is shown in Table 1. Sequence analysis of the genomic DNA yielded two novel intronic mutations in
the NIPBL gene. In patient 1 a transition (c.5329-15A>G in intron 27) and in patient 2 a deletion (c.6344del(-13)_(-8) in intron 36) were
identified (Figure 1(c)). Sequencing analysis of the parents confirmed the de novo status for both mutations. RNA analysis could prove
aberrant splicing in both patients. In patient 1, an aberrant transcript of 535 bp beside the expected wild type PCR product of 634 bp was
observed. Sequencing analysis of the aberrantly spliced product revealed a loss of a 99 bp fragment representing the entire exon 28 region
(Figure 1(c)). In patient 2 the expected wild type product of 363 bp plus an additional product of 208 bp was detected. Subsequent
sequencing analysis showed a deletion of 155 bp representing exon 37 of the NIPBL gene (Figure 1(c)). Transfection using the exon 37 WT
construct generated two fragments, the main one of 423 bp containing exon 37 and another of 268 bp without this exon (Figure 2(a)). The
presence of the mutation c.6344del(-13)_(-8) leads to a rise of the transcript with exon 37 deletion while the normal transcript disappeared
(Figure 2(a)). The disruption of the polypyrimidine tract of exon 37 (PUR) produced a similar effect to mutation c.6344del(-13)_(-8) (Figure
2(a)). Total NIPBL mRNA levels were assessed by quantitative real-time PCR using oligonucleotides that recognize NIPBL sequences not
affected by aberrant or alterative splicing. The mean level of total NIPBL expression measured in four control cDNAs (CT) was assigned as
100% (SD = 5.1%), and the mean NIPBL expression in each patient was referred as a percentage to the control. Whereas no distinct changes on
NIPBL mRNA levels were observed in patient 1 (P1 = 96%, SD = 1.4%) a decrease of ~30% on total NIPBL mRNA levels was measured in patient 2
(P2 = 71%, SD = 1.4%, P < 0.001) (Figure 2(b)). Here, we report and characterize for the first time two novel de novo CdLS-causing mutations
within intronic regions of NIPBL that do not affect the conserved splice-donor or acceptor site but result in aberrant mRNA splicing. In
patient 1 (P1), the A>G transition located at c.5329-15 within intron 27 of NIPBL results in the skipping of the adjacent exon (Figure
1(c)). This adenine (c.5329-15) lies within a predicted branch point sequence YNYYRA_Y (TGTCAA_T) , which is in close proximity to the
splice-acceptor site and therefore might be involved in the formation of the lariat structure during the splicing process. This kind of
mutation is often missed within molecular diagnostics because there is no explicit consensus sequence and branch points can be located at
variable distances from the acceptor site [19, 20]. However, the position of this change, the surrounding nucleotides matching the consensus
sequence, and A>G transition of the “lariat adenine” is the most frequent mutation affecting proper lariat formation , strongly suggesting
the disruption of a branch point by this mutation. In our minigene model, exon 28 WT showed a big trend to skip, thus hindering subsequent
analyses, maybe due to the lack of some splicing regulatory sequences in the model which are present in vivo. Nevertheless, a change in the
splicing pattern corresponding to an increase of exon skipping was observed in the presence of the mutation c.5329-15A>G as well as with the
disruption of the branch point sequence (data not shown). The six-nucleotide deletion within intron 36 in patient 2 (P2),
c.6344del(-13)_(-8), causes skipping of exon 37 during the splicing process (Figure 1(c)). The deletion disrupts a polypyrimidine stretch
located adjacent to the acceptor sequence. Since these stretches are known to play a fundamental role in the splicing process, the deletion
of six base pairs, five of which are pyrimidines, within this functional region, might explain the skipping of the exon . Despite the fact
that a specific consensus sequence has not yet been defined, it has been reported that a minimum tract is required, and both its length and
its composition contribute to splicing efficiency [23, 24]. Although the most common mutations are transversions of pyrimidines into purines
, this mutation would affect the length of the sequence. The minigene carrying the deletion of c.6344del(-13)_(-8) could further confirm
these findings. Furthermore, a transversion of the five deleted pyrimidines into purines (PUR) also results in a skipping of exon 37 which
strongly supports the functional relevance of this pyrimidine stretch for proper NIPBL splicing (Figure 2(a)). In general, frameshift
mutations in NIPBL encoding a truncated nonfunctional protein result in a reduced level of functional NIPBL and are mostly associated with a
severe CdLS phenotype due to the genetic model of haploinsufficiency. Missense mutations as well as small in-frame deletions or insertions
that preserve the reading frame of the transcript are mostly detected in patients with more moderate phenotypes [4, 25]. The phenotype of
the patients with mutations affecting NIPBL splicing seems to be in agreement with these observations and are associated with the
consequences for the NIPBL protein encoded by the aberrantly spliced transcript . The mutation c.5329-15A>G results in an aberrantly spliced
NIPBL transcript that excludes a 99 bp fragment representing exon 28 but it preserves the protein reading frame and is supposed to result in
a slightly shortened NIPBL protein. This exon encodes parts of HEAT-repeat domain of NIPBL. Although the precise function is still unknown,
protein-protein interactions were mapped within the HEAT-repeat domain and there is a clear enrichment of missense mutations affecting this
part of the protein . However, at least a partial preservation of the NIPBL function might be postulated, supported by the fact that
numerous missense mutations distributed over almost entire protein-coding region of NIPBL result in similar CdLS phenotypes . Furthermore,
quantitative analyses exclude a significant reduction of the total NIPBL transcript levels in patient 1 compared to unaffected controls
(Figure 2(b)). This is in contrast to patient 2, who shows a significant reduction of total NIPBL mRNA levels down to 71% of those observed
in controls (P < 0.001) (Figure 2(b)). We could show that the deletion of c.6344del(-13)_(-8) results in an aberrantly spliced transcript
that lacks exon 37 which causes a shift in the reading frame. The observed decrease of the NIPBL transcript level down to 70% might be
explained by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay of the aberrant transcript which would be in agreement with the proposed model of
haploinsufficiency . The two patients described here meet the general CdLS. It is of note that they present with different phenotypical
features. Patient 1 shows a rather mild phenotype without intrauterine growth restriction and a slight postnatal retardation of height and
weight. However he shows microcephaly. He has feeding problems without GERD and minor limb anomalies and his developmental delay is mild
(Table 1). By contrast, patient 2 shows a more severe phenotype with evident craniofacial features even in the neonatal period, limb
abnormalities, profound growth, and psychomotor retardation as well as severe microcephaly. In addition, she suffered from severe GERD
(Table 1). The association of frameshift aberrant transcripts with severe CdLS phenotypes has been previously suggested . This work provides
experimental support to this hypothesis, since clinical findings are in agreement with our molecular analyses: a general reduction of NIPBL
mRNA levels and a transcript that contains a frameshift or encodes a truncated protein result in a more severe phenotype than alteration of
protein function/structure preserving the reading frame and totally NIPBL levels [4, 25]. Furthermore, we could give functional evidence
that intronic variants which do not necessarily affect splice-donor or acceptor site result in aberrantly spliced NIPBL transcripts and are
of pathological relevance for CdLS. Although recent findings could reveal de novo mutations in the ANKRD11 gene in patients with the
clinical diagnosis of CdLS, the genetic causes in about 30% of patients with CdLS are still unknown [31, 32]. Whether unknown mutations
affecting NIPBL splicing within the often large intronic regions that are not totally covered by current sequencing analyses might result in
the CdLS phenotype can only be speculated. Thus, intronic variants identified by sequencing analysis in CdLS diagnostics should carefully be
examined before excluding them as nonrelevant to disease. We report on the functional characterization of two intronic NIPBL mutations in
two patients with CdLS that do not affect a conserved splice-donor or acceptor site. While c.5329-15A>G may disrupt a branch point in exon
27, c.6344del(-13)_(-8) would affect a polypyrimidine stretch in exon 37. The deletion of c.6344del(-13)_(-8) generates a frameshift
aberrant transcript resulting in NIPBL haploinsufficiency, consistent with the severe phenotype of this patient. These findings highlight
the fact that intronic variants should carefully be examined before excluding them as nonrelevant to CdLS. The authors thank the patients
and their families for participating in this study. This study was funded by grant from the Spanish Ministry of Health, Fondo de
Investigación Sanitaria (FIS) (Reference no. PI12/01318), the Diputación General de Aragón (Grupo Consolidado B20), and European Social Fund
(Construyendo Europa desde Aragón) and the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under the frame of E-Rare-2 (TARGET-
CdLS; Frank J. Kaiser). María E. Teresa-Rodrigo, Beatriz Puisac, María C. Gil-Rodríguez, María Hernández-Marcos, Feliciano J. Ramos, and
Juan Pié are members of “Grupo Clínico Vinculado al CIBERER” and ISS-Aragon at the University of Zaragoza Medical School and Hospital
Clínico Universitario “Lozano Blesa.” The authors declare no conflict of interests. Overview of the phenotype and molecular findings of two
patients with CdLS. (a) Phenotype of patient 1. (b) Phenotype of patient 2. (c) Localization of the mutations on NIPBL gene and their
consequences upon transcript processing. Boxes mean exons and lines mean introns. Dark boxes represent the nontranslated region. The
localization of each mutation and chromatograms on genomic DNA are shown above the gene. Agarose gel of the cDNA PCR products in each
patient' pictures and chromatograms are shown underneath the gene. Patient 1 yielded normal product of 634 bp and an aberrant fragment of
535 bp corresponding to exon 28 skipping. Patient 2 showed the normal product of 363 bp and an additional band of 208 bp corresponding to
exon 37 skipping (MW: molecular weight, WT: wild type, P1: patient 1, and P2: patient 2). Functional analyses of the intronic mutations
c.5329-15A>G and c.6344del(-13)_(-8). (a) Minigene constructs were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. Deletion of c.6344del(-13)_(-8)
causes an exon skipping that was also found by a transversion of the five deleted purines into pyrimidines (PUR). (b) Quantitative real-time
PCR analysis of total NIPBL mRNA from leukocytes of patients with CdLS and controls. NIPBL transcript levels were normalized by GAPDH
expression. The values presented are the medians of triplicate determinations ± SD. The mean ratio of total NIPBL mRNA in controls was
assigned as 100% (CT: controls, P1: patient 1, P2: patient 2, and ∗∗∗: P < 0.001 versus control). Clinical features of two patients with
CdLS. +: present; −: not present; OFC: head circumference; CNS: central nervous system; NA: not available; GERD: gastroesophageal reflux
disease; GU: genitourinary; SD: standard deviation.
