Silent myocardial infarction relates to the absence of symptoms usually associated with myocardial ischemia. It has been estimated that
silent myocardial infarction can occur in 2–4 % of young adult asymptomatic men. A majority of patients without an initially apparent cause
of sudden death have been found at autopsy to have had significant coronary heart disease, including old, undetected myocardial infarction.
Cases of sudden death in young men with unrecognized silent myocardial ischemia seem to be underreported, however. A 35-year-old Norwegian
man without a previous medical history died suddenly without preceding symptoms of coronary ischemia. Apart from elevated lactate, his
laboratory test results were within normal limits. An autopsy revealed advanced coronary artery thrombosis of the left anterior descending
branch with an extensive, partly organized myocardial infarction. The results of toxicological examinations of peripheral blood were
negative for usual narcotics and alcohol. Sudden, unexpected death due to myocardial infarction can occur even at a young age in patients
without known coronary heart disease. Cardiovascular disease is the most frequent cause of death worldwide . The first manifestation of
coronary artery disease in 60–70 % of patients is either sudden death or myocardial infarction (MI) . Silent myocardial infarction (SMI)
relates to absence of symptoms usually associated with myocardial ischemia. Its risk factors include heavy smoking, family history of heart
disease, age, high blood cholesterol and systemic blood pressure, diabetes, and overweight [3, 4]. Silent myocardial ischemia may occur in
patients of all ages with a coronary disease. It has been estimated that SMI can occur in 2–4 % of young adult asymptomatic men . Previous
studies have shown the relationship between increased degrees of pulmonary congestion and painless (not silent) MI in older patients . A
majority of patients between the ages of 25 and 60 years without an initially apparent cause of death were reported to have had a
significant coronary heart disease at autopsy, including old, undetected MI . Sudden death in young men with silent myocardial ischemia
without established risk factors is probably underreported, however. Our patient was a 35-year-old Norwegian man who suddenly collapsed in
the street. Emergency services attended and started cardiopulmonary resuscitation on site, eventually achieving return of spontaneous
circulation. The patient experienced another cardiac arrest in the emergency room at the hospital and was given thrombolytic treatment, but
he died shortly thereafter. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed irregular rhythm with both left and right bundle branch block (Fig. 1). Apart
from elevated lactate, his laboratory test results were normal (Table 1). According to the patient’s relatives, he had been healthy without
known risk factors or a family history of coronary disease. He had occasionally smoked cannabis and hashish and drank alcohol. The use of
other narcotic substances was unknown to his relatives or his general practitioner. The patient had been of medium build with a body mass
index of 25 kg/m2. He had experienced slight chest discomfort 1 month before his death; that episode lasted a couple of hours. The autopsy
revealed a 20-mm-long thrombus lodged in the left anterior descending (LAD) branch of the coronary artery associated with moderate
atherosclerosis in the same segment. The rest of his vascular system showed only focal mild atherosclerosis. His heart weighed 350 g and was
not enlarged. The posterior wall of the left ventricle and part of the septum showed a sharply demarcated infarcted area with a largest
diameter of 8 cm. It was yellow-red, soft, and had reddish edges. The rest of the heart was unremarkable. The left and right ventricle walls
were 10 and 5 mm thick, respectively.Fig. 1Twelve-lead electrocardiogram shows irregular rhythm with right and left bundle branch blockTable
1Laboratory results related to main and secondary diagnosesTestResultReference rangeNa+ 136137–145K+ 3.83.5–5.0Cl− 9997–107Ca2+
1.242.15–2.55Hematocrit4740–50Lactate8.50.5–1.6 Twelve-lead electrocardiogram shows irregular rhythm with right and left bundle branch block
Laboratory results related to main and secondary diagnoses Other autopsy findings were the main diagnoses of acute MI and thrombosis of the
LAD branch of the coronary artery as well as the secondary diagnoses of pulmonary atelectasis; blood stasis in the liver, spleen, and
kidney; and mild focal atherosclerosis in the aorta and its major branches. The histological specimens from the heart and LAD branch were
fixed in 4 % formaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, and cut at 4 μm. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Sections from the heart
showed infarction with early organization (7–10 days old) and acute reinfarction at the edges (Fig. 2). At 7–10 days old, an infarction is
maximally yellow-tan and soft, with depressed red-tan margins and well- developed phagocytosis of dead cells as well as granulation tissue
at the margins . The LAD branch showed atherosclerotic changes in the wall with remnants of a thrombus attached to the intima (Fig. 3).Fig.
2Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section of myocardium illustrating areas of myocardial infarction, early organization (7–10 days old) and
acute reinfarction0Fig. 3Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section of left anterior descending branch of the coronary artery illustrating areas
of atherosclerosis and partly organized thrombosis in the lumen Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section of myocardium illustrating areas of
myocardial infarction, early organization (7–10 days old) and acute reinfarction Hematoxylin and eosin–stained section of left anterior
descending branch of the coronary artery illustrating areas of atherosclerosis and partly organized thrombosis in the lumen In this case
report, we describe sudden death caused by acute MI without other symptoms of coronary ischemia in a young Norwegian man without known risk
factors. The findings were compatible with SMI. A previous episode of chest discomfort might have been an early warning sign, even though
the patient himself had ignored it as such. Silent myocardial ischemia may occur in patients of all ages with coronary disease, and a
majority of patients with SMI who die suddenly are found at autopsy to have had a significant coronary heart disease. Cases of SMI-related
sudden death in younger individuals may be underreported in autopsy series worldwide. Knowledge of this disease is crucial with respect to
early detection and possible prevention of death. We believe this case report contains a worthwhile clinical lesson for both clinicians and
pathologists. As presented in our report, SMI with sudden death can occur in young patients and in patients without known risk factors such
as a positive family history, regular cigarette smoking, or use of vasoconstrictive drugs. Further autopsy studies on SMI in young
individuals are encouraged, and clinical awareness of the condition is mandatory in early intervention to at best avoid a fatal outcome of
the disease. Patient's relatives have, in accordance with Norwegian autopsy legislation, given full consent for autopsy including handling
of biological material and its use in teaching and research. This is documented by an autopsy requisition form filled out and signed by the
patient’s physician at the hospital. A scanned copy of this schema is retained in the patient data base of the hospital; this copy is
available for review by Editor-in-chief of this journal. Acetone and alcohols (acetone, ethanol, isopropanol, methanol) β-Hydroxybutyrate
Amphetamines (amphetamine, methamphetamine, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine, para-methoxy-N-methylamphetamine, para-methoxyamphetamine,
meta-chlorophenylpiperazine, 2-(4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine, methylenedioxypyrovalerone) Cannabis (tetrahydrocannabinol)
γ-Hydroxybutyrate Cocaine (cocaine, benzoylecgonine) Opiates/opioids (buprenorphine, ethylmorphine, fentanyl, hydromorphone, codeine,
methadone, morphine, oxycodone) Benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine derivatives (alprazolam, bromazepam, diazepam, N-desmethyldiazepam,
phenazepam, flunitrazepam, 7-aminoflunitrazepam, clonazepam, 7-aminoclonazepam, lorazepam, midazolam, nitrazepam, 7-aminonitrazepam,
oxazepam, zolpidem, zopiclone) Analgesics (dextropropoxyphene, ketamine, ketobemidone, paracetamol, salicylic acid, tramadol)
Antidepressives (amitriptyline, citalopram, doxepin, fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, clomipramine, mianserin, mirtazapine, moclobemide, nefazodone,
nortriptyline, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, trimipramine, venlafaxine) Antipsychotics (amisulpride, dixyrazine, flupentixol,
haloperidol, chlorpromazine, chlorprothixene, clozapine, levomepromazine, olanzapine, perphenazine, quetiapine, risperidone, zuclopenthixol)
Antiepileptics (phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, pregabalin) Others (alimemazine, carisoprodol, meprobamate,
methylphenidate, orphenadrine, promethazine, theophylline) Acetone and alcohols (acetone, ethanol, isopropanol, methanol) β-Hydroxybutyrate
Amphetamines (amphetamine, methamphetamine, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine, para-methoxy-N-methylamphetamine, para-methoxyamphetamine,
meta-chlorophenylpiperazine, 2-(4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine, methylenedioxypyrovalerone) Cannabis (tetrahydrocannabinol)
γ-Hydroxybutyrate Cocaine (cocaine, benzoylecgonine) Opiates/opioids (buprenorphine, ethylmorphine, fentanyl, hydromorphone, codeine,
methadone, morphine, oxycodone) Benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine derivatives (alprazolam, bromazepam, diazepam, N-desmethyldiazepam,
phenazepam, flunitrazepam, 7-aminoflunitrazepam, clonazepam, 7-aminoclonazepam, lorazepam, midazolam, nitrazepam, 7-aminonitrazepam,
oxazepam, zolpidem, zopiclone) Analgesics (dextropropoxyphene, ketamine, ketobemidone, paracetamol, salicylic acid, tramadol)
Antidepressives (amitriptyline, citalopram, doxepin, fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, clomipramine, mianserin, mirtazapine, moclobemide, nefazodone,
nortriptyline, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, trimipramine, venlafaxine) Antipsychotics (amisulpride, dixyrazine, flupentixol,
haloperidol, chlorpromazine, chlorprothixene, clozapine, levomepromazine, olanzapine, perphenazine, quetiapine, risperidone, zuclopenthixol)
Antiepileptics (phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, pregabalin) Others (alimemazine, carisoprodol, meprobamate,
methylphenidate, orphenadrine, promethazine, theophylline) left anterior descending myocardial infarction silent myocardial infarction
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MRFA and AV performed postmortem and
microscopic examinations of histological samples. All authors, including BSS, participated in design and coordination and in the drafting of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by our institution.
