A 20-year-old male patient with dyspnea complaint was referred to our hospital. On physical examination there was grade 2/6 systolic murmur,
which is best heard at the second left intercostal space and fixed split S2. ECG revealed sinus rhythm with complete right bundle brunch
block. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) and Qp/Qs ratio was 1.6. The right ventricle was
severely dilated, inconsistent with the size of the defect. Two-dimensional and color Doppler transesophageal echocardiographic examination
confirmed the secundum type ASD (asterisk) and revealed an additional sinus venosus type ASD between the right atrium and the superior vena
cava (SVC)(Figures 1A, 1B, 1C; Video 1). Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography verified both septal defects (Figure 1D). The
patient underwent cardiac tomography for further anatomical outlining the. Figures 1E and 1F clearly show the secundum ASD (asterisk), sinus
venosus ASD (arrow) and anomalous drainage of the right superior pulmonary vein to the SVC (star). The patient underwent surgery. Figures 1G
and 1H show intraoperative images of the defects. Figure 1Multimodality and intraoperative images of a mixed atrial septal defect.
VideoAccess the video through the link: http://www.arquivosonline.com.br/2016/english/10602/pdf/i10602013.pdf Multimodality and
intraoperative images of a mixed atrial septal defect. Access the video through the link:
http://www.arquivosonline.com.br/2016/english/10602/pdf/i10602013.pdf The interatrial septum is anatomically divided into 5 septal zones. A
mixed atrial septal defect involves 2 or more of the 5 septal zones and accounts for 7 of all atrial septal defects.1 In patients with
severely dilated right ventricle and high Qp/Qs ratio, inconsistent with defect size, physicians should consider the presence of additional
septal defects. These patients must be evaluated with advanced imaging modalities. Author contributions Conception and design of the
research: Işılak Z; Acquisition of data: Uz O, Temizkan V; Writing of the manuscript: Küçük U; Critical revision of the manuscript for
intellectual content: Yalçın M. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any thesis or
dissertation work.
