Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 70 Final Diagnosis: Malignant mesothelioma Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Radiation/Chemotherapy Specialty: Oncology Rare co-existance of disease or pathology The histopathological diagnosis of
malignant mesothelioma is based mainly on the immunohistological profile of the neoplasia, using different immunohistochemical markers to
distinguish between a malignant mesothelioma and a carcinoma. A female patient presented with a right paravertebral rapidly growing tumor
and severe pain. Based on the immunohistochemical findings, we present the first case of a malignant mesothelioma with immunohistochemical
expression of thyroid transcription factor-1. The detection of a positive reaction for thyroid transcription factor-1 in the tumor cells may
not exclude a malignant mesothelioma. Malignant mesothelioma is a rare malignant disease, but its incidence is increasing worldwide,
strongly associated with amphibole asbestos exposure . It is thought that the parietal pleura are the basis for malignant mesothelioma;
however, there are rare cases of primary peritoneal mesothelioma . The localized malignant mesothelioma is a very rare tumor that grossly
appears as a distinctly localized nodular lesion without gross or microscopic evidence of diffuse pleural spread. There are many
immunohistochemical markers known to distinguish between a malignant mesothelioma and a carcinoma, including pancytokeratin, cytokeratin
5/6, calretinin, WT-1, D2-40, BG8, MOC-31, EpCAM (BerEP4), Claudin, and TTF-1 . The expression of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is
positive in about 85% of lung adenocarcinoma and in thyroid carcinoma cases. Other tumors rarely show TTF-1 expression; for example, 10% of
colorectal cancers show this expression, but so far none have been described in malignant mesothelioma . A 70-year-old white female
presented with a right paravertebral rapidly (within 4 weeks) growing tumor and severe pain, for which morphine was administered. Since
2003, the patient had been under observation because of stable B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), Rai staging 0, and slowly
advancing Alzheimer disease. A cerebral metastasis had been excluded by computerized tomography (CT). The patient was employed as a
commercial clerk without particular work-related exposure to noxa, such as asbestos or radiation. In the clinical examination, an
approximately 4-cm lesion expansion, painful when pressed, was found in the area of the upper third paravertebral right of the thoracic
spine. Further tumor manifestations were excluded clinically and by CT. The CT showed a 6×5 cm large lesion expansion with the beginning of
shallow erosion of the 4th rib dorsal right. The lesion expansion extended continuously from the pleura (there was a pleura swelling
approximately 1.5 cm large and 4.0 cm long) through the thorax wall in between the ribs to the margo lateralis scapulae (Figure 1). A
vicinal triangular subpleural atelectasis and smaller pleural effusion were secondary findings. Using a rechargeable pistol from Barth with
insertable Trucut needles (14G), tissue cylinders from the lesion expansion were obtained for histological assessment. The sonography-guided
puncture under sterile conditions is preferable, because with a one-person one-hand puncture necessary corrections can be performed quickly.
The specimens were routinely fixated in 4% buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned into 3–4 µm thick sections. Then they were
routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin. They were also immunohistochemically stained with primary antibodies cytokeratin 5/6 (Cell
Marque, Cell Marque Corporation, Rocklin, California, USA), cytokeratin 7 (Roche Diagnostics International AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland),
cytokeratin 20 (Roche Diagnostics International AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland), calretinin (Roche Diagnostics International AG, Rotkreuz,
Switzerland), and TTF-1 (Roche Diagnostics International AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) using the ultra-view™ universal alkaline phosphatase red
detection kit (Roche Diagnostics International AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) on a Benchmark XT device (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc). In
addition, on-slide positive controls were used. Microscopical examination showed monotonous growth with uniform flat or cuboidal medium-size
cells with round nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm . Moreover, mitotic activity and giant cells could be detected. A lymphocytic
inflammatory infiltrate was verifiable (Figure 2). There was a verifiable negative immunohistochemical reaction in the tumor cells for
cytokeratin 7 and cytokeratin 20. A positive reaction was detected in the tumor cells for cytokeratin 5/6 (Figure 3), calretinin (Figure 4),
and TTF-1 (Figure 5). In addition, the tumor cells showed an immunohistochemical positive reaction for D2-40 and WT-1 (not shown). The
treatment consisted of a combination of radiation/chemotherapy: Cisplatin weekly 20 mg/m2, cumulative dose 240 mg. In addition, the patient
was treated in a palliative setting with a 6 MV photon beam from a linear accelerator. The single dose was 2.5 Gray (Gy), 5 times a week,
and the total dose 50.0 Gy. Target volume was the dorsolateral thoracic wall. At the end of this therapy, a sonographically measured 50%
tumor reduction was achieved. Four months later, no growth gain was detected. The patient required no analgesic. We present the first report
of a malignant mesothelioma with immunohistochemical positive expression of TTF-1. There are many immunohistochemical markers known to
distinguish between a malignant mesothelioma and a carcinoma, including pancytokeratin, cytokeratin 5/6, calretinin, WT-1, D2-40, BerEP4,
MOC-31, BG8, Claudin, and TTF-1. The expression of TTF-1 is positive in about 85% of lung adenocarcinoma cases and in thyroid carcinoma.
Some other tumors rarely show an expression of TTF-1; for example, 10% of colorectal cancers show this expression, but so far none have been
described in malignant mesothelioma. TTF-1 is a transcription factor essential for the morphogenesis and differentiation of several organs,
including the lungs, ventral forebrain, and thyroid . TTF-1 is necessary for the expression of some genes in the thyroid, lungs, and central
nervous system. Human TTF-1 is located on chromosome 14 . In the lungs, TTF-1 controls the expression of surfactant proteins that are
essential for lung stability and, until now, TTF-1 was deemed to be negative in mesothelioma . We detected a localized malignant
mesothelioma with a positive reaction for TTF-1 (Figure 5) in the tumor cells. This was confirmed by the internationally renowned Professor
A. Tannapfel, director of the German mesothelioma register of Ruhr University Bochum, who provided scientific consultations. This finding is
important for prospective pathological diagnosis of mesothelioma because a positive reaction for TTF-1 may not exclude a malignant
mesothelioma. We present the first report of a malignant mesothelioma with immunohistochemical positive expression of TTF-1. Until now, the
detection of TTF-1 seems to have ruled out the diagnosis of a malignant mesothelioma, but now a positive reaction for TTF-1 may no longer
exclude a malignant mesothelioma. The authors thank the patient described in this study and the patient’s daughter for her consent for this
article. The authors thank Professor Andrea Tannapfel of Ruhr University Bochum, Germany for her support. Also, the authors thank Mrs.
Claudia Noble-Pyott for her relentless and excellent work on this case report. Conflict of interests The authors declare that there is no
conflict of interests regarding the publishing of this paper. Axial CT scan showing an expansive lesion with the beginning of shallow
erosion of the 4. rib dorsal right. Micrograph hematoxylin and eosin staining (original magnification ×200). Micrograph immunohistochemical
positive reaction for cytokeratin 5/6 (original magnification ×400). Micrograph immunohistochemical positive reaction for calretinin
(original magnification ×400). Micrograph immunohistochemical positive reaction for TTF-1 (original magnification ×400).
