This is the first reported case of pineal lymphoma with concomitant prolactin-producing pituitary adenoma. A 51-year-old male experienced
worsening headaches accompanied by nausea, diplopia, and memory loss for 1 month. Cranial nerve examination revealed bilateral upward gaze
limitation with convergence impairment, which is known as Parinaud syndrome. Magnetic resonance images revealed a mass in the pineal gland
with a coexisting mass within the enlarged sella fossa. Hormone analysis revealed hyperprolactinemia. The pineal mass was removed without
injuring the hypothalamus, brain stem, or any neighboring vessels. Pathology examination confirmed the diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) involving the pineal gland. After further studies, the pineal lymphoma was determined to be a secondary tumor from a
gastric primary tumor. The patient died 6 months after diagnosis due to systemic progression of DLBCL. Although the mechanistic link between
hyperprolactinemia and lymphoma progression has not been clarified on a clinical basis, high prolactin levels may contribute to the rapid
progression and therapeutic resistance of the lymphoma. Cerebral lymphoma is a malignant lymphocytic neoplasm that can occur as a primary
tumor or as a secondary manifestation of systemic disease. Once considered a rare neoplasm, the incidence of central nervous system (CNS)
lymphoma has increased significantly in recent decades.1 At initial diagnosis, a primary CNS lesion appears in approximately 1% to 2% of
patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma.2 Systemic lymphoma spreads to the CNS in 5.5% to 9.4% of cases and is associated with a poor
prognosis.3,4 The occurrence of malignant lymphoma in the pineal region is extremely rare. Only 10 cases of primary or secondary pineal
lymphomas, including the case in this study, have been reported in the literature to date.5–13 Neuroendocrine and immune responses mutually
affect each other via various interactions between the hormones/respective receptors and the immune system.14 Furthermore, elevated
prolactin (PRL) levels are associated with the progression of hematologic diseases including multiple myeloma, acute myeloid leukemia, and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.15–17 Here, we report a case of pineal lymphoma as the first manifestation of gastric lymphoma and discuss the possible
role of concomitant pituitary prolactinoma on lymphoma. A 51-year-old male experienced worsening headaches for 1 month, which were
accompanied by nausea, diplopia, and mild memory loss. He had no significant medical history and was not taking any medications including
antipsychotics. On admission, the liver and spleen were not palpable, and there were no palpable superficial lymph nodes. Neurological
examination revealed no evidence of impaired mental status, gait difficulties, or sensory or motor deficits. Positive neurological findings
included bilateral upward gaze limitation with convergence impairment, also called Parinaud syndrome. Magnetic resonance (MR) image of the
brain revealed a 2 × 2 × 2 cm mass in the pineal gland with a concomitant 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.2 cm mass within the enlarged pituitary fossa
(Figure 1A–D). The pineal mass showed iso- to hypointensity on T1- and T2-weighted MR images and heterogeneous enhancement by gadolinium
administration. It was a multilobulated mass that extended into the hypothalamus and midbrain. The lesion showed perilesional edema and
internal calcification. Obstructive hydrocephalus due to stenosis of the aqueduct of Sylvius was also seen. Laboratory findings upon
admission included a 6.7 × 103/mm3 white blood cell count with a normal differentiation, a hemoglobin level of 10.8 g/dL, and a platelet
count of 360 × 103/mm3. Hormonal analysis indicated hyperprolactinemia (977.7 ng/mL; normal, 2.8–29.3 ng/mL). The patient's serum thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) and free T4 values were 0.652 μIU/mL (normal, 0.8–1.71 μIU/mL) and 0.770 ng/dL (normal, 0.4–4.8 ng/dL).
Coagulation, hepatic, and renal profiles were within normal limits. A serologic study for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. Tumor
markers for a pineal mass, such as α-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, and carcinoembryonic antigen, were within normal ranges. Due
to the presumptive diagnosis of a nongerminomatous, parenchymal, or glial tumor on the pineal gland, surgery was performed using the
occipital transtentorial approach. A slightly hard, dark red mass was located in the pineal gland and posterior third ventricle. The mass
had internal calcification and was easily demarcated from the peritumoral brain parenchyma. Some portions of the mass that adhered to
surrounding venous structures required sharp dissection. Frozen biopsy diagnosis of the pineal lesion suggested a pineoblastoma. The mass
was removed completely without injuring the hypothalamus, brain stem, or any neighboring vessels. Preoperative magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging. (A) A hypo- to isointense mass was detected at the pineal region on the T1-weighted image. (B) Marked peritumoral edema was shown
surrounding the pineal mass on the T2-weighted image. (C) Axial image with gadolinium enhancement demonstrated multilobulation and
heterogenous enhancement of the pineal mass, with a margin indistinct from the surrounding hypothalamus and midbrain, and hydrocephalus
caused by obstruction of the aqueduct of Sylvius. (D) Note a strongly enhanced mass located entirely within the enlarged sellar turcica
(asterisk). Histopathology revealed diffuse infiltration of large lymphocytes with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and abundant
cytoplasm. In some portions, the cells were arranged in sheets with a prominent starry-sky pattern and geographic coagulative necrosis.
Interestingly, the well-known characteristics of perivascular infiltration of tumor cells were not identified, since the pineal parenchyma
was almost completely replaced by neoplastic lymphocytes. An initial immunohistochemistry (IHC) panel was performed to exclude the
diagnostic possibility of pineoblastoma and other germ cell tumors that frequently develop in the pineal gland. The tumor cells were all
negative for synaptophysin, glial fibrillary acidic protein, pan-cytokeratin, and placental alkaline phosphatase. Instead, tumor cells
showed strong positivity for B-cell markers including CD79a and CD20 but were negative for T-cell markers including CD3 and CD45RO. BCL2 was
also positive, and the Ki-67 labeling proliferation index exceeded 50%. Pathology confirmed a diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
involving the pineal gland. Additional IHC panel for DLBCL subdivision revealed BCL6 positivity, and CD10 and MUM1 nonreactivity (Figure
2A–D). Consequently, the immunohistochemical subgroup of the lymphoma was a germinal center-like DLBCL.18 Microscopic characteristics of the
pineal and gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). (A) The pineal mass was composed of enlarged lymphocytes and scattered pale
histiocytes featuring a starry-sky appearance (hematoxylin and eosin staining, original magnification × 200). (B) The tumor cells were
diffusely positive for CD20 (immunohistochemistry, × 400). (C) Approximately 40% of the tumor cells showed positivity for BCL6
(immunohistochemistry, × 400). (D) The Ki-67 proliferation index of the tumor exceeded 50% (immunohistochemistry, × 400). (E) The lymphoma
cells were densely infiltrated between the remaining gastric glands (H&E stain, × 200). (F) The gastric lymphoma cells showed strong
staining for CD79a (immunohistochemistry, × 400). Two weeks after the operation, the patient complained of gastric fullness and aggravated
vomiting. Abdominal computed tomography revealed concentric wall thickening in the lower portion of the lesser curvature of the gastric
body, but there was no evidence of enlarged lymph nodes or hepatosplenomegaly. Upper esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a diffuse
ulceroinfiltrative mass in the lesser curvature of the gastric body (Figure 3). Pathological diagnosis was DLBCL, identical to that of the
previously removed pineal mass (Figure 2E and F). Other systemic evaluations, including chest and neck computed tomography scans and bone
marrow biopsy, were normal. The PRL level gradually dropped to 459 ng/mL 3 months after the brain operation. After removal of the pineal
gland mass, the patient was treated with 2 cycles of R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) followed
by 1 cycle of high-dose methotrexate (3.5 g/m2) chemotherapy. The patient was originally planned to be treated with 2 cycles of R-CHOP,
followed by 4th infusion of high-dose MTX-based chemotherapy and additional 4 cycles of R-CHOP chemotherapy. However, further chemotherapy
had to be discontinued after 1 cycle of high-dose MTX chemotherapy since the patient had neutropenia and general weakness. Two months after
the brain operation, the patient underwent an emergent operation for mechanical ileus due to a newly developed mass. Subsequently, the
patient had aspiration pneumonia and showed progression of the brain lesion aggravated by CSF seeding. The patient died 6 months after
initial diagnosis. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed a diffuse infiltrative mass with central ulceration (indicated by arrowheads)
located in the lesser curvature of the gastric body. To evaluate the contribution of elevated PRL levels on the rapid progression of DLBCL,
PRL expression in lymphoma cells was investigated by IHC. Both the pineal and gastric lesions were repeatedly negative for PRL staining
(Figure 4A). For further evaluation of PRL receptor (PRL-R) expression, IHC and Western blot (WB) analysis were performed (dilution 1:200
for IHC, 1:2000 for WB; clone B6.2, catalogue no. MA5-11955, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). WB was performed as described
previously.19 To validate the results, WB analysis using a representative lymphoma cell line, EG7 (kindly provided by Dr Yang Deok-Hwan,
Chonnam National University), and IHC staining for PRL-R were performed in an additional 10 DLBCL cases (Table 1). As shown in Figure 4A,
surgical samples from primary gastric and metastatic pineal lesions stained positive for PRL-R. PRL-R expression in lymphoma cells was also
shown in the EG7 lymphoma cell line by WB (Figure 4B). In addition, 9 of 10 cases displayed diffuse or patchy strong PRL-R positivity
(Figure 5), and the remaining case showed localized immunoreactivity around the vessels. The patients provided signed, informed consent, and
the study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital. Brief Summary of Additional 10
Cases of DLBCL Expression of prolactin receptor (PRL-R) in the current case. (A) Immunohistochemistry of PRL-R revealed a strong positivity
in both primary gastric and metastatic pineal lymphomas (immunohistochemistry, × 200 and × 400, respectively). There was no expression of
prolactin in the same samples (immunohistochemistry, × 200 and × 400, respectively). (B) Western blot analysis revealed PRL-R expression in
the pineal lymphoma. This positive reaction was also noted in the lymphoma cell line EG7. Immunohistochemistry of the prolactin receptor
(PRL-R) in additional diffuse large B-cell lymphoma samples. Nine out of 10 selected cases showed positive immunoreactivity with variable
portions of tumor components. Primary CNS lymphomas (PCNSL) are supratentorial in approximately 60% of patients.20 Despite the more common
location of PCNSL in the supratentorial region, involvement of the pineal gland is extremely rare. In a meta-analysis of PCNSL, only 0.5% of
enrolled cases (2 of 424 cases) had tumors in the pineal location.21 Secondary CNS involvement is infrequent in DLBCL, with an incidence
range of 5% to 25% reported in studies assessing different risk factors and diagnostic tools.22–24 The pineal region is one of the rarest
locations for intracranial metastasis of systemic malignancies, with an incidence range of 1.8% to 4% of all intracranial metastases.25–28
Approximately half of the cases have no other metastases within the brain, as in this case.25 Hematogenous spread through the posterior
choroidal artery is suggested as the pathomechanism for pineal metastasis, given that the pineal gland is a circumventricular organ of the
brain lacking a blood–brain barrier.28,29 Even though it is an isolated event, CNS involvement represents widespread disease progression and
has the worst clinical outcome, with less than 10% of patients surviving 1 year.4,30,31 Of the 10 reported cases of pineal lymphoma, 6
involved multiple locations, and 2 were secondary, with 1 retroperitoneal primary and 1 gastric primary (Table 2). The majority of the cases
(6 out of 8 with determined histological types) were of a B-cell lineage, and the overall clinical progression seemed to be fatal, but
follow-up information was insufficient. Clinoco-Radiological Characteristics of Reported Cases of Pineal Lymphoma In CNS lymphoma,
concurrent brain tumor types including astrocytoma,32 meningioma,33 and pituitary adenoma34–36 have been reported. Interruption of the
inhibitory pathway between the hypothalamus and pituitary gland was proposed as the putative pathogenesis for the development of pituitary
adenoma in hypothalamic PCNSL.34 In contrast, lymphoma development may be stimulated by microenvironmental alterations or hormones produced
by the pituitary adenoma.35 Another reported case of intermingled adenoma with lymphoma suggested a strong connection between pituitary
adenoma and lymphoma in the same location.36 Whereas PRL-R is expressed in immune cells universally, the expression of human PRL is found
mainly in T lymphocytes.37 In addition, PRL production is evident in normal extrapituitary sites, including the decidua, myometrium, breast,
prostate, brain, and malignant cells.38,39 Although the precise function of PRL in immune cells is not clear, PRL has an important role in
immunomodulation and lymphoid cell proliferation, in addition to the promotion of normal hematopoiesis.40–42 PRL promotes both cell-mediated
and humoral immune responses through signaling pathways, including JAK/STAT and mitogen-activated protein kinase, resulting in target gene
expression,43 stimulation of B- and T-cell proliferation, proinflammatory cytokine production, and B-cell growth arrest.14 PRL can act as a
survival (antiapoptotic) factor or as a mitogen, as exemplified in the lactating mammary gland, Nb2 lymphoma cells, and breast cancer
cells.38 The presence of elevated serum PRL levels in the context of hematological malignancy is still controversial. A small number of
previous studies reported elevated PRL levels in lymphoma patients,16,44 as well as in acute myeloid leukemia patients.17,45 Pathological
hyperprolactinemia was shown to be associated with a reduction in natural killer cell number and function.46 In addition to a direct
mitogenic effect, PRL also has the capacity to inhibit cell death induced by cisplatin, doxorubicin, taxol, and other agents in cancer cells
as exemplified by breast cancer research,47,48 through drug detoxification arising from PRL-induced activation of glutathione
S-transferase,48 or potentially via PRL-mediated upregulation of antiapoptotic proteins such as BCL2.49 In this case, the endosellar mass
was diagnosed as a prolactinoma based on an elevated PRL > 300 ng/mL and relevant MR imaging,50,51 even without pathological confirmation.
There were a couple of reasons for that the pituitary tumor was prolactinoma. First, IHC staining using PRL antibody was repeatedly negative
in the pineal and gastric lesions. It seemed unlikely that PRL was massively secreted from the pituitary lesion if the pituitary gland also
had a lymphoma. Second, serum PRL levels exceeding 300 ng/mL are almost always caused by a pure prolactinoma or a mixed pituitary adenoma
with a lactotrophic component.50,51 There are variable causes of hyperprolactinemia including drugs, pregnancy, nipple stimulation, and
pituitary PRL secreting adenoma. Serum PRL levels in patients with prolactinoma can range from minimally elevated to 50,000 ng/mL, but the
PRL levels rarely exceed 200 ng/mL in hyperprolactinemia due to other causes. Three months after complete removal of the pineal lymphoma,
the PRL level gradually dropped to 459 ng/mL without specific treatment for the prolactinoma. This finding corroborated a previous report
that hyperprolactinemia is associated with lymphoma.16,44 The studies described above showed that certain subpopulations of lymphocytes
synthesize and secrete biologically active PRL and that PRL can act as an autocrine and/or paracrine factor to modulate the activities of
cells of the immune system. Despite repeated immunostaining in the current case, the tumor cells did not stain for PRL. In comparison, some
lymphoma samples showed PRL-R expression. Presumably, shrinkage of the lymphoma volume may have affected the functional aspects of the
prolactinoma. In addition, it is likely that the persistent hyperprolactinemia may have affected the chemoresistance of the DLBCL and have
contributed to the fatal deterioration of the patient's condition. In conclusion, this is the 1st clinical report of concurrent prolactinoma
and pineal lymphoma to our knowledge. This report raises questions about the mutual interaction between lymphoma progression and
hyperprolactinemia. The occurrence of lymphoma in the clinical context of hyperprolactinemia may have important implications. Any clinical
condition that results in elevated PRL levels needs to be controlled. In small clinical studies on breast cancer, patients treated with
antiprolactinemic agents in combination with docetaxel responded better than those treated with docetaxel alone.52,53 Additional research
and clinical data are required to clarify the exact correlation between DLBCL progression and hyperprolactinemia. Abbreviations: CNS =
central nervous system, DLBCL = diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, IHC = immunohistochemistry, MR = magnetic resonance, PRL = prolactin, PRL-R =
prolactin receptor. This work was supported by the National R&D Program for Cancer Control, Ministry of Health & Welfare (0720570). The
authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
