Brodie's abscess usually presents as a diagnostic dilemma resulting in a diagnostic delay. It mimics various benign and malignant conditions
both clinically and radiologically. This report describes a case of a 14 year old boy who presented with a clinical and radiological picture
of osteoid osteoma of proximal femur but found to have a brodie's abscess on histology and culture. It describes the clinical spectrum of
subacute osteomyelitis, its unusual MRI features and the importance of obtaining a histological diagnosis before definitive treatment.
Brodie's abscess usually presents as a diagnostic dilemma and clinically mimics various benign and malignant conditions (1–3). Also,
sometimes the radiological features are misleading (1–5). Brodie's abscess or primary subacute osteomyelitis is known to occur more commonly
in children. Metaphyseal lesions are the most common and occur most commonly in proximal tibia (2, 6, 7). The neck and the surrounding
metaphyseal region of proximal femur is a less commonly affected site (8, 9). Roberts et al described a classification of brodie's abscess
depending on their anatomical location and their resemblance to specific neoplasms. Type 1 b represents a metaphyseal lesion comprising a
radiolucent area with a sclerotic margin along with periosteal reaction (10). This type of lesion closely resembles osteoid osteoma both
clinically and radiologically. This report describes a case of a 14 year old boy who presented with a clinical and radiological picture of
osteoid osteoma of proximal femur but found to have a brodie's abscess on histology and culture. It describes the clinical spectrum of
subacute osteomyelitis, its unusual MRI features and the importance of obtaining a histological diagnosis before treatment. We report a case
of a 14 years old boy who came to our clinic, i.e. the Out-patient Department of a tertiary care referral center in India, in February 2014,
with complaints of pain in his left hip. The pain was insidious in onset, dull aching in nature, mild to moderate in severity, more during
the nights and was present for the last three months. Physically, he was able to carry out all his daily activities including squatting with
some discomfort but was not able to carry out strenuous activities like running and jumping. The patient did not complain of any other
constitutional symptoms like fever, weight loss, decreased appetite or night sweats. On clinical examination, the patient had tenderness
anteriorly over the left hip joint, with no local signs of infection. The patient did not have any fixed deformities on the affected site.
Passive movements over the left hip, specifically flexion, adduction and internal rotation were restricted and painful terminally as
compared to the right side. There was no limb length discrepancy; however, the patient walked with an antalgic limp. The examination of the
right hip, the left knee and the spine showed no positive findings. The patient was subjected to routine biochemical and radiological
investigations. It included a total WBC count of 8,400, differential neutrophil count of 70% and lymphocyte count of 26%. The ESR
(erythrocyte sedimentation rate) after 1 hour was 26 and CRP (C- Reactive protein) was 2.8 mg/L. A true size plain radiograph AP view
revealed an osteolytic area of around 1 cm diameter in the calcar region surrounded by osteosclerotic margins along with periosteal reaction
along the medial aspect of neck and metaphysis (Figure 1). A true size AP radiograph of a 14 year old male with a radiolucent lesion in the
calcar region of the left proximal femur with surrounding sclerosis and periosteal reaction After thorough clinical examination and routine
investigations, a provisional diagnosis of an osteoid osteoma was considered, and the patient was further subjected to Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) to substantiate this. MR imaging showed a lesion measuring around 12 × 8 mm with a central nidus which was hypointense on
T1-weighted images and was hyperintense on T-weighted images (Figures 2 & 3). The clinical and radiological picture was quite confirmatory
for the diagnosis of osteoid osteoma, and it was imperative to treat it with Radio Frequency Ablation. However, the senior surgeon stressed
confirming the diagnosis histologically prior to it. Thus, the patient underwent a curettage procedure, which was done through a lateral
approach. Under image guidance, a 2 mm k-wire was directed towards the osteolytic lesion over which a 5 mm cannulated drill was passed and
the cavitary lesion was opened (Figure 4). The track in the outer femoral cortex was widened, and a curette was passed through the tract
into the lesion, and the lesion was curetted out and the tissue obtained was sent for histopathology and microbial culture. The
histopathology revealed granulation tissue with both acute and chronic inflammatory cells with areas of dead bony tissue, and the culture
grew Staphylococcus aureus. These findings led to the final diagnosis of brodie's abscess in contrast to our provisional diagnosis, which
was based on clinical examination and radiological features, emphasizing the importance of culture and histology of every suspected bony
neoplasm. The patient was managed with antibiotics based on the sensitivity, and he was allowed only partial weight bearing with support for
the next 6 weeks. At 6 months' followup, the patient was asymptomatic and could do all the activities which were restricted previously. A
MRI scan was repeated at 6 months followup, which did not show any signs of persistent disease. T1 weighted axial MR image showing a
hypointense nidus surrounded by a zone of hyperintensity and bone oedema T2 weighted axial image showing the incresed intensity of the nidus
as compared to T1 image Intra-operative lateral radiograph showing the k-wire placed in the lesion opening the cavity Subacute osteomyelitis
has not been strictly defined, but most people agree to its definition as any infectious process in the bony tissue persisting for more than
2 weeks without any symptoms of acute illness (5, 6). The infection persists in subacute form either due to low virulence of the organism or
good host resistance or because of inappropriate use of antibiotics. The disease occurring due to two earlier reasons is termed as primary
subacute osteomyelitis, and is mostly due to haematogenous seeding (5). Occurring predominantly in young adult males with a history of
trauma, recurrent pain and localized tenderness are common presenting symptoms, and are usually associated with fever, chills or malaise due
to systemic infection (5, 6). However, in a significant number of patients, localized pain or vague symptoms ranging from 1 month to 3 years
are the only manifestations of a Brodie's abscess. Radiographically, brodie's abscess appears as a radiolucent lesion, usually eccentric,
varying in size from as small as 1 cm to as large as occupying the entire diameter of the bone, with marginal sclerosis and some periosteal
thickening (8). On computed tomography, a sinus tract can be visualized in a few cases. A “penumbra sign” has been described on T1-weighted
MRI in cases of brodie's abscess. It is a discrete zone of transition of relatively hyperintense signal between the intermediate to low
signal intensity abscess cavity and the adjacent oedematous or sclerotic bone marrow on unenhanced T1-weighted imaging. Brodie's abscess is
known to mimic osteoid osteoma, more so in the metaphysis of tibia or femur (1–3). Only a few cases have been reported which describe the
diagnostic dilemma in the neck of femur (7). The case reported in this paper talks about a brodie's abscess in the neck of femur,
specifically in the calcar region which masquerades an osteoid osteoma. Osteoid osteoma occurs most commonly in the second decade and
presents a typical history as was in this case.(1–3, 5,6). Radiographically, a typical osteoid osteoma appears as a dense sclerotic area
surrounding a radiolucent nidus and does not usually exceed a size of 15 mm. On computed tomography, the nidus is of low attenuation
surrounded by an area of high attenuation. No sinus tracts or cloaca are seen. On MRI T1-weighted images; the nidus demonstrates low to
intermediate signal intensity, though on T2-weighted images, the nidus intensity is increased (9,10). The misleading appearance of osteoid
osteoma on CT or MRI often leads to the diagnosis of osteomyelitis. Although both the entities are quite similar in their clinical and
radiological presentation, the incidence of brodie's abscess is lower than that of osteoid osteoma (7). However, some radiological features
can help distinguish between the two. The presence of sinus tract on computed tomography is almost diagnostic for brodie's abscess. The
nidus of osteoid osteoma is centrally placed in contrast to brodie's abscess where sequestration is eccentrically placed. Labeled
scintigraphy has also been of use to distinguish the two but has been reported to be non-specific (9, 10). This case re-emphasizes the fact
that a detailed histological and microbiological work up is essential before subjecting the patient to definitive treatment. Microbial
cultures of tissue specimen from brodie's abscess are inconsistently positive for any organism (3). A microbial growth is hardly seen in 50%
of cases (3). Cultures, when positive, usually grow Staphylococcus aureus, as in this case; some other organisms have also been reported (2,
3, 7). The unusual location of the abscess in the neck of femur often results in incomplete excision of the diseased tissue, which further
leads to recurrence. Moreover, it has been recommended that abscess in the femoral neck approached from the side where they are closest to
cortex to minimize bone resection (6). However, in this case, as the abscess was located in the calcar region, it was decided to approach it
laterally, thereby avoiding any disruption in the medial calcar. In the light of the above discussion, it can be concluded that brodie's
abscess in femoral neck is a rare entity and can mimic osteoid osteoma clinico-radiologically. This case further substantiates the old
dictum “culture every tumor and biopsy every infection before definitive treatment”.
