Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 68 Final Diagnosis: Urinary bladder angiosarcoma Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: TURBT Specialty: Diagnostics, Laboratory Rare co-existance of disease or pathology Angiosarcoma is a fatal and
aggressive mesenchymal tumor. It occurs in skin, breast, and parenchymal organs. It rarely arises primarily in the urinary bladder. Only 13
cases of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma have been reported in the English literature. The patient was a 68-year-old man who presented
to the Emergency Department with inability to void. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed a urinary bladder mass. Surgical
excision of the mass was performed. Pathological examination results were consistent with angiosarcoma. In addition to the unusual location
of this tumor, the pathology was different from the previously reported cases in that this case was rich with osteoclast-like multinucleated
giant cells. The pathological diagnosis of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma is challenging. Histological patterns and immunophenotypes
are variable. Here, we review all reported cases of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma, highlight the clinical and morphological features
of this malignant neoplasm, and report a unique case of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma with osteoclast-like multinucleated giant
cells. Primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma is an extremely rare mesenchymal tumor with only 13 reported cases . It presents mainly in
elderly men with hematuria. Histologically, the tumor consists of atypical anastomosing vascular channels in approximately 50% of cases. It
is not uncommon for this tumor to dedifferentiate and form sheets of primitive cells, spindle cells, epithelioid cells, or a mixture of
these cell types. The infrequency of such an entity in the urinary bladder, as well as the variation of histological appearance, constitutes
a diagnostic challenge. Here, we review all reported cases of this neoplasm, highlighting the clinical presentation, histological features,
immunophenotypic profile, and treatment. We present our case as the 14th reported case of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma and the first
primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma with osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells. A 68-year-old white male presented to the Emergency
Department (ED) with a chief complaint of inability to void, abdominal pain, fever, and unintentional weight loss for 6 weeks duration. The
patient had a known history of congenital hypospadias, diverticulosis, and frequent ED visits with urinary outflow obstruction. The history
was negative for malignancy and radiotherapy. Laboratory studies were significant for leukocytosis and high creatinine level. Computed
tomography of the abdomen and the pelvis showed a distended urinary bladder with large filling defect on the left lateral wall of the
urinary bladder with bilateral hydroureteronephrosis (Figure 1). The radiological appearance of the mass was worrisome for a malignant
process. A urinary catheter was placed and 2000 mL of urine with white debris and sediments were evacuated. The patient was admitted for
transurethral resection of a bladder tumor (TURBT). The intra-operative course was complicated by limited visibility secondary to the large
tumor burden, bleeding, and excessive necrotic debris. The tumor encased the urinary bladder and the prostate. The tumor was sent for
pathology examination. The received tissue weighed 185 g and consisted of an aggregate of tan-pink fragments of soft tissue admixed with
blood. No normal prostatic tissue or urinary bladder mucosa was identified. A total of 14 sections were submitted for microscopic
examination. The tissue consisted of solid sheets of cells with areas of acute inflammation, hemorrhage, and necrosis. Three populations of
cells were identified: spindle cells, epithelioid cells, and multinucleated giant cells. The spindle cells and epithelioid cells were highly
atypical, with high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio, and hyperchromasia, as well as prominent and multiple nucleoli and atypical mitotic figures.
Some of the epithelioid cells had intracytoplasmic lumens. The tumor had scattered multinucleated giant cells (Figure 2); these were
osteoclast-like with up to 75 nuclei, phagocytosed blood elements, and no mitotic activity. Rare questionable intracytoplasmic lumens were
noted in the multinucleated giant cells (Figure 3). No urothelial or prostatic tissues were identified. The differential diagnoses based on
the morphological findings were poorly differentiated carcinoma, melanoma, high-grade lymphoma, and high-grade sarcoma. To narrow the
differential diagnoses, we used immunohistochemistry as ancillary testing. The tumor was tested with epithelial cell markers (GATA-3, CK7,
prostate-specific antigen, prostate-specific alkaline phosphates, CK5/6, and P63), melanoma markers (S-100, Mart-1, and HMB-45), and
lymphoma markers (LCA, CD20, CD3, CD30, and ALK-1). Other used markers included Ki-67, CD68, vimentin, and vascular markers (factor XIII and
factor VIII). Tumor cells, including the multinucleated giant cells, were diffusely positive for vimentin, CD31, and CD68 and focally
positive for factor XIII. Ki-67 was positive in about 40% of the tumor cells and it was negative in the multinucleated giant cells (Figure
4). The tumor cells were negative for all other markers. Given the pathological features combined with the immunophenotypic features, the
diagnosis of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma was rendered. Post-operatively, the patient’s urethral catheter was repeatedly obstructed
with necrotic tumor tissue. Aggressive therapy was recommended to the patient, including radical cystoprostatectomy with urethrectomy
followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy, but the patient refused further treatment and elected to go home with hospice care. The patient
died 6 weeks after hospital discharge. Angiosarcoma of the urinary bladder is a malignant tumor that mimics the morphology and function of
endothelium. It can be primary or secondary to direct extension or metastasis. Primary urinary bladder angiosarcomas are very rare. Thirteen
cases of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma (PUBA) have been reported in the English literature . Our review of the 13 reported cases
indicated that primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma (PUBA) occurs in males more often than females, with a ratio of 3:1, and the patients
have a median age of 68 years at diagnosis. Patients commonly present with hematuria. Other symptoms include: flank pain, suprapubic pain,
and dysuria. The etiology of PUBA is unknown. Radiotherapy and hemangioma are seen in association with PUBA in 38% and 15% of cases,
respectively. Grossly, PUBA is described as large hemorrhagic mass with areas of necrosis. The histopathology of PUBA is variable. The
typical histology of angiosarcoma with anastomosing vascular channels is seen in PUBA in about 53.5% of cases. The epithelioid variant was
described in 23% of cases. In about 30.8% of cases, the tumor consisted of sheets of primitive cells, some mixed with epithelioid cells, and
some with a focus of typical histology. The immunophenotypic features are also variable; therefore, a panel of immunostains, including CD31,
CD34, factor XIII, and factor VIII, is necessary. Of the reported cases, 7 showed positive staining with factor VIII and 2 were negative.
CD34 staining was positive in 5 cases and was negative in 2 cases. CD31 staining was performed in 5 cases and it was positive in all of them
(Table 1). As very few cases of this malignancy have been reported , there is no consensus treatment algorithm. Due to the aggressive nature
of the tumor, the primary treatment modalities consist of resection of the tumor with a radical cystectomy, also including the prostate,
urethra, vagina, or any other structures that have been invaded. Radical cystectomy with lymph node dissection followed by chemotherapy and
radiation therapy is the recommended therapy . Chemotherapy regimens that have been performed include Ifosfamide and epirubicin followed by
single-fraction radiation therapy . Adequate tumor resection and margin status are important determinants of survival . Despite the
aggressive therapy noted in the literature, long-term survival is poor. The longest documented survival after multimodal therapy is 6 years
. Factors that made the diagnosis of PUBA challenging in this case were the unusual clinical presentation and unusual histology. This
patient presented with symptoms of urinary tract obstruction rather than hematuria. In addition, the patient had no prior exposure to
radiation, as opposed to the 38% of reported cases. Histologically, the tumor was poorly differentiated and was rich with osteoclast-like
multinucleated giant cells. These cells were immunophenotypically similar to the tumor cells in the expression of vimentin, CD31, and factor
XIII. The presence of osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells in this case with the described immunophenotype is unique. Giant cells have
been described in association with urothelial carcinoma in situ, invasive papillary carcinoma, high-grade infiltrating urothelial carcinoma,
sarcomatoid carcinoma, and choriocarcinoma of the bladder . To the best of our knowledge this is the first reported case of PUBA with
osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells. The role of these cells in PUBA is not yet clear. Primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma is a rare
and an aggressive malignant neoplasm. It has a male predominance and commonly presents with hematuria. Exposure to radiotherapy is
associated with PUBA in 38% of cases. The pathogenesis of PUBA is not yet understood. The pathology is that of typical angiosarcoma in only
half of the cases. In atypical cases, testing with immunohistochemistry is essential. Markers expressed in angiosarcoma include CD31, CD34,
factor VIII, and factor XIII. Treatment requires surgical excision and postoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The prognosis is poor.
For the pathologist, diagnosing this entity is challenging, especially in cases with atypical morphology. Pathologists should have a high
index of suspicion in elderly men presenting with hematuria and a urinary bladder mass. The absence of a history of radiotherapy does not
exclude angiosarcoma from the differential diagnoses list. Here, we presented a unique case of primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma with
osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells. These cells have been described in association with urinary bladder carcinoma. This is the first
case report describing osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells in urinary bladder angiosarcoma and it is the 14th reported case of
primary urinary bladder angiosarcoma. More research is necessary to understand the role of osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells in
urinary bladder neoplasm in general and in angiosarcoma in particular. We thank Dr. Phyllis Sawyer for writing assistance. CT scan of
abdomen and pelvis showing urinary bladder mass. Representative H&E images. (A) (40×) Atypical spindle cells and epithelioid cells with
mitotic figures. (B) (60×) Epithelioid cells with intracytoplasmic lumen. (C) (20×) Area with numerous multinucleated giant cells. (D) (60×)
Cells with high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio. Features of multinucleated giant cells. (A) (60×) Multinucleated giant cell with up to 75 nuclei
(B) (60×) Multinucleated giant cell with phagocytosed blood elements. (C) (60×) Questionable multinucleated giant cell with intracytoplasmic
lumen. Immunophenotypic features. (A, B) Cells express CD68 (left) and CD31 (right). (C) Patchy staining with factor XIII. (D) Ki-67 is
expressed in approximately 40% of cells and is not expressed by the multinucleated giant cells. Summary of reported primary urinary bladder
angiosarcoma cases. NAD – no available date; NIP – no immunohistochemical studies performed; C– chemotherapy; R – radiotherapy; S – surgery.
