Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma is the second most common etiology of appendiceal mucocele. We report a relatively rare case of a giant
appendiceal mucocele caused by mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, which occupied the entire abdomen of an adult woman. A 63-year-old woman
presented with a chief complaint of abdominal distention. Imaging studies showed a giant cystic mass occupying her entire abdomen.
Laparotomy confirmed a giant appendiceal mucocele, and the patient underwent ileocecal resection. A mucinous deposit was not found in her
abdominal cavity, and the ovaries were grossly normal bilaterally. The pathological diagnosis was mucinous adenocarcinoma with a low-grade
mucinous neoplasm that invaded the subserosa. Regional lymph node metastasis was not found. She has had recurrence-free survival for
5 years. The present case is the largest appendiceal cystadenocarcinoma ever reported. The optimal treatment of an appendiceal neoplasm
requires further research based on consensus terminology of an appendiceal mucocele. Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma is the second most common
etiology of appendiceal mucocele [1, 2], and it is usually a well-differentiated, slowly progressive neoplasm. The gross morphology is
indistinguishable from other types of mucoceles, but it is easy to perforate them before a giant cystic tumor is produced. We report a
relatively rare case of a giant appendiceal mucocele caused by mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, which occupied the entire abdomen of an adult
woman. A previously healthy 63-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of abdominal distention. She denied abdominal pain, nausea,
or constipation. She also did not have any relevant medical history. Her abdomen was remarkably distended but was soft and nontender. Blood
test indicated slight anemia of hemoglobin (10.2 g/dL; normal range, 11.6–14.8 g/dL) and increased levels of the carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) and cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) to 406.1 ng/mL (normal range, 0–5.0 ng/mL) and 66 U/mL (normal range, 0–37.0 U/mL), respectively. The
CA-125 level was normal. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a well-encapsulated, unilocular cystic mass with focal mural
calcification. It occupied her entire abdomen from just below the diaphragm to the pelvis, and it measured 40.2 cm in length (Fig. 1).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a cystic mass with high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and intermediate signal
intensity on T1-weighted images (Fig. 2). These imaging studies also showed a dendritic structure protruding into the cavity, and the
feeding artery originated from a branch of the ileocecal artery. Extrinsic obstruction due to the giant mass was identified on colonoscopy,
but the orifice of the appendix remained intact. Based on these results, our preoperative diagnosis was a large neoplastic mucocele of the
appendix.Fig. 1Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a well-encapsulated, unilocular cystic mass which occupied the entire abdomen
from just below the diaphragm to the pelvis. Arrow showed a dendritic structure protruding into the tumor cavityFig. 2Magnetic resonance
imaging demonstrated a giant unilocular cystic mass with high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (a) and intermediate signal intensity
on T1-weighted images (b) Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a well-encapsulated, unilocular cystic mass which occupied the entire
abdomen from just below the diaphragm to the pelvis. Arrow showed a dendritic structure protruding into the tumor cavity Magnetic resonance
imaging demonstrated a giant unilocular cystic mass with high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (a) and intermediate signal intensity
on T1-weighted images (b) Laparotomy showed the enlarged appendix, which occupied the entire abdomen. A mucinous deposit was not found in
her abdominal cavity, and the ovaries were grossly normal bilaterally. Even though the cyst adhered strongly to the abdominal wall due to
inflammation, ileocecal resection was performed uneventfully. The cystic mass contained about 7000 mL of serous fluid. The levels of CEA and
CA19-9 in the fluid were 57,905 ng/mL and 1380 U/mL, respectively. Macroscopically, a cross-section of the mass showed a cystically dilated
lumen containing mucin, and the portion protruding from the appendiceal lumen looked like a villous tumor (Fig. 3). The histopathological
diagnosis was a mucinous adenocarcinoma with a low-grade mucinous neoplasm that had invaded the wall into the subserosa (Fig. 4). Regional
lymph node metastasis was not detected. The levels of CEA and CA19-9 were within normal range 3 months postoperatively, and the patient has
had recurrence-free survival for 5 years.Fig. 3 a A cross-section of the mass showed a cystically dilated lumen with the portion protruding
from the appendiceal lumen (arrow). b A magnified view of the dendritic structure which appeared as a villous tumorFig. 4 a Microscopical
view of the tumor showed a mucinous adenocarcinoma, and a low-grade mucinous neoplasm is intermingled (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×20). b
Adenocarcinoma is observed to invade the subserosa of the appendix (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×50) a A cross-section of the mass showed a
cystically dilated lumen with the portion protruding from the appendiceal lumen (arrow). b A magnified view of the dendritic structure which
appeared as a villous tumor a Microscopical view of the tumor showed a mucinous adenocarcinoma, and a low-grade mucinous neoplasm is
intermingled (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×20). b Adenocarcinoma is observed to invade the subserosa of the appendix (hematoxylin and eosin
stain, ×50) We report a rare case of a giant appendiceal mucocele caused by mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, which occupied the entire abdomen
of an adult woman. An appendiceal mucocele is a morphologic entity referring to the distention of the appendicular lumen due to the
accumulation of mucus. It has been a long time since it was first described by Rokitansky , but the terminology for appendiceal mucocele has
not been agreed on . Mucoceles of the appendix have been classified into four types: (1) a simple mucocele or retention cyst resulting from
obstruction of the appendiceal outflow, (2) mucosal hyperplasia, (3) a benign mucinous cystadenoma, and (4) a mucinous cystadenocarcinoma
[5, 6]. A mucinous cystadenocarcinoma is the second most common etiology after mucinous cystadenoma, and it accounts for 11 to 20 % of cases
of appendiceal mucoceles. Although luminal dilatation is mild (up to 1 cm) in retention mucocele and hyperplasia, mucinous cystadenoma and
cystadenocarcinoma often exhibit marked distention . We searched PubMed for publications on mucoceles of the appendix with the keywords
“giant” and “large,” and there have been about 50 cases reported from 1919 to 2015. The median diameter was 13 cm, and the largest mucocele
ever reported was 40 cm in diameter, which was caused by a mucinous cystadenoma . The majority of these giant mucoceles were caused by
mucinous cystadenomas, whereas cystadenocarcinomas were the cause of only a few cases . Therefore, the present case is rare in two respects:
it is the largest mass among all types of appendiceal mucoceles, and it is a giant mucocele caused by a cystadenocarcinoma. A mucocele is
usually diagnosed by an abdominal CT scan. The typical finding of an appendiceal mucocele is a low attenuated, well-encapsulated, thin-
walled cystic mass in the right lower quadrant. Mural calcification is seen in less than 50 % of cases . MRI demonstrates a mass with
intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images and homogeneous high signal intensity on T2-weighted images [15, 16]. An enhancing
nodule in the mucocele wall is suggestive of a cystadenocarcinoma. In the present case, the dendritic structure within the cystic cavity was
a clue to suspect malignancy. However, the precise preoperative distinction between a cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma is often difficult
[17, 18]. The tumor marker level is insufficient for an accurate diagnosis, because it is still unclear whether there is a difference in the
serum or cystic fluid of CEA and CA19-9 levels between cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinomas [19, 20]. The boundary between cystadenomas and
cystadenocarcinomas is ambiguous even in a pathological study. The term “mucinous tumor of low malignant potential” or “low-grade
appendiceal mucinous neoplasm” was introduced to describe intermediate grades between cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinomas . Furthermore,
various subclassifications have been proposed according to the presence of acellular peritoneal mucin deposits or extra-appendiceal
neoplastic epithelium [21, 22]. The Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group International recently reported the consensus for classification and
pathologic reporting . It argues that the term “cystadenoma” should no longer be used as a diagnostic term with regard to the appendix.
Mucinous adenocarcinoma is defined as a mucinous tumor with infiltrative invasion. Mucinous neoplasm with low-grade cytologic atypia is
classified as low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN) regardless of its associated features. The term “high-grade appendiceal
mucinous neoplasm” was proposed for lesions with low-grade architectural features similar to LAMN but with high-grade cytologic features.
The operative strategy is also changing. It was the standard concept, and it still is in many facilities, that if the histological diagnosis
is hyperplasia or cystadenoma, appendectomy is the definite treatment, but if it is a cystadenocarcinoma, resection should be combined with
right colectomy [25, 26]. However, appendectomy combined with excision of all the mesoappendiceal fat can be adequate in patients with a
cystadenocarcinoma in the absence of mesenteric adjacent organ or peritoneal involvement [27, 28]. Obviously, right hemicolectomy is advised
if tumor clearance is required. Formerly, an appendiceal mucocele was considered an indication for open surgery, but now, many surgeons
think that laparoscopic appendectomy is a reasonable choice when treating a mucocele of the appendix . However, extreme care is imperative
to avoid underestimating the extent of the disease and prevent iatrogenic rupture and dispersion of mucus or epithelial cells into the
peritoneal cavity during the surgical procedure. In the current case, we converted to open ileocecal resection to achieve curative operation
without causing intraoperative rupture. We describe the case of an adult woman with the largest mucinous cystadenocarcinoma of the appendix
that occupied the entire abdomen. The optimal treatment of appendiceal neoplasm requires further research based on consensus terminology of
an appendiceal mucocele. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. cancer antigen carcinoembryonic
antigen computed tomography low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm magnetic resonance imaging Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution HN, YKo, and SK wrote the manuscript, and HN reviewed the literature; KK, NT, DS,
JY, and YKu helped to draft the manuscript; TW, SI, and JK reviewed the manuscript; YKo and SK cared for the patient; SK carried out the
pathological diagnosis, and ES provided clinical images. All authors read and approved of the final manuscript.
