Invasive cerebral aspergillosis always developed in immunocompromised host. Early diagnosis may save life in this critical condition;
however, it is difficult to reach. Herein, we presented an unusual case of invasive cerebral aspergillosis in a cirrhotic patient. A
47-year-old man presented with progressive deterioration of consciousness for three days. The patient had a history of alcoholic liver
cirrhosis, Child-Pugh class C. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain showed multi-focal parenchymal lesions, which was consistent with
multiple brain abscesses. The diagnosis of invasive cerebral aspergillosis was made by molecular based laboratory methods including
Aspergillus galactomannan antigen assay and oligonucleotide array. Despite treatment with the antifungal agent, Amphotericin B, the patient
died at the ninth day of hospitalization. Our findings suggest that liver cirrhosis can be one of risk factors of invasive cerebral
aspergillosis, and support the diagnosing usefulness of MRI, Aspergillus galactomannan antigen assay, and oligonucleotide array. Invasive
cerebral aspergillosis usually developed in immunocompromised host.1–3 Early diagnosis may save life in this critical condition; however, it
is difficult to reach. Herein, we presented an unusual case of invasive cerebral aspergillosis that was diagnosed by image, and molecular-
based laboratory methods. A 47-year-old man presented with progressive deterioration of consciousness for 3 days. The patient had a history
of alcoholic liver cirrhosis, Child-Pugh class C. On arrival, his vital signs were as follows: a temperature of 38.2°C, pulse rate of
112/min, respiratory rate of 23/min, and blood pressure of 115/74 mm Hg. Laboratory examinations were as follows: white cell count
22900/mm3, platelet 52000/mm3, creatinine 0.86 mg/dL, asparate aminotransferase 55 IU/L, sodium 130 mmol/L, glucose 151 mg/dL, ammonia, 30
umol/L, C-reactive protein of 89 mg/L (reference value <3 mg/L). Radiography of the chest revealed multiple patches over bilateral
peripheral lung fields. Computed tomography of brain did not disclose any evidence of intracerebral hemorrhage. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of brain showed multifocal parenchymal lesions with signal change involving subcortical regions of bilateral superior frontal gyri,
left lateral occipital gyrus, bilateral cerebellar parenchyma, and left lenticular nucleus (Figure 1), which was consistent with multiple
brain abscesses. In support of our clinical diagnosis, we used ELISA and PCR to detect Aspergillus antigen and DNA, respectively.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Platelia Aspergillus galactomannan antigen test showed a value of optical density index >7.46. However, for the
PCR we used oligonucleotide array for rapid screening in which the gold standard for Aspergillus species confirmation relies on the internal
transcribed spacer sequencing and the 28s rDNA sequencing.4 In this case, the internal transcribed spacer result was Aspergillus fumigatus
99.5% (549/552) and 28s rDNA sequencing result was A fumigatus 99.5% (578/581). At the same time, the culture of sputum specimen grew A
fumigatus, and serum Aspergillus galactomannan antigen test also showed a positive result (optical density index ≥ 0.5). Despite treatment
with the antifungal agent, Amphotericin B, the patient had rapidly developed shock with acute respiratory failure. The patient died at the
ninth day of hospitalization. However, eventual fungal culture results of CSF remain negative after 4 weeks. Magnetic resonance imaging
showed multifocal parenchymal lesions with hemorrhage in the brain (arrows). Invasive cerebral aspergillosis is an uncommon disease, and
most of reported cases developed in severe immunodeficiency patients, such as transplant recipients, steroid users, and cancer patients.1–3
In contrast, liver cirrhosis—the only one immunocompromised condition for the present case—is not traditionally considered an important risk
factor of invasive cerebral aspergillosis. Based on a literature search in PubMed/Medline, Jeurissen et al5 identified only a total of 43
cases with cirrhosis and/or liver failure who have developed invasive aspergillosis between 2002 and 2012. Among them, lung was the most
frequent organ involved (n = 42), whereas other organs including skin, esophagus, pericardium, myocardium, stomach, kidney, and brain were
less involved with only 7 patients being reported. Although invasive aspergillosis rarely develops in cirrhotic patients without
conventional risk factors, our report and previous studies5–7 should suggest that clinicians should keep in mind this possible invasive
aspergillosis, including aspergillus brain abscess as possible differential diagnosis among patients with liver cirrhosis. Because the
clinical manifestations of intracerebral aspergillosis are nonspecific, early diagnosis to prompt direct treatment is difficult. However,
other options for early diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis should be explored. Ideally, culture of sterile CSF specimen is the method of
choice and is considered the “gold standard” for definitive diagnosis. Current methods to obtain CSF specimen from this critically ill
patient were hindered unless an aggressive, risky, and invasive approach is exercised. Alternatively, MRI and molecular diagnostic methods
offered an attractive approach that helped us to save the life of this patient and to reach a definitive diagnosis in speedy manner.4 In our
case, characteristic MRI findings of Aspergillus brain abscess, and the positive Aspergillus galactomannan antigen assay provided useful
information in diagnosing invasive aspergillosis. In addition, a supportive test, oligonucleotide array, had helped us to accurately and
rapidly identify the mycotic infection to the species level as A fumigatus. Based on these findings, it is evident that using
oligonucleotide array test can make the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis more easy and rapid than before. However, the unavailability of
this test constrains its application as a diagnostic method of choice in conventional laboratories. Our findings suggest that liver
cirrhosis can be one of risk factors of invasive cerebral aspergillosis and support the diagnosing usefulness of MRI, Aspergillus
galactomannan antigen assay, and oligonucleotide array. Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. Informed
consent: The patient's family has given written informed consent for the case to be reported. Because it was not a clinical trial and no
off-label drugs were used, the ethical approval is not necessary for this case report. The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
