Symptoms of theophylline toxicity and factors that augment the risk of developing it are well documented in the literature. However these
appear to be poorly considered in clinical practice. This case underlines the challenges in recognising and managing theophylline toxicity;
moreover the requirement for improved application of knowledge of its pharmacokinetics to our practice. In this case we observe how
theophylline toxicity can be overlooked due to the presence of non-specific symptoms and lack of a structured system to mitigate error in
detection, in both hospital medicine and general practice. Here, the initial theophylline concentration measurement was documented as
59.3 mg/l in a patient taking the medication long-term, with the previous concentration being recorded one year prior. Management consisted
of suspension of theophylline along with best supportive care, however in the process other conditions were exacerbated and the patient
ultimately died in hospital. Congestive cardiac failure, congestive liver disease and polypharmacy were factors isolated from this case that
expedited the patients’ development of theophylline toxicity. This was perpetuated by delay in diagnosis due to presentation with
generalised symptoms including tachycardia, vomiting and neurological symptoms. Findings from this case necessitate a requirement for more
stringent monitoring of theophylline when taken chronically in those who demonstrate risk factors for toxicity. This would aim to prevent
accumulation of the drug, toxicity onset and subsequent acute presentation to hospital. Intervention, through charcoal haemoperfusion may
provide a means of enhanced recovery to reduce sequelae of toxicity. Theophylline is a member of the methylxanthine class of medications and
is typically used in the management of patients with airway disorders such as Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and asthma. This
is due to its relaxing effect on smooth muscle within the bronchi and pulmonary vasculature, as well as stimulating central respiratory
drive . Theophylline is used in the management of reversible airways obstruction or exacerbations of COPD , it is typically an adjunct to
other, more commonly prescribed medications, such as beta-2 agonists and steroids. The dose is typically started at 225 mg BD and then
increased to 450 mg BD after one week. Classically, theophylline is not prescribed as a first-line medication due to its narrow therapeutic
index, the British National Formulary (BNF) suggest target plasma concentrations of 10–20 mg/l . This case outlines an example of the
severity of adverse effects demonstrated by theophylline; furthermore we explore the pitfalls in recognising theophylline toxicity,
particularly when taking the medication chronically. Many of the typical symptoms of theophylline toxicity are non-specific, which further
perpetuates the challenges of recognition in a long-term user. These include nausea, vomiting, fatigue, tachycardia and central nervous
system (CNS) effects such as dizziness and seizures . When given in the acute setting, more precautions are taken to monitor serum
concentrations. However it appears we are less stringent on monitoring when the medication is taken chronically, as exemplified in this
case. The BNF suggests monitoring every 6–12 months for those patients on a stable dose . However significant individual variations in
hepatic metabolism of the drug also contribute to a difficulty in maintaining a therapeutic concentration. The aim of this report is to
provide a case-based example to advocate more stringent theophylline concentration monitoring, particularly in patients considered high risk
for toxicity. The intention is to help prevent toxicity occurring in patients taking this medication long-term. Mrs. E was a 57-year-old
lady with a 12-year history of COPD, with an FEV1 of 30 %. Furthermore, she had a past medical history of carcinoma of the breast, type 2
diabetes mellitus and left ventricular failure (LVF), which was diagnosed on an echocardiogram (ECHO) in July 2014. Despite a diagnosis of
COPD she continued to smoke 20–30 cigarettes/day. She was prescribed a number of medications to help manage her airways disease including
tiotropium, seretide 500, salbutamol, prednisolone and most recently oral theophyline (450 mg twice daily), which was started in April 2013
as an adjunct to her current medications. She was admitted in June 2015 following a fall with notable decreased sensation bilaterally in her
lower limbs and a tachycardia of 133 beats per minute. Spinal cord compression was an initial concern, however this was excluded with a
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) spine. There was no change to her theophylline prescription on admission to hospital and no new medication
was prescribed that would affect theophylline metabolism. Over several days additional symptoms were noted, including worsening nausea,
blurred vision, increasing fatigue (with stable blood sugars) and worsening speech with slurring of words. Development of vomiting resulted
in a decision to measure her theophylline concentration and perform a CT head, as no obvious cause for her symptoms had been elicited. The
CT head was reported as clear of any ischaemia, haemorrhage or space-occupying lesion. The trough theophylline concentration was 59.3 mg/l.
The last result obtained in July 2014 during an admission for influenza related infective exacerbation of COPD was reported as 20.2 mg/l,
marginally above the 10-20 mg/l recommended reference range. The concentration was then not re-checked either in primary care or in
hospital; it therefore became apparent this was a case of chronic theophylline toxicity. The medical team at The National Poisons
Information Service was contacted for advice on management of this patient. The rationale being abnormally high theophylline concentration,
furthermore this was a case of chronic, rather than acute toxicity, for which we felt specialist input was required. The patient was
monitored for significant effects of toxicity; these include seizures (reported at trough concentrations of 50 mg/l ), reduced conscious
level and tachyarrhythmias. Although Mrs. E suffered a persistent tachycardia, her heart rate remained in sinus rhythm. Cardiac monitoring
was started. She was managed conservatively by stopping the theophylline and monitoring symptoms. Due to vomiting, oral activated charcoal
was excluded and although charcoal haemoperfusion was discussed, it was not accessible at the RUH and as Mrs. E was haemodynamically stable
and not acidotic, it was deemed not to be essential. This point will be discussed further in the conclusion. Mrs. E developed electrolyte
imbalances not long after the vomiting started, suffering hypokalaemia (3.2 mmol/l), hypomagnaesemia (0.56 mmol/l) and hypocalcaemia
(1.96 mmol/l). This was postulated to be secondary to both vomiting and theophylline accumulation. This subsequently resulted in a pseudo-
obstruction, diagnosed on abdominal x-ray. A nasogastric tube was placed and she was supplemented with appropriate electrolytes via
intravenous infusion. An arterial blood gas demonstrated a pH 7.398 (7.34-7.44), pO2 (kPa) 9.24 (11–14), pCO2 (kPa) 6.36 (4.7-6.0), HCO3−
(mEq/l) 21.7 (22–26), lactate (mmol/l) 1.5 (0.4-2.2). As no signs of acidosis were present and bicarbonate was at the low end of the normal
range, we decided not to prescribe bicarbonate for this patient. After stopping her theophylline and without any active intervention her
serum concentration fell gradually (Table 1). By the time her theophylline concentration was within therapeutic range, her electrolytes had
been corrected and her pseudo-obstruction had resolved. However, she developed signs of fluid overload, her heart rate also remained in
persistent sinus tachycardia. Notably, findings of Congestive Cardiac Failure (CCF) were demonstrated on a previous echocardiogram and were
substantiated by results of her computed tomography (CT) abdomen/pelvis and ultrasound sonography scan (USS) liver during her current
admission; these both showed abnormal appearances of the liver consistent with cardiac dysfunction. It therefore appeared she had developed
acute CCF. Ultimately, this resulted in challenging fluid balance management with serial chest x-rays demonstrating worsening bilateral
effusions and renal function continuing to decline until the death of the patient.Table 1Theophylline measurements post stopping of the
medicationTime after initial measurementTheophylline Level (mg/L)Initial
Measurement59.312 h51.624 h43.448 h31.13 days22.84 days15.45 days10.1Serial theophylline readings recorded after stopping the medication.
Initial reading was a trough measurement post stopping the medication. Theophylline reference range 10-20 mg/L Theophylline measurements
post stopping of the medication Serial theophylline readings recorded after stopping the medication. Initial reading was a trough
measurement post stopping the medication. Theophylline reference range 10-20 mg/L There are a number of key learning points to draw from
this case, pertaining to multiple areas of clinical practice. In retrospect, it remains difficult to understand exactly to what extent
theophylline toxicity contributed to the death of this patient with multiple co morbidities. However, what is clear from the literature and
from this case is that toxic theophylline concentrations can result in significant morbidity with potentially fatal outcomes . As a
medication with a narrow therapeutic index and an inexorable correlation between plasma concentration and therapeutic/toxic effects, there
should be an impetus on close monitoring of serum concentration. Theophylline is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration
and freely distributes throughout fat-free tissues. The drug is primarily metabolised by the cytochrome P450 liver enzyme, CYP1A2, and also
eliminated via the hepatic route, with a half life of 9 h [7, 8]. There are a number of medications and conditions that can impact on this,
rendering theophylline a difficult drug to manage. One such condition is CCF with hepatic congestion, which has been demonstrated to reduce
the clearance by 50 % and double the half life, thereby reducing drug elimination and increasing concentrations [5, 9, 10]. Other recognised
factors which can reduce theophylline clearance include increased age and liver enzyme inhibiting medications [11, 12]. A key point that
pertains to this case is that smoking is an inducer of CYP1A2. We recognise that Mrs. E continued to smoke until her final hospital
admission, which theoretically would confer an increased elimination of theophylline and act as protective mechanism against the development
of toxicity. To our knowledge she was receiving no medications that are inhibitors of this enzyme. However it is critical to recognise these
(Table 2.) as well as identifying recent smoking cessation; as these could both significantly impact on theophylline concentrations .Table
2Medications that inhibit the liver enzyme CYP1A2CYP1A2 inhibitorsAtazanavirCimetidineCiprofloxacinEnoxacinEthinyl
EstradiolFluvoxamineThiabendazoleList outlining some commonly prescribed medications that are recognised to inhibit CYP1A2 Medications that
inhibit the liver enzyme CYP1A2 List outlining some commonly prescribed medications that are recognised to inhibit CYP1A2 Indeed, we should
approach treating patients with theophylline, who have underlying CCF, with increased caution. With data demonstrating that elimination time
of the drug can be doubled [9, 10] with this condition, there should be a greater onus on primary care physicians, as well as hospital
clinicians to monitor the serum concentration to avoid chronic intoxication. It is sub-standard practice to neglect to monitor theophylline
concentrations for over a year in a patient with established CCF, particularly when they have had a previously high reading . The BNF
suggests that serum concentrations should be measured every 6–12 months in patients with a stable dose after 5 days . However it would be
reasonable to suggest that those patients who have risk factors for reduced elimination or metabolism of the drug, such as CCF or liver
disease, are monitored at least every 6 months to avoid the manifestation of significant intoxication and avoid acute presentation. When
discussing with Mrs. E the reasons behind her admission, it was interesting to hear that neither she, nor her full-time carer, knew the name
theophylline or its indication. In cases of polypharmacy like this, it can be challenging for patients to remember all medications, their
indication and associated adverse effects. This further substantiates the argument for responsibility within healthcare professionals to
provide close monitoring and support for these vulnerable patients. Indeed there were shortcomings in patient management in this case,
however it is recognising intoxication that poses one of the key challenges. This difficulty can be attributed to the generalised symptoms
displayed by the patient. Neurological symptoms, fatigue, vomiting, blurred vision; these are all symptoms that could be a manifestation of
multiple other disorders, especially in a patient with multiple co-morbidities. Other reports have described concomitant findings, outlining
the challenges of diagnosing theophylline toxicity in hospital due to the broad array of symptoms at presentation . We postulate that better
education around toxicology and an increased awareness of chronic theophylline toxicity, as well as serum concentration screening for all
patients who come through the emergency department taking this medication, may help improve outcomes within the hospital setting. With
regards to intervention, one study demonstrated that in cases of severe theophylline toxicity (trough concentration >48 mg/l) there was a
significant reduction in morbidity and mortality to those patients who underwent charcoal haemoperfusion . This increases theophylline
clearance from the normal endogenous value of 50 ml/kg/h up to 157 ml/kg/h . In future cases, it would be interesting to observe whether
charcoal haemoperfusion would enhance recovery from theophylline toxicity and improve patient outcomes as the literature tenuously suggests
? At what serum concentration would you expect to see a consistently significant benefit from this therapy? Further research is required
into charcoal haemoperfusion as well as incidence of theophylline toxicity before this intervention can become more widely available across
hospitals. Findings from this case necessitate a requirement for more stringent monitoring of theophylline when taken chronically in those
who demonstrate risk factors for toxicity. This would aim to prevent accumulation of the drug, toxicity onset and subsequent acute
presentation to hospital. Intervention, through charcoal haemoperfusion may provide a means of enhanced recovery to reduce sequelae of
toxicity. Due to the unfortunate death of the patient in our case report, consent to publish this report was obtained from her daughter (her
next of kin). A written copy of this consent form is available for review from the series editor of this journal. Formal approval from an
ethics committee has not been sought as this is a ‘Case-Report’ and therefore does no require research ethics committee approval. All
relevant data for this case report was collected from the case notes of the patient discussed. Although confidentiality must be maintained,
these case notes can be acquired from the medical records department at the Royal United Hospital, Bath. British national formulary
congestive cardiac failure central nervous system chronic obstructive pulmonary disease computed tomography echocardiogram left ventricular
failure magnetic resonance imaging royal united hospital ultrasound sonography scan Competing interests The authors declare they have no
competing interests Authors’ contributions MEH–Primary author. Conceptualised the case study, involved in background research, data
collation and drafting the manuscript. RVM-R–Involved in critically revising the content of the manuscript. Ensuring the data included was
correct and accurate. All read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information MEH–Foundation Year 1 Doctor, RUH, Bath. MBChB, BSc
(Hons.) RVM-R–Consultant Respiratory Physician, RUH, Bath. MB BChir, MRCP. We thank the National Poisons Information Service (Cardiff) for
their help in management of this case.
