Endometrial cancer in patients with uterine congenital malformations is exceptional and there are only a few rare cases published in the
literature. We report the case of a 67 years-old patient with an endometrial cancer located in the right cavity of a complete septate
uterus. Congenital uterine malformations result from a total or incomplete caudal migration of Müllerian ducts which is responsible for
uterine atresia, hypoplastic or Aplastic uterus or from a fusion failure of ducts responsible for uterine duplication. Failure of resorption
of septa between the mullerian ducts leads to the formation of septate uterus. The incidence of these malformations is estimated around 4-5%
but the rate seems to be higher since they are usually discovered as part of an infertility evaluation or repeated miscarriages. Endometrial
cancer in patients with these abnormalities is rarely described. We report the case of a patient with unrecognized complete septate uterus
associated to endometrium cancer located in the right hemicavity. A 67- year-old woman with no medical history, nulligravida, post-
menopausal since the age of 52, consulted for vaginal bleeding for about 2 weeks. Clinical examination revealed an endocervical bleeding
without any suspicious vaginal or cervical lesions. Transvaginal Ultrasound showed an endometrial hypertrophy and an endometrial curettage
biopsy performed afterwards revealed a poorly differentiated cancerous process. The patient had an RMI that objectified a complete septate
uterus with a 40 mm tumor process limited to the right side. A total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral-salpingo-oopho-rectomy and staging
(bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection and pelvic washings) were performed. Pathological examination of the surgical specimen showed a
macroscopically uterus 9x7, 5x2cm with normal external configuration (Figure 1). The coronal examination confirmed the presence of a total
septum reaching the cervical canal (Figure 2) with a 4.9 cm long axis whith a whitish tumor process in the right cavity. The microscopic
study revealed the presence of a tumor lesion corresponding to an endometrioid adenocarcinoma grade I of the WHO classification that
infiltrated more than the one half of the myometrium without any peritumoral vascular embolus (Figure 3). In the left side, an atrophic
endometrium was found. The bilateral adnexae, parametia and pelvic lymph nodes were all free of tumor. Normal external configuration of the
septate uterus (A) et (B) pathology spicemen shown a complete septate uterus with whitish tumor process in the right hemiuterus and
apparently normal left hemiuterus Histological aspect of the tumor (H & E). Crowded and irregularly shaped glands lined by moderately
atypical cells, separated by a little stroma (A:×40, B:×100) There are several classifications to categorize uterine malformations; however,
the last anatomical classification seems to be the more adapted one it . In the case of septate uterus, the external configuration is normal
because the default of resorption of septum between the Müllerian ducts happens at an advanced stage. The correlation between these
abnormalities and the incidence of endometrial cancer has never been established and some authors suggest that Mullerian abnormalities can
be a protective factor against endometrial cancer by hormone abnormalities signals to estrogen receptors . The Mullerian abnormalities
associated with endometrial cancer are exceptionally described. A few cases of endometrial cancer arising in bicornuate uterus have been
reported [4, 5]. Most reports showed endometrial adenocarcinoma involving one horn [6, 7] and only two cases reported the endometrial
adenocarcinoma in both horns [5, 8]. After consulting the pubmed database, we found two publications on the location of endometrial
adenocarcinoma in one side of a septate uterus. The first reported case was discovered incidentally during a hysteroscopy diagnosis . The
second case was discovered in a patient during the exploration of post partum menometrorrhagia . Our case is the first case reported
describing an endometrial cancer in a complete septate uterus in a patient with post-menopausal bleeding. The problem in this association is
to confirm the malignancy of a suspicious cavity image especially when there is an incorrect appreciation of these defects or in case of
focal lesion that may be missed by curettage . Lopez-Fernandez highlights the importance of biopsy by hysteroscopy in case of uterine
malformations . The combination of a uterine malformation to malignant tumor pathology is exceptional and poses the problem of confirmation
in some situations in which hysteroscopy is the key element of the management. The authors declare no competing interest. Ikram Boubess:
contributed to writing of the manuscript and treated the patient; Adib Filali and Hassan Alami: contributed to the diagnosis and review the
literature; Hanan Ramsis: contributed to writing the manuscript and treated the patient; Hafid Hachi: treated the patient and reviewed the
literature; Basma El khannoussi: confirmed the diagnosis by Pathological examination and reviewed the manuscript; Mahdi Youssef: has
Prepared the figures and legends. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have equally contributed to
its content and to the management of the case. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have equally
contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
