Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 63 Final Diagnosis: Drug-induced hyponatremic encephalopathy Symptoms:
Seizures • coma Medication: Hypertonic 3% saline infusion Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Internal Medicine Unusual clinical course Drug-
induced hyponatremia characteristically presents with subtle psychomotor symptoms due to its slow onset, which permits compensatory volume
adjustment to hypo-osmolality in the central nervous system. Due mainly to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
(SIADH), this condition readily resolves following discontinuation of the responsible pharmacological agent. Here, we present an unusual
case of life-threatening encephalopathy due to adverse drug-related effects, in which a rapid clinical response facilitated emergent
treatment to avert life-threatening acute cerebral edema. A 63-year-old woman with refractory depression was admitted for inpatient
psychiatric care with a normal physical examination and laboratory values, including a serum sodium of 144 mEq/L. She had a grand mal
seizure and became unresponsive on the fourth day of treatment with the dual serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor duloxetine
while being continued on a thiazide-containing diuretic for a hypertensive disorder. Emergent infusion of intravenous hypertonic (3%) saline
was initiated after determination of a serum sodium of 103 mEq/L with a urine osmolality of 314 mOsm/kg H20 and urine of 12 mEq/L.
Correction of hyposmolality in accordance with current guidelines resulted in progressive improvement over several days, and she returned to
her baseline mental status. Seizures with life-threatening hyponatremic encephalopathy in this case likely resulted from co-occurring SIADH
and sodium depletion due to duloxetine and hydrochlorothiazide, respectively. A rapid clinical response expedited diagnosis and emergent
treatment to reverse life-threatening acute cerebral edema and facilitate a full recovery without neurological complications. Drug-Induced
hyponatremia is a frequent and potentially serious adverse reaction with many psychopharmacological agents, mediated in most cases by the
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) . This condition most often leads to subtle psychomotor symptoms due to its
slow progression, permitting a compensatory adjustment of intra-cellular volume in the central nervous system. Subtle psycho-motor symptoms
and motor imbalance readily resolve after discontinuation of the responsible pharmacological agent . In contrast, rapid onset of
hyponatremia may present with life-threatening encephalopathy, which requires emergent infusion of intravenous hypertonic (3%) saline to
reverse acute cerebral edema. We describe herein a patient presenting with seizures 4 days after initiating treatment with the dual
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor duloxetine, with continuation of a thiazide-containing diuretic for a stable hypertensive
disorder. Laboratory data determined that SIADH and sodium depletion were collateral underlying causes of this atypical presentation related
to duloxetine and hydrochlorothiazide, respectively. A rapid clinical response expedited diagnosis and emergent treatment, averting
potentially fatal acute cerebral edema and facilitating a full recovery without neurological complications. A 63-year-old white woman was
hospitalized for refractory depression. Physical exam was unremarkable and laboratory values were normal, including a serum sodium of 144
meq/L. Treatment was initiated with the SNRI duloxetine and titrated to 40 mg daily over several days while triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide
37.5/25 mg daily was continued for a stable hypertensive disorder. Her daily sodium intake was 5 grams and she had no sign of a thirst
disorder. Seizures and unresponsiveness led to an emergent evaluation showing a of 103 mEq/L, potassium 3.5 mEq/L, chloride 76 mEq/L, BUN 15
mg/dL, creatinine 0.7 mg/dL, C02 of 16 mEq/L, anion gap 13, lactic acid 4.4 mg/dL, urine osmolality 314 mOsm/kg H20, and urine 12 mEq/L.
Emergent infusion of intravenous hypertonic (3%) saline according to current clinical guidelines resulted in progressive improvement over
several days and a return to her baseline mental status without neurological complications. As the most common electrolyte abnormality in
medical practice, recent evidence from meta-analyses indicates that hyponatremia, defined as a reduction in the serum sodium concentration
(Na+)<135 mEq/L, is associated with increased morbidity and excess mortality . Psychiatric patients are at substantial risk for this adverse
event, which may occur with many pharmacologic agents. SIADH is the most common underlying mechanism, accounting for over 80% of cases in
psychiatric patients in contrast to less than 30% in general medical practice . SIADH characteristically results in subtle changes in mental
status, psychomotor deficits, and motor instability with an increased risk for falling. Optimal treatment of symptomatic hypo-osmolar
hyponatremia begins with a high index of suspicion and identification of the underlying cause as determined by simultaneous measurement of
serum and urine chemistry (Table 1) . Hyponatremia due to SIADH results in less than maximally diluted urine, with an osmolality greater
than 100 mOsm/kg H2O and a urine greater than 30 mEq/L. Symptoms resolve rapidly after discontinuation of the responsible agent. In
contrast, the rapid onset of hyponatremia, as seen in patients with polydipsia, results in maximally diluted urine with a variable sodium
content. Sodium depletion results in high urine osmolality with a low urine concentration and elevated BUN in the presence of co-occurring
dehydration. Taking laboratory findings into account in this case, the urine osmolality of 314 mOsm/kg H20 indicates that the SIADH was
likely related to the SNRI duloxetine, while the urine of 12 mEq/L represents sodium depletion likely due to hydrochlorothiazide. The co-
occurrence of SIADH and sodium depletion likely accounts for the uncharacteristically severe onset of life-threatening hyponatremic
encephalopathy in this case, with a higher degree of clinical severity than has been reported previously with either SNRI-induced SIADH or
thiazide-induced hyponatremia alone . Co-administration of pharmacological agents conferring risk for dilutional hyponatremia by various
mechanisms should therefore be avoided. Treatment of symptomatic hyponatremia is guided by the level of clinical severity, as shown in an
algorithm based on recent best-practices guidelines (Figure 1) . Emergent infusion of intravenous hypertonic (3%) saline is indicated for
severe neurological symptoms to rapidly reverse the flow of water in the brain in response to increased blood osmolality. Current guidelines
call for a rate of correction with a maximal increase in of 8–10 mEq/L in the first 24 hours to avoid the complications of osmotic
demyelination syndrome or central pontine myelinolysis . Treatment with vasopressin receptor blockers as pure aquaretic agents may be
indicated with moderate symptoms, as shown to be efficacious and safe for patients with SIADH . A summary of current treatment practices
based on an international registry showed a greater likelihood of meaningful correction of hyponatremia with these agents compared to
alternative therapies . The finding of a urine concentration above 219 mOsm/kg has been identified as a potentially reliable biomarker for
the efficacy of vaptan usage unless precluded, as in this case, by the degree of clinical severity . A rapid clinical response to the abrupt
onset of seizures expedited diagnosis and emergent treatment, reversing acute cerebral edema and facilitating a full recovery without
neurological complications. Clinicians prescribing pharmacological agents conferring risk for dilutional hyponatremia should maintain a high
index of suspicion for the full spectrum of consequent clinical severity. Conflicts of interest None. Algorithm for Treatment of
Hyponatremia Guided by Clinical Severity 1. Treatment of dilutional hyponatremia in psychiatric patients. * The severity of symptoms is
related to the rate of development of the hypo-osmolality; the serum at which symptoms appear varies markedly among individuals, although
most patients demonstrate symptoms when the serum falls below 125 mEq/L. ** The rate of correction of hyponatremia should not exceed a
maximum of 10 to 12 mEq/L in 24 hours. Adapted from: Siegel AJ: Hyponatremia in psychiatric patients: update on evaluation and management.
Harv Rev Psychiatry, 2008; 16: 13–24. Pathophysiologic findings in hypo-osmolar hyponatremia: Differentiation of dilutional versus
depletional mechanisms. The underlying mechanism of hypo-osmolar hyponatremia can be assessed according to laboratory criteria. Dilutional
hyponatremia due primarily to polydipsia produces a maximally dilute urine with a variable (Na+) and suppression of AVP secretion.
Dilutional hyponatremia under conditions of SIADH results in a concentrated urine with a sodium value >30 mEq/L and an inappropriate urinary
response to hypo-osmolality. Depletional hyponatremia associated with dehydration [BUN >15 mg/dL] leads to concentrated urine with a sodium
value <30 mEq/L and volume-dependent stimulation of AVP secretion. AVP – arginine vasopressin; SIADH – syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion. (Adapted from: Siegel AJ: Is urine concentration a reliable biomarker to guide vaptan usage in psychiatric
patients with symptomatic hyponatremia? Psychiatry Res, 2015; 226: 403–4).
