Diffuse renal and retroperitoneal metastasis of prostatic origin is an uncommon spread pattern of prostate cancer. We described a 74-year-
old male patient who was admitted because of dysuria and nocturia. Physical examination and imaging study indicated prostate mass, and
laboratory analysis revealed elevated prostate specific antigen (PSA). The diagnosis of prostate cancer was established after biopsy. In the
further evaluation, diffuse renal and retroperitoneal metastasis of prostate cancer was confirmed. Radiotherapy combined with endocrine
therapy was given. Our present case emphasized that the routine metastatic work-up was quite necessary, since a small proportion of men with
advanced prostate cancer might experience metastases in atypical sites. Renal and retroperitoneal metastasis from prostatic origin is an
extremely rare clinical entity. Although prostate cancer has a recognizable pattern of spread, most often to regional lymph nodes and to the
skeleton , many patients might present with atypical metastases at diagnosis . We present a 74-year-old man who had a history of abnormally
elevated prostate specific antigen (PSA) level. Radiological study suggested that the patient had diffuse retroperitoneal abnormal tissue
and masses in the left kidney, which was confirmed to be metastasis from prostate cancer by biopsy. Renal and retroperitoneal metastasis
from prostate cancer is a rare clinical entity. Necessary examination should be taken to make correct diagnosis. A 74-year-old male patient
with 2-month history of dysuria and nocturia came to our hospital. Physical examination revealed mild edema of lower extremities. A hard
nodule in the right lobe of prostate was detected in digit rectal exam. Laboratory data suggested an elevated PSA level of 36.801 μg/L.
Prostate magnetic resonance imaging indicated that there was a solid mass in the right peripheral lobe of prostate with extracapsular
extension and seminal vesicle invasion. The histological diagnosis of prostate cancer with Gleason score 5 + 4 = 9 was established by
prostate biopsy. In the further evaluation, skeleton scan was non-significant, but the ultrasonography found that there was a low echogenic
mass in the upper pole of the left kidney. For further investigation, computed tomography (CT) was taken. The CT scan showed diffuse
retroperitoneal low density mass wrapping the aorta and renal pedicle along with the left upper pole renal tumor (Fig. 1), which indicated
the possibility of lymphoma. So the ultrasonography-guided retroperitoneal and renal mass biopsy was performed. The pathology (Fig. 2)
suggested that the mass was adenocarcinoma, which was considered to be originating from the prostate according to the immunohistochemical
stain. Considering the feature of metastatic prostate cancer, radiotherapy combined with endocrine therapy was given. However, the patient
abandoned the treatment 1 month later because of economic reason and was lost in the follow-up.Fig. 1Computed tomography. a The arterial
phase scanning image showing diffuse retroperitoneal mass wrapping the aorta and renal pedicle (arrow head), especially the left renal
artery. b The excretory phase image showing the tumor (arrow head) located on the upper pole of the left kidney. c Coronal image revealed
retroperitoneal mass with renal involvement (arrow)Fig. 2Histopathologic examination of renal and prostate biopsy. a Microscopic image
revealed both renal metastases (arrow) and extra-capsular (asterisk) cancer tissue. b Microscopic appearance of retroperitoneal cancer with
renal capsule (arrow) involvement. (H&E stain, ×100). b Retroperitoneal cancer with muscle (arrow) invasion. (H&E stain, ×100). c Prostate
biopsy tissue (H&E stain, ×400) Computed tomography. a The arterial phase scanning image showing diffuse retroperitoneal mass wrapping the
aorta and renal pedicle (arrow head), especially the left renal artery. b The excretory phase image showing the tumor (arrow head) located
on the upper pole of the left kidney. c Coronal image revealed retroperitoneal mass with renal involvement (arrow) Histopathologic
examination of renal and prostate biopsy. a Microscopic image revealed both renal metastases (arrow) and extra-capsular (asterisk) cancer
tissue. b Microscopic appearance of retroperitoneal cancer with renal capsule (arrow) involvement. (H&E stain, ×100). b Retroperitoneal
cancer with muscle (arrow) invasion. (H&E stain, ×100). c Prostate biopsy tissue (H&E stain, ×400) Prostate cancer is the second most
commonly diagnosed malignancy in men in the Western world and the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths among men worldwide . Most
prostate-cancer-related deaths result from distant metastasis . The location of the metastatic lesion is not random, prostate cancer tends
to spread to the skeleton . Less frequently, it spreads to the liver, lung, bladder, or brain. Giorgio et al. summarized 74,826 patients
with metastatic prostate cancer from 1998 to 2010. They reported the most common metastatic sites were the bone (84 %), distant lymph nodes
(10.6 %), liver (10.2 %), and thorax (9.1 %). Prostate cancer metastasis proceeds through a complex series of molecular events that include
angiogenesis at the site of the original tumor, local migration within the primary site, intravasation into the blood stream, survival
within the circulation, extravasation of the tumor cells to the target organ, and colonization of those cells within the new site .
Retroperitoneal involvement is an uncommon manifestation of prostate cancer. It is usually results from lymphatic spread of nodal metastases
in ascending pattern. Metastases to the kidney are even more rare. To the best of our knowledge from literature searches, there are very few
literatures that reported on renal metastasis from prostatic cancer. Philip et al. reported a patient who was managed as a case of infected
renal cyst which later turned out to be a metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma with a rare pattern of widespread bony metastases. The authors
suggested that suspicion was needed in order to avoid potential diagnostic pitfall. Fahd et al. also reported a case with a left-sided renal
mass found by radiological study. Subsequent histological examination and immunostain of biopsied tissue revealed feature characteristics of
metastatic moderately differentiated to a focally poorly differentiated, large duct type of prostatic adenocarcinoma. In our case, we also
found the left kidney lesion incidentally. But unlike the previous two cases, the retroperitoneal space of our current patient was diffusely
invaded by the metastatic lesion, which could possibly mislead to the diagnosis of lymphoma. Biopsy helped us establish the correct
diagnosis. So we should bear in mind that although the skeleton is the most common site of prostate cancer metastasis, a small proportion of
men with advanced prostate cancer might experience metastases in atypical sites. Thus, routine metastatic work-up was quite necessary.
Metastasis work-up was quite necessary to rule-out extra-skeleton metastasis for those with high-risk prostate cancer, as a small proportion
of patients with advanced disease would suffer from atypical site metastasis. Consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CC and XW were in charge
of the case and summarized the detail information. HH wrote the manuscript. YQ performed the literatures review. ZY helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
