Chlorfenapyr is a widely used, moderately hazardous pesticide. Previous reports have indicated that chlorfenapyr intoxication can be fatal
in humans. We reported the first non-fatal case of chlorfenapyr-induced toxic leukoencephalopathy in a 44-year-old female with resolution of
extensive and abnormal signal intensities in white matter tracts throughout the brain, brain stem, and spinal cord on serial magnetic
resonance imaging. Chlorfenapyr is classified as a moderately hazardous pesticide, which has been widely used in eradication of insects over
the past 15 years (1). However, chlorfenapyr toxicity in humans has rarely been studied. To date, only 3 cases of human chlorfenapyr
intoxication with central nervous system involvement based on radiologic evidence have been reported, all of which were fatal (234). Herein,
we reported the first non-fatal case of chlorfenapyr-induced toxic leukoencephalopathy with radiologic reversibility. This report was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of our institution and informed consent was waived. A 44-year-old female patient presented with a
5-day history of bilateral lower leg weakness and urinary incontinence. She had an alert mental status and stable vital signs. A neurologic
examination revealed motor weakness in both legs (grade II/grade II) and hypoesthesia below the T11 dermatome. Serum and cerebrospinal fluid
laboratory findings were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine was performed using a 1.5T unit (Signa HDxt; GE
Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA). The brain MRI scan revealed extensive and symmetric signal-intensity abnormalities across the entire
bilateral cerebral and cerebellar white matter, including the internal capsule, optic nerve and chiasm, corpus callosum, corticospinal
tract, and brain stem (Fig. 1). The lesion showed increased signal intensity on T2-weighted images (T2WI) (Fig. 1A), and significant
diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and an apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map (Fig. 1B). The spinal MRI scan
revealed diffuse swelling and hyperintensity in the entire spinal cord on T2WI (Fig. 1C). The lesion showed no contrast enhancement after
intravenous injection of gadolinium (not shown). Based on these MRI findings, toxic leukoencephalopathy was suspected. Detailed patient
history revealed that the patient had accidentally ingested a 10% chlorfenapyr solution 19 days prior (2 weeks before symptom onset). The
patient had retained the liquid chlorfenapyr orally and immediately spat it out without swallowing. Steroid pulse therapy was initiated as
adjunctive treatment for symptom relief. Despite the treatment, neurologic symptoms progressed over the next 7 days. Lower leg weakness
progressed to paralysis, and hypoesthesia deteriorated to complete sensory loss below the T8 dermatome. Follow-up MRI performed 71 days
later revealed complete resolution of abnormal signal intensities in the brain, brain stem (Fig. 1D, E), and cervical to upper thoracic
spinal cord, with residual hyperintensity and atrophic change in the spinal cord below the T7 level (Fig. 1F). During this period, the
patient's symptom of paraplegia were unimproved. No other newly developed neurologic deficits were noted. Based on the radiologic and
clinical findings, the case was categorized as partially reversible chlorfenapyr-induced toxic leukoencephalopathy. Chlorfenapyr is a widely
used pyrrole insecticide (1). Oxidative removal of the N-ethoxymethyl group of chlorfenapyr, using mixed function oxidases, forms the CL
303268 compound. CL 303268 uncouples oxidative phosphorylation at the mitochondria, resulting in disrupted adenosine triphosphate
production, cellular death, and mortality of the organism (5). Despite its wide use, there are few reports of chlorfenapyr intoxication in
humans (2346). Based on radiologic evidence, only 3 human chlorfenapyr intoxication cases with central nervous system involvement have been
reported (234). Kwon et al. (2) were the first to describe MRI findings of chlorfenapyr-induced leukoencephalopathy. In their report, brain
MRI revealed a bilateral, symmetric lesion along the entire white matter tract with high signal intensity on a fluid attenuated inversion
recovery scan and diffusion restriction on DWI and an ADC map. The following year, Tharaknath et al. (3) reported another chlorfenapyr
intoxication case. MRI scans included in their report revealed diffuse swelling and increased signal intensity in the spinal cord on T2WI,
as well as white matter changes in the brain and brain stem, similar to the present case. Recently, Kang et al. (4) also reported a similar
case with diffuse, low white matter density on a computed tomography scan. In the present case, brain and spinal MRI showed notably
extensive and symmetric hyperintense changes on T2WI confined to the white matter throughout the brain, brain stem, and spine, with
significant diffusion restriction. These results are very similar to those of previous cases (234). In 1998, Kramer et al. reported
interesting results based on neurohistological examinations of one-year chlorfenapyr dietary neurotoxicity in rats (1). In their study, a
myelinopathic process consisting of vacuolar myelinopathy and mild myelin sheath swelling was found in rats with chlorfenapyr intoxication
at 52 weeks. MRI findings, including white matter distribution and high signal intensity on T2WI, reflected these pathologic findings. The
reason for pathology of the white matter tracts alone is still unknown. Characteristic involvement of the entire white matter tract in
chlorfenapyr intoxication may help distinguish it from other toxic leukoencephalopathy causes such as heroin toxicity or chemotherapeutic
agents-induced leukoencephalopathy (7). Serial MRI findings related to chlorfenapyr-induced leukoencephalopathy have not been previously
published. The present case revealed the complete resolution of abnormal signal intensities in the brain and the cervical to upper thoracic
spinal cord, with residual hyperintensity and atrophic change in the spinal cord below T7 on follow-up MRI scans obtained 71 days later.
There are several reports of diffusion restriction reversibility in follow-up MRI studies assessing toxic leukoencephalopathy with various
causes (89). Sivasubramanian et al. (9) referred to this disease entity as "acute reversible toxic leukoencephalopathy". These
leukoencephalopathies are being increasingly reported with the increased use of chemotherapeutic agents. However, reversibility of
chlorfenapyr-induced leukoencephalopathy has not been reported previously. The pathophysiologic mechanisms of reversible diffusion
restriction in toxic leukoencephalopathy are unknown but presumably due to intramyelinic edema, myelin vacuolation, and direct toxic
demyelination (8). Similarities between presumed pathomechanisms of radiologic reversibility and pathologic results from animal studies with
chlorfenapyr intoxication could explain the radiologic findings observed in the present case. The majority of previous chlorfenapyr
intoxication cases exhibited a distinct clinical course that was described as an initial latent period lasting from 7 to 14 days followed by
rapidly progressive symptoms resulting in death (2346). Kang et al. (4) assumed that a latent chlorfenapyr intoxication period is related to
time required for formation of the active toxic product from the pro-insecticide. A latent period was also observed in our case. The present
patient had no symptoms for 14 days after chlorfenapyr ingestion. Because of this latent period, clinicians usually do not consider toxic
insults prior to performing an MRI scan. Whereas most previously reported patients experienced a high fever, diaphoresis, general fatigue,
changes in mental state, and death, the present patient only experienced paraplegia despite extensive white matter tract signals. However,
previous cases reported an ingested volume of approximately 20 to 250 mL; whereas, the volume ingested by the present patient was estimated
to be considerably less, which may have contributed to the non-fatal nature of the neurotoxicity. Ku et al. (10) reported another case of
survival after chlorfenapyr intoxication. In this case, the dose consumed was only 10 mL, and the patient experienced mild rhabdomyolysis,
fever, and acute pancreatitis. These results suggested that the fatal clinical course from chlorfenapyr intoxication is associated with the
ingested volume. Nevertheless, despite the small volume ingested by the patient in the present case, chlorfenapyr ingestion still led to
paraplegia. During the follow-up period (71 days), the patient's symptom of paraplegia were unimproved and there were no other persisting or
newly developed neurologic deficits on neurologic examination. These clinical findings were consistent with the radiologic findings of
partial resolution of abnormal signal intensity with residual hyperintensity and atrophic changes in the thoracic spinal cord. To our
knowledge, this was the first reported case of chlorfenapyr-induced reversible toxic leukoencephalopathy. Serial MRI scans showed resolution
of extensive abnormal signal intensities in white matter tracts throughout the brain, brain stem, and spinal cord, with residual
hyperintensity and atrophic changes in the lower spinal cord. Unusual radiologic reversibility in the present case was likely related to the
small volume of ingested chlorfenapyr. Considering the delayed chlorfenapyr toxicity, MRI features are potentially valuable for prompt
diagnosis and adequate follow up in chlorfenapyr-induced toxic leukoencephalopathy cases. A. Axial T2-weighted images show diffuse,
bilaterally-symmetrical, and increased signal intensities involving periventricular white matter, corpus callosum, internal capsule,
cerebellar white matter, and pons (corticospinal tract and central tegmental tract). B. Lesions show significant diffusion restriction on
axial diffusion-weighted images and apparent diffusion coefficient map. C. Sagittal T2-weighted spinal images show diffuse enlargement of
whole spinal cord with increased signal intensity. D. Follow-up axial T2-weighted images at 71 days after initial presentation show complete
improvement in abnormal signal intensity within white matter throughout brain. E. Follow-up diffusion-weighted images confirmed complete
resolution of previously noted restricted diffusion. F. Follow-up sagittal T2-weighted image of cervicothoracic spine shows improved general
enlargement and hyperintensity of cervical and upper thoracic spinal cord. However, sagittal T2-weighted image of thoracolumbar spine shows
residual hyperintensity in spinal cord below T7, with atrophic change.
