A 27-year-old male patient was presented with foreign body sensation in both the eyes for 2 years duration and blisters followed by scarring
and pigmentation in the photo-exposed areas of the body over the previous 12 years. His urine was reddish colored for the previous year. On
examination, there was scarring, hyper-pigmentation of photo-exposed parts of the body along with resorption of the distal phalanges of
fingers in both hands except the smallest digit which had onycholysis. Ocular examination indicated scleral necrosis in the interpalpebral
areas in both eyes and bilateral dry eye. Hematological examination indicated a picture suggestive of hemolytic anemia. Abdominal
ultrasonography indicated an enlarged spleen. These clinical features are suggestive of puberty onset congenital erythropoietic porphyria
with ophthalmological manifestations. Cutaneous porphyrias primarily affect areas of the skin that are exposed to the sunlight. Congenital
erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is a severe form of porphyria caused by a deficiency of the enzyme uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-
synthase).1 CEP, an autosomal recessive disorder, is very rare, with approximately 200 cases reported over the recent past. Symptoms usually
begin in infancy or in early childhood. Rarely (about 12 cases worldwide), CEP may begin in puberty.2 We present a very rare case of puberty
onset CEP with ophthalmological manifestations. A 27-year-old male, presented to our clinic with a history of foreign body sensation in both
eyes for the previous 2 years. He had a history of blistering skin lesions on the photo-exposed areas of the body for the past 12 years. At
first, blisters started developing over the lower extremities and then gradually involved upper extremities and face. There was also a
history of hyper-pigmentation and scarring of the photo-exposed areas of the body. He developed severe pain in the fingers of both hands
1-year prior presentation. He complained of the passage of red colored urine for the past 1 year. There was no history of acute abdominal
pain and no family history of the similar phenomenon was found. Striking features on physical examination were a pinched up nose, scarring
over the lips, nose, hands, and resorption of distal phalanges of all the fingers in both hands except onycholysis of the smallest digits
[Figure 1]. Onycholysis was present on all the toes. The remainder of the systemic examination was noncontributory. Photographs showing
pinched up nose, scarring over lips and nose, mutilation of distal phalanges of all fingers except little fingers in both hands The
patient's uncorrected visual acuity was 20/40 in both eyes. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes with a correction of –0.5 ×
115° in the right eye and –1.25 × 80° in the left eye. Air-puff tonometry measured intraocular pressure of 14 mm-Hg bilaterally. The fundus
examination was unremarkable. Slit-lamp examination indicated scleral necrosis in the interpalpebral area of both eyes that was more
pronounced temporally compared to nasally. Temporally, it was 4 mm × 3 mm in the left eye and 3 mm × 3 mm in the right eye. Nasally, minimal
scleral necrosis was seen with overlying fibrosed conjunctiva in both eyes. Mild conjunctival scarring was present in the temporal necrosed
part of the right eye. In the left eye, the temporal necrosed part was devoid of conjunctival tissue, a frill of conjunctival tissue was
present at the margin of the necrosed area. Conjunctiva and sclera in the covered area appeared to be normal. Infiltrations were seen in the
peripheral cornea of both eyes near the limbus with temporal and nasal involvement [Figures 2 and 3]. Fluorescein staining indicated normal
epithelium. Schirmer's test 1 was 8 mm in the right eye and 10 mm in the left eye. Left eye shows scleral necrosis in the interpalpebral
area temporally more than nasally, nonphoto-exposed part of sclera and conjunctiva remains unaffected Right eye shows sclera necrosis in the
interpalpebral area both temporally and nasally with mild conjunctival scarring These symptoms were suggestive of porphyria. Laboratory
testing based on the definite pattern of accumulation and hyperexcretion of porphyrins and porphyrin precursor is the most effective measure
for diagnosis and typing of porphyrias. Exact porphyrin isomer identification requires sophisticated equipment such as high-performance
liquid chromatography which is unavailable at our center and in most hospitals in the developing countries. Hematological tests reported
hemoglobin, 9.8 g/dL, platelets and white blood cell counts were normal. Peripheral blood smear showed normocytic red blood cells. Liver
function test showed a moderate increase in lactic dehydrogenase (423U/l) and mild increase in serum bilirubin (1.8 mg/dL). Ultrasonography
of the whole abdomen showed splenomegaly (17 mm). These features are suggestive of hemolytic anemia. The treatment involved complete
avoidance of sunlight and use of dark goggles. The patient was prescribed topical cyclosporine 0.5% eye drop 3 times a day and ocular
lubricant was prescribed for both eyes. We planned a full-thickness scleral patch graft with amniotic membrane transplant in the necrosed
region. The patient was advised to return for periodic follow-up to our cornea clinic. The clinical symptoms of CEP are caused by a
homozygous defect of the enzyme uroporphyrinogen III synthase which leads to severe anemia and accumulation of type I porphyrins such as
uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I mainly in erythrocytes, skin, and teeth. Excessive amounts of these metabolites deposited in skin induce
phototoxic, oxygen-dependent damage characterized by sub-epidermal blistering with severe inflammation and subsequent ulceration and
scarring of all light exposed skin areas. This leads to severe mutilation of hands, fingers, and face, as seen in our case. Rarely, it can
cause bilateral corneoscleral involvement.345 In our case, the patient has had bilateral scleral necrosis in the photo-exposed regions with
some dry eye, likely due to conjunctival scarring associated to mucin deficiency, but overall the cornea was normal. Four cases reported in
Germany had severe conjunctival scarring, eyelid scarring, and symblepharon.6 However, in our case; these signs were absent probably because
our patient had puberty onset porphyria. Our literature search indicated that there are no cases of puberty onset CEP with ophthalmic
manifestations. Thus, it might be a rare differential diagnosis of scleral necrosis. The authors certify that they have obtained all
appropriate patient consent forms. In the form the patient(s) has/have given his/her/their consent for his/her/their images and other
clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patients understand that their names and initials will not be published and due
efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
