Pneumopericardium is defined as the presence of air inside the pericardial space. Usually, it is reported as a complication of blunt or
penetrating chest trauma, but rare iatrogenic and spontaneous cases have been reported. Pneumopericardium is relatively stable if it does
not generate a tension effect on the heart. However, it may progress to tension pneumopericardium, which requires immediate pericardial
aspiration. We report a case of iatrogenic pneumopericardium occurred in a 70-year-old man who presented dyspnea at emergency department.
The patient underwent pericardiocentesis for cardiac tamponade due to large pericardial effusion, and iatrogenic tension pneumopericardium
occurred due to misuse of the drainage device. After evacuating the pericardial air through the previously implanted catheter, the patient
became stable. We report this case to increase the awareness of this fatal condition and to help increase the use of precautions against the
development of this condition during emergency procedures. Pericardiocentesis is an invasive procedure which is usually performed in a
patient who has pericardial effusion to resolve the pressure in the pericardial sac. In 1653, Riolanus (1) first described as a trephination
of the sternum to relieve fluid surrounding the heart. Due to frequent complications this procedure was out of interest until ultrasound
guided technique emerged (2). However, many complications are reported through literature to this day (345). Herein, we report a case of
iatrogenic tension pneumopericardium, which exhibit impending cardiac arrest. A 70-year-old male presented with severe dyspnea and general
weakness on March 8, 2013. He was referred from a local hospital for pericardiocentesis and further work-up due to a large pericardial
effusion. He had a past medical history of ischemic stroke 15 years prior to his visit to the hospital and of syncope a day before his visit
to the hospital. The vital signs of the patient in the Emergency Room (ER) were as follows: blood pressure of 163/93, heart rate of 135
beats per minute, respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, body temperature of 37.0°C, and oxygen saturation of 91%. The patient had
distended neck veins and muffled heart sounds but did not have low blood pressure. Echocardiography was performed by an emergency physician,
and a right ventricle (RV) free wall collapse in was observed in the diastolic phase. An emergency pericardiocentesis was indicated, and it
was performed by a subxiphoid approach. Approximately 700 mL of serous effusion was drained through a catheter; the patient’s heart rate
dropped to 110 and his blood pressure was maintained above 130. The follow-up echocardiography showed the absence of RV wall diastolic
collapse. A water-sealed chest tube bottle was connected at the end of the catheter for further drainage. The patient was transferred to a
computerized tomography (CT) room for a chest CT to examine the cause of his pericardial effusion. Before he left the ER, his vital signs
were stable and he was alert. After the patient returned to the ER from the CT room, his heart rate fell to 30, and he exhibited impending
cardiac arrest. An intravenous dose of 0.5 mg atropine was given, and the patient was hydrated with crystalloid solution. The patient’s
chest CT confirmed tension pneumopericardium, and imaging showed that pericardial air was compressing the right ventricle and that the
catheter tip was placed behind the left ventricle (LV) (Fig. 1). Approximated 500 mL of pericardial air was evacuated rapidly through the
previously implanted catheter, and the patient’s vital sign became stable. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and
subsequently transferred to a long-term care hospital. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of the chest. (A) Axial view showed the
air compressing the right ventricle (arrows) and tip of the catheter inside pericardium (arrow head). (B) Coronal view showed the air inside
pericardial sac (arrows). Pneumopericardium is defined as the presence of air inside the pericardial space. In 1910, Wenkebach first
described the X-ray findings of pneumopericardium, and in 1967, Cimmino (6) described the diagnostic features of pneumopericardium. In a
review of the literature, Toledo et al. (7) classified the etiology of pneumopericardium into four categories: iatrogenic, pericarditis,
fistula formation between the pericardium and an adjacent air-containing organ, and trauma. Additionally, Cummings et al. (8) reported that
trauma and positive pressure ventilation are the major causes of pneumopericardium. Iatrogenic cases of pneumopericardium associated with
various procedures, such as thoracentesis, paracentesis, poststernal bone marrow aspiration, postcauterization of esophageal webs,
pericardiocentesis, radiofrequency ablation, and pacemaker insertion, have been reported (7910). Usually, pneumopericardium presents as
chest pain and dyspnea. If the patient has tension pneumopericardium, physical examination may show tachycardia, distended neck veins, and
hypotension. In 1844, Bricheteau was the first to describe the mill wheel murmur in auscultation, which is a characteristic churning or
splashing auscultatory sound due to blood mixing with air in the pericardial sac. A chest X-ray showing air surrounding the heart and the
“small heart sign” suggests tension pneumopericardium (11). Pericardial air can be mistaken for mediastinal air, but the air in the
pericardial sac does not rise above the pericardial reflection of the proximal great vessels. Also a chest X-ray taken from the decubitus
position may show a shift of air if the air is in the pericardium, but mediastinal air does not shift (12). A small amount of air in the
pericardial sac is indistinguishable by plain chest X-ray but can be detected by CT scan. Bedside echocardiography in the ER is an
alternative method for detecting air in the pericardial sac, but a large amount of air may hinder the penetration of the ultrasound beam, so
diagnosis by this method may be challenging. Tension pneumopericardium requires immediate evacuation of the pericardial air. The traditional
blind subxiphoid approach can still be used for pericardiocentesis in emergency situations. The needle should be placed 1 cm inferior to the
left xiphocostal angle at a 30-degree angle to the skin. It should be aimed toward the left shoulder and advanced while maintaining negative
pressure (13). After the insertion of the catheter, a drainage tube is connected to a water sealed device. In our case, a conventional chest
tube bottle was used, and during transportation to the CT room, the drainage device was not clamped. There is one possible explanation for
this case of iatrogenic pneumopericardium. During the transfer, the water in the bottom of the bottle could have swung back and forth.
Originally, the tube connected to the catheter would have been sealed with water, but this swinging motion would have provided the
opportunity for air to enter the catheter and, subsequently, the pericardial sac. Iatrogenic pneumopericardium is rarely reported after
pericardiocentesis, but it can lead to tension pneumopericardium, which is a life threatening condition. Physicians should be aware of this
serious complication of pericardiocentesis and take extra precautions in handling drainage devices because this iatrogenic complication can
lead to cardiac arrest and a medical dispute. DISCLOSURE: All of the authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION:
Concept and design of case report: Kim C, Choi HJ. Drafting and image preparation: Lee J. Critical review: Kang BS. Approval of final
manuscript: all authors.
