In addition to its role in cell adhesion and gene expression in the canonical Wingless/integrated Wnt signaling pathway, β-catenin also
regulates genes that underlie the transmission of nerve impulses. Mutations of CTNNB1 (β-catenin) have recently been described in patients
with a wide range of neurodevelopmental disorders (intellectual disability, microcephaly and other syndromic features). We for the first
time associate CTNNB1 mutation with hyperekplexia identifying it as an additional candidate for consideration in patients with startle
syndrome. We describe an 11 year old male Polish patient with a de novo nonsense mutation in CTNNB1 who in addition to the major features of
CTNNB1-related syndrome including intellectual disability and microcephaly, exhibited hyperekplexia and apraxia of upward gaze. The patient
became symptomatic at the age of 20 months exhibiting delayed speech and psychomotor development. Social and emotional development was
normal but mild hyperactivity was noted. Episodic falls when startled by noise or touch were observed from the age of 8.5 years,
progressively increasing but never with loss of consciousness. Targeted gene panel next generation sequencing (NGS) and patient-parents trio
analysis revealed a heterozygous de novo nonsense mutation in exon 3 of CTNNB1 identifying a novel association of β-catenin with
hyperekplexia. We report for the first time a clear association of mutation in CTNNB1 with an atypical syndromic heperekplexia expanding the
phenotype of CTNNB1-related syndrome. Consequently CTNNB1 should be added to the growing list of genes to be considered as a cause of
startle disease or syndromic hyperekplexia. A novel dominant intellectual disability (ID) syndrome caused by β-catenin gene (CTNNB1)
haploinsufficiency was recently identified . Mutations in CTNNB1 (chr3: 41,194,837-41,260,096) are responsible for a wide spectrum of
neurodevelopmental disorders. The phenotypes of all 21 patients with CTNNB1 mutations reported to date in four different studies are broad
and consistently include several major features: ID and motor delay with different degrees of severity, speech impairment, behavioral
anomalies, spastic paraplegia, microcephaly and overlapping facial features . In addition, variable clinical findings may involve brain MRI
abnormalities (corpus callosum thinning and enlarged ventricles) and spinal anomalies (syringomyelia or tethered cord) . We report a case of
an 11-year-old boy with a de novo nonsense mutation in CTNNB1 who presented with mild ID, ataxia, spastic paraplegia, mild microcephaly and
dysmorphic features. Notably our patient exhibited hyperekplexia and apraxia of upward gaze, features which to date have not been described
in patients with mutations of CTNNB1.Table 1Clinical findings in patients with mutation in the N-terminal of β-catenin. * Previously
published patients , n.e. not examined, n.r. not recordedOur PatientPatient 5*Patient 10*Patient 13* Gender MFFM Gestational weeks 39404039
Apgar scores 109/10/10n.r.10/10 Birth weight 2900345033003160 Birth length 535150.849 Age at last examination 115 7/1245 6/12 Height
150108104.5112 Weight 461514.1517.2 BMI 20.412.913.013.7 OFC 5147.34648.5 Microcephaly ++++ Croniofacial dysmorphism broad nasal tip +++(+)
small alae nasi +++- long and/or flat philtrum −/++/++/+−/+ thin upper lip vermillion ++++Developmental and neurological abnormalities
Truncal hypotonia ++++Peripheral hypertonia/spasticity++atactic gait++legs > armsMotor delayCrowling (months)Free
walkingmoderateseveremoderatemoderatedid not crawl2412253 yearsnot yet, walking frame4 years, falls a lotnot yet, walking frameSpeech
impairmentmoderate, unclear speechsevere, few words (30–34), sign languagespeech apraxia, ~50 wordsshort sentences at 6 yearsBasic speech
comprehension++++goodIntellectual disability++++ (no formal test available) Regression + speech?-- Behavioral characteristics temper
tantrums/crying, friendly personality, aggression, frustration, anxiety, sleep disturbances, stereotypic movementssleep disturbances,
stereotypic movements, autoagressionnormalnormal, friendly, sensitive to loud noises Seizures ---- EEG during episodes diffused fast
background activitynormalnormaln.e. Brain MRI arachnoid cyst, enlarged Sylvius sulcusnormalbasically normalnormal Hearing loss ---- Vision
hyperopia, astigmatism, strabismushyperopia, intermittent strabismusnormalstrabismus Others Internal abnormalities ---- Frequent infections
---+ (infancy) Miscellaneous ginecomastia, inverted nipples-feeding difficulties- Hands slender and long fingersthin fingers, short distal
phalangesnormalclinodactyly V, hand and feet Feet sandal gap, long toesflat feetnormalpes equines Clinical findings in patients with
mutation in the N-terminal of β-catenin. * Previously published patients , n.e. not examined, n.r. not recorded The study was approved by an
ethics committee of Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland. Parents provided written informed consent according to the Declaration of
Helsinki for publication of clinical information. The index case, a male patient was born at term as the first child to healthy, young, non-
consanguineous Caucasian parents. Family history was negative for the presence of neurological disorders. He weighed 2900 g, with a good
Apgar score. After a normal neonatal period, delayed psychomotor and speech development was evident (at 20 months of age he was unable to
walk unassisted and was able to speak only a few words). His social and emotional development was within normal range but hyperactivity was
observed. No focal lesions were visualized in 1.5 T MRI; notably in cortex, thalami, midbrain and medulla, except for a 12–13 mm in diameter
arachnoid cyst in the posterior fossa and an enlarged Sylvian fissure. An EEG recording showed mild slowing of background activity. The
parents had noticed episodic falls since the age 8.5 years. The episodes were provoked by noise, touch or rapid movement in the
neighbourhood. Sudden loss in muscle tonus of lower limbs was observed, together with an increase in axial muscle tonus. It led to a rapid
flexion in knees and hips provoking a fall. The boy has never had any head injury while falling, due probably to the extension position of
his trunk. Episodes were short, lasting a second or two, without loss of consciousness. The boy was able to lift up by himself very quickly
directly afterwards and was able to recall the entire episode. This sequence was highly repetitive. A progressive increase in the frequency
of falls was noticed. Neurological examination between episodes indicated a left hemiparesis with positive Babinski sign and mild
dysarthria. EEG during episodes showed diffused fast background activity, typical for hyperekplexia. In the interictal EEG no epileptiform
discharges were observed. Levetiracetam was introduced with good clinical response however the drug was withdrawn because of behavioral
disturbances (aggression, tendency to cry). Brivaricetam was introduced instead and the effect was similar to Levetiracetam with fewer side
effects. During the last examination at the age of 11 years problems with speech were shown to have increased and coordination problems
appeared. In addition to episodes of hyperekplexia, he presents with mild ID, ataxia, truncal hypotonia, bilateral spastic paraplegia,
dysarthria and apraxia of upward gaze. He needs support to walk. Ophthalmic examination showed astigmatism and hyperopia with a normal
fundus of the eye. Periodical horizontal nystagmus is present but vision evoked potentials are normal. The boy has height and weight within
normal ranges, he is mildly dysmorphic (asymmetric face, right frontal hair upsweep, hypotelorism, deep set eyes, strabismus, diastema,
small teeth, short philtrum, thin upper lip vermillion, prominent columella, broad nasal tip, small alae nasi, hypoplastic upper crus of the
inner helix), has long slender fingers and toes, mild scoliosis, gynecomastia, inverted nipples and microcephaly. He is generally a friendly
child, rather anxious, avoiding eye contact, with episodes of frustration. Verbal aggression, crying and sleep disturbances have been also
observed (Table 1). The patient was followed by neuropediatrics and based upon symptoms including ataxia with progressive pyramidal
syndrome, combined with supranuclear vertical gaze palsy, Niemann-Pick type C disease was assumed initially. However, sequencing of the
entire coding and flanking regions of NPC1 and NPC2 failed to identify any pathogenic mutations. We further analyzed the index case using a
NGS gene panel (targeted resequencing) that included 758 OMIM genes (including GLRA1, GLRB and SLCA) associated with neurological disorders
(genomebiology.com/content/supplementary/s13059-015-0693-2-s4.xls). Genes were amplified and a library constructed using an AmpliSeq HiFi
mix, proprietary primers and library kit (Thermo Fisher, Carlsband, CA, USA) followed by sequencing on the Ion Proton platform following the
manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher, Carlsband, CA, USA). Sequences were mapped to hg19 and variants were called and annotated using the
ion torrent pipeline (Thermo Fisher, Carlsband, CA, USA). Sequencing identified 2985 variants relative to hg19. By excluding previously
reported variants (present in RefSeq, OMIM, Genbank, dbSNP, 1000 genomes, in-house database) and only focusing on non-synonymous, splicing,
frameshift, indel and nonsense variants we decreased the number to 10 heterozygous changes each in a different gene (Fig. 1A). All changes
were validated by Sanger sequencing of the index case and parents. Nine changes were inherited with the only other variant being confirmed
as a heterozygous de novo nonsense mutation in exon 3 of CTNNB1 (NM_001098209): c.C232T; p.Q78X (Fig. 1B).Fig. 1Filtering strategy used for
identification of a causative mutation using trio analysis and NGS-gene panel (a). DNA electrophoregram with the c.C232T; p.Q78X mutation in
exon 3 of CTNNB1 (b) Filtering strategy used for identification of a causative mutation using trio analysis and NGS-gene panel (a). DNA
electrophoregram with the c.C232T; p.Q78X mutation in exon 3 of CTNNB1 (b) In this study we present an 11 year old boy in which we detected
a de novo nonsense mutation in β-catenin (CTNNB1). Mutations of CTNNB1 were recently reported to be associated with a rare ID syndrome with
consistent clinical features including significant motor delay with hypotonia of the trunk, progressive distal hypertonia/spasticity of the
legs, speech impairment, behavioral anomalies, frequently microcephaly and overlapping dysmorphic facial features . Our patient’s phenotype
was consistent with, albeit generally milder than major signs of this entity. However, the boy also suffers from hyperekplexia and apraxia
of upward gaze. These features have not been previously described in patients with a mutation of CTNNB1. Hyperekplexia, or human startle
disease, (OMIM#149400) is a rare, nonepileptic, paroxysmal neurogenetic disorder characterized by hypertonia and exaggerated persistent
startle reflex to unexpected auditory, visual, and somatosensorial stimuli [5, 6]. The cluster of these symptoms is associated with failure
of glycinergic synaptic transmission often resulting from mutations in genes encoding presynaptic and postsynaptic proteins . Hyperekplexia
results from mutations in GLRA1 and GLRB encoding the human glycine receptor and also the glycine transporter SLCA5 [8, 9]. Later, mutations
in the proteins (GPHN and ARHGEF9) that cluster and localize the inhibitory glycine and GABA receptors were identified [10, 11]. However,
patients with defects in these synaptic clustering proteins presented a disorder that had only a degree of phenotypic overlap with
hyperexplexia. The genetic basis of hyperekplexia in a large proportion of cases remains to be discovered . In our case the clinical
diagnosis of hyperekplexia is based on the presence of its typical features: falls as a reaction to sudden stimuli, paroxysmal character,
shortness and repetitiveness of episodes (that differenciate hyperekplexia from episodic falls and dyskinesias), no epileptiform EEG
discharges during episode nor loss of conciousness (that are observed in atonic seizures), rapid recovery (that is never seen in cataplexy).
However, the hyperekplexia in our patient lacks some of cardinal features of hyperekplexia such as rigidity during first year of life,
general increase of muscle tonus during an episode and frequent head injuries. Presence of progressive neurologic impairment is also not
typical for hyperekplexia. Therefore, we propose a diagnosis of atypical hyperekplexia for this patient`s neurological condition. β-catenin
(CTNNB1) belongs to the armadillo family of proteins responsible for regulation of gene expression in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway,
in addition to their function in cell adhesion . Wnt family secreted glycoproteins are highly conserved and modulate cell-cell communication
in cellular processes including central nervous system development . A central component of this pathway, β-catenin binds the TCF/LEF
transcription factors that are involved in regulation of many genes . In the thalamus, β-catenin regulates the expression of genes encoding
proteins associated with excitation of neurons. In the mouse, it binds to Gabra 3 encoding the GABA receptor, and also to genes responsible
for voltage and ligand-gated ion channels: Cacna1g and Kcna6. This indicates a role of β-catenin in the maintenance of neuronal excitability
. During axonal developmental, the specification of the axon initial segment (AIS), characterized by a high density of voltage-gated Na+ and
K+ channels, is critical in initiating and modulating action potentials . These ion channels are tethered by ankyrinG (intracellular
protein) to the membrane of the AIS and during this process, β-catenin is progressively accumulated at the AIS and is an essential component
of this neuronal domain . Its enrichment plays a role in dendritic morphogenesis, axonal growth and the maturation of AIS functions,
modulating neuronal excitability and voltage-gated sodium channels [13, 18]. β-catenin knockdown decreases voltage-gated sodium currents at
the AIS. The sodium current reduction is most likely due to diminished ankyrinG tethering at the AIS and the loss of AIS integrity when
β-catenin is absent . This molecular mechanism underlying neuronal action potential generation explains β-catenin involvement in disorders
related to neuronal development and excitability . Our patient expresses hyperekplexia, a unique symptom that has not been seen among other
reported CTNNB1 patients. Only in one other case (P14) a pronounced startle response on both auditory and visual stimuli provoking a breath
holding spell was noted without a clear diagnosis of hyperekplexia . Our patient has a de novo mutation in CTNNB1 (c.C232T; p.Q78X) which is
localized in the N-terminal domain of β-catenin. Three other patients (P5, P10 and P13) described by Kuechler’s et al. also had mutations in
the N-terminal helical domain . This region contains a conserved short linear motif responsible for binding β-TrCPE3 ubiquitin ligase, but
only when it is phosphorylated. Degradation of β-catenin is regulated by this N-terminal segment. When comparing the clinical findings for
all four patients with mutation in the N-terminal of β-catenin, consistent phenotypic features emerge with exception of atypical
hyperekplexia and impaired upward gaze unique to our case (Table 1). In some cases with CTNNB1 haploinsufficiency syndrome, there are
patients with additional features not seen in others . There is also, perhaps not surprisingly, inconsistency in the phenotype resulting
from heterozygous loss-of-function mouse and human mutations, with phenotype in humans being much more severe . This wide spectrum of
clinical features in cases with CTNNB1 mutations may result from compensatory activity of other protein partners that can assume the role of
β-catenin in its absence . Plakoglobin for instance (also called γ-catenin) has a very similar structure and ligand binding capacity to
β-catenin . The data presented here provides new insight into the role of β-catenin in brain development and its association with
neurodevelopmental disorders including hyperekplexia. CTNNB1 should be considered a candidate in patients with hyperekplexia in whom
classical genetic mechanisms identified to date are negative. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for
publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Wingless/Integrated Next Generation Sequencing β-catenin protein γ-aminobutyric acid Electroencephalogram T-cell factor-1
(Tcf-1) and lymphoid enhancing factor-1 (Lef-1) Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions AWW, MBS, BS and ALB performed the medical assessment. AMN, MN and DM performed genetic analysis. AWW, MBS and DM drafted the
manuscript with the help of all other authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank the
patient and parents for their cooperation and consent in relation to this study
