Up to 50% patients with sarcoidosis display extra-pulmonary disease. However, initial and isolated (ie, without lung disease) acute muscular
involvement associated with pseudo-malignant hypercalcemia is very uncommon. We report on 3 cases of life-threatening hypercalcemia
revealing florid and isolated acute sarcoid-like myositis. All patients complained of fatigue, progressive general muscle weakness, and
weight loss. Laboratory tests showed a severe life-threatening hypercalcemia (>3.4 mmol/L). Hypercalcemia was associated with increased
serum level of 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D and complicated with acute renal failure. One patient displayed acute pancreatitis due to hypercalcemia.
In all cases, PET-scan, performed for malignancy screening, incidentally revealed an intense, diffuse, and isolated muscular
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake consistent with diffuse non-necrotizing giant cells granulomatous myositis demonstrated by muscle biopsy. Of
note, creatine phosphokinase blood level was normal in all cases. No patients displayed the usual thoracic features of sarcoidosis. All
patients were treated with high dose steroids and achieved rapid, complete, and sustained remission. A review of English and French
publications in Medline revealed 5 similar published cases. Steroid-sensitive acute sarcoid-like myositis causing high calcitriol levels and
life-threatening hypercalcemia should be recognized as a separate entity. Sarcoidosis is a multi-system granulomatous disease of unknown
etiology. Although muscle involvement is described in up to 80% of patients with sarcoidosis,1 clinically significant myositis is rare.2,3
In such setting, acute myositis may even be less frequent.4,5 In addition, muscular sarcoidosis typically occurs in patients with already
known sarcoidosis.1,6 Eventually, 90% of patients with extra-pulmonary sarcoidosis have lung involvement. Hence, isolated muscular
sarcoidoisis is exceedingly rare.3 Calcitriol-mediated hypercalcemia is a well-known complication of sarcoidosis. Mild to severe
hypercalcemia, however, is detected in less than 5% of patients and pseudo-malignant hypercalcemia (>3.5 mmol/L) is very unusual.2,3,7,8
Here, we report on 3 cases of life-threatening hypercalcemia that revealed florid and isolated acute sarcoid-like myositis. We review the
literature and analyzed 5 other observations related to this very unusual disorder. The study included 3 patients who were followed in
Internal Medicine departments from 3 French university hospitals (Bichat Hospital, Louis Mourier Hospital, and Pitie-Salpêtrière Hospital,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris) between September 2010 and November 2013. Demographic, medical history, laboratory, imaging,
histology, treatment, and follow-up data were extracted from medical records. Our study is a retrospective human non-interventional study.
According to the Public Health French Law (art L 1121–1–1, art L 1121–1–2), approval from institutional review board and written consent are
not required for human non-interventional studies. For ethical consideration, patients were, however, informed that data that were collected
in medical records might be used for research study in accordance with privacy rule. The study protocol conforms to the ethical guidelines
of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki. MEDLINE (National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD) search was performed until August 2015 using
[sarcoid-like myositis] OR [granulomatous myositis] OR [muscular granulomatosis] OR [muscular sarcoidosis] OR AND items. Analysis was
limited to article published in English and French. Fifteen cases were identified. Eight cases were excluded because of irrelevant
(n = 3)9,10 or incomplete (n = 5) information regarding granulomatous disease or serum calcemia.4,11–13 Two cases were excluded because of
language issue (n = 2).14,15 A 34-year-old non-smoker man went to the emergency room (ER) for abdominal pain. He had no significant past
medical history and did not take any treatment. He complained of fatigue, general muscle weakness, and weight loss over a few weeks.
Physical examination was normal. C-reactive protein was measured at 23 mg/L. Blood creatinine was 214 μmol/L. Calcium blood level was
3.43 mmol/L. Serum lipase level was more than 20-fold the upper normal limit. Hemogram and liver tests were normal. The diagnosis of acute
pancreatitis caused by hypercalcemia was considered and the patient was hospitalized. Further, serum testing showed that serum levels of
parathormon (PTH), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTH-rp), and 25-OH vitamin D were low while 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D level was high.
Blood level of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) was slightly increased. Serum creatine phosphokinase level and protein electrophoresis
were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography only detected renal stones without parenchymal calcification. A PET-scan was performed and showed an
unexpected, intense, diffuse, and isolated muscular fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake (Figure 1A). Muscle Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
showed bilateral and symmetric abnormal signal intensity in the proximal thigh (Figure 2A). Of note, electromyography was normal. PET-scan
findings, (A) maximum intensity projection coronal images revealing multiple linear and nodular intense FDG uptakes in intercostal, back,
shoulder, and thigh muscles. (B) Complete regression of aforementioned pathologic FDG uptakes after 2 months of steroid treatment. MRI and
deltoid muscle biopsy findings, (A) coronal STIR weighted images showing a high signal intensity of the following muscles: gluteus maximus,
adductor brevis, adductor magnus, semi-membranosus, and lateral portion of the biceps femoris. (B) Paraffin-embedded longitudinal section
with haematoxylin-eosin stains showed two (arrows) intra muscular non-necrotizing granuloma (270×). (C) Large collection of epithelioid
histiocytes cells with small lymphocytic cells in the periphery were noted (540×). Deltoid muscle biopsy showed numerous intra muscular non-
necrotizing giant cells granuloma (Figure 2B and C). Chest-CT scan and pulmonary function testing were normal. Bronchoscopy with bronchial
biopsy and bronchoalveolar lavage did not revealed granuloma or alveolitis. The diagnosis of severe hypercalcemia caused by florid and
isolated sarcoid-like myositis was made. High-dose steroid treatment was initiated. Blood calcium and creatinine levels normalized in
several days. After 2 months of treatment, PET-scan (Figure 1B) and muscle MRI confirmed a full remission. The patient was still receiving
prednisone at daily dose of 9 mg, 21 months after diagnosis. No relapse occurred during follow-up. A 50-year-old man without past medical
history went to the ER for fatigue, general muscle weakness, and weight loss. She denied tobacco use and was treated with esomeprazole for
recurrent pyrosis. Physical examination was normal with 5/5 proximal and distal muscle strength. Standard biology test revealed a calcium
blood level of 3.81 mmol/L. Blood creatinine was 163 μmol/L. Complete blood cell count, electrolytes, C-reactive protein, creatine
phosphokinase, and liver tests were normal. Serum level of PTH was low. A PET scan performed for occult malignancy screening revealed an
isolated, diffuse, and intense FDG uptake in muscles. Electromyography was not performed. Muscle biopsy specimen obtained from the right
calf showed numerous intra muscular non-necrotizing giant cells granuloma. Intravenous rehydration, bisphosphonates, and steroids were
prescribed. Blood calcium and creatinine levels promptly normalized in several days. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up soon
after discharge. A 71-year-old non-smoking woman was referred for asthenia, weight loss, and increasing painful proximal leg and arm
weakness over a 2-week period. She had a past history of hypothyroidism, high blood pressure, dyslipidemia, and essential thrombocythemia.
Treatment included lercanidipin, levothyroxine, and low dose aspirin. Physical examination was normal. No muscle tenderness or atrophy was
noted. Blood screening showed a mild isolated anemia (Hb 9.8 g/dL). Blood calcium level was 3.9 mmol/L. Serum creatinine was 243 μmol/L.
C-reactive protein, creatinine phosphokinase, liver tests, and thyroid function tests were normal. PTH serum level was low. Serum protein
electrophoresis revealed a monoclonal IgG lambda protein measured at 3 g/L. Blood level of ACE and 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D were around 2-fold
the upper normal limit. A PET scan was performed for malignancy screening and showed isolated, intense, and diffuse FDG uptake of skeletal
muscles. Scare perilymphatic micronodules were noted on chest CT-scan without mediastinal nodal enlargement. A deltoid muscle biopsy
specimen revealed several diffuse, large, and non-necrotizing giant cells granuloma. The bone marrow smear analysis showed no abnormal
plasma cells. Treatment with prednisone, 45 mg daily and methotrexate (MTX), 15 mg weekly was started. The patient reported prompt clinical
improvement. Blood calcium and creatinine normalized in several days. Four months later, MTX was switched for mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
because of stomatitis while the patient was in complete remission. PET-scan control performed at 6 months of treatment normalized. Thirty
months later, she remains well on low dose prednisone and MMF. To our best knowledge, 8 cases of life-threatening hypercalcemia revealing
isolated acute sarcoid-like myositis, including our 3 cases, have been reported so far.16–20Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of these
patients. Median age was 51.5 (range: 34–75) years. Sex ratio (F/M) was 1.7/1. All patients suffered severe hypercalcemia ranging from 3.34
to 5.02 mmol/L complicated with renal failure. Progressive weakness was reported in all cases (8/8) contrasting with normal (5/8), and
painless (6/8) muscle strength. CPK blood level was always normal (8/8). Electromyogram showed a myopathic pattern (3/4). PET-scan revealed
an intense, diffuse, and isolated muscular FDG uptake (5/5). In all cases, PET-scan was performed for malignancy screening and incidentally
revealed the muscle disease. Muscle biopsy showed diffuse non-necrotizing granulomas in all cases. Of note, thoracic features of sarcoïdosis
(ie, bilateral hilar and mediastinal nodal enlargement and lung micronodules with a perilymphatic distribution) were absent in all but one
case. All patients received corticosteroids. Immunosuppressive drugs were prescribed in two cases. All but one patient achieved rapid,
complete, and sustained remission under treatment with a median follow-up of 18.5 (range: 3–24) months. One patient died from acute
congestive heart failure with autopsy revealing a disseminated giant cell granulomatous process affecting skeletal, cardiac, and
gastrointestinal smooth muscle.17 Relapse occurred in only one case.20 Characteristic of Studied Patients and Literature Review Mild to
severe hypercalcemia is detected in less than 5% of patients and hypercalcemia requiring emergency treatment as reported here is very
uncommon.3,7,8 The hypercalcemia in sarcoidosis is mostly the result of increased absorption of intestinal calcium due to increased
1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D production by granuloma.8,17,21 In our study, the elevated (or inappropriately normal) 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D associated
with suppressed PTH pointed to the presence of excessive 1-hydroxylase activity by sarcoid macrophages. Accordingly, treatment with
prednisone led to dramatic clinical improvement. Sarcoid macrophages have been reported to produce PTH-rp that may contribute to
hypercalcemia as well.22,23 In our series, PTH-rp was measured in only one case but was undetectable. Asymptomatic muscle involvement is
common in systemic sarcoidosis, with about 50% to 80% of routine muscle biopsies showing abnormalities.6 Muscle symptoms are, however, only
observed in less than 0.5% of cases and are rarely inaugural.2,3 In our cases, the pattern of muscular involvement did not fit with any of
the 3 classical—chronic, nodular, and acute-myositis types described in patients with sarcoidosis.1,4,5,24–26 Indeed, the course of chronic
sarcoid myositis—the most common pattern—is characteristically slow and steadily progressive, with a limited benefit of steroid treatment.
The nodular type of sarcoid muscle involvement is characterized by palpable nodules that do not lead to weakness or functional disability.
The acute sarcoid myositis mimics the presentation of acute polymyositis with elevated CPK blood levels. Moreover, muscle involvement in
classic systemic sarcoidosis is not known to be associated with severe hypercalcemia (Table 2). Sarcoid and Sarcoid-like Myositis: Differing
Patterns6,27–33 Sarcoid lung involvement occurs in 80% to 90% of patients with extra-pulmonary sarcoidosis. A typical sarcoidosis
presentation with uncommon locations to a single organ and no lung involvement is clearly challenging.2,3 Our series highlights the high
diagnostic yield of PET-scan in such setting. In most cases, muscular involvement, despite its extensive pattern, was not clinically
suspected because of unspecific symptoms and normal CPK. Only PET-scan—that was performed to disclose underlying malignancy in a context of
profound hypercalcemia—clearly pointed to a diffuse and active muscle inflammation. Moreover, PET-scan appeared useful for monitoring the
treatment response. In conclusion, the isolated granulomatous myositis causing high calcitriol levels should be considered a separate
entity, distinct from systemic sarcoidosis. Severe hypercalcemia revealing a diffuse granulomatous disorder limited to muscles might be life
threatening and appears highly steroid-sensitive. Abbreviations: ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme, Ca = calcium, CPK = creatine
phosphokinase, Cr = creatine, ER = emergency room, F = female, FDG = fluorodeoxyglucose, HS = high signal, M = male, MMF = mycophenolate
mofetil, MRI = Muscle Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MTX = methotrexate, N = normal, NA = not available, PTH = parathormon(PTH), PTH-rp =
parathyroid hormone-related protein, STIR = short TI inversion recovery, TTT = treatment This research received no specific grant from any
funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
