Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH-a) was one of the most used therapies in the treatment of endometriosis. But unfortunately, no
literatures realized GnRH-a may be related to thrombosis until now. The case below was exactly about thromboembolism taking place after
using GnRH-a because of estradiol (E2) peak short-time after injection. A 50-year-old woman presented to our institution with menorrhagia.
Her medical history was notable for adenomyosis and dysmenorrhea for more than 10 years. In January 2014, the patient had blood transfusion
because of anemia and progestogen (norethisterone) to control the menorrhagia. Two months later, after stopping norethisterone for 2 days,
her vaginal bleeding increased. Subsequently, she was prescribed Marvelon for 3 months. On April 15, the patient went to our institution,
the physical examination showed that her uterine was enlarged to 26-week size. She had curettage (dilation and curettage) followed by GnRH-a
(leuprorelin acetate microspheres for injection, Shanghai Livzon Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., China) 3.75 mg subcutaneous injection, and was
advised to stop Marvelon. Vaginal bleeding recurred 3 days later, and she continued to take oral norethisterone 5 mg every 8 h. After 24 h,
she felt unwell with decreased urine output. The blood test showed sodium 130 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 11.4 mmol/L, creatinine 436
μmol/L, C-reactive protein 303.6 mg/L, white blood cell count 27.6 × 109/L, hemoglobin 56 g/L, carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) 334 U/ml,
alanine transaminase 103 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 110 U/L, and D-Dimer 1.5 μg/ml. She was admitted to hospital subsequently. Upon
admission, the patient was transfused with 4 units packed red blood cell. Further, blood test showed β2-glycoprotein 1 Immunoglobulin AGM
(Ig AGM) antibody positive, anticardiolipin antibody (ACA) 35.5 RU/ml, and antinuclear antibodies negative. Upper abdominal and pelvic
computerized tomography showed hematomata and bilateral pulmonary exudative process with bilateral pleural effusion. Ultrasound of bilateral
kidney and renal artery: bilateral kidney diffuse lesions, sparse renal blood flow, and abnormal bilateral renal artery spectrum. We
gradually reduced the dose of norethisterone. Her vaginal bleeding subsided. However, the renal function continued to deteriorate. As a
result, the patient was transferred to nephrology department for hemodialysis. Her renal condition was improved after hemodialysis
treatment. Nevertheless, her pulmonary ventilation and perfusion scanning [Figure 1a and 1b] showed a defect in lower lobe of the left lung,
which did not match the pulmonary ventilation imaging, led to the diagnosis of “pulmonary embolism.” Her renal biopsy showed: 3/17
glomerular sclerosis, 7/17 coagulation necrosis, a portion of tubular epithelial necrosis, bare basement membrane formation, a large number
of cellular pipe, particle of tube formation; a large number of lymph plasma cells and eosinophil granulocyte infiltration in interstitium,
arteriolar wall thickening, and hyaline degeneration. The Seldinger technique of renal arteriography taken on May 8 showed that left renal
artery–vascular distribution was sparse, and the right was in normal vascular distribution. Brain magnetic resonance imaging suggested that
there was ischemia in the white matter region of right frontal lobe. ACA was retested and the value was 21.4 RU/ml, β2-glycoprotein 1 IgAGM
antibody was positive. At this point, the patient was diagnosed as catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome (CAPS) because of the onset of
acute kidney injury with kidney embolism, pulmonary embolism, and cerebral infarction within 1 week. The patient received low molecular
weight heparin and methylprednisolone (40 mg daily), amlodipine tablet 5 mg daily. Her physical condition was gradually improved. Five
months later, she underwent hysterectomy + bilateral tubal resection + bilateral ovarian cystectomy. (a and b) Pulmonary ventilation and
perfusion scanning: defect in left lower lobe of lung, which did not match the pulmonary ventilation imaging. In this report, we observed a
case of a woman with adenomyosis who developed pulmonary embolism and multiple organs failure shortly after the injection of GnRH-a. GnRH-a
was a synthetic derivative of GnRH. In the initial stage, it could promote secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating
hormone (FSH) by binding to GnRH receptor competing with GnRH. When continuously administered, pituitary was desensitized, releasing of GnRH
would be suppressed. Therefore, there was a short E2 peak in early stage. Some research data showed that within 12 h after injection, the
concentration of serum FSH increased by 5 times, LH increased by 10 times, and E2 increased by 4 times. Estrogen could lead to increase of
synthesis of several coagulation factors including fibrinogen, factor II, VII, and X, and at the same time, thrombin inhibitors such as
synthetic and activities of antithrombin III, protein C, and protein S were reduced, which made the blood easier to coagulate, more prone to
cause thrombosis. Hence, we speculated that the patient was in high coagulation state during the long history of adenomyosis, thrombosis
took place because of triggering of E2 peak after injection of GnRH-a. It was notable that the patient had multiple risk factors which led
to hyper-coagulation state, the details were as follows: The effect of oral contraceptive on coagulation function was mainly related to
estrogen. Early literature showed that there was a risk of thrombosis caused by oral contraceptive, such as Marvelon. It could lead to
8.6/millions fatal venous thrombosis, especially when the patient complicated with genetic defects which could induce thrombosis. It was
also found that the risk of thrombosis due to oral contraceptives was not increased during therapy time, the greatest risk was in the 1st
year. The patient in this study had a history of taking Marvelon orally for nearly 6 months; it might be one of the risk factors that led to
high coagulation in blood. In 2012, Yamashiro et al. reported 4 cases of adenomyosis complicated with cerebral infarction. This same team
reported a case of adenomyosis patient with occurrence of cerebral thrombosis without apparent cause in 2014. The authors thought blood loss
anemia caused by adenomyosis and elevated levels of CA125 could promote the high coagulation state and lead to cerebral thrombosis. There
were many studies taking anemia as a risk factor of embolism. By investigating its pathogenesis, some people thought that was due to
thrombocytosis after anemia, but other theories thought that quantity of platelet did not increase when anemia, the thrombosis was caused by
hematic high coagulation state because of long-time blood loss. Moreover, some studies indicated that hypoxia damage of terminal arteries
caused by anemia would result in thrombosis. CA125 was a marker of epithelial ovarian tumor, and a kind of sticky protein that could lead to
hematic high coagulation state. This case had long-term severe blood loss anemia, accompanied by abnormally high CA125 level, these factors
made blood in a high coagulation state for a long time, and eventually led to thrombosis on a stimulation of E2 peak caused by GnRH-a.
Notably, the patient was diagnosed as CAPS finally. The titers of ACA of the patient were not high, but β2-glycoprotein 1 IgAGM antibody was
continuing positive for a period of 6 weeks. Positive result of antiphospholipid antibodies was one of the high risk factors of thrombosis.
It was reported that β2-glycoprotein 1 antibody had strong correlation with thrombosis. Because of the limitation of our clinical
laboratory, we could not examine other coagulation factors, such as protein C or S, antithrombin III. Deficiencies of those factors were
also the cause of embolism. In conclusion, this case of thrombosis may be multi-factorial, but the occurrence of thrombosis had close
temporal relationship to GnRH-a administration. Many investigations believed that GnRH-a could reduce inflammation and angiogenesis, relieve
pain, improve anemia condition, and could be considered as an effective therapy to preserve the uterus. The case suggested that GnRH-a
should be used with caution in adenomyosis patients who had recently used oral contraceptive agents or other estrogenic drugs, chronic
severe anemia, or high CA125. Coagulation function should be checked before the use of GnRH-a, perhaps, it should be used after anemia has
been corrected and blood coagulation status has been improved. It may be necessary to give prophylactic anticoagulation therapy in high
coagulation state. More importantly, we should inform patients about the risk of thromboembolism. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
Edited by: Yi Cui
