Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a severe, debilitating, and complex psychiatric disorder with multiple causative factors. An increasing number of
studies have determined that rare variations play an important role in its etiology. A somatic mutation is a rare form of genetic variation
that occurs at an early stage of embryonic development and is thought to contribute substantially to the development of SCZ. The aim of the
study was to explore the novel pathogenic somatic single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and somatic insertions and deletions (indels) of SCZ.
One Chinese family with a monozygotic (MZ) twin pair discordant for SCZ was included. Whole exome sequencing was performed in the co-twin
and their parents. Rigorous filtering processes were conducted to prioritize pathogenic somatic variations, and all identified SNVs and
indels were further confirmed by Sanger sequencing. One somatic SNV and two somatic indels were identified after rigorous selection
processes. However, none was validated by Sanger sequencing. This study is not alone in the failure to identify pathogenic somatic
variations in MZ twins, suggesting that exonic somatic variations are extremely rare. Further efforts are warranted to explore the potential
genetic mechanism of SCZ. Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a severe, debilitating, and complex psychiatric disorder that contributes substantially to
the global disease burden. As a multifactorial disease, a variety of genetic and environmental factors play roles in the etiology. Genome-
wide association studies have identified a number of common risk loci, but all common polygenic variations combined account for only 32–36%
of the genetic risk for SCZ. It is thought that the so-called “missing heritability” can in part be explained by rare variations of large
effect size. Next generation sequencing technology enables the identification of novel rare susceptibility loci at the whole genome and
exome levels. In recent years, researchers have characterized a polygenic burden arising primarily from rare, disruptive mutations
distributed across many genes enriched in discrete biological processes such as synaptic network function. Discordant monozygotic (MZ) twins
provide a unique window into the genetic factors underlying the disease phenotype. Several studies have shown that phenotypic discordance
between MZ twins can be attributed to rare sequences differences caused by de novo events such as chromosomal mosaicism (e.g., the
discordant karyotypes mos 47, XX, +21/46, XX and 46, XX), differing copy number variations (CNVs) and distinct single nucleotides. The
genetic differences between MZ twins can be regarded as an extreme form of somatic mosaicism resulting from postzygotic mutations that
occurred at an early stage of embryonic development and grew into two populations of cells with genotypes different from that of the single
fertilized egg. The genetic comparison of discordant MZ twins represents a promising paradigm for identifying rare novel candidates that may
help to account for some or all missing heritability. Discordant MZ twin pairs have been used previously to investigate the potential
mechanism of SCZ. Many studies have focused on differences in DNA methylation between discordant MZ twins, and series of genes have been
identified to play a role in gene networks relevant in the context of SCZ. However, individual differences in DNA methylation are correlated
with DNA sequence variations. The genes that affected by differential methylation between discordant twins also harbor various types of
discordant sequence variations that should not be overlooked. CNVs, a predominant form of DNA structural variation, have been the subject of
recent focus. Maiti et al. observed somatic deletions (14q32.11, 8q11.21) and duplication (19q13.41) in SCZ-affected twins, and Castellani
et al. observed an additional novel somatic deletion (7q11.21). Nevertheless, some studies have failed to confirm somatic CNVs in discordant
twin pairs, suggesting that there may be other underlying genetic causes of the SCZ discordant phenotype including single nucleotide
variations (SNVs) and short insertions and deletions (indels), which are undetectable by the arrays used to detect CNVs. In a recent study,
Castellani et al. performed whole genome sequencing together with genome-wide methylation analysis without the validation step of Sanger
sequencing in two families with MZ twins discordant for SCZ. A total of 71 genes harboring somatic SNVs and indels were identified in
affected twins. Nine missense mutations were observed in exonic regions. Exonic regions containing about 85% of known disease-related
variants are valuable to be explored. To the best of our knowledge, the aforementioned study is the only one to examine differences in
somatic SNV and indel profiles in MZ twins discordant for SCZ. Evidence from further studies is needed. Therefore, we conducted high depth
exome sequencing of a family with an MZ twin pair discordant for SCZ to explore possible relevant somatic mutations. This study was approved
by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Mental Health, the Sixth Hospital, Peking University. All subjects understood the purpose and
procedure of the study and provided informed written consents prior to enrollment. We sequenced the exomes of one family with a pair of
twins discordant for SCZ [Figure 1] from the Sichuan Province of China. We included the elder sister of the twins in the study to get more
genetic information. All family members were of Chinese Han descent. The demographic and clinical data of the family are shown in Table 1.
The MZ twins were 25-year-old males exhibiting highly similar physical characteristics, including height, weight, pupil color, hair color,
and hair texture, and could not be easily distinguished by individuals other than their parents. Twin 1 was healthy and without mental
health problems. Twin 2 had been diagnosed with SCZ and major depressive disorder. He had experienced delusions of reference and
persecution, auditory hallucinations, and thought broadcasting since the age of 19 years. Then, these symptoms gradually lessened with
regular medication. He began to feel depressed at the age of 24 years, characterized by diminished interest in his usual activities, a lack
of energy, poor concentration, and insomnia. The depressive symptoms lasted for 6 months and then remitted. The parents and the elder sister
of the twins were all unaffected. There was no family history or personal history of severe psychiatric or neurological illness. Pedigree
chart of a family with discordant monozygotic twins. Twin 2 (II-3) was diagnosed with schizophrenia and major depressive disorder. Shaded
and unshaded symbols indicate affected and unaffected individuals, respectively. Squares and circles represent males and females,
respectively. Summary of demographic and clinical family data *The score of PANSS is composed of three components: positive score (P=8),
negative score (N=11), and general psychopathology score (G=30); †the items related to apathy, slow response, poverty of thought, and lack
of social contact were scored in SANS; ‡the items related to delusion were scored in SAPS. SCID-I/P: Structured Clinical Interview from the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV-TR Axis I Disorders-Patient; PANSS: Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale; SAPS: Scale for the
Assessment of Positive Symptoms; SANS: Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms; PSP: Personal and Social Performance scale; GAF:
Global Assessment of Functioning; IQW: Intelligence quotient estimated by Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Adult-Chinese Revised; SCZ:
Schizophrenia; MD: Major depressive disorder; –: Not available. All family members completed the Structured Clinical Interview from the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV-TR Axis I Disorders-Patient. Diagnoses were made by an experienced psychiatrist according to Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Revision criteria; and were confirmed by one senior psychiatrist. We used
three scales, including the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale, the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms, and the Scale for the
Assessment of Negative Symptoms to rate symptom severity. Overall individual and social functioning were assessed by the Personal and Social
Performance scale and the Global Assessment of Functioning. The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Adult-Chinese Revised was used to estimate
intelligence quotient. A standardized questionnaire was designed to collect demographic data and detailed information regarding the
childhood environment, developmental history, and family history of the individuals. Genomic DNA was extracted from leukocytes obtained from
peripheral blood using standard methods. Whole exome sequencing was performed for four members of the family (I-1, I-2, II-2, and II-3).
Targeted enrichment was conducted using the NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Exome + Untranslated Regions (UTR) Library (Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI,
USA), and exon-enriched DNA was sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencing platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA) according to the
manufacturer's instructions to obtain 125 bp paired-end reads. FASTQ files (i.e., the raw data) were filtered to remove low-quality reads,
and the remaining high-quality reads were mapped onto a human reference genome (hg19) using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner version 0.6.2
(http://sourceforge.net/projets/bio-bwa/). Variants such as SNVs and indels were called using a pipeline according to the Genome Analysis
Toolkit version 3.1 software (https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/). Parameters of VariantFiltration for SNVs were set as follows: QD <2.0,
MQ <40.0, FS >60.0, HaplotypeScore >13.0, MQRankSum < −12.5, and ReadPosRankSum < −8.0. Those for indels were set as follows: QD <2.0, FS
>200.0, and ReadPosRankSum < −20.0. ANNOVAR software (http://annovar.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/) was used to annotate the variants.
Sorting intolerant from tolerant (SIFT) (http://sift.jcvi.org/) and polymorphism phenotyping 2 (PolyPhen2)
(http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph 2/) were used to assess the pathogenicity of protein-altering variants. Evolutionary conservation was
evaluated using genomic evolutionary rate profiling (GERP++) (http://mendel.stanford.edu/SidowLab/downloads/gerp/). Several rigorous
filtering steps were performed to prioritize SNVs and indels: (1) variants that were present in the affected twin and that were unshared by
the healthy twin and the parents were included; (2) the variants exhibited more than 20 × coverage; (3) variants for which the percentage of
reads supporting the newly identified allele (defined as mutation frequency) was >20%, with at least three reads supporting the mutation,
were chosen;(4) variants in splicing regions and protein-coding regions, such as missense, frameshift, stop-loss and stop-gain mutations
were included; (5) reserve variants with a minor allele frequency ≤1% in a public database such as dbSNP 138, 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3
(released May 2013), the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Sequencing Project (ESP 6500), or the Complete Genomics CG46
database were chosen; (6) select variants were predicted to be damaging if they had a SIFT score <0.05 and a PolyPhen2 score >0.85; and (7)
conservative variants (GERP++ score >2.0) were selected. Sanger sequencing was performed on an ABI 3730XL Genetic Analyzer (PE Applied
Biosystems, Forest City, CA, USA) for four members of the family (I-1, I-2, II-2, and II-3) to validate the variants prioritized by the
filtering steps. Forward and reverse primer sequences for the candidate loci are listed in Table 2. List of candidate variants in the
affected twin after filtering SNV: Single nucleotide variation; F: Forward primer; R: Reverse primer. A quality summary for whole exome
sequencing is provided in Table 3. An average of 96.9% of the target regions (96.5 Mb) were captured in each exome, and the mean depth of
the target region was 136×. In addition, 94.9% of the captured target exons were covered by ten or more reads. A total of 580,849 variants
(511,951 SNVs and 68,898 indels) were called in the family, of which 84,545 variants (83,131 SNVs and 1414 indels) were in exonic regions
and 18 variants (14 SNVs and 4 indels) were in splicing regions. Whole exome sequencing quality report data Mb: Million bases. There were
127,762 and 127,186 SNVs present in each twin, respectively, and 124,185 (97.4%) of the SNVs were shared between the twins, supporting their
monozygosity. Twin 1 and twin 2 shared 79.7% of the total SNPs with their father and 80.0% with their mother, providing proof of the
biological relationship of the family. Three candidate somatic variations passed our rigorous filtering steps [Figure 2], including 1 SNV in
CEP57, 1 deletion in CTAGE5, and 1 insertion in ORC2 [Table 2]. Unfortunately, none of the variants was confirmed by Sanger DNA sequence
analysis, as shown in Figure 3. Illustration of the variant reduction procedure. Three de novo candidates were identified. MAF: Minor allele
frequency; SIFT: Sorting intolerant from tolerant; PolyPhen: Polymorphism phenotyping; GERP: Genomic evolutionary rate profiling; SNV:
Single nucleotide variation. Validation of the mutations by Sanger sequencing of the family. We failed to confirm 1 SNV and 2 indels. SNV:
Single nucleotide variation; Indels: Insertions and deletions. This study pioneers the application of a family with MZ twins discordant for
SCZ to explore pathogenic SNVs and indels using whole exome sequencing. Sanger sequencing was performed in our study to confirm all
candidates. One somatic SNV and 2 somatic indels with the potential to be pathogenic in the affected twin were identified. However, none of
these variations was validated via Sanger sequencing. Although one previously reported study has been successful in the identification of
somatic variations in MZ twins discordant for SCZ using high-throughput sequencing, we are not alone in the failure to identify convincing
somatic mutations that could be responsible for the discordant phenotypes between MZ twins. Many studies using a similar design have
likewise failed. For instance, whole genome or exome sequencing studies in MZ twins discordant for Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, congenital heart defect, and congenital hypothyroidism have failed to identify significant variants. These
negative results support the notion that somatic variants between MZ twins are extremely rare. The rate of early postzygotic mutation is
exceptionally low. In a recent study, only 1 and 8 somatic SNVs were identified in two pairs of healthy MZ twins, respectively, at the whole
genomic level, and none was located in coding regions. The rate of early postzygotic SNVs is estimated to be 0.04 × 10−9 and 0.34 × 10−9 per
generation per position among two twin pairs, which equates to one-thirtieth and one-third of the gremlin mutation rate. Thus, the
occurrence of somatic de novo mutation is so rare that it is not easily observed, especially in exonic regions, which account for only 1–2%
of the genome. Given that definitive differences of SNVs and indels to explain the SCZ discordance were absent in our twin pair, other
possibilities should be considered. First, rare and large de novo CNVs have emerged as an important genomic factor in psychiatric disease
and occur eight times more frequently in patients with sporadic SCZ; we could not exclude the possibility that the co-twins carry different
CNV profiles. Epigenetic differences could also explain the discordance in our twin pair. Methylation differences between identical twins
have been demonstrated as early as the newborn stage and accumulate with age, possibly resulting in phenotypic differences. Integration DNA
sequencing and other technologies, such as CNV and epigenetic analysis, to explore the potential mechanisms of SCZ should be considered.
Third, the tissue-specific somatic variation could explain discordance. Somatic variations affect various cell types and tissues depending
on the time at which the mutation occurs. In our twin pair, we did not detect somatic variations in leukocytes, but this does not mean that
other tissues, such as the central nervous system (CNS) and other tissues originating from the ectodermal layer, do not harbor pathogenic
somatic mutations. Thus, the detection of brain tissue or hair follicle (which is of ectodermal origin) should be considered in the future.
Experimental limitations should also be considered. Whole exome sequencing primarily detects protein coding regions and a small fraction of
sequences adjacent to coding exons. Thus, most noncoding regions, such as intergenic, intronic, and 3’- or 5’-UTR, are not covered. It is
possible that genetic differences might exist in regions outside the assessable coding sequences. In conclusion, we did not identify
convincing pathogenic SNVs and indels in coding regions by whole exome sequencing in the family with MZ twins discordant for SCZ. This
finding suggests that the pathogenic genetic difference between MZ twins is too rare to be detected. Further efforts are needed to
investigate the potential mechanisms of SCZ, such as noncoding DNA, CNS-specific somatic variations, and different profiles of CNVs and
epigenetics. This work was supported by a grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81201039). There are no conflicts
of interest. Edited by: Qiang Shi
