The aim of this study was to add a new case of primary non-Hodgkin's malignant lymphoma of the vulva to the literature and to review the
current literature. We searched the PubMed/MEDLINE databases for previous case reports using the key words “non-Hodgkin's malignant lymphoma
of the vulva,” “vulvar lymphoma,” and “primary vulvar non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.” We found 29 cases of primary vulvar non-Hodgkin's malignant
lymphoma of the vulva reported until 2015. Among them, only 8 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), classified according to the
most recent 2008 WHO classification, were reported. Moreover, only few studies reported the therapeutic management and clinical follow-up of
patients affected by this condition. Due to its uncommon presentation, the primary non-Hodgkin's malignant lymphoma of the vulva can be
undiagnosed; thus gynecologists, oncologists, and pathologists should be aware of this condition, as a correct diagnosis is essential for an
appropriate therapeutic management. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) may involve the gynecological tract in the 30% of cases, most often as a
manifestation of systemic disease.1 In order of frequency, ovary (49%), uterus (29%), Fallopian tubes (11%), vagina (7%), and vulva (4%) can
be involved.2 Therefore, vulvar NHL is quite rare and only very few cases of primary NHL involving the vulva have been reported in the
literature (Table 1); thus it often poses a diagnostic challenge if its existence is not suspected.3 Primary NHL of the Vulva Reported in
Literature Vulvar NHL may present as a localized, solid, nontender mass confined to the clitoris or Bartholin's glands4; less often it can
spread within the subcutaneous fibroadipose tissue of the labia maiora.5 We report the case of a woman diagnosed with a primary non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma of the upper part of the left labium maior of the vulva, arising in a background of a persistent lymphoma-like lesion
(pseudolymphoma) of the inguino-femoral region diagnosed 1 year previously. The uncommon presenting site of this entity warrants great
diagnostic accuracy because of its prognostic and therapeutic implications. A 43-year-old woman presented to our Institution with a 6 months
history of a nontender mass in the upper part of the left labium maior. She was nulliparous and a moderate tobacco user
(5–6 cigarettes/day). One year earlier, the patient had developed a solid nontender mass within the left inguino femoral region. She
underwent surgery in another Institution and a fibroadipose mass of 6.5 × 4.5 × 3.8 cm was excised. The mass had sclerotic areas and blood
vessels in the context of friable fibroadipose tissue, with lymphocyte infiltration. The diagnosis was subcutaneous pseudolymphoma. When the
woman presented to our Institution, a gynecological examination was performed and revealed a solid mass of ∼3 cm, with irregular margins, in
the upper third of the left labium maior. This mass was movable and nontender. A recurrence of the subcutaneous pseudolymphoma previously
diagnosed was observed in the left inguino femoral region. The vagina and anal sphincter were clear of disease. The pelvic examination
revealed normal cervix and vagina, and uterus of normal size with no palpable adnexal masses. Routine laboratory tests were normal. An
abdominal CT scan with contrast revealed a left inguino-femoral adenopathy and a solid mass, without specific acquisition of contrast,
within the left vulvar region. No hepatosplenomegaly was detected. Thus we decided to excise the vulvar mass to get an accurate
histopathologic diagnosis of the lesion. Wide local excision, with 1 cm clear peripheral margins, was performed. The mass was 3.2 cm in the
maximum diameter and the cut surface showed a multilobular soft mass of whitish color, without necrosis or hemorrhage. The histological
examination (Figure 1A and B) showed a diffuse population of medium- to large-sized malignant lymphoid cells, which displayed vescicular and
irregular nuclei with up to 4 membrane-bound nucleoli. Mitotic figures and apoptotic bodies were evident, as well as an admixed inflammatory
infiltrate, mainly consisting of neutrophils, eosinophils, and lymphocytes. Immunohistological findings. The lesion showed a diffuse
malignant lymphoid population of medium- to large-sized cells, which displayed vescicular and irregular nuclei with evident nucleoli (A, B:
Hematoxylin & Eosin, C: diffuse immunopositivity for CD20; D: positive staining for BCL6; E: positive staining for CD10; F: positive
staining for ICSAT/MUM1). 2.5-micron sections were cut and immunohistochemical analysis was performed in an automated system (Benchmark-XT,
Ventana, Tucson, AZ). Neoplastic cells were positive for the following antibodies (Figure 1B–F):CD20 (monoclonal, clone L26, dilution 1:200,
Dako, Glostrup, Denmark)CD10 (monoclonal, clone SP67, prediluted, Ventana, Tucson, AZ)BCL-2 (monoclonal, clone 124, prediluted, Ventana,
Tucson, AZ)CD30 (monoclonal, clone berH2, prediluted, Ventana, Tucson, AZ)ki67 (40%) (monoclonal, clone 30.9, prediluted, Ventana, Tucson,
AZ)BCL-6 (monoclonal, clone G/191E/A8, prediluted, Cell Marque, Rocklin, CA)ICSAT (Interferon Consensus Sequencebinding protein for
Activated T cells)/MUM1 (multiple myeloma oncogene 1) (polyclonal, dilution 1:250, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX). CD20 (monoclonal,
clone L26, dilution 1:200, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) CD10 (monoclonal, clone SP67, prediluted, Ventana, Tucson, AZ) BCL-2 (monoclonal, clone
124, prediluted, Ventana, Tucson, AZ) CD30 (monoclonal, clone berH2, prediluted, Ventana, Tucson, AZ) ki67 (40%) (monoclonal, clone 30.9,
prediluted, Ventana, Tucson, AZ) BCL-6 (monoclonal, clone G/191E/A8, prediluted, Cell Marque, Rocklin, CA) ICSAT (Interferon Consensus
Sequencebinding protein for Activated T cells)/MUM1 (multiple myeloma oncogene 1) (polyclonal, dilution 1:250, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Dallas, TX). Neoplastic lymphoid cells did not react with the following antibodies: CD3 (monoclonal, 2GV6, prediluted, Ventana), CD5
(monoclonal, clone 4C7, dilution 1:100, Novocastra-Leica biosystems, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK), ALK-1 (monoclonal, clone ALK01, prediluted,
Ventana). The final pathologic diagnosis was diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). According to the immunohistochemical markers expressed,
this DLBCL belonged to the subgroup with germinal center B cell-like (GCB) profile, which has shown a better prognosis compared with non
GCB-like lymphomas.6 The definition of primary lymphoma was given, according to criteria adopted by Kosari et al.7 Molecular analysis
further demonstrated the monoclonal origin of the lesion (Figure 2). B-cell clonality determination using the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and capillary electrophoresis (GENESCAN analysis). Analysis of 3 different PCRs carried out using primers for FR1, FR2, FR3 regions
(forward primer), and JH region (reverse primer): a single band consistent with single monoallelic clonal rearrangement is indicated by a
red arrow; polyclonal background is indicated by a green arrow. JH = joining region of heavy chain; PCR = polymerase chain reaction. At the
time of diagnosis, the patient had no constitutional symptoms and the laboratory data were as follows: serum lactate dehydrogenase was
255 U/L (230–460 U/L); serum β2 microglobin was 1.49 mg/L (0.8–2.40 μg/mL). The blood routine examination and the erythrocyte sedimentation
rate were normal. Urine occult blood was negative. Urea was 31 mg/dL (10–50 mg/dL), uric acid was 3.5 mg/dL (2.40–6.00 mg/dL). Serologic
evaluations of HCV, HBV, and HIV infection were negative. K and lambda free chain ratio was normal. The PET-CT performed 40 days after the
vulvar excisional surgery showed a mass in the left inguinal area (>5 cm, bulk), and a smaller one (2 cm) in a right inguinal node with
elevated 18-FDG activity, which did not undergo surgical excision. The PET-CT showed a positive 2 cm mass in the left breast that was
biopsied and diagnosed as fibroadenoma. Moreover, a staging bone marrow biopsy in the iliac crest was then performed and resulted negative
for neoplasia. In conclusion the patient had a stage IIE disease, according to revised staging for primary nodal lymphoma and Lugano
classification.8 Regarding the prognostic factors we considered an aa-IPI 0 (low risk) and MInT unfavorable subgroup (>5 cm).9,10 Due to the
MInT unfavorable group and the age, the patient underwent to R-CHOP chemotherapy (rituximab 375 mg/m2 i.v. day 1, Endoxan 750 mg/m2 i.v. day
2, doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 i.v. day 2, and prednisone 100 mg from day 2 to day 6 every 14 days for 6 cycles) without consolidation radiotherapy
considering the fast achievement of complete response after 2 cycles of treatment assessed with PET-CT scan. The treatment was well
tolerated with the use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) for 6 days from day 4 from the beginning of the chemotherapy.
Prophylaxis with fluconazole 100 mg a day, cotrimoxazole 1 tablet a day, and acyclovir 800 mg a day were also administered. At the first
follow-up visit, 6 months after the end of chemotherapy, the patient showed a complete remission of the disease, without clinical signs or
symptoms and no pathological findings on PET-CT scan; the routine laboratory tests were normal. A signed written consent was obtained from
the patient for this case report. Primary vulvar NHL is a rare entity and, as such, has been reported only in single cases and in few
limited series, most of which lacked a detailed immunohistochemical analyses and molecular tests (which often were not available at the time
of diagnosis) and used out-dated classifications. Moreover, sometimes authors used archaic terminology, that is, “reticulum cell sarcoma” or
“lymphosarcoma”: those cases are now hypothesized to represent DLBCL, according to the most recent classification.11 Furthermore, only few
previous studies reported the therapeutic management and the clinical follow-up of patients affected by this condition. Until 2015, 29 cases
of primary vulvar non-Hodgkin's malignant lymphoma were reported (Table 1): among them only 8 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), classified according to the most recent 2008 WHO classification, were identified. Moreover, only 3 cases of vulvar pseudolymphoma
(lymphoma-like) have been reported, only 1 of which evolving into lymphoma of the vulva.4,12,13 There is increasing evidence that these
tumors may have been underdiagnosed by either the gynecologists (because of their low incidence and unusual site of presentation) or by the
pathologists (because they could be mistaken for different malignancies or for inflammatory lesions). The differential diagnosis of vulvar
NHL includes inflammatory conditions (e.g., lichenoid dermatoses, lymphoma-like lesions), carcinomas (e.g., neuroendocrine carcinomas,
Merkel's cell carcinoma, poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma or cutaneous adnexa carcinoma), Hodgkin lymphoma and lesions with
small round blue cell or sarcomatoid components (e.g., melanoma, extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor). Reactive
processes are usually superficial, band-like, noninfiltrating and they are commonly composed of a polymorphous population of lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and histiocytes without atypia.1,4 Poorly differentiated epithelial tumors may have a broad, discohesive pattern that might
mimic DLBCL. However, focal intercellular bridges, keratinization and the association with an in situ component, are all clues to the
diagnosis of an epithelial neoplasm. On the contrary, sclerosis that compartimentalizes neoplastic lymphoid cells in DLBCL may be mistaken
for cluster and cords of a carcinoma. Immunohistochemical stains and, when needed, molecular tests are of invaluable help in making this
distinction.1,4 The most used treatment for vulvar lymphoma is actually R-CHOP therapy, with or without consolidation radiotherapy.14
Recently, however, several studies have demonstrated that the cell of origin of DLBCL is of particular clinical relevance. Indeed, the
distinction between Activated B Cell (ABC) and Germinal Centre B Cell (GBC) DLBCLs is not only important from a scientific point of view,
but also has clinical implications, as these subtypes are characterized by differences in the overall survival when treated with the
standard treatment of rituximab and CHOP chemotherapy (R-CHOP). The majority of patients diagnosed with GCB-DLBCL respond favorably to
R-CHOP, whereas R-CHOP appear to be less effective in ABC-DLBCL patients.15 For these reasons, we treated this case of vulvar lymphoma,
derived from GCB, with the standard R-CHOP.16 Even if in previous studies the dose intensification of R-CHOP by a 14-day versus a 21-day
cycle did not result in improved outcomes,17 for this young patient, we preferred the 14-day R-CHOP taking into account the faster
conclusion of the treatment. With the rapid achievement of a complete response after 2 cycles that was confirmed with PET-CT scan after 6
courses of R-CHOP, we chose to avoid radiotherapy, according to RICOVER-North study in which overall survival benefit was not
demonstrated.18 The aim of this case report was to highlight an unusual and extremely rare case of vulvar disease. Primary vulvar NHL is a
rare entity; thus it often poses a diagnostic challenge if its existence is not suspected. Gynecologists, oncologists, and pathologists
should be aware of this condition, as a correct diagnosis is essential for an appropriate therapeutic management. These patients should
always be evaluated by a multidisciplinary team with particular expertise in NHL. Abbreviations: ABC = activated B cell, CT = computed
tomography, DLBCL = diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, GCB = germinal center B cell, G-CSF = Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor, NHL = non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma, PET = positron emission tomography NC and LA contributed equally to this study. Authors’ contribution—study concept and
design: NC, FS; acquisition of data: NC, LA, MR, PB, EL; analysis and interpretation of data: NC, LA, MR, FS; drafting of the manuscript:
NC, LA, MR; critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: FS, VC. The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.
