Cervical spinal fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture of the vertebra has been little reported and the management of such a patient
is difficult. Considering the little knowledge of this area, we present this special case of a successful revision surgery for the treatment
of redislocation after a failed surgery to treat C6/7 fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture of the C6 vertebra to share our
experience. A 45-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with history of neck pain for 4 months. According to his medical records,
he was involved in an architectural accident and diagnosed with C6/7 fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture of the C6 vertebra (ASIA:
D). A surgery of posterior lateral mass screw fixation (bilateral in C5 and C7; left side in C6) was performed in a different institution.
However, 4 months after his primary surgery, he was still troubled by serious neck pain and muscle weakness in all right side limbs. The
physical examination of the patient showed hypoesthesia in the right side limbs, myodynamia of the right side limbs weakened to Grade 4.
Cervical X-rays, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the redislocation of C6/7. A successful revision surgery
of anterior cervical corpectomy and fusion (ACCF) with nanohydroxyapatite/polyamide 66 composite fulfilled with vertebral autograft plus
anterior plate was performed. The 3 months postoperative X-rays and CT scan showed the good position of the implant and bony fusion. The
patient's neck pain was relived and the neurological function recovered to ASIA E grade at the 3rd month follow-up. ACCF with
nanohydroxyapatite/polyamide 66 composite fulfilled with vertebral autograft plus anterior plate is effective for the treatment of
redislocation after a failed surgery in patients of fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture. The best method to avoid such a failed
surgery is a combined anterior–posterior approach surgery in our opinion. In 2013, about 973 million people suffered from injuries that
warranted healthcare and about 4.8 million people died from injuries.1 And the annual incidence rate of trauma-related spinal fractures were
reported to range from 0.019% to 0.088%.2,3 The subaxial cervical spinal fracture-dislocation, often accompanying with direct spinal cord
and nerve root injury, is a severe traumatic lesion which most frequently resulting in significant functional disability, high economic
burden, and decreased life expectancy.4 A lot of treatment methods have been reported for the treatment of subaxial cervical spinal
fracture-dislocation: prolonged cervical traction, immobilization in a halo thoracic brace, posterior cervical pedicle or lateral mass
screw, anterior cervical plating with bone grafting, and combined anterior and posterior stabilization.4,5 However, the management of
patients with subaxial cervical spinal fracture-dislocation still remains controversial and so many methods of treatment often confused our
spinal surgeons. Subaxial cervical spinal fracture-dislocation often means a 3 column injury according to the Denis 3 column spine
theory.6,7 Subaxial cervical spinal fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture of the vertebra has been little reported and the management
of such a patient is much more difficult especially for some young spinal surgeons. Considering the little knowledge of this area, we
present this special case of a successful revision surgery for the treatment of redislocation after a failed surgery to treat C6/7 fracture-
dislocation with pedicular fracture of the C6 vertebra to share our experience. More importantly the causes of the failed primary surgery
and the revision surgical strategies were discussed in depth. The patient provided informed consent for the publication of his clinical and
radiological data. This case report was approved by Medical Ethical Committee of West China Hospital, Sichuan University. A 45-year-old male
patient presented to our hospital with history of neck pain for 4 months. According to his medical records, he was involved in an
architectural accident and diagnosed with C6/7 fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture of the C6 vertebra (ASIA: D).8 January, 2015, he
was performed a surgery of posterior lateral mass screw fixation (bilateral in C5 and C7; left side in C6) in a different institution. After
his primary surgery he was sent to department of rehabilitation for subsequent treatment. However, 4 months after his primary surgery, he
was still troubled by serious neck pain and muscle weakness in all right side limbs. The physical examination of the patient showed
hypoesthesia in the right side limbs, myodynamia of the right side limbs weakened to Grade 4, Hoffmann sign (−), Babinski sign (−).
Unfortunately the patient was unable to provide the immediate radiological images after the accident. He was obeyed to take cervical X-ray,
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging in our hospital again. The X-rays showed the redislocation of C6/7 after his
surgery (Figure 1). The CT scan 3-dimensional reconstruction images confirmed the redislocation of C6/7 and showed the laminectomy and
lateral mass screw fixation in his primary surgery (Figure 2). Cervical magnetic resonance imaging showed the redislocation of C6/7 and the
oppression of endorhachis (Figure 3). Preoperative anteroposterior and lateral X-rays revealed redislocation of C6/7 after his primary
surgery. The computed tomography (CT) scan 3-dimensional reconstruction images confirmed the redislocation of C6/7 and showed the
laminectomy and lateral mass screw fixation in his primary surgery. Cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the redislocation of
C6/7 and the oppression of endorhachis. After a heated discussion in several spinal surgeons in our department and an effective
communication with the patient, a revision surgical plan of anterior cervical corpectomy and fusion (ACCF) with nanohydroxyapatite/polyamide
66 composite fulfilled with vertebral autograft plus anterior plate was reached. The surgery was performed on a classic anterior right
Smith–Robinson approach by a very experienced surgeon after induction of general anesthesia. The operation time is 150 minutes and the
estimated blood loss is 100 mL. The 3 months postoperative X-ray and CT scan showed the good position of the implant and bony fusion (Figure
4). The patient's neck pain was relived and the neurological function recovered to ASIA E grade at the 3rd month follow-up. The 3 months
postoperative X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan showed the good position of the implant and bony fusion. We present this special case
to discuss the management and surgical strategies of subaxial cervical spinal fracture-dislocation incorporate with pedicular fracture of
the vertebra, analysis of the causes of the failed primary surgery, and discuss the revision surgical strategies in such a patient of
redislocation after surgery. The management of patients with subaxial cervical spinal fracture-dislocation still remains controversial, and
fracture-dislocation incorporates with pedicular fracture of the vertebra increases the difficulty and complexity. Sarkar et al9 compared
the operative outcome of unstable lower cervical fracture dislocation by lateral mass screw fixation or anterior plating, and they concluded
that both posterior and anterior surgical approaches are viable alternatives for treating subaxial spine injuries with different indication
and risk profiles. In our opinion, operative treatment can decrease the complications related to prolonged immobilization in recovery phase
in these cervical fracture-dislocation patients. Sribnick et al10 reviewed 15 patients with traumatic high-grade cervical dislocation, and
they recommended either a combined anterior–posterior approach or a posterior-only approach for these patients. However, as subaxial
cervical spinal fracture-dislocation often means a 3 column injury, we strongly recommend a combined anterior–posterior approach for these
patients especially when incorporates with pedicular fracture of the vertebra or posterior elements fractures such as vertebral lamina. All
of the spinal surgeons in our department took part in the discussion before surgery. Some surgeons in our department think that the cause of
the failed primary surgery can be attributed to the short fixation segments and they think the posterior fixation and fusion segments should
be as long as C5 to C7 or T1. Some surgeons think that the cause of the failed primary surgery is the lateral mass screw fixation and they
think the strength of pedicle screw is better. However, most spinal surgeons think that the main cause of the failed primary surgery is the
single posterior fixation as C6/7 fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture of the C6 vertebra makes the C6 vertebra almost like a free
vertebra. Single posterior lateral mass screw fixation in this patient can hardly restore the intervertebral height and the stability of
anterior column, so the C6/7 segments can hardly reach bony fusion. The best method to avoid such a failed surgery is a combined
anterior–posterior approach surgery in our opinion. The last discussion point in this case report is the revision surgical strategies. If we
understand the causes of such a failed surgery and the Denis 3 column spine theory, we can easily reach a revision surgical plan that the
revision surgery should be performed through an anterior approach. In our opinion, both ACCF and anterior cervical discectomy and fusion are
suitable for this patient. However, ACCF is much easier for reduction and we choose ACCF according to the intraoperative situation in this
patient of redislocation. As ACCF with nanohydroxyapatite/polyamide 66 composite fulfilled with vertebral autograft plus anterior plate has
been widely reported to be effective and safe, we did not use the autologous iliac bone in our surgery.11,12 Anterior cervical corpectomy
and fusion with nanohydroxyapatite/polyamide 66 composite fulfilled with vertebral autograft plus anterior plate is effective for the
treatment of redislocation after a failed surgery in patients of fracture-dislocation with pedicular fracture. The best method to avoid such
a failed surgery to deal with fracture-dislocation incorporates with pedicular fracture is a combined anterior–posterior approach surgery in
our opinion. The authors thank the following spinal surgeons (Yueming Song, Jiancheng Zeng, Liming Liu, Qingquan Kong, Lei Wang, Chunguang
Zhou, Beiyu Wang, Yuxiao Deng, and Liang Wang) in our department for their participation in the discussion before the revision surgery.
Abbreviations: ACCF = anterior cervical corpectomy and fusion, CT = computed tomography The patient provided informed consent for the
publication of his clinical and radiological data. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
