Familial partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type (FPLD 2) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder caused by the mutations of the lamin A/C
gene leading to the defective adipogenesis, premature death of adipocytes and lipotoxicity. FPLD 2 is characterized by a progressive loss of
subcutaneous adipose tissue in the limbs and trunk, and accumulation of body fat in the face and neck with accompanying severe metabolic
derangements including insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, diabetes, dyslipidemia, steatohepatitis. Clinical presentation of FPLD 2 can
often lead to misdiagnosis with metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes or Cushing syndrome. We report a case of a 14-year-old girl admitted to
the Department of Paediatrics due to chronic hypertransaminasemia. On physical examination the girl appeared to have athletic posture. She
demonstrated the absence of subcutaneous adipose tissue in the extremities, sparing the face, neck and gluteal area, pseudo-hypertrophy of
calves, prominent peripheral veins of limbs, massive acanthosis nigricans around the neck, in axillary and inguinal regions and natural skin
folds, hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory results revealed hypertransaminasemia, elevated γ-glutamyltranspeptydase, and dyslipidemia,
hyperinsulinaemia with insulin resistance, impaired glucose tolerance, and hyperuricemia. Diffuse steatoheptitis in the liver biopsy was
stated. Clinical suspicion of FPLD 2 was confirmed genetically. The pathogenic mutation, R482W (p.Arg482Trp), responsible for the FPLD 2
phenotype was identified in one allele of the LMNA gene. Presented case highlights the importance of the holistic approach to a patient and
the need of accomplished collaboration between paediatricians and geneticists. FPLD 2 should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
diabetes, dyslipidemia, steatohepatitis, acanthosis nigricans and polycystic ovary syndrome. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12887-016-0581-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Lipodystrophy refers to a wide
array of congenital or acquired syndromes manifesting with the general or partial absence of subcutaneous adipose tissue, which are
frequently associated with metabolic derangements . Familial partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type (FPLD 2; OMIM #151660) is a rare
autosomal dominant disorder defined by a progressive loss of body fat in the limbs and trunk with an accompanying accumulation of
subcutaneous adipose tissue in the face and neck leading to severe metabolic consequences i.e. insulin resistance, glucose intolerance,
diabetes, hyperlipidemia, steatohepatitis . Patients with FPLD 2 may be misdiagnosed with metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes or Cushing
syndrome . FPLD 2 is caused by the mutations of the lamin A/C gene (LMNA) located on chromosome 1q21-22 [1, 2]. The LMNA gene encodes A-type
lamins - proteins, which contribute in the maintenance of nuclear structure, transcriptional regulation and heterochromatin organization .
The majority of LMNA mutations are heterozygous, missense mutations of 482nd codon (with variable aminoacid substitution; p.R482W/Q/L)
leading to the defective adipogenesis, premature death of adipocytes and lipotoxicity [4, 5]. We present a unique case of an adolescent girl
who remained under the comprehensive supervision of dermatologist due to acanthosis nigricans and gynaecologist due to suspicion of
polycystic ovary syndrome. She was admitted to the Department of Paediatrics with chronic hypertransaminasemia at the age of 14 years old.
The liver biopsy showed features of steatohepatitis. However, it was not the final diagnosis but just another piece of the puzzle. Medical
history, clinical phenotype and the results of additional tests strongly suggested FPLD2, which was confirmed by molecular testing. Although
our patient remained under the comprehensive supervision of paediatrician, dermatologist and gynaecologist, the final diagnosis was stated
at the age of 14 years. It should be stressed, that despite young age of our patient, the delay in FPLD2 diagnosis led to severe metabolic
derangements and decreased quality of life. We present that case to highlight the importance of clinical acumen and holistic approach to a
patient based on thorough medical history and careful physical examination. We would like to emphasise that the recognition of
steatohepatitis should alert one to the possible diagnosis of rare metabolic disorder including FPLD2. We believe that present case report
will improve the awareness of FPLD2 among paediatricians and result in earlier diagnosis of that disorder. A 14-year-old Caucasian girl was
admitted to the Department of Paediatrics, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, for hypertransaminasemia of six months’ duration, which was
stated for the first time in laboratory tests performed due to acanthosis nigricans by dermatologist. The girl was born preterm at 36 weeks
of gestation by caesarean section after uncomplicated first pregnancy. Her birth weight was 2,050 g. At the first minute after birth the
Apgar score was 9. The neonatal period was complicated by prematurity problems i.e. pneumonia, sepsis, anaemia and prolonged jaundice.
Afterwards, normal mental and physical development was observed. Till puberty she had no relevant medical history. Since menarche which
occurred at the age of 11 years, she noticed gradual loss of body fat and acanthosis nigricans around her neck, in axillary and inguinal
regions. She subsequently developed an athletic appearance (Fig. 1). She also suffered from oligomenorrhea. Changes in the physical
appearance did not disturb her, because her mother and grandmother presented similar silhouette. However, both mother and grandmother of our
patient deny any medical conditions and they did not consent on any further diagnostic evaluation.Fig. 1Patient with the Dunnigan-type
familial partial lipodystrophy Patient with the Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy On physical examination, the girl appeared to
have athletic posture. She demonstrated the absence of subcutaneous adipose tissue in the arms and legs, sparing the face, neck and gluteal
area, fat accumulation in the pubic and vulva area, hypertrophy of skeletal muscles particularly of calves, prominent peripheral veins of
the limbs, hirsutism, hypomastia. Massive acanthosis nigricans was seen around the neck, in axillary and inguinal regions and in natural
skin folds. Acne lesions occurred on the face and upper trunk. On both shins small subcutaneous lipomas were palpable. The liver edge was
palpable about 1.5 cm below the right costal margin. Spleen was no palpable. She had elevated blood pressure (155/80 mmHg). Selected
features of FPLD 2 in our patient are presented in Figure 2.Fig. 2Selected features of the Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy. a
Pseudohypertrophia of calves, prominent peripheral veins of lower limbs. b Massive acanthosis nigricans. c Acanthosis nigricans, acne
lesions on the trunk Selected features of the Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy. a Pseudohypertrophia of calves, prominent
peripheral veins of lower limbs. b Massive acanthosis nigricans. c Acanthosis nigricans, acne lesions on the trunk Her weight was 60.3 kg
(75-90th percentile), height 162 cm (50th percentile), body mass index 22.5 kg/m2 (75-90th percentile) and waist to hip ratio was 0.88. She
had disproportionately short limbs compared to the trunk, with height to leg length ratio almost 2:1. Bi-acromial distance (35.4 cm) was
greater than bi-trochanteric (26.7 cm), giving her impression of large build. The sum of three skin folds was at 25th percentile. The chest
circumference was excessive (>97th percentile), with large chest width and depth (90-97th percentile). In the bioelectrical impedance
analysis (BIA) total fat mass was 21 %. Laboratory results revealed hypertransaminasemia, elevated γ-glutamyltranspeptydase,
hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperinsulinaemia, insulin resistance, impaired glucose tolerance, decreased adiponectin,
increased creatine kinase MB and hyperuricemia. Detailed diagnostics was performed to determine the cause of hypertransaminasemia. We
excluded viral hepatitis caused by hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, cytomegalovirus, Ebstein – Barr virus and human immunodeficiency
virus, autoimmune hepatitis, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, and Wilson’s disease. Table 1 presents selected laboratory results of our
patient.Table 1Selected laboratory results of the patientParameterResultReference rangeBilirubin 1.09<1,5ALT 222<23AST 97<25GGT
120<23Creatinin 0.60.5 – 1.1Urea 2919 – 49Uric acid 8.65.7Oral glucose tolerance testFasting plasma glucose 80≤12630 min glucose 1192 h
glucose 154<140Insulin after glucose loadFasting plasma insulin 77.13-2530 min insulin 375.63-252 h insulin 920.93-25Insulin:glucose
ratio0.96Homa-IR15.23Quicki0.17HbA1C 4.6 %4-6 %Fructosamine 265100-285C-peptide 7.770.81-3.85Lipids profileTotal cholesterol 230115 – 190HDL
43.7>40LDL 132Triglycerides 271<150Adiponectin 2.2>10Leptin 7.72.43-28Anti-Hbe antibodiesnegativenegativeHBs antigennegativenegativeAnti-HCV
antibodiesnegativenegativeAnti-EBV antibodiesnegativenegativeAnti-CMV antibodiesnegativenegativeAnti-HIV
antibodiesnegativenegativeα-1-antitrypsin 1.30.9-2.0Ceruloplasmin 0.20.16-0.45Serum copper
1018800-1550AutoantibodiesANA1:40AMAnegativeSMA1:80LKM-1negativeComplement Component C3198.485-160Complement Component C425.312-36IgG
1053716-1711Adrenocorticotropic hormone 28.077.2-63.6Cortisol 6 am20.44.3-22.4Cortisol 7 pm2.2<16.66FSH [mIU/mL ]5.241-7.4LH [mIU/mL
]7.340.5-15Estradiol 46.7525-345Progesterone 0.560.55-12.3Testosterone 40.7828-1110SHBG 17.5526.1-10017-OH-Progesterone 2.331-4.5DHEA-S
204.933.9-280 Selected laboratory results of the patient In abdomen ultrasound examination we found enlarged steatotic liver, splenomegaly
and polycystic ovaries. The percutaneus liver biopsy revealed chronic diffuse steatohepatitis. Although, elevated blood pressure was noted
during routine measurement, there were no abnormalities in 24-hour blood pressure monitoring, echocardiography and electrocardiogram.
Radiological evaluation of the skeletal system showed no specific findings. No abnormalities were found during ophthalmological examination.
The clinical picture strongly suggested FPLD 2. We excluded acquired causes of lipodystrophy (HIV infection, deficiency of C4 and C4
complement components). Genetic testing was performed to confirm FPLD 2 diagnosis. In order to perform the first step of genetic analysis 5
LMNA gene exons were selected (ex. 6,7,8,9,10). This selection was based on current database and literature findings showing that molecular
defects of 3’ gene region are often related to the clinical outcome of FPLD 2. After prior amplification (PCR reaction) of selected regions,
the direct DNA sequencing based on Sanger method was performed and the pathogenic mutation R482W (HGVS nomenclature: NM_170707.2:
c.1444C > T; NP_733821.1: p.Arg482Trp) was identified in one allele of the LMNA gene (heterozygous form). R482W mutation has been registered
in The Human Gene Mutation Database as a disease causing LMNA variant. Therefore, due to the disease autosomal dominant mode of inheritance,
obtained genetic analysis confirmed the clinical diagnosis of FPLD 2 in our patient. Result of the DNA Sanger sequencing analysis of the
LMNA gene in our patient is presented in Figure 3. Other members of our patient’s family did not consent for any clinical and genetic
testing.Fig. 3Result of DNA Sanger sequencing analysis of the LMNA gene: within ex. 8 the single nucleotide substitution C > T in one LMNA
allele has been identified which is related to occurrence of p.Arg482Trp mutation in described patient. Sequencing result has been analyzed
with usage of the Mutation Surveyor software Result of DNA Sanger sequencing analysis of the LMNA gene: within ex. 8 the single nucleotide
substitution C > T in one LMNA allele has been identified which is related to occurrence of p.Arg482Trp mutation in described patient.
Sequencing result has been analyzed with usage of the Mutation Surveyor software The girl was referred to the Department of Paediatric
Metabolic Diseases, Children’s Health Institute in Warsaw for further care. The estimated incidence of FPLD 2 is 1 case per 15 million
persons . However, the real prevalence may be 1 out of 200, 000 . Discrepancies in morbidity data probably result from under-diagnosis of
FPLD2 because of its heterogeneous phenotype mimicking metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes or Cushing syndrome . To date, there have been
described three cases of FPLD 2 in Poland . In patients with FPLD 2, progressive loss of adipose tissue starts in puberty and concerns
extremities and trunk making the muscles and veins of limbs more prominent. Significant sign of FPLD 2 is pseudohypertrophy of calves.
Patients acquire athletic appearance [1, 10]. However, excessive accumulation of body fat in the face and neck may give Cushingoid
appearance. Adipose tissue is also deposited in intra-abdominal region, and in women in vulva region . Our patient’s phenotype is consistent
with previous observations of FPLD 2 patients reported in the literature. Skeletal abnormalities include short lower extremities with the
height-to-legs-length ratio more than 2, greater bi-acromial than bi-trochanteric distance, broad hands with spindle-shaped fingers, and
posture anomalies . Retraction of Achilles tendons, deficiency of the pelvic and shoulder girdle, myalgia, muscular weakness or cramps may
be also seen [1, 11, 12]. Our patient did not present these symptoms. The most striking skin manifestation of FPLD 2 is acanthosis nigricans
localized around the neck, in axillae and periumbilical area, which is a manifestation of insulin resistance. Other skin signs include
seborrhoea, acne, leuko-melanoderma, subcutanues lipomas . In our patient acanthosis nigricans and massive acne were the reason for medical
consultation. Metabolic derangements in FPLD 2 result from lipotoxicity of spared adipose tissue and include insulin resistance, diabetes
and dyslipidemia, steatohepatitis, hyperandrogenism, and polycystic ovary syndrome . In our patient, results of diagnostic tests revealed
hyperinsulinaemia with insulin resistance, impaired glucose tolerance, steatohepatitis, hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia. She
had also significantly decreased adiponectin serum level. Serum leptin level was within laboratory ranges. However, serum leptin level in
our patient was less than 10 μg/L, which is 69 % sensitive and 78 % specific for lipodystrophy . In FPLD 2 cardiovascular complications are
also presented i.e. cardiomyopathy, hypertension, early atherosclerosis and microangiopathy. Our patient had the incident of elevated blood
pressure. However, other cardiovascular derangements may appear in the future [1, 12]. In women with FPLD 2 fertility and obstetrical
complications are more common than in general population. Vantyghem et al. showed that in LMNA-mutated women the prevalence of polycystic
ovary syndrome was 54 %, infertility 28 %, miscarriages 50 %, gestational diabetes 36 %, and eclampsia and foetal death 14 % . Our patient
exhibited a clinical phenotype of polycystic ovary syndrome. The molecular background of lipodystrophy in our patient is the LMNA gene
defect: R482W (p.Arg482Trp) mutation which has been described as a pathogenic variant responsible for FPLD 2. The first reported FPLD
mutation of the LMNA gene was change at codon 482 in exone 8, which predicted the replacement of arginine by glutamine (Arg482Gln) .
Subsequently, Shackleton et al. identified five different missense mutations in LMNA gene i.e. Arg482Trp, Arg482Gln, Arg482Leu, Lys486Asn,
Lys486Asn in ten kindred and three individuals with familial partial lipodystrophy . More than ten different clinical syndromes have been
attributed to LMNA mutations like FPLD 2, congenital muscular dystrophy, dilated cardiomyopathy type 1A The wide phenotypic heterogeneity of
diseases resulting from a mutation in a single gene may be explained by the variable roles of the nuclear lamina . It has been observed that
the majority of mutations in FPLD 2 affect the C-terminal domain of the lamin A/C protein, whereas alterations responsible for dilated
cardiomyopathy and other diseases are usually clustered in the rod domain of the protein . Mutations causing classical FLPD 2 usually affect
“hot-spot” codon R482 which is probably responsible for decreased charge of specific surface on the C-terminal domain of lamin A/C. However,
even in patients with the same LMNA genotype the clinical heterogeneity is significant .The CARE checklist is available as Additional
file 1. The diagnosis of FPLD 2 is based on the typical signs and symptoms, requiring thorough medical approach to a patient and targeted
genetic analysis. Presented case shows the importance of precise and wide clinical description of patient’s outcome which indicates the
optimal molecular diagnostic procedure, especially in such cases as LMNA gene which different mutations are responsible for multiple
disorders. FPLD 2 should be considered in the differential diagnosis of diabetes, dyslipidemia, steatohepatitis, acanthosis nigricans and
polycystic ovary syndrome. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parent for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. Additional file 1: CARE checklist. (DOC 1.51 MB) CARE checklist. (DOC 1.51 MB) Human Genome Variation Society Familial
partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type lamin A/C gene Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contribution PK was responsible for the conception and design of the study, data collection and interpretation, and manuscript
writing. BM participated in the design of the study, data collection and analysis, and manuscript writing. EPK participated in the design of
the study and critically revised the manuscript. AMJ participated in data collection and interpretation, and critically revised the
manuscript. KC carried out the molecular genetics studies, and manuscript writing. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This
study was supported by the Medical University of Lublin. There were no sponsors of this paper with no role in 1) the study design; 2) the
collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; 3) the writing of the report; and 4) the decision to submit the manuscript for
publication. There has been no honorarium, grant, or other form of payment given to anyone to produce the manuscript. All authors of this
paper declare not to have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work
submitted.
