Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 55 Final Diagnosis: Mantle cell lymphoma Symptoms: Cytokine release syndrome
• hypoglycemia • hypotension • splenic rupture • splenomegaly • vision loss Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Case Report Specialty:
Oncology Unusual clinical course Rituximab is a therapeutic monoclonal antibody that is used for many different lymphomas. Post-marketing
surveillance has revealed that the risk of fatal reaction with rituximab use is extremely low. Splenic rupture and cytokine release syndrome
are rare fatal adverse events related to the use of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, especially in aggressive malignancies with high tumor
burden. A 55-year-old woman presented with abdominal pain and type B symptoms and was diagnosed with mantle cell lymphoma. Initial
peripheral blood flow cytometry showed findings that mimicked features of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Further treatment with rituximab led
to catastrophic treatment complications that proved to be fatal for the patient. Severe cytokine release syndrome associated with biologics
carries a very high morbidity and case fatality rate. With this case report we aim to present the diagnostic challenge with small B-cell
neoplasms, especially mantle cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic lymphomas, and underscore the importance of thorough risk assessment for
reactions prior to treatment initiation. Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody that has significant efficacy in various individual lymphoid
malignancies. Rituximab is generally well tolerated; infusion reaction associated with rituximab administration is well recognized and is
usually associated with the first infusion. However, there is high potential for significant toxicity, which is correlated with the degree
of tumor burden. Here, we present the case of a patient with aggressive mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) initially presenting with leukocytosis
and splenomegaly mimicking chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) on immunophenotypic features. Further treatment with rituximab caused
catastrophic complications, including cytokine release syndrome and splenic rupture. Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) account for the majority of small B-cell neoplasms (SBCNs) that express CD5 without CD10, and could present as a diagnostic
challenge due to its overlapping clinical, morphologic and immunophenotypic features. A 60-year-old white woman presented with abdominal
pain, drenching night sweats, early satiety, anorexia, and significant weight loss during the previous 8 months. Prior to this she was in
good health and taking no medications. On physical examination she had generalized lymphadenopathy and massive splenomegaly. Complete blood
cell count showed pancytopenia, normal blood chemistry, and elevated LDH 778 U/L (Table1). Differential count showed predominant
lymphocytosis. Peripheral smear showed increased lymphocytes, condensed nuclear chromatin, rare smudge cells and occasional left-shifted
neutrophils. CT imaging showed diffuse lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly measuring 24×17 cm (Figure 1). Flow cytometry showed a large
monoclonal B-cell population, kappa light chain restriction, dim CD19, CD20, CD5, and variable expression of CD23. This population
demonstrated moderate to bright CD38 and was negative for CD10 and CD11c (Figure 2). The findings were most compatible with a diagnosis of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Results of a FISH panel was reported pending at that point. Due to B symptoms and ongoing pain, a decision was
made to initiate FCR chemotherapy (Fludarabine, Cyclophosphamide, and Rituximab). A bone marrow biopsy was done and further rituximab
treatment was initiated a day later. At 30 minutes after initiation of rituximab, the patient developed severe rigors, chills, and nausea.
She became hypotensive, hypoglycemic, and developed severe respiratory failure requiring intubation and vasopressor support. Her clinical
features and work-up (Table 1) were consistent with cytokine release syndrome (CRS) and she was started on systemic steroids. She was
treated with antibiotics and aggressive fluid resuscitation, but developed acute renal failure requiring bicarbonate infusion and emergent
hemodialysis. An echocardiogram showed a dilated right ventricle with decreased ejection fraction and a CT scan showed findings concerning
for splenic infarction. By this time the peripheral blood FISH panel showed t (11; 14) consistent with MCL. A bone marrow biopsy showed very
aggressive MCL with associated TP53 deletion and Ki-67 proliferation index 60% (Figure 3). Although her clinical status improved, she
developed severe vision loss in both eyes. On day 30 she developed intractable abdominal pain and severe thrombocytopenia. An urgent CT scan
demonstrated splenic rupture and hemoperitoneum (Figure 4). She received palliative care and died shortly thereafter. MCL is an aggressive
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma with the worst prognosis of all lymphomas. Although not curable outside of transplantation, frequent remissions
(60–90%) can be obtained, but they are short (1–2 years) . MCL is a SBCN that is often misdiagnosed as CLL. Flow cytometric
immunophenotyping often helps differentiate CLL from MCL, and a characteristic CLL phenotype is considered essentially diagnostic . There is
significantly higher expression of CD23 in CLL. MCL typically is negative for CD23, but 25% of cases can be dimly positive . CLL, on the
other hand, can occasionally be CD23-negative. Thus, NHL often is less obvious and confounds the diagnosis if a leukemic phase occurs at
presentation. MCL is more specifically identified by the presence of the translocation t (11; 14) (q13; q32), which juxtaposes the cyclin D1
gene to the immunoglobulin locus. Rare cyclin D1-negative variants do exist, which may be characterized by increased expression of cyclin
D2. At present, FISH assay is by far the most sensitive and specific technique for t (11; 14) identification . This should be considered and
waited upon in newly diagnosed CLL patients with atypical features, especially B grade symptoms at initial presentation, massive
splenomegaly, and immunophenotypic feature showing moderate bright CD20 and bright surface light chain expression. Given the importance of
stem cell transplants for MCL patients, it is important to recognize this, as fludarabine therapy can impair successful collection of stem
cells . Bone marrow biopsy is not required for diagnosis of CLL, but should be strongly considered in atypical presentations, discordance in
the immunophenotypic markers, and presence of cytopenias, preferably prior to treatment initiation. Rituximab-induced severe CRS or splenic
rupture is very rarely reported in literature. Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) is a potentially fatal toxicity that has been associated with
administration of any therapeutic monoclonal antibody, with the mildest form manifested as infusion reaction. The incidence and severity of
adverse infusion events, in 80% of the cases, are reported mostly during the first infusion of rituximab . In patients with peripheral
lymphocytosis, this is dependent on the number of circulating CD20+ tumor cells . There is emerging evidence implicating IL-6 as a central
mediator in CRS. Tocilizumab (humanized anti-IL-6 receptor antibody) is increasingly being used as a first-line immunosuppressive therapy in
clinical trials, with dramatic responses, but data on rituximab-induced severe systemic inflammatory response syndrome is limited at this
point . The exact incidence of splenic rupture associated with rituximab is not reported; however, this needs to be considered in relation
to the aggressiveness of the tumor, and possible splenic capsule infiltration by malignant cells with the potential to have dramatic tumor
breakdown upon treatment with a very effective anti-tumor biologic agent. Ophthalmic adverse effects of rituximab have been reported,
including transient ocular edema, transient visual changes, and severe loss of visual acuity; however, these are very rare . When evaluating
SBCN, it is important to distinguish CLL from MCL and other non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas that have a leukemic phase, especially with atypical
presentations. Although there is no single pathognomonic karyotype that distinguishes CLL, cytogenetic studies and FISH analysis can provide
prognostic information and important clues to differentiate it from other non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. Rituximab is a drug that is widely used
in clinical oncology practice but has potential to cause complications of catastrophic proportions unless careful attention is paid to
assess the risks. In the absence of clear guidelines, it is important to perform clinical risk assessment with the use of biologics because
the severity of reactions could correlate with the aggressiveness and burden of the disease. Strong consideration should be given to
aggressive prophylactic hydration, pre-treatment with steroids, anti-hyperuricemic therapy, antihistamines, and holding or dose reduction of
rituximab with the first cycle. The post-marketing surveillance database on rituximab indicates a mortality rate of 0.04–0.07% associated
with the drug; however, due to its increasing use, there should be a high index of suspicion for these adverse effects because they are
life-threatening. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of interest or sources of funding declared for this report. CT scan image
showing massive splenomegaly. Flow cytometry showing a large monoclonal B-cell population Kappa light chain restriction, dim CD19, CD20,
CD5, and variable expression of CD23. (A) Bone marrow core biopsy (40× magnification) (insert: 100× magnification) showing sheets of large
transformed lymphocytes with occasional prominent nucleoli. (B) Bone marrow aspirate (100× magnification) showing large lymphoid cells with
slightly folded nuclei and vesicular chromatin. (A, B) CT scan images showing splenic rupture. Blood work at the time of presentation and 4
hours post rituximab infusion.
