Complex partial seizure complicated by psychiatric comorbidities like depression and conduct disorder presents management challenges for
both the physician and parents. The etiology of such psychiatric comorbidities may be related to the seizure or to several other unrelated
risk factors. The psychiatric comorbidities and the seizure affects the child's activities of daily living and are often a source of worry
to parents and school authorities A high index of suspicion and a multidisciplinary approach are essential in the management of the affected
adolescents. Seizures are symptoms due to abnormal discharges from neurons in the central nervous system . Complex partial seizures are
focal seizures lasting 30 seconds to 2 minutes and characterized by impaired conciuosness [1, 2]. It represents temporal lobe epilepsy and
its etiology in adolescents is often related to trauma, genetic and infective factors and brain tumor [2, 3]. Childhood epilepsy is a
particular concern to psychiatrists because it is often associated with behavioral problems [1, 2]. Studies have noted the occurrence of
psychiatric comorbidities with epilepsy [1, 3, 4]. The psychiatric comorbidities include depression (36.4%) , anxiety disorders (15-50%) [5,
6], attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (29.1%) and conduct disorder [3, 7]. It is pertinent to note that focal epilepsy has
been significantly found to be more frequent in children and adolescents with psychiatric disorders . The psychiatric comorbidities are
significantly associated with age and ADHD has been found to be commoner in children while depression occurs more in adolescents [1, 4, 7].
The actual etiology of these psychiatric comorbidities is still controversial and demographic and biological factors have been identified as
risk factors [1, 3–6]. Central nervous system disorder have been identified as a major risk factor and may or may not be related to the
epilepsy. Social problems such as family factors have also been known to contribute to depression . Irrespective of the etiology, complex
partial seizure in addition to the psychiatric comorbidities affect a child's quality of life . They disrupt the child's academic activities
and are major sources of worry for parents with accompanying financial burden . A multidisciplinary approach is essential in the overall
management of complex partial seizures and associated psychiatric comorbidities. Primary health care providers and physicians should be on
the lookout for psychiatric comorbidities in adolescents that present with complex partial seizures. PE is a 15year old female student who
was admitted via the accident and emergency department of the Niger Delta University Teaching Hospital (NDUTH) Yenagoa on account of loss of
consciousness and irrational talk four hours prior to presentation. Four hours prior to presentation patient had frontal headache which was
severe for which she went to a neighbor's house to obtain help since her parents were not at home. At the neighbor's house she was yet to
obtain the medications when she fainted and lost consciousness. The duration of loss of consciousness could not be quantified but she
regained consciousness without intervention but had visual and auditory hallucinations. There was no fecal or urinary incontinence. This
was, apparently, the first episode of loss of consciousness and hallucinations in the patient. However, she had similar episodes of headache
in the past and they often coincided with her menstrual flow. She was still menstruating when the latest incident occurred. There was no
prior history of trauma to the head, ingestion of poisonous substances or hallucinogens. Her last meal was two hours prior to the incident.
There was no prior history of blood transfusion, hospital admission or mental illness in the family. Developmental history or history of
febrile illness could not be ascertained. She is the first child of her parents; mother is separated from the father. She lives with her
father, step mother and 3 younger siblings from the step mother. There is history of unruly behavior, stubbornness, truancy,
destructiveness, school refusal and poor performance in school. History of sexual activity could not be ascertained from both parents. There
was recent associated history of low mood, social withdrawal, expression of suicidal intents and unprovoked weeping. At presentation to the
hospital, she was conscious but restless and agitated. She was afebrile (36.8°C), not pale, anicteric, not dehydrated and had no pedal
edema. Her pulse rate was 89 per minute (full volume and regular), her respiratory rate was 42 cycles per minute while her blood pressure
was 120/80mmHg. Mental state examination revealed a poorly dressed young female, agitated and restless. Orientation, Judgment and insight
could not be ascertained. Her mood was sad and there was associated crying spells. An assessment of Acute Psychosis? Cause was made by the
Medical team on call. She was given intramuscular fluphenazine deconate 25mg stat, intravenous diazepam 10mg stat, tablets risperidone 1mg
daily, tablets amitriptyline 25mg nocte. The following investigations were requested, namely full blood count, urinalysis, blood chemistry,
retroviral screening malaria parasite test,widal test and electroencephalogram(EEG). All the investigations were normal with the exception
of EEG which was not done due to financial constraint. She was transferred to the pediatrics unit. Three days later, patient was still
severely depressed. She was reviewed by the consultant psychiatrist who made an assessment of Complex partial seizure with severe depression
and Conduct disorder. The tablets amitriptyline and risperidone were discontinued while patient was commenced on tablets carbamazepine (slow
release) 200 mg two times daily and tablets sertraline 50 mg daily. She had significant reduction in depressive symptoms and was seizure
free after 3 weeks on admission. She was discharged subsequently on request of her father and placed on outpatient clinic follow up. Complex
partial seizure was in 1981 classified as focal seizure with impaired consciousness by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) .
Our patient was recorded as having suffered loss of consciousness, although the duration could not be quantified. The characteristic
headache that preceded the seizure and subsequent irritability and change in personality has been documented in other studies [2, 9].
History and laboratory investigations did not clearly implicate trauma, infective or familial causes in the trace for etiology or triggers.
Financial constraint prevented electroencephalogram (EEG), although the result is often normal . Lack of universal coverage and financial
constraint are major challenges to health care in low and middle income countries. Our patient had sustained features of depression and
history revealed poor performance at school as well as conduct disorder. These psychiatric comorbidities coexisting with the complex partial
seizure are consistent with findings in literature [1, 3–6]. Psychiatric disorders are quite common among children and adolescents and most
cases go undiagnosed. Epilepsies are also common among them and complex partial seizure frequently presents with psychiatric symptomatology.
Presence of these comorbidities usually impair quality of life and social growth of children and adolescents especially in the developing
world. As such a high index of suspicion should be held by physicians managing seizure disorders among the young. Early detection and prompt
interventions will go a long way to improving the outcome of these disorders. The authors declare no competing interests. CUE and SPC were
directly in charge of the patient's liaison management and assisted to organize the case write up. EID was also involved in the management
of the patient and did the literature search. He also contributed to the write up. All authors read through and approved the final
manuscript.
