An eight-year-old boy presented to the emergency department (ED) with a 2cm-long laceration over the prepatellar region of his left knee
after falling over and cutting his knee on broken glass. Physical examination demonstrated the laceration breached the dermis but otherwise
there was no obvious defect in the deep fascial layer. He had a free range of motion of his knee and clinically his extensor mechanism was
intact; however, a plain lateral radiograph showed that he had pneumarthrosis of his knee joint. Within six hours of injury the wound was
formally explored in the operating room and a small breach in the knee capsule was found. The wound edges were debrided, the knee joint
irrigated and the skin closed primarily. Following surgery he received 24 hours of antibiotic coverage with a first-generation
cephalosporin. Gas in the joint or “pneumarthrosis” in the context of trauma is not uncommon around superficial joints such as the knee and
indicates that there is a penetrating wound with intra-articular extension.1 This implies that the joint has been inoculated with bacteria
and pyoarthrosis is possible if not managed appropriately.1 The standard treatment for a traumatic arthrotomy is antibiotic coverage and
prompt surgical debridement in the operating room with lavage of the soft tissues and joint.2 In the absence of gross contamination primary
closure can be performed.2 Even innocuous-looking lacerations adjacent to or overlying superficial joints can lead to a traumatic
arthrotomy. Plain radiographs should be obtained and a high suspicion for intra-articular extension maintained. For lacerations around
superficial joints there should be a low threshold for exploring and washing these wounds out in the operating room rather than closing
primarily in the ED. Section Editor: Rick A. McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Lateral radiograph of knee showing gas in the suprapatellar pouch of the joint capsule.
