Leiomyosarcoma is a rare tumor of the smooth muscle, but relatively frequent in the stomach and the small intestine. The mesocolic site is
rare. Globally, leimyosarcoma represents less than 0, 1% of the malignant tumors found in the colon and the anus. Because of the
similarities with other digestive tumors, namely mesenchymatous or benign tumors of the smooth muscle, the diagnosis of a pleomorphic
sarcoma remains difficult even at the histological stage. Surgery is the mainstay of the therapy. We report a case of leiomyosarcoma of the
mesocolon and discuss about its main characteristics in the view of the current literature about this pathological condition. Soft tissue
sarcomas (STS) are an extremely diverse group of tumors occurring in every region of the human body and affecting all ages with significant
morbidity and mortality. Soft tissue sarcomas include more than 35 different neoplasms derived from fat, muscle, nerve, fibrous, vascular,
or deep skin tissue, and can be classified by their tissue of origin or their anatomical location . The World Health Organization classifies
liposarcomas into 5 histologic subtypes: welldifferentiated, dedifferentiated, myxoid, round cell, and pleomorphic sarcomas.
Dedifferentiated histologic subtypes have a worse prognosis and an increased risk of local recurrence compared with well- differentiated
liposarcomas . Therefore, aggressive complete surgical resection of the tumor and adjacent organs is the mainstay of treatment for
dedifferentiated liposarcomas . We report here a case of pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma arising from the mesocolon and discuss its main
characteristics and the management of this tumor along with a review of the literature. A - 62-year- old female patient, who had past
medical history of well treated pulmonary tuberculosis 6 years ago, that hospitalized because of a chronic abdominal pain for 10months. The
patient reported weight loss about 6-kg during her illness. The physical examination found palpable per-umbilical mass (10 cm of diameter),
hard and mobile relatively to the deeper and superficial neighboring structures. No lymph node or ascites was found. Laboratory exams:
complete blood count was in normal range and tumor markers were negative. Computer tomography scanning of the abdomen showed a round
tissular mass with irregular edges, which makes 14 cm in its great axis, with central necrotic areas enhancement in the peripheral zones
(Figure 1). A primitive pelvic tumor was suspected. At laparotomy exploration, the surgeons noted a pink multiloblar tumor of the transverse
mesocolon of 15 cm is his greatest axis, without any ascites or peritoneal carcinoid. The surgeons performed a resection of the tumor and
the adjacent part of the mesocolon (Figure 2). CT scan of the abdomen showing a round tissular mass with irregular edges with central
necrotic areas enhancement in the peripheral zones Removed specimen of the tumor and the adjacent part of the mesecolon On macroscopically
exam, the tumor was 15cm of diameter, firm with necrotic areas. Histopathological examination combined with immunohistochemical studies
established the diagnosis of pleomorphous sarcoma of the mesocolon. The postoperative course was uneventful. No adjuvant therapy was
instituted. Pleomorphous sarcomas represent approximately 10 to 15% of the sarcoma of the smooth tissues of the adult . The mean age at
occurrence is about the 6th decade of the life . There is a slight male predominance, with a sex ratio of 1,6 [5, 6]. The clinical
symptomatology is not specific; can be abdominal pain or mass , alteration in the general condition [10, 11], or signs related to a vascular
or nervous compression can all be experienced by the patient. Hepatic and pulmonary metastasis can be observed in the course of a
leiomyosarcoma of the mesocolon. They represented the main causes of the death. Involvement of the nodes is rare ; ultrasonography and
computer tomographic scanning of the abdomen are very helpful in view of the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. Leiomyosarcoma usually appears at
ultrasonography as a high volume and irregular mass with multiples echogenic lobes, and central cavity of necrotic areas. Computer
tomography scanning also exhibits a rounded in homogenous tissular mass with irregular edges, central necrotic areas and enhancement of the
peripheral zone. Pathological exam combined with immunohistochemical studies usually confirms the diagnosis of pleomorphous sarcomas are
defined as mesenchymal tumors consisting on pleomorphic spindle- cells with different forms and size and the pleomorphic is high lightened
by the nuclear atypical and the anyso caryopses . Durant the years 1980 , a balanced proposition of pleomorphous sarcoma was classified as
malignant histocytofibromas (MHF). Currently, the MHF is no way considered as a specific clinic pathologic entity but just as a
morphological feature seen in many tumors, including melanomas, lymphomas and carcinomas. Because of the progress in immunohistochemistry
and electronic microscopy, some criteria's have been included in order to make a subclassification of the pleomorphous sarcoma entity.
Macroscopically, pleomorphous sarcoma presents as a white to grey-pinked hard and firm great mass, sometimes elastic or renittent. More it
is more than 10 cm, the tumor is generally lobulated with smooth areas corresponding to intratumoral necrotic zones, and recovered by a
complex channel of blood vessels. At the microscopic level, pleomorphous leiomyosarcoma contain pleomorphous cells, which are around and
spindle shaped, extending as longs fasciles takings contact the ones to others in rights angles. Atypical cells are frequents because of the
presence of giants cells, normal and abnormal mitosis. The cells have an abundant eosinophil and fibrillary cytoplasm. The nucleus muscle
and desmine (50 to 70% of all the cases) . The differential diagnosis is essentially with others clinical entities such as undifferenciated
pleomorphous sarcoma, gastro-intestinal tumors of the stroma, pleomorphous rhabdomyosarcoma. Immunohistochemistry studies allow performing
the diagnosis . The benign or malignant nature of a pleomorphous sarcoma is not always easy to establish. Grading's system relying on
histological parameters that have been described in order to better differentiate between the different tumoral grades and so the prognosis
. Like for the other sarcoma of the smooth tissues, prognostic factors on the histological type, the depth of the tumor, the high grade, the
tumor size (more than 5cm), tumoral necrosis great mitotic activity, infiltration in the neighboring structures, vascular invasion and the
localization other than a limb, recurrence. Generally pleomorphous leiomorphous are considered as very aggressive and metastatic
pleomorphous sarcomas. Moreover, it has been shown that myogenic differentiation was a deleterious prognostic factors . The treatment of
pleomorphous sarcomas rely on surgery. The excision of the tumor in a monobloc fashion, with the viscera and without any tumoral effraction,
is the standard of therapy . Nodes excision is not systematic because involvement or recurrences at these sites are rare . The high
recurrence rate after surgery has led to investigations into the use of combined modality treatment for these tumours. As the most common
form of relapse in retroperitoneal sarcoma is a local recurrence, adjuvant radiotherapy has been proposed to enhance the cure rates and
improve the relapse free survival. Studies in extremity sarcomas have demonstrated improved local control rates when surgery was combined
with radiotherapy. Globally, the sensitivity of sarcomas to irradiation is low . However, there is no consensus regarding use of neoadjuvant
or adjuvant chemotherapy. Neo adjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) is given with an aim to improve the resectability of the tumour. The advantages
of NACT are a reduction in the size of tumours, probability of a margin negative resection and determining the tumour response to
chemotherapy. In addition, any micrometastatic disease could be controlled. The disadvantages are that a tumour may not respond to
chemotherapy and a potentially resectable tumour may become inoperable. Chemotherapy may also worsen the performance status of the patient .
Several studies, most of them non-randomized have not shown any consistent benefit withNACT. In one large study, Meric et al,reported
results of 65 patients of RPS with NACT doxorubicin or ifosfamide, of these 23 had resectable RPS . After surgical treatment, the course of
pleomorphous sarcoma is characterized by the high frequency of local recurrences, as up as 44% to 85% [7, 11]. The management of these
recurrences relies on iterative surgeries. The global rate of survival at 5 years is about 20 to 30% [7, 11]. Pleomorphous leiomysarcoma of
the mesocolon is a rare tumor. The positive diagnosis of this condition can be made on pathological exam combined with immunohistochemistry
studies after surgery. The association of an adjuvant therapy remains controversial; however, adjuvant chemotherapy can be suggested in the
case of a bad prognosis, a short time after the surgical procedure. The authors declare no competing interests. All authors are fully
participated in the study design, performed the analysis, and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
