A 58-year-old female with a past medical history of hepatitis C virus-induced cirrhosis presented to the emergency department with three
days of increasing abdominal pain, chills, and nausea and vomiting. Abdominal physical examination revealed gross ascites with fluid wave.
Diagnostic paracentesis resulted in the aspiration of approximately 60mL of white turbid peritoneal fluid (Figure). The differential
diagnosis of turbid peritoneal fluid includes spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, chylous ascites, and pseudochylous ascites. Spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis is suggested by a predominance of polymorphonuclear cells, a positive Gram stain or a positive culture.1 Chylous
ascites refers to increased concentration of triglycerides (>200mg/dL)2 in the peritoneal fluid, typically the result of traumatic lymphatic
obstruction, tumor, tuberculosis, filariasis, congenital abnormalities or nephrotic syndrome.1,2 Cirrhosis may cause up to 11% of atraumatic
chylous ascites.3 Pseudochylous ascites results from degeneration of leukocytes or tumor cells without high levels of triglycerides or
active infection.4 Chylous and pseudochylous ascites may be differentiated by triglyceride levels.1 Given the patient’s established history
of chronic liver disease, the inpatient team focused on spontaneous bacterial peritonitis as the potential etiology for the turbid
peritoneal fluid. The patient was treated empirically with antibiotics. Formal abdominal ultrasonography affirmed a cirrhotic liver with
large volume ascites and no evidence of mass. Peritoneal fluid cultures were negative for bacterial growth, suggesting that the fluid
represented sterile ascites. Triglyceride assays were not performed. Repeat paracentesis on hospital day 3 revealed straw-colored peritoneal
fluid. The patient was discharged home on hospital day 4 after clinical improvement. Section Editor: Rick A. McPheeters, DO Full text
available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be
perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Peritoneal fluid aspirated from diagnostic paracentesis.
