Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 81 Final Diagnosis: Gastrointestinal amyloidosis Symptoms: Gastrointesinal
haemorrhage • hypotension Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Endoscopy Specialty: Criitcal Care Medicine Challenging differential diagnosis
Amyloidosis is a multisystem disease, and can present with multitude of nonspecific symptoms. Gastrointestinal amyloidosis is common, and
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding in these patients has a wide differential diagnosis. The present case features the distinctive endoscopic
finding of submucosal hematoma as a clue to immunoglobin light chain (AL) amyloid involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. An 81-year-old
woman with AL amyloidosis was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for evaluation of GI bleeding. Prior to the bleeding episode, the
patient had undergone paracentesis for management of her ascites related to restrictive cardiomyopathy. Initial evaluation was negative for
any intra-abdominal catastrophe related to her recent paracentesis. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was negative for any source of
bleeding. However, colonoscopy showed a ruptured submucosal hematoma, which is a rare but classical finding in patients with amyloidosis.
The patient was managed conservatively and did not have any further episodes of bleeding in the hospital. She unfortunately died due to her
primary illness 6 weeks after discharge from the hospital. The finding of submucosal hematoma on endoscopy is a rare but sentinel sign for
amyloidosis involvement in the GI tract. Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement in amyloidosis is common, and can present with upper and lower
gastrointestinal bleeding . Clinical symptomatology and endoscopic findings vary widely, from minimal to life-threatening bleeding, and
normal mucosa to frank ulceration, respectively . This case highlights the distinctive endoscopic finding of submucosal hematoma as a clue
to GI tract AL amyloid involvement. GI bleeding in amyloidosis has a wide differential and clinicians need to be aware of the spectrum of
likely causes. An 81-year-old white woman was transferred to the ICU for management of acute severe lower gastrointestinal bleeding. She had
many co-morbidities, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, coronary artery disease, stage IV chronic kidney disease, diastolic
heart failure, and monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) for the past 14 years. Index admission to the hospital was for
worsening heart failure due to restrictive cardiomyopathy secondary to bone marrow biopsy-proven AL amyloidosis. The patient had been on
diuretics and had a large-volume paracentesis performed 2 days prior to the lower GI bleeding. On arrival at the ICU, her blood pressure was
80/60 mm Hg; heart rate and other vital parameters were normal. She was asymptomatic, and a review of the system was negative for prior
bleeding, anticoagulation, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use, or any signs or symptoms of lymphoma, ischemic colitis, or
active infection. Her prior screening colonoscopy performed at an outside facility a few years before was reported to be normal. Laboratory
studies revealed a sharp drop in hemoglobin values, from a baseline of 12 to 8.4 gm/dl. Coagulation parameters (prothrombin time, thrombin
time, and factor X activity level) were normal. Abdominal CT with contrast demonstrated mild ascites and no evidence of perforation, large
hematoma, free intraperitoneal air, or foreign body. The lower lung fields showed moderate bilateral pleural effusions with associated
compression atelectasis. An upper GI endoscopy did not reveal the source of bleeding. The source of bleeding was identified on colonoscopy
as a ruptured submucosal hematoma in the right hemi-colon (Figures 1, 2). The lesion was managed conservatively and subsequent management
included intravenous crystalloids and packed red blood cell transfusion. No further bleeding episodes occurred in the hospital, and the
patient was subsequently discharged from the hospital. Unfortunately, she died due to complications from progressive heart failure
approximately 6 weeks after hospital discharge. Gastrointestinal bleeding due to AL amyloidosis is a rare phenomenon, and has been reported
in 10–40% of patients with GI involvement . Other clinical manifestations of GI amyloidosis involvement include abdominal pain, GERD-like
symptoms, nausea, gastroparesis, food retention, intestinal obstruction (and pseudo-obstruction), malabsorption, bacterial overgrowth, and
diarrhea . Submucosal hematoma as reported in this case has been described as a distinctive feature of GI amyloidosis on endoscopy and can
be seen along the entire length of the gastrointestinal tract . The reported size of the hematoma can vary from a few millimeters to several
centimeters. Submucosal hematomas can expand rapidly, leading to life-threatening complications. A giant submucosal hematoma of the gastric
fundus with rapid expansion resulting in emergent gastrectomy has been reported in the literature . Other endoscopic findings associated
with GI amyloidosis are mentioned in Table 1 and include diffuse mucosal involvement resulting in decreased rugal folds, mucosal erosions
and ulcerations, and a granular appearance of the mucosa. A proposed mechanism for submucosal hematoma relates to the increased fragility of
blood vessels in the bowel wall (due to amyloid deposits), leading to spontaneous bleeding . However, the exact pathogenesis remains
unclear. The classic finding of ‘raccoon eyes’ due to hemorrhage around the orbit likely has the same pathophysiology as GI tract submucosal
hematoma. An endoscopic finding of submucosal hematoma can be diagnostic of amyloidosis in the right clinical setting; however, biopsies are
often needed to confirm the diagnosis. It appears that biopsies of adjacent mucosa can be performed safely in the setting of acute bleeding
without increased risk . Other causes of submucosal hematomas should also be carefully considered and excluded (Table 2). Submucosal
hematoma in endoscopy could be a sentinel sign of gastrointestinal involvement in case of plasma cell dyscrasia. Biopsy of the uninvolved
mucosa can be performed safely in the setting of bleeding. The role of endoscopic therapy in management of bleeding is not clearly defined.
Potential life-threatening bleeding can be managed with arterial embolization. Statement None of the authors has any potential conflicts of
interest. Ruptured submucosal hematoma. Unruptured submucosal hematoma, marked by arrow. Endoscopy findings in GI amyloidosis. Focal
ulcerations, ischemia and hemorrhage: ‘moon surface mucosa’ Diffuse involvement (occasionally with normal endoscopy findings) Thickened
mucosa with absent rugae/folds Submucosal hematoma Patchy granular appearance (yellowish-white nodular lesions) with polypoid mucosal
protrusions and friability ‘Fish mouth’ appearance of mucosa after endoscopic biopsy Differential diagnosis of submucosal hematomas on
endoscopy. Trauma during endoscopy Foreign body ingestion Hemophilia Coagulation abnormalities Ischemic colitis Lymphoma
