Brain calcification might be associated with various metabolic, infectious or vascular conditions. Clinically, brain calcification can
include symptons such as migraine, parkinsonism, psychosis or dementia. The term Primary Brain Calcification was recently used for those
patients without an obvious cause (formerly idiopathic) while Primary Familial Brain Calcifications was left for the cases with autosomal
dominant inheritance. Recent studies found mutations in four genes (SLC20A2, PDGFRB, PDGFB and XPR1). However, these gene represent only 60%
of all familial cases suggesting other genes remain to be elucidated. Studies evaluating treatments for such a devastating disease are
scattered, usually appearing as single case reports. In the present study, we describe a case series of 7 patients treated with Alendronate,
a widely prescribed biphosphanate. We observed good tolerance and evidence of improvements and stability by some patients. No side effects
were reported and no specific symptoms related to medication. Younger patients and one individual continuing a prescription (prior to study
commencement) appeared to respond more positively with some referred improvements in symptoms. Biphosphanates may represent an excellent
prospect for the treatment of brain calcifications due to their being well tolerated and easily available. Conversely, prospective and
controlled studies should promptly address weaknesses found in the present analysis. The term primary brain calcification was recently
coined to refer to patients in whom neuroimaging analysis often reveals symmetrical, bilateral calcinosis in the basal ganglia, thalamus,
dentate nuclei and other brain regions without a defined cause (formerly known as idiopathic brain calcification)12. Primary familial brain
calcification, also known as Fahr’s disease, refers to cases with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, ~60% of which are linked to
mutations found in four genes. Two (SLC20A2, XPR1) have been linked to phosphate metabolism, while the other two (PDGFB, PDGFRB) are
associated with blood–brain barrier integrity and pericyte maintenance345678. Few trials have been conducted to elucidate pharmacotherapy
for brain calcification; the literature is limited to isolated case reports describing treatments to control tremor, headaches, mood swings,
and psychotic symptoms1291011. Symptom monitoring and management is the main treatment goal. There is an urgent need to invest in treatment
options that target calcinosis per se, in order to halt the disease process or minimize progression. Bisphosphonates seem to be an intuitive
option, considering their clinical success in various disorders that feature bone remodeling, such as Paget disease, osteoporosis, vascular
calcification in kidney transplants, and bone fragmentation due to metastasis91012. These drugs bind to hydroxyapatite crystals and thus
have a very high affinity for bone91012. Bisphosphonates are released from the bone matrix upon exposure to acid and enzymes secreted by an
active osteoclast. This preserves bone matrix and increases calcium and phosphate content within bone, while decreasing bone
resorption91012. In addition, bisphosphonates cross the blood–brain barrier, making them excellent candidates for the treatment of
progressive brain calcification91012. In 1998, experimental treatment of a familial case of primary brain calcification with a
bisphosphonate (disodium etidronate) was reported10. The treatment produced a two-fold improvement in speech and gait, but did not affect
spasticity, dystonia, or ataxia10. Quantitative analysis of cerebral calcification did not reveal any reduction, suggesting other possible
mechanisms for this clinical improvement10. In 2006, the same drug was used to treat two patients with brain calcification linked to
specific medical conditions: a child with seizures undergoing chemotherapy and exhibiting small spots of calcification and a patient with a
cerebral hemangioma with calcifications. Both individuals were reported to have experienced improvement of seizures, headaches, and
parkinsonian symptoms9. Additional cases treated with bisphosphonates are necessary to ensure this class of drugs is appropriate for routine
use. This paper describes 7 cases (familial and sporadic) of primary brain calcification treated with alendronate. Diagnostic criteria were
primary brain calcification confirmed on computed tomography (CT) and exclusion of potential secondary causes, e.g., trauma or endocrine and
infectious disorders, through biochemical testing and serology in blood and urine samples. Seven patients were diagnosed with primary brain
calcification (4 confirmed as familial, with specific mutations in SLC20A2 and PDGFB) and started on a course of alendronate (70 mg/week).
We chose alendronate due to its ease of availability, safety, and simple, once-weekly administration. All patients consented to publication
of clinical data. Consent forms were obtained from patients who agreed to participate. This project was approved by the Federal University
of Pernambuco IRB, registration code 09475912.8.0000.5208. All methods were in accordance with approved guidelines. Five patients, recruited
at different time points from 2012, participated in a prospective clinical protocol. Two others were retrospectively evaluated, as they had
used bisphosphonates for several years for osteoporosis prior to being included in the present study. The parameters of interest included
symptoms, imaging patterns, pre- and post-treatment evaluation findings, genetic analysis, and treatment duration. Results are summarized in
Table 1. Head CTs from all patients are shown in Figs 1 and 2. Demographic characteristics, clinical profile, level of severity/impairment,
genetic analysis, treatment duration, and clinical response were assessed and are presented in Table 1. For comparative purposes, patients
will be presented in order of level of impairment, from most to least severe. Patient 1 was a 56-year-old man with a history of
poliomyelitis with hypotonia and atrophy of the right lower limb. After the acute episode, he recovered limb function progressively. The
patient had a normal life until age 46, when he developed slowly progressive aphasia and motor syndrome of the right lower and upper limbs.
He stopped working at the age of 51 and became gradually dependent. At the time of presentation, neurological exam revealed expressive
aphasia, stiffness and spasticity of the right upper and lower limbs, and lower limb atrophy. Strength, sensation, coordination,
proprioception, and cranial nerves were unaffected. The metabolic and endocrine profile (including calcium metabolism) were normal. CT scans
obtained at the onset of neurological deficits showed extensive calcification of the basal ganglia, cerebellum, thalamus, and subcortical
white matter. Subsequent scans confirmed progression of calcinosis. Genetic screening detected a PDGFB mutation (c.356 T > C). This patient
received alendronate for 3 months; however, his condition was already severe, with limited movement and long periods in bed. He ultimately
contracted pneumonia and died of respiratory complications. Patient 2 was a 49-year-old woman who presented with a 5-year history of
progressive tremors. Cognitive examination was unremarkable; however, she had developed a depressed mood with the onset of parkinsonism. The
patient received alendronate for 9 months and reported continued progression of symptoms. She continues to search for alternative treatments
to improve her symptoms and slow disease progression. A 43-year-old man, one of seven children born to the same mother (described below as
Patient 4), presented with rapid progression of parkinsonism. In the last 5-years, a progressive presentation of general bradykinesia,
rigidity, and paresis in the right arm had developed. He had previously been an active individual with regular employment. Prior to
recruitment, this patient had been on carbidopa/levodopa, which was continued throughout the duration of the present study. Genetic
screening identified a SLC20A2 mutation (c.1483 G > A)3, and the patient was placed on alendronate therapy. This 84-year-old woman presented
with mild depression, late-stage parkinsonism, and large calcifications (10.85 cm3) in the basal ganglia and cerebellum. She is the mother
of Patient 3 and carries the same SLC20A2 mutation. This patient had been taking alendronate for 10 years due to a diagnosis of
osteoporosis. Intriguingly, she presented with fewer symptoms than her son, despite being 41 years old older3. A 38-year-old male presented
with sudden onset of right arm paresis followed by syncope, initially diagnosed as a stroke. Neuroimaging showed brain calcifications. While
a full endocrine workup revealed no overt abnormalities, genetic analysis identified a previously reported mutation in the SLC20A2 gene
(c.1753 G > A)3. The patient experienced improvement in arm paresis and decreased intensity and frequency of tremors. He continues to
receive alendronate. A 51-year-old female presented with a 15-year history of sporadic headaches of moderate to severe intensity, with
increasing frequency over the last 6 years (current frequency: two episodes daily). She was diagnosed with osteoporosis 3 years before
presentation and had been taking alendronate for the last 28 months. In this patient, a large brain calcification was discovered
incidentally on head CT performed following a bicycle accident (Figs 1 and 2). The patient’s only symptoms were sporadic (weekly, mild-to-
moderate headaches. Additional biochemical and hormonal tests were performed, but no abnormalities were detected. Since starting
alendronate, the patient has been completely symptom-free. During 3-year neuroimaging follow-up, comparing images from 2012, 2014 and 2015
(Fig. 2), there has been no evidence of expansion. Primary brain calcification is characterized by various neurological and psychiatric
symptoms, and remains a diagnostic and prognostic challenge1211. The condition is often inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern with at
least two genes (SLC20A2 and XPR1) associated with phosphate homeostasis48. We have followed 7 patients treated with alendronate, with
inconsistent results. The main finding during follow-up was stable disease. However, we observed symptomatic improvement in some cases,
especially in younger patients. There was no clear change in imaging pattern during follow-up. Treatment was well-accepted by all patients,
with no reported adverse effects. An initial concern was that, for unknown reasons, alendronate treatment could trigger new symptoms; this
was not the case. Interestingly, two women (patients 4 and 6) had been on alendronate therapy for osteoporosis for several years prior to
enrollment in the present study. This suggests that clinical benefit might depend on the time and duration of treatment. Limitations include
the case-series design of this study, small number of patients, absence of control group, and heterogeneous sample. Our findings may not be
fully supported by the experimental data, as our results were divergent and we could not conduct any statistical analysis. Furthermore, the
duration of follow-up was short. In slowly progressive diseases, such a brief follow-up period may be insufficient to allow further
discussion. As clinical features were distinct, not uniform, and difficult to evaluate, no objective scales were administered. Finally, the
decrease in symptom intensity (especially headache) observed during follow-up may simply correspond to an oscillating disease course.
Patients 1 and 5 presented with unilateral symptoms. Considering that calcifications are bilateral, they should generally present with
symmetrical symptoms and signs. In Patient 1, unilateral symptoms might be explained by post-polio syndrome (reactivation of the disease
several years after initial presentation). The unilateral symptoms of Patient 5 may eventually progress to the typical symmetrical
expression. We chose alendronate due to its availability, safety, and comfortable dosing schedule (oral administration, once a week).
Etidronate probably works via a different mechanism (bulk action binding to hydroxyapatite) than the newer amino bisphosphonate alendronate
(inhibition of osteoclasts). This might explain why the effects seen in our series were less dramatic than those seen in patients treated
with etidronate. Thus, while alendronate has a more convenient dosing schedule and, possibly, fewer side effects, a larger clinical trial
should consider the choice of bisphosphonate carefully. To date, there is no specific treatment for primary brain calcification; the main
goal is symptom management. Clinicians should make sure that the idiopathic/primary profile is accurately defined to rule out any underlying
organic cause, e.g., in non-idiopathic basal ganglia calcification caused by abnormal calcium regulation, such as in primary endocrine
disorders. Bisphosphonates represent the only effective (although still anecdotal) treatment that could have wider applications in basal
ganglia calcification. Prospective, controlled studies should be conducted to address the weaknesses of the present manuscript and establish
a definitive analysis of bisphosphonate therapy for primary brain calcification. Furthermore, the excellent tolerability profile of
alendronate in primary brain calcifications suggests that a trial in asymptomatic patients could help address the potential benefit of this
strategy to control symptoms in younger patients. Biphosphonates may be applicable, safe and change the natural progression of primary brain
calcifications, especially in younger patients and across prolonged periods. Nevertheless, future studies with adequate design should answer
remaining questions. How to cite this article: Oliveira, J. R. M. and Oliveira, M. F. Primary brain calcification in patients undergoing
treatment with the biphosphanate alendronate. Sci. Rep. 6, 22961; doi: 10.1038/srep22961 (2016). Author Contributions O.J.R.M. designed
study and collected data, wrote manuscript and reviewed final version. O.M.F. collected data, wrote manuscript and reviewed final version.
Above we show patients number 1, 2, 3 and 4 and below patients 5, 6 and 7. It is possible to see three CT separated by three years (2012,
2014 and 2015). No specific image change can be recognized, although symptoms improved after alendronate use. For comparative reasons, the
patients will be presented orderly, from the most critical (Up row) to the most functional one (bottom row), in terms of personal
impairment. NA = Not available. *patients with retrospective data.
