Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is an uncommon syndrome. Its prevalence among patients with polycystic kidney disease is very rare,
with no previously reported involvement of the right posterior descending coronary artery. We describe the case of a middle-aged Caucasian
woman with polycystic kidney disease who presented with a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. Cardiac catheterization revealed a
dissection of her right posterior descending coronary artery. She was treated with dual antiplatelet therapy and had a favorable outcome. We
report a rare and interesting case of spontaneous coronary artery dissection of the right posterior descending coronary artery in a patient
with polycystic kidney disease. It is important to consider spontaneous coronary artery dissection in the differential diagnosis of patients
with polycystic kidney disease who present with an acute coronary syndrome. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is a known cause
of acute coronary syndrome . It has been reported to present in peripartum women, in patients with a history of fibromuscular dysplasia or
inherited collagen vascular disorders, and with the use of hormonal therapy . The association of SCAD with autosomal dominant polycystic
kidney disease (PKD) is less well recognized and limited to only a handful of cases . Our reported case is of a woman with PKD who presented
with SCAD of her right posterior descending coronary artery (RPDA). Our patient did not need any acute interventions and had spontaneous
resolution of symptoms with no recurrent episodes reported over a 1-year follow-up. This is a rare and interesting presentation of an
uncommon disorder. A 52-year-old Caucasian woman with a known history of autosomal dominant PKD presented with acute onset chest pain
lasting over 1 day. She had no prior history of coronary disease or diabetes, nor a personal or family history of connective tissue disorder
or vasculitis, and did not use oral contraceptives. The pain was sub-sternal in location with radiation to her left arm and was reported as
pressure-like in quality. It started while she was sitting and improved with the use of sublingual nitroglycerine on initial presentation to
our emergency department. She also reported transient left-sided facial droop at the start of her symptoms. Her symptoms lasted only for a
few minutes and spontaneously resolved. An initial electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with nonspecific ST–T wave changes in
the inferior leads (Fig. 1). Cardiac enzymes (troponin I) demonstrated a rising trend (peak 3.14 U/ml) during the day of admission. A non-
contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of her brain demonstrated no acute bleed. No atherosclerotic disease was identified via CT
angiography of her head and neck vessels. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain with contrast was also performed. This showed no
dissection of her intracranial vessels, no cerebral aneurysms, and no evidence of stroke. No vertebral or carotid artery dissection was seen
on these studies. An echocardiogram demonstrated hypokinesis of the mid- to apical inferior wall and mid-inferolateral wall. She
subsequently underwent cardiac catheterization, which demonstrated spontaneous coronary artery dissection of her distal RPDA (Fig. 2). No
interventions were performed and our patient was started on dual anti-platelet therapy (DAPT). She was followed up over one year with no
reported recurrent symptoms.Fig. 1Electrocardiography at the time of presentation to the emergency department demonstrating normal sinus
rhythm with non-specific ST and T wave changes in the inferior (II, III, and aVF) and lateral leads (V 4-6)Fig. 2Right anterior oblique view
of the right coronary artery demonstrating the spontaneous coronary artery dissection at the distal end (the culprit for our patient’s
presentation) of the right posterior descending artery Electrocardiography at the time of presentation to the emergency department
demonstrating normal sinus rhythm with non-specific ST and T wave changes in the inferior (II, III, and aVF) and lateral leads (V 4-6) Right
anterior oblique view of the right coronary artery demonstrating the spontaneous coronary artery dissection at the distal end (the culprit
for our patient’s presentation) of the right posterior descending artery We describe a case of spontaneous RPDA dissection in the setting of
autosomal dominant PKD. Although previously described in the literature, spontaneous coronary artery dissection continues to be an
infrequently reported syndrome. To the best of our knowledge, only six such cases have previously been published . None of these reported
cases had isolated involvement of the RPDA. Although it is more common in women, SCAD should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
all patients with acute coronary syndromes. It may occur in the presence or absence of coronary atherosclerosis . In patients without
atherosclerosis, SCAD more commonly involves the left anterior descending artery (67 %), whereas involvement of the right coronary artery is
less common (15–30 %). Only one of the patients in these reported cases is mentioned to have a history of PKD [5, 12]. It is unclear from
the series whether the reported patient had RPDA involvement or not. Interestingly, SCAD in patients with co-existing coronary
atherosclerosis more commonly affects the right coronary artery (50 %) than the left anterior descending artery (33 %) . Although our
patient had no angiographic evidence of coronary disease, the sensitivity of angiography alone is limited; therefore, we cannot totally
exclude this possibility. More sensitive methods for the detection of coronary disease, such as intra-vascular ultrasound, optical coherence
tomography, or CT angiography may have detected non-occlusive plaque. Some have proposed classification of the risk factors for SCAD into
three broad categories: atherosclerosis, pregnancy-associated, and idiopathic . Connective tissue disorders, such as Type IV Ehlers–Danlos
syndrome, or in this case, PKD, are included in the idiopathic category. PKD is considered to manifest if there is reduced expression of
polycystins (polycystin 1 and 2 due to mutation in genes PKD1 and PKD2, respectively). These protein products are thought to play a crucial
role in the coupling between various layers of the tunica media. Thus their normal expression is believed to be crucial for maintaining the
integrity of the myoelastic structure of the arterial wall . Owing to its rarity, the prevalence of SCAD in patients with PKD is currently
unclear. This case highlights the fact that patients with PKD should be considered at high risk for SCAD even if they have no coronary
artery disease risk factors. The causes of pregnancy-associated SCAD are not entirely understood . The dramatic endocrine and hemodynamic
changes that occur in pregnancy are likely to play a role. The precise adverse effects of estrogen and progesterone on the arterial wall are
not known, but a pathologic mechanism is supported by multiple lines of evidence: (1) a greater incidence of SCAD in women, (2) a greater
incidence in the peripartum period, (3) reports of SCAD during the menstrual cycle, and (4) the known association with oral contraceptive
use. Among other possible effects, progesterone or estrogen may stimulate degradation of collagen within the arterial media . Our patient
had SCAD in the distal portion of her RPDA. The lesion was not amenable to coronary intervention. She was started on DAPT and did not have
any recurrent symptoms. The use of conservative medical therapy to treat patients with SCAD is well reported [1, 5, 12]. When SCAD occurs in
a distal vessel not amenable to coronary intervention, and patients are asymptomatic and hemodynamically stable, treatment with DAPT is
often sufficient, and allows for spontaneous healing of the vessel wall over time [1, 12]. It is unclear to us why our patient had initial
symptoms of a neurological deficit. These symptoms could have been caused by a spontaneous carotid or vertebral vessel dissection that was
beyond the sensitivity of the brain MRI scan and CT angiogram. Similar cases have previously been described in the literature . These
patients usually have a good prognosis with rarely reported recurrent symptoms . It is important to include SCAD in the differential
diagnosis of patients with PKD who present with an acute coronary syndrome. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions PG and TF contributed to
the conception and design of the manuscript. PG was involved in drafting the manuscript and TF and PG together revised it critically for
important intellectual content. PG and TF have given their final approval of the version to be published; and agree to be accountable for
all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately
investigated and resolved.
