Esophageal bronchogenic cysts are extremely rare. Here we report a more rare type of both presence of intra- and paraesophageal bronchogenic
cyst that was safely removed via surgical resection. A 31-year-old male patient with space-occupying lesions in the mediastinum suddenly
presented with persistent chest pain for 2 days and then transferred to dysphagia >1 week. Preoperative diagnosis is difficult. Endoscopic
ultrasonography (EUS) showed a hypoechoic cystic-solid mass arising from the muscularis propria and local hyperechoic area in the deeper
portion of cyst, concomitant with a heterogeneous center and tube-like structure lesion in mediastinum. Turbid coffee color paste contents
were aspirated inside the tumor under endoscopic ultrasonography guided-fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA). A subsequent surgery was performed
and histologic finding was diagnostic of esophageal bronchogenic cyst. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed the cyst was positive for
carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) and carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125). At a follow-up visit 3 months later, the patient had a regular diet
and no complaint. This study is to summarize the clinical manifestations and EUS features of esophageal bronchogenic cyst by retrospectively
reviewing the literature and simultaneously to provide guide for the correct examination scheme. The appearance of esophageal bronchogenic
cyst can be great variation; EUS seems to be a valuable option for diagnosis and surveillance. Bronchogenic cysts are rare congenital
malformation originated from the development of ventral foregut, and mostly located in the middle and superior mediastinum.1 They more
frequently situated in close relation to tracheobronchial tree or lung parenchyma with or without a well-defined borderline.2,3 Although
these lesions are often benign, bronchogenic cysts can also cause symptoms such as chest pain, cough, dysphagia, and dyspnea via compression
of the surrounding structures.4 As the majority of cysts are within the mediastinum, previous para-esophageal bronchogenic cysts have been
frequently reported. Sporadic cases concerning intramural esophageal bronchogenic cysts are reported.5 Moreover, despite improved imaging
modalities, a definitive preoperative diagnosis is difficult. To our knowledge, this is the first report to share our experience with a very
rarely clinical entity of both periesophageal and intramural esophageal bronchogenic cysts with positive expressions of CA199 and CA125 by
immunohistochemical study and also review of the literature with an emphasis on endoscopic ultrasonography image characteristics to guide
correct examination scheme. (The answer to Reviewer #1 and .) Patients have signed informed consent and data had been anonymized and
deidentified. A 31-year-old man who presented to our hospital with suddenly symptoms of persistent chest pain for 2 days and then
transferred to dysphagia >1 week. He has no fever, cough, vomit, and weight loss. And there was no obvious positive characteristics on
physical exams. With regard to laboratory values, only serum tumor marker CA125 (>1000 U/mL; normal reference range: <35 U/mL) and CA199
(156.3 U/mL; normal reference range: <37 U/mL) levels were remarkable increased. Blood routine test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR),
C-reactive protein, hepatic and renal function were all within normal limits. An esophagography obtained before presentation identified a
huge filling defect compressed to esophagus under the aortic arch (Figure 1A). The thoracic computer tomography (CT) scanned a 14.5 × 2.3 cm
ovoid and well-defined low-density mass located in the right posterior mediastinum, with a maximum cross-section area of 7.2 × 4.3 cm and
presented dumbbell-shaped (Figure 1B–D). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a cystic lesion by relatively high-signal intensity
behind the trachea and with a direct displacement of the esophagus (Figure 1E and F). In addition, gastroendoscopy and endoscopic
ultrasonography were also performed to clarify anatomic relations. At esophagoscopy, a large semispherical swelling covered by some mucosal
erosion was noted at 25 cm from the incisors to the dentate line (Figure 2A). Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) with 7.5 to 12 MHz showed a
diameter of 25 mm hypoechoic cystic-solid mass arising from the muscularis propria and local hyperechoic area in the deeper portion of cyst,
concomitant with a heterogeneous center and tube-like structure lesion in mediastinum (Figure 2B–E). Turbid coffee color paste contents were
aspirated inside the tumor under EUS-FNA (Figure 2F). Malignant cells were not detected on cytopathologic evaluation. Surprisingly in our
case, the CA125 value of the intracystic fluid was measured as>1000 U/mL with an increased level of CA199 (>1200 U/mL). With these findings,
a diagnosis of muscularis propria and mediastinal cysts were highly suspected and surgical exploration was planned due to the intolerable
symptoms. Preoperative imaging diagnoses. (A) A barium swallow identified an extrinsic compression shadow ∼13 cm in length under the aortic
arch (arrowheads), with a regular mucosal pattern. (B) The esophageal computer tomography revealed a sharply defined mass attached to the
right side of esophageal wall. (C) The maximum cross-section area was 7.2 × 4.3 cm and presented dumbbell-shaped (arrowheads). (D)
Parenchyma was heterogeneous with slight enhancement on contrast material-enhanced CT scan. (E,F) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images
show a large circumscribed (a maximum cross-section area was 4.5 × 7.3 cm) tubular cystic lesion and a round mass behind the trachea,
concomitant with compressed esophagus. The masses had a relatively high-intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images. CT = computerized
tomography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. The characteristics of EUS appearance. (A) Upper endoscopy revealed a large ovoid bulging
mass, 2.5 cm in diameter, with an erosion surface in the right anterior wall of the esophagus (arrowhead). (B–E) EUS evidenced that proper
muscularis propria of the esophagus was damaged and tumor parenchyma was hypoechoic cystic-solid, concomitant with a heterogeneous center
and tube-like structure lesion in mediastinum. (F) Concentrated coffee color fluid contents were aspirated by EUS-FNA. EUS = endoscopic
ultrasonography, EUS-FNA = endoscopic ultrasonography guided-fine needle aspiration. The patient underwent a right thoracotomy on the sixth
intercostal space and 2 cysts were found. Macroscopically, one cyst was well demarcated, situated in lower pare-esophageal near cardia of
stomach and extraction completion (Figure 3A). However, the length of other cyst was exceed 10 cm concomitant with the esophagus and located
in the esophageal muscularis propria. Considering the lesion is too long and complete resection could affect esophageal dynamic function, it
was decided to perform a thoracentesison-Tube drain for external drainage. Both cysts had an intact inner surface, without any communication
with the esophageal lumen or adhesion to the adjacent structures. Ciliated columnar epithelium lining the cyst wall with underlying smooth
muscles were found in the microscope and the diagnosis of esophageal bronchogenic cyst was finally confirmed (Figure 3C and D). We also
found that positive expression of CA199 and CA125 in cyst sections by immunohistochemical staining (Figure 3E and F). The patient's intra-
operative and postoperative evolution was uneventful with a rapid recovery. An esophageal iodine oil contrast at the seventh day after
surgery was performed in order to guarantee esophageal lumen was no leakage (Figure 3B). At a follow-up visit 3 months later, the patient
had a regular diet and no complaint. Complete removal of the paraesophageal cyst through a right thoracotomy and pathological results. (A)
At macroscopic appearance, a 5 cm × 5 cm smooth-walled large cyst was filled with coffee color mucus. (B) Postsurgical esophagogram showing
there was no communication with surrounding structures. (C) Microscopically, bronchogenic tissue including ciliated columnar epithelium
lining and smooth muscle layers in the cyst wall but no cartilage or glands (hematoxylin and eosin ; magnification ×100). (D) Close-up of
ciliated columnar epithelium lining of the cyst (H&E; magnification ×200). (E) Positive expression of CA199 in cyst sections by
immunohistochemical staining, original magnification ×100. (F) Positive expression of CA125 in cyst sections by immunohistochemical
staining, original magnification ×100. H&E = hematoxylin and eosin. Bronchogenic cysts are broncho-pulmonary foregut abnormalities that
usually occur along the tracheobronchial tree in the mediastinum. They may be located in paratracheal, carinal, or hilar.6,7 However,
esophageal bronchogenic cyst is extremely rare and morbidity is still unknown due to most patients asymptomatic.8 When present, the symptoms
are usually caused by compression of the surrounding structures or by complications related to the cyst9 (The answer to Reviewer #2). Here
we reported a more rare type of both presence of intra- and para-esophageal bronchogenic cyst that was safely removed via surgical
resection. To our knowledge, a similar case had never been reported. Different imaging techniques can be used for preoperative diagnosis and
differential diagnoses included a duplication cyst, esophageal leiomyoma, pleural fibroma, lymphadenopathy, and bronchogenic cyst.10 Despite
improved imaging modalities, a definitive diagnosis remains difficult preoperatively. CT or MRI sometimes can indicate the nature of the
cyst. But once bronchogenic cyst is infected or high in protein or calcium content, its density may fall into the same solid mass scope that
increases diagnostic uncertainty.11,12 Moreover, the intramural and extramural relationship of esophageal cysts is also difficult to
identification. EUS is sensitive for distinguishing cystic from solid masses and facilitates the diagnosis of intramural esophageal lesions
because of its capacity to clearly delineate the size, layer of origin, and the relationship of the cyst to the esophagus.3 The present
study first to review of the literature with an emphasis on EUS appearance of esophageal bronchogenic cyst, as only 8 cases have been
presented in the literature since 2000s12–17 (Table 1). The structure of the cyst can be round, oval or tubular, which mostly originates
from muscularis propria. The appearance can range from being hypoechoic to containing dense hyperechoic debris which potentially confused
with soft lesions. In our case, EUS clearly demonstrated a hypoechoic cystic-solid tumor that muscularis propria was damaged and local
hyperechoic area in esophagus, as well as defined the extramural extent of lesions in mediastinum. Endoscopic Ultrasonography Features of
Published Cases With Periesophageal or Intramural Esophageal Bronchogenic Cyst Because of great variation in the EUS appearance and severe
consequences, the routine application of EUS-FNA in bronchogenic cysts is not advocated;18 however, in atypical and uncertain mediastinal
cystic masses, it is necessary to perform FNA to obtain samples for a definitive cytological/histological diagnosis. Concentrated coffee
color fluid was aspirated by EUS-FNA in our report. Both of serum and intracystic fluid levels of CA125 and CA199 were found to be
remarkably elevated. CA125 is the main marker of choice for ovarian carcinoma and uncommonly reported in bronchogenic cyst,19 especially in
esophageal bronchogenic cysts, reports of high levels of both CA199 and CA125 are extremely rare.13,20 We also first confirm CA199 and CA125
are positive expression in cyst sections by immunohistochemical staining. Measurement of CA199 and CA125 levels may be a diagnostic
implication when we encounter a bronchogenic cyst of esophagus. With regarding to the management of esophageal bronchogenic cysts, complete
surgical removal by thoracotomy or video-assisted thoracoscopy is recommended, even when they are asymptomatic, because of subsequent
complication of infection, rupture, intracystic hemorrhage, carcinomatous change.21,22 As in our case, the intramural cyst may be associated
with greater difficulty to resection due to the lesion length. Endoscopic submucosal tunnel dissection (ESTD) is a newly effective and safe
procedure to treat submucosal tumors originating from the muscularis propria and has been successful to extract an intraesophageal
bronchogenic cyst .16,23 This treatment would be a less complicated and less risky choice, but long-term follow-up visits and complications
are required to evaluated further, EUS seems to be a valuable option for diagnosis and surveillance. Chaoqun Han: collection and assembly of
data, data analysis, manuscript writing, performed the literature search; Rong Lin: collection and assembly of data, manuscript writing and
performed the literature search; Jun Yu: provision of pathological data and valuable suggestions; Qin Zhang: provision of pathological data
and valuable suggestions; Yang Zhang: provision of gross samples post operation; Jun Liu: administrative support and valuable suggestions;
Zhen Ding: conception and design, financial support, revised the manuscript as corresponding author; and Xiaohua Hou: financial support and
valuable suggestions. Abbreviations: CT = computerized tomography, EMR = endoscopic mucosal resection, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
ESTD = endoscopic submucosal tunnel dissection, EUS = endoscopic ultrasonography, EUS-FNA = endoscopic ultrasonography guided-fine needle
aspiration, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging Chaoqun Han and Rong Lin contributed equally to this work. Funding: this study was supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81470039, 81330014). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
