Genitourinary hemangiomas are rare entities of the urinary system. We reported a female patient who suffered dyspareunia and intermitant
hematuria that was proved as urethral cavernous hemangioma. Despite its benign nature, hemangiomas may recur due to incomplet excision.
Genitourinary hemangiomas are rare entities that may seldom affect lower portion of the urinary system. Urethral hemangiomas are mostly
reported men. Female urethra is rarely affected [2, 3]. In this presentation we reported a cavernous hemangioma of the urethra in a female
patient who suffered dyspareunia and intermitant hematuria. Fifty one year old female patient admitted to our clinic with difficulty of
urination, dyspareunia and intermitant hematuria. Her medical history revealed no genital surgery and genital infection. On her physical
examination, there was a painless, reddish lesion in 30 mm diameter at distal part of urethra surrounding external meatus (Figure 1).
Laboratory findings were within normal range. On Computerized Tomography (CT) there was no pathological finding in upper part of the urinary
system. After confirming the cystoscopy was normal, urethral mass excision was planned. A foley catheter was placed and mass was excised
completely. External meatus was everted with interrupted 3-0 synthetic absorbable sutures (Figure 2). Pathological examination revealed an
encapsulated mass which was composed of large, cavernous vascular spaces filled with blood and separated by connective tissue stroma
diagnosed as cavernous hemangioma of the urethra (Figure 3). Foley catheter was withdrawn five days after the procedure. The patient was
symptom free at seven month follow-up with no evidence of recurrence. Preoperative appearence of urethral hemangioma Postoperative
appearance Encapsulated mass was composed of large, cavernous vascular spaces filled with blood cells Hemangioma is a very rare pathology
and it may be seen in the kidney, ureter, bladder, prostate and urethra . In radiological evaluation, there was no pathological findings in
upper urinary system. Involvement of the urethra is extremely rare in women, and reports have been presented as only case reports [2, 3].
The most common symptom is hematuria but patients may also present with urethral mass. In concordance with literature, our patient suffered
from intermitant hematuria and frequency on urination. Differential diagnosis of urethral hemangiomas should be considered with malign and
benign conditions such as carcinomas, caruncula and periurethral abscess. In spite of benign nature, hemangiomas may recur due to incomplet
excision. Other theurapotic modalities are electrocautery or laser ablation . Differential diagnosis of urethral hemangiomas should be
considered with malign and benign conditions such as carcinomas, caruncula and periurethral abscess. In spite of benign nature, hemangiomas
may recur due to incomplet excision. The authors declare no competing interests. Kubilay Yuzuncu and Mustafa Suat Bolat have examined and
operated the patient. Ekrem Akdeniz has reviewed the literature. Ayse Nurten Demirdoven has done histopathological diagnosis. All authors
have read and approved the final version of the manuscritp.
