Phaeohyphomycosis is an infection caused by a filamentous fungus that contains pigment melanin in its cell wall. We report two cases caused
by Exophiala sp. emphasizing the clinical variability of the disease, as well as diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties of this
opportunistic infection in immunosuppressed patients (kidney transplant). Phaeohyphomycosis is a rare opportunistic infection caused by a
heterogeneous group of pigmented filamentous fungi.1,2 These fungi are saprophytic in nature but may be highly pathogenic in
immunocompromised individuals. In these patients, clinic manifestations may be quite varied.1 The disseminated form of the disease is
associated with severe clinical presentation and mortality rates of up to 70%. We present two cases of phaeohyphomycosis in kidney
transplant patients. We demonstrate the diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties of this opportunistic infection that may present a high risk
of dissemination and high mortality rates in these patients. A 57-year-old male patient presented for 2 years multiple nodules and tumors of
cystic consistence on the back of right foot and right leg (Figure 1). The lesions exhibited a sporotrichosis-like distribution pattern but
there was no history of local trauma. The patient received a kidney transplant 4 years ago due to hypertensive nephropathy and his
immunosuppressive treatment included azathioprine, tacrolimus and prednisone. The initial diagnostic hypotheses were sporotrichosis,
paracoccidioidomycosis, leishmaniasis and phaeohyphomycosis. Direct mycological examination revealed irregular and septate moniliform hyphae
of pigmented fungi. Culture on Sabouraud-Agar with chloramphenicol demonstrated vegetative chambered hyphae with septate annellophores,
compatible with Exophiala sp. At the histopathological test a granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate was observed, in the form of brownish
walls composed of giant multinucleated cells with fungal structures (Figure 2). Specific staining demonstrated pheomelanin in the fungi
walls (Fontana-Masson) and search for fungi was positive (Gridley) (Figure 3). The patient was treated first with voriconazole 200mg 12/12h
associated with surgical excision of lesions. During treatment with voriconazole the patient developed a severe clinical picture of
hyponatremia; the drug was replaced with itraconazole 200mg/day, which was used during five months, with no relapses since then. Figure
1Nodules and tumors of cystic consistence on the right leg of a patient Nodules and tumors of cystic consistence on the right leg of a
patient Figure 2Inflammatory granulomatous infiltrate composed of giant multinucleated cells (HE x100) Inflammatory granulomatous infiltrate
composed of giant multinucleated cells (HE x100) Figure 3Positive search for fungi (Gridley x400) Positive search for fungi (Gridley x400) A
59-year-old male patient presented for 8 months an erythematous-violaceous plaque covered with pustules and honey-colored scabs on the right
thigh (Figure 4). No history of previous local trauma. The patient received a kidney transplant two years ago for hypertensive and diabetic
nephropathy and the immunosuppressive treatment included mycophenolate sodium, tacrolimus and prednisone. The initial diagnostic hypotheses
were squamous cell carcinoma, chromomycosis and phaeohyphomycosis. Direct mycological examination revealed irregular pigmented and septate
hyphae. The morphological aspect of culture on Sabouraud-Agar with chloramphenicol was compatible with Exophiala sp. At the
anatomopathologic examination with specific staining were observed septate hyphae with acute angle ramification (Figure 5). The established
treatment was surgical lesion excision associated with itraconazole 200mg/day during four months. Up to this time no signs of relapse have
been observed. Figure 4Erythematous-violaceous plaque, covered with pustules and honey-colored scabs on the right thigh of patient 2
Erythematous-violaceous plaque, covered with pustules and honey-colored scabs on the right thigh of patient 2 Figure 5Septate hyphae with
ramification at an acute angle (Fontana- Masson x400; Gridley x400) Septate hyphae with ramification at an acute angle (Fontana- Masson
x400; Gridley x400) Phaeohyphomycosis is an opportunistic fungal disease that predominantly affects the skin and may disseminate in
immunocompromised patients. The incidence in transplanted patients is approximately 9%, with most cases occurring after the two first years
following transplant, as observed in our patients.2 This incidence has been increasing in the last decades due to the escalation in the
number of transplant patients and the use of highly immunosupressive drugs. Although the new immunosupressive drugs have improved survival
rate of these patients, they are also associated with the increased morbidity and mortality due to opportunistic infections. Calcineurin
inhibitors seem to increase susceptibility to fungal infections even more, when compared to other immunosuppressants.4,5 The diagnosis
becomes more difficult because of clinical polymorphism of lesions and the lack of serological or antigenic tests that may prove there is
infection in the blood or tissues. The diagnosis of our patients was based on the clinical lesions and on direct mycological examination, on
culture and anatomopathological examination, which are the main diagnostic tools.(6n) In transplanted patients, the clinical polymorphism
usually present in phaeohyphomycosis is exacerbated by the intense iatrogenic immunosuppression used, making diagnosis extremely difficult.
They may present papules, nodules, erythematous plaques, abscesses, ulcers and/or tumors, which have in common the frequent involvement of
subcutaneous tissue. Up to this time there are more than 100 species of melanotic fungi associated with phaeohyphomycosis. Alternaria sp,
Curvularia sp and Exophiala sp are the species most frequently found in transplanted patients.3 The fungus identified in our patients was
Exophiala sp., which is the most common etiologic agent in subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis.7,8 There is no correlation established until now
between etiologic agents and the clinical presentation of phaeohyphomycosis. Despite having the same etiologic agent, we observe a distinct
clinical picture in our patients, a fact that may be justified by the different moment in the progression of the disease and the differences
in the immunosuppressive scheme employed. The treatment of phaeohyphomycosis is difficult and non standardized due to the rarity of the
disease. In transplanted patients the therapeutic approach is challenging, as larger doses of antifungals are required and there is the
possibility of drug interactions that may place at risk the functionality of the transplanted organ. Surgical excision is the therapy of
choice for localized and well-delimited lesions caused by Exophiala sp. The use of antifungal drugs is recommended for transplanted patients
before and after surgery, but there is no consensus about the drug of choice nor length of treatment. In severe and/or disseminated cases it
is also recommended to reduce the immunosuppressive doses.6,9 Most of the melanotic fungi are susceptible to azolics, making itraconazole
and voriconazole the main drugs employed, followed by amphotericin B.2 In transplanted patients, the high doses of azolics may trigger drug
interaction with calcineurin inhibitors and MTOR as they are important CYP3A4/5 inhibitors.10 This interaction may raise the serum levels of
immunosuppressants to extremely toxic levels. On the other hand, reduction of immunosuppressant doses to extremely low levels may trigger
functional loss of the transplanted organ. The early clinical suspicion of phaeohyphomycosis in transplanted patients becomes extremely
important, since immunosuppression is the main risk factor for infection and responsible for systemic dissemination of the disease,
culminating in severe and fatal clinical pictures. Therefore, the importance of this article resides in the fact that it demonstrates two
distinct clinical forms of phaeohyphomycosis in kidney transplant patients (disease with increased incidence in this population of patients)
and for pointing out the diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties, as well as the possibility of drug interaction. Conflict of Interest:
None. Financial Support: None. Study carried out at the Dermatology outpatient clinic, Teaching Hospital of the School of Medicine of the
Universidade de São Paulo (HC-FMUSP) - São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
