Human lipodystrophies are uncommon disorders, with important clinical consequences, which are often undiagnosed. The Barraquer–Simons
syndrome is a form of partial symmetric lipodystrophy of unknown etiology, characterized by the loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue, limited
to upper part of the body. Insulin resistance and metabolic complications are less common than with other lipodystrophy subtypes. Patients
usually have decreased serum complement-component 3 levels, associated with complement activation by the alternative pathway, which may
indicate the presence of renal involvement. The authors report a case of a 31-year-old woman with progressive loss of subcutaneous fat,
limited to the face, neck and thorax. She presented no severe metabolic complications, neither signs of insulin resistance. Laboratory tests
revealed mild dyslipidemia, and low serum levels of complement-component 3. Clinical and biochemical characteristics were consistent with
the diagnosis of Barraquer–Simons syndrome. The present case illustrates the importance of recognizing the clinical features of this
lipodystrophic syndrome, which may present potentially severe consequences and psychological distress. A brief overview is made, addressing
the clinical signs of the disease, its course, and how to manage it. Human lipodystrophies are a group of acquired or inherited disorders
which are characterized by selective fat loss, ranging from partial to generalized [1, 2]. Lipodystrophies are usually tightly linked with
severe metabolic complications, which highlight the significance of adipose tissue as an active endocrine organ . Insulin resistance,
diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension and hepatic steatosis are often seen in affected patients [1, 2]. The severity of metabolic
disease usually correlates with the extent of fat loss, suggesting that insulin resistance could result from the absence of adipose tissue
and the consequent leptin deficiency [4, 5]. More than a century ago, Mitchell , Barraquer , and Simons described the first lipodystrophic
disorder, known as lipodystrophia progressiva, or Barraquer–Simons syndrome, which is now called ‘acquired partial lipodystrophy’ (APL).
Approximately 250 patients have been described in the literature , the majority being of European descent . Females are three to four times
more likely to be affected than men . Fat loss usually starts during childhood or adolescence, and may follow an acute viral infection such
as measles [12, 13]. Barraquer–Simons syndrome is mainly characterized by the loss of subcutaneous tissue, limited to upper part of the
body, with the face, neck, arms, thorax, and upper abdomen being affected in a cephalocaudal manner (cephalothoracic lipodystrophy). In
contrast, the adipose stores of the gluteal regions and lower extremities tend to be either preserved or are increased . Unlike others types
of lipodystrophy, insulin resistance and its related metabolic complications appear to be less frequent (diabetes 10 %, hypertriglyceridemia
30 %) and are less severe . One third of patients presented membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and associated signs of activation of
alternative complement pathway—the reduction of circulating concentrations of complement-component 3 (C3), and the presence of the
C3-nephritic factor [14, 15]. The authors describe the clinical case of a female patient with clinical and biochemical features consistent
with Barraquer–Simons syndrome. A 31-one-year old Caucasian woman was referred to the endocrinology department for a facial lipodystrophy.
She was the second child of non-consanguineous, healthy parents. The neonatal period and her psychomotor development were unremarkable. She
had chickenpox during her childhood, and later mumps at the age of fifteen. Her first menstruation was when she was 12 years old, and she
had had regular menstrual cycles ever since. At puberty, she noted that her subcutaneous adipose facial tissue gradually began to decrease
(Fig. 1). No abnormality in her past medical history existed, and she had never used any drug that could cause lipodystrophy. There was no
family history of the same condition and furthermore, she did not report any symptoms. A physical examination revealed facial lipoatrophy,
with loss of buccal fat pads and prominent zygomatic arches. She presented bilateral breast hypoplasia. The subcutaneous fat was preserved
in other anatomic regions, particularly in the lower abdomen and thighs (Fig. 2). She presented normal thyroid palpation.
Hepatosplenomegaly, umbilical hernia, acanthosis nigricans, clitorimegaly, hirsutism or acromegalic features were all absent. Ophthalmic and
other systemic examinations were unremarkable, including her neurological status and deafness was excluded. Laboratory tests, including a
complete blood count, biochemical parameters (with renal and liver function tests), urine analysis with urinary albumin excretion, insulin-
like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and sexual and thyroid function tests revealed no abnormalities. Her fasting glucose (70, 82 mg/dL) and
insulin (2.7 mU/mL), A1c (5.2 %) and oral glucose tolerance test (2 h plasma glucose 96 mg/dL) presented normal values. There was a discrete
elevation of LDL-cholesterol (139 mg/dL), and reduced HDL-cholesterol (54 mg/dL), with normal triglycerides level. The C3 levels were low,
detected as <18 mg/dL (normal: 83–177 mg/dL). The patient presented no renal disease, nor more severe metabolic disorders up until our last
observation. She underwent surgical correction of facial lipoatrophy, with good aesthetic results.Fig. 1Progressive facial lipoatrophy with
loss of buccal fat padsFig. 2Subcutaneous adipose tissue preserved in the lower abdomen and thighs Progressive facial lipoatrophy with loss
of buccal fat pads Subcutaneous adipose tissue preserved in the lower abdomen and thighs The overall clinical and biochemical features of
our patient led us to consider Barraquer–Simons syndrome as being the main diagnosis. The abnormal fat repartition was in conformity with
the essential criterion proposed by Misra et al. : with gradual symmetrical subcutaneous fat loss from the face, neck, upper extremities,
thorax and abdomen, preserving the lower extremities. Some supportive criteria were also met, namely: onset during adolescence, the absence
of a family history of lipodystrophy, and low serum levels of C3. The lack of C3 allows for a clear distinction between this syndrome and
other forms of lipodystrophy. The C3-nephritic factor induces lysis of adipocytes expressing factor D (adipsin)—a serine protease enzyme—and
the overt expression of factor D by numerous tissues, which produces the characteristic fat loss pattern [3, 16]. Some patients may progress
to present drusen—small accumulations of hyaline bodies underneath the retina . Such as in this present case, metabolic disorders can be
absent in patients with late-onset partial lipodystrophy. Furthermore, acanthosis nigricans, hirsutism and signs of virilization are very
unusual . Mutations in several genes have been found in patients with inherited lipodystrophies, including mutations in LMNA, PPARG, AKT2
and ZMPSTE24 in partial lipodystrophy , and mutations in AGPAT2, BSCL2, CAV1 and PTRF in congenital total lipodystrophy . However, the
molecular pathogenesis of APL has not been clearly established. In 2006, Hegele proposed that LMNB2 could be a mutation responsible for APL.
In four out of nine patients he found three new rare LMNB2 mutations, by using candidate gene sequencing. He concluded that not all subjects
with APL had LMNB2 mutations and also found a few carrier mutations among healthy controls. Therefore, it seems that APL behaves like a
complex trait, in which a susceptibility allele requires the presence of additional factors to trigger the expression of the disease . A
family history is usually absent, and a broad set of autoimmune diseases is often associated : membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis,
hypocomplementemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis and localized scleroderma . Occasional functional anomalies, such as
deafness, epilepsy, and mental retardation can also be associated with the condition . Therapeutic approaches for APL consist of improving
esthetic appearance with plastic surgery and the management of additional systemic disorders. The main goal of cosmetic surgical procedures
is to minimize the psychological discomfort that impairs the patient’s quality of life. Metabolic complications are not usually a main
problem, however they still have to be screened and treated when they exist. A hypolipidic diet plan and regular exercise were advised, and
medication will be offered when necessary. Thiazolidinediones stimulate growth and differentiation of adipocytes and seem to be effective in
some heterogeneous forms of lipodystrophy. In 2003, Walker et al reported increases of fat in buccal and subcutaneous abdominal adipose
tissue in a 20-year-old woman with APL after 7 months of rosiglitazone therapy. Unfortunately, this may exacerbate the fat accumulation in
non-affected regions. Recently, metreleptin, a recombinant analogue of human leptin, has been approved for the treatment of metabolic
derangements of lipodystrophy. Metreleptin replaces the leptin deficiency, thus improving insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia,
and hepatic steatosis. Acquired partial lipodystrophy has less low leptin levels, and less metabolic derangements, and therefore metreleptin
has lower efficacy . The prognosis of Barraquer–Simons syndrome is mainly dependent on renal disease. A few patients have required renal
transplantation for end-stage renal disease related to glomerulonephritis [29, 30]. Barraquer–Simons syndrome is an extremely rare disorder
with important clinical consequences and psychosocial effects. The authors underline the importance of the identification and the periodic
assessment of patients with APL. Close long-term follow-up is required to identify metabolic disturbances, potentially life-threatening
renal problems, and other associated diseases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report
and any accompanying images. acquired partial lipodystrophy insulin-like growth factor-1 plasma complement-component 3 JO collect the data
and drafted the manuscript, EL helped to draft the manuscript, and PF and DC revised it critically for important intellectual content. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. None. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
