Morvan syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the combination of peripheral nerve hyperexcitability, encephalopathy and dysautonomia
with marked insomnia. It was reported to have association to antibodies to voltage-gated potassium channels including contactin associated
protein-like 2 antibodies (CASPR2-Ab) and leucine-rich glioma inactivated protein 1 antibodies (LGI1-Ab). LGI1-Ab was reported to associate
with seizures, amnesia, confusion, hyponatraemia and a good prognosis, while CASPR2-Ab with peripheral presentations, probable risk for
tumor and a poor prognosis. The vast majority of Morvan syndrome patients were male, with normal magnetic resonance imaging of the brain. We
report a female case presenting with a combination of bilateral leg pain, widespread myokymia, memory disturbance, seizure, hyperhidrosis
and insomnia. She had antibodies targeting CASPR2 and LGI1, tested by the indirect immunofluorescence test, which demonstrated the diagnosis
of typical Morvan syndrome as well as classical limbic encephalitis. Cranial MRI revealed bilateral hyper-intensity of the medial temporal
lobe, insular lobe and basal ganglia on T2/FLAIR and DWI sequence. As the treatment carried on, her serum LGI1-Ab disappeared and her memory
loss, seizure and confusion quickly relieved. But her peripheral presentations did not relieve until serum CASPR2-Ab turned negative.
Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment showed limited efficacy while she achieved almost complete remission with corticosteroids therapy. This
case provides a rare female resource of Morvan syndrome, which is the first patient with both CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab positive Morvan syndrome
in China and one of the few female patients with Morvan syndrome reported so far. Through the detailed analysis of her clinical course, the
diverse and overlapping clinical phenotype of CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab in patients with Morvan syndrome was obvious and interesting. Limbic
encephalitis (LE) is defined as the subacute development of seizures, short-term memory loss, confusion and psychiatric symptoms suggesting
the involvement of the limbic system . Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability (PNH) is used to describe acquired neuromyotonia (NMT) or partial
manifestations of this disorder including cramps, muscle twitching (fasciculations or myokymia) and muscle stiffness [2, 3]. And Morvan
syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the combination of PNH or NMT, encephalopathy and dysautonomia with marked insomnia . The vast
majority of Morvan syndrome patients were male, with normal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain . Plenty of studies have
demonstrated the association between Morvan syndrome and antibodies to voltage-gated potassium channels (VGKC-Ab) including contactin
associated protein-like 2 antibodies (CASPR2-Ab), leucine-rich glioma inactivated protein 1 antibodies (LGI1-Ab) and other antibodies [2,
4–8]. LGI1-Ab was reported to associate with seizures, amnesia, confusion, hyponatraemia and a good prognosis, while CASPR2-Ab with
peripheral presentations, probable risk for tumor and a poor prognosis [2, 4, 9]. Here we report on a both CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab positive
female patient who presented with typical Morvan syndrome as well as classical LE, which is the first patient with double antibodies
positive Morvan syndrome in China and one of the few female patients with Morvan syndrome reported so far. She had an abnormal cranial MRI,
and and achieved almost complete remission with the treatment of steroids and IVIG. Through the detailed analysis of her clinical course, we
aim to emphasis the diverse and overlapping clinical phenotype of LGI1-Ab and CASPR2-Ab in patients with Morvan syndrome. A 40-year-old
Chinese woman presented with a 2-month history of bilateral leg pain, widespread myokymia, memory disturbance, seizure, hyperhidrosis and
insomnia. Two months prior to the admission, she developed repeating pain in bilateral proximal end of lower limbs, accompanied with
widespread myokymia, shaking of the toes, insomnia and hyperhidrosis. One week later, she developed seizures for three times a day,
consisting of eyes on the turn, froth at the mouth, unresponsiveness and convulsion of bilateral upper limbs. Levetiracetam was started by
the referring doctor, which relieved her seizure soon. From then on, family members noted her recent memory loss, confusion and apathy.
Cranial MRI (Fig. 1) revealed bilateral hyper-intensity of the medial temporal lobe, insular lobe and basal ganglia on T2/FLAIR and DWI
sequence. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed a few non-specific slow waves in background and occasional abnormal sharp waves on occipital
lead during wakefulness.Fig. 1Cranial MRI of our patient. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) (a) and the corresponding
plane in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (b) showed bilateral hyper-intensity of the medial temporal lobe, insular lobe and
basal ganglia (arrows). Repeated MRI were normal in February 28, 2015. (c, d) Cranial MRI of our patient. Diffusion-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (DWI) (a) and the corresponding plane in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (b) showed bilateral hyper-intensity
of the medial temporal lobe, insular lobe and basal ganglia (arrows). Repeated MRI were normal in February 28, 2015. (c, d) Serum test in a
cell based assay showed serum VGKC-complex proteins (EUROIMMUN, Germany) including CASPR2-Ab strongly positive (+++) and LGI1-Ab positive
(+), while cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) LGI1-Ab was weakly positive (±), examined by the indirect immunofluorescence test (IIFT) (Fig. 2). CSF
for cells, glucose, chloride and culture were normal, while CSF protein was mildly elevated at 0.5 g/L. Blood natrium was normal. Thyroid
function and anti-thyroid antibodies including Anti-TG and Anti-TPO was negative. Tumor markers (CEA, AFP, CA125, CA19-9, CA15-3, SCCAg,
NSE, Cyfra211, TPS) and paraneoplastic neuronal antibodies (Hu, Ri, Yo) were all negative, and body CT scanning showed no malignancy. Her
mini-mental state examination (MMSE) was 21/30. Neurologic examination revealed only myokymia in the limbs, shaking of the toes, and
hyperhidrosis. She has no remarkable past history, personal history or family history.Fig. 2The immunoreactivity of patient’s serum to
CASPR2 and LGI1 proteins. EU90 cells were transfected with cDNAs encoding CASPR2, LGI1 and other four neuropil proteins associated with
autoimmune encephalitis (EUROIMMUN, FA 112d-1005-1, Germany), incubated with this patient’s serum and detected by IIFT. This patient’s serum
collected at different time showed different immunoreactivity to CASPR2 (a, d, g) and LGI1 (b, e, h), and areas with no specific fluorescene
to other proteins on the same slide tested at the same time would be regard as control (c, f, i). The patient’s serum collected on November
26, 2014 showed strong binding to the surface of cells expressing CASPR2 proteins (a) (50x) and moderate binding to the ones expressing LGI1
proteins (b)(50x). The patient’s serum collected on December 26, 2014 showed moderate binding to the surface of cells expressing CASPR2
proteins (d) (50x) and no binding to the ones expressing LGI1 proteins (e) (50x). The patient’s serum collected on January 12, 2015 showed
weak binding to the surface of cells expressing CASPR2 proteins (g) (100x) and no binding to the ones expressing LGI1 proteins (h) (100x)
The immunoreactivity of patient’s serum to CASPR2 and LGI1 proteins. EU90 cells were transfected with cDNAs encoding CASPR2, LGI1 and other
four neuropil proteins associated with autoimmune encephalitis (EUROIMMUN, FA 112d-1005-1, Germany), incubated with this patient’s serum and
detected by IIFT. This patient’s serum collected at different time showed different immunoreactivity to CASPR2 (a, d, g) and LGI1 (b, e, h),
and areas with no specific fluorescene to other proteins on the same slide tested at the same time would be regard as control (c, f, i). The
patient’s serum collected on November 26, 2014 showed strong binding to the surface of cells expressing CASPR2 proteins (a) (50x) and
moderate binding to the ones expressing LGI1 proteins (b)(50x). The patient’s serum collected on December 26, 2014 showed moderate binding
to the surface of cells expressing CASPR2 proteins (d) (50x) and no binding to the ones expressing LGI1 proteins (e) (50x). The patient’s
serum collected on January 12, 2015 showed weak binding to the surface of cells expressing CASPR2 proteins (g) (100x) and no binding to the
ones expressing LGI1 proteins (h) (100x) VGKC-Ab related limbic encephalitis and Morvan’s syndrome were presumed diagnosis. She was treated
with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at a dose of 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days and continued oral prednisolone 20 mg/day treatment for a month.
Carbamazepine 0.1 g tid was administered instead of levetiracetam to prevent epilepsy recurrence. Her memory loss and confusion responded
quite well to the immunotherapy, while bilateral leg pain, myokymia, shaking of the toes, insomnia as well as hyperhidrosis mildly relieved
but not disappeared. Repeated CSF routine, cells, glucose, chloride, protein, CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab were within the normal range. Serum
CASPR2-Ab was still positive (+) while LGIA-Ab turned negative. Electromyography (EMG) revealed abnormal F wave in bilateral lower limb,
indicating abnormal peripheral nerve excitability. Nerve conduction velocity showed normal motor and sensory nerve responses, and
somatosensory evoked potential (SEP) of lower limbs were normal. Methylprednisolone pulse therapy (1 g for 3 days and 500 mg for 3 days) was
commenced, after which all symptoms above got significant remission. Repeated MMSE was 27/30. Repeated serum CASPR2-Ab turned weakly
positive (±). Prednisolone 60 mg daily oral treatment was administered subsequently with slow tapering (Fig. 3). She did a good job in
following the treatment plan and showed no specific adverse reaction. In a 50 days’ follow-up, after stopping all the drugs for almost
1 week, her repeated MRI (Fig. 1) were normal and all of her symptoms experienced complete remission.Fig. 3Timing of clinical course,
antibodies test and treatment. 0, No symptom; +, mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; IVIG, intravenous immunogloblin; PED, prednisone; MP,
methylprednisolone; LEV, Levetiracetam; CBZ, carbamazepine Timing of clinical course, antibodies test and treatment. 0, No symptom; +, mild;
++, moderate; +++, severe; IVIG, intravenous immunogloblin; PED, prednisone; MP, methylprednisolone; LEV, Levetiracetam; CBZ, carbamazepine
Serum from the patient was qualitatively tested for neuropil antibodies associated with autoimmune encephalitis including antibodies to
glutamate receptors type NMDA, type AMPA1 and type AMPA2, LGI1, CASPR2 and GABARB1/B2using the indirect immunofluorescence test (IIFT)
(EUROIMMUN, FA 112d-1005-1, Germany). Cell-based assays (CBAs) for those antibodies were performed using EU90 cells (EUROIMMUN) transfected
with cDNAs encoding the relevant proteins. Combinations of substrates were incubated with patient serum (1:10 dilution) or undiluted CSF
sample. In a second step, the attached antibodies were stained with fluorescein-labelled anti-human antibodies (EUROIMMUN) and made visible
with a fluorescence microscope. Each slide was devided into six areas detected for the above-mentioned six antibodies and those areas with
no specific fluorescene would be regard as the control of positive area with specific fluorescence. Fluorescence intensity level was used to
describe the intensity of the specific fluorescence as a numeric value, reaching from “0” or “−” (no specific fluorescence) to “5” or
“+++++” (extremely strong specific fluorescence). The deviation in the fluorescence intensity of the IIFT amounted to no more than ± 1
fluorescence intensity level for all samples. There are very few female Morvan syndrome cases with both CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab positive [1,
7, 10]. Loukaides et al. have reported a 67-year-old man with autoantibodies targeting LGI1, CASPR2 and Contactin-2/Tag-1 presenting with
Morvan syndrome. Klein et al. and Lai et al. have reported 9 patients whose CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab were both positive, but none of them were
diagnosed with Morvan syndrome. Although 29 Morvan syndrome cases have been collected by Irani et al. , of which only two patients were
female. Our patient’s symptoms can be devided into following aspects. Neuropathic pain, widespread myokymia and shaking of the toes were
manifestations of PNH [2, 3]. And epilepsy, recent memory loss, confusion and apathy were classified as symptoms of limbic encephalitis (LE)
[1, 4, 9]. With hyperhidrosis as dysautonomia and insomnia, the patient was diagnosised with a typical Morvan syndrome . Compared with LE,
Morvan syndrome showed significant less amnesia, confusion or seizures as the neuropsychiatric manifestations, but more hallucinations and
agitation. Whereas the presence of neuromyotonia, dysautomia (hyperhidrosis, cardiovascular) and neuropathic pain would help to distinguish
Morvan syndrome from classical LE . In addition, most Morvan syndrome patients were reported with normal cranial MRI findings [4, 8]. For
this patient, we would like to attribute the encephalopathic clinical features as well as abnormal intensity on cranial MRI to the common
phenomenon of LE. Thus this patient should be diagnosed with classical LE as well as Morvan syndrome. There was a detailed change of the
clinical manifestation and titers of antibodies along with the treatment. In the beginning, her serum CASPR2-Ab was strongly positive (+++)
and LGI1-Ab was positive (+), while CSF LGI1-Ab was weakly positive (±). After the treatment of IVIG, both her serum and CSF LGI1-Ab turned
negative, and in the meanwhile her memory loss, confusion and apathy resolved to some extent. At the same time, her serum CASPR2-Ab kept
positive, from which we could conclude that LGI1-Ab was the primarily relevant antibody for these encephalopathic symptoms. In this case we
can’t arbitrarily contribute the seizure to LGI1-Ab for the timely treatment with antiepileptic drugs since the beginning of seizure. After
the methylprednisolone pulse therapy, her symptoms of PNH, insomnia and hyperhidrosis almost disappeared while serum CASPR2-Ab turned weakly
positive. Besides, titer of CASPR2-Ab was always higher than that of LGI1-Ab, which indicated the association of CASPR2-Ab with PNH and
Morvan syndrome. This agrees with the different clinical features of CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab that CASPR2-Ab was in association with PNH and
Morvan syndrome while LGI1-Ab with memory loss, cognitive impairment and seizures [2, 6, 7, 9]. The combination of LGI1-Ab and CASPR2-Ab
attracted our attention. Within the 29 Morvan cases reported by Irani et al. , there were 15 patients with both positive LGI1-Ab and
CASPR2-Ab, among which there were three patients with additional contactin-2 antibodies. Different antibodies may contribute to the distinct
phenotype of Morvan syndrome. Our case also corresponded with the condition that Morvan syndrome is usually associated with high-titer
CASPR2-Ab and often accompanied by lower-titer LGI1-Ab . From her treatment and clinical course, the diverse and overlapping effects of
LGI1-Ab and CASPR2-Ab in Morvan syndrome were apparent. Irani et al. have described 29 Morvan syndrome cases, of which 27 patients were all
male. And all five Morvan syndrome patients reported by Sarosh et al. were male. Seven of eight patients with positive CASPR2-Ab collected
by Lancaster et al. with or without Morvan syndrome were male. The striking male preponderance in patients with Morvan syndrome and
CASPR2-Ab related disease is interesting. In previous study, CASPR2 mRNA has been found in the prostate tissue and Morvan syndrome onset was
observed after scrotal drainage in some cases . These might indicated that the storage and release of relevant antibodies in the male
productive system increase the titer of serum antibodies to cause Morvan syndrome [4, 11]. In the contrast, this case would add a valuable
female resource to the mechanism study of Morvan syndrome and VGKC antibodies. Although LGI1-Ab was commonly agreed with no association with
neoplasm, no agreement on the relation between CASPR2-Ab and neoplasm has been reached. Previous studies have shown CASPR2-Ab positive
patients were more likely to be found with neoplasm especially thymomas, accompanied with acetylcholine receptor antibodies and myasthenia
gravis (MG) [4, 6, 11–13]. And CASPR2 has been reported to function as a tumor suppressor gene in glioma by Bralten et al. . However, some
other studies showed no neoplasm in a long follow-up in CASPR2-Ab positive patients [2, 9]. And there has been no evidence showing the
difference of neoplasm concurrent rate between both CASPR2-Ab and LGI1-Ab positive patients and only CASPR2-Ab positive patients [4, 7].
With a short term follow-up, there has been no finding showed any neoplasm in this patient. Most Morvan syndrome patients without neoplasm
responded well to immunotherapy including IVIG, plasma exchange and corticosteroids, while patients who coexist with neoplasm mostly had a
poor treatment outcome or prognosis [2, 4, 6]. In this case report, as for clinical syndromes, the patient got limited benefit from the
initial IVIG treatment while got significant improvement with methylprednisolone pulse therapy, which was the same with other two cases [8,
15]. However, titres of CASPR2-Ab significantly reduced while LGI1-Ab turned negative with IVIG treatment, so the treatment effect of IVIG
should not be overlooked either. In conclusion, this case provided a rare female case with typical Morvan syndrome as well as classical LE.
It was showed from the detailed analysis of clinical course that the combination of LGI1-Ab and CASPR2-Ab might contribute to distinct
phenotype of Morvan syndrome. With this case, we would like to draw your attention to the diverse and overlapping effects of these two
autoantibodies. As to the treatment outcome and risk for neoplasm, we would have a continuous long follow-up on this patient. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are
available in the zenodo repository. Photos are available on https://zenodo.org/record/35473. And the video is available on
https://zenodo.org/record/35474. peripheral nerve hyperexcitability contactin associated protein-like 2 leucine-rich glioma inactivated
protein 1 limbic encephalitis voltage-gated potassium channels Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions QL interviewed, diagnosed and treated the patient. LZ interpreted the data and drafted the manuscript for
content. HZ-G and HT-R tested the antibodies in the CSF of this patient. MS-L interviewed the patient and did the electromyography for the
patient. JH-M, BP and LY-C contributed to the follow-up of the patients and literature reviewing. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We thank the physicians who provided clinical support and clinical examination. And we also wish to thank our patient and her
family.
