Insulinomas are functional neuroendocrine pancreatic tumors rarely encountered in pediatric pathology. Insulinomas are usually solitary and
sporadic, but may occur in association with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Whipple's triad—hypoglycemia, simultaneous compatible
adrenergic and/or neurological signs, and relief of symptoms upon the administration of glucose—remains the fundamental diagnostic tool. We
report a case of insulinoma in an 11-year-old boy with malnutrition and mild psychic retardation. History revealed neuroglycopenic symptoms
associated with hypoglycemia that returned to normal values after glucose intravenous infusion; before admission in our unit, the levels of
circulating insulin, as well as the abdominal ultrasound and abdominal computed tomography scan, were reported within normal range. During
hospitalization in our service, the glycemic curves showed recurring low values associated with low glycated hemoglobin, positive fasting
test, and elevated C-peptide. The pancreatic ultrasound was inconclusive, but the magnetic resonance imaging revealed a high signal focal
area with a diameter of 1 cm, located in the tail of pancreas. Conventional enucleation of the lesion prompted a spectacular normalization
of glucose metabolism and the alleviation of the main clinical symptoms. The child had a favorable evolution in the clinical follow-up,
presenting with weight gain and progressive remission to complete disappearance of most symptoms—except for the mental impairments. Although
in our case Whipple's triad was apparent from the beginning, the diagnosis was delayed due to the failure of conventional imaging methods in
locating the tumor. Weight loss and mental impairment contributed to the diagnosis pitfalls. Pediatricians should be aware of confusing and
nonspecific symptoms, especially when children with insulinoma present mental or neurological retardation. Despite the existence of medical
regimens, surgery remains the gold standard for the therapeutic approach to this condition. Insulinomas are the most frequently encountered
type of neuroendocrine pancreatic tumors, with a reported incidence of 1 to 4 cases/million persons/y.1,2 This kind of tumor can occur at
any age—Das et al3 reported the case of a 4-month-old baby—with a slight predominance in females. Although most of the lesions are unique,
approximately 10% of them are multiple and occur in association with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1).4 Benign insulinomas are
small tumors that usually measure around 1 to 2 cm. Although the classical Whipple triad—hypoglycemia, simultaneous compatible adrenergic
and/or neurological symptoms, and prompt relief of these symptoms upon glucose intake—is pathognomonic, many pitfalls and errors may arise
in insulinoma diagnosis. Standardized fasting test is mandatory, but the imaging work-up can sometimes be inconclusive for the
objectification of masses that only measure a few millimeters. Although there are other recommended medical regimens, surgical removal
remains the gold standard for this pathology.5,6 An 11-year-old Caucasian boy was admitted into our unit with diffuse abdominal pain, cold
sweats, confusion, tremor, and paresthesias. The patient came from a rural area, where he lived in a community with limited resources. His
mother was 38, in apparent good health, and his father had died at the age of 50 (i.e., 3 years before the admission) from acute myocardial
infarction. The patient had a 9-year-old sister with no significant medical history. The pregnancy was uneventful, with vaginal delivery at
39 weeks. The boy had no perinatal pathology, but since the age of 7 had presented numerous respiratory infections and uninvestigated mild
psychic retardation. History revealed several episodes of faintness, myalgias, paraesthesias, and unexplained irritability; his mother also
reported unusual hunger and tachycardia occurring mainly in the morning hours or after physical exercise. The symptoms started 5 months
before the admission in the hospital service. He was admitted twice in a county hospital; although it was noticed that hypoglycemia (ranging
from 14 to 38 mg/dL) would promptly return to normal values after glucose intravenous infusion, the levels of circulating insulin, as well
as the abdominal ultrasound and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, were reported within normal range. The patient was finally
diagnosed with “idiopathic intermittent” hypoglycemia. An informed consent was given by his mother upon admission; clinical examination
revealed an impaired general condition, normal skin color, marked hypotrophy of stature, and weight (weight = 19.5 kg, height = 132 cm, body
mass index = 17.7 kg/m2). The vital signs were as follows: temperature 98.4°F, heart rate 121 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min,
and blood pressure 96/67 mm Hg without any orthostatic changes. Physical examination revealed the following aspects: normal shaped head with
no sign of trauma, intact extraocular muscles, equal and round pupils, reactive to light and accommodation, normal nostrils; well hydrated
and lesion free oral cavity, with moist mucous membranes; lungs were clear to auscultation; regular heart rate and rhythm, with no murmurs;
cold extremities; soft abdomen, presenting with no tenderness or distension, positive bowel sounds, no organic masses were noted. The
patient described paresthesias, irritability, confusion, dizziness, and tremor; he was hypokinetic, presenting with uncoordinated movements
of the extremities and slight limb spasticity. Neuropsychiatric examination ascertained the patient had a mild mental retardation. During
hospitalization, the glycemic curves showed recurring values <50 mg/dL associated with low glycated hemoglobin (reported value: 3.90%;
normal value: 4%–6%), a fasting insulinemia of 12.6 μU/mL (normal value <6 μU/mL) together with a postprandial insulinemia of 72.1 μU/mL,
and elevated C-peptide level (reported value: 6.42 ng/mL; normal value <2 ng/mL). The urine sample was normal. Low serum glucose levels were
closely monitored, and the patient received continuous intravenous serum glucose and electrolyte solutions. The pancreatic ultrasound was
inconclusive, but the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a high signal focal area with a diameter of 1 cm, located in the tail of
pancreas (Figure 1). MRI: high signal focal area of 1 cm in diameter in the tail of the pancreas. MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.
Considering the case history, the clinical, biochemical and imaging findings, and excluding other causes of hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia—such as exogenous insulin administration or accidental ingestion of oral antidiabetic medicine—the patient was temporarily
diagnosed with hypoglycemia-inducing caudal pancreatic tumor, which was a clear indication for surgical treatment. The patient underwent an
open surgical procedure. Complete mobilization and careful exploration of the pancreas revealed a firm nodule located in the tail of the
pancreas which was easily enucleated; the piece was routinely fixed in 4% formaldehyde and embedded in paraffin for pathological
examination. The excised tumor measuring 1 cm in diameter was well-circumscribed, softer than the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma, and had
a yellow-brownish cut surface that did not appear to be necrotic or cystic (Figure 2). Further immunohistochemical examination of the
operative piece was positive for chromogranin A associated with the cytoplasmic neurosecretory granules of the tumor cells and approximately
8% of nuclear Ki67 positivity (Figures 3 and 4). The patient's immediate postoperative course was uneventful. Plasma insulin values promptly
returned to normal, but transient hyperglycemia occurred and lasted for approximately 48 hours. However, no further episodes of hypoglycemia
were recorded. The patient was discharged without hypoglycemic symptoms 8 days later. He currently has a favorable evolution in the clinical
follow-up, presenting with weight gain and progressive remission to complete disappearance of most symptoms—except for the mental
impairments. Insulinoma, operative piece. Immunohistochemistry positive for chromogranin A associated with the cytoplasmic neurosecretory
granules of the tumor cells. Nuclear Ki67 positivity (approximately 8%). Insulinomas are a particular kind within the broad category of
neuroendocrine pancreatic tumors by virtue of their incidence, pathogenic mechanisms, symptomatology and biology, as well as due to the
diagnostic difficulties and pitfalls, the natural history, and last but not least, the therapeutic possibilities. These lesions are very
rare, with around 1 to 4 new cases occurring per million persons per year, and particularly uncommon in children—the mid-20th century
medical literature only gathering dozens of isolated or small series of cases.7–11 Although most insulinomas are solitary and sporadic—such
as in our case —10% of them occur in connection with MEN1.12–14 Most insulinomas are benign, but up to 10% can be malignant.14,15 The
clinical presentation of patients includes neuroglycopenic symptoms such as loss of consciousness, lethargy, confusion, dizziness, recurrent
seizures, and coma. Other symptoms are related to the catecholamine response, such as palpitations, tachycardia, and hypertension, as well
as hunger, weight gain, epigastric pain, or vomiting. Nonetheless, Whipple's triad remains the fundamental diagnostic tool.16,17 Although in
our case the triad was apparent from the beginning, the diagnosis was delayed due to the failure of conventional imaging methods in locating
the tumor. Unlike other cases reported by authors, this patient presented with weight loss.18 Also, the mental impairment could be
attributed to the frequent hypoglycemic episodes and the psychological stress caused by the death of the patient's father, as well as to the
lack of global stimulation due to poor education associated with a low socioeconomic status. Other authors reported diagnostic difficulties
associated with confusing neurologic symptoms, such as recurrent seizures, that were diagnosed as drug-refractory epilepsy.16–18 Childhood
insulinoma should not be confused with pancreatic nesidioblastosis or persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PHHI), which has
a higher incidence in Saudi children and Ashkenazi Jewish populations, with a focal or diffuse hyperfunction of the β islet cells.19 PHHI
has a very early onset (hours/days after the birth), presenting with persistent hypoglycemia and hyperinsulinism, and sometimes even leading
to sudden death. The biological assessment of insulinomas includes glucose levels quickly dropping <40 mg/dL and C-peptide levels exceeding
0.6 μg/mL, as well as high levels of circulating insulin and proinsulin. The increase of serum immunoreactive insulin levels in response to
secretin is significantly lower than in normal persons.20 A combination of gadolinium MRI, triple-phase CT, octreotide scanning, selective
intra-arterial calcium stimulation, and particularly endoscopic and intraoperative ultrasound may actually detect almost all lesions.21 The
initial treatment of childhood insulinoma is dietary and focused on preventing hypoglycemia. Diazoxide suppresses insulin secretion and
enhances glycogenolysis, but has severe adverse effects including sodium retention, congestive heart failure, or hirsutism. The
administration of somatostatin is frequently unsuccessful because unlike other neuroendocrine tumors many insulinomas do not express the
necessary somatostatin receptors. Octreotide and lanreotide maintain insulinemia within reasonable limits. Systemic chemotherapy, including
combination of streptozotocin and doxorubicin associated with chemoembolization, peptide-receptor radionuclide therapy, radiofrequency
ablation, or cryotherapy, may lead to temporary palliation of symptoms and may inhibit tumor growth.22,23 However, surgery is the only
radical method of treatment, whether by enucleation or limited distal, central or even cephalic resection (sometimes with laparoscopic
approach) in order to ensure stable healing.24,25 Total pancreatectomy and lymphadenectomy, if necessary, is reserved for extremely rare
malignant cases.26 Insulinomas are the most frequent neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas, yet with an extremely rare incidence during
childhood. As with most other neuroendocrine tumors, insulinomas are often difficult to diagnose due to the unpredictable presentation of
its symptoms and involve numerous biochemical and imaging tests to document the reality and topography of endogenous hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia. Pediatricians should be aware of confusing and nonspecific symptoms, especially when the patient presents with mental or
neurological retardation. Surgical removal is the mainstay of treatment for these tumors. The authors thank the Pathology Department of “St.
Mary” Emergency Hospital for Children, Iasi, Romania. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, MEN1 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1,
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PHHI = persistent hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycemia of infancy The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.
