Therapy for large symptomatic keloids is often plagued with complicated reconstruction manner and recurrence. This article reports a rare
treatment combination for a chest keloid with internal mammary artery perforator flap reconstruction and radiation therapy. We excised the
keloid and covered the defect with an internal mammary artery perforator flap. Immediate electron-beam irradiation therapy was applied on
the second postoperative day. There was no sign of recurrence over the follow-up period of 18 months. The combination of internal mammary
artery perforator flap and immediate radiation therapy is useful when faced with chest keloids of similar magnitude and intractability.
Keloids are common, benign, hyperproliferative growths of dermal collagen of unknown etiology. Due to pain, hyperesthesia, pruritus, and
significant psychosocial impact on quality of life, strategic approaches should be taken in keloid management. Many treatment modalities,
including surgery, intralesional corticosteroid injection, pressure therapy, radiation, cryotherapy, silicone gel application, lasers,
photodynamic therapy, have yielded limited success for large keloids.1 The lesions are frequently located at areas of stretching tension
such as the anterior chest, shoulder and upper back. According to previous studies, the presence of tension seems to be one of the
determinant factors for keloid formation.2 Here we relate a case of chest keloid, involving the combined treatments of internal mammary
artery perforator (IMAP) flap reconstruction and radiation therapy. Recommendation of their use is underpinned by the core concepts of
tension-free reconstruction manner and rational multimodality therapies focused on prevention of recurrence. A 45-year-old man was diagnosed
with a recurrent major keloid over his chest, which he had had for over 13 years. Past history consisted of repeated failed excisions and
intralesional steroid injections. The patient suffered from localized pain and itching as well as progressive enlargement of the keloid. On
physical examination, a large 6(W) (×) 8(L) (×) 1.5cm (thick) epidermal mass was seen over the midline of his chest below the cartilago
ensiformis (Figure 1). The patient was concerned about the risk of recurrence. Therefore, a radical excision with flap coverage was planned,
followed by electron-beam irradiation therapy. Figure 1Preoperative view of reluctant chest keloid Preoperative view of reluctant chest
keloid The patient underwent complete resection of the keloid (Figure 2). An IMAP flap of 9×7cm skin dimension was harvested on the lateral
side of his chest. The flap was based on the perforators in the fifth intercostal space and rotated 180°along the vascular axis to the chest
wall defect. After suturing the flap completely without tension, a percutaneous drain was placed. The donor site was closed directly, which
releasing tension by subcutaneous and fascial sutures (Figure 3).Histological analysis revealed a typical keloid feature. Figure 2IMAP Flap
design during the excision IMAP Flap design during the excision Figure 3IMAP Flap was rotated 180° with primary closure of the donor site
IMAP Flap was rotated 180° with primary closure of the donor site To achieve tight control in preventing recurrence, our patient initiated
adjuvant electron-beam irradiation therapy on the second postoperative day. He received 13 Gy over four fractions in total. After being
discharged, the patient continued to heal well and the flap showed stable circulation without limited necrosis or other conditions. At his
last follow-up (18 months later), he was asymptomatic and demonstrated no sign of keloids at the donor or recipient site (Figure 4). The
patient was highly satisfied with his result, and was rated "good" by the surgeons. Figure 4Follow up after postoperative radiotherapy
Follow up after postoperative radiotherapy This patient is one of few reported cases of flaps for keloid reconstruction in the English
literature. Treatment of a large sternum keloid was reported, associated with bilateral mammaplasty, from which the remaining skin was used
for the sternum defect.3 There are two recorded cases of microvascular free tissue transfer for keloid reconstruction using transverse
rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap and free myocutaneous left lateral arm flap.4Furthermore, clinical trials revealed that skin flaps,
combined with postoperative radiotherapy, can be more effective in keloid treatment.5 As a general rule, closing the wound should be
performed with minimal tension, therefore, Z-plasties, W-plasties and advancement local flaps may indeed be indicated.5In our case, the IMAP
flap was chosen for his chest keloid. IMAP flap is an island flap with perforators from the internal mammary artery. Previous studies have
shown that this flap is a reliable and less invasive option for localized reconstruction of the chest wall.6 Its advantages lie in the
flap's mobility range (90-180° to reach the opposite chest wall), minimal morbidity at the donor site, the cosmetic match to the reception
site, as well as its relatively thin tissue. Keloid resection and defect reconstruction were only the first step. The second challenge was
postoperative keloid prevention. Keloids in the sternum area are frequently complicated by high recurrence. Surgical excision alone leads to
recurrence rates ranging from 80% to 100%.1 The use of radiotherapy as an adjunct treatment has shown success rates of between 52.4% and
91%.7 It has been suggested that radiation may inhibit fibroblasts and neovascular buds.4 Assessed among other existing adjunct modalities,
flapscans provide bulk in addition to cover. Hence, they provide better radiation resistance than skin grafts and other coverage with poor
vascularity. By applying the IMAP flap in our patient, postoperative radiation may be considered the primary treatment option. For scar
management recommendations in Asian, low-dose fractionated radiotherapy (12 Gy in three fractions) remains an effective adjuvant option.8
Although scar sites with high stretch tension could be treated with higher doses, up to 32 Gy in the literature, we opted for a normal dose,
as the IMAP flap had ensured maximum tension relief.7 Moreover, for low dose therapy, the risk of carcinogenesis attributed to radiation
therapy is very low when the surrounding tissues are adequately protected.8 The limitation of our treatment combination lies in the surgical
needs of a donor site and the essential radiation protection. Diverse adjuvant methods have been associated with recurrence rates of less
than 10%.1 Novel immune modulators, such as topical imiquimod or intralesional interferon-alpha and 5-fluorouracil, used in adjunction with
surgery and the latest available technology in dermal replacement, could yield better alternatives.5For future undertakings, it may be
useful to enroll a series of patients,observe multiple adjuvant therapies and ensure comprehensive documentation of results. Conflict of
Interest: None. Financial support: The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81301654) and the Foundation of Education
Department of Zhejiang Province (No. 491020-G21393) provided funding for this work. Work performed at the Department of Plasticand
Reconstruction Surgery The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University - Zhejiang, China.
