Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 66 Final Diagnosis: Awakening blood pressure rise Symptoms: Syncope
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring Specialty: Cardiology Challenging differential diagnosis The
pathophysiological mechanism causing awakening blood pressure (BP) rise is not clear. We report the case of a 66-year-old man with a history
of spinal cord injury, and who had remarkable awakening BP rise in ambulatory BP monitoring. The patient also had orthostatic hypotension
and post-prandial hypotension associated with an increased insulin level. This case suggests that awakening BP rise can occur without
increased physical activity or positional changes, in those with autonomic nerve dysreflexia associated with a spinal cord injury. The
reduction of elevated awakening BP level can be affected by eating breakfast in association with an increased insulin level. However, in
ambulatory BP monitoring, the awakening BP rise was reproducible, but this patient also exhibited evening BP rise in home BP monitoring when
he took a nap. Exaggerated awakening BP rise can occur in patients with spinal cord injury without positional change, and the recovery of BP
may be modified by post-prandial and orthostatic BP drop. BP tends to be higher upon awakening in the morning than at other times during
ambulatory BP monitoring, and it has been reported that the elevated BP is associated with elevated incidence of cardiovascular events early
in the morning . However, the cause of BP elevation in the morning remains unclear. The possible mechanisms causing BP elevation in the
morning are: (1) postural change (orthostatic hypertension) , (2) sympathetic nerve activation , (3) activation of the renin-aldosterone
system, and (4) activation of the cortisol system. Kario et al. hypothesized that subjects with awakening BP rise were associated with
orthostatic BP rise after standing up. Stergiou et al. also reported that BP rise after awakening can occur even after taking a nap. These
reports suggest that the BP rise in the morning hours is a phenomenon that occurs after awakening (but it is not a chronological
phenomenon). Patients with spinal cord injury often have autonomic nerve dysfunction, which causes increased blood pressure variability;
however, there is no previous report showing that awakening blood pressure rise could be observed in patients with spinal cord injury. A
66-year-old man was admitted to the hospital because of repeated syncope due to postprandial hypotension. The patient had sustained a spinal
cord injury at the level between the 4th and 5th thoracic vertebra when he was 24 years old. After the injury, he had paraplegia and lies on
the bed throughout the day, except when in a wheel chair in a passive sitting position. He had strong constipation and was obliged to use
glycerin sp. for defecation on a regular basis. Several months before the admission, the patient became unconscious just after eating and
after sitting repeatedly, and he was therefore admitted to the hospital. On physical examination, he was alert when he was lying down on the
bed. Blood pressures (BP) measured at the left upper arm in a supine position were 154/81 mmHg before breakfast, 69/43 mmHg after breakfast,
116/71 mmHg before dinner, and 84/54 mmHg after dinner. BP also dropped from 128/90 mmHg (pulse rate 62 beats per min) in a supine position
to 89/61 mmHg (pulse rate 56 beats per min) after sitting-up for 30 min. His height was 150 cm, body weight was 50 kg, and body mass index
was 22.2 kg/m2. There were no bruits on the neck or abdomen. Heart and respiratory sounds were normal. The abdomen was not distended. There
was no edema in his feet. The patient was alert and had normal higher cerebral function, but he was paraplegic and had sensory disturbance
at the level of the 4th thoracic vertebra. The chest x-ray and electrocardiogram were normal. There was no episode of arrhythmia suggesting
Adam-Stokes attack in the continuous electrocardiogram monitor. In the laboratory examination (Table 1) there were no significant findings
suggestive of anemia, diabetes, or secondary hypertension. Brain CT was normal. In the echocardiogram, the wall motion of the left ventricle
was normal. The results of BP during a 75-g glucose tolerance test are shown in Figure 1. The fasting glucose level was 102 mg/dl and
increased to 171 mg/dl at 60 min after 75-g glucose ingestion. The level of serum insulin had a parallel change to serum glucose level. The
BP had the opposite change to serum insulin level (i.e., it dropped until 60 min after 75-g glucose ingestion, and then recovered).
Additionally, even when glucose was administered to the patient intravenously, there was a drop in BP at the time when the insulin level was
elevated (Figure 2). The result of 24-h ambulatory BP monitoring (taken at 15-min intervals) is shown in Figure 3. The mean 24-h ambulatory
BP was 122/74 mmHg (pulse rate 62 beats/min). The blood pressure decreased remarkably after eating in a supine position. Moreover, awakening
systolic BP was increased by 78 mmHg (from the night-time lowest systolic BP 89 mmHg to morning systolic BP mmHg 167 mmHg), according to the
definition in a previous report . Percutaneous oxygen saturation during sleeping hours was normal, and the patient was unlikely to have had
sleep-disordered breathing. The result of heart rate variability showed that there were no findings suggestive of sympathetic nerve
activation, as measured as low-frequency (LF)/high-frequency (HF) component, in the morning hours, although parasympathetic nerve
activations, measured as HF component, were observed after breakfast. The patient was evaluated for serum catecholamine, renin activity,
aldosterone, and cortisol levels just before sleeping and after awakening (in the same supine position). On another day of 24-h BP
monitoring, the serum adrenaline and cortisol levels in the morning hours were slightly higher than those in the evening (adrenaline, 9.0 to
13.0 pg/ml; cortisol, 5.3 to 9.5 µg/dl), but the levels of dopamine, noradrenaline, and aldosterone, as well as plasma renin activity, in
the morning hours were slightly lower than those in the evening (dopamine 24.0 to <5.0 pg/ml, noradrenaline, 297.0 to 251.0 pg/ml; renin
activity, 0.3 to 0.2 ng/ml/hr; aldosterone, 65.4 to 42.3 pg/ml). The awakening BP rise was reproducible in a repeated ambulatory BP
monitoring; however, this patient demonstrated BP rise not only in the morning, but also in the evening when he took a nap during home BP
monitoring. The patient was prescribed Droxidopa 200 mg p.o. at 30 min before eating, and was discharged from the hospital without
unconscious events after eating. The patient in this case report was unable to sit down by himself and remained lying down during the
ambulatory BP monitoring. The remarkable awakening BP rise in the patient occurred without postural change or increased physical activity.
The awakening BP rise in ambulatory BP monitoring was reproducible, but the patient also exhibited evening BP rise in home BP monitoring
when he took a nap. Sympathetic nerve activity, measured as the LF/HF component of heart rate variability, was not elevated in the morning
hours during the 24-h BP monitoring. The patient had slightly higher adrenaline and cortisol levels in the morning hours than in the
evening, but the changes were clinically subtle. It has been reported that blood vessels in the upper portion of the body receive
sympathetic nerve innervations from the Th1 to Th5 spinal sympathetic neurons, while the major vasculature beds in the splanchnic region and
lower extremities are under the control of the more caudal Th6 to L2 sympathetic preganglionic neurons. Therefore, pronounced cardiovascular
dysfunction occurred by the spinal cord injury above Th6 and the level of spinal cord injury in our patient was Th4. After awakening in the
morning, BP level decreased after eating breakfast, with increased parasympathetic activity measured as HF component. It was reported that
parasympathetic nerve activity can be preserved in patients with spinal cord injury of Th4 . The “lowest” BP in the sleeping hours was
associated with the parasympathetic nerve activity without eating. The parasympathetic nerve activation during the sleeping hours might help
cause extreme-dipping status. Awakening BP rise is a normal physiological response in general, but exaggerated BP rise could be
pathogenetic. The exaggerated awakening BP rise could be caused by autonomic dysreflexia and impaired baroreflex response associated with
spinal cord injury. Impaired baroreflex response causes hypertensive crisis, volatile hypertension, orthostatic tachycardia, and malignant
vagotonia . As seen in the results of the home BP monitoring, an exaggerated BP rise can occur even in the evening when taking a nap.
Therefore, the term “morning BP rise” is inappropriate and we should use “awakening BP rise”. The cardiovascular risk associated with
awakening BP rise is still controversial. In retrospective analysis of prospective cohorts in Japan, exaggerated awakening BP rise was
reported to be associated with stroke events in elderly hypertensive patients and with cerebral hemorrhage in a general population , but
there is no prospective study that confirms the results by predefined hypothesis. Moreover, many cohorts in Europe demonstrated that a
greater awakening BP rise was associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular events. Therefore, we focused on the background causing
exaggerated awakening BP rise. Patients with spinal cord injury were reported to have an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality .
Postprandial hypotension in the present case was managed successfully with droxidopa taken before eating, but the effect of droxidopa for
neurogenic orthostatic hypotension is controversial . We did not prescribe antihypertensive medication to manage the awakening BP rise,
because the exaggerated awakening blood pressure rise was reduced after eating or sitting-up. Moreover, there are no data showing that a
reduced awakening BP rise is associated with reduced hypertensive organ damage. We treated a patient with spinal cord injury and autonomic
nerve dysreflexia, who exhibited exaggerated awakening BP rise in ambulatory BP monitoring, without changes in physical activity or
position. Postprandial and orthostatic hypotension could be associated with exaggerated awakening BP rise. Change in blood pressure and
pulse rate during a 75-g glucose tolerance test. Change in blood pressure and pulse rate during intravenous administration of glucose (25
g). Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Awakening blood pressure (BP) was 123/75 mmHg (pulse rate 63 beats/min), asleep BP was 119/71 mmHg
(pulse rate 57 beats/min) (nocturnal BP fall 3%), 24-h average BP was 122/74 mmHg (pulse rate 62 beats/min), night-time BP (the lowest) was
89/63 mmHg (pulse rate 55 beats/min), morning BP was 167/93 mmHg (pulse rate 70 beats/min), and morning BP surge was 78 mmHg. Laboratory
data.
