We describe two patients with HIV/AIDS who presented pulmonary and intestinal infection caused by Cryptosporidium parvum, with a fatal
outcome. The lack of available description of changes in clinical signs and radiographic characteristics of this disease when it is located
in the extra-intestinal region causes low prevalence of early diagnosis and a subsequent lack of treatment. Cryptosporidium parvum is an
obligate intracellular parasite of the Coccidia class that infects the microvilli epithelial cells of the digestive and respiratory
systems1. This parasite is responsible for causing severe diarrhea in approximately 55% of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) patients living in developing countries2. Among the 16 currently described species of Cryptosporidium, C.
parvum and C. hominis are those that predominate in immunocompromised individuals3. Infection occurs after ingestion of water or food
contaminated with oocysts or direct person-to-person or animal-person contact4. Respiratory forms of infection can happen upon inhalation of
oocysts during an episode of vomiting5 , 6. Studies by LOPEZ-VELEZ et al. 7 and CLAVEL et al. 8 found that 30.2% of patients with intestinal
cryptosporidiosis also carried extraintestinal infections in both the lungs and bile. The studies mentioned above reported high mortality
rates amongst the patients as these cases showed dramatically lower CD4 + cell counts, ultimately reflecting a very severe degree of
immunosuppression. Therefore, we decided it to be of clinical and educational significance to report our finding of C. parvum (identified by
molecular testing) in fecal samples and sputum from two HIV/AIDS patients. This study was submitted and approved by the Research on Human
Beings Ethics Committee of the Marília Medical School (FAMEMA), under the number 33677514.1.0000.5413. Figure 2 was made using the medical
records of patients what are in the custody of the Serviço de Prontuário de Paciente (SPP) of Marília Medical School. Similarly, the blades
for the manufacture of Figure 3 were photomicrographed in Olympus microscope BX41 model coupled to a digital video camera, Olympus, DP 25
model, DP2-BSW software, Olympus, originals of FAMEMA Parasitology and Microbiology Laboratories. Fig. 1 - A phylogenetic tree was inferred
using the neighbor-joining method28 with 1000 bootstrap replicates, and evolutionary distances calculated using the Kimura 2-parameter29
method. Evolutionary analyzes were performed by MEGA5 software30. Fig. 2- A: Nonspecific radiographic changes presented by Patient 1. B:
Patient 2 without significant radiographic changes. Fig. 3 - A: Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts in faeces stained by the Kinyoun method.B:
Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts in sputum stained by the Ziehl-Neelsen method. On 10/06/2013, a fifty-nine-year-old female patient sought
medical care at the emergency ward of the Marilia Clinical Hospital. The patient reported a two-month-long history of diarrhea, along with
oral moniliasis associated with weight loss of 15 kg +/- over this period. She denied any fever, cough, urinary changes or emesis. The
patient reported one prior medical consultation within Brazil's Specialized Care Service (SAE) with the same story and referring indication
of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), however, without any confirmed CD4 + result. On the day of treatment, the patient had a
physical examination that determined a poor general condition: pale; dehydrated; Heart rate: 68 bpm; Blood pressure: 80 x 50 mmhg; afebrile.
Lungs: Vesicular murmur: present with bibasilar crepitant rales. Heart: S1 and S2 heart sounds normal and regular; without murmurs. Abdomen:
excavated, bowel sounds present and hypoactive, limp and painless. Lower limb: weak pulse, with capillary refill time: 3 seconds. At this
time, supportive measures were instituted, including a broad spectrum treatment for opportunistic diseases. Laboratory tests were requested,
including for detection of Cryptosporidium spp., which ultimately proved positive in both stool samples (method Kinyoun) and sputum (the
Ziehl-Neelsen). On 10/18/2013, a forty-four-year-old female patient was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Ward of Marilia Clinical
Hospital. The patient reported experiencing diarrhea for approximately the previous three months. During this period, the patient
experienced a weight loss of 10 kg, associated with an unmeasured fever and dry cough. On the day of admission, the patient presented a
normal general condition: conscious, oriented, dehydrated and pale. Heart: S1 and S2 heart sounds normal; without murmur Heart rate: 86 bpm,
Lungs: Vesicular murmur: present, no adventitious sounds (Saturation: 98%). Supportive measures and laboratory tests were performed.
Treatment of esophageal candidiasis was initiated upon hospitalization. An Acid-Alcohol Resistant Bacilli (AARB) exam was performed with
negative results, and the analysis of stool and sputum samples forCryptosporidium returned positive. Molecular testing: Stool and sputum
samples from both patients were submitted to a specific detection of Cryptosporidium using Nested PCR method. The fragment of the 18S rRNA
subunit was amplified by nested PCR by using the forward primers: SCL1F 5'-CTGGTTGATCCTGCCAGTAG-3' and reverse CPB-DIAGR
5'-AAGGTGCTGAAGGAGTAAGG-3' which amplify 1035 pb and SSU F 5'-GGAAGGGTTTTTATTGTAAGATAAAG-3' and SSUR 5'-AAGGAGTAA GGATCCACCACAA- 3' which
amplify about 826 pb as previously described by COUPE et al. 9 and XIAO et al. 10 to identify ofCryptosporidium spp. The fragments of the
secondary PCR were purified with GFXTM PCR DNA Gel Band Purification Kit (GE-UK) and directly sequenced. The nucleotide sequences obtained
were analyzed and compared with those registered in GenBank, and phylogenetic analysis were used on the aligned sequences to assess
relationships among sequences that allowed the identification of Cryptosporidium parvum in both patients. The low number of diagnosed cases
of extraintestinal cryptosporidiosis, especially of pulmonary location, is largely due to the absence of specific clinical signs, as well as
the presence of radiological abnormalities, which can be confused with other opportunistic infections that commonly affect patients with
immune impairment. In our cases, parasitological examination by Ziehl-Neelsen and Kinyoun techniques demonstrated the presence of
Cryptosporidium spp. in the sputum and stool (Fig. 3) of two patients. Confirming the presence of the specific species, C. parvum, was
performed by nested PCR of the 18S rRNA region in sputum and feces of patient 2, and sputum of patient 1. Sequencing of the samples was then
performed and aligned with the sequences available in the GenBank database, showing similarity with the C. parvum species, as can be
observed in Figure 1. There is no sufficient molecular data available to support information on the prevalence of C. parvum in clinical
cases in Brazil. ASSISet al. 11 detectedCryptosporidium parvum in 10 HIV-positive patients inMinas Gerais, suggesting a possible zoonotic
transmission of this species of Cryptosporidium. However, many studies showed thatC. hominis, along with C. parvum, are the most frequent
species observe in humans worldwide12 , 13. The differentiation of Cryptosporidium to species level depends on the identification by
specifics molecular methods, which limits the availability of information on the spread of this species of Cryptosporidium in human clinical
cases, mainly in Brazil12. Therefore, the epidemiological importance of reporting these cases is bolstered by the fact that the transmission
of this parasite occurs from person-person14, since certain promiscuous habits can happen primarily amongst practitioners of oro-anal
intercourse, putting these individuals at specific risk of infection12 , 15 , 16. Although the results demonstrated the presence of C.
parvum in stool and sputum, indicating the possibility that pulmonary infection has occurred through inhalation of oocysts during an episode
of vomiting, as mentioned by some authors6, one cannot rule out the spread by hematogenous route, since it is described as the presence of
the parasite within macrophages17. GENTILE et al. 18 reported finding Cryptosporidium oocysts within blood vessels and studies of MARTINEZ
et al. 19 in anin vitro study conducted in mice, demonstrated thatCryptosporidium can multiply within macrophages, resisting the action of
lysosomal enzymes, making it difficult to control the infection in immunocompromised patients in case that this possibility occurred in
humans. Although radiographic changes occurred only in Patient 1, (Fig. 2), specific treatment for cryptosporidiosis was not instituted,
because until then there was no effective treatment for cryptosporidiosis in HIV/AIDS patients. Several authors showed the limited
effectiveness of drugs like Nitazoxanide, Macrolides, or Paromomycin for treating cryptosporidiosis in immunocompromised patients, even if
HAART was associated20 , 21 , 22 , 23. Recently, promising results have been obtained by CASTELLANOS-GONZALEZ et al. (2013)24 when they
treated immunosuppressed mice infected withC. parvum using Calcium-dependent protein kinases inhibitor (CDPK1 inhibitor). Therefore at this
time, we choose to treat the most prevalent infectious diseases in these patients, and antiretroviral therapy HAART was initiated to
recovery the cellular immune system25, since CD4+ cells are decisive for the acquired immune response26. However, in a short space of time,
there was a worsening of the general condition of Patient 1, and she progressed to death. In relation to Patient 2, as she had been
clinically stable, the patient was discharged with guidelines for outpatient follow-up and established HAART. However, the patient did not
return to her scheduled consultations, resulting in an interruption in medical care and, consequently, the maintenance treatment, leading to
a fatal outcome. Seeing as a pulmonary infection, it is considered a rare complication in its intestinal form27, combined with the high
mortality rate of these cases, the lack of formal description of clinical and radiographical changes seen upon extra-intestinal localization
of this parasite, cause an extremely low rate of early diagnosis and untimely treatment.
