Duplication of the distal part of chromosome 6p is a rare genetic syndrome. Renal involvement has been reported in the majority of patients,
including a wide range of congenital abnormalities of kidney and urinary tract and, occasionally, a proteinuric glomerulopathy. Here, we
report a 13-year-old girl with 6p25.3p22.1 duplication who presented with proteinuria in infancy, was later diagnosed as focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis, progressed to end-stage renal disease and was successfully transplanted. A systematic literature review suggests that
15–20 % of individuals with distal 6p duplication develop progressive proteinuric glomerulopathy. Monitoring of kidney function should be
recommended in all cases. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12882-016-0246-2) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. Trisomy of the distal fragment of chromosome 6p is extremely rare. So far, less than 50 patients have been
reported worldwide, each presenting with a distinct region of aberration, unique chromosomal breakpoints and considerable phenotypic
variability . Nevertheless, a few features appear consistent: pre- and post-natal growth retardation, developmental delay, intellectual
disability, dysmorphia, and congenital malformations, most commonly heart, renal and ocular defects (Table 1).Table 1Clinical features of
the distal chromosome 6p duplication syndromePerinatal period: IUGR, general hypotonia, feeding problems, pre- and post-natal growth
retardation,Congenital defects: Brain malformations (cerebellal hypothrophy, hypoplastic corpus callosum, hypothalamic hamartoma,
hydrocephalus internus)Heart defects (PDA, ASD, VSD, postvalvular (peripheral) pulmonary stenoses, ventricular hypertrophy, tetralogy of
Fallot)GI malformations (choanal atresia, anal atresia, diaphragmatic hernia)CAKUT (kidney hypoplasia, kidney aplasia, ectopic kidneys,
hydronephrosis, vesico-ureteral reflux, horseshoe kidney, cystic abnormality of Potter)Craniofacial abnormalities (dysmorphy) Skull (facial
asymmetry, craniosynostosis, frontal bossing, flat occiput)Eye (palpebral ptosis, blepharophimosis, hypotelorism, microophtalmia)Ear (low-
set, malformed lobes, thick helices, malformed pinnae)Nose (prominent nasal bridge, short nose, tiny nares)Mouth (small, thin lips; long
flat philtrum, high arched palate, small pointed chin, micrognathia, gingival hypertrophy)Neurological signs Developmental delayIntellectual
disability (moderate to severe)SeizuresBehavioral problems (autism-spectrum disorders, gentle personality, recurrent laughing spells, low
frustration tolerance)Vision problems (nystagmus, strabismus, cataracts, microcorneas, myopia, retinal pigmentary dystrophy, persistent
hyperplastic primary vitreous with retinal detachment)Hearing lossOther Proteinuria/glomerulopathyGrowth retardation (proportional
microsomy)Recurrent infectionsImmunodeficiencySkin pigmentary anomalies, capillary hemangiomas PDA patent ductus arteriosus, ASD atrial
septal defect, VSD ventricular septal defect Clinical features of the distal chromosome 6p duplication syndrome PDA patent ductus
arteriosus, ASD atrial septal defect, VSD ventricular septal defect The Central European descent girl with a complex genomic disorder
involving chromosome 6p presented with persistent proteinuria from the age of 9 months. Family history was unremarkable. Birth weight,
length and head circumference were below the 3rd centile. General hypotonia and failure to thrive prompted a detailed evaluation, which
revealed dysmorphia and multiple congenital defects, including corpus callosum hypoplasia, moderate internal hydrocephalus, brain asymmetry,
subvalvular pulmonary stenosis and partial synostosis of 1st and 2nd ribs. Distinctive facial features: craniosynostosis, facial asymmetry,
high broad front with frontal bossing, microphthalmia with ptosis and blepharophimosis, broad prominent nose bridge with relatively small
nose, microstomia, narrow lips and low-set dysplastic ears were observed. Nystagmus, strabismus and severe bilateral hearing impairment
developed and developmental milestones were delayed; she was able to sit without support at 14 months and started walking at 39 months of
age. At 13 years she still cannot speak and communicates by basic gestures. She understands and follows simple orders. At the age of
9 months the girl was hospitalized because of proteinuria (1.5 g/l). On admission, total serum protein was 63 g/l, albumin 38.5 g/l,
cholesterol 6.1 mmol/l, creatinine 49 μmol/l with eGFR 70 ml/min/1.73 m2, complement C3 1.54 g/l, C4 0.154 g/l. Serology for prenatal
infections was negative. The girl presented no edema or hypertension. Predisolone (15 mg/day) was started but after four weeks proteinuria
persisted at 0.75 g/l in spot urine. Predisolone was tapered over two months, and enalapril (1.25 mg/day) was introduced. Besides persistent
proteinuria, in the first 3 years of life the girl presented with at least six febrile episodes of urinary tract infection. No
vesicoureteral reflux was revealed by cystography. On ultrasound examination, small kidneys with increased echogenicity and reduced
corticomedullary differentiation were noted. Kidney function gradually deteriorated and the child progressed to end-stage kidney disease.
Peritoneal dialysis was started at the age of 9.8 years. Six months later kidney transplantation from a living-related donor (mother) was
performed and she remains without signs of disease recurrence for 3 years. Kidney biopsy was performed at age 23 months. Four out of 41
glomeruli were globally obsolescent and two segmentally sclerosed. Immunofluorescence showed weak mesangial positivity for IgM. On electron
microscopy, glomerular ultrastructure was generally well preserved, with very few areas exhibiting podocyte foot process effacement,
collapse of capillary tuft, and very limited foci of thinning, splintering and lamellation of the glomeruli basement membrane. Mean
thickness of the basement membrane was 203 nm. The diagnosis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) was made. Conventional cytogenetic
testing showed 46,XX,add(6)(p21), whereas parents exhibited normal karyotypes (Fig. 1a). Array-CGH analysis revealed female hybridization
pattern with ~1 Mb terminal deletion at 6p25 encompassing loci of seven genes and adjacent interstitial duplication of ~28 Mb consisting of
254 genes (Fig. 1c). The results were confirmed by qPCR (Fig. 1b) and FISH studies (Fig. 1d). Finally, the karyotype was established as
follows: 46,XX,dup(6p25p21).ish
inv(6)(p25.3)(RP11-299 J5+)(p22.1)(RP11-121B12++).arr6p25.3(92,934-1,172,037)x1,6p25.3p22.1(1,172,038-29,167,599)x3.Fig. 1 a-d Genetic
studies of the presented case against reported patients with pure distal 6p duplication. a Conventional GTG-banding performed at 550 band
level showing additional genetic material at chromosome 6p (arrow). b Array CGH analysis. Above chromosome 6 ideogram log2 ratio of
patient’s probes are plotted as a function of chromosomal position. Below the chromosome ideogram, mapping of breakpoints of other reported
cases is shown. Of these, seven resulted from an insertion of the duplicated 6p fragment on another chromosome and five, including the
present case, represent explicitly “pure” 6p duplications resulting from an intrachromosomal rearrangement. Note that for six cases –
indicated with black asterisks - determination of the duplicated region was performed on cytogenetic level only, therefore the location of
their breakpoints is only approximate. Chromosomal coordinates are presented according to NCBI36/hg18 assembly. The analysis was performed
using Human CGH 3x720K Whole-Genome Tiling v3.0 Array (NimbleGen, Roche), scanned with MS200 Microarray Scanner (NimbleGen, Roche) and
analyzed using Nexus Copy Number Software 7.1 (BioDiscovery). c Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) validation of array CGH. Dosage of the
three genes localized in region of rearrangement: EXOC2, MAK and DCD2 (their loci indicated by arrows) relative to two reference genes:
GPR15 (3q11.2) and ERMP1 (9p24.1) and normalized to reference DNA. Patient and her parents DNA were analyzed against a reference control
DNA. All samples were run in triplicate. The diploid (two copies of a gene) samples have the normalized ratio = 1 (gray-colored band);
whereas the normalized ratio of 1.5 and 0.5 refers to triploid and monoploid samples respectively. d FISH FISH analysis was performed using
standard procedures with the bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones specific for the aberration’s regions. The chromosome 6
breakpoints were mapped to 6p25.2 with BAC clone RP11-299 J5 (green signal) and to 6p22.1 with BAC clone RP11-121B12 (red signal). Left
interphase; middle and right – metaphase a-d Genetic studies of the presented case against reported patients with pure distal 6p
duplication. a Conventional GTG-banding performed at 550 band level showing additional genetic material at chromosome 6p (arrow). b Array
CGH analysis. Above chromosome 6 ideogram log2 ratio of patient’s probes are plotted as a function of chromosomal position. Below the
chromosome ideogram, mapping of breakpoints of other reported cases is shown. Of these, seven resulted from an insertion of the duplicated
6p fragment on another chromosome and five, including the present case, represent explicitly “pure” 6p duplications resulting from an
intrachromosomal rearrangement. Note that for six cases – indicated with black asterisks - determination of the duplicated region was
performed on cytogenetic level only, therefore the location of their breakpoints is only approximate. Chromosomal coordinates are presented
according to NCBI36/hg18 assembly. The analysis was performed using Human CGH 3x720K Whole-Genome Tiling v3.0 Array (NimbleGen, Roche),
scanned with MS200 Microarray Scanner (NimbleGen, Roche) and analyzed using Nexus Copy Number Software 7.1 (BioDiscovery). c Quantitative
real-time PCR (qPCR) validation of array CGH. Dosage of the three genes localized in region of rearrangement: EXOC2, MAK and DCD2 (their
loci indicated by arrows) relative to two reference genes: GPR15 (3q11.2) and ERMP1 (9p24.1) and normalized to reference DNA. Patient and
her parents DNA were analyzed against a reference control DNA. All samples were run in triplicate. The diploid (two copies of a gene)
samples have the normalized ratio = 1 (gray-colored band); whereas the normalized ratio of 1.5 and 0.5 refers to triploid and monoploid
samples respectively. d FISH FISH analysis was performed using standard procedures with the bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones
specific for the aberration’s regions. The chromosome 6 breakpoints were mapped to 6p25.2 with BAC clone RP11-299 J5 (green signal) and to
6p22.1 with BAC clone RP11-121B12 (red signal). Left interphase; middle and right – metaphase Mutational screening of 31 glomerulopathy-
associated genes using a custom-designed multiplex PCR (Multiplicom, Niel, Belgium) revealed no pathogenic mutation in any of the genes
tested, NPHS1, NPHS2 and WT1 included. In most cases reported, distal trisomy 6p results from an unbalanced inheritance of a parental
translocation. The clinical picture of these patients is influenced by the accompanying monosomy of an another chromosomal region. Here, we
present an extremely rare case of a pure chromosome 6p duplication resulting from de novo reverse duplication (Fig. 1d). A review of the
published cases along with database search allowed for identification of 12 individuals whose region of duplication was partially
overlapping with the region affected in our case (Fig. 1c). Renal abnormalities have been observed in approximately half of the patients.
Congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT), such as hypoplastic kidneys, renal cysts, vesicoureteral reflux and
hydronephrosis have been described [4, 6, 7]. In addition, proteinuria has been reported in eight patients. These included two cases of a
pure 6p duplication [5, 7] and six with a duplication resulting from an unbalanced parental translocation (after [4, 7–9]). The presented
case is, however, the first to be comprehensively studied for mutations in all known glomerulopathy-associated genes to rule out co-
incidence of two genetic entities. Based on the findings reported to date, we estimate that at least 15–20 % of patients with terminal 6p
duplication might develop proteinuria. This may be an underestimate since kidney disease may still be clinically silent at the time when the
genetic diagnosis is established. The age at onset of proteinuria was less than three years in 7/9 subjects including the present case; the
remaining two developed glomerular failure before the age of ten years. Six patients underwent kidney biopsy. Of these, three were diagnosed
with FSGS, while membranous glomerulonephritis, focal mesangial hypercellularity and periglomerular fibrosis was reported each in one case.
Five patients underwent kidney transplant at age 4–18 years; so far no disease recurrence has been reported, suggesting an intrinsic renal
rather than a systemic abnormality as the cause of glomerulopathy. Resistance to steroids was observed In two treated subjects including the
present case. Giardino et al. proposed 6p22– > 6pter as the most likely localization of the putative locus of the causative gene(s). Taking
into account breakpoints of a few patients published afterwards including our case, we are able to further narrow the smallest region of the
overlap to the 6p25 band. The assigned region comprises 29 protein-coding genes and three miRNAs (Additional file 1: Table S1). None of the
established glomerulopathy-associated genes is located within the region of interest. A recent review described candidate genes expected to
be involved in phenotypic features of the distal chromosome 6p duplication syndrome . Of these, only one, namely FOXC1, was identified as a
player in kidney development and functioning. FOXC1 encodes a transcription factor that, along with Lmx1b, interacts synergistically through
a common enhancer site to regulate the expression of podocyte specific genes, including NPHS2 . Mutations in FOXC1 have previously been
described in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and/or glaucoma (OMIM*601090). Haploinsufficiency studies have identified FOXC1 as a
strongly dosage sensitive gene, supporting the hypothesis that FOXC1 may be pathogenic if overexpressed. Our findings reinforce the
hypothesis that the proximal 6p region contains gene(s) involved not only in kidney development but also in postnatal podocyte function. We
recommend monitoring of kidney morphology and function in all patients with constitutive distal 6p duplication. Conversely, in patients with
features of CAKUT and/or SRNS/FSGS who have associated syndromic disease array-CGH evaluation for chromosome 6p duplication should be
performed. Additional file 1: List of the genes in the smallest region of overlap in patients with constitutional distal chromosome 6p
duplication presenting with glomerulopathy. (PDF 457 kb) List of the genes in the smallest region of overlap in patients with constitutional
distal chromosome 6p duplication presenting with glomerulopathy. (PDF 457 kb) Competing interests None. The results presented in this paper
have not been published previously in whole or part. Authors’ contribution AJ conceived the study, contributed to acquisition of data as
initial primary nephrologist of the patient, coordinated the study and helped to draft the manuscript, MK: performed molecular and
cytogenetic studies (aCGH, qPCR, NGS); AB: contributed to acquisition of the data as the current primary nephrologist of the patient; JB
performed FISH studies; FS contributed to the conception, design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript; BSL-Z contributed to the
conception, design of the study, performed Sanger sequencing of /NPHS2, WT1/ genes, designed the experiments, performed interpretation of
data, and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the Polish
National Science Centre (011/01/D/NZ2/01600) and the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement
n° 2012-305608 (EURenOmics). The authors thank dr. A. Matuleviciene from Centre of Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital,
Lithuania and dr. Mariola Iliszko from Department of Biology and Genetics for conventional cytogenetic (karyotype) studies; dr. Beata
Nowakowska from Department of Medical Genetics at the Institute of Mother and Child in Warsaw, Poland for help with FISH studies and prof.
Arvydas Laurinavičius from National Pathology Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania for pathology evaluation. Consent was obtained from the parents
of the child to publish details of this case report.
