Pathological laughing and crying, or pseudobulbar affect (PBA), has been described in patients with neurological disorders such as multiple
sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, stroke, and traumatic brain injury (TBI) since the 19th century (Schiffer
2005). The syndrome is characterized by inappropriate episodes of laughing or crying after minor stimuli. It was first coined a
disinhibition of cortical control by Kinnier Wilson in 1924. It was observed in brain disease and seen with mild TBI. It can impair social
and occupational function and is largely underrecognized in clinical settings. PBA is usually treated with antidepressants and dopaminergic
agents. In this case we treated a military recruit with TBI with Nuedexta—a dextromethorphan/Quinidine derivative with a subsequent decrease
in his episodes. Pathological laughing and crying, or pseudobulbar affect (PBA), has been described in patients with a variety of
neurological disorders, including multiple sclerosis (MS), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), epilepsy, brain tumors, Alzheimer's disease,
and traumatic brain injury (TBI) since the 19th century. PBA is characterized by uncontrollable, inappropriate episodes of laughing or
crying after minor stimuli that would not typically cause such an outburst and are embarrassing or socially awkward when they occur for the
individual with PBA. Dextromethorphan/Quinidine (DM/Q) has been demonstrated to be effective in the treatment of PBA in individuals with ALS
or MS.1 We report a case of an individual who was assaulted and suffered a TBI and subsequently developed PBA who was successfully treated
with DM/Q. A 34-year-old male Marine presented to the Intrepid Spirit Concussion Recovery Center, a holistic, integrated, interdisciplinary
clinic, for treatment in April 2012 following an assault in November 2011. He reported having little memory of events for about 2 days
before the assault to about 2 days after the assault. History obtained from the chart documented that he had been struck in the head and
suffered a traumatically induced physiological disruption of brain function, thereby fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of TBI. He
complained of headaches, disturbances in sleep, increased irritability, difficulty with short-term memory, and occasional episodes of
dizziness that all started after his assault. He also stated that before his TBI he could take unpleasant feelings and memories of
frightening, stressful situations, and metaphorically “place them in a filing cabinet, stick them in there, shut the door” in his mind and
proceed with his daily activities with no problems. However, after the TBI he could not “shut the door anymore” and began experiencing
enormous emotional volatility. In addition, after the assault he began having episodes of crying at unusual or inappropriate times and
episodes of laughter after minor stimuli that were embarrassing to him. His past medical history was remarkable for the diagnosis of
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) which started after the assault, as well as various orthopedic injuries, including an ankle injury. He
was taking prazosin 2 mg qhs, nortriptyline 50 mg qhs, and eszopiclone 2 mg qhs when he presented to the clinic. He had no known drug
allergies. Physical examination was remarkable only for antalgic gait due to an orthopedic injury to his ankle. His neurological examination
was remarkable for the Center for Neurologic Study-Lability Scale (CNS-LS) for PBA of 26, where CNS-LS of 13 or higher is highly suggestive
of PBA (Figure 1). His funduscopic examination, cranial nerve, motor, sensory, and cerebellar examination were all normal. He had some
difficulty with Romberg testing and gait because of his ankle injury. His reflexes were 2/4, and Babinski testing demonstrated downgoing
toes. Laboratory testing was unremarkable, and electrocardiogram was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed an area of
increased signal in the right frontal lobe. However, these lesions had described previously as age appropriate. They have also been seen and
described in PBA (Figure 2). CNS-LS for PBA. CNS-LS = Center for Neurologic Study-Lability Scale, PBA = pseudobulbar affect. Small lesion in
the right frontal deep white matter on the T2 and Flair images which measure 2 to 3 mm in size. Ten percent normal individuals under the age
of 40 have a similar foci (TK Burkhard, MD, unpublished data, March 2012). He started taking 20 mg DM/10 mg Q, 1 tablet a day. He felt
better after taking this medication for several weeks so he discontinued the medication on his own accord, but then the symptoms of PBA
returned. He again started taking 20 mg DM/10 mg Q and was titrated up to twice a day dosing. He is currently on this dose of the
medication, and reports that he is able to “shut the door” again and control his emotional volatility when taking the medication, and that
the symptoms of PBA have resolved. He reported no side effects or problems with taking the medication. The regulation of mood and affect is
a complicated and poorly understood phenomenon. It probably involves at the very least emotional input from the limbic system that is
projected to the frontal cortex; projections from the frontal cortex via the corticobulbar tracts to the cranial nerves in the brainstem
resulting in facial nerve activation manifesting as laughing or crying, with additional input from the cerebellum modulating motor activity.
The exact neuroanatomy involved in the regulation of mood and affect is unclear, but there is a consensus in the literature that it involves
several areas of the brain functioning as a neural network with multiple feedback loops regulating cortical activity. Such a network would
be vulnerable to coup-countercoup injury, as well as axonal shear injuries, which is commonly seen in TBI. The neuropharmacology of all the
receptors and neurotransmitters involved in the regulation of mood and affect is probably even less understood than the neuroanatomy.
However, there is evidence that tonic activation of the N-methyl-d-aspartate glutamate (NMDA) receptor can cause neuronal injury and death.2
Phasic activation of the receptor can cause learning difficulties and learning impairment. DM is a known low affinity noncompetitive
antagonist of the NMDA receptors. It is also a sigma receptor agonist, and has been shown to have a neuroprotective effect on injured
brain.3 Q is a potent cytochrome P450 2 D6 inhibitor, and slows the metabolism of DM, resulting in higher levels of DM for longer periods in
the bloodstream; 20 mg of DM and 10 mg of Q were married to create DM/Q (Nuedexta). The most common side effect of DM/Q is dizziness,
nausea, and headaches. The most concerning side effect is from Q, which has been used to treat atrial fibrillation and flutter, but can
cause prolonged QT syndrome in the 1000 mg/d dosage range. However, the dose of Q in DM/Q is approximately 100 times less than the order of
magnitude typically associated with cardiac side effects. Based on this pharmacological information, DM/Q was evaluated and found in 3
different double blind, randomized clinical studies to significantly improve the symptoms of PBA in people suffering from MS or ALS. There
is a paucity of data about the use of DM/Q in TBI, especially in high functioning individuals with TBI such as the individual described in
this case report.1,4,5 This Marine had a TBI with complete amnesia of events surrounding and including the assault that caused the TBI. He
then presented with classic symptoms seen after a TBI, including headaches, problems with mood, memory, and sleep. He also gave a remarkably
insightful description of intrusive thoughts and memories that he could longer “close the door” on and control that is consistent with his
diagnosis of PTSD. Such scenarios, where an individual does not consciously recall a trauma that they have experienced and then go on to
develop PTSD, are not uncommon, and may be due to the individual striving to cope with the repercussions of the trauma. This individual had
an improvement in not just his PBA, but also ability to manage intrusive memories, when taking DM/Q. This suggests that individuals who have
developed PBA as a result of TBI could potentially benefit from DM/Q. It also raises the possibility that there is a neuroanatomical and/or
neurophysiological disorder that manifests itself clinically as PTSD that responds to DM/Q. There is no evidence that this individual
experienced any adverse effects or harm from taking DM/Q. He was being treated with several medications and receiving cognitive,
occupational, vestibular, and other therapies at the same time he was treated with DM/Q, so it is not possible to attribute his clinical
improvement solely to the DM/Q. However, the fact that he discontinued the medication and then had a worsening of symptoms, and then
restarted the medication with improvement of symptoms, suggests that he was benefiting from the DM/Q. Further studies are required to
determine if DM/Q is effective in the treatment of PBA in TBI patients. Abbreviations: ALS = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, CNS-LS = Center
for Neurologic Study-Lability Scale, DM = dextromethorphan, DM/Q = Nuedexta, EKG = electrocardiogram, IRB = Institutional Review Board, MRI
= magnetic resonance imaging, MS = multiple sclerosis, NMDA = N-methyl-d-aspartate glutamate, PBA = pseudobulbar affect, PTSD = post-
traumatic stress disorder, Q = quinidine, TBI = traumatic brain injury. JW, TMJ, and DG-B work for the Naval Hospital Camp Lejeune in North
Carolina. JW is a contractor employee, and TMJ and DG-B are employed by the United States Navy. There is no source of funding declared and
no other conflicts of interest by the other parties. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, nor the U.S. Government.
