Septic arthritis of the sternoclavicular joint is rare. It can be associated with serious complications such as osteomyelitis, chest wall
abscess, and mediastinitis. In this report, we describe a case of an otherwise healthy adult with septic arthritis of the sternoclavicular
joint with chest wall abscess. A 68-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital complaining of pain and erythema near the right
sternoclavicular joint. Despite 1 week of oral antibiotics, his symptoms did not improve. Computed tomography revealed an abscess with air
around the right pectoralis major muscle. After being transferred to a tertiary hospital, emergency surgery was performed. Operative
findings included necrotic tissue around the right sternoclavicular joint and sternoclavicular joint destruction, which was debrided and
packed open. Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus was identified in blood and wound cultures. Negative pressure wound therapy and
hyperbaric oxygen therapy were performed for infection control and wound healing. The patient’s general condition improved, and good
granulation tissue developed. The wound was closed using a V-Y flap on hospital day 48. The patient has been free of relapse for 3 years.
Septic arthritis of the sternoclavicular joint is an unusual infection, especially in otherwise healthy adults. Because it is associated
with serious complications such as chest wall abscess, prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment are required. The sternoclavicular joint
(SCJ) is an unusual site of septic arthritis. It is involved in only 0.5–1.0 % of all joint infections and in less than 0.5 % of joint
infections in healthy patients . Common risk factors for SCJ septic arthritis include intravenous drug use (21 %), infection at a distant
site (15 %), diabetes mellitus (13 %), trauma (12 %), and an infected central venous line (9 %). No risk factors were found in 23 % of
patients with SCJ septic arthritis . SCJ septic arthritis may lead to serious complications such as osteomyelitis , chest wall abscess ,
mediastinitis , or myositis . Management of SCJ septic arthritis consists of surgical debridement and intravenous antibiotics [3, 11]. In
this report, we describe a case of an otherwise healthy adult with SCJ septic arthritis with chest wall abscess. A 68-year-old Japanese man
presented to our hospital complaining of pain and erythema near the right SCJ. He had no risk factors for SCJ septic arthritis such as
intravenous drug use, infection at a distant site, diabetes mellitus, trauma, laceration, or valvular heart disease. His past medical
history and family history were noncontributory. Oral levofloxacin was started. One week later, he went to another hospital for medical care
because his symptoms had not improved. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed an abscess with air around the right pectoralis major
muscle. He was transferred to a tertiary center for surgical care. His physical examination revealed a body temperature of 39.3 °C, heart
rate of 100 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg. Signs of inflammation such as redness, swelling, and tenderness over the
right SCJ (Fig. 1) were present. His white blood cell count was 14,060/μl, and his C-reactive protein level was 17.5 mg/dl (Table 1). Repeat
CT revealed an extensive abscess with air, involving the right pectoralis major muscle, right SCJ, retrosternal region, and right
sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Chest findings on admission. Redness and swelling of skin localizing to the sternoclavicular joint
are shownTable 1Laboratory data on admissionLaboratory parametersTest resultsTP4.2 g/dlAlb2.2 g/dlCPK127 IU/LAST45 IU/LALT28 IU/LLDH239
IU/LALP538 IU/Lγ-GTP81 IU/LAmy16 IU/LCre0.80 mg/dlBUN15.7 mg/dlTG122 mg/dlT-Chol85 mg/dlT-Bil2.9 mg/dlD-Bil1.7 mg/dlNa+ 139 mEq/LK+ 3.2
mEq/LCl− 103 mEq/LMg1.9 mg/dlCa2+ 7.1 mg/dlIP3.1 mg/dlCRP17.5 mg/dlHbA1c5.7 %Arterial blood gas FiO2 0.6 pH7.51 pCO2 33.0 mmHg pO2 116.0
mmHg BE3.2 mmol/LLactate7 mg/dlWBC14,060/μlRBC356 × 104/μlHb11.0 g/dlHct31.9 %Plt14.6 × 104/μlPT15.0 secondsaPTT33.5 secondsFibrinogen683
mg/dlFDP14.2 μg/dl d-dimer7.2 μg/dlAT-III49 %Antinuclear antibodyNegativeRheumatoid factorNegative Alb albumin, ALP alkaline phosphatase,
ALT alanine aminotransferase, Amy amylase, aPTT activated partial thromboplastin time, AST aspartate aminotransferase, AT-III antithrombin
III, BE base excess, BUN blood urea nitrogen, Ca 2+ calcium, Cl − chloride, CPK creatine phosphokinase, Cre creatinine, CRP C-reactive
protein, D-Bil direct bilirubin, FDP fibrin degradation products, FiO 2 fraction of inspired oxygen, γ-GTP γ-glutamyl transferase, Hb
hemoglobin, HbA1c glycated hemoglobin A1c, Hct hematocrit, IP inorganic phosphorus, K + potassium, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, Mg magnesium,
Na + sodium, pCO 2 partial pressure of carbon dioxide, Plt platelets, pO 2 partial pressure of oxygen, PT prothrombin time, RBC red blood
cells, T-Bil total bilirubin, T-Chol total cholesterol, TG triglycerides, TP total protein, WBC white blood cellsFig. 2Computed tomographic
scans of the chest on admission. Computed tomography of the chest detected an abscess with air located below the thyroid gland and involving
the right pectoral major muscle around the right sternoclavicular joint (a, b), as well as disaggregation of the right sternoclavicular
joint (b) Chest findings on admission. Redness and swelling of skin localizing to the sternoclavicular joint are shown Laboratory data on
admission Alb albumin, ALP alkaline phosphatase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, Amy amylase, aPTT activated partial thromboplastin time, AST
aspartate aminotransferase, AT-III antithrombin III, BE base excess, BUN blood urea nitrogen, Ca 2+ calcium, Cl − chloride, CPK creatine
phosphokinase, Cre creatinine, CRP C-reactive protein, D-Bil direct bilirubin, FDP fibrin degradation products, FiO 2 fraction of inspired
oxygen, γ-GTP γ-glutamyl transferase, Hb hemoglobin, HbA1c glycated hemoglobin A1c, Hct hematocrit, IP inorganic phosphorus, K + potassium,
LDH lactate dehydrogenase, Mg magnesium, Na + sodium, pCO 2 partial pressure of carbon dioxide, Plt platelets, pO 2 partial pressure of
oxygen, PT prothrombin time, RBC red blood cells, T-Bil total bilirubin, T-Chol total cholesterol, TG triglycerides, TP total protein, WBC
white blood cells Computed tomographic scans of the chest on admission. Computed tomography of the chest detected an abscess with air
located below the thyroid gland and involving the right pectoral major muscle around the right sternoclavicular joint (a, b), as well as
disaggregation of the right sternoclavicular joint (b) Emergency surgical debridement was performed. The skin incision began at the right
border of the thyroid and extended to the head of the right clavicle. Operative findings included necrosis of parts of the right pectoralis
major and minor muscles and the right SCJ. The patient also had right SCJ destruction. The necrotic pectoralis major and minor muscles and
parts of the clavicle and manubrium near the SCJ that had become detached were debrided. The cavity was irrigated and packed open (Fig. 3).
An initial Gram stain revealed gram-positive cocci. Ampicillin/sulbactam, which was given preoperatively, was changed to cefazolin (6
g/day), gentamicin (320 mg/day), and clindamycin (2700 mg/day) after surgery. On hospital day 6, methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus
aureus was cultured from blood and wound specimens. Antibacterial therapy was tapered to intravenous cefazolin and continued for 6 weeks to
treat osteomyelitis (Fig. 4). On postoperative day 10, residual necrotic tissue was debrided, and part of the wound edges was sutured
together. After surgery, negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) and hyperbaric oxygen therapy were performed for infection control and wound
healing. The patient’s general condition improved, and there was good granulation tissue formation. He was transferred to his hometown
hospital, and the wound was closed using a V-Y flap on hospital day 48. The patient has been free of relapse for 3 years.Fig. 3Wound-related
findings. Operative findings on the day of admission (a, b) were necrotizing tissue around the sternoclavicular joint and the joint
destruction (white arrow). When we debrided residual necrotizing tissue on postoperative day 10, the sternoclavicular joint was still
exposed (black arrow) (c). We introduced negative pressure wound therapy on postoperative day 11 (d). On postoperative day 37, good
granulation was observed (e)Fig. 4Clinical course. WBC white blood cells, CRP C-reactive protein, BT body temperature, CEZ cefazolin, CLDM
clindamycin, GM gentamicin, ABPC/SBT ampicillin/sulbactam, NPWT negative pressure wound therapy, HBO hyperbaric oxygen therapy Wound-related
findings. Operative findings on the day of admission (a, b) were necrotizing tissue around the sternoclavicular joint and the joint
destruction (white arrow). When we debrided residual necrotizing tissue on postoperative day 10, the sternoclavicular joint was still
exposed (black arrow) (c). We introduced negative pressure wound therapy on postoperative day 11 (d). On postoperative day 37, good
granulation was observed (e) Clinical course. WBC white blood cells, CRP C-reactive protein, BT body temperature, CEZ cefazolin, CLDM
clindamycin, GM gentamicin, ABPC/SBT ampicillin/sulbactam, NPWT negative pressure wound therapy, HBO hyperbaric oxygen therapy Septic
arthritis of the SCJ is rare, involving only 0.5–1.0 % of all joint infections. It occurs in less than 0.5 % of otherwise healthy adults .
It may cause serious complications such as osteomyelitis , chest wall abscess , mediastinitis , or myositis , with an increased risk of
irreversible tissue damage and possibly death [4, 10]. Among 180 cases of SCJ septic arthritis, Ross et al. identified the following
predisposing risk factors: intravenous drug use (21 %), distant site of infection (15 %), diabetes mellitus (13 %), trauma (12 %), and
infected central venous line (9 %). No risk factor was found in 23 % of the patients . The route of infection is often unknown, especially
in otherwise healthy patients . The clinical signs of SCJ septic arthritis are chest pain localizing to the SCJ (78 %), fever (65 %), and
shoulder pain (24 %). SCJ septic arthritis infrequently presents with neck pain (2 %) [1, 2]. Therefore, septic arthritis should always be
considered in the differential diagnosis of chest and neck pain and fever. CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be performed
routinely in all cases of SCJ arthritis to determine the severity of the infection and guide the surgical strategy . CT and MRI can
demonstrate joint subluxation, joint destruction, periarticular inflammation, and SCJ abscess. The rate of positive cultures with needle
aspiration is 77 %, compared with 36 % with surgical debridement and 13 % with blood culture . S. aureus is responsible for 49 % of culture-
positive infections, Pseudomonas aeruginosa for 10 %, Brucella melitensis for 7 %, and Escherichia coli for 5 %. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection occurs infrequently . Management of SCJ septic arthritis consists of surgical debridement and intravenous antibiotics [3, 11].
Song et al. reported that complete SCJ resection and pectoralis flap closure resulted in no recurrences among patients with SCJ septic
arthritis, while debridement and antibiotic therapy alone were associated with recurrence in five of six patients . In our patient, because
SCJ infection was limited to a small area, partial debridement was performed instead of complete resection. The cavity after debridement was
relatively small, and NPWT was performed for wound granulation. After methicillin-susceptible S. aureus was identified in blood and wound
cultures, broad-spectrum intravenous antimicrobial therapy was switched to intravenous cefazolin, which was continued for 6 weeks to treat
osteomyelitis. SCJ septic arthritis is a rare infection, especially in healthy adults. Because SCJ septic arthritis is associated with a
risk of serious complications such as chest wall abscess, prompt diagnosis and appropriate surgical and antibacterial treatment are
required. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ampicillin/sulbactam albumin alkaline phosphatase
alanine aminotransferase amylase activated partial thromboplastin time aspartate aminotransferase antithrombin III base excess body
temperature blood urea nitrogen calcium cefazolin chloride clindamycin creatine phosphokinase creatinine C-reactive protein computed
tomography direct bilirubin fibrin degradation products fraction of inspired oxygen gentamicin γ-glutamyl transferase hemoglobin glycated
hemoglobin A1c hyperbaric oxygen therapy hematocrit inorganic phosphorus potassium lactate dehydrogenase magnesium magnetic resonance
imaging sodium negative pressure wound therapy partial pressure of carbon dioxide platelets partial pressure of oxygen prothrombin time red
blood cells sternoclavicular joint total bilirubin total cholesterol triglycerides total protein white blood cells Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YT analyzed and interpreted the clinical data, wrote the case
report, and revised the manuscript. HK, KS, YN, NY, HO, TY, IT, and SO supervised the case. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
