Chronic infection with Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) has a detrimental effect on morbidity and mortality for patients with cystic
fibrosis (CF). It is therefore logical to attempt to eradicate new isolates however there is a paucity of information to guide treatment. We
report the successful eradication of new isolates of BCC in two children with CF. Burkholderia cepacia was successfully eradicated in a
14 year old boy with CF and Burkholderia gladioli was successfully eradicated in a six year old girl with CF. In both children two weeks of
intravenous (IV) tobramycin, ceftazidime and temocillin were used followed by three months of inhaled tobramycin. Bronchoalveolar lavage
samples taken during flexible bronchoscopy were used prior to treatment to exclude spontaneous clearance as well as after treatment to
confirm eradication. New isolates of BCC can be successfully eradicated in children with CF. More research is urgently required in this area
to identify the best treatment regimen for BCC eradication. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the commonest life shortening, inherited disease in the
Caucasian population. It is characterised by recurrent lower respiratory infections, inflammation and lung damage. Burkholderia cepacia
complex (BCC) refers to a group of at least 17 closely related bacterial species (formerly called genomovars) that can cause pulmonary
infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) . These Gram-negative organisms are inherently resistant to Colistin and can survive for
prolonged periods in moist environments such as water and soil . In patients with CF, new BCC infection can clear spontaneously or require
eradication with a combination of antibiotics. If new infection is not cleared, chronic infection develops. Chronic BCC infection is
associated with a more rapid decline in lung function , increased requirements for intravenous antibiotics , increased outpatient attendance
and increased mortality . Patient to patient spread of epidemic strains of Burkholderia cenocepacia (such as ET12) was identified at a
number of CF centres in the early 1990’s . This had a catastrophic effect on the CF population due to its association with Cepacia Syndrome.
This is an acute, necrotising pneumonia with an almost universal fatal outcome . The presence of Burkholderia cenocepacia remains a
contraindication to lung transplantation at most CF transplantation centres due its association with poor outcomes . The widespread
segregation of CF clinics has been successful in reducing the overall prevalence of chronic BCC infection in the UK to 3 % . It is
predominantly seen in adult patients . The success of segregation means that most new BCC infections are now acquired from the environment
rather than from other patients . Despite a wealth of knowledge on the adverse long-term effects of BCC infection, there is lack of reliable
evidence on which to base management decisions for CF patients with new or chronic BCC infection [12, 13]. An in-vitro study suggest that
triple-antibiotic combinations are more likely than double and single antibiotic combinations to be bactericidal against BCC . Despite this,
a Cochrane Systematic Review failed to identify a single randomised study investigating BCC eradication and concluded that “without further
comprehensive studies it is difficult to draw conclusions about a safe and effective management strategy for BCC eradication in CF” . A
review of practice in UK CF Centres revealed that despite this lack of evidence, most attempt to eradicate new isolates of BCC. The
treatment regimens vary widely and reported success was limited (37 %) . The published evidence is limited to a few small case series. Some
of these use a combination of intravenous and nebulised antibiotics , others use a combination of nebulised antibiotics and others a single
nebulised antibiotic . We report two children in whom new isolates of BCC have been successfully eradicated using the same combination of
intravenous (IV) and inhaled antibiotics. These are the only two cases of attempted BCC eradication at our centre in the last eight years. A
14 year old boy with CF (homozygous Phe508del) presented with a 2 week history of a wet cough productive of green sputum. His lung function
remained stable (FEV1 90 %) and clinical examination was unremarkable. He was known to be chronically infected with Staphylococcus aureus
but was free from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (last isolate 34 months previously) and had never grown BCC. His treatment included nebulised
dornase alfa but no nebulised antibiotics. The sputum culture from this presentation isolated BCC, Staphylococcus aureus, and Haemophilus
influenza. Table 1 shows the antibiotic sensitivities. The BCC isolate was sent to the National Reference Laboratory where recA sequencing
confirmed its identity as Burkholderia cepacia. The antibiotic sensitivities are given in Table 1. Five weeks after the first isolate,
flexible bronchoscopy with single aliquot bronchoalveolar lavage samples (FB-BAL) from six lobes (including the lingula lobe) was performed
to see if the organism had spontaneously cleared. BCC was isolated from all the sampled lobes. A 2 week eradication regimen was planned
using intravenous (IV) tobramycin (10 mg/kg once daily), ceftazidime (50 mg/kg three times daily), and temocillin (2 g twice daily) followed
by 3 months of nebulised meropenem (250 mg twice daily). The IV antibiotics were administered in hospital without any problems. Trough serum
tobramycin concentrations were <1 mg/L when measured on day 2 and day 8 of treatment. Renal and liver functions were also within normal
limits. Unfortunately, the patient could not tolerate the nebulised meropenem due to the taste. He was therefore prescribed 3 months of
inhaled tobramycin. The possibility of using either a nebulised or a dry powder (TIP) formulation was discussed with the patient who chose
the latter. The patient passed his trial of TIP and treatment was commenced (112 mg twice daily) the day after his IV antibiotics had
finished. The family reported excellent adherence with the 3 months of treatment. All subsequent microbiology samples have been negative for
BCC. These have included four sputum cultures whilst still on TIP, FB-BAL samples taken 1 month after the end of the eradication course and
three subsequent cough swabs. The last sample was 13 months after the first BCC isolate.Table 1Antibiotic sensitivities of the two BCC
isolatesCeftazTazocinCiproGentTobraAmikacinMeroColistinAztreoTemoChild 1SSIRRRSRISChild 2SRIIIRSRRS Ceftaz ceftazidime; Cipro ciprofloxacin;
Gent gentamicin; Tobra tobramycin; Mero meropenem; Aztreo aztreonam; Temo temocillin; S sensitive; I intermediate; R resistant Antibiotic
sensitivities of the two BCC isolates Ceftaz ceftazidime; Cipro ciprofloxacin; Gent gentamicin; Tobra tobramycin; Mero meropenem; Aztreo
aztreonam; Temo temocillin; S sensitive; I intermediate; R resistant Four weeks after the above child first isolated BCC, a 6 year old girl
with CF (homozygous Phe508del) also isolated BCC from a cough swab after a four week history of cough and shortness of breath. She had
isolated Pseudomonas aeruginosa on two previous occasions (latest 20 months ago) and was receiving nebulised dornase alpha but not nebulised
antibiotics. The BCC isolate was sent to the National Reference Laboratory where gryB cluster analysis confirmed its identity as
Burkholderia gladioli. The antibiotic sensitivities are given in Table 1. FB-BAL was performed 4 weeks after the positive culture to check
if it had spontaneously cleared but BCC was isolated from all six sampled lobes. She completed 2 weeks of IV tobramycin (10 mg/kg once
daily), ceftazadime (50 mg/kg three times daily) and temocillin (1 g twice daily). Trough serum tobramycin concentrations were <1 mg/L when
measured on day 2 and day 8 of treatment. Renal and liver function were also within normal limits. As she had previously struggled to
tolerate the taste of nebulised treatments we did not try nebulised meropenem and went straight for 3 months of nebulised tobramycin (300 mg
twice daily). This was started on the day the IV antibiotics finished. She tolerated this well and the family reported excellent adherence.
During this time her lung function and clinical status remained stable. All subsequent microbiology samples have been negative for BCC. This
has included four cough swabs cultures whilst still on nebulised tobramycin, FB-BAL samples taken 1 month after the eradication course
finished and six subsequent cough swabs. The last sample was 12 months post first BCC isolate. We report two children with CF in whom new
isolates of BCC were successfully eradicated using the same combination of intravenous and inhaled antibiotics. There is a paucity of
evidence to inform practice on the eradication of BCC and we believe that these are the first two isolates successfully treated and reported
in children. A Cochrane review concluded that there is “an extreme lack of evidence in this area of treatment management for people with
cystic fibrosis” . Although this report adds to the available evidence there is still an urgent need for multi-centre randomised controlled
trials to investigate antibiotic regimens for the eradication of BCC. The BCC isolates in these children were identified as Burkholderia
cepacia and Burkholderia gladioli. The progression of Burkholderia cepacia infection and its detrimental effect on morbidity and mortality
is well established . The clinical significance of Burkholderia gladioli infection in patients with CF is slightly more controversial as
infections can be transient and prevalence of chronic infection is relatively low . However, there is evidence that if chronic infection
does develop there is associated morbidity both pre and post-transplant [20, 21]. In these children we checked for spontaneous clearance by
performing FB-BAL four/five weeks after the initial isolate. In both, BCC was identified in all six of the sampled lobes excluding this
possibility. We were equally thorough in our assessment of the success of eradication. This included FB-BAL one month after eradication had
completed in addition to regular respiratory microbiology samples during and after treatment. In conclusion, new isolates of BCC can be
eradicated in children with CF. This report identifies one possible eradication regimen using three IV antibiotics and one nebulised
antibiotic. More research is required to establish which eradication regimen is the best for new isolates of BCC. Ethical approval was not
required for this article as case reports are not research. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for publication of these
case reports. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Burkholderia cepacia complex cystic
fibrosis flexible bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage intravenous tobramycin inhalation powder Competing interests None of the authors
have any competing interests relevant to this article. Authors’ contributions FG and WL were the patients CF clinicians. They devised the
article and edited the manuscript. HK wrote the first draft and subsequent versions. All authors have seen and approved the final version of
the manuscript. No funding was received for this article.
