Imaging findings of hepatic lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) have been rarely reported before. We present the computed
tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT
findings in a patient with untreated pulmonary and hepatic MALT lymphoma over a 5-year period. On the 1st abdominal MRI scan, the hepatic
MALT lymphoma showed multiple hepatic subcapsular masses. On FDG PET/CT, these hepatic tumors showed hypodenisty with FDG uptake similar to
the liver on early PET images, and higher than liver on delayed PET images. The patient declined to undergo treatment. Fiver year later, the
follow-up MRI and FDG PET/CT showed enlargement and confluence of the hepatic tumors with higher FDG uptake than before. The enlarged
hepatic tumors had minimal mass effect. In the hepatic lesions, the blood vessels and bile ducts had no distortion or displacement. The
hepatic MALT lymphoma should be taken into consideration when the hepatic tumors have minimal mass effect with the intrahepatic blood
vessels and bile ducts normally passing through the tumors. Delayed-time-point FDG PET/CT imaging may be helpful for improving detectability
of the hepatic MALT lymphoma. Lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) are low grade extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
(accounting for approximately 8% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas) with an indolent course.1,2 They commonly occur in the gastrointestinal tract
and can arise from various nongastrointestinal sites, such as salivary glands, skin, conjunctiva, lung, upper airways, obit, lachrymal
gland, liver, breast, pancreas, urogenital tract, kidney, and dura.2–5 Approximately 34% of cases with MALT lymphoma present with a
disseminated disease at diagnosis.2 Nongastrointestinal MALT lymphoma more frequently occurs simultaneously at different organs than
gastrointestinal MALT lymphoma.4–6 Therefore, accurate staging of MALT lymphoma by radiologic investigation and histopathologic analysis is
essential for optimizing treatment. The imaging findings of hepatic MALT lymphoma have been rarely reported before.7–10 In this paper, we
present the computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET)/CT findings in a patient with untreated pulmonary and hepatic MALT lymphoma over a 5-year period. A 52-year-old female was
referred because of 1-month history of chest discomfort. Laboratory tests showed normal a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen,
carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and carbohydrate antigen 125 levels. Serum hepatitis B virus surface antigen was positive. Chest radiograph and
enhanced CT showed multiple peripheral consolidations of the bilateral lungs (Figure 1). CT also showed diffuse right lung-predominant
micronodules with peribronchovascular and subpleural distribution (Figure 1). Upper abdominal MRI scan showed multiple hepatic subcapsular
masses (Figure 2). These masses showed isointensity on dynamic enhanced MRI. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/CT was performed for further
elevation of the patient. Early FDG PET/CT scan (performed 1 hour after injection of tracer) showed increased FDG uptake of the multiple
pulmonary consolidations (Figure 3A) with maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 5.4. The FDG uptake of hepatic masses (SUVmax, 3.5) was
similar to the surrounding hepatic parenchyma. The bilateral parotid (SUVmax, 1) and submaxillary (SUVmax, 2.5) glands were normal. On
delayed FDG PET/CT scan (performed 2 hours after injection of tracer), the SUVmax of the hepatic masses increased to 4.4. Biopsies of the
right pulmonary and hepatic lesions revealed small B-cell lymphocytic hyperplasia in the pulmonary and hepatic parenchyma. B-cell lymphoma
was suspected. But the patient declined to undergo any future examination and treatment. Five years later, she complained of cough lasting
for 20 days. A chest CT was performed showing enlargement of the pulmonary consolidations (Figure 4A–C). Abdominal MRI showed significant
enlargement of the hepatic lesions with minimal mass effect (Figure 4D–F). In the hepatic lesions, the blood vessels and bile ducts had no
distortion or displacement. FDG PET/CT scan (performed 1 hour after injection of tracer) showed increased FDG uptake of the pulmonary
(SUVmax, 5.4) and hepatic (SUVmax, 4.3) lesions, and bilateral parotid (SUVmax, 3.6) and submaxillary (SUVmax, 4.1) glands (Figure 5). Chest
radiograph (A) and transverse enhanced computed tomography (CT) (B, C) showed multiple peripheral consolidations (arrows) of the bilateral
lungs. Transverse (D), coronal (E), and saggital (F) CT at pulmonary window showed multiple bilateral micronodules with right lung-
predominant distribution, and thickening of bronchovascular bundles and interlobular septa. Transverse unenhanced T1-weighted magnetic
resonance (MR) image (A) showed multiple hypointense hepatic subcapsular masses (arrows). These masses showed hyperintensity on transverse
(B) and coronal (C) T2-weighted MR images, and isointensity on enhanced T1-weighted MR images at arterial (D), portal (E), and equilibrium
(F) phases. Early MIP PET (A) showed multiple hypermetabolic lesions (arrows) (SUVmax, 5.4) in the bilateral lungs. The bilateral parotid
(SUVmax, 1) and submaxillary (SUVmax, 2.5) glands were normal. Transverse CT (B) and corresponding fused (C) images showed multiple
hypodense hepatic masses (arrows) with SUVmax of 3.5. These hepatic masses showed increased FDG uptake (arrows) (SUVmax, 4.4) on delayed MIP
PET (D), transverse CT (E), and corresponding fused (F) images. CT = computed tomography, FDG = fluorodeoxyglucose, MIP = maximum intensity
projection, PET = positron emission tomography, SUVmax = maximum standard uptake value. Transverse CT (A–C) showed enlargement of the
pulmonary lesions with air bronchogram. Transverse T1-weighted MR image (D) showed significant enlargement of the hepatic masses with
homogeneous hypointensity. These masses showed homogeneous hyperintensity on transverse (E) and coronal (F) T2-weighted MR images with
confluence and minimal mass effect. The spleen became larger than before. CT = computed tomography, MR = magnetic resonance. MIP PET (A),
transverse CT (B–D), and corresponding fused (E–G) images showed increased FDG uptake of the enlarged pulmonary (SUVmax, 5.4) and hepatic
(SUVmax, 4.3) lesions, and bilateral parotid (arrows) (SUVmax, 3.6) and submaxillary (arrowheads) (SUVmax, 4.1) glands. CT = computed
tomography, FDG = fluorodeoxyglucose, MIP = maximum intensity projection, PET = positron emission tomography, SUVmax = maximum standard
uptake value. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the right pulmonary lesion showed dense proliferation of small lymph cells. Immunohistochemistry
staining revealed the lymph cells were positive for CD20, CD79a, and leukocyte common antigen, and negative for CD10 and CD56. Ki-67
staining showed the proportion of the positive tumor cells was about 15%. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were normal. Based on these
imaging and pathologic findings, the patient was diagnosed with pulmonary and hepatic B-cell MALT lymphoma. Subsequently, the patient
underwent chemotherapy with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone. The CT features of pulmonary MALT
lymphomas include bilateral or unilateral pulmonary nodules, masses or mass-like consolidations, with or without air bronchogram.11–13
Rarely, MALT lymphoma can manifest as mosaic or lymphangitic spread pattern in the lung.14,15 In this case, the pulmonary MALT lymphoma
showed bilateral peripheral consolidations, and diffuse micronodules with lymphangitic distribution. CT or MRI features of hepatic MALT
lymphoma are rarely described before.7–10 Hepatic MALT lymphoma can show unifocal or multifocal nodules or masses with hypodensity on CT,
hypointensity on T1-weighted MR images, and hyperintensity on T2-weighted MR images.7–10 On FDG PET or PET/CT, MALT lymphoma shows lower FDG
uptake compared with the aggressive lymphomas, such as diffuse large B cell lymphoma.16 The proportion of FDG avid lesions is significantly
higher for mass-forming lesions than for superficial lesions in both gastric and nongastric MALT lymphomas, which may be explained by the
volume of the tumor.17 FDG PET/CT is useful for detection of pulmonary MALT lymphoma, which may be due to the minimal background activity of
the lung.17,18 FDG PET/CT may be less useful for the detection of hepatic MALT lymphoma because of relatively higher background activity of
the liver.9,19 We present the changes of CT, MRI, and FDG PET/CT findings in a case with untreated pulmonary and hepatic MALT lymphoma over
a 5 years. On the 1st FDG PET/CT scan, the hepatic tumors showed FDG uptake similar to surrounding hepatic parenchyma at early FDG PET
images and hypermetabolism at delayed FDG PET images, indicating delayed FDG PET/CT imaging may be more useful for tumor detection.
Mayerhoefer et al19 have also reported that delayed-time-point FDG PET imaging can increase lesion-to-liver and lesion-to-blood contrast
than standard-time-point FDG PET, and may improve detectability of MALT lymphoma in liver, stomach, and the small bowl. After 5 years, the
pulmonary consolidations remarkably enlarged with air bronchogram, while the FDG uptake degree of the lesions had no significantly
increased. The hepatic masses enlarged greatly with confluence and minimal mass effect. In the hepatic lesions, the blood vessels and bile
ducts had no distortion or displacement. The FDG uptake of the enlarged hepatic tumors on the second PET/CT scan was higher than that on the
1st PET/CT scan. Unsuspected hypermetabolic lesions in the salivary gland were detected, which may be the new tumor lesions. In conclusion,
the hepatic MALT lymphoma should be taken into consideration when the hepatic tumors have minimal mass effect with the intrahepatic blood
vessels and bile ducts normally passing through the tumors. Delayed-time-point FDG PET/CT imaging may be helpful for improving detectability
of the hepatic MALT lymphoma. Ethical approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of Changhai Hospital, Shanghai, China. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Abbreviations: CT = computed
tomography, FDG = fluorodeoxyglucose, MALT = mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET = positron emission
tomography, SUVmax = maximum standard uptake value. AD and ZX contributed equally to the article. The authors have no funding and conflicts
of interest to disclose.
