Self-injection of elemental mercury is a rare finding especially in healthy people who are mentally sound. Early detection and removal of
mercury from the body by chelation and physical removal of a stored injected site is required to prevent long term toxicity. A 15 year old
previously healthy girl presented with an acute febrile illness with a generalized maculopapular skin rash for 3 days with a preceding
history of self-injection of mercury to both her forearms. This was an imitating experimental act influenced by a movie and she was mentally
sound. Very high whole blood mercury levels, x-rays of the forearms and histology confirmed mercury poisoning. Self-injection of elemental
mercury can also occur in mentally sound people and rapid diagnosis and decontamination is required. This also signifies the importance of
imposing limitations for visual media which could misguide minors and lead those to imitate and cause serious self-harm. Mercury is the only
metal that exists in liquid form at room temperature. It has no essential biological function. It is used in the manufacture of switches,
thermometers, sphygmomanometers, extraction of gold and silver and also known to be used in preservatives, pesticides and tooth fillings .
Exposure to mercury can cause mercury poisoning which is also known as hydrargyria or mercurialism. Exposure can be inhalation, ingestion or
injection. Self-injection of mercury is very rare but is well documented . We report a case of deliberate self-injection of mercury by a
15 year old girl, inspired by a movie who subsequently achieved complete recovery following removal of mercury by chelation and tissue
exploration of the injected sites. A 15 year old previously healthy girl was brought to our acute medicine unit by the parents with a 3 days
history of fever and a generalized maculopapular, non-itchy rash. On further questioning the parents revealed that she had injected 2 ml of
mercury by herself to both the antecubital fossae. This was a deliberate action which she had done 1 week prior to the admission and denied
any suicidal thoughts. It was an imitating, experimental act influenced by a movie which gave the wrong impression that injection of liquid
metals to the bones can convert bone to metal. She did not give similar occurrences in the past and had good school performances and a
normal IQ (intelligence quotient). On general examination she was febrile with a generalized maculopapular, non-scaly rash and mild
inflammation at injection sites was noted. There was no lymphadenopathy. Rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable. Her x-rays of
both forearms revealed subcutaneous depositions which are compatible with mercury (Fig. 1). Whole blood mercury levels was 183.2 μg/L
(normal range 0.46–7.5). All other basic investigations were normal.Fig. 1x-rays of hands showing deposition of mercury in subcutaneous and
deep tissues x-rays of hands showing deposition of mercury in subcutaneous and deep tissues She was treated with intramuscular (IM)
dimercaprol 3 mg/Kg 4 hourly for 2 days, 6 hourly on 3rd day and then once daily for 3 weeks. At the same time physical removal of mercury
was arranged by wide margin excision down to muscle in both her forearms. During surgery depositions of mercury were identified (Figs. 2, 3)
and histology (Fig. 4) further confirmed it. She recovered uneventfully and whole blood mercury levels reduced to normal after 4 weeks.
Post-surgical x-rays revealed clearance of mercury (Fig. 5). She was revived 2 weekly for 1 month and then monthly for another 6 months. Her
whole blood mercury levels were remained normal during this period.Fig. 2 Arrows show subcutaneous deposition of mercuryFig. 3 Arrows show
deposition of mercury inside the musclesFig. 4H and E staining of the subcutaneous tissues showing mercury droplets and micro abscess
formationFig. 5post-surgical x-rays of hands showing full clearance of mercury. (Plaster casts and surgical clips also visible in this
x-rays) Arrows show subcutaneous deposition of mercury Arrows show deposition of mercury inside the muscles H and E staining of the
subcutaneous tissues showing mercury droplets and micro abscess formation post-surgical x-rays of hands showing full clearance of mercury.
(Plaster casts and surgical clips also visible in this x-rays) Elemental mercury—silvery, shiny volatile liquid which gives off colourless,
odourless vapour at room temperature.Inorganic salts—when elemental mercury combines with other elements to form mercury salts.Organic
compound—when elemental mercury combines with carbon such as in methylmercury.In any of these forms, it is poisonous. Exposure can occur in
many ways such as inhalation of its vapor, ingestion and intravenous injection . Organic compounds of mercury are more toxic than elemental,
or inorganic salts of mercury, and inorganic salts of mercury are more toxic than elemental mercury. Inhalation of elemental mercury vapors
are more hazardous than its ingestion or intravenous injection . Organic compounds of mercury especially methyl mercury are concentrated in
the food chain (biomagnification). Fish from contaminated water are the main source. The classic example is Minimata disease which occurred
in the residents around the Minamata bay in Japan . Mercury was also an essential part of many different medicines in the past such as
diuretics, antibacterials and antiseptics. At present mercury is used in tooth fillings, thermometers, sphygmomanometers and in vaccines .
In our case the patient’s father who is a science enthusiast, had stored little amount of mercury at home for his experiments. According to
the father, one of his friends has given this mercury to him but he denied to reveal further information regarding the source. Elemental
mercury—silvery, shiny volatile liquid which gives off colourless, odourless vapour at room temperature. Inorganic salts—when elemental
mercury combines with other elements to form mercury salts. Organic compound—when elemental mercury combines with carbon such as in
methylmercury. Mercury toxicity also occurs in various other ways depending on the form of mercury, the amount of exposure, and the route of
entry into the body. It most commonly affects the neurological, gastrointestinal and renal systems. Symptoms of mercury toxicity are
manyfold and it can be acute, subacute or chronic. Patients can present with numbness and tingling of peripheries, hearing loss, visual
difficulties, gait unsteadiness, tremulousness, desquamating skin rash and emotional and cognitive difficulties . Self-subcutaneous
injection of elemental mercury is rare and generally does not lead to systemic effects . Abscess formation is the most common local
presentation in patients with self-injection of mercury . Our patient presented with a maculopapular skin rash and histology revealed
microabscess formation. The main mechanism of mercury toxicity is due to the irreversible inhibition of selenoenzymes, such as thioredoxin
reductase which restores the antioxidant molecules back to their reduced form [9, 10]. As such, the cells which have a high oxygen
consumption rate like brain tissues are particularly vulnerable. Mercury toxicity should be diagnosed quickly and decontamination started by
removing clothes, washing skin with soap and water followed by chelation and physical removal as in a case of injection. Chelation of acute
mercury poisoning can be done with DMSA (dimercaptosuccinic acid), DMPA (2,3-dimercapto-1-propanisulfonic acid), dimercaprol [British anti-
Lewisite (BAL)] or D-penicillamine (DPCN) . DMSA is given orally and it has few side effects and is superior to DMPA, BAL or DPCN . Evan
though N-acetyle cysteine (NAC) and glutathione (GSH) were used in the past, evidence suggests that they can be counterproductive . In some
studies zinc and selenium have been shown to exert a protective effect most likely by induction of metal binding proteins, such as
metallothionein and selenoprotein , but some found little evidence for this . The duration of chelation depends on the serum mercury levels,
and should be continued till the levels become normal. Our patient presented with acute mercury toxicity with high serum mercury levels.
x-rays of the hands and histology confirmed this. Chelation was started with intramuscular dimercaprol and at the same time surgical
exploration and removal of tissues containing mercury was also done. Psychiatry assessment stated that child is of sound mental health and
of normal IQ. The skin rash and fever was transient and disappeared within a few days. Whole blood mercury levels reduced to normal and the
child made an uneventful recovery and further follow up was arranged. Although self-injection of elemental mercury is rare it is well
documented , often as a part of suicide attempts or among drug users. Unusual instances are that of injection of mercury with the mistaken
belief that it would strengthen sport performances . Our patient was misguided by a movie and it was an experimental act. Deepthi Sukheeja
et al. have reported similar case of a 15 year-old-male child who presented with multiple non healing ulcers of the left forearm due to
self-injection of mercury after watching the same movie. Self-injection of elemental mercury can also occur in mentally sound people and
rapid diagnosis and decontamination is required. This case also signifies the importance of imposing limitations for visual media which
could misguide minors and lead those to imitate and cause serious self-harm. We suggest to include a warning saying “Injection or ingestion
of mercury can cause serious bodily harm” at the start of this type of movies. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this
journal. AK—diagnosed the clinical scenario, managed the patient, manuscript preparation. TNP—diagnosed the clinical scenario, managed the
patient, manuscript preparation, literature search. SK—diagnosed the clinical scenario, managed the patient. PW helped in the surgical
management. IL—literature search, managed the patient. MG—managed the patient. BD- managed the patient. SU—managed the patient. CR—managed
the patient. TS—managed the patient. All authors provided care for the patient. All authors read and approved final manuscript. The authors
would like to acknowledge the contribution of the doctors and nurses of the national hospital of Sri Lanka for their contribution to make
the diagnosis and for aiding in the management of the patient. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
