Female patient, 31 years old, with a history of ischemic stroke 7 years before, was referred for treatment of Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO).
She only had a complaint of migraine with aura, with no focal neurological abnormalities. On July 2, 2015, she was submitted to an
uneventful percutaneous PFO occlusion using a Cardia IntraseptTM prosthesis (CARDIA, Inc., Burnsville, MN, USA). Intraoperative three-
dimensional transesophageal echocardiography confirmed correct prosthesis positioning and absence of residual shunt through the bubble test.
Current guidelines of the two most important international societies of echocardiography, the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging
and the American Society of Echocardiography, determine that the three-dimensional echocardiography is the echocardiographic modality of
choice for monitoring, following and guiding percutaneous procedures performed in hemodynamics and hybrid rooms, as in this case.1 The
patient was discharged on the first postoperative day. After 30 days, adequate placement of the device was confirmed with PFO occlusion
through transthoracic echocardiography. The patient remains in outpatient care, with migraine improvement. Figure 1 Three-dimensional
transesophageal echocardiography image in multiple planes (from the left atrium, the right atrium, from the lateral, diagonal and triplane
views) of the Cardia IntraseptTM prosthesis (arrow) well positioned in the atrial septum in a patient with patent foramen ovale. RA: right
atrium; LA: left atrium. Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography image in multiple planes (from the left atrium, the right
atrium, from the lateral, diagonal and triplane views) of the Cardia IntraseptTM prosthesis (arrow) well positioned in the atrial septum in
a patient with patent foramen ovale. RA: right atrium; LA: left atrium. Author contributions Conception and design of the research and
Writing of the manuscript: Poffo R; Acquisition of data: Montanhesi PK, Pope RB, Toschi AP, Vieira MC; Analysis and interpretation of the
data: Poffo R, Montanhesi PK; Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Poffo R, Montanhesi PK, Vieira MC. Potential
Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no external
funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
