The patient is a 56-year-old male from the city of São Paulo, with atrial septal defect (ASD) and pulmonary arterial hypertension, who was
hospitalized due to dyspnea, hypoxemia and lower limb edema. In September 1996, the patient sought the Hospital do Coração for the first
time due to fatigue on strenuous exertion for two months and chest X ray diagnosis of enlarged heart area. His physical examination
(September 11, 1996) revealed heart rate of 80 bpm and arterial blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg. His pulmonary auscultation was normal. His
cardiac auscultation showed a fixed and wide splitting of the second heart sound, and systolic heart murmur (+/4+) on the left sternal
border. He was diagnosed with ASD and pulmonary arterial hypertension. The electrocardiogram (ECG - 1996) revealed right ventricular
overload (Figure 1). Figure 1ECG (1996). Sinus rhythm, right ventricular overload. ECG (1996). Sinus rhythm, right ventricular overload. The
chest X ray showed bulging of the pulmonary artery, reduced pulmonary circulation and cardiomegaly (+/4+). The echocardiogram (December
1996) revealed: septum and posterior wall thickness, 8 mm; left ventricular (LV) diameters (diastolic/systolic) of 50/30 mm; aortic, left
atrial and right ventricular (RV) diameters of 35 mm, 40 mm and 54 mm, respectively; normal LV segmentary motility; RV hypokinesia; normal
valves; and estimated pulmonary artery pressure of 84 mm Hg. The pulmonary perfusion scan (1997) was interpreted as of low probability of
pulmonary thromboembolism, and compatible with pulmonary hypertension. The cardiac catheterization (July 22, 1997) revealed: ASD; pulmonary
arterial hypertension; no obstructive coronary lesion; mild compression of the left main coronary artery by the pulmonary trunk; and LV
hypertrophy with moderate diffuse hypokinesia. Table 1 shows the pressures and oximetry. Manometry and oximetry in cardiac catheterization
Syst: systole; Diast: diastole; RA: right atrium; RV: right ventricle; PT: pulmonary trunk; LA: left atrium; LV: left ventricle; Ao: aorta;
Syst: systolic; Diast: diastolic. The pulmonary hypertension was considered disproportional to the left-right shunt, and ASD correction was
not indicated. Warfarin, digoxin, furosemide and captopril were prescribed. Other laboratory findings were as follows: hemoglobin, 19.3
g/dL; hematocrit, 56%; platelets, 176,000/mm3; and leukocytes, 8,000/mm3. The patient remained stable with dyspnea on strenuous exertion
until 2006, when he was 49 years old. His laboratory tests in December 2005 showed: hemoglobin, 21.6 g/dL; hematocrit, 66%; platelets,
146,000/mm3; INR, 1.9; total cholesterol, 136 mg/dL; HDL, 45 mg/dL; LDL, 77 mg/dL; triglycerides, 68 mg/dL; glucose, 82 mg/dL; creatinine, 1
mg/dL; potassium, 4.4 mEq/L; sodium, 143 mEq/L; D dimer < 25 ng/mL. The chest tomography showed signs of pulmonary emphysema, but no sign of
pulmonary thromboembolism, suggesting pulmonary arterial hypertension. The pulmonary function test (December 29, 2005) revealed: FVC= 2.77 L
(94%); FEV1= 3.09 L (66%); FEF 25%-75%= 3.32 (32). After the bronchodilator: FVC= 3.81 L (101%); FEV1= 2.3 L (74%); FEF 25%-75%= 1.25 (38%).
That result is compatible with mild obstruction (FEV1) and a marked reduction in the intermediate stage of breathing, FEF 25%-75%,
compatible with obstruction of the small airways. In June 2006, he experienced worsening of his dyspnea and chest pain, the diagnostic
hypothesis of pulmonary thromboembolism being considered. The pulmonary angiotomography (June 30, 2006) showed a filling gap in the lower
lobe branch of the left pulmonary artery and another filling gap in the upper segmental branch to the left and parietal calcifications;
mosaic perfusion area in the region; moderate pleural effusion on the left; and cardiomegaly. The measurements were as follows: pulmonary
trunk, 47.9 mm; right pulmonary artery branch, 41 mm; left pulmonary artery branch, 36.2 mm. One year after that episode, the patient sought
medical care because of pain in the left hemithorax and cough. The new tomography revealed a large thrombus in the pulmonary trunk,
extending to the left and interlobar descending branch, eccentric, with marginal calcifications. In addition, the following were observed:
smaller, marginal, distal thrombus in the right pulmonary artery; heterogeneous opacities and diffuse septal thickening in the left lung
base; and pleural effusion to the left. The RV diameter/LV diameter ratio was close to 1. The measures were as follows: pulmonary trunk,
38.9 mm; right pulmonary artery, 42.4 mm; left pulmonary artery, 37.4 mm. The patient was diagnosed with chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
and pneumonia. Levofloxacin was prescribed. The echocardiogram (July 12, 2007) showed marked biventricular systolic dysfunction, marked RV
dilation and full-contrast filling of the cavity. No thrombus was visualized, and the RV outflow tract was dilated. Marked dilation of the
pulmonary trunk and branches was identified, as was an echodense filamentous image in the pulmonary trunk suggestive of a thrombus. There
was diffuse LV hypokinesia, and the emergence of the left coronary artery and its bifurcation were visualized, apparently with no sign of
compression. In addition, marked dilation of the atria, moderate tricuspid regurgitation (could be underestimated due to RV dysfunction),
moderate mitral regurgitation and bilateral pleural effusion were observed. Two months later (September 2007), the patient sought the
emergency of InCor with dyspnea at rest, tachycardia, hepatomegaly, ascitis and lower limb edema. The ECG showed atrial tachycardia.
Congestive heart failure was diagnosed, requiring the use of intravenous dobutamine and furosemide, compensation being achieved.
Spironolactone and amiodarone were added to the medications. A new cardiac catheterization (September 2007) revealed: pulmonary artery
pressure of 80/32 mm Hg (mean, 50 mm Hg); no coronary lesion; and diffuse, moderate-to-severe LV hypokinesia. The patient was discharged
with the prescription of furosemide (60 mg/day), spironolactone (25 mg/day), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg/day), amiodarone (200 mg/day),
warfarin (2.5 mg), clopidogrel (75 mg/day), omeprazol (40 mg/day) and fluid restriction of 1800 mL/day. On the following month (October
2007), the patient was hospitalized again due to cardiac decompensation, when hypothyroidism was detected. The new echocardiography (October
2007) showed right chamber dilation, ASD of 35 mm, moderate-to-severe tricuspid regurgitation, RV systolic pressure of 66 mm Hg, and
dilation of the pulmonary arteries. The abdominal ultrasonography (October 10, 2007) showed hepatomegaly with mild steatosis. Sildenafil (40
mg, 3x/day) was introduced, and the patient developed fatigue on strenuous exertion. On physical examination (July 2011), the patient had a
healthy coloring, was in a good general state of health, hydrated, cyanotic (3+/4+), anicteric, afebrile, eupneic. His room air saturation
was 80%, heart rate, 76 bpm, arterial blood pressure, 120/80 mm Hg, and his chest anteroposterior diameter was enlarged. His pulmonary
auscultation was normal. His cardiac auscultation revealed increased intensity of the second heart sound on the pulmonary area, and no heart
murmur. The abdomen was normal, and there was no edema. The ECG (2011) showed sinus rhythm with right ventricular overload (Figure 2).
Figure 2ECG (2011). Sinus rhythm, right ventricular overload. ECG (2011). Sinus rhythm, right ventricular overload. The angiotomography of
the pulmonary arteries (May 2011) revealed dilation of the pulmonary trunk (43 mm) and of the right and left pulmonary artery braches (37 mm
and 36mm, respectively), suggesting pulmonary hypertension. The pulmonary trunk had parietal calcifications. There were circumferential
contrast-filling defects, compatible with mural thrombi, in the left branch of the pulmonary trunk and ipsilateral interlobar artery. In
addition, there was a filling defect associated with marked thinning of the left bronchial arteries of the upper lobe and of the arteries of
the left basal segments, except for the artery of the posterior basal segment, findings compatible with previous thromboembolisms (Figures 3
and 4). (Antonio Fernando Lins de Paiva, MD, radiologist) Figure 3Angiotomography. A. Heart: right ventricular dilation and large atrial
septal defect (ASD); B. Pulmonary arteries: dilated pulmonary trunk (PT), right pulmonary artery (RPA) and left pulmonary artery (LPA) with
mural thrombi and calcifications. Angiotomography. A. Heart: right ventricular dilation and large atrial septal defect (ASD); B. Pulmonary
arteries: dilated pulmonary trunk (PT), right pulmonary artery (RPA) and left pulmonary artery (LPA) with mural thrombi and calcifications.
Figure 4Chest angiotomography. A. Sagittal plane. Left pulmonary artery and left lower lobe branch - extensive mural thrombi and
calcifications; B. Right ventricular outflow tract (RV) and dilated pulmonary trunk (PT); mural thrombi in the pulmonary artery. Chest
angiotomography. A. Sagittal plane. Left pulmonary artery and left lower lobe branch - extensive mural thrombi and calcifications; B. Right
ventricular outflow tract (RV) and dilated pulmonary trunk (PT); mural thrombi in the pulmonary artery. The new echocardiogram (September
2011) was similar to that of 2007, except for the ASD size, which measured 24 mm. There was a mild reduction in the LV ejection fraction
(LVEF= 52%). Bosentan (125 mg, 2x/day) was added to the treatment, and the patient remained in functional class II until the end of 2012. At
the beginning of 2013, due to dyspnea worsening and an episode of pain in the left hemithorax, the patient sought help at a hospital close
to his house, where he underwent bloodletting, and improved. His hematocrit was 67%. The patient was admitted to the emergency unit on June
1, 2013, complaining of dyspnea worsening for 2 days, even on minimum exertion. He associated his symptoms with flu findings. He reported
abdominal volume increase, lower limb edema, cyanosis worsening, reduced urine output, coughing up white mucus, and runny nose. His
examination showed: oxygen saturation blood test, 68%; heart rate, 85 bpm; arterial pressure, 99/60 mmHg; cyanosis, 3+/4+; diffusely reduced
respiratory sounds with crepitant rales on the bases. The cardiac auscultation revealed reduced intensity of the rhythmic heart sounds, and
fixed second heart sound splitting. The abdomen showed signs of ascitis and liver palpable 3 cm from the right costal border. There was
lower limb edema (2+/4+). Dobutamine was administered (5 mcg/kg/min), being reduced to 3.3 mcg/kg/min on the following day, due to improved
hemodynamic findings. Oseltamivir was used because of the previous history of flu. The ECG showed right bundle-branch block and right
ventricular overload (Figure 5). Figure 5ECG (2012). Right bundle-branch block and right ventricular overload. ECG (2012). Right bundle-
branch block and right ventricular overload. The chest X ray (June 01, 2013) showed an enlarged hilum, reduced peripheral lung
vascularization, pulmonary bulging, heart enlargement (4+/4+) at the expense of the RV (Figure 6). Figure 6Chest X-ray (posteroanterior
view) (June 01, 2013) - enlarged pulmonary hila, reduced peripheral pulmonary vascularization; cardiomegaly with enlargement of the left
middle arch (enlarged pulmonary artery). Chest X-ray (posteroanterior view) (June 01, 2013) - enlarged pulmonary hila, reduced peripheral
pulmonary vascularization; cardiomegaly with enlargement of the left middle arch (enlarged pulmonary artery). The laboratory tests (June 01,
2013) revealed: venous blood gas analysis: pH, 7.33; PCO2, 44.6 mm Hg; pO2, 29.1 mm Hg; oxygen saturation, 44.7%; bicarbonate, 22.8 mmol/L;
base excess, (-) 3.3 mmol/L; sodium, 126 mEq/L; potassium, 3.8 mEq/L; lactate, 42 mg/dL; red blood cells, 6.9 million/mm3; hemoglobin, 22
g/dL; hematocrit, 63%; leukocytes, 5020/mm3 (5% band neutrophils, 60% segmented neutrophils, 29% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes); platelets,
424,000/mm3; creatinine, 0.92 mg/dL; urea, 34 mg/dL; magnesium, 1.40 mEq/L; C-reactive protein, 7.25 mg/L; TP (INR) 2.9; TTPA (rel) 1.49; D
dimer, 536 ng/mL; fibrinogen, 186 mg/dL. The echocardiogram (June 03, 2013) showed: RV dilation, 60 mm; left ventricle, 59x46 mm; moderately
reduced LVEF (44%); ASD of 35 mm, with right-to-left flow; marked tricuspid regurgitation; RV systolic pressure, 50 mm Hg; marked mitral
regurgitation; marked enlargement of the right atrium and moderate enlargement of the left atrium (at bedside, patient with oxygen catheter
and on dobutamine) (Figure 7). Figure 7Transthoracic echocardiogram. Left: parasternal view in the short axis: dilation of pulmonary trunk
(PT) and right and left branches of the pulmonary artery (RPA and LPA). Right: parasternal view in the long axis: right ventricle (RV)
dilation and interventricular septal rectification. Transthoracic echocardiogram. Left: parasternal view in the short axis: dilation of
pulmonary trunk (PT) and right and left branches of the pulmonary artery (RPA and LPA). Right: parasternal view in the long axis: right
ventricle (RV) dilation and interventricular septal rectification. On the sixth day of hospitalization (June 06, 2013), aggravation of the
dyspnea, cyanosis and edema was observed, in addition to radiological worsening. Intravenous ceftriaxone, clarithromycin and furosemide were
introduced, and dobutamine dose increased. The laboratory tests (June 06, 2013) were as follows: urea, 20 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.83 mg/dL;
sodium, 132 mEq/L; potassium, 4 mEq/L; venous lactate, 20 mg/dL; TP (INR) 2.6; TTPA (rel) 1.32; D dimer, 434 ng/mL; hemoglobin, 20,1 g/dL;
hematocrit, 63%; leukocytes, 4460/mm3 (70% neutrophils, 1% eosinophils, 1% basophils, 15% lymphocytes and 13% monocytes); platelets,
117,000/mm3; albumin, 3.1 g/dL; C-reactive protein, 49.07 mg/L. The chest X ray (June 06, 2013) showed opacification of the right lung and
of the lower two-thirds of the left lung. On the following night (June 07, 2013, 8PM), the patient had cardiac arrest with pulseless
electrical activity. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, and orotracheal intubation performed. On right hemithorax puncture, air
was drained. The patient did not respond to the maneuvers and died. The ASD is the most common congenital heart disease in adulthood. It is
characterized by a communication between the atria, being classified into four types (ostium primum, ostium secundum, sinus venosus and
defect involving the coronary sinus). Only the ostium secundum defects are true ASD. The other types originate from defects in other
structures, causing a communication between the atrial cavities. The ostium secundum ASD is the most commonly found, corresponding to 80% of
the cases, and results from the excessive resorption of the septum primum or deficient growth of the septum secundum.1 It usually has an
insidious clinical presentation. The communication between the atria causes left-to-right shunt since birth; however, most children are
asymptomatic. The malformation is detected on physical examination because of the presence of a systolic heart murmur on the left sternal
border. Thus, the symptoms usually begin in adolescents or young adults. At the fifth decade of life, 75% to 80% of the patients are
symptomatic.1 Our patient is a 56-year-old male diagnosed with ASD after the appearance of right heart failure symptoms. The diagnosis was
late, when pulmonary hypertension secondary to that congenital malformation had already installed. At that stage, the patient already had
reverse right-to-left shunt, and ASD correction was contraindicated.1 Surgical correction is indicated in the presence of a significant ASD
or associated right ventricular overload, even when symptomless. The correction should be carefully assessed, because, when performed at a
late stage, they can cause serious complications.2 When inadvertent, the ASD correction may worsen pulmonary hypertension, because the
right-to-left shunt closure can increase pulmonary arterial pressure, aggravating the right heart failure. In addition, in more advanced
cases, in which LV systolic dysfunction is associated, ASD closure increases pulmonary capillary pressure, causing pulmonary edema.2 Some
parameters, such as normal oxygen saturation at rest or exertion, left-to-right shunt on echocardiography, and systolic pulmonary artery
pressure lower than 70 mmHg, should be assessed before indicating ASD correction.2 None of these parameters were present in our patient. To
our patient, who had a late diagnosis of ASD complicated with pulmonary hypertension, surgical correction was contraindicated. The
unrepaired ASD resulted in reverse right-to-left shunt, progressing to Eisenmenger syndrome, the final stage of pulmonary obstructive
vascular disease secondary to the preexisting left-to-right shunt.1 The Eisenmenger syndrome is associated with several complications:
arrhythmias, heart failure, pulmonary and systemic thrombosis, hemoptysis, renal dysfunction, cerebral abscess, gout and biliary lithiasis.3
At the time our patient was diagnosed, he already had right heart failure and RV dysfunction. As the disease progressed, episodes of
pulmonary arterial thrombosis occurred. The prevalence of thrombosis is high in that population due to the hypoxemia that results in
secondary polycythemia, and, consequently, higher risk for thrombosis. The chance of pulmonary arterial thrombosis is suggested to increase
with age, probably due to the progression of endothelial dysfunction over time.4 Thus, to a patient at low risk for bleeding,
anticoagulation should be discussed, even before thrombosis manifests. The patient was medicated for heart failure, and oral anticoagulation
was initiated even before the manifestation of pulmonary arterial thrombosis. He remained stable for 10 years, and, during which, his
medication was optimized with the later introduction of pulmonary vasodilators. These drugs are essential to treat the Eisenmenger syndrome,
improving functional class, increasing tolerance to exercise and improving performance on the 6-minute walking test.5 Despite adequate drug
treatment, our patient's clinical status progressively worsened, and he died due to disease complications (heart failure and pulmonary
arterial thrombosis). This case shows the importance of the early diagnosis of ASD, allowing the repair of the congenital defect timely,
before complications occur. (Carolina Santana, MD, and Prof. Antonio Augusto Lopes) Diagnostic hypothesis: end-stage pulmonary hypertension
(Eisenmenger syndrome) due to atrial septal defect. (Carolina Santana, MD, and Prof. Antonio Augusto Lopes) The heart was enlarged and
globoid, weighing 832 g. On gross examination, the RV was prominent. The opening of the cavities evidenced eccentric hypertrophy of the four
chambers, mainly the right ones, which showed marked dilation. A large ASD was identified in the fossa ovalis (ostium secundum type),
measuring 3.5 x 3.0 cm (Figure 8). The ventricular septum was intact, no other heart malformation being identified. The microscopic
examination revealed hypertrophy of the cardiomyocytes and myocardial interstitial fibrosis in both ventricles, with no evidence of ischemic
lesions (infarction). The pulmonary trunk was dilated (diameter of 4.0 cm) and showed complicated atherosclerosis, with calcified areas. The
right pulmonary artery showed calcified atherosclerosis, organized partial thrombosis, and markedly dilation of its parenchymatous branches.
The process was similar in the left lung, but the thrombosis was more extensive, affecting numerous arterial branches, in an occlusive way,
including the pulmonary hilum (Figure 9). The microscopic examination of the lungs confirmed the extensive organizing arterial thrombosis
detected on gross examination, in addition to revealing: organized and rechanneled arteriolar thrombosis (Figure 10); recent focal
thrombosis of a small artery and small hemorrhagic infarction in the lower lobe of the right lung (Figure 11); areas of alveolar hemorrhage;
anthracosis; microscopic evidence of chronic bronchitis; and diffuse pulmonary emphysema. In addition, a small in situ adenocarcinoma was
found in the right lung, measuring 9 mm. Moderate aorta atherosclerosis was identified, with calcified plaques. Neither pneumothorax nor
bronchopneumonia were evidenced. Figure 8View of the right heart chambers opened, evidencing eccentric hypertrophy with marked dilation.
Note the large atrial septal defect in the fossa ovalis (double asterisk). View of the right heart chambers opened, evidencing eccentric
hypertrophy with marked dilation. Note the large atrial septal defect in the fossa ovalis (double asterisk). Figure 9Gross examination.
Section of the left lung showing atherosclerosis and calcification of the pulmonary artery branches, which are markedly dilated with
extensive, occlusive, organized thrombosis (arrows). Gross examination. Section of the left lung showing atherosclerosis and calcification
of the pulmonary artery branches, which are markedly dilated with extensive, occlusive, organized thrombosis (arrows). Figure 10Microscopic
section evidencing organized and recanalized arteriolar thrombosis of the lung parenchyma. Hematoxylin-Eosin, X 200. Microscopic section
evidencing organized and recanalized arteriolar thrombosis of the lung parenchyma. Hematoxylin-Eosin, X 200. Figure 11Microscopic section of
the right lung lower lobe showing a recent hemorrhagic infarction. Hematoxylin-Eosin, X 50. Microscopic section of the right lung lower lobe
showing a recent hemorrhagic infarction. Hematoxylin-Eosin, X 50. (Luiz Alberto Benvenuti, MD) Anatomopathological diagnoses - Atrial septal
defect in the fossa ovalis; secondary pulmonary hypertension; congestive heart failure with marked cardiomegaly; extensive organizing
thrombosis in the pulmonary arteries and their branches; recent focal thrombosis of a small artery and small hemorrhagic infarction in the
lower lobe of the right lung; pulmonary emphysema probably related to chronic smoking; in situ adenocarcinoma of the right lung. (Luiz
Alberto Benvenuti, MD) The patient was a 56-year-old male with wide ASD, marked secondary pulmonary hypertension and Eisenmenger syndrome.
He was initially cared for at our service at the age of 37 years, when diagnosed with congenital heart defect. On that occasion, he already
had marked pulmonary hypertension, and no indication for surgical repair. The surgical repair of congenital heart defects that progress with
pulmonary hypertension should be early, before the latter acquires greater importance, becoming irreversible. Under certain circumstances,
pulmonary biopsy is performed to grade hypertension, contributing to assess the possibility of surgical repair.6,7 Our patient progressed
with congestive heart failure, polycythemia with marked hematocrit increase and episodes of thrombosis of pulmonary arteries. In addition,
there was an inversion of the flow through the ASD (right-to-left), characterizing Einsenmenger syndrome.8 The postmortem examination
confirmed the large ASD and pulmonary hypertension. There was marked dilation of the pulmonary arteries and branches, with extensive
organized thrombosis, affecting the hilar vessels. These findings can occur in pulmonary hypertension of any etiology, but, in our case, the
thrombosis was exuberant, probably related to the marked increase in the patient's hematocrit and prothrombotic state, described in the
adult's Eisenmenger syndrome.8,9 It is worth noting that, under those circumstances, there is thrombosis rather than thromboembolism of the
pulmonary arteries, because it is a local phenomenon and not embolization of thrombi formed in another vascular territory. Death resulted
from cardiogenic shock, due to heart failure and extensive thrombosis of the pulmonary arteries, aggravated by hemorrhagic pulmonary
infarction. (Luiz Alberto Benvenuti, MD) Editor da Seção: Alfredo José Mansur (ajmansur@incor.usp.br) Editores Associados: Desidério
Favarato (dclfavarato@incor.usp.br) Vera Demarchi Aiello (anpvera@incor.usp.br)
