Surgical treatment for spinal tuberculosis includes focal tuberculosis debridement, segmental stability reconstruction, neural decompression
and kyphotic deformity correction. For the lesions mainly involved anterior and middle column of the spine, anterior operation of
debridement and fusion with internal fixation has been becoming the most frequently used surgical technique for the spinal tuberculosis.
However, high risk of structural damage might relate with anterior surgery, such as damage in lungs, heart, kidney, ureter and bowel, and
the deformity correction is also limited. Due to the organs are in the front of spine, there are less complications in posterior approach.
Spinal pedicle screw passes through the spinal three‐column structure, which provides more powerful orthopedic forces compared with the
vertebral body screw, and the kyphotic deformity correction effect is better in posterior approach. In this paper, we report a 68‐year‐old
male patient with thoracic tuberculosis who underwent surgical treatment by debridement, interbody fusion and internal fixation via
posterior approach only. The patient was placed in prone position under general anesthesia. Posterior midline incision was performed, and
the posterior spinal construction was exposed. Then place pedicle screw, and fix one side rod temporarily. Make the side of more bone
destruction and larger abscess as lesion debridement side. Resect the unilateral facet joint, and retain contralateral structure integrity.
Protect the spinal cord, nerve root. Clear sequestrum, necrotic tissue, abscess of paravertebral and intervertebral space. Specially
designed titanium mesh cages or bone blocks were implanted into interbody. Fix both side rods and compress both sides to make the mesh cages
and bone blocks tight. Reconstruct posterior column structure with allogeneic bone and autologous bone. Using this technique, the procedures
of debridement, spinal cord decompression, deformity correction, bone grafting, and internal fixation can be completed with only one
incision and surgical position, and the deformity correction efficiency is higher than anterior surgery. Disclosure: The authors have no
conflicts of interest to disclose. Bone and joint tuberculosis (TB) accounts for 13% of TB cases; 50% of these are in the spine.1 The
incidence of TB has increased globally in recent years because of large‐scale migration, increase in number of patients with HIV infection,
emergence of antibiotic‐resistant strains and other reasons. Patients with spinal TB often have severe nerve damage, spinal instability and
kyphotic deformity and therefore usually require surgical treatment. The aims of such treatment are to eradicate the TB lesion, relieve
spinal nerve compression, reconstruct spinal stability and correct spinal deformity. For spinal destruction by TB foci in the anterior and
middle columns, anterior debridement, bone grafting and either anterior or posterior internal fixation have been performed by many
researchers.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 However, because of the complex anterior structure, this approach is associated with many complications.9,
10, 11 Furthermore, combined posterior and anterior procedures lead to greater blood loss, increased operating time, prolonged anesthesia,
more hospitalization expenses, and increased mortality and complications. In addition, exposure of the upper thoracic and lumbosacral
segments is a major challenge for surgeons. Because tuberculous lesions always involve the anterior and middle columns of the spinal
vertebrae, many researchers have concerns about whether posterior surgery can accomplish focal debridement completely with its limited
visual field, how it may affect the stability of the spine and whether it may cause intraspinal infection. We have designed a new posterior
approach for treating spinal TB that effectively addresses the above problems. From January 2006 to January 2012, 290 patients with spinal
TB have undergone surgery comprising debridement, interbody fusion and internal fixation via a posterior approach only in our hospital. In
this paper, we present a typical case of a 68‐year‐old male patient who was admitted to our hospital with thoracic TB and underwent surgical
treatment comprising debridement, interbody fusion and internal fixation via a posterior approach only to illustrate the clinical efficacy
and feasibility of this new surgical procedure. A 68‐year‐old male patient was admitted to our hospital with chest pain for 6 months and
lower limb fatigue for 1 month. There had been no obvious cause for the onset of back pain 6 months ago. This pain was particularly evident
at night and had become more severe and accompanied by lower limb fatigue 1 month previously. He had received no anti‐TB therapy before
admission. X‐rays, MRI and CT of spine, routine blood tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C‐reactive protein (CRP) concentrations
and hepatorenal function were examined. He had a white blood cell count was 5.7 × 109/L, ESR 87 mm/1h, CRP concentration 21.4 mg/L and
normal hepatorenal function. The patient consented to publication of data concerning his case. Physical examination showed hypesthesia below
the rib arch, Grade 1 lower limb muscle strength and Frankel Grade C neurological function. It also showed increased muscular tone in the
lower limbs, knee and ankle hyperreflexia and positive sign for ankle clonus. X‐ray films showed collapse of the T8 vertebrae and T7–8
intervertebral space. CT scan showed destruction of T7, T8 and the intervertebral space and sequestrum formation, especially on the left
side. A paravertebral abscess was limited to T7 and T8 without an obvious gravitation abscess. The height of the T8 vertebral body was
markedly reduced and the dural sac and spinal cord severely compressed by an abscess posterior to the vertebral body. The patient was
administered the anti‐TB drugs isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide prior surgery. He underwent surgical debridement,
interbody fusion and internal fixation via a posterior approach 7 days after starting anti‐TB therapy because his paralysis progressively
worsened after commencing chemotherapy. He continued to receive anti‐TB chemotherapy for 18 months postoperatively. The patient was placed
in a prone position under general anesthesia with somatosensory‐evoked potential monitoring. Extraperiosteal dissection at both non‐fusion
and fusion levels was performed through a midline incision. The posterior spinal construction was exposed, including the spinous processes,
lamina, facet joints and transverse processes and the range of exposure at the level of decompression expanded to include the
costotransverse articulations and 3–5 cm of the medial ribs bilaterally. Pedicle screws or hooks were placed at one or two levels superior
and inferior to the level of decompression under C‐arm fluoroscopy guidance. One side rod was fixed temporarily to avoid spinal cord injury
during decompression and focal debridement. Lesion debridement to drain the prevertebral abscess and expose the diseased vertebral bodies
was performed from the side with more bone destruction and a larger abscess (left). The facet joint was resected unilaterally and the lower
costotransverse joints excised with a small fragment of adjoining rib if in the thoracic segment, retaining contralateral structural
integrity12 (Figs 1, 2), while protecting the spinal cord and nerve root. Spatulas of various sizes and angles were used from a posterior
approach to remove all lesions, including sequestra, abscesses and granulation tissues. The abscesses were drained by suction and curettage
as thoroughly as possible. Diagrammatic representation of surgical management of spinal tuberculosis via a posterior approach only. (A) The
range of excision viewed from behind, including the spinous process, facet joint on one side and lower costotransverse joint (with a small
fragment of ribs if in thoracic segment). (B) The range of excision viewed axially. (C) Specially constructed titanium mesh cages or bone
blocks are implanted in the interbody via the posterior approach after debridement. Video screen shot showed temporary fixation with one
side rod and resection of the spinous process, facet joint on one side and the lower costotransverse joint with a small fragment of rib.
After distracting the intervertebral space, specially constructed titanium mesh cages or bone blocks were implanted into the interbody (Fig.
3). Both ends of the titanium mesh cages were filled with autologous bone with allograft or autogenous bone in the middle.13 Both side rods
were then fixed and both sides compressed to tighten the mesh cages and bone blocks. After completion of internal fixation, debridement and
interbody thoracic fusion were performed, and strip‐sized autogenous or allograft bone imbedded in the posterior body to fuse the segments
that had been subjected to decompression and focal debridement. Streptomycin (1.0 g) and isoniazid (0.3 g) were deposited locally. The
debrided material underwent bacterial culture and histopathologic examination. Video screen shot showing implantation of specially
constructed titanium mesh cages into the interbody via a posterior approach only. Antibiotics were given i.v. injection during the first
postoperative week. The drainage tube was removed when the drainage volume was less than 20 mL/24 h. The patient was asked to wear a brace
as soon as possible and then for at least for 6 months.14 The patient received anti‐TB chemotherapy with the four drugs mentioned above for
at least 9 months and isoniazid, rifampicin and ethambutol treatment for another 3–6 months thereafter. The patient was examined clinically
and radiologically 3, 6 and 12 months after surgery and then at yearly intervals. X‐rays and blood tests were examined. Bone graft fusion
was assessed using Bridwell's radiologic criteria.15 The patient had significant improvement in back pain after surgery and had achieved
bony spinal fusion 6 months after surgery. His ESR and CRP had recovered to normal values by 3 months postoperatively. Spinal TB accounts
for approximately half of all cases of musculoskeletal TB, which is more common in children and young adults. The incidence of spinal TB is
increasing in developing nations, especially in China. Chemotherapy is a very effective way of controlling and treating TB and most
individuals with spinal TB can be cured by conservative treatment. However, patients whose disease is not sensitive to anti‐TB chemotherapy
and who develop progressive kyphosis, bone destruction or neurological impairment usually require surgical treatment. The purpose of
surgical treatment is debridement of focal TB, reconstruction of segmental stability, neural decompression and correction of kyphotic
deformity. For the lesions mainly involved anterior and middle column of the spine, Hodgson et al. first reported their “Hong Kong
operation” for treating spinal TB in 1960.16 With the development of instrumentation techniques, a one stage anterior procedure comprising
debridement and fusion with internal fixation has become the most frequently performed surgical treatment for spinal TB.5, 10, 17, 18, 19 An
anterior approach allows direct debridement, which facilitates focal debridement and nerve decompression, without destroying the spinal
posterior column structure.20, 21 However, the anatomical structures encountered with an anterior approach are more complex, including major
blood and lymphatic vessels, nerves and other important organs such as the lungs, heart, kidney, ureter and bowel. There is therefore a high
risk of structural damage associated with such surgery. Because tuberculous lesions always involve the anterior and middle columns, many
researchers have the following concerns about posterior surgery: (i) whether the surgery can accomplish focal debridement completely with
its limited visual field; (ii) whether it will affect the stability of the spine; and (iii) whether it will cause intra‐spinal infection and
central nervous system complications. We create adequate operating space by resecting the spinous process and facet joint on the more
severely involved side and excising the adjacent costotransverse joint with a small fragment of ribs; this allows posterior decompression,
anterior debridement and strut bone grafting without risking spinal cord injury because the spinal dura mater can be directly visualized.
Relatively complete focal debridement, which requires removal of sequestra, granulation tissue and abscesses, can only be achieved via a
posterior approach. We resect the facet joint unilaterally: the pedicle screw supplies enough support to maintain segmental stability of the
spine in the early stages and solid stability is achieved when the bone fuses at a later stage. Because with a posterior approach the spinal
canal is exposed to TB, some researchers are concerned about the possibility of intraspinal infection and central nervous system
complications of TB infection, such as TB meningitis when removing TB foci via this approach.22, 23 In our series, no patients have
developed TB meningitis, this possibly being attributable to initiating anti‐TB treatment preoperatively and continuing it postoperatively,
inserting anti‐TB drugs locally intraoperatively and the biological membrane barrier provided by the spinal dura mater. The posterior
approach has some unique advantages over other surgical procedures. Firstly, the operative procedures of debridement, spinal cord
decompression, deformity correction, bone grafting and internal fixation can all be completed via only one incision and in one position and
better correction of deformity is achieved than with anterior surgery. Secondly, without one‐lung ventilation and with less operative
trauma, there is less interference with the lungs, aorta and intestinal and therefore fewer postoperative complications such as atelectasis,
lung infection, chylothorax, massive hemorrhage and paralytic ileus. Compared with anterior surgery, the posterior operation can be
performed safely even though there is severe pleural adhesion. The key to get good outcomes after this procedure is to minimize the risk of
spinal reconstruction failure and TB recurrence by selecting appropriate cases that meet the following criteria: (i) monosegment spinal TB
without a big gravitation abscess; and (ii) the TB lesion can be removed completely. Additionally, the patient should meet at least one of
the following conditions: (i) bone destruction with collapse of the vertebral body and spinal instability; (ii) compression of the spinal
cord or spinal nerve root by an abscess; and (iii) obvious or progressive spinal deformity. For monosegment spinal TB without a big
gravitation abscess, compared with anterior surgery it safer, less traumatic and better deformity correction can be achieved by performing
internal fixation, debridement and interbody bone graft via a posterior approach only. Supporting Information Click here for additional data
file. This research was supported by the Project of Furong Scholar of Hunan Province.
