Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 77 Final Diagnosis: Femoral artery pseudoaneurysm Symptoms: None Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Cardiac catheterization and coronary stenting with Starclose vascular closure Specialty: Interventional Cardiology
Educational Purpose (only if useful for a systematic review or synthesis) Vascular closure devices (VCDs) are frequently used for hemostasis
with endovascular procedures by employing sutures or plug devices (using collagen or hydrogel) or through the use of a metal clip made of
nickel and titanium, such as the StarClose SE device. In comparison to manual compression (MC), VCDs are associated with earlier time to
discharge and ambulation, improved patient comfort, and better cost-effectiveness. A 77-year-old man with history of ischemic cardiomyopathy
with non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) underwent diagnostic cardiac catheterization with deployment of a StarClose SE
vascular closure device for hemostasis. Upon repeat access 4 days later for coronary intervention, retrograde sheath angiography revealed a
pseudo-aneurysm emanating from the center of the StarClose clip. A review of the literature shows VCDs to be non-inferior to MC, with an
overall high success rate. Major and minor complications rates are comparable to those with MC, and pseudo-aneurysm is an infrequent
complication. Femoral arterial hemostasis after cardiac catheterization can be achieved through manual compression (MC), mechanical
compression, or vascular closure devices (VCDs). Although VCDs have been shown to be non-inferior to MC with respect to access site
hemostasis and complications, MC is still considered the standard traditional method . Use of VCDs avoids the need to interrupt
anticoagulation, improves patient comfort, provides faster time to ambulation and discharge, and reduces healthcare burden by freeing staff
resources . The literature shows pseudo-aneurysm formation with StarClose vascular closure device to be infrequent. In deciding which method
to use for arterial closure – MC versus VCD – one must take into account numerous factors, from patient characteristics to the site of
arterial puncture, to minimize VCD-related complications. A 77-year-old man with history of ischemic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular
ejection fraction 20–25% and atrial fibrillation was transferred to our hospital after cardiac arrest. He was noted to have positive
troponins and was diagnosed with NSTEMI. Anticoagulation was started with a loading dose of aspirin 325 mg and Plavix 600 mg with
maintenance dose of 81 mg and 75 mg, respectively, along with intravenous heparin infusion. After stabilization, cardiac catheterization was
performed via a right femoral approach due to limited radial arterial access, revealing multi-vessel coronary artery disease with a syntax
score of 16. Hemostasis post-procedure was achieved with a StarClose SE device with no post-deployment oozing or delayed hemostasis. He was
felt to be at extreme surgical risk and was referred for high-risk percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Again, right femoral arterial
access was obtained and a 6F sheath was introduced. PCI was performed with the placement of 4 drug-eluting stents: 1 in the proximal LAD, 1
in the ramus intermedius, and 2 in the first obtuse marginal. Prior to PCI, retrograde sheath angiography was performed to evaluate the
access site for hemostasis and suitability for closure. The femoral arterial cannulation site was noted to be approximately 2 cm cranial to
the prior access site closed with the StarClose SE device (Figure 1A). Retrograde sheath angiography revealed the previously deployed
StarClose clip with a 0.5-cm pseudo-aneurysm (PSA) emanating from its center (Figure 1B). As the pseudo-aneurysm was small, the decision was
made to achieve hemostasis and to treat the pseudo-aneurysm simultaneously by applying manual pressure for hemostasis. There was no post-
compression bleeding, oozing, or other post-procedure complication. The StarClose device (Abbott Vascular, Abbott Park, IL) is a 4-mm
circular nitinol clip that is deployed at the arterial puncture site, drawing the edges of the arteriotomy together for closure (Figure 2).
Complications associated with the device as published in trials, case reports, and database searches have revealed PSA occurrence to be
infrequent. Johnson et al. reported major and minor complications with StarClose SE device in a 16-month period, using the Manufacturer and
User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database. A total of 1118 device complications were reported, which included: failure to achieve
hemostasis (409; 36.6%), inability to complete deployment sequence (268; 24%), entrapped deployment device (224, 20%), clip not being
deployed (151, 13.5%), late bleeding or oozing from dermatotomy site (25, 2.2%), vessel occlusion (19, 1.7%), retroperitoneal hematoma (12,
1.1%), PSA (6, 0.4), and death (4, 0.4%) . Other case reports have reported bleeding requiring transfusions, vascular injury requiring
repair, ipsilateral lower extremity ischemia, vessel occlusion requiring stenting, re-access catheter entrapment requiring surgical
extraction, and ipsilateral deep venous thrombosis . The StarClose SE device has shown comparable results to MC in many trials. In the
pivotal CLIP trial, StarClose was non-inferior to MC with respect to major complications and with successful access site closure of 100% and
98.9% in patients undergoing diagnostic and interventional procedures, respectively. There were fewer incidences of minor complications and
reduced times to discharge, ambulation, and hemostasis in the StarClose arm . In addition, no PSA or arterial-venous malformations (AVM)
were reported. An ultrasound substudy of the CLIP trial assessed patency of the femoral artery and determined access site complications with
use of duplex ultrasonography in a prospective fashion. No difference in access site complications was found, and both groups maintained
vessel paten-cy without PSA, AVM, hematoma, vessel stenosis, or thrombosis . A systematic review of 34 randomized controlled trials
including 14401 total subjects comparing complications, overall cost, and time to hemostasis, discharge, ambulation, and quality of life was
reported by Cox et al. comparing MC and all VCDs. Procedural success for all VCDs was 95.7%, with a reduced time to hemostasis, ambulation,
and discharge for both diagnostic and interventional procedures. Complication rates were similar between the 2 groups but varied depending
upon the device used. Upon surveying patients, 94.45% of patients preferred VCD for future angioplasties, and a 13% reduction in overall
costs was reported due to reduced use of staff resources and earlier time to discharge . Many recent trials have shown similar results when
evaluating the safety and efficacy of MC with the StarClose SE device. Tavris et al. reported StarClose to be 1 of 4 VCDs demonstrating
significantly lower bleeding or vascular complications compared to MC controls . An analysis of anterograde and retrograde femoral access in
more than 1000 consecutive peripheral angioplasty procedures reported the overall hemostasis success rate to be 93.9%, with overall major
and minor complications rates to be 0.3% and 5.3%, respectively . Williams et al. reported closure of anterograde punctures with the
StarClose device following infrainguinal endovascular interventions to be successful in 94.6% of 212 patients. The reasons for failure were
device failure in 5, obesity was 1, groin scarring in 2, and uncertain cause in 4 patients . Ratnam et el prospectively compared StarClose
with MC and the collagen plug-based Angio-Seal device, with significantly more StarClose patients requiring additional MC to achieve
hemostasis; however, the incidence of major complications was lowest with StarClose patients (1.9%) vs. Angio-Seal (2.9%) and was the
greatest with MC (3.7%) . The StarClose device has been associated with increased post-deployment oozing, but it is successfully deployed in
most patients and has a lower incidence of major complications than MC. Pseudoaneurysm formation after StarClose clip deployment is an
extremely infrequent occurrence. The initial multicenter randomized CLIP Study evaluating major and minor complications in 208 diagnostic
and 275 interventional patients at 17 centers in the U.S. reported no post-procedure PSAs . The subsequent prospective RISE study, following
171 patients for post-procedure 30-day complications and early time to ambulation with StarClose device in cardiac and peripheral vascular
procedures reported only 1 patient with PSA . Risk factors that increase incidence of PSA include: use of anti-platelet agents (aspirin and
Plavix), anticoagulation, large sheath size (>8F), age over 65 years, obesity, poor post-procedural compression, simultaneous artery and
vein catheterization, hypertension, peripheral arterial disease, hemodialysis, complex interventions, and low- or high-grade punctures at
external iliac or superficial or deep femoral artery level . PSA is a rare occurrence with StarClose, but further risk can be decreased by
careful patient population selection. The treatment of PSA after cardiac catheterization is dependent upon size and associated
complications. A PSA of less than 1.8 cm may thrombose spontaneously in the absence of anticoagulation and antiplatelet agents. Rupture is
the most feared complication of PSAs and is seen more commonly with size greater than 3 cm, symptoms, a large expanding hematoma, or
infection, which can lead to septic emboli. The most common treatment modalities are ultrasound-guided compression (USGC) repair,
ultrasound-guided thrombin injection (UGTI), and surgical repair. UGTI seems to be the most common modality but has an average time to
occlusion of about 33 min, with a range of 10 to 120 min, and is associated with patient discomfort and prolonged staff resource utilization
. A prospective study by Paschalidis et al. reported MC to be as successful and more cost-effective in treating PSA when compared with USGC,
although the success rate may be lower in the presence of anti-coagulation, 95% versus 86% . Surgical intervention is reserved for PSAs at
vascular anastomosis sites, of mycotic origin, causing compression of underlying structures, including claudication, neuropathy, critical
limb ischemia, neuropathy, or skin necrosis . Currently, there are no studies demonstrating the most effective way to treat PSA caused by
VCDs, and this field requires further research. The StarClose SE closure device has a success rate of achieving hemostasis approaching 97% .
We present a case report with an interesting radiographic image of a pseudo-aneurysm emanating from the center of the StarClose clip. The
small pseudo-aneurysm was successfully treated with manual compression. Pseudo-aneurysm is an infrequent occurrence with the StarClose clip
device. However, it can still occur, even with optimal access and closure technique. Conflict of interest The authors declare that there is
no conflict of interest. Right femoral X-ray (A) and femoral artery arteriogram (B) showing StarClose nitinol clip (black arrow) at the
common femoral artery level approximately 2 cm distal to the initial cannulation site with a 0.5-cm pseudo-aneurysm (white arrow) emanating
centrally through the StarClose clip. The 4-mm StarClose nitinol clip attached extra-vascularly at the femoral arterial puncture site.
