We present the first case of Morvan’s syndrome (MoS) and myasthenia gravis (MG) related to familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) gene
mutations. A 40-year-old woman with a 1-year history of bilateral ptosis and limb muscle weakness presented to our hospital. She also had
memory impairment, insomnia, hyperhidrosis, and muscle twitches. Electromyography confirmed widespread myokymia, and there was evidence of
temporal region dysfunction on electroencephalography. Anti-voltage-gated potassium channel complex antibodies and anti-acetylcholine
receptor antibodies were both positive. Edrophonium administration was effective for bilateral ptosis and muscle weakness. She and her
family experienced self-limiting febrile attacks with arthralgia, which led us to suspect FMF. Genetic analyses revealed compound
heterozygous mutations in exon 2 of the MEFV gene (L110P/E148Q). From these findings, a diagnosis of MoS and MG complicated with MEFV gene
mutations was made. Intravenous high-dose corticosteroids, plasma exchange, and intravenous immunoglobulin resulted in only transient,
limited improvement, and frequent relapses, especially in the myasthenic symptoms. Interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor-α
were markedly elevated in the serum, which was considered to be derived from the MEFV mutations and responsible for the resistance to
immunotherapy. The present case illustrates a possible link between auto-inflammation and auto-antibody-mediated neurological diseases.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a genetic auto-inflammatory disease characterized by self-limiting relapsing fever and polyserositis,
caused by mutations of the MEFV gene encoding pyrin . Some neurological autoimmune or auto-inflammatory disorders, such as multiple
sclerosis, Behçet disease, and polymyositis (PM), have been reported as complications of FMF [2, 3]. We report the first case of Morvan’s
syndrome (MoS) and myasthenia gravis (MG) related to FMF harboring MEFV mutations (L110P/E148Q). A 40-year-old woman had experienced ptosis
and double vision with daily fluctuations for 1 year and was admitted to our hospital in August 2012. She also had insomnia, hyperhidrosis,
and progressive weakness of the extremities. She had experienced recurrent fever, arthralgia, abdominal pain, and oral aphtha since
childhood; her mother, older sister, and son also had self-limiting periodic fever. Neurologically, she had ptosis, double vision, mild
dysphagia, neck flexor weakness (Medical Research Council (MRC) scale grade 4), symmetrical weakness of her deltoids (MRC grades: right
4/left 4), triceps (right 4/left 4), digit flexors (right 3/left 3), quadriceps (right 4/left 4), and tibialis anterior muscles (right
4/left 4), grip myotonia, and myokymia. Myokymia was most frequently seen in the bilateral first dorsal interosseous muscles and less
frequently in the lower leg and trunk muscles. An edrophonium test was positive for ptosis, double vision, and proximal limb muscle weakness
but not distal muscle weakness. Blood tests were unremarkable except for hyper-IgDemia (12.2 mg/dL; normal, 0.0–9.0). Anti-acetylcholine
receptor antibodies were weakly positive (0.4 nmol/L; normal, <0.2) and anti-muscle-specific receptor tyrosine kinase and anti-low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 antibodies were negative. Anti-voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC) complex antibodies were
elevated to 316 pM (normal, <100), while antibodies against leucine-rich glioma inactivated protein 1 (LGI1) and contactin-associated
protein-like 2 (Caspr2) were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid tests including IgG index (0.51; normal, <0.73) were normal and oligoclonal IgG
bands were absent. Brain and skeletal muscle magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography/computed tomography of the whole
body detected no abnormalities including thymic tumors. Needle electromyography showed neuromyotonic discharges in the left quadriceps and
first dorsal interosseous muscles (Fig. 1a) and myokymic discharges in the right thenar muscles (Fig. 1b). Nerve conduction studies in the
upper and lower extremities were normal. Repetitive nerve stimulation of the orbicularis oculi, frontalis, and abductor digiti minimi
muscles showed no decremental or incremental responses. Electroencephalography revealed intermittent irregular slow waves around 4 Hz in the
left temporal region without epileptic discharge. Unrelated word pairs (in Miyake’s Paired-Associate Word Learning Test; a Japanese memory
function test) elicited low scores: first task = 0 (normal, 3.2–7.0), second task = 4 (normal, 6.6–10.0), and third task = 7 (normal,
7.7–10.0). Based on these observations, we diagnosed her as having MoS complicated with MG. Intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) (1 g/day
for 3 days) followed by oral prednisolone (PSL) (40 mg/day) with gradual tapering and five courses of simple plasma exchange (PE) alleviated
the ptosis, double vision, memory disturbance, hyperhidrosis, and insomnia. The left temporal slow waves were diminished on
electroencephalography. The unrelated word pair scores also improved: first task = 3, second task = 9, and third task = 9. However, her
myokymia and muscle weakness persisted. Administration of a choline esterase inhibitor (pyridostigmine 180 mg/day) was effective for the
ptosis, double vision, and proximal limb weakness but not the distal muscle weakness. Genetic analyses of MEFV revealed compound
heterozygous mutations of L110P/E148Q in exon 2 (Fig. 1c, d), while analyses for mutations associated with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
receptor-associated periodic syndrome and hyper-IgD syndrome were negative. She had an HLA-B51/-52 genotype. Based on these findings, she
was also diagnosed with FMF .Fig. 1Clinical and pathological findings in the present case. a, b Needle electromyography at rest shows
neuromyotonic discharges around 450 Hz in the left first dorsal interosseous muscle (a) and myokymic discharges in the right thenar muscle
(b). The black arrow in a indicates an insertional activity. c, d Analyses of MEFV gene mutations identified the heterozygous mutation L110P
(c) and homozygous mutation E148Q (d) Clinical and pathological findings in the present case. a, b Needle electromyography at rest shows
neuromyotonic discharges around 450 Hz in the left first dorsal interosseous muscle (a) and myokymic discharges in the right thenar muscle
(b). The black arrow in a indicates an insertional activity. c, d Analyses of MEFV gene mutations identified the heterozygous mutation L110P
(c) and homozygous mutation E148Q (d) Her MG symptoms were exacerbated in January 2013 and she was re-admitted to our hospital. Marked
elevation of serum interleukin (IL)-6 (353 pg/mL; normal, <8), TNF-α (43 pg/mL; normal, <2.8), and IL-1β (24 pg/mL; normal, <10) was found.
She was treated with IVMP followed by oral PSL (40 mg/day) with gradual tapering, which led to limited efficacy for the ptosis and double
vision. Although oral colchicine (1 mg/day) resolved her recurrent fever, arthralgia, and oral aphtha, her MG symptoms frequently recurred
from July 2013 to October 2014. PE and IVIg (0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days) were required repeatedly every several months, in addition to PSL
(5–10 mg/day) and immunosuppressants (tacrolimus 6 mg/day or azathioprine 100 mg/day), which showed transient efficacy for the ptosis,
double vision, and proximal limb weakness. However, the limb weakness with myokymia progressively worsened (right 3/left 3), which rendered
her wheelchair-bound. FMF causes episodic rises in IL-1β and downstream pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and TNF-α, with recurrent
fever and serosal inflammation . Indeed, serum IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 were elevated in our patient. Pyrin plays a critical role in assembly
of the inflammasome. Although it remains unclear how mutated pyrin produces increases in IL-1β, hyper-activated T helper (Th)1 and Th17
cells are assumed to contribute to the auto-inflammatory response . Interestingly, our patient developed MoS and MG, both antibody-mediated
diseases, but her myokymia and MG symptoms were resistant to intensive immunotherapies. A previous report described a case of FMF caused by
MEFV gene mutations of L110P and E148Q that coexisted with PM . In that case, colchicine treatment successfully alleviated both FMF and PM,
suggesting that the disease activity of PM was considerably modulated by the coexisting FMF . Among the pro-inflammatory cytokines elevated
in our patient’s serum, IL-6 facilitates Th17 differentiation from naïve T cells and decreases regulatory T cells. Furthermore, pathogenic
Th17 cells were shown to exacerbate experimental autoimmune MG . Therefore, frequent pro-inflammatory cytokine surges caused by the MEFV
mutations, despite their treatment by immunotherapies such as PE, may be responsible for the refractory nature of MG, and possibly MoS, in
our case. However, for the development of antibody-mediated neurologic diseases, activation of the adaptive immune system is required, even
in patients with non-antigen-specific activation of the innate immune system through a genetic disorder . The reason for the involvement of
the distal muscles in our case is unclear. However, one explanation might be that the myokymia and neuromyotonia, which reflect peripheral
nerve hyperexcitability (PNH), may play a considerable role because PNH is a potential cause of axon loss that can precede weakness or
muscle atrophy [7, 8]. Another explanation could be that the distal muscle weakness was derived from MG because some patients with MG can
show distal muscle involvement without other concomitant diseases that contribute to distal muscle weakness ; however, a choline esterase
inhibitor was only effective for the proximal muscle weakness, and not the distal muscle weakness, in our patient. In conclusion, FMF-
related auto-inflammation may contribute to the development and augmentation of MG and MoS, suggesting a possible link between auto-
inflammation and auto-antibody-mediated diseases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Ethical approval
was obtained from the Institutional Review Board of Kagoshima University for anti-VGKC complex antibodies and Kyushu University for MEFV
gene analyses. contactin-associated protein-like 2 familial Mediterranean fever interleukin intravenous methylprednisolone leucine-rich
glioma inactivated protein 1 myasthenia gravis Morvan’s syndrome Medical Research Council plasma exchange polymyositis peripheral nerve
hyperexcitability prednisolone T helper tumor necrosis factor voltage-gated potassium channel Competing interests HM has received research
support from the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, and Japan Blood Products Organization, and
speaking fees from Astellas Pharma and Novartis Pharma. OW has received research support from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science, and Technology of Japan (KAKENHI Grant 25461286) and Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare Research Committee. HT has
received speaking honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline, Bayer, Eisai Co., Novartis, Tanabe Mitsubishi, Biogen Idec, Benesis Co., Takeda, Teijin,
Pfizer, and Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma, research support from the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare Research Committee for
Charcot–Marie–Tooth Disease, Ataxic Disease, Applying Health Technology, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED), and
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan. J-I K is a consultant for Biogen Idec Japan and has received
research support from the Japan Blood Products Organization, Takeda Pharmaceutical Ltd., Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare,
Science and Technology Agency, and Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan, speaking fees from Bayer
Healthcare, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, and Otsuka Pharmaceutical, and travel expenses from Bayer Healthcare. Authors’ contributions JK
designed the study, collected and analyzed data, and wrote the article. SH designed the study, collected and analyzed data, and wrote the
article. JY, YM, and HM collected and analyzed clinical data. TU conducted the electrophysiological studies and analyzed data. NU conducted
the gene analyses. OW and HT conducted the antibody studies and analyzed data. J-I K designed the study, analyzed data, and wrote the
article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Angela Vincent (Nuffield Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK) for evaluating the antibodies against VGKC complex, LGI1, and
Caspr2.
