Wernicke’s encephalopathy (WE) is a life-threatening disease with acute onset, resulting from thiamine deficiency. Causes are alcohol
intake, malnutrition, gastric bypass surgery, human immunodeficiency virus infection, total parenteral nutrition (TPN), chronic dialysis,
and cancer . WE may cause neurological symptoms such as nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, confusion, convulsions, delirium, coma, and
acute psychoses . An 18-year-old female patient with refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML) was given FLAG-IDA (fludarabine, cytosine
arabinoside, idarubicin) chemotherapy protocol. As she developed typhlitis, oral intake was stopped; broad-spectrum antibiotics and TPN
without any vitamin supplementation were started. She developed a fixed look to a point, chin and upper extremity spasms, and urinary
incontinence on the 38th day of chemotherapy. Neurological examination showed non-lateralization, bilateral light reflexes were +/+, verbal
stimuli were negative, and the reflex response to painful stimuli was positive. Laboratory results showed hemoglobin of 7.2 g/dL, leukocytes
of 3380/mm3, neutrophils of 2890/mm3, platelets of 48,000/mm3, and normal blood biochemistry. The level of serum thiamine could not be
measured, because the laboratory did not have the capabilities to measure it. Brain diffusion MRI showed increased signal intensity in the
medial thalami (Figure 1). The patient was diagnosed with WE. She was given 1500 mg/day thiamine i.v. for 3 days and 250 mg/day thiamine
i.v. for another 5 days. On the fourth day of thiamine infusion, her general condition began to improve and she started giving one-word
responses to verbal stimuli. Her convulsions disappeared and she started to form short sentences and walk without assistance; she was
discharged on the 30th day of thiamine replacement therapy. Currently, 2 years have passed since the WE and the patient is in complete
hematologic remission. In cancer patients, WE may develop because of certain chemotherapeutic agents (especially doxifluridine, ifosfamide,
and 5-fluorouracil) , malnutrition, and thiamine depletion due to fast-growing tumor cells or gastrointestinal bypass surgery . In the
literature, there are a few cases of WE in AML. The diagnosis of WE in cancer patients is difficult because there are many causes of similar
symptoms, such as confusion-causing hypoxia, infections, electrolyte imbalance, opioid medications, chemotherapy, brain and meningeal
metastases, and delirium . To make a definite diagnosis of WE, it should be clinically suspected. WE may be verified with the measurement of
thiamine concentration in blood or erythrocyte transketolase activity; however, these tests are not widely available . Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) has 93% specificity and 53% sensitivity to verify the diagnosis . Bilateral dorsomedial thalamus, tectal plaque, and
periaqueductal gray matter signal abnormalities are observed as classical in MRI . WE should be treated empirically with 500 mg of thiamine
3 times per day for 2-3 days. If there is no response, supplementation may be discontinued after 2-3 days. In case an effective response is
observed, 250 mg of thiamine should be continued daily until clinical improvement . Thiamine supplementation should definitely be added to
TPN or the diets of hematologic malignancy patients with poor oral nutrition. When symptoms such as ataxia, confusion, or ophthalmoplegia
appear in these patients, brain MRI should be immediately performed and thiamine infusion should be initiated immediately in the case of
strong suspicion. Concept: Muhammet Maden, Gülsüm Pamuk, Design: Muhammet Maden, Gülsüm Pamuk, Data Collection or Processing: Muhammet
Maden, Ercüment Ünlü, Yahya Çelik, Analysis or Interpretation: Muhammet Maden, Gülsüm Pamuk, Ercüment Ünlü, Yahya Çelik, Literature Search:
Muhammet Maden, Gülsüm Pamuk, Writing: Muhammet Maden. Conflict of Interest: The authors of this paper have no conflicts of interest,
including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials included.
