†The first two authors equally contributed to this work. West Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquito-borne zoonotic pathogen that has spread
throughout Europe and the United States. Recently, WNV spread to East and Southeast Asia, and great efforts have been made in South Korea to
prevent the spread of WNV from neighboring countries. In this study, we diagnosed the first case of WNV in pigeons (Columba livia domestica)
residing in cities using a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and confirmed it with nested reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction analysis and sequencing. This is the first report to provide convincing evidence that WNV is present within South Korea. West Nile
virus (WNV) is spread by Culex spp. mosquitoes and propagated in birds, which are its natural host. Although humans and horses can be
infected with WNV, they are end-point hosts and most infections are asymptomatic. In humans, approximately 20% of the infections present
with mild headaches, myalgia, erythema and other symptoms, whereas meningitis and encephalitis are diagnosed in less than 1% of cases. The
elderly are especially vulnerable to severe disease, often requiring hospitalization, with reported death rates of ~4% to 14%. In 1990, WNV
was identified as the causal agent of encephalitis in humans in Europe, highlighting its significance as a zoonotic pathogen . The first
case of WNV was reported in the United States in the summer of 1999. Because of the wide flyways of host migratory birds, the geographic
range of WNV has been dramatically expanding for the last 15 years, which makes it one of the most widely spread arboviruses . In South
Korea, both the animal and plant quarantine agency (QIA) and Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) have been constantly
monitoring migratory birds and mosquitoes; however, they have not reported any WNV cases in the country to date. Although there was one
human case that was reported in South Korea in 2012, this case involved an individual infected in a foreign country before they returned
home to South Korea . Considering all of the rapid epidemiologic changes that have been continuously observed in Europe and the United
States, we theorized that we should conduct surveillance programs focusing on domestic birds in South Korea for public health since it was
possible that WNV could be introduced. In this study, we attempted to confirm the presence of WNV in domestic pigeons (Columba livia
domestica) in South Korea using serological and molecular diagnostic techniques focusing on pigeons in areas in which the birds share
territories with humans. A total of 75 pigeons were captured, 25 birds each from the Northern region of Paju, the central region of
Mungyeong and the Southern region of Busan in South Korea. All experimental procedures were performed in accordance with guidelines approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Seoul National University. We used a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (c-ELISAs) (IdVet ID Screen West Nile Competition; IdVet, France) to run serological tests on blood samples isolated from the captured
pigeons. To detect WNV from tissue samples, we conducted nested reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with WNV specific
primers (primary primers, 1401: 5′-ACCAACTACTGTGGAGTC-3′, and 1845: 5′-TTCCAT CTTCACTCTACACT-3′; nested primers, 1485: 5′-GCCTTC
ATACACACTAAAG-3′ and 1732: 5′-CCAATGCTATCACA GACT-3′) . The PCR products were sent to Macrogen (Macrogen, Korea) for confirmation through
sequencing analysis. A positive control was purchased from Sino Biological (WNV-prM/E cDNA Clone; Sino Biological, China). Of the 75
pigeons, three (one each from the northern, central and southern regions of South Korea) tested positive for WNV envelop protein (E) by
c-ELISA. In addition, the long term persistence of WNV with antibody was reported in wild birds 5.2 . The pigeon that was captured from
Busan had a high antibody titer, so we analyzed the corresponding tissue samples for the presence of WNV through PCR to confirm. To
investigate the specifications of WNV using PCR, we selected the E region of the genome, which encodes the envelop protein of WNV. The
region is highly conserved in WNV and presents species-specific differences from other Flaviviridae, such as Japanese encephalitis virus and
tick bone encephalitis . As described in panel A in Fig. 1, primary RT-PCR results confirmed WNV in the tissue samples that were taken from
the brains and kidneys of the positive bird from Busan, but not from the other two specimens. However, secondary nested PCR analysis showed
the presence of WNV in the tissues of every sample (panel B in Fig. 1) that tested positive by c-ELISA. Finally, in order to confirm the PCR
results, we sequenced the isolated product (445 bp) and then compared the obtained sequences with the reference sequence of WNV from GenBank
(National Center for Biotechnology Information, USA) using the Clustal W algorithm of the BioEdit Sequence Alignment Editor software (Ibis
Biosciences, USA). Neighbor joining analysis with evolutionary distances calculated using the Tamura-Nei parameter model was conducted with
MEGA version 5.2 . Fig. 2 shows the phylogenetic relationships between various WNV species/genotypes and Korean isolates in this study. The
Korean isolates (GenBank accession No. KU507578) were identified to cluster lineage 1. These findings add further evidence that the pigeons
in South Korea are infected with WNV. In addition, Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) has IgM cross-reactivity with WNV in the c-ELISAs kit.
Therefore, we checked the possibility of JEV infection or any other contamination in each sample. We cultured WNV using African green monkey
kidney-derived Vero cells and repeated the entire process of detection without the positive sample. Based on the results, we could rule out
the possibility of JEV infection. Although, we could not detect any WNV sequences other than the E region of WNV, the results clearly
demonstrated the presence of WNV in Vero cells and supernatant based on the specific E region sequence. We assumed that the difficulty of
additional sequence detection was caused by mutation of some WNV sequences; therefore, we plan to analyze the complete genome sequence using
Next Generation Sequencing. Cities are believed to the best place for pigeons to reproduce because of the abundance of good sources of food
and nest sites. Pigeons are now well adapted to cities and share the territory with humans. Recently, there has been some concern about
zoonoses that can be transmitted to humans. In particular, since pigeons co-exist with humans in cities, they are considered to be a high
risk factor for transmitting avian-derived diseases because of the strong chance of contact with humans. Although WNV is technically not
transmitted to humans from birds, since WNV spread to the United States in the 2000s, studies have been conducted to investigate the role
pigeons in cities play in propagating and spreading WNV . In addition, when a Eurasian color dove was experimentally infected, it was
confirmed to have sufficient viremic levels to spread WNV . The pigeons used in this study were captured in urban areas of northern, central
and southern South Korea, where they are exposed to humans. South Korea is in danger of sustaining WNV, which presents a potential danger to
people who might come into contact with infected birds. The results of this study support the notion that WNV is already present within
South Korea. Accordingly, South Korea should consider adopting an Early-Warning system, such as the WNV surveillance program that is
currently in place in Greece, to prevent WNV infection . Overall, this is the first study to investigate WNV in South Korea, and the results
highlight the risk of WNV that is occurring in South Korea and the significance of further studies. This study was partially supported by
the Brain Korea 21 PLUS Program for Creative Veterinary Science Research, the Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National
University, and the National Institute of Environmental Research (NIER) in Korea.
