Esophageal verrucous carcinoma is a rare variant of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. In most cases, verrucous carcinoma presents as an
exophytic, slow-growing mass with an extensive superficial growth pattern. Symptoms often include an insidious onset of dysphagia resulting
in weight loss. In a patient presenting with super early-stage verrucous carcinoma, we were able to eliminate the aberration using
endoscopic submucosal dissection. An asymptomatic 68-year-old Asian man was found to have an abnormality in his esophagus. The abnormality
was discovered, by chance, in a barium study for a health checkup. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a 1-centimeter polypoid lesion
covered with squamous epithelium. Biopsies showed squamous high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia. An endoscopic submucosal dissection was
performed and the histopathological findings showed a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with hyperkeratosis with a church spire
configuration. These features are consistent with the growth pattern of verrucous carcinoma. Verrucous carcinoma can manifest as a small
mass with nonclinical symptoms and endoscopic submucosal dissection is useful as a curative treatment. We must consider that verrucous
carcinoma can manifest as appearance of a polyp that is not papillary or warty-like with and without extensive superficial growth
appearance. Esophageal verrucous carcinoma (VC) is a rare variant of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. In most cases, it usually presents
as an exophytic, slow-growing mass emerging as papillary or warty-like, with an extensive superficial growth pattern . Diagnosis is often
delayed resulting in surgical treatment at an early stage of VC . Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is an advanced endoscopic technique
that allows for the complete en bloc resection and possible cure of superficial gastrointestinal neoplasms . We here report that VC was
identified in a small atypical VC and was completely cured by an ESD. By chance, an asymptomatic 68-year-old Asian man was found to have an
abnormality in his esophagus by barium study for mass screening. He was referred to our hospital and underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy
which showed a 1-centimeter polypoid appearance covered with squamous epithelium in the distal esophagus (Fig. 1). Biopsies showed squamous
high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia. An endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) was performed and the histopathological findings showed a
well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with hyperkeratosis with a church spire configuration (Fig. 2). These features were consistent
with the growth pattern of VC. No vessel invasion or lymphatic permeation was recognized of this resected specimen.Fig. 1 a An endoscopic
picture showing a polypoid lesion in the distal esophagus. b Endoscopic image stained by iodine. The lesion is within the iodine-stained
areaFig. 2 a Photomicrograph of the resected esophageal specimen shows epithelial downgrowth and invasive findings (H&E, original
magnification, ×20). b High-magnification image shows well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and focal hyperkeratosis with a church
spire configuration (H&E, original magnification, ×400). Black arrow and circle indicate a focal hyperkeratosis with a church spire
configuration a An endoscopic picture showing a polypoid lesion in the distal esophagus. b Endoscopic image stained by iodine. The lesion is
within the iodine-stained area a Photomicrograph of the resected esophageal specimen shows epithelial downgrowth and invasive findings (H&E,
original magnification, ×20). b High-magnification image shows well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and focal hyperkeratosis with a
church spire configuration (H&E, original magnification, ×400). Black arrow and circle indicate a focal hyperkeratosis with a church spire
configuration Esophageal verrucous carcinoma (VC) is a rare variant of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The majority of the cases are
associated with smoking, reflux esophagitis, alcohol use, human papilloma virus (HPV), achalasia, and other chronic inflammatory conditions.
An incidence rate of such cancer has been shown to be higher in males than females, with a ratio of 2:1, and seen in the age group from 35
to 80 years . We ascertained two important clinical issues. VC can manifest as a small mass without clinical symptoms and ESD is useful as a
curative treatment. With regard to the first clinical issue, VC can manifest as a small mass without clinical symptoms. VC of the esophagus
is a rare malignant epithelial tumor representing a variant of squamous cell carcinoma. VC was first reported in 1967 . Since then, 44 cases
have been reported in the literature. The endoscopic appearance of VC usually presents with an exophytic, whitish, wart-like mucosal
surface, and is typically diagnosed months to years after the onset of symptoms such as dysphagia and weight loss . Most esophagus squamous
cell carcinomas are not stained with a Lugol iodine due to the fact they contain lesser amounts of glycogen. VC, however, has an increased
amount of glycogen due to a slow growth pattern. A PubMed MEDLINE search was performed at the Jikei University Library of Medline using the
keywords “verrucous cancer” and “esophagus”. Forty-four case reports were determined before October 19, 2015. In forty-three of the 44 cases
(or 97.7 %) VC was found to have the appearance of an exophytic, whitish and wart-like mucosal surface, except for one report . One case
reported VC with an atypical expression. Tajiri et al. reported the endoscopic appearance as an elevated papillary lesion, which was quite
different from our findings. We therefore assume that the incipience of VC has various endoscopic forms. Concerning the second clinical
issue, we learned that ESD is useful for curative treatment . In the last decade, ESD, a therapeutic endoscopic technique, has been used to
excise superficial GI neoplastic lesions. ESD is an alternative, or replacement therapy, to endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). An ESD is
performed using the following technique:Circumferential markings are made a few millimeters outside and around the margin of the lesion
using brief bursts of cautery with a Dual knife (KD-650L; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan).Next, submucosal injections are performed
along the perimeter of the markings to raise the lesion. A solution of 0.5 % sodium hyaluronate (Mucoup; Seikagaku Corporation, Tokyo,
Japan) in 10 % glycerine solution with 0.025 % epinephrine and 0.05 % indigo carmine is used.Third, an incision is made along the perimeter
of the markings. This isolates the injected area.Lastly, using an endoscopic knife, the raised superficial lesion is filleted away from the
submucosa and removed. Circumferential markings are made a few millimeters outside and around the margin of the lesion using brief bursts of
cautery with a Dual knife (KD-650L; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan). Next, submucosal injections are performed along the perimeter of
the markings to raise the lesion. A solution of 0.5 % sodium hyaluronate (Mucoup; Seikagaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) in 10 % glycerine
solution with 0.025 % epinephrine and 0.05 % indigo carmine is used. Third, an incision is made along the perimeter of the markings. This
isolates the injected area. Lastly, using an endoscopic knife, the raised superficial lesion is filleted away from the submucosa and
removed. The case described above is the first known report using ESD as a treatment for early-stage VC. Table 1 (below) shows the methods
of treatment for VC since it was first reported . Twenty-six cases were surgically treated and only one by EMR . Because of the slow-growing
tumor character causing late-stage detection, most cases are not candidates for noninvasive curative treatments like EMR or ESD. Because we
identified the tumor in our patient to be VC in an early stage, we were able to use ESD as a treatment. We reason that ESD will decrease the
local recurrence rate after endoscopic tissue resection . Our patient was thereby cured “en bloc” using a minimally invasive dissection
technique instead of surgical resection.Table 1Forty-four reports of the treatment methods of verrucous
carcinomaTreatmentOperation23Radiation2Chemotherapy1Chemotherapy/radiation4Chemotherapy/radiation/operation3Endoscopic mucosal
resection1Medication1Conservative7Unknown2 Forty-four reports of the treatment methods of verrucous carcinoma VC can manifest as a small
mass without clinical symptoms. ESD is a useful curative treatment in the removal of VC. It is further understood that VC can manifest with
an atypical polyp appearance and not with its typical papillary or warty-like appearance. It is noteworthy to consider that unknown
expressions of VC exist, causing future undetected VC cases. ESD can be a curative treatment if VC lesions are detected early with
superficial growth. Subsequent reports should be collected and analyzed to determine whether “hidden” VC cases might be detected and
diagnosed and whether ESD use may contribute to curative treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. endoscopic mucosal resection endoscopic submucosal dissection verrucous carcinoma Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TA was a major contributor to writing the manuscript. MK reviewed and was a major
contributor to writing the manuscript. The endoscopic treatment was performed by MI. SH performed the histological examination. YK and SI
supported the entire scope of work. KS and YA reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The authors have no disclosures to make and have had no source of funding in the preparation of this manuscript. We would
like to thank Mr. Wayne Thibaudeau for his support.
