Schwannomas located in the periportal region are extremely rare. Only 14 cases have been reported in the medical literature worldwide. Cases
of porta hepatic schwannomas reported in the literature worldwide were reviewed. As a result, it is very challenging for surgeons to make a
preoperative diagnosis due to its rarity and nonspecific imaging manifestations. A 57-year-old Chinese female was admitted to our
institution with complaint of upper abdominal distension and the abdominal CT in the local hospital revealed a hypodense mass in the porta
hepatis. A fine needle aspiration (FNA) was made to confirm the diagnosis, but the result was just suggestive of spindle cell neoplasia.
Eventually, the patient underwent surgery and postoperative pathology confirmed schwannoma in porta hepatis. The patient recovered
uneventfully with no evidence of recurrence after a follow-up period of 41 months. It is essential for the final diagnosis of porta hepatic
schwannomas to combine histological examination with immunohistochemistry after surgery. The main treatment of porta hepatic schwannomas is
complete excision with free margins and no lymph node dissection. In some cases, biliary reconstruction or the proper hepatic and the
gastroduodenal artery resection was performed because the tumor was inseparably attached to the extrahepatic bile duct or the proper hepatic
and the gastroduodenal artery. Malignant transformation of schwannomas is very rare and the overall prognosis is satisfactory. The
periportal region is a complex anatomic region between the superior aspect of the first portion of the duodenum and the porta hepatis,
including the hepatoduodenal ligament and the extrahepatic bile duct, portal vein, hepatic artery, autonomic nerve fibers, and lymph nodes .
When patients exhibit symptoms of abdominal pain or jaundice or show no symptoms, and a mass in the periportal region is detected in image
scans, the diagnosis of a cholangiocarcinoma or a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) may be considered first. However, in rare cases, the
diagnosis is of a porta hepatic schwannoma. Porta hepatic schwannomas are extremely rare, with only 14 cases reported in the literature to
date. Of the 14 cases, the mean age of the patients was 45 years (range 29–74 years), and the male-female ratio was 6:8. The literature
depicted tumors varying from 2.2 cm (the average tumor diameter line) to 7.5 cm in size, with a median of approximately 4.8 cm. For the mass
in porta hepatic, it is difficult to perform a biopsy because of vessel interposition. So, the surgeons are inclined to make a fine needle
aspiration (FNA) because of lower risk of bleeding. In the 14 cases, the FNA was operated only for two patients, and none underwent biopsy
before surgery. But, the FNA usually fails to provide the immunohistochemistry, which is imperative to make a diagnosis for the mesenchymal
tumors. In most cases, the final diagnosis of schwannoma was confirmed by postoperative pathological examination. Herein, we report a case
of schwannoma located in the porta hepatis and review cases reported in the literature worldwide for a better understanding of the clinical
and pathological features of porta hepatic schwannomas. On October 12, 2011, a 57-year-old Chinese female was admitted to our institution
with complaint of upper abdominal distension for 2 weeks. She denied any abdominal trauma or surgeries in her life. No specific findings
were noted in her family history and personal history. And, she was taking no medications. Before this treatment, she went to the local
hospital where an abdominal ultrasound was performed revealing a mass in the head of the pancreas. No abnormalities were detected upon
clinical examination and in laboratory investigations. The computer tomography (CT) scan (Fig. 1a–c) revealed a 4.0 × 3.2 × 3.0-cm hypodense
mass in the porta hepatis, mildly enhanced in arterial phase, and moderately enhanced in portal phase. There was no clear boundary between
the mass and the caudate lobe of the liver, and the lower edge of the lesion was close to the neck of pancreas, pressing down on the common
hepatic artery. No enlarged hilar lymph nodes or exogenous caudate lobe tumor were identified. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
(Fig. 1d–f) showed the long T1 and T2 signal mass in the porta hepatis, with 4.0 × 3.0 cm. The imaging feature on MRI was similar to CT.
Fine needle aspiration guided by endoscopic ultrasonography revealed spindle cells arranged in bundles and palisades, with no nuclear
atypia, suggestive of a spindle cell neoplasia. With a high suspicion of a GIST, diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. The tumor was located
in the porta hepatis, tightly pressing the hepatoduodenal ligament, and the caudate lobe and the pancreas were not involved. Then, after
careful dissection, the tumor was found to be in close contact with the common hepatic artery and cystic artery. Subsequently, the patient
underwent laparotomy, and intraoperative frozen-section examination revealed a mesenchymal tumor in the porta hepatis, highly suspicious of
a GIST. So, the tumor was macroscopically resected en-bloc with the invaded common hepatic artery, and the blood supply of the proper
hepatic artery was good through the gastroduodenal artery. And, cholecystectomy was also performed. Post-operative detailed
histopathological examination showed benign schwannoma (Fig. 2a–d): CD117(−), S-100(+), GFAP(+), CD34(−), SMA(−), and Ki-67(+, little).
Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully. No symptoms or signs of recurrence have been observed in our patient during the
41 months of follow-up.Fig. 1Abdominal CT and MRI findings of the patient. a Plain CT scan revealed a 4.0 × 3.2 × 3.0-cm hypodense mass in
the porta hepatis (black arrow). b Enhanced CT scan revealed a mildly enhanced mass in arterial phase (black arrow). c Moderately enhanced
mass in portal phase (black arrow). d MRI revealed a 4.0 × 3.0-cm mass in the sagittal section (black arrow). e Low signal intensity in
T1-weighted imaging (black arrow). f High signal intensity in T2-weighted imaging (black arrow)Fig. 2 a Histological examination findings of
the tumor: bundles of uniform spindle cells whose elongated nuclei were arranged in a palisading pattern (hematoxylin and eosin;
magnification, ×100). b Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein (magnification, ×100). c
Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor cells were negative for CD117 (magnification, ×100). d Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor
cells were positive for GFAP (magnification, ×100) Abdominal CT and MRI findings of the patient. a Plain CT scan revealed a
4.0 × 3.2 × 3.0-cm hypodense mass in the porta hepatis (black arrow). b Enhanced CT scan revealed a mildly enhanced mass in arterial phase
(black arrow). c Moderately enhanced mass in portal phase (black arrow). d MRI revealed a 4.0 × 3.0-cm mass in the sagittal section (black
arrow). e Low signal intensity in T1-weighted imaging (black arrow). f High signal intensity in T2-weighted imaging (black arrow) a
Histological examination findings of the tumor: bundles of uniform spindle cells whose elongated nuclei were arranged in a palisading
pattern (hematoxylin and eosin; magnification, ×100). b Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein
(magnification, ×100). c Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor cells were negative for CD117 (magnification, ×100). d
Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor cells were positive for GFAP (magnification, ×100) PubMed, Google scholar
(http://scholar.google.com.cn/), the National Knowledge Infrastructure (http://www.cnki.net//), the Chinese periodical Database of Science
and Technology (http://lib.cqvip.com/), and the Wanfang Data Knowledge Service Platform (http://www.wanfangdata.com.cn/) were searched for
cases of porta hepatic schwannoma between 1985 and 2015, adding up to 14 patients. Details of all the 14 cases and the current case shown in
Tables 1 and 2 summarized the important available clinicopathological factors. Continuous data are presented as mean ± standard deviation
and range.Table 1Summary of cases of porta hepatic schwannomaAuthorYearSex/agePresenting symptomsImaging examinationSize (cm)LocationPrimary
diagnosisTreatmentFollow-up (months)Nagafuchi 1993F /62AsymptomaticUS + CT + MRI + ERC + CA6.2Hepatoduodenal ligamentAcute hepatitis and
hilar massSR26 (no relapse)Fang 1995F /33Abdominal distension + jaundiceUS4.5Porta hepatisPortal hypertension and hilar massSRNOHuang
1996M/41Abdominal painUS + CT + IVP + GIBI7.2Hepatoduodenal ligamentAbdominal massSRNOChoi 2001M/37AsymptomaticUS + CT + MRI5Porta
hepatisHilar massSRNOPark 2006F/53AsymptomaticCT4.5Porta hepatisHilar massSR11 (no relapse)Wang 2006M/45Abdominal
distension + nauseaUS + CT + MRI + MRCP7Porta hepatisKlatskin’s tumorSRNOZhang 2009F/42AsymptomaticUS + CT2.2Hepatoduodenal ligamentLeft
hepatic lobe mass (liver cancer not excluded)SRNOKulkarni 2009M/38Abdominal pain + jaundice + weight lossCT4.5Porta hepatisHilar massSR3 (no
relapse)Li 2010F/38Abdominal distensionUS + CEUS + CT4Porta hepatisFNH considered (FNA)SRNOPinto
2011M/29AsymptomaticUS + EUS + MRI3.7Hepatoduodenal ligamentSpindle cell neoplasia or stromal tumor (FNA)SRNOHuang 2011F/45Abdominal
painCT7.5Proper hepatic arteryHilar massSR36 (no relapse)Present case2011F/57Abdominal discomfortUS + CT + MRI + EUS3.5Porta hepatisSpindle
cell neoplasia (FNA)SR41 (no relapse)Wang 2012M/62Abdominal painUS + CT + MRI3.5Porta hepatisHilar mass (probably liver abscess)SR4 (no
relapse)Wang 2012F/74AsymptomaticCT + MRI + MRCP2.5Porta hepatisHilar massSRNOChen 2015F/69Abdominal distensionCT4.7Hepatoduodenal
ligamentGLNH (plasma cell type) consideredSRNO M male, F female, NA not available, CEUS contrast-enhanced ultrasound, EUS endoscopic
ultrasonography, ERC endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram, CA celiac angiography, GIBI gastrointestinal barium imaging, IVP intravenous
pyelography, FNH focal nodular hyperplasia, FNA fine needle aspiration, SR surgical resection, GLNH giant lymph node hyperplasiaTable
2Summary of clinicopathological data from 15 cases of porta hepatic schwannoma n (%) or mean ± SD (range)Age (years)48.3 ± 13.7 (29–74)Sex
(male/female), (male %)6/9 (40 %)SymptomsAsymptomatic6 (40 %)SymptomaticAbdominal distension/abdominal discomfort5 (33 %)Abdominal pain4
(27 %)Jaundice/dark urine/colorless stool/pruritus2 (13 %)Weight loss1 (7 %)Nausea/vomiting/anorexia1 (7 %)LocationPorta hepatis9
(60 %)Hepatoduodenal ligament5 (33 %)Proper hepatic artery1 (7 %)Mean size (cm), (n = 15)4.7 ± 1.6 (2.2–7.5)Mean follow-up months
(n = 6)16.0 ± 14.5 (3–41)Disease related mortality0 (0 %) Summary of cases of porta hepatic schwannoma M male, F female, NA not available,
CEUS contrast-enhanced ultrasound, EUS endoscopic ultrasonography, ERC endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram, CA celiac angiography, GIBI
gastrointestinal barium imaging, IVP intravenous pyelography, FNH focal nodular hyperplasia, FNA fine needle aspiration, SR surgical
resection, GLNH giant lymph node hyperplasia Summary of clinicopathological data from 15 cases of porta hepatic schwannoma Schwannoma, also
known as neurilemmoma, is a tumor derived from Schwann cells, which form the inner portion of the peripheral nerve sheath . The exact
etiology and pathogenesis of schwannomas remain unclear, but recent research has indicated that defects in merlin gene are responsible for
both sporadic and genetically acquired schwannomas, and the mechanisms by which merlin loss triggers tumor development are being unraveled .
Theoretically, the tumor can affect any nerve trunk or any organ, except the olfactory and optic nerves, which lack Schwann cells . The most
common locations for schwannomas are the upper extremities, trunk, head, and neck, retroperitoneum, mediastinum, pelvis, and peritoneum .
Intraperitoneal schwannomas are relatively rare and mostly located in solid organs such as the liver and the pancreas. However, porta
hepatic schwannomas are extremely rare, with only 14 cases reported in the literature to date. The sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers
are distributed along the hepatic and gastroduodenal arteries, with their branches interwoven into a network, which is the anatomical
location of occurrence of the porta hepatic schwannoma . Schwannomas most commonly occur in patients between the ages of 20 and 50 years
with equal frequency in men and women . For cases of porta hepatic schwannoma, the mean age of the patients was 48 years (range 29–74
years), and the male-female ratio was 6:9. Symptoms caused by schwannomas vary with the site and size of the tumors. In the 15 cases, the
lesion was located in the porta hepatis in nine patients (60 %), hepatoduodenal ligament in five patients (33 %), and proper hepatic artery
in one patient (7 %). The literature depicts tumors varying from 2.2 cm (the average tumor diameter line) to 7.5 cm in size, with a median
of approximately 4.7 cm. Patients with porta hepatic schwannomas may exhibit symptoms by compressing adjacent structures such as the bile
duct and the gastrointestinal tract. In the literature, 40 % of the patients were asymptomatic and 60 % of the patients were symptomatic.
The most common symptom was abdominal distension/abdominal discomfort (5/15 patients or 33 %), followed by abdominal pain (4/15 patients or
27 %), jaundice/dark urine/colorless stool/pruritus (2/15 patients or 13 %), nausea/vomiting/anorexia (1/15 patients or 7 %), and weight
loss (1/15 patients or 7 %). Patients with porta hepatic schwannomas usually present with a porta hepatis or hepatoduodenal ligament mass on
imaging studies, and it is very challenging for surgeons to make a preoperative diagnosis due to its rarity and nonspecific clinical and
imaging characteristics. The ultrasound imaging often shows isoechoic or hypoechoic solid masses with well-defined limits. Generally, a CT
scan shows a well-defined hypodense heterogenous mass with peripheral enhancement . Schwannomas on the MRI are usually masses with
hypointensity on T1-weighted images and heterogenous hyperintensity or, sometimes internal heterogeneous mixed hypo and hyperintensity on
T2-weighted images . Author Cohen has presented histologic evidence suggesting that the hypo-density areas and inhomogeneities in
schwannomas are due to hypocellular areas adjacent to more cellular regions and/or hypocellular areas adjacent to dense bundles of collagen,
xanthomatous formation, and cystic degeneration within the tumors . In the present case, the CT and MRI showed a homogeneous mass with
peripheral enhancement in the porta hepatis. When a solitary, well-demarcated mass occurs in the porta hepatis, differential diagnosis
should be made including the following diseases: lymphoma, giant lymph node hyperplasia (GLNH), lymph node tuberculosis, and lesser sac
benign smooth muscle tumors such as leiomyomas, nerve sheath tumors, and hemangiomas originating in the lesser sac as well as stromal tumors
of the gastrointestinal tract protruding into the lesser sac . Considering that imaging manifestations of porta hepatic schwannomas are
nonspecific, patients are usually misdiagnosed preoperatively, unless by biopsy. In the 15 cases, the FNA was operated only for three
patients, including the present case. However, the result of FNA may be inconsistent with final pathologic results . Therefore,
postoperative pathologic examination is still the gold standard in the diagnosis of schwannoma. Overall, it is essential for the diagnosis
of schwannoma to combine histological examination with immunohistochemistry. Macroscopically, small schwannomas tend to be spheroidal,
whereas larger tumors can be sausage-shaped, ovoid, or irregularly lobulated . Larger schwannomas have a tendency to undergo secondary
degeneration such as pseudocystic regression, calcification, and hemorrhage , which can explain inhomogeneities in a portion of schwannomas.
In the 15 cases, seven cases (47 %) underwent cystic changes or calcification. Microscopically, the hallmark of schwannoma is the pattern of
alternating Antoni A and B areas, with varying relative amounts . The Antoni A area is hypercellular and characterized by closely packed
spindle cells with occasional nuclear palisading and Verocay bodies, whereas the Antoni B area is hypocellular and is occupied by loosely
arranged tumor cells . Two kinds of structures often coexist in the same tumor, but most with one main type. There were two cases of
cellular schwannoma in 15 cases characterized by predominantly Antoni A areas histologically [17, 18]. Immunohistochemical staining is
strongly and diffusely positive for S-100 protein in a schwannoma consistent with the finding of a nerve sheath tumor . A few
gastrointestinal stromal tumors are positive for S-100; however, they are also positive for either CD34 or CD117 . As a contrast, a
schwannoma is negative for both CD34 and CD117 . A leiomyoma would be negative for S-100 and positive for desmin or smooth muscle actin . In
addition, we also demand to make a differential diagnosis with malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), although malignant
transformation of these tumors is very rare . MPNSTs are usually characterized by high cell density, obvious cell atypia, more pathological
mitotic, diverse cellular components, and it is common to see tumor necrosis, CK(+), EMA(+), and CEA(+) . The main treatment of porta
hepatic schwannomas is complete excision with free margins and no lymph node dissection. In the 15 cases, seven patients underwent complete
tumor excision. But, two patients underwent tumor excision en bloc with hepatic artery resection because of the intraoperative finding of
tumor invasion of the hepatic artery (including the present case) . In addition, one patient underwent tumor or bile duct excision and Roux-
en-Y hepaticojejunostomy because the tumor was attached to the extrahepatic bile duct . One patient underwent tumor excision en bloc with
T-tube drainage because a small rupture of the bile duct wall caused bile leakage during the dissection of the extrahepatic bile duct . One
patient underwent tumor excision en bloc with right hepatectomy because the right anterior portal vein was invaded , and the details of
surgical resection were not specified in three patients. Postoperative pathological results indicated 13 cases of benign schwannoma and two
cases of cellular schwannoma which is considered as a subtype of schwannoma [17, 18]. The complete excision of the tumor is curative and
most cases do not relapse and additional treatments are not necessary. The overall prognosis is very good . In the follow-up of 6/15
patients, there was no recurrence with a mean follow-up of 16 months (range 3–41 months). Porta hepatic schwannomas are extremely rare. It
is a big challenge to make a correct diagnosis preoperatively due to its rarity and nonspecific imaging and clinical manifestations.
Postoperative pathologic examination is still the gold standard in the diagnosis of schwannoma. The main treatment of benign schwannomas is
complete excision with free margins and no lymph node dissection and biliary surgery when needed. Malignant transformation of schwannomas is
very rare and the overall prognosis is satisfactory after surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions WDL provided the case and conception.
RKW and YYC collected the case data and radiographic images. LXY and WLJ provided the pathological images. LXY made the test of GFAP IHC and
provided the photograph. ZZL drafted the manuscript. YSY and ZSS revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
First of all, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Sheng-yong Yin, for his instructive advice and useful
suggestions on my thesis. I am deeply grateful of his help in the completion of this thesis. I am also deeply indebted to all the other
tutors and teachers in Translation Studies for their direct and indirect help to me. Special thanks should go to my friends who have put
considerable time and effort into their comments on the draft. Finally, I am indebted to my parents for their continuous support and
encouragement.
