Simvastatin is commonly prescribed for hypercholesterolemia to reduce vascular risk in patients. Some of these patients have dementia with
cognitive defects of several domains. Although protective effects seem to be present, there is emerging evidence that statins cause
cognitive impairment. The role of cholesterol in cognitive function is complex. This is reflected in the effects that statins show on
cognition functions. The reduction in cholesterol levels seen with statins is effective in improving learning and memory in some patients.
However, there is emerging evidence that statins may worsen cognitive function. Similarly, there are major concerns over whether statins
alleviate or worsen cognitive problems. The correlation between cholesterol levels and cognitive function is still controversial, mainly due
to a lack of robust evidence. We report the cases of two Asian patients who developed cognitive deficits after starting simvastatin. A
32-year-old man and a 54-year-old woman developed different but clear cognitive deficits that reversed after stopping simvastatin. The
possibility of new-onset cognitive dysfunction and the deterioration of existing cognitive deficits should be considered when prescribing
simvastatin to patients. Simvastatin is a statin belonging to the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors that
lower cholesterol levels, particularly low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and triglycerides. It increases high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol. Statins generally have minimal adverse effects, with the common side effects being myopathies, effects on liver enzymes,
diarrhea, and, rarely, rhabdomyolysis . Several case reports and case series have suggested a potential association between statins and
cognitive impairment . With the increased diagnosis of hypercholesterolemia, the prescription of statins has also increased. Because
cholesterol is heavily implicated as a causative factor in the formation of amyloid plaques, a reduction in cholesterol formation is
postulated to slow plaque formation . Statins are also reported to possess anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties. There are several
studies and meta-analyses confirming the benefits of statin use on cognitive impairment. Within the population receiving statins, there is a
high proportion with memory loss and associated cognitive symptoms owing to the strong correlation of vascular risk factors, like diabetes
and hypercholesterolemia, with vascular and Alzheimer’s dementia. Statins are used to control vascular risk factors that may contribute to
dementia, and there is emerging evidence that statins may play a protective role in improving memory problems in dementia [4, 5]. However,
there is also increasing concern that statins may be a causative factor for cognitive problems, mainly memory problems , although this has
not yet been reported as a side effect in the British National Formulary. The postulation that statins can cause cognitive decline is based
on the fact that lipophilic statins like atorvastatin and simvastatin show increased crossing of the blood–brain barrier compared to
hydrophilic statins (for example, pravastatin and rosuvastatin). Two possible mechanisms are proposed: (1) the reduced availability of
cholesterol caused by statins might impair the integrity of the neuronal and glial cell membrane, resulting in slowed conduction of neuronal
impulses ; and (2) the reduced re-myelination and reduction in coenzyme Q10 levels impairs mitochondrial function and may lead to an
increase in oxidative stress [7, 8]. However, in a study investigating the long-term effects of treatment with pravastatin and atorvastatin
in adult rats, pravastatin tended to impair learning, implying an impact on working memory and object recognition memory that was reversible
on discontinuation, whereas atorvastatin did not impair either task. This model contradicts the postulated mechanism of lipophilic statins
causing more cognitive impairment because pravastatin is hydrophilic and atorvastatin is lipophilic . Two randomized control trials on
simvastatin and pravastatin , which included a large number of patients, as well as a study conducted in Australia did not identify a
relationship between statin usage and cognitive decline. However, there are published case reports on statins causing memory loss . In a
study of 60 patients who had memory loss associated with statins, 36 patients received simvastatin, 23 atorvastatin, and 1 pravastatin .
About 50 % of patients showed cognitive adverse effects within 2 months of therapy. A problem with this study, as well as most other case
reports, is the lack of formal cognitive test results in the patients who developed cognitive changes. No specific memory test results were
documented in any of the 60 reports. Four reports documented tests such as computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
intelligence quotient (IQ), and an unidentified cognitive test. Test results were normal for three of the four patients; MRI results were
unknown for one patient . In a randomized trial with healthy adults, simvastatin was associated with decreased performance on some
neuropsychological tests compared with the placebo . A survey conducted in 171 patients on statins reported that cognitive problems
associated with statins have variable onset and recovery courses, and that there is a clear relationship with the potency, resulting in a
significant negative impact on quality of life . In 2012, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) changed labeling for statins,
advising of the possibility of cognitive impairment and further adding to the concerns regarding cognitive decline . We report the cases of
two patients who reported memory loss and associated cognitive deficits after starting simvastatin and recovered following discontinuation.
We did formal cognitive testing as well as brain imaging in both patients, which helps to rectify the lack of proper neuropsychiatric
assessments in existing case studies. Our first patient was a 32-year-old Asian man with bipolar affective disorder who was prescribed 20 mg
of simvastatin for hypercholesterolemia. He complained of forgetfulness resulting in significant losses to his business one month after
initiation of simvastatin. He had impaired recall and memory. He did not complain of any disturbances in his memory prior to starting
simvastatin, despite being known to the services for several years. The collateral history from his family confirmed that there had been
significant, noticeable impairment related to short-term memory that led him to forget some major business transactions he had carried out.
History from our patient and his family was obtained to rule out any possible contributory factors for his symptoms. Our patient did not
have any family history of hypercholesterolemia. He had no features to suggest any vascular events in the preceding months that may have
contributed to the fairly rapid development of cognitive dysfunction. Our patient had been stable in his mental state for more than 1 year
at the time he developed cognitive symptoms. Our patient did not have any abnormalities in an examination of his central nervous system and
an MRI yielded normal results. Results from biochemical testing carried out to rule out possible contributory factors, including lipid
profiles, were normal. His memory, as reported by our patient as well as his relatives, improved significantly after simvastatin was
stopped. Although improvements were seen in his short-term recall 3 months after stopping simvastatin, the improvement was not significant
on neuropsychological testing. The changes in the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) scale, Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), and
memory component of Neuropsychiatry Unit Cognitive Assessment Tool (NUCOG) are shown in Table 1. Although improvements were observed in his
cognitive profile, his cholesterol levels were uncontrolled because he refused to accept any form of treatment for
hypercholesterolemia.Table 1Neuropsychological test scores during and after stopping simvastatinDomainWith simvastatinAfter stopping
simvastatinOrientationIntactIntactAttention– Forward digit span67– Reverse digit span46Concentration (serial sevens)IntactIntactRegistration
(5 items)IntactIntactRecall (5 items)2/54/5Long-term memoryIntactIntactMontreal Cognitive Assessment24/3027/30Mini Mental State
Examination28/3028/30Neuropsychiatry Unit Cognitive Assessment Tool Attention19/2020/20 Visuoconstruction19/2019/20 Memory14.5/2018/20
Executive20/2020/20 Language20/2020/20 Total92.5/10097/100 Neuropsychological test scores during and after stopping simvastatin Our second
patient was a 54-year-old Asian woman diagnosed with treatment-resistant schizophrenia who developed hypercholesterolemia while on
clozapine. She developed memory impairment and difficulty executing day-to-day activities 2 months after starting simvastatin. At the time
of presentation, she had had these symptoms for a year. As in the case of our first patient, there were no prior complaints of memory
symptoms. Her history was obtained from her husband to rule out other possible causes for her symptoms. Our patient did not have any family
history of hypercholesterolemia. Her mental state had been stable for several years prior to the development of cognitive symptoms. She did
not have any neurological abnormalities on examination and her MRI was normal. No abnormalities were noted in biochemical testing, including
her lipid profile. Her scores on cognitive assessment on simvastatin and 3 months after stopping simvastatin are shown in Table 2. On
initial testing, there was impairment in the domains of recall, attention, visuoconstruction, memory, executive functions and language,
which improved after discontinuation of simvastatin. Similar to our first patient, the observed improvement of cognitive functions as
reported by our patient and her family was not reflected on formal testing. She was initiated on a non-statin lipid-regulating agent and her
cholesterol levels are well controlled.Table 2Neuropsychological test scores during and after stopping simvastatinDomainWith
simvastatinAfter stopping simvastatinOrientationIntactIntactAttention– Forward digit span57– Reverse digit
span46ConcentrationIntactIntactRegistrationIntactIntactRecall1/52/5Long-term memoryIntactIntactMontreal Cognitive Assessment18/3021/30Mini
Mental State Examination28/3030/30Neuropsychiatry Unit Cognitive Assessment Attention16/2020/20 Visuoconstruction16/2017/20 Memory12/2017/20
Executive9/2019/20 Language18/2019.5/20 Total71/10092.5/100 Neuropsychological test scores during and after stopping simvastatin Two years
after discontinuation of simvastatin, both patients remained free of any cognitive symptoms. A comparison of scores on cognitive testing of
the two patients, while on simvastatin and after discontinuation, is shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 1Comparison of cognitive profiles in the two
patients while on simvastatin and after simvastatin was stopped Comparison of cognitive profiles in the two patients while on simvastatin
and after simvastatin was stopped Although there were clear deficits in cognitive functions in our two patients, the pattern of deficits was
different. Both patients had deficits in memory and recall, while one patient had deficits in attention, visuoconstruction, memory, and
executive functions as well. Our case series also replicates the findings of Parker et al., who reported statin-related problems with memory
and learning, as well as reduced performance in established cognitive tests, that resolved with discontinuation of statin therapy. The
subjective and objective improvement of memory seen with their patient was similar to that in the two patients we have reported . An
objective improvement was seen in neuropsychological testing at least by a few points after discontinuing simvastatin. However, a common
feature observed in both patients was that the observed improvement in cognitive and day-to-day functioning was significantly greater than
that reflected on formal neuropsychological testing. Unfortunately, baseline neurocognitive assessments prior to the development of symptoms
were unavailable in both patients because there had been no indication to carry out formal testing prior to the complaint. Our findings are
similar to several other case reports that describe development of memory and cognitive impairment. However, other cognitive deficits were
not mentioned in these reports nor imaging techniques used to exclude other causes [2, 18]. A survey conducted by Evans et al. on 171
patients showed that cognitive problems associated with statins have a variable onset and recovery course . However, both our patients
developed symptoms within 2 months of starting therapy and recovered within 3 months of stopping therapy. Our findings also confirm the
finding of Evans et al. that there is a significant negative impact on the quality of life because both our patients incurred significant
adverse outcomes owing to cognitive impairment, which reversed with discontinuation of the statin. It was difficult to determine if the
difference in the pattern of cognitive deficits between our two patients was due to the difference in the underlying mental disorder
(bipolar affective disorder versus schizophrenia). However, it was clear that the causative factor for the cognitive deficits was not the
underlying mental disorder because the deficits occurred after starting simvastatin and reversed with its discontinuation. Both our patients
developed significant cognitive changes following commencement of simvastatin. These cognitive changes were different between our two
patients, indicating that simvastatin may cause non-specific or global cognitive deficits, as predicted by studies done on statins. It is
also important to note that the observed and perceived impairment of cognitive deterioration was greater than that reflected on formal
neurological testing in both our patients. Although both patients had comorbidities, the clinical history, normal neurological and MRI
findings, and the significant reversal of symptoms with discontinuation of simvastatin implicate simvastatin as the cause of our patients’
cognitive problems. Although definitive conclusions cannot be made, the possibility of new-onset as well as worsening of existing cognitive
symptoms should be borne in mind when prescribing simvastatin. Further studies with detailed cognitive assessments on larger samples of
patients are required to determine the exact pattern of cognitive change. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Copies of the written consents are available for review by the Editor-in-Chief
of this journal. US Food and Drug Administration high-density lipoproteins 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase intelligence
quotient low-density lipoproteins Mini Mental State Examination Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale magnetic resonance imaging
Neuropsychiatry Unit Cognitive Assessment Tool Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions RH assessed and managed the patients with the assistance of CS. CS, RH, and VS have been involved in drafting the manuscript
and revising it critically. All authors have given final approval of the version to be published and agree to be accountable for all aspects
of the work. Authors’ information RH and VS are Professors in Psychiatry. We would like to acknowledge the two patients that we have
discussed in the case presentation.
