Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 82 Final Diagnosis: Clostridium perfringens infection Symptoms: Anemia • fever
• shock Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Antimicrobial chemotherapy Specialty: Infectious Diseases Rare disease Clostridium perfringens (C.
perfringens) can cause various infections, including gas gangrene, crepitant cellulitis, and fasciitis. While C. perfringens sepsis is
uncommon, it is often rapidly fatal because the alpha toxin of this bacterium induces massive intravascular hemolysis by disrupting red
blood cell membranes. We present the case of a male patient with diabetes who developed a fatal liver abscess with massive intravascular
hemolysis and septic shock caused by toxigenic C. perfringens. The peripheral blood smear showed loss of central pallor, with numerous
spherocytes. Multiplex PCR only detected expression of the cpa gene, indicating that the pathogen was C. perfringens type A. C. perfringens
infection should be considered in a febrile patient who has severe hemolytic anemia with a very low MCV, hemolyzed blood sample, and
negative Coombs test. The characteristic peripheral blood smear findings may facilitate rapid diagnosis. Clostridia are anaerobic gram-
positive rods, which are ubiquitous saprophytes and also inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of healthy humans and animals. These
microorganisms occasionally cause severe infections with gas gangrene, septic shock, myonecrosis, liver abscess, and hemolysis. Septicemia
associated with massive hemolysis due to Clostridium perfringens is most frequently a postpartum or postabortal infection, and also occurs
in immunocompromised patients, but is rarely found in otherwise healthy persons . When sepsis occurs, C. perfringens usually gains access to
the bloodstream via penetrating wounds or mucosal defects in the gastrointestinal tract , female genital tract , or hepatobiliary system .
About 14% of patients with C. perfringens septicemia develop massive intravascular hemolysis . Since 1990, 50 cases of C. perfringens
septicemia complicated by massive hemolysis have been reported in the English literature . The reported patients had a median age of 61
years, the mortality rate was 74%, and the median time to death was 9.7 h. Although the majority of gas-forming infections in patients with
diabetes are caused by Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumonia, C. perfringens also needs to be considered. We present the case of a
diabetic patient with liver abscess, massive intravascular hemolysis, and septic shock caused by C. perfringens type A. Despite rapid
initiation of antibiotic therapy, the patient died within a few hours of being admitted to the ICU. This study was conducted in conformity
with the Declaration of Helsinki. An 82-year-old man with a history of diabetes presented to the emergency room of a local hospital. He
complained of nausea, low-grade fever, and restlessness for 8 h, with no diarrhea. On examination, the patient had a pulse rate of 120/min,
respiration rate of 30/min, temperature of 37.7°C, oxygen saturation of 93% on room air (pulse oximetry), and blood pressure of 180/78 mmHg.
A general physical examination revealed no abnormalities. The first blood sample showed hemolysis, which was initially thought to be due to
an error during collection. Laboratory data revealed a hemoglobin of 8.3 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 58, platelet count of 76
000/mm3, white blood cell count of 30 140/mm3, LDH of 10 321 IU/l, AST of 1366 IU/l, total bilirubin of 9 mg/dl, creatinine of 2.28 mg/dl,
CRP of 20 mg/dl, serum glucose of 354 mg/dl, Na of 129 mmol/l, and K of 6.7 mmol/l. Plasma and urine were both dark red, suggesting massive
hemolysis. The electrocardiogram and chest X-ray film were unremarkable. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed an abscess with gas in
the left lobe of the liver and emphysematous cholecystitis. He also had pneumobilia and dilation of the common bile duct (Figure 1).
Therefore, he was treated empirically for suspected biliary sepsis with 0.5 g of meropenem (MEPM) intravenously after blood and urine
cultures were obtained. A decision was made to immediately transport the patient to the nearest emergency center, and he was admitted to the
Department of Emergency and Acute Intensive Care Center of Fujita Health Sciences University just 25 min later. During transfer, the
patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly. His pulse rate decreased and cardiopulmonary arrest occurred briefly. Although he was resuscitated
by injection of epinephrine, he remained in a deep coma. After arrival at the emergency room, he was intubated for ventilation and was
admitted to the ICU. Laboratory tests performed on admission to the ICU showed a hemoglobin of 5.6 g/dl, platelet count of 29 000/mm3, white
blood cell count of 21 300/mm3, AST of 2343 IU/l, haptoglobin of 10.5 mg/dl, creatinine of 3.02 mg/dl, procalcitonin of 27.9 mg/dl,
prothrombin time of 23%, and FDP of 843 µg/ml. While on mechanical ventilation with an FiO2 of 1.0, his pH was 6.98, pCO2 was 35 mmHg, pO2
was 304 mmHg, lactate was 197 mg/dl, and HCO3– was 8.2 mmol/l. Petechiae were seen extensively on his body. Massive fluid replacement was
provided, as well as transfusion with 6 units of packed red blood cells and 6 units of fresh frozen plasma. In addition, 1 g of MEPM and 0.6
g of clindamycin were infused. Urine output was 5 ml during the first hour, but he subsequently became anuric. He died 2 h after admission.
Review of the peripheral blood smear showed loss of central pallor and numerous spherocytes. Some of the red blood cells were
dehemoglobinized ghosts (Figure 2). Two days after his death, both of the 2 blood cultures obtained from the patient grew large Gram-
positive rods, which were definitively identified as C. perfringens. No other microorganism was found in the blood and the urine culture was
negative. We wanted to determine the origin of the patient’s clostridial bacteremia. Because autopsy was refused, we could not take bile
samples for microbiological testing to determine whether emphysematous cholecystitis or the liver abscess was the original focus. However,
we postulate that C. perfringens migrated from the gastrointestinal tract to the liver via the biliary tract. Molecular typing of C.
perfringens was performed by use of a multiplex PCR (BACTOTYPE PCR Amplification Kit; Labor Diagnostik GmbH Leipzig), using primers to
determine the presence of the α (cpa), β (cpb), ɛ (etx), ι (iA), enterotoxin (cpe), and β2 (cpb2) toxins genes. Briefly, from 1 to 5
colonies growing on solid media were removed with a sterile plastic tip and genomic DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA mini kit (Qiagen,
Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR was performed with a 25-µl reaction mixture containing 2.5 mM MgCl2, 100 µM of each
deoxynucleoside triphosphate, 100 pmol of each primer, 1 U of Taq DNA polymerase, and 2.5 µl of the source DNA obtained as described above.
Amplification was done in an automated thermal cycler (MJ Mini, Bio Rad, Hercules, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then
the products (3–10 µl) were run on 2% agarose gel, stained with ethidium bromide, and visualized under ultraviolet light. PCR detected the
cpa gene, but not the cpb, etx, iA, cpe, and cpb2 genes (Figure 3). This patient’s course included several features that could alert the
clinician to the possibility of C. perfringens infection. He had diabetes, high fever, and a liver abscess with gas. In addition, there was
severe hemolysis in blood samples and hemoglobinuria, which were first identified by the nurses and laboratory technicians, together with
characteristic spherocytes and ghost cells in the peripheral blood smear . These findings could raise suspicion of C. perfringens
septicemia. Because the doubling time of C. perfringens is only 7 min, this bacterium can increase toxin production very rapidly, as
manifested by the rapid deterioration of our patient . C. perfringens is classified into 5 types (A to E) based on its production of
different major lethal toxins . All types of C. perfringens produce α toxin, while type B strains also produce β and ɛ toxins, type C also
produces β toxin, type D produces ɛ toxin, and type E produces ι toxin. Because multiplex PCR only identified expression of the cpa gene,
the pathogen isolated from the present patient was shown to be C. perfringens type A. PCR-based identification of C. perfringens types has
previously been reported using DNA extracted from archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded liver specimens . However, to the best of our
knowledge this is the first report on typing of toxigenic C. perfringens from a blood culture. The α toxin of C. perfringens is a
phospholipase C that hydrolyzes lecithin to form phosphorylcholine and diglyceride, and it is believed to be the major factor responsible
for tissue damage caused by this bacterium . It has been reported that α toxin hydrolyses phospholipids in red blood cell membranes, leading
to spherocytosis and hemolysis, while production of streptolysin O and perfringolysin O have been implicated in the occurrence of
disseminated intravascular coagulation . Thus, C. perfringens type A produces several powerful toxins and type A infection can result in
myonecrosis, hemolysis, increased vascular permeability , and platelet aggregation . The major lethal effects associated with α toxin are
gas gangrene in humans and necrotic enteritis and enterotoxemia in animals. Treatment of this rapidly lethal infection is based on immediate
administration of antibiotics, transfusion of blood products, and measures to correct metabolic derangement and support failing organs . The
choice, dose, and timing of antibiotic therapy may play an important role in determining the survival of patients with C. perfringens sepsis
. Our initial choice was MEPM because of its exceptionally broad spectrum and excellent anaerobic coverage. Although in vitro studies show
that C. perfringens is susceptible to almost all penicillins, cephalosporins, and carbapenems, these agents are unable to rapidly suppress α
toxin activity and patients remain at risk of fatal endotoxemia. In contrast, clindamycin and metronidazole have been shown to rapidly
reduce α toxin activity . A recent experimental study demonstrated that the combination of high-dose penicillin and clindamycin is superior
to monotherapy with either drug alone . When soft tissue infection is suspected, surgical debridement is mandatory to improve survival and
prevent complications. Surgical removal or drainage of an infected focus is significantly correlated with better survival . Even among
patients who die, the mean time to death is significantly prolonged by surgical treatment compared with conservative therapy . In addition
to antibiotics and surgical debridement, hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been advocated by some authors based on nonrandomized studies . This
therapy has a theoretical basis for efficacy since Clostridia lack superoxide dismutase and are therefore incapable of surviving in an
oxygen-rich environment. In fact, α toxin production ceases at a PO2 of 80 mmHg or more . Differential diagnosis of intravascular hemolysis
can be difficult, but fewer conditions cause massive intravascular hemolysis . Possible infectious causes of massive hemolysis are
clostridial septicemia, rare infections (malaria, bartonellosis, and babesiosis), and adult hemolytic uremic syndrome associated with
infection. Noninfectious causes of severe intravascular hemolysis include incompatible ABO blood transfusion, paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria, paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, hemolysis due to lysins such as snake venom,
and severe burns . In conclusion, C. perfringens infection should be kept in mind when a febrile patient has severe hemolytic anemia with a
very low MCV, hemolysis in blood samples, and a negative Coombs test. The characteristic peripheral blood smear findings shown in Figure 2
may assist with rapid diagnosis. The authors would like to thank Mr. Yasuhiro Imamura and Mrs. Mitsuyo Hasegawa for their valuable comments
and advice. Author disclosure statement No competing financial interests exist. Abdominal computed tomography shows a gas-filled abscess in
the left lobe of the liver, as well as emphysematous cholecystitis and pneumobilia. Peripheral blood smear using the sample collected in the
ER of the local hospital. Note that there is marked anisocytosis (red cells of varying sizes), spherocytosis (red arrows), nucleated red
blood cells (blue arrows), and dehemoglobinized ghost cells (green arrow). Agarose gel electrophoresis of PCR products. Lane 1 is the 100 bp
DNA ladder; Lane 2 is positive controls for α, β, and τ toxins; Lane 3 is the negative control; Lanes 4 and 5 are PCR products extracted
from 1 and 5 colonies of C. perfringens; and Lane 6 is positive controls for enterotoxin and ɛ and β2 toxins. The arrow indicates α toxin.
