Digital ulcers (DUs) are a severe and frequent clinical feature of patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc). The presence of DUs may cause
severe pain and often lead to impairment of patient’s functional activities and health-related quality of life. Moreover, poor patient
cooperation during the wound care procedure due to pain may be associated with a negative outcome of DU healing. Therefore, pain management
has a key role in patients with SSc. These two case reports describe the effectiveness and safety of oxycodone/naloxone in patients with SSc
complicated by painful chronic DUs. Such a therapy has provided pain relief and consequently an increased compliance during redressing
wounds. Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a complex multisystem disorder characterized by immune system activation, vascular involvement, and
multiorgan fibrosis.1 Vasculopathy is postulated to have a key role in the early pathogenesis of SSc and in some of the complications of the
disease, such as digital ulcerations. Digital ulcers (DUs) are a serious and burdensome clinical manifestation of SSc, typically occurring
on the fingertips or over the extensor aspects of the hands, and may also be related to calcinosis or become infected. Approximately 50% of
patients report a previous history of DUs,2 often occurring early3 and predicting a worse disease course.4 The presence of DUs accounts for
much of the pain in SSc and is significantly associated with disability,5 affecting the impairment of daily activities,6 reduction in
quality of life,7 and a negative impact on occupation.8 Indeed, patients with SSc report the impact of DUs as worse than other disease
manifestations, such as lung and gastrointestinal (GI) problems.9 Despite the impact of DUs, there is currently a limited evidence base to
guide the management of DUs in patients with SSc. In addition to vasodilator therapy, wound care is pivotal, and sometimes surgical
debridement is required (eg, underlying calcinosis), but such procedures may be exquisitely painful.10 As pain management has a key role in
wound healing and standard therapy (ie, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) is often inadequate or dose limited by side effects, opioids
are likely to be used. However, effective pain management has not been investigated in detail in patients with SSc and the experience in DUs
is further limited, particularly regarding opioids such as oxycodone.11,12 Due to the lack of best practice consensus, analgesic strategies
are not standardized and are mainly guided by a physician’s experience. Against this background, we report the experience of a tertiary
referral center concerning the pain management of two patients with SSc affected by DUs with oral prolonged-release (PR) oxycodone/naloxone
(OXN-PR) combination. Such a drug is approved to treat severe chronic pain non responsive to non-opioids. Our institutional review board
approval was obtained for publication of this paper. A 71-year-old woman with a 20-year history of diffuse cutaneous SSc (anti-Scl70
antibodies positive) was admitted for multiple recurrent DUs in August 2015. Her history was notable for SSc multiorgan involvement (mildly
progressive interstitial lung disease previously treated with cyclophosphamide, then ongoing mycophenolate, and stable esophagopathy treated
with daily prokinetics, proton-pump inhibitors, and antacids), controlled hypertension, statin-treated hypercholesterolemia, osteoporosis,
generalized osteoarthritis, and an extrapyramidal syndrome in follow-up. New DUs developed in the third fingertip of the left hand and in
the second fingertip of the right hand with underlying calcinosis. All DUs had similar aspects: round in shape with a diameter of 4 mm and a
depth of ~2 mm, edges were flat with normal surrounding skin, and bases were pink. In addition, the patient had multiple concurrent scars
from the second to the fourth fingertips bilaterally. During admission, swabs collected from all DUs were cultured and the findings were
negative. Full-dose oral calcium antagonist (nifedipine) and bosentan 125 mg twice a day (bid) were regularly administered, and intravenous
vasodilator iloprost therapy was intensified to daily administration and carried on as appropriate. Despite the ongoing analgesic treatment
(paracetamol 3,000 mg daily), pain control was poor and wound care was limited by the intense pain. During admission, OXN-PR 5/2.5 mg bid
was started. At baseline and after 2 months prior to wound care, pain and GI symptoms were assessed. The Brief Pain Inventory was used to
assess the severity of pain and the impact of pain on daily functions. Based on a verbally administered 0- to 10-point numeric rating
scale,13 the arithmetic mean of the four severity items can be used as measures of pain severity, while the arithmetic mean of the seven
interference items can be used as a measure of pain interference (Table 1). Common adverse events of the GI tract related to the opioid
therapy were monitored using the validated Italian version of UCLA Scleroderma Clinical Trial Consortium Gastrointestinal Tract (UCLA-SCTC
GIT) 2.0.14 UCLA-SCTC GIT 2.0 is a 7-multi-item scale with areas of reflux, distention/bloating, diarrhea, fecal soilage, constipation,
emotional well-being, and social functioning. Each item is scored from 0 to 3 except the diarrhea and constipation (range from 0–2 and
0–2.5, respectively), with the lower values indicating a better health-related quality of life. The total UCLA-SCTC GIT 2.0 score averages
six of seven scales (excluding constipation) and is scored from 0 (no GI problems) to 3 (most severe).15 In this study, we used the total
and constipation scores (Table 1). Throughout the treatments, pain assessment showed a reduced numeric rating scale score in the absence of
opioid-related adverse events, particularly with regard to bowel movements (Table 1). The dose of OXN-PR remained stable. Residual pain was
reported only during ulcer dressing procedures, but compliance to wound care significantly ameliorated. A 61-year-old woman with a 19-year
history of limited cutaneous SSc (anticentromere antibodies positive) was admitted to our Rheumatology Unit for multiple recurrent infected
DUs with underlying calcinosis. Her history was notable for SSc-related esophagopathy (ongoing daily prokinetics, proton-pump inhibitors,
and antacids), active smoking with moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (ongoing inhaled bronchodilators), chronic obstructive
peripheral arteriopathy (ongoing cilostazol), statin-treated hypercholesterolemia, and osteoporosis (ongoing supplementation of calcium plus
vitamin D). Standard treatment for multiple recurrent DUs accounted for oral calcium antagonist (amlodipine), bosentan 125 mg bid,
intravenous iloprost, and human immunoglobulin therapy every other month. For multiple calcinosis and recurrent DU infections, the patient
underwent multiple surgical debridements and repeated courses of antibiotics according to antibiograms as appropriate. In September 2015,
DUs developed again in the fourth fingertip of the left hand and in the third and fifth fingertips of the right hand with an underlying
calcinosis (Figure 1). At the fourth fingertip of the left hand, DU was round in shape with a diameter of 4 mm and a depth of ~3 mm, edges
were flat with surrounding skin slightly inflamed, and bases were pink and white with an underlying calcinosis. At the third fingertip of
the right hand, DU was round in shape with a diameter of 1 mm and a depth of ~1 mm, edges were flat with normal surrounding skin, and base
was pink. DU at the fifth fingertip of the right hand was round in shape with a diameter of 2 mm and a depth of ~3 mm, edges were flat with
normal surrounding skin, and base was pink. In all DUs, there were no discharges suggesting an infection. During admission, swabs collected
from all DUs were cultured and the findings were negative. Iloprost administration and wound dressing procedures were increased (every third
day). The ongoing analgesic treatment (paracetamol 3,000 mg daily) was insufficient for pain relief, hence OXN-PR 5/2.5 mg bid was started.
At baseline and after 2 months prior to wound care, the pain was reduced in Brief Pain Inventory domains (Table 1), in the absence of
opioid-related adverse events and changes of bowel movements, according to UCLA-SCTC GIT 2.0.14 The dose of OXN-PR remained stable.
Compliance to wound care ameliorated as well. In our anecdotal experience, oral administration of a combination of opioid agonist–antagonist
OXN-PR was shown to be effective and well tolerated in the management of chronic pain from DUs in SSc. Opioids have been defined to be
effective and safe in the treatment of chronic cancer and noncancer pain,16,17 including rheumatic diseases. However, reports on pain
treatment in SSc were sporadic and limited to a few opioids, such as oral tramadol and oxycodone;12,18 in SSc-related DUs, the use of
oxycodone showed efficacy with only mild side effects (itching, nausea, and/or dizziness), including constipation responsive to treatment in
51.7% of patients.12 Therefore, the experience on the use of opioids in patients with SSc is sparse, and concerns about GI adverse events
should be taken into account. With particular attention to opioid-induced constipation in chronic noncancer pain, the OXN-PR combination
proved to be effective and better tolerated when compared to oxycodone.19 Thus, OXN-PR may also be considered in SSc when standard nonopioid
therapy is inadequate or limited by side effects and primarily when GI manifestations are a major issue. Our experience in SSc was
consistent with previous reports in patients with non-SSc, and the GI tolerability of OXN-PR was excellent. Moreover, in both patients, pain
relief was reached with the initial low dose (5/2.5 mg bid) without the need for a dose increase. In addition to pain relief, pain control
is fundamental to optimize wound care. Treatment adherence is, in effect, increased, and the compliance to change of wound dressings
ameliorated as well. In our two cases, the treatment with oral OXN-PR allowed a better local management of DUs, especially in the
tolerability of deep wound surgical debridement that otherwise was very difficult to carry out without adequate procedural pain management.
Moreover, SSc-related calcinosis is often associated with painful DUs as a worsening factor.20 In both cases, calcinosis was present; in the
past, both patients underwent calcinosis removal, but they did not experience any beneficial long-term effects. In fact, DUs improved
quickly but then recurred, including calcinosis. In addition to oral formulations, topical use of opioids in SSc ulcers was anecdotally
reported.21 In a recent uncontrolled trial on patients with SSc, in addition to local administration of anesthetics, local (and oral)
morphine administration has been shown as a promising tool for the management of procedural pain in wound care of DUs in SSc.22 However,
topical opioids are not easily accessible and, with regard to our experience, not available for routine use in clinical practice. Management
of pain related to DUs in SSc is a relevant, yet poorly investigated issue. The choice for optimal analgesia is often challenging, and
opioids may be considered when standard therapy is inadequate. In our anecdotal experience, oral administration of OXN-PR combination is
safe and well tolerated in SSc, and it might be considered for DU pain and to optimize the overall treatment of DUs. Due to the lack of
evidence base, clinical trials in SSc concerning opioids, especially OXN-PR, are warmly suggested to evaluate their effectiveness and safety
in such populations. The study was completed independently with no funding. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for the
publication of these case reports and accompanying images. Authors’ contributions All authors contributed to the acquisition of data and
drafting and critically revising the article and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work. Disclosure The authors report no
conflicts of interest in this work. Digital ulcers of the third and fifth fingertips of the right hand (A) and the fourth fingertip of the
left hand (C) at baseline. The underlying calcinosis is shown in the plain X-ray images of the right (B) and left (D) hands. Assessment of
pain and gastrointestinal symptoms using patient-reported outcomes during treatment with oral prolonged-release oxycodone/naloxone
combination Note: Bid means twice a day. Abbreviations: BPI, Brief Pain Inventory; GIT, gastrointestinal tract; NRS, numeric rating scale;
OXN, oxycodone/naloxone; PR, prolonged release; UCLA-SCTC GIT 2.0, UCLA Scleroderma Clinical Trial Consortium Gastrointestinal Tract 2.0.
