Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs) have been reported to cause resolution of intracardiac thrombus, but there have been no
reported cases of internal carotid arterial thrombus resolution. We report a case of a 76-year-old man in whom an internal carotid arterial
thrombus resolved after administration of the NOAC dabigatran at a dose of 110 mg twice daily. This is the first reported case of carotid
arterial thrombus resolution after oral intake of NOAC (direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors), to the best of our knowledge. We conclude
that this case had major clinical significance because it might represent one of the multiple effects of NOACs. Recently, there have been
increasing opportunities to use non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs) instead of warfarin in the prevention of cardiogenic
cerebral embolism due to nonvalvular atrial fibrillation (NVAF).1 Several randomized controlled trials have shown that these NOACs are
superior to warfarin in the prevention of cardiogenic cerebral embolism and that there are fewer concomitant intracranial hemorrhages.2–7
During atrial fibrillation, thrombus tends to form readily because there is excessive promotion of blood coagulation. This thrombogenesis is
suppressed by these NOACs, which inhibit thrombin or factor Xa and prevent the formation of new intracardiac thrombus. Recently, there have
also been a number of reports indicating that existing intracardiac thrombus also resolve, despite the fact that an obvious mechanism has
not yet been elucidated.8–16 Although many effects continue to be observed, there have been no reports regarding the resolution of internal
carotid arterial thrombus. Here, we report a case in which resolution of an extra-cardiac thrombus within the internal carotid artery was
achieved through oral administration of the NOAC dabigatran. A 76-year-old man was taking oral warfarin for chronic NVAF. He experienced
ataxia and dysarthria on December 16, 2010, and was admitted to our hospital with cardiogenic cerebral embolism affecting the right superior
cerebellar artery region. Because prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.20 on admission, the dose of warfarin was
increased while also administering unfractionated heparin intravenously. On January 6, 2011, the patient was discharged without assistance.
Fluctuation of the PT-INR subsequently continued while the patient was treated on an outpatient basis. On March 13, 2012, the patient
experienced dysarthria and right central facial nerve paralysis, and he was admitted until March 23 for cardiogenic cerebral embolism
affecting the area from the left insular cortex to the cortical and subcortical regions in the precentral gyrus. PT-INR on admission was
1.25, indicating a subtherapeutic INR. When we investigated the source of the embolus, no thrombus was observed in the carotid arteries or
inside the heart. After the dose of warfarin was adjusted while administering unfractionated heparin intravenously, the patient was
discharged without assistance. Continued fluctuation of PT-INR levels was noted in the blood tests performed at the outpatients department
after discharge. We switched the patient from warfarin to dabigatran 110 mg twice daily because of low creatinine clearance on May 15, 2012,
and have not observed any new cerebrovascular events to date. In early 2015, pharyngeal obstruction was observed, and upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy revealed type I squamous cell carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus (T3N1M0 stage III). The patient was admitted to the Department
of Gastrointestinal Surgery for workup to decide the treatment strategy on March 9. Carotid artery ultrasound unexpectedly showed thrombus
formation at the right internal carotid artery, which was performed to evaluate the metastasis in the cervical lymph node on March 9, and it
was repeated to reconfirm the existence of the thrombus on March 13 (Figure 1A, B). A request for treatment was made to the Department of
Neurology approximately 10 days later on March 24. Neurological examination on the same day showed only the already-known ataxic speech and
mild truncal ataxia. Atrial fibrillation was also observed on electrocardiogram. Prior to admission, oral dabigatran intake was irregular,
and the drug was taken only approximately 60% to 70% of the time due to obstruction caused by the esophageal carcinoma. After admission,
there was a request for treatment to be administered orally at regular times. When we repeated the carotid artery ultrasound on the same
day, the thrombus at the same site had disappeared and only “spontaneous echo contrast (SEC)” was observed (Figure 1C). Black blood magnetic
resonance imaging at the carotid artery on March 26 (Figure 2) revealed a hyperintensity, indicating the presence of an unstable plaque, on
T1- and T2-weighted images, but no thrombus at this site. On April 23, cranial magnetic resonance revealed that there were no new cerebral
infarctions and no occlusions of the intracranial vessels (Figure 3). We subsequently repeated the carotid artery ultrasound on June 30
(Figure 4) and did not observe thrombus within the right internal carotid artery; similar to the previous time, we only observed mild SEC.
During the admission, he did not have any medical treatment such as chemotherapy or radiation. In blood tests of the coagulation-
fibrinolytic system, activated partial thromboplastin time was 35.7 (control: 30.0) s, PT-INR was 1.15, and D-dimer was <0.3 (normal range
0–0.5) μg/mL on March 9 when oral dabigatran intake had been inadequate. Tests on July 22, after regular dabigatran intake, revealed an
activated partial thromboplastin time of 49.4 (control: 30.2) s, a PT-INR of 1.48, D-dimer <0.3 μg/mL, antithrombin of 77 (normal range
75–125)%, soluble fibrin monomer complex value of 1.7 (normal range 0–6.1) μg/mL, and a plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 of 61 (normal
range ≤50) ng/mL. Carotid artery ultrasound on admission (A), the 5th day after admission (B), and the 16th day after admission (C). The
carotid artery ultrasound performed at the time of admission and on the 5th day of hospital stay showed a thrombus at the right internal
carotid artery on both days. Ten days later, a repeat ultrasound at the same site showed that the thrombus had disappeared, leaving only
“spontaneous echo contrast.” CCA = common carotid artery, ICA = internal carotid artery, Rt = right. Black blood MR imaging at the carotid
artery after disappearance of cervical thrombus. We observed a hyperintensity, indicating the presence of an unstable plaque, at the right
internal carotid artery on T1- and T2-weighted images, but there was no thrombus. ICA = internal carotid artery, MR = magnetic resonance,
MRA = magnetic resonance angiography, Rt = right, T1WI = T1 weighted image, T2WI = T2 weighted image. Cranial MR imaging and angiography
after disappearance of intracarotid artery thrombus. No new cerebral infarctions and no occlusions of the intracranial vessels on MR images
and angiography. DWI = diffusion weighted image, FLAIR = fluid attenuated inversion recovery, MRA = magnetic resonance angiography,
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, Rt = right. Carotid artery ultrasound after disappearance of intracarotid artery thrombus. No thrombus was
observed in the right internal carotid artery, but we observed “spontaneous echo contrast.” CCA = common carotid artery, ICA = internal
carotid artery, Rt = right. In this case, we administered the NOAC dabigatran to prevent recurrence of cardiogenic cerebral embolism due to
NVAF, but a thrombus formed in the internal carotid artery due to irregular oral intake of the drug. After regular intake was ensured, the
thrombus disappeared. To our knowledge, this is the first report of such an event, and we believe this report is of clinical significance as
it might represent one of the many effects of NOACs. Dabigatran acts as a direct thrombin inhibitor. It directly and reversibly binds to the
active sites of initial and free thrombin, inhibiting their activation.17 The result is suppressed conversion of soluble fibrinogen into
fibrin monomers or finally into stabilizing fibrin by the fibrin stabilizing factor, which is coagulation factor XIII activated by thrombin.
In addition, dabigatran also binds to the active site of fibrin-bound thrombin. By doing so, it inhibits the extension of the thrombus.
Nevertheless, it is mainly known for its inhibitory effects on new thrombus formation and is not known to cause the resolution of existing
thrombus. However, in 2012, Vidal and Vanerio8 first reported treatment of a 59-year-old woman with an 8 × 8 cm thrombus in the left atrial
appendage with dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, resulting in thrombus resolution in 6 to 7 weeks and no new cerebral embolism. There have been
some reports of similar intracardiac thrombus resolution after the administration of dabigatran or the Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban or
apixaban.9–16 Furthermore, differences were observed in thrombus resolution at different doses of dabigatran. Tabata et al18 reported that
resolution of intracardiac thrombus after administration of dabigatran 110 mg twice daily was insufficient. Very few of these reports
clearly mention the resolution mechanism. Of those that did, Kaku10 described that dabigatran induced endogenous fibrinolysis, while
Nagamoto et al11 reported dabigatran had thrombolytic action on acute preexisting intracardiac thrombus. Regarding rivaroxaban, Kato et al12
presumed that there was promotion of fibrinolysis due to a peak and trough period, and Takasugi et al14 reported that rivaroxaban caused a
looser clot to form that is more sensitive to fibrinolytic enzyme by decreasing thrombin production. In our case, we speculate that a new
thrombus formed on the unstable plaque that was originally present at the site of onset in the right internal carotid artery when oral
intake of dabigatran was insufficient, and after admission, oral intake of dabigatran became regular and there was resolution of the new
thrombus by a mechanism similar to that of resolution of intracardiac thrombus in previous reports. There are several issues in this case.
First, it is possible that the presence of esophageal carcinoma affected the coagulation-fibrinolytic system when the thrombus developed or
resolved in the internal carotid artery. Second, when the oral intake of dabigatran was irregular, the D-dimer value, which indicates
stabilizing fibrin thrombus formation, was normal during development of the internal carotid thrombus. We speculate that the reason was the
lack of conversion of fibrinogen into stabilizing fibrin because dabigatran suppressed the activation of coagulation factor XIII while it
was being administered with incomplete dosing. In other words, the thrombus was easily degraded by plasmin because it was a looser thrombus
in a soluble fibrin state, and so it did not lead to an elevated D-dimer value. Third, there was no pathological verification of the
thrombus that formed in the internal carotid artery. Regarding the component of that thrombus, there is usually formation of a platelet-rich
white thrombus due to the high flow velocity in the arteries, but there are some reports of the presence of fibrin-rich red thrombus.19 In
our case, as we saw SEC in both carotid artery ultrasound investigations, even though there was a site where the flow velocity was high and
there was no severe stenosis at this site, it was obvious that there was regional blood stasis or low-velocity blood flow.20 For this
reason, we considered the possible mechanism of internal carotid arterial thrombus resolution by the direct thrombin inhibitor as follows:
the rupture of an existing, unstable plaque caused activation of the coagulation system at this site, formation of a red thrombus, and then
resolution of the red thrombus, which is the same process as in the resolution of an intracardiac thrombus. In conclusion, we reported a
case of internal carotid arterial thrombus resolution due to the administration of oral dabigatran. This is the first reported case to the
best of our knowledge. This case has major clinical significance because it might represent one of the multiple effects of NOACs. Going
forward, we will need to investigate more cases and perform large-scale studies. The patient or their next of kin gave written informed
consent for publication of this report. Abbreviations: NOAC = non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant, NVAF = nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation, PT-INR = prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, SEC = spontaneous echo contrast. The authors have no funding and
conflicts of interest to disclose.
