Wet beriberi-induced pericardial effusion has rarely been previously described. Little is known about the effect of beriberi-induced
pericardial effusion on hemodynamics. Here we present a case of wet beriberi with pericardial effusion that exhibited constrictive
physiology, which was dramatically improved after treatment. A 61-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital for progressive leg
edema, dyspnea on exertion, and lower-extremity muscle weakness. Echocardiography showed a hyperkinetic left ventricle and a moderate amount
of pericardial effusion. Hemodynamic measurements, including simultaneous measurement of left and right ventricular pressures, revealed high
output heart failure and constrictive physiology. Blood test showed lactic acidosis, and low level of serum thiamine levels; consistent with
a diagnosis of wet beriberi. After thiamine replacement therapy, the patient’s hemodynamic state rapidly improved. Additionally, pericardial
effusion decreased and constrictive physiology was successfully resolved. No other possible causes of pericardial effusion could be
identified, with the exception of thiamine deficiency. This case illustrates the importance of considering wet beriberi as a possible cause
of pericardial effusion with constrictive physiology. Wet beriberi is one of the clinical syndromes associated with thiamine (Vitamin B1)
deficiency, and is typically characterized by high output heart failure with low peripheral vascular resistance . Its most fulminant form is
shoshin beriberi, which is characterized by cardiovascular collapse and these patients may die within hours if left untreated [2, 3].
Unfortunately, wet beriberi often goes unrecognized, a consequence of its rarity and the non-specificity of symptoms . Clinical presentation
may be somewhat varied and pericardial involvement is rarely manifested. Little is known regarding the effect of wet beriberi-related
pericardial effusion on hemodynamic parameters. Here we report the case of a wet beriberi patient accompanied by pericardial effusion with
constrictive physiology; equalization of end diastolic pressure in right and left ventricular with dip and plateau pattern and increased
ventricular interdependence , and whose condition rapidly improved after the replacement of thiamine. A 61-year-old male patient was
admitted to our hospital with progressive external dyspnea, leg edema, and muscle weakness. The patient was in good health up to a point two
months prior to admission. The patient had a history of stomach ulcers and drank alcohol socially. He ate an unbalanced diet for many years.
His BMI was 20.2 kg/m2 and blood pressure was 97/45 mmHg. Paradoxical pulsation was not observed. The patient’s heart rate was 92 bpm and
oxygen saturation was 98 % at room air. A physical examination revealed jugular venous distention, although heart and breath sounds were
unremarkable. Bilateral pitting edema was observed throughout the legs and muscle tenderness in the lower extremities was noted. A chest
X-ray showed cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular congestion, and pleural effusion. An electrocardiogram revealed ST segment depression in leads
V4-5 (Fig. 1a). Echocardiography revealed a hyperkinetic left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 85 % without regional wall motion
abnormalities and normal LV size (end-diastolic dimensions: 53 mm). A moderate amount of pericardial effusion was noted and mitral Doppler
measurements showed the peak E wave velocity of 112 cm/s, the E/A ratio of 1.6, and E wave deceleration time of 151 ms; consistent with a
pseudonormal pattern. No significant respiratory E wave variation (17 %) was observed (Fig. 2a). Tricuspid regurgitation was observed with a
maximal velocity (TR V max) of up to 3.4 m/s. The inferior vena cava was markedly dilated to 23 mm and respiratory variation was diminished.
Arterial blood gas analysis showed severe metabolic acidosis with an elevated lactate level of 56 mg/dL, while pH was preserved by a
compensatory hyperventilation response. B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels were elevated to 322.8 pg/mL. No evidence of any viral
infection or mycobacterium tuberculosis, both possible cause pericarditis, was found. Thyroid function was also normal. In addition, no
malignancies were observed and all immunological profiles were negative.Fig. 1Electrocardiogram on admission showed slightly low voltage,
poor progression R wave and ST segment depression in leads V4-5 (a). With the exception of the poor progression R wave, all changes were no
longer observed by day 27 (b)Fig. 2A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a moderate amount of pericardial effusion. A pseudonormal pattern
of transmitral flow was observed on administration of thiamine (a). Two days after thiamine administration, pericardial effusion decreased
and the mitral Doppler findings showed that constrictive physiology was resolved after thiamine replacement therapy (b) Electrocardiogram on
admission showed slightly low voltage, poor progression R wave and ST segment depression in leads V4-5 (a). With the exception of the poor
progression R wave, all changes were no longer observed by day 27 (b) A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a moderate amount of pericardial
effusion. A pseudonormal pattern of transmitral flow was observed on administration of thiamine (a). Two days after thiamine administration,
pericardial effusion decreased and the mitral Doppler findings showed that constrictive physiology was resolved after thiamine replacement
therapy (b) Intravenous furosemide was administered to the patient, however, his condition failed to improve. Hemodynamic evaluation using a
Swan-Ganz catheter revealed high output heart failure with low peripheral vascular resistance and constrictive physiology, cardiac index of
5.35 l/min/m2, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 18 mmHg, and systematic vascular resistance of 400 dyne・sec・cm-5. Right ventricular
(RV) and LV end diastolic pressures were approximately equal (20 and 19 mmHg, respectively) and exhibited a dip and plateau pattern (Fig. 3;
Table 1). Coronary angiography was normal.Fig. 3Simultaneous right and left ventricular measurements showed elevated and approximately equal
end-diastolic pressures with dip and plateau pattern (a). Paradoxical pulsation was not observer during respiratory change, but respiratory
ventricular discordance was seen; Arrows shows increased RV pressure occurred concomitantly with decreased LV pressure decreased during
inspiratory phase (b)Table 1Hemodynamic data from cardiac catheterizationVariableValueday4day27Pressures (mmHg) Right atrium
(a/v/mean)20/19/156/5/4 Right ventricle53/2023/6 Pulmonary artery51/2025/10 Pulmonary capillary wedge1810 Left
ventricle85/19134/13 Aorta86/49146/76Cardiac output (l/min)10.06.47Cardiac index (l/min/m2)5.353.93Systematic vascular resistance
(dyne・sec・cm-5)4001236Pulmonary vascular resistance (dyne・sec・cm-5)12887 Simultaneous right and left ventricular measurements showed
elevated and approximately equal end-diastolic pressures with dip and plateau pattern (a). Paradoxical pulsation was not observer during
respiratory change, but respiratory ventricular discordance was seen; Arrows shows increased RV pressure occurred concomitantly with
decreased LV pressure decreased during inspiratory phase (b) Hemodynamic data from cardiac catheterization Given the deficiency of thiamine
(measured concentration: 13 ng/mL; normal range: 24-66 ng/mL) and the presence of lactic acidosis, we suspected wet beriberi in this case.
Intravenous thiamine was administered (100 mg/day). Approximately seven hours after initial administration, the patient’s urine output
rapidly increased and his hemodynamic status improved dramatically. Two days after thiamine administration, an echocardiograph showed normal
LV contraction (EF: 66 %), decreased pericardial effusion, and an improved pseudonormal pattern by mitral Doppler examination. The E/A ratio
decreased to 0.8 and E wave deceleration time was extended to 204 ms (Fig. 2b). Lactic acidosis resolved 47 h after first dose and heart
failure symptoms ceased after 2 days of thiamine replacement therapy. Twenty days after thiamine administration the hemodynamic profile was
as follows: cardiac index 3.93 l/min/m2, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 10 mmHg, and systematic vascular resistance 1236 dyne・sec・cm-5.
Simultaneous RV and LV pressure tracings showed decreased end diastolic pressures, while respiratory ventricular discordance was negative.
Electrocardiogram showed all changes were no longer observed by day 27 with the exception of the poor progression R wave (Fig. 1b). This
rapid recovery post-administration of thiamine provided strong support for a diagnosis of wet beriberi. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
was done in order to investigate the cause of the constrictive physiology. However, late gadolinium enhancement of the myo- and pericardia,
increased pericardial thickening, and calcification were not observed. In addition, no pathological findings related to the pericardium were
identified. As the pericardial effusion rapidly decreased and the constrictive physiology resolved after thiamine administration, we
concluded that wet beriberi was responsible for the pericardial involvement. This could further have a restraining effect on both
ventricles, thus accounting for the constrictive physiology observed. On follow-up, no recurrence of pericardial effusion was found.
Echocardiography was performed 47 days after initiation of intravenous thiamine and this confirmed successful resolution of the constrictive
physiology. Wet beriberi is one of the clinical syndromes associated with thiamine deficiency and is hemodynamically characterized by high
output heart failure with low peripheral vascular resistance . Thiamine is a water-soluble vitamin that serves as a cofactor for two key
enzymes in the tricarboxylic acid cycle: pyruvate dehydrogenase and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. Thus, a deficiency of thiamine leads
to decreased enzyme activity and consequent anaerobic metabolism and lactic acidosis, a condition that can be reversed by thiamine
replacement therapy . Although the precise mechanism remains unknown, impaired myocardial energy metabolism does result in myocardial
damage, while a thiamine deficiency leads to decreased systemic vascular resistance. This myocardial dysfunction and increased preload can
result in congestive heart failure . Increased pulmonary arterial blood flow, elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure reflecting
elevated LV end-diastolic pressure, and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance can all cause pulmonary hypertension . A striking and
complicating clinical feature in this case was the constrictive physiology observed in addition to high cardiac output with low peripheral
vascular resistance. Beriberi occurs mainly in patients with inadequate nutrition and chronic excessive alcohol intake [7, 8]. Currently,
diagnosis is dependent on the following factors: a characteristic history of dietary inadequacy in combination with excessive alcohol
intake, exclusion of other etiologic types of heart disease, additional signs of thiamine deficiency, and therapeutic response to thiamine
administration . Administration of thiamine is recommended for both the diagnosis and treatment of beriberi. In our case, a decrease in
serum concentrations of thiamine, lactate acidosis, and the dramatic improvement of clinical features after thiamine replacement all lead to
a final diagnosis of wet beriberi. However, the accurate etiology for beriberi remained unclear. His unbalanced nutrition and poor appetite
with gastric ulcers might have induced the deficiency of thiamine leading to wet beriberi. The clinical presentation of beriberi is often
variable. Constrictive physiology, as observed in our patient, appears to be an extremely rare clinical manifestation of this disease. Thus,
we initially investigated all possible etiologies of this finding before finally considering wet beriberi. However, after careful
consideration of additional possible causes and the clinical course observed (resolution of pericardial effusion and constrictive physiology
after thiamine administration), we ultimately concluded that pericardial effusion was a result of increased hydrostatic pressure brought
about by wet beriberi. This in turn resulted in the restraining effect on both ventricles, mimicking the hemodynamic state of constrictive
pericarditis. Araki et al. previously reported a case of beriberi heart disease with exudative pericardial effusion . They speculated that
pericardial effusion was associated with beriberi based on the clinical course of their patient, although the precise mechanism was unknown.
In our case, as no pathological findings related to pericarditis were identified, it is reasonable to speculate that a non-inflammatory
transudative pericardial effusion was caused by wet beriberi. In this case, the severe leg edema could be partly attributable to RV heart
failure with constrictive physiology. Here we presented the case of a patient with wet beriberi accompanied by constrictive physiology,
whose condition improved dramatically with timely treatment. Clinical presentation may be somewhat varied and pericardial involvement is
rarely manifested. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a wet beriberi case presenting with constrictive physiology.
The case presented here should serve to remind clinicians of the importance of considering wet beriberi as a possible cause of pericardial
effusion with constrictive physiology. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Left ventricular B-type
natriuretic peptide Right ventricular Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
MY has made substantial contributions to conception and design, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; HM has been
involved in drafting the manuscript or revising it critically for important intellectual content; SU has been involved in drafting the
manuscript or revising it critically for important intellectual content; HF has been involved in drafting the manuscript or revising it
critically for important intellectual content; SK has given final approval of the version to be published; MT have given final approval of
the version to be published agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or
integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
