We report a case of a 17-year-old female patient who presented with sudden, painless, nonprogressive diminished vision in both eyes (best
corrected visual acuity in right eye - 6/60 and left eye - 6/36). An ophthalmological evaluation revealed bilateral pale tarsal conjunctiva
and bilateral macular hemorrhage. Hematological evaluation revealed the presence of megalocytic anemia (with hemoglobin - 4.9 g%). General
examination showed severe pallor. On systemic examination, no abnormality was detected, confirmed by ultrasonography abdomen. Other causes.
This case documents the rare occurrence of bilateral subinternal limiting membrane macular hemorrhage with megaloblastic anemia without
thrombocytopenia and other retinal features of anemic retinopathy. Bilateral macular hemorrhage alone due to megaloblastic (nutritional)
anemia without thrombocytopenia is a rare ocular finding reported for the first time. Anemia is characterized by hemorrhages in all layers
of retina, Roth spots, exudates, retinal edema, and venous dilatation. The differential diagnosis of such a presentation can be drug induced
anemia, trauma, welding arc exposure, postcorneal or refractive surgery, e.g., LASIK, blood dyscrasias including autoimmune hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia, vasculitides, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dengue fever. A 17-year-old female with no history of any prior
ocular complaints presented with sudden bilateral painless diminished vision for 45 days. There was no history of fever, vomiting, any head
or ocular trauma. There was no history of any systematic afflictions such as diabetes, hypertension, any vasculitis, blood dyscrasias, blood
transfusions, and any ocular surgical intervention or drug intake. On general examination, the patient was calm, cooperative, and conscious.
Severe pallor was present. Vitals: Afebrile, blood pressure - 110/70 mmHg, pulse - 99/min. Visual acuity: 6/60 OD and 6/36 OS. No
improvement with pinhole. Papillary responses and intraocular pressure were normal. Anterior segment: Conjunctival pallor present. Fundus
examination showed subinternal limiting membrane macular hemorrhages in the right eye [Fig. 1] and left eye [Fig. 2]. Fundus picture of the
right eye showing macular hemorrhage Fundus picture of the left eye showing macular hemorrhage Optical coherence tomography showed bilateral
subinternal limiting membrane macular hemorrhage. Other investigations: Hemogram: Hemoglobin (Hb) - 4.9 g%Red blood cell count: 1.6
million/cmmWhite blood cell count: 4000/cmm.Differential count:Neutrophil - 49%Eosinophils - 3%Basophils - 0%Lymphocytes - 42%Monocytes -
6%.Packed cell volume - 14 vol%Mean corpuscular volume - 87.5 cmmMean corpuscular Hb (MCH) - 30.6 pgMCH concentration - 35.0%Reticulocyte
count - 0.1%Platelet count - 1.41 lakh/cummClotting time - 5 min 40 sBleeding time - 2 min 10 sSerum B12-31 pg/ml (normal range: 180–914
pg/ml)Folic acid - 3.94 ng/ml (normal: >6.59 ng/ml)HIV screening test (tri-dot method): NonreactivePlasmodium vivax and Plasmodium
falciparum: Negative.VDRL test: NonreactiveLipid profile: NormalChest X-ray: NormalUltrasound abdomen: NormalPeripheral smear: Macrocytic
anemia. Hemogram: Hemoglobin (Hb) - 4.9 g% Red blood cell count: 1.6 million/cmm White blood cell count: 4000/cmm. Differential count:
Neutrophil - 49% Eosinophils - 3% Basophils - 0% Lymphocytes - 42% Monocytes - 6%. Packed cell volume - 14 vol% Mean corpuscular volume -
87.5 cmm Mean corpuscular Hb (MCH) - 30.6 pg MCH concentration - 35.0% Reticulocyte count - 0.1% Platelet count - 1.41 lakh/cumm Clotting
time - 5 min 40 s Bleeding time - 2 min 10 s Serum B12-31 pg/ml (normal range: 180–914 pg/ml) Folic acid - 3.94 ng/ml (normal: >6.59 ng/ml)
HIV screening test (tri-dot method): Nonreactive Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum: Negative. VDRL test: Nonreactive Lipid profile:
Normal Chest X-ray: Normal Ultrasound abdomen: Normal Peripheral smear: Macrocytic anemia. The patient received one unit of blood
transfusion and Vitamin B12 and folate supplements. Two weeks after blood transfusion, her best corrected visual acuity improved to 6/9 in
the right eye and 6/6 in the left eye and her Hb is 7.9 g%. Two weeks after treatment, fundus showed resolution of subinternal limiting
membrane macular hemorrhages in the right eye [Fig. 3] and left eye [Fig. 4]. Fundus picture of the right eye showing resolution of
hemorrhage after treatment Fundus picture of the left eye showing resolution of hemorrhage after treatment Anemia has been reported as an
important risk factor for developing retinopathy in many case series, with a prevalence of 20–28.3%. The retinopathy was described due to
several types of anemia such as iron deficiency anemia, aplastic anemia, sickle cell anemia, beta-thalassemia, pernicious anemia, and drug-
induced anemia. We diagnosed megaloblastic anemia as a cause of bilateral subinternal limiting membrane hemorrhage. The manifestations of
anemic retinopathy are nonspecific and may closely simulate hypertensive or diabetic retina. Retinal changes in anemia are cotton wool
spots, venous tortuosity, and hemorrhages which may be present at all levels of the retina and choroid. All retinal hemorrhages can occur
when Hb falls below 8 g/100 ml or if the platelet count falls below 50,000/cumm. The combination of severe anemia and thrombocytopenia is
likely to produce retinal hemorrhages in a majority of patients. Factors such as anoxia, venous stasis, angiospasm, increased capillary
permeability, and thrombocytopenia have been implicated in the pathogenesis of anemic retinopathy. This rare case documented for the first
time with bilateral subinternal limiting membrane macular hemorrhage with megaloblastic anemia without thrombocytopenia and other retinal
features of anemic retinopathy. These hemorrhages regressed following treatment of megaloblastic anemia. Nil. There are no conflicts of
interest.
