The association of congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) with congenital heart disease is rare. We present the case of a 6-month-
old child with atrial septal defect and pulmonary hypertension (PH) who presented with severe respiratory distress and hypoxia. The patient
underwent right lobectomy for CPAM. With timely management, real-time monitoring, one lung ventilation, and adequate analgesia, we were able
to extubate the child in the immediate postoperative period. We conclude that with meticulous planning and multidisciplinary team approach,
such complex cases can be managed successfully. Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), a congenital lung lesion in children is the
result of an embryologic insult in early gestation causing maldevelopment of the terminal bronchiolar structures. This usually occurs in a
single lobe causing ipsilateral lung compression, pulmonary hypoplasia, and occasional mediastinal shift. Congenital heart disease (CHD) is
the most common birth defect which occurs in 1 in 125 live births. Left to right shunts such as atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular
septal defect (VSD), and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) account for 50% of the CHDs. Pulmonary hypertension (PH), as a complication, can
develop in ASD, although less frequently. Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) is an independent etiological factor for the
development of PH. Development of PH is associated with increased risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality. The association of CPAM and
CHD is rare and accounts for 15–20% of cases. We present the case of a 6-month-old child posted for lobectomy, with CPAM and ASD, who
developed PH, which resulted in a reversal of the shunt. A 6-month-old female child weighing 4 kg diagnosed as ASD with bidirectional shunt
and severe PH was posted for the right upper and middle lobectomy. She presented with tachypnea, chest indrawing, and intercostal
retractions. On examination, the vitals were as follows: Pulse rate - 148/min, respiratory rate - 56/min, and O2 saturation - 68% on air. On
auscultation, there were decreased breath sounds on the right upper and middle zone with normal heart sounds. Computerized tomography (CT)
thorax showed CPAM with cardiomegaly [Figures 1 and 2]. Two-dimensional echo revealed moderate ostium secundum ASD with bidirectional shunt
and moderately severe pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) of 53 mmHg. A high-risk consent including the requirement for postoperative
mechanical ventilation was obtained from the parents. Patient was premedicated with intravenous (i.v.) midazolam 0.03 mg/kg, i.v. ketamine 1
mg/kg, and i.v glycopyrrolate 4 mcg/kg. Anesthesia was induced with i.v fentanyl 5 μg/kg, 100% O2, sevoflurane, and maintaining spontaneous
respiration. The patient's airway was secured with 4.0 mm endotracheal tube (ETT) introduced into the left main bronchus. There was a drop
in the saturation which could not be improved in spite of bringing back the ETT into the trachea. This was anticipated, and the surgeon was
ready with a large bore cannula to decompress the lung. Upon insertion of the 18 gauge cannula in the right 2nd intercostal space,
saturation improved, and the ETT was repositioned back into the left main bronchus. In addition to standard monitors, invasive monitoring
was performed using femoral line for CVP and radial arterial line for blood pressure. A 20 gauge thoracic epidural catheter was introduced
at T7/T8 interspace, and the catheter was fixed at 8 cm. After a test dose of 0.4 cc 1% lignocaine with adrenaline (1:200,000), analgesia
was maintained with intermittent bolus doses of 0.2% bupivacaine. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen/air, sevoflurane (clinical minimum
alveolar concentration of 1.0), and spontaneous respiration. Nondepolarizing muscle relaxant atracurium 0.6 mg/kg was given only after the
right thoracotomy incision. A cardiothoracic surgeon was standby for the procedure. The intraoperative finding was a large cyst arising from
the upper and middle lobe with dense adhesions and no demarcation between the upper and middle lobe; the lower lobe was normal with thick
hypertrophied vessels probably secondary to PH. Upper and middle lobectomy was performed [Figure 3]. The child received 10 ml/kg of 2%
dextrose ringer lactate. Blood loss was around 25% of the blood volume and was replaced with equal volume of blood. Intraoperative
hemodynamics was well-maintained. Operative time was 2 h. At the end of surgery, the patient was shifted to high dependency unit and
extubated 1 h later. Cystic lesion in the right lung with mediastinal shift Cystic lesion in the right lung with mediastinal shift-
transverse section Upper and middle lobe of right lung CPAM, previously known as Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM) is a
congenital disorder of the lung with a reported incidence of 1:25,000–1:35,000. About 15–50% of cases of congenital cystic lung disease are
reported to be CPAM. Usually, an entire lobe of the lung is replaced by a nonworking cystic piece of abnormal lung tissue. The underlying
cause is not known. Surgical resection is the gold standard for the management of CPAM for both pathological diagnosis and treatment. The
association of CPAM and CHD is rare and accounts for 15-20% of cases. Respiratory symptoms can be present at birth and PH can be seen
secondary to either compression of the cysts or from rupture and resultant pneumothorax. Type 2 CPAM has the worst prognosis because they
are often associated with other defects such as ASD, VSD, PDA, and other renal and skeletal anomalies. PH is a complication of CHD,
particularly in patients with left-to-right (systemic-to-pulmonary) shunts. Pretricuspid shunt patients (i.e. ASD or unobstructed anomalous
pulmonary venous return) generally do not develop PH at all or present with PH in adulthood. Persistent exposure of the pulmonary
vasculature to increased blood flow and pressure may result in vascular remodeling and dysfunction. This leads to increased pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) and, ultimately, to reversal of the shunt or bidirectional shunts. PH seen in our case can be attributed to the
combination of CPAM with ASD causing bidirectional shunt and further comprising the oxygenation of the patient. The anesthetic goals are to
prevent hypoxia, acidosis, and hypercarbia which further increase PVR, to prevent reduction in systemic vascular resistance and depression
of myocardial function associated with the use of anesthetic agents. Surgical assistance should be readily available for thoracotomy
incision/needle decompression in the case of severe desaturation on induction. One-lung ventilation (OLV) improves surgical access and may
reduce blood loss. CPAM may contain fluid varying from clear to purulent in nature. OLV also minimizes trauma to the limited residual normal
lung tissue and protects normal lung from contralateral contamination. Our plan was to extubate this child early to avoid positive pressure
ventilation and the possible complications of barotrauma. Provision of good analgesia was, therefore, a priority. We emphasize the need for
readiness to immediately decompress the lung, as positive pressure ventilation can jeopardize oxygenation with the expansion of the cyst or
possible complication of pneumothorax. Surgery must be performed by an experienced surgeon. Nitrous oxide was not used because of its
potential for cyst expansion. Muscle relaxant was given only after the thoracotomy incision. In congenital lung lesions such as CPAM, CT is
the optimum postnatal diagnostic imaging modality, pulmonary resection is the surgical procedure of choice, expected survival is good, and
PH is the most common cause of mortality. A complete workup including history and clinical examination, focusing on cardiac signs and
symptoms, and other systems including renal and skeletal systems, and previous catheterization procedures are essential as CPAM is
associated with anomalies of other systems. Provision of care by an expert team is essential for a successful outcome. Nil. There are no
conflicts of interest.
