The treatment of deep anterior crossbite is technically challenging due to the difficulty of placing traditional brackets with fixed
appliances. This case report represents a none traditional treatment modality to treat deep anterior crossbite in an adult pseudo class III
malocclusion complicated by severely retruded, supraerupted upper and lower incisors. Treatment was carried out in 2 phases. Phase I
treatment was performed by removable appliance “modified Hawley appliance with inverted labial bow,” some modifications were carried out to
it to suit the presented case. Positive overbite and overjet was accomplished in one month, in this phase with minimal forces exerted on the
lower incisors. Whereas, phase II treatment was performed with fixed appliances (braces) to align teeth and have proper over bite and
overjet and to close posterior open bite, this phase was accomplished within 11 month. Anterior forward displacement of the mandible due to
interferences causes anterior cross bite, which is a characteristics of pseudo-Class III and true skeletal Class III malocclusions.1,2 The
differences between true skeletal Class III and pseudo-Class III malocclusion lies in both skeletal and dent-alveolar components. In the
skeletal component, the true skeletal Class III malocclusion patient has deficient maxilla, protruded mandible, or both producing a true
skeletal Class III malocclusion. However, in pseudo-Class III malocclusion, the patient has normal maxilla and mandible sizes and have
skeletal Class I malocclusion.3 In the dento-alveolar component, usually the true skeletal Class III patient has dental compensation due to
protruded maxillary incisors and retruded mandibular incisors. In pseudo-Class III malocclusion, the upper incisors are retroclined with
normal or protruded lower incisors. To differentiate between true skeletal Class III and pseudo-Class III malocclusions, a proper diagnosis
of each case has to be performed because both malocclusions clinically have anterior crossbite.4 Correct pseudo-Class III malocclusion
diagnosis makes a huge difference in the type of orthodontic treatment plan. Diagnosis is performed clinically by guiding the patients into
centric relation, if the incisors show an edge-to-edge relationship with posterior open bite and for the posterior teeth to occlude in
centric occlusion, a forward functional mandibular shift is created causing incisors to occlude in anterior crossbite, this indicates that
the patient has pseudo-Class III malocclusion. However, this diagnosis should be supported by radiographic analysis, as the patient with
pseudo-Class III malocclusion have skeletal Class I relationship with normal maxilla and mandible sizes.5 Anterior crossbite has been
associated with a variety of complications, such as gingival recession of the lower incisors, incisal wear, and eventually losing these
teeth. Skeletally, this malocclusion worsens the growth pattern to develop into true skeletal Class III malocclusion.6 In orthodontic
treatment, it is known that the correction of anterior crossbite can be carried out by fixed, or removable appliances.7 However, the
therapeutic use of the inverted labial bow incorporated in a removable appliance to open the bite and correct the anterior crossbite was
rarely used. In the literature, this appliance was first introduced by Wang in 19968 after that only few reported cases used it
successfully.9,10 The presented study offers a way to deal with pseudo Class III malocclusion complicated by reverse deep bite with retruded
supraerupted both upper and lower incisors. The inverted labial bow in the appliance described by Wang in 19968 was used; however,
modifications were made to open the reverse deep bite and to correct the anterior crossbite without exerting any force on the retruded lower
incisors. The aim of this study is to introduce a simple appliance that can treat a pseudo Class III malocclusion in an adult patient
complicated by a reverse deep bite with retruded supraerupted of both upper and lower incisors. A 16-year-old female patient, complains of
the appearance of her anterior teeth (abnormal anterior deep crossbite resembling monkey’s bite), with both upper and lower incisors being
severely retruded and supraerupted. She was diagnosed with pseudo Class III malocclusion; the incisors are in an edge-to-edge relationship,
but due to incisal interference between the upper and the lower incisors, an anterior functional mandibular shift was created and the teeth
fall in deep anterior crossbite as she closes in centric occlusion. Skeletally, she was Class I; hence, this confirms the pseudo Class III
malocclusion diagnosis (Figure 1A-1H). Pre-treatment extra-oral photos (A-C) and intra-oral photos (D-H) showing the patient chief complain
(unpleasant monkey bite). In order to construct the removable appliance “Hawley appliance with inverted labial bow,” the bite registration
was taken for the patient in centric relation; this was carried out by guiding the mandible posteriorly in an edge-to-edge incisor
relationship. The bite was then transferred to the working model articulated in a hinge articulator (Figure 2A-2D). Construction of inverted
labial bow was performed on the lower arch and 2 Adams clasps on upper first molars, and these represents the retentive components of this
removable appliance, whereas, the active component was the helical Z bow spring fabricated behind the upper incisors and they are supported
by a horizontal wire extensions and all these components were attached to the palatal acrylic plate, which was cut intentionally away from
the upper anterior teeth (Figure 3A-3D). Frontal views of the patient cast in: A) centric occlusion, B) centric relation, and C - frontal
view and D - side view) the bite registration of the mounted patient’s cast in centric rrelation. Intra-oral photos (frontal and side views)
after insertion of the appliance showing: A & B) the inverted labial bow, and C & D) upper view of the patient cast with the appliance
showing 2 Adams clasps and helical “Z” bow spring. Treatment of this case was carried out in 2 phases. In phase I treatment, the removable
appliance with the inverted labial bow was used. The objective of this phase was to create a positive overbite and overjet and this was
accomplished in one month. At the beginning, to test if the appliance was fabricated correctly, it was fitted passively in the mouth. This
was performed by fitting the Adams clasps in the upper part of the appliance on the upper first molars and the acrylic plate on the palate
with the helical Z bow spring passively lying behind the upper incisors, then her mandible was guided to bite in centric relation (edge to
edge relation) placing the lower anterior teeth into the inverted labial bow in the lower arch. After making sure that the appliance was
fitted correctly, it was then taken from patient’s mouth and 2 modifications were carried out before re-inserting it back. The first
modification was expanding the labial bow by opening slightly the U shape of the inverted labial bow to fit it loosely on the lower incisors
and the second modification was activating the helical Z bow spring by opening slightly the helixes of the spring to push the upper incisors
forward out of crossbite. She was trained on wearing and removing the appliance several times, and instructions were given to her to use it
all the time including nighttime. It will be removed only during eating and brushing. This was continued for 3 weeks. A follow-up
appointment was made after 3 weeks of wearing the appliance, it was noticed that she was able to close in centric occlusion with positive
overbite and overjet with no anterior forward shift. For retention, she was asked again to re-use the appliance at bedtime for another week
and then the appliance was discontinued (Figure A4-4F). In phase II treatment, fixed appliances (braces) were placed to align teeth and to
have proper overbite and overjet, which was accomplished in 11 months (Figure 5A-5H). She had a very small size upper right and left second
premolars; however, the upper right second premolar had undermined deep carious lesion that was extended to the roots, and it was hopeless
to treat; thus, it was extracted before orthodontic treatment. The decision was made to mesialize the upper right first and second molar
into its place. Asymmetrical extraction was also carried out in the lower right arch because even after having positive overbite, she still
has Class III canine relationship on the right side and Class I canine relation on the left side. Thus, it was decided to extract the lower
right first premolar during orthodontic treatment to correct the right side canine relationship and help to flatten the curve of Spee.
Panoramic views of the case pre and post phase II treatment is shown in Figure 6A & 6B. Lateral cephalometric radiographs of the pre-
treatment in centric occlusion, the pre-treatment in centric relation, and the post-treatment are shown in Figure 7A & 7C. The lateral
cephalometric analysis of the pre-treatment measurements in centric occlusion (Pre-CO), the pre-treatment measurements in centric relation
(Pre-CR), and the post-treatment (POST) measurements were compared with the mean cephalometric measurements in a normal adult of black
ethnic race7 were shown in Table 1. Post-treatment measurements were almost normalized compared with the mean. Overall comparison of pre,
progree, post-treatment extra-oral photographs were shown in Figure 8, and intra-oral views were al gathered in Figure 9. Intra-oral photos
(frontal and side views) showing: A & D) pre-treatment, B & E) progress-treatment phase I after the insertion of the removable appliance,
and C & F) post-treatment. Intra-oral photos (frontal and side views) of phase II progress-treatment photos with fixed appliances “Braces”
(A-E), and post-treatment photos (F-H). Panoramic radiographs of the case in: A) pre-treatment, and B) post-treatment. Cephalometric
radiographs of the pre-treatment in: A) centric occlusion, B) the pre-treatment in centric relation, and C) the post-treatment.
Cephalometric measurements of the pre-treatment in centric occlusion (Pre CO) and the pre-treatment in centric relation (Pre CR) and the
post-treatment (POST). Extra-oral photographs comparing the pre-treatment, progress-treatment phase I, and post-treatment. Improvements were
seen in frontal, smiling, and profile views. Intra-oral photographs comparing the pre-treatment, progress of (phase I & phase II)-treatment,
and post-treatment. Improvements were seen in frontal and side views. Previous study reported that treatment of a pseudo-Class III
malocclusion must be performed as soon as it is detected to prevent dental and skeletal consequences.6-8 In the literature,2,5,6,8-10
several different appliances were suggested for correction of dental anterior cross-bite, they are either fixed or removable appliances. The
most popular appliances were 2X4 fixed appliances in mixed dentition or full upper fixed appliances in adults with the use of expanded upper
arch wire, or using removable appliance with Z helical spring or jackscrew behind upper incisors. The idea of all these appliances was to
push or protrude the upper incisors labially.7,8 In Wang,8 Albarakati,9 and Negi and Sharma’s10 studies, all used a removable appliance with
the inverted labial bow similar to the appliance used in this study. However, the idea of the inverted labial bow in their studies was to
exert a lingually directed force on the lower anterior teeth by activating the inverted labial bow. This produced a reciprocal labial force
on the upper incisors through the palatal spring incorporated in the acrylic of inverted Hawley appliances. They used their appliances on
young growing patient in mixed dentition stage approximately 9 to 10 years with the lower incisors that normally positioned.8,10 Whereas, in
this study the patient adult and the lower incisors were already retruded, and using the same appliance without making any modification
could cause damaging effect. However, some modifications were made during fabrication and insertion of the appliance used in this case, and
these modifications were made so as to exert minimal or no lingual forces on lower incisors. This was performed by expanding inverted labial
bow to prevent direct lingual effect to the lower retruded incisor and cutting the acrylic away from all upper anterior teeth to prevent any
reciprocal push forces transmittede to the lower incisors through the inverted labia bow after activation of the helical Z bow spring behind
the upper incisors. Thus, the inverted labial bow was totally passive and it was only used for opening the bite. For retention and to guide
the mandible in centric relation. However, the force to push upper incisors labially came only from the activation of the helical Z bow
spring incorporated in this removable appliance. In the presented study, it was impossible to place fixed brackets on the upper anterior
teeth to protrude them due to the presence of the reverse deep bite and the supraerupted, retruded lower incisors. However, opening the bite
by placing posterior bite plane would produce intrusion effect on the upper and lower posterior teeth because the bite would open beyond the
normal rest space limits (the free way space), thus, this intrusion effect would worsen the case since the cause of the excessive deep bite
in this case is due to the supraerupted, retruded both upper and lower anterior teeth and not by the extruded posterior teeth. Thus, using
this appliance creats a positive overbite quickly and efficiently. In conclusion, deep anterior crossbite of pseudo Class-III malocclusion
was successfully treated using none traditional treatment modality (removable appliance with inverted labial bow and helical Z-bow spring)
followed by fixed appliance therapy. The presented removable appliance with its modifications was proven to be the cheapest and simplest
appliance to correct anterior crossbite in pseudo Class-III malocclusion with deep bite as compared with other appliances. Disclosure.
Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of
interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company. Saudi Medical Journal Online features * Instructions to Authors*
Uniform Requirements* STARD* Free access to the Journal’s Current issue* Future Contents* Advertising and Subscription Information *
Instructions to Authors * Uniform Requirements * STARD * Free access to the Journal’s Current issue * Future Contents * Advertising and
Subscription Information All Subscribers have access to full text articles in HTML and PDF format. Abstracts and Editorials are available to
all Online Guests free of charge.
