We report the finding of a female brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Acari: Ixodidae) on the scalp of a male patient in Porto Alegre,
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. Human parasitism by this tick is rare and has seldomly been reported in the literature, despite its recognized
importance since it can act as a vector of Rickettsia rickettsii, the agent of spotted fever. The brown dog tick (or kennel tick)
Rhipicephalus sanguineus(Latreille, 1806) (Acari: Ixodidae) has great medical and veterinary significance, since it is a vector and
reservoir of many human and animal pathogens1 - 5. Dogs are the main hosts of the adult and pre-adult parasitic stages of the tick. Adults
of R. sanguineus can also feed on humans and many other mammals, such as goats, sheep, cattle, horses, wild carnivores, cats, hares and
hedgehogs; pre-adult ticks have been found in shrews and many rodents6 - 11. The genus Rhipicephalus comprises 17 species that are
morphologically similar and show intraspecific variations within populations whose taxonomic status is still uncertain12. Nowadays, the
molecular approach is used to investigate differences among the species of the R. sanguineus complex13 - 15. Although human parasitism by R.
sanguineus is unusual, it has already been reported in different parts of the world16 - 22. In Brazil, the first description of human
parasitism by this species of ixodid tick was reported in 200523. Other cases have been recorded ever since in the country24 - 27. The
ability of R. sanguineus to transmit pathogens such as Rickettsia rickettsii, the agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, known in Brazil as
Brazilian spotted fever (BSF), to humans is little understood28 - 33. On the other hand, infestation by Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Latreille)
in dogs has increased considerably in urban areas of the State of Rio Grande do Sul34-36. Here, we report the finding of an adult female of
R. sanguineus on the scalp of an adult male patient in the city of Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. A 27-year-old male presented
with bilateral erythematous macular inflammatory lesions, with a central bite spot, on the posterior region of the thigh (Fig. 1A). The
lesions healed spontaneously. A week later, he reported other, similar lesions and minor allergic reactions including redness and swelling
in the right ear (Fig. 1 B), face (Fig. 1 C), right thigh (Fig. 1 D), neck, and right hand. Some days later, the patient found a tick on his
scalp. He consulted a physician, and no other remarkable findings were seen. Based on the skin lesions and the presence of the tick,
serology tests for Rickettsia and Borrelia were requested, and a presumptive treatment for rickettsia with doxycycline for 21 days was
started. The serology tests were negative. Fig. 1- A. The patient's skin lesions in the posterior area of the thigh; B. Right ear; C. Face;
D. Right thigh. While awaiting the serological results, the patient sent the tick specimen to the Parasitology Laboratory at ICBS-UFRGS for
identification. The tick was identified as a female brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Fig. 2A, B), based on the characteristics
described by Guimarães et al.37The patient has improved and remains asymptomatic. Fig. 2- Rhiphicephalus sanguineus: FEMALE - A. Dorsal
view; B. Ventral view. Dantas-Torres & Otranto6 stated that some populations presently assigned to R. sanguineus in different parts of the
world could belong to different species, and that this possibility may have been overlooked by taxonomists. However, it is also possible
that this wide geographical distribution can be attributed to the adaptability of this tick species to different hosts and climate
conditions. Borsoi & Serra-Freire28 found that R. sanguineus was the dominant species in some communities in the State of Rio de Janeiro.
People in daily contact with dogs parasitized by R. sanguineus could be included in the risk group for this type of parasitism24 , 25. These
conditions could increase the risk of transmission of R. rickettsiito humans in Brazil. Future studies are needed to determine the incidence
of R. rickettsii in local populations of R. sanguineus 29 , 30 , 39. Information on human parasitism by R. sanguineus in Brazil is sparse.
In 2005, Dantas-Torres et al.23 provided the first, brief description of human parasitism by this species of tick in Brazil. In the
following year, Dantas-Torres et al.24 investigated the species of ectoparasites in domestic dogs from the metropolitan region of Recife,
Pernambuco State, and reported that four dog owners were found to be parasitized by ticks identified as R. sanguineus. These were the first
four cases of human parasitism by this tick species in Brazil. Louly et al.25 described the first case of human parasitism by R. sanguineus
in the State of Goiás. Several species of ticks are vectors of viruses, protozoa and rickettsia that cause human diseases4 , 30 , 40. This
reinforces the need to increase the knowledge of the parasitic relationship between ticks and humans, as well as for the continuous
implementation of control measures against this parasite17 , 29 , 31 , 32 , 41. In Brazil, a detailed study of the factors leading to human
parasitism by ticks is needed, since most studies until now have examined only the species distribution and occurrence. Brazilian spotted
fever (BSF) is an infectious, febrile, and acute disease, with variable severity, which usually has an endemic character. This disease can
be difficult to diagnose, especially in the early stages. Because it is multi-systemic, spotted fever can follow different clinical courses,
ranging from the classical picture to atypical forms without exanthema. If not treated properly, mortality in the most severe cases reaches
80%38. This is the first report of a R. sanguineus tick biting a human being in Porto Alegre. In the case reported here, we presume, based
on the skin lesions seen in the patient, that the female tick made several attempts to attach without success. The public-health authorities
must evaluate the incidence of R. sanguineus in dogs from urban areas, improving the monitoring of the distribution of these dogs and their
contact with humans34. Future control attempts must consider the limited knowledge of the tick behavior and other biological parameters in
the State of Rio Grande do Sul.
