Pulmonary infections caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii in immunocompromised host can be associated with cysts, pneumatoceles and air leaks
that can progress to pneumomediastinum and pneumothoraxes. In such cases, it can be challenging to maintain adequate gas exchange by
conventional mechanical ventilation and at the same time prevent further ventilator-induced lung injury. We report a young HIV positive male
with poorly compliant lungs and pneumomediastinum secondary to severe Pneumocystis infection, rescued with veno-venous extra corporeal
membrane oxygenation (V-V ECMO). A 26 year old male with no significant past medical history was admitted with fever, cough and shortness of
breath. He initially required non-invasive ventilation for respiratory failure. However, his respiratory function progressively deteriorated
due to increasing pulmonary infiltrates and development of pneumomediastinum, eventually requiring endotracheal intubation and invasive
ventilation. Despite attempts at optimizing gas exchange by ventilatory maneuvers, patients’ pulmonary parameters worsened necessitating
rescue ECMO therapy. The introduction of V-V ECMO facilitated the use of ultra-protective lung ventilation and prevented progression of
pneumomediastinum, maintaining optimal gas exchange. It allowed time for the antibiotics to show effect and pulmonary parenchyma to heal.
Further diagnostic workup revealed Pneumocystis jirovecii as the causative organism for pneumonia and serology confirmed Human
Immunodeficiency Virus infection. Patient was successfully treated with appropriate antimicrobials and de-cannulated after six days of ECMO
support. ECMO was an effective salvage therapy in HIV positive patient with an otherwise fatal respiratory failure due to Pneumocystis
pneumonia and air leak syndrome. Lung protective ventilation and prevention of ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI) are a cornerstone in
the management of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) . But implementing these strategies in patients with poor lung compliance can
lead to inadequate gas exchange. The use of veno-venous extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (V-V ECMO) to facilitate lung rest and maintain
optimal gas exchange has been significantly growing in the past few years [2, 3]. Prognosis of the underlying disease, timing, quality of
life of survivors and the possibility of being lung transplant candidate remain important considerations for patient selection. There are
concerns about initiating ECMO support in immunocompromised patients especially those with underlying HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus)
infection and AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) due to poor outcomes . We report a case of life threatening respiratory failure due
to severe Pneumocystis jirovecii infection complicated by pneumomediastinum in a HIV infected patient who was rescued by V-V ECMO. A 26 year
old male with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department with complaints of fever, dry cough, difficulty in
breathing and chest pain of 15 days duration. Initial assessment showed an averagely built male with body mass index (BMI) 18.8 kg/m2
(normal: 18.5-24.9 kg/m2), fever (38.9 °C), tachycardia (heart rate 120/min, regular), tachypnea (respiratory rate 35/min), hypoxia (pulse
oximetry: 85 % on room air, PaO2: 55 mm Hg) and normal blood pressure (126/76 mm Hg). Systemic examination was unremarkable other than
reduced air entry at both lung bases. Blood investigations revealed an elevated white cell count of 14.2 x 109/L (normal: 4.5-10 x 109/L),
predominantly neutrophilic; serum electrolytes, renal function, liver function, coagulation profile were within normal limits; lactate was
2.2 mmol/L (normal: <2 mmol/L) and procalcitonin was 0.6 ng/mL (normal: <0.5 ng/mL). Blood cultures, sputum for gram’s stain and nasal swab
for viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were collected. Chest x-ray showed bilateral middle and lower zone air space opacities (Fig. 1a).
After oxygen supplementation via nasal cannula, fluid resuscitation and empirical antimicrobial therapy (ceftriaxone 2 gm i.v. once daily,
azithromycin 500 mg i.v. once daily and oseltamivir 75 mg orally twice daily) patient was stabilized (PaO2 80 mm Hg on oxygen 2 L/min
through nasal cannula) and admitted to medical ward.Fig. 1Chest x-ray of patient. a On admission: Bilateral middle and lower zone air space
opacities with air bronchograms; b After application of non-invasive ventilation: Subcutaneous emphysema around neck and axillary region,
hyper-lucency around mediastinal structures suggestive of pneumomediastinum and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. c Post endotracheal
intubation and ECMO cannulation Chest x-ray of patient. a On admission: Bilateral middle and lower zone air space opacities with air
bronchograms; b After application of non-invasive ventilation: Subcutaneous emphysema around neck and axillary region, hyper-lucency around
mediastinal structures suggestive of pneumomediastinum and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. c Post endotracheal intubation and ECMO
cannulation Due to worsening of respiratory function (respiratory rate 30/min and PaO2 60 mm Hg on supplemental oxygen 5 L/min through face
mask) on the 2nd day post hospitalization, patient was transferred to medical intensive care unit (MICU). Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) via
face mask was initiated to improve respiratory parameters and ceftriaxone was escalated to piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 gm i.v. every 6 h;
azithromycin and oseltamivir were continued. Blood and respiratory samples collected initially did not reveal causative organism for
pneumonia. Over the next 2 days patient’s condition remained steady with single organ (respiratory) failure requiring intermittent NIV
(averaging 16 h/day) with oxygen supplement (FiO2 0.5). As the patient was neurologically appropriate and understood his clinical condition,
good adherence to NIV was maintained. On Day 4 of ICU admission, patient’s respiratory function further deteriorated (respiratory rate
40/min; PaO2 50 mm Hg on FiO2 0.6) and chest x-ray showed subcutaneous emphysema with pneumomediastinum in addition to bilateral pulmonary
infiltrates (Fig. 1b). After detailed discussion with the patient and addressing his concerns, he was intubated and mechanical ventilation
was initiated. This was followed by diagnostic bronchoscopy with broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid collection and CT (computerized
tomography) scan of chest which revealed bilateral diffuse ground glass opacity with extensive basal consolidation and pneumomediastinum
(Fig. 2). Bedside trans-thoracic echocardiography showed good left ventricular function and non-dilated right ventricle. Since serial
imaging did not show worsening of pneumomediastinum, it was managed conservatively. Despite optimal sedation, analgesia and neuro-muscular
paralysis it was not possible to achieve adequate gas exchange with lung protective ventilation and hence, ‘Severe Respiratory Failure’ team
at our institution was consulted.Fig. 2CT scan of patient. a At the level of arch of aorta. b Lung bases. Shows bilateral diffuse ground
glass opacity with extensive basal consolidation. Pneumomediastinum: air in the anterior and superior mediastinum CT scan of patient. a At
the level of arch of aorta. b Lung bases. Shows bilateral diffuse ground glass opacity with extensive basal consolidation.
Pneumomediastinum: air in the anterior and superior mediastinum On evaluation by the Severe Respiratory Failure team (Table 1), tidal volume
was decreasing to critical levels (225 mL) trying to achieve safe ventilation pressures, PaO2/FiO2 was 200 mm Hg on 45 % of FiO2 and 10 cm
H2O of Positive End-Expiratory Pressure (PEEP). As well patient had severe respiratory acidosis with PaCO2 of 109 mm Hg and pH 7.01;
pulmonary compliance was only 9 ml/cm H2O and Murray score was 3. The decision was made to place the patient on V-V ECMO to facilitate lung
protective ventilation, prevent progression of pneumomediastinum and improve respiratory acidosis. 25 French drainage cannula was inserted
percutaneously into inferior vena cava via left femoral approach and 23 French return cannula was inserted into the inferior vena cava via
right femoral approach under fluoroscopy guidance. Post cannulation, ECMO blood flow and sweep flow were titrated to 4 liters/min each in
order to achieve optimal gas exchange. Mechanical ventilation was switched to ultra-protective strategy using Pressure Control Ventilation
(PCV) with Peak Inspiratory Pressure (PIP) 15 cm H2O, PEEP 5 cm H2O, respiratory rate 10/min and FiO2 21 %. Patient was anticoagulated with
intravenous heparin infusion targeting an APTT of 50-70 s. Cotrimoxazole 250 mg i.v. every 6 h (20 mg/kg/day of Trimethoprim) and prednisone
40 mg twice daily through feeding tube were started after Pneumocystis jirovecii was identified in the broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid
on ECMO day 1. Subsequently, serology confirmed HIV-1 infection with CD4+ cell count of 84/mm3 of blood (normal: 600-1500/mm3 of blood) and
HIV viral load of 907,302 copies/mL. Patient’s respiratory parameters progressively improved (Table 1), his blood pressure was maintained
without vasopressor support and other organs function including the kidneys remained normal throughout ECMO therapy and ICU stay. Neuro-
muscular paralysis was held on ECMO day 2 followed by weaning off sedation on ECMO day 3. The patient was able to tolerate pressure support
ventilation (PSV) by ECMO day 4 and he was successfully de-cannulated after 6 days of V-V ECMO support. Patient was extubated the next day,
followed by aggressive physiotherapy/mobilization and transfer to medical ward in the next 48 h. There were no complications related to ECMO
therapy in this patient during ICU stay and on follow-up post discharge. Patient was explained about his diagnosis and highly active anti-
retroviral therapy (HAART: Efavirenz, Emtricitabine and Tenofovir) was initiated in the medical ward. He was discharged in good general
condition after 21 days of hospitalization with follow-up appointment in Infectious Disease clinic.Table 1Ventilator and ECMO parametersPre-
IntubationPost-IntubationECMO Day 1ECMO Day 2ECMO Day 3ECMO Day 4ECMO Day 5ECMO Day 6Mode of VentilationPSV
(NIV)PCVPCVPCVPCVPSVPSVPSVRR4035101010252522PIP1635151515131111PEEP410555333VT-22590200400400360370FiO2 40 %45 %21 %21 %21 %30 %30 %30 %P/F
ratio-200------Blood Flow--43.783.753.73.63.6Sweep Flow--42.51.00.500pH7.467.017.447.397.427.477.57.5PaO2 739083161114707486PaCO2
44109494345383335 RR Respiratory rate, PIP Peak Inspiratory Pressure (cm H2O), PEEP Positive End Expiratory Pressure (cm H2O), VT Tidal
volume (mL), FiO 2 Fraction of inspired oxygen (%), P/F ratio Ratio of partial pressure arterial oxygen and fraction of inspired oxygen (mm
Hg), PaO 2 Partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (mm Hg), PaCO 2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (mm Hg), NIV
Non Invasive Ventilation, PSV Pressure Support Ventilation, PCV Pressure Control Ventilation Ventilator and ECMO parameters RR Respiratory
rate, PIP Peak Inspiratory Pressure (cm H2O), PEEP Positive End Expiratory Pressure (cm H2O), VT Tidal volume (mL), FiO 2 Fraction of
inspired oxygen (%), P/F ratio Ratio of partial pressure arterial oxygen and fraction of inspired oxygen (mm Hg), PaO 2 Partial pressure of
oxygen in arterial blood (mm Hg), PaCO 2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (mm Hg), NIV Non Invasive Ventilation, PSV
Pressure Support Ventilation, PCV Pressure Control Ventilation The frequency of ICU admission for Pneumocystis pneumonia in
immunocompromised patients is decreasing but mortality is high if it progresses to respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation .
The most common manifestation on chest radiographs is bilateral interstitial or alveolar opacities. Parenchymal/sub-pleural cysts and
pneumatoceles are frequently seen on CT scan. Spontaneous pneumothorax can occur in up to 36 % of patients with Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia [5, 6]. However, spontaneous pneumomediastinum is an uncommon complication with no reported incidence rates. The mechanism of
spontaneous pneumomediastinum can be explained by the existence of a decreasing pressure gradient between the alveoli and the lung
interstitium that can result in alveolar rupture. This leads to the accumulation of air in the interstitium that circulates centripetally
through the venous sheaths to the hilum and mediastinum as the pressure in the mediastinum is lower than that of the lung periphery . Our
patient developed pneumomediastinum while on NIV. Barotrauma is very uncommon and pneumothorax following NIV occurs in less than 5 % of
cases . Development of pneumomediastinum in Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia patient receiving NIV has been reported previously . This could
be explained by the rupture of pre-existing pneumatoceles or cysts under the effect of positive pressure ventilation. Acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) is a life threatening respiratory condition. The Berlin definition classifies ARDS as mild, moderate and severe
according to the value of PaO2/FiO2 ratio (Table 2) . The main supportive therapy for ARDS is positive pressure mechanical ventilation which
helps to ensure adequate oxygenation. A landmark trial conducted in the late 1990s by the ARDS Network compared conventional tidal volume of
12 ml/kg with low tidal volume of 6 ml/kg and permissive hypercapnia. A 9 % absolute mortality reduction was found in the low tidal volume
ventilation group. In this study, target tidal volume was calculated based on ideal body weight (IBW) with targeted plateau pressures of
<30 cm H2O and permissive hypercapnia . Our patient did not retain CO2 while breathing spontaneously or supported by NIV. But soon after
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation he developed severe hypercapnia. This could be explained by the fact that during
spontaneous breathing patient was inhaling large tidal volumes which resulted in increased minute ventilation and adequate CO2 clearance at
the expense of high trans-pulmonary pressures resulting in worsening of air leak. After intubation, sedation and paralysis; lung protective
ventilation was provided which resulted in severe (permissive) hypercapnia. Thus, ventilating this patient with ARDS and air leak syndrome
was challenging because a balance was to be maintained between providing adequate gas exchange and preventing worsening of
pneumomediastinum. The Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO) guidelines for Adult Respiratory Failure 2013 have listed carbon
dioxide retention on mechanical ventilation despite high plateau pressures (>30 cm H2O) and severe air leak syndrome as indications for
initiating extracorporeal life support . Based on these recommendations we provided ECMO therapy to our patient, as a bridge to recovery
from severe pulmonary infection.Table 2ARDS Berlin definitionTiming:Within 1 week of a known clinical insult or new or worsening respiratory
symptoms.Chest imaginga:Bilateral opacities — not fully explained by effusions, lobar/lung collapse, or nodules.Origin of edema:Respiratory
failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload.Need objective assessment (e.g., echocardiography) to exclude hydrostatic
edema if no risk factor presentOxygenationb: • Mild - 200 mm Hg < PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 300 mm Hg with PEEP or CPAP ≥5 cm H2Oc • Moderate - 100 mm
Hg < PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 200 mm Hg with PEEP ≥5 cm H2O • Severe - PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 100 mm Hg with PEEP ≥5 cm H2O CPAP continuous positive airway
pressure, FiO 2 fraction of inspired oxygen, PaO 2 partial pressure of arterial oxygen, PEEP positive end-expiratory pressure aChest
radiograph or computed tomography scan bIf altitude is higher than 1000 m, the correction factor should be calculated as follows:
[PaO2/FIO2*(barometric pressure/760)] cThis may be delivered noninvasively in the mild acute respiratory distress syndrome group ARDS Berlin
definition CPAP continuous positive airway pressure, FiO 2 fraction of inspired oxygen, PaO 2 partial pressure of arterial oxygen, PEEP
positive end-expiratory pressure aChest radiograph or computed tomography scan bIf altitude is higher than 1000 m, the correction factor
should be calculated as follows: [PaO2/FIO2*(barometric pressure/760)] cThis may be delivered noninvasively in the mild acute respiratory
distress syndrome group There are very few case reports of ECMO therapy for severe respiratory failure due to Pneumocystis pneumonia in
HIV/AIDS patients (Table 3) [9, 12–15]. All reported patients required V-V ECMO support for primarily respiratory failure other than the
case reported by Gutermann et al, who was provided V-A (veno-arterial) ECMO therapy post cardiac arrest. 5 out of 8 patients had concomitant
pneumothorax/pneumomediastinum which could have possibly worsened the respiratory failure, necessitating rescue ECMO therapy. The timing for
initiation of V-V ECMO in severe respiratory failure remains debatable. However, based on previous studies it has been observed that
increased pre-ECMO ventilation duration is associated with worse outcomes . One of the exclusion criteria in CESAR trial was high pressure
(>30 cm H2O of peak inspiratory pressure) and/or high FiO2 (>0.8) ventilation >7 days . In our patient the duration of pre-ECMO invasive
ventilation was very short and this could be one of the contributing factor for his improved outcome. Fifty percent of the reported cases
survived to hospital discharge. It is interesting to note that the patients who survived had a shorter duration of ECMO support (mean 9.25
versus 41 days). Advanced patient age, increased pre-ECMO ventilation duration, diagnosis category and complications while on ECMO are some
of the factors associated with adverse outcomes in patients receiving ECMO support .Table 3Adult patients with HIV/AIDS and severe
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia requiring ECMO therapyPatient (Ref)Age (years)/Gender (M/F)Pre-ECMO invasive ventilation
(days)Pneumothorax/PneumomediastinumPre-ECMO P/F ratio; PaCO2; pHECMO ConfigurationDuration of ECMO (days)CD4 count (cells/mm3)HIV viral
load (copies/mL)Anti-Pneumocystis treatmentTiming of ART initiationOutcomeGutermann et al 55/M4NoNR; NR; NRVeno-arterial4980,235TMP/SMXPost-
ECMOSurvived to hospital dischargeSteppan 39/M8YesNR; NR; NRVeno-venous14696297CLI + PI, then ATQ, then TMP/SMXPre-ECMODied on ECMOGoodman
et al 25/MNRNo63.6; 52.9; 7.38Veno-venous6936622,234PI, then CLI + PQ, then TMP/SMXPre-ECMODied on ECMOGoodman et al 30/F3Yes50.1; 41.6;
7.39Veno-venous713976,631TMP/SMXPost-ECMOSurvived to hospital dischargeDe Rosa et al 21/FNRYes120; NR; NRVeno-venous202118,330TMP/SMX, then
CLI + PQNRSurvived to hospital dischargeDe Rosa et al 24/MNRNo100; NR; NRVeno-venous24350,728TMP/SMX, then CLI + PQ + ATQDuring ECMODied in
hospital post ECMOCawcutt et al 45/MNRYes50; NR; NRVeno-venous5733113,000TMP/SMX, CLI, PQPre-ECMODied in hospital post ECMOOur
patient26/M1Yes200; 109; 7.01Veno-venous684907,302TMP/SMXPost-ECMOSurvived to hospital discharge P/F ratio Ratio of partial pressure
arterial oxygen and fraction of inspired oxygen (mm Hg), PaCO 2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (mm Hg), ART
Antiretroviral therapy, TMP Trimethoprim, SMX Sulfamethoxazole, CLI Clindamycin, PI Pentamidine, ATQ Atovaquone, PQ Primaquine, NR Not
reported Adult patients with HIV/AIDS and severe Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia requiring ECMO therapy P/F ratio Ratio of partial pressure
arterial oxygen and fraction of inspired oxygen (mm Hg), PaCO 2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (mm Hg), ART
Antiretroviral therapy, TMP Trimethoprim, SMX Sulfamethoxazole, CLI Clindamycin, PI Pentamidine, ATQ Atovaquone, PQ Primaquine, NR Not
reported Patients in need of V-V ECMO support have a high predicted mortality, and implementing an invasive therapy that requires central
venous cannulation, systemic anticoagulation, and exposure to an extracorporeal bypass circuit involves substantial risk. The most common
complication encountered in ECMO patients is bleeding. Cannula site, surgical site, central nervous system and gastrointestinal bleeding are
the most frequent hemorrhagic complications. Infection is also relatively common, with culture proven infections occurring in approximately
20 % of adult respiratory ECMO patients. Mechanical complications such as oxygenator failure, clotting, air in the circuit and tubing
rupture are other important considerations [18, 19]. In the CESAR trial , not all patients transferred to the ECMO center received ECMO
therapy. Despite this their outcomes were better than those managed in conventional treatment centers. This highlights the fact that
management of patients with severe respiratory failure by a specialized team in units that have an ECMO-based management protocol improves
outcome. As such, we have developed a ‘Severe Respiratory Failure’ team at our hospital that receives referrals from ICUs across the
country. Their role is to evaluate and manage patients with life threatening respiratory failure who fail conventional ventilation. V-V ECMO
was an effective rescue therapy in HIV positive patient with an otherwise fatal respiratory failure due to Pneumocystis pneumonia and air
leak syndrome. This case report emphasizes on the fact that the use of ECMO support in HIV/AIDS patient is not always futile and can be
considered if the patient has favorable baseline characteristics and the primary problem is respiratory failure that has a reversible
etiology. It also highlights the role of ECMO in allowing ultra-protective lung ventilation and preventing ventilator-induced lung injury in
patients with poorly compliant lungs. The ‘Medical Research Center’ at Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar has granted permission for
publication of this case report. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Data underlying the
conclusions drawn is contained in the manuscript and its supporting files. acquired immune deficiency syndrome activated partial
thromboplastin time acute respiratory distress syndrome broncho-alveolar lavage body mass index computerized tomography extra-corporeal life
support organization fraction of inspired oxygen human immunodeficiency virus medical intensive care unit non-invasive ventilation partial
pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood polymerase chain reaction pressure control
ventilation positive end expiratory pressure peak inspiratory pressure pressure support ventilation ventilator-induced lung injury veno-
venous extra corporeal membrane oxygenation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions HSA principal investigator, responsible for data analysis and drafting the manuscript. IFH was leading member of ECMO team and
was responsible for ECMO care during treatment in ICU; manuscript revision. SG responsible for acquisition and interpretation of data. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information HSA: MBBS, CABIM, MRCP (UK), EDIC; Consultant Medical Intensive Care
Unit; Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar. IFH: MD; Director of Medical Intensive Care Unit; Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar. SG: CABIM,
MRCP (UK), EDIC; Consultant Medical Intensive Care Unit; Hamad General Hospital; Doha, Qatar. The authors thank all the members of the
‘Severe Respiratory Failure’ team and the patient. There has been no financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.
