To the Editor: Zika virus, a mosquito-borne flavivirus, causes, a usually self-limiting febrile and exanthematic arthralgia syndrome that
resembles dengue and chikungunya (1). This arboviral disease has emerged in tropical areas of Latin America, particularly in Brazil and
Colombia (2), as a public health threat in 2015 and has spread into areas to which dengue virus (DENV) and chikungunya virus (CHIKV) are
endemic (1–4). Cases of severe and fatal Zika virus infection have not been described (5), and the spectrum of clinical disease remains
uncertain in the setting of rapidly evolving epidemics of this arbovirus in Latin America (1). We report a person with sickle cell disease
who acquired a Zika virus infection and died. The patient was a 15-year-old girl who in October 2015 came to the outpatient clinic of the
Hospital of Malambo (a primary-level public hospital) in Malambo (Atlántico Department) in northern Colombia. In this region, during
September 22, 2015–January 2, 2016, a total of 468 suspected cases of Zika virus infection and 4 reverse transcription PCR (RT-
PCR)–confirmed cases have been reported. This patient had a high fever (temperature >40°C), arthralgias, retro-ocular pain, abdominal pain,
myalgias, and jaundice for the previous 4 days. She had sickle cell disease for 5 years (hemoglobin genotype SC identified by DNA analysis),
but no previous hospitalizations or episodes of vaso-occlusive crises. She had never had dengue, chikungunya, or acute chest syndrome. At
admission to the hospital, the patient had a pulse rate of 112 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 110/70
mm Hg, and a temperature of 39.0°C. She had abdominal pain, no petechiae, and no lymphadenopathy. The patient was given acetaminophen.
Results of a neurologic assessment were unremarkable. Clinical laboratory findings are shown in the Table. Given these manifestations, she
was given a diagnosis of a DENV infection and referred to Barranquilla Hospital Metropolitano (Barranquilla, Colombia) where she was
admitted 1 day later. Physical examination showed a pulse rate of 122 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 34/min (peripheral capillary oxygen
saturation 93%), a blood pressure of 112/58 mm, and a temperature of 37.5°C. She had generalized jaundice, respiratory distress, severe
abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly, but no lymphadenopathy. The patient was conscious (stuporous) and had a Glasgow Coma Scale
score of 13. Cardiovascular assessment showed tachycardia and a holosystolic murmur (grade II) but no other findings. The patient was then
transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit, where she was intubated and mechanical ventilation was initiated. Her condition was
considered life threatening; the patient had severe acute respiratory distress syndrome and progressive hypoxemia despite ventilator
treatment, and laboratory findings worsened (Table). *ICU, intensive care unit; ND, not determined; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; PT,
prothrombin time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; LDH, lactate
dehydrogenase; Hb, hemoglobin; –, negative; MAT; microscopic agglutination test; RT-PCR, reverse transcription PCR; DENV, dengue virus;
CHIKV, chikungunya virus; YFV, yellow fever virus; ZIKV, Zika virus; +, positive. †Blood samples were obtained 5 days after illness onset.
These tests were performed at the National Reference Laboratory of the National Institute of Health, Bogotá, Colombia. The patient was given
transfusions of blood products for treatment of anemia and thrombocytopenia. Chest radiograph and ultrasound showed an extensive right-side
hemothorax. The result of a Zika virus–specific real-time RT-PCR was positive (Table). Her clinical condition deteriorated. Despite
intensive treatment, the patient did not recover and died 37 hours later. An autopsy showed hepatic panacinar necrosis, erythrophagocytosis
of Kupffer cells, and severe decrease of splenic lymphoid tissue (functional asplenia) with multiple drepanocytes and splenic sequestration,
but no signs of yellow fever or malaria (Technical Appendix Figure). Although sickle cell disorders are not common in Colombia, their
frequency is higher along the Caribbean coast (including Atlántico Department) and 2 times that of the rest of Colombia) (6). Although
chronic diseases, such as sickle cell disorders, are considered to be a risk factor for development of severe dengue and chikungunya (7,8),
no cases have been reported in association with Zika. Reports of patients co-infected with DENV and CHIKV are rare, few details are
available, and mostly restricted to few fatal cases of dengue (9). In patients with dengue, deaths might be higher among those who have a
hemoglobin SC genotype, as recently reported (10). Onset of vaso-occlusion in persons with sickle cell disorders is often triggered by
inflammation, as has been reported in DENV infections and which probably occurred in our patient (8). This complication and severe splenic
sequestration, detected by autopsy, probably caused her death. In summary, this case indicates that patients with sickle cell disorders and
suspected arboviral infections should be closely monitored. Given current epidemics of Zika virus infection in Colombia (746 RT-
PCR–confirmed cases and 11,712 suspected cases during September 22, 2015–January 2, 2016), atypical and severe manifestations and concurrent
conditions in patients should be assessed to prevent additional deaths (2). Technical Appendix Figure. Autopsy findings for liver and spleen
of a 15-year-old girl with sickle cell disease who died of Zika virus infection, Colombia. Suggested citation for this article: Arzuza-
Ortega L, Polo A, Pérez-Tatis G, López-García H, Parra E, Pardo-Herrera LC, et al. Fatal Zika virus infection in girl with sickle cell
disease, Colombia . Emerg Infect Dis. 2016 May [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2205.151934
