Pulmonary paragonimiasis is a food-borne zoonosis with a wide variety of radiologic findings, which sometimes can be confused with
tuberculosis and carcinoma. Therefore, differential diagnosis is always warranted. A 43-year-old male farmer, with productive cough, blood-
tinged sputum and chest pain, as well as patchy consolidation and pleural effusions in chest computer tomography, was misdiagnosed of
community-acquired pneumonia and tuberculosis. Complete blood cell count, sputum smear and culture, chest computer tomography, thoracoscopy,
and biopsy. The diagnosis of pulmonary paragonimiasis was established due to the finding of Charcot–Leyden crystals in the pleural necrosis,
and antibodies against Paragonimus westermani in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Paragonimiasis should be considered as a possibility in
the differential diagnosis of tuberculosis. Thoracoscopy is an effective and valuable technology that can help make an accurate diagnosis.
Paragonimiasis, known as pulmonary distomatosis or lung fluke, is a parasitic disease caused by a trematode of the genus Paragonimus via
ingestion of raw, inadequately cooked crabs or crayfish.1 The first report of human lung fluke was in 1879 in China, attributed to the
findings of adult worms in the lungs of a dead Taiwanese.2 The common species of paragonimiasis vary from different regions, with most
prevalent species of Paragonimus westermani in Asia, whereas Poroderma africanum and Paragonimus uterobilateralis in Africa.1 It is
estimated that it affects ∼22 million people around the world, but with a significant geographical variability of prevalence,1 resulting in
16.8% in Nigeria,3 7% in Liberia,4 and 1.71% in China.5 The onset of paragonimiasis is usually latent due to the chronic course in
development.2 Typical features of pulmonary paragonimiasis are reported to consist of but not limited to cough and blood-tinged sputum in
higher frequency, and hemoptysis, distressing chest pain and dyspnea in lower frequency; however, they remained a lack of specificity.2
Patients with paragonimiasis reveal a wide variety of nonspecific findings in chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) such as patchy,
cloudy infiltration of the lungs, pulmonary nodules, calcified spots, pleural thickening with interlobar pleuritis, pleural effusion, and
even masses,2,6 which are often confused with those in patients with tuberculosis and lung carcinoma.6,7 A 43-year-old male farmer was
admitted to a local hospital with productive cough, blood-tinged sputum, and chest pain. Complete blood cell count (CBC) showed a neutrophil
and eosinophil level of 7510/mm3 and 270/mm3, which accounted for 69.9% and 3.1%, respectively. Chest CT showed patchy consolidation in
ligule segment of the left lung, atelectasis of the left lower lobe, multiple lymph nodes in the mediastinum, and bilateral pleural
effusion. Fluid extracted from the left thoracic cavity was proved to be an exudate with total protein levels of 54.1 g/L, lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) levels of 3262 IU/L, and adenosine deaminase (ADA) levels of 75 IU/L, but the acid-fast staining and the cytological
examination of the pleural effusion and sputum were negative. He was diagnosed as community-acquired pneumonia and received antibiotics for
a week, and then he was discharged with relief of the symptoms. Two weeks later, the patient was admitted to our hospital for exacerbation
of the recurrent chest pain. He had no history of ingestion of freshwater crabs, crayfish, or wild pig meats. On admission, he was in good
general health, and the physical examination discovered an enlarged lymph node with a size of ∼0.8cm × 1.0 cm in the left anterior triangle
and decreased breath sounds in left lower lung with dullness on percussion. After admission, a CBC revealed hemoglobin (Hb) levels of
143 g/L, platelet levels of 256,000/mm3, absolute white blood cell (WBC) and eosinophil levels of 6620/mm3 and 390/mm3, and the percentage
of WBC and eosinophil rendering 67.9% and 4%. Serum tumor markers showed a normal carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). Other laboratory tests
revealed no abnormal findings. Sputum samples and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) found nothing of particular significance. Chest CT showed
increased size and positions of patchy consolidation, and thickened left pleura (Figure 1). Thoracoscopy revealed diffused sallow necrosis
covered the parietal and visceral pleura (Figure 2), and the biopsy of the necrosis showed chronic inflammation and coagulative necrosis
with eosinophils and histocytes infiltration (Figure 3). Thus, tuberculous pleurisy was suspected and he received diagnostic
antituberculosis chemotherapy. For this patient, we could not observe parasite eggs in stool, sputum, or BAL fluid. However, 20 days later,
Charcot–Leyden crystals were found in the pleural necrosis (Figure 3), and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was positive for
antibodies against P westermani. Chest CT findings. It showed patchy consolidation in ligule segment of the left lung (black arrow),
atelectasis of the left lower lobe, multiple lymph nodes in the mediastinum, left pleural effusion (white arrow), and thickened left pleura
(black dashed arrow). CT = computed tomography. Thoracoscopy of left thoracic cavity. It revealed diffused sallow necrosis covered the
parietal and visceral pleura (black arrow). (Magnification × 40). Pathological findings of the necrosis in left parietal pleura. They showed
chronic inflammation and coagulative necrosis (black dashed arrow) with eosnophils (white arrow) and histocytes infiltration, and
Charcot–Leyden crystals (black arrow). (Magnification: 3A × 40, 3B × 10). Eventually, this patient was diagnosed as pulmonary paragonimiasis
and eosinophilic pleurisy, and he received praziquantel therapy (25 mg/kg, 3 times a day for 3 days). Two months later, he was back to
normal life with clear chest CT. Paragonimiasis is a food-borne zoonosis, and it has a parasitic cycle, like all trematode infections,
requiring 2 intermediate hosts: first, a mollusc (river snail), where the embryonated eggs become cercariae, and then a freshwater
crustacean (crayfish), where they evolve to metacercariae, which are passed to the definitive host (human being or carnivorous mammal) when
these crustaceans are ingested in an undercooked state.1 But sometimes the nonspecificity of the pulmonary symptoms and chest CT may lead to
misdiagnosis as pulmonary tuberculosis or lung cancer, as in our patient. In this case with bilateral pleural effusion, thoracentesis of the
left thoracic cavity was proven to be an exudate. The most common causes of undiagnosed exudative pleural effusion are tuberculosis and
malignancy.8 But serum tumor markers showed a normal CEA, and thoracoscopy revealed diffused sallow necrosis and the biopsy of the necrosis
showed chronic inflammation and coagulative necrosis with eosnophils and histocytes infiltration, so tuberculous pleurisy was suspected and
this patient received diagnostic antituberculosis chemotherapy. Thoracoscopy is defined as the exploration of the pleural cavity and its
neighboring organs, and one of its principal applications focuses on the exploration and treatment of pleural effusions.9,10 Studies
demonstrated that thoracoscopy is a safe, easy-to-handle, cost-effective, and accurate technique in diagnosis of pleural effusions of
undetermined origin and for obtaining histological diagnosis in pleural effusions.11 In terms of tuberculosis, the diagnostic sensitivity
ranges from 93.3% in areas of low prevalence for tuberculosis to 100% in areas of high prevalence.12,13 Case report of pulmonary
paragonimiasis diagnosed by thoracoscopy showed a dense thickened peel over both visceral and parietal pleural surfaces, and the
histopathological examination of pleural biopsy demonstrated that eosinophilic pleuritis with polarizable birefringent material was in the
center of oval-shaped necrotizing granulomas and that the lung parenchyma was heavily infiltrated with macrophages and eosinophils.14
Although in the case of tuberculous pleurisy, thoracoscopy showed that diffuse nodules on pleura and biopsy specimen demonstrated
epithelioid cell granulomas with caseation necrosis,15 in the present case, thoracoscopy revealed that diffused sallow necrosis covered the
parietal and visceral pleura, and the biopsy specimen showed chronic inflammation and coagulative necrosis with eosinophils and histiocytes
infiltration, which corresponded to both conditions, and tuberculous pleurisy could not be excluded. However, our patient was finally
diagnosed as pulmonary paragonimiasis because Charcot–Leyden crystals were found in the pleural necrosis and ELISA was positive for
antibodies against P westermani. Charcot–Leyden crystals are bipyramidal crystals seen in body fluids or aspirates associated with
eosinophilic inflammatory reactions.16 They are composed of lysophospholipase, a constituent protein of eosinophils, and are formed when
increased turnover of eosinophils occurs, and it is postulated that they degrade the lipases generated on cell necrosis.17 In addition, they
can also be occasionally seen in patients with other diseases besides paragonimiasis,18 such as acute myeloid leukemia,19 invasive
aspergillosis20 among others, which, however, could easily be differentiated from paragonimiasis based on the clinical presentations and
related laboratory analysis. Eventually, in combination of positive ELISA test for paragonimiasis, pulmonary paragonimiasis was identified.
As a possibility in the differential diagnosis of increased serum eosinophils and exudative pleural effusion with thickened pleura,
paragonimiasis should be considered. Thoracoscopy is an effective and valuable technology that can help make an accurate diagnosis. The
authors thank Professor Dongtao Lin (College of Foreign Languages, Sichuan University), who is specialized in biomedical writing and
editing, for copyediting this manuscript. Abbreviations: ADA = adenosine deaminase, BAL = bronchoalveolar lavage, CBC = complete blood cell
count, CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen, CT = computer tomography, ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Hb = hemoglobin, LDH = lactate
dehydrogenase, WBC = white blood cell. JL, M-YW, B-ML, and Z-AL contributed equally to this study. Authorship: JL and M-YW designed the
study and collected data. HZ and SY performed tharocoscopy and provided image. DL performed pathological analysis and provided image. JL and
B-ML drafted the manuscript. B-ML and Z-AL revised the manuscript and approved the version to be published. The patient provided written
informed consent to approve the use and accuracy of the data. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
