Mutations in the gene encoding filamin A (FLNA) lead to diseases with high phenotypic diversity including periventricular nodular
heterotopia, skeletal dysplasia, otopalatodigital spectrum disorders, cardiovascular abnormalities, and coagulopathy. FLNA mutations were
recently found to be associated with lung disease. In this study, we report a novel FLNA gene associated with significant lung disease and
unique angiogenesis. Here, we describe a 1-year-old Saudi female child with respiratory distress at birth. The child then had recurrent
lower respiratory tract infections, bilateral lung emphysema with basal atelectasis, bronchospasm, pulmonary artery hypertension, and oxygen
and mechanical ventilation dependency. Molecular testing showed a new pathogenic variant of one copy of c.3153dupC in exon 21 in the FLNA
gene. Our data support previous reports in the literature that associate FLNA gene mutation and lung disease. Filamin A is a 280-kD protein
that crosslinks actin filaments into orthogonal networks in cortical cytoplasm and participates in the anchoring of membrane proteins for
the actin cytoskeleton. Remodeling of the cytoskeleton is central to the modulation of cell shape and migration. Filamin A, encoded by the
FLNA gene, is a widely expressed protein that regulates reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton by interacting with integrins,
transmembrane receptor complexes, and second messengers, thus mutations in the gene encoding filamin A (FLNA) lead to diseases with high
phenotypic diversity including the following: periventricular nodular heterotopia (PNH), skeletal dysplasia, otopalatodigital spectrum
disorders such as Melnick-Needles syndrome and frontometaphyseal dysplasia , cardiovascular abnormalities that include patent ductus
arteriosus (PDA), valvular disease, aortic root dilatation and aneurysms, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome-like phenotype , and coagulopathy with
thrombocytopenia . Recently, Masurel-Paulet et al. , de Wit and colleagues , and Lord et al. reported associations between pulmonary
diseases in both sexes with substantial heterogeneity in manifestations and lethality. Here, we report the case of a female child with a
novel FLNA gene mutation who developed significant lung disease and unique angiogenesis. Our patient is a 1-year-old Saudi female child who
was referred from another hospital after PDA ligation, left inguinal hernia repair, accidental fracture of her right ulna and radius, and
prolonged mechanical ventilation for severe respiratory syncytial virus infection complicated by acute respiratory distress syndrome. The
patient was sent to our hospital for further evaluation due to ongoing respiratory distress and hypoxemia. Our patient was the third child
of nonconsanguineous Saudi parents and was born via cesarean section at 36 weeks gestation due to fetal distress. The child was admitted to
the neonatal intensive care unit for 5 days because of respiratory distress and was ventilated for 36 hours. The mother has epilepsy and the
father has been diagnosed with Behcet's disease. Since the age of 2 months, the child had multiple lengthy admissions in different hospitals
(for 1 to 3 months at a time) for recurrent cyanotic events, respiratory distress, frequent choking with feeding, and significant vomiting.
The child had accumulated the following diagnoses: severe gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), failure to thrive requiring prolonged
nasogastric tube feeding, patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary hypertension, anoxic convulsions, chronic lung disease with prolonged oxygen
dependency, reversible bronchospasm, left external iliac vein thrombosis, and developmental delay. She had two prior prolonged stays at our
institution. The first admission was due to rhinovirus infection and clinically diagnosed recurrent aspiration secondary to aberrant right
subclavian artery (dysphagia lusoria) with prolonged oxygen therapy. The second admission was for respiratory failure that required
prolonged intubation including high-frequency oscillatory ventilation complicated by recurrent lung atelectasis and right lung pneumothorax.
She failed multiple trials of extubation and unfortunately died of cardiac arrest due to sepsis while receiving maximal supportive therapy.
An initial physical examination during the first admission revealed a baby girl in poor health with the following clinical values: moderate
respiratory distress and a respiratory rate of 70/min, heart rate of 144/min, blood pressure of 101/47 with saturation of 95% on 1.5 L/min,
body weight of 5.9 kg (below the third percentile), and height of 69 cm (at the tenth percentile).The child had diminished breath sounds
bilaterally with a prolonged expiratory phase, wheezing, and scattered crackles posteriorly, mild hypotonia, and significant hyperlaxity.
Investigations showed normal sweat chloride level, and immune function testing was normal. A chest X-ray (Fig. 1) showed multiple
subsegmental atelectasis and areas of air trapping. Computed tomography and angiography of her chest (Fig. 2) revealed bilateral lower lobe
airspace disease, hyperinflation of the right middle lobe and left upper lobe including the lingual, and an enlarged main pulmonary artery.
The sagittal view (Fig. 3) showed a right aberrant subclavian artery causing posterior compression to the esophagus at the level of the T4
vertebra and minimal compression in the posterior trachea. An echocardiogram showed no residual PDA or significant evidence of pulmonary
hypertension. Barium administration (Fig. 4) showed external compression along the posterior wall of the proximal third of the esophagus,
which was causing significant narrowing of the esophageal lumen. The pH probe showed no significant GERD. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
showed there was a narrowed and compressed area located 18 cm into the esophagus at T4, and was identified with marked pulsation. The
flexible bronchoscopy showed complete ring and narrowing of the lower third of the trachea. A lung biopsy (Fig. 5) showed alveolated lung
parenchyma with alveolar simplification, in which alveoli do not show age-appropriate normal architecture, compared with the normal alveolar
architecture (Fig. 6). There was no magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain because our patient's condition did not allow it.Fig.
1Chest X-ray anteroposterior view shows multiple subsegmental atelectasis, areas of air trapping and osteopeniaFig. 2Computed tomography
angiography axial view below bifurcation of carina shows basal lung atelectasis, lung hyperinflation, and enlarged main pulmonary arteryFig.
3Computed tomography angiography sagittal view shows right aberrant subclavian artery posterior compression to the esophagus at level of T4
vertebra and minimal compression in the posterior tracheaFig. 4Barium meal shows external compression noted along posterior wall of proximal
third of the thoracic esophagus causing significant narrowing of esophageal lumenFig. 5Alveolated lung parenchyma (black arrows) with
alveolar simplification. Small yellow arrow: from the microscope that is probably not relevantFig. 6Normal alveolar septation Chest X-ray
anteroposterior view shows multiple subsegmental atelectasis, areas of air trapping and osteopenia Computed tomography angiography axial
view below bifurcation of carina shows basal lung atelectasis, lung hyperinflation, and enlarged main pulmonary artery Computed tomography
angiography sagittal view shows right aberrant subclavian artery posterior compression to the esophagus at level of T4 vertebra and minimal
compression in the posterior trachea Barium meal shows external compression noted along posterior wall of proximal third of the thoracic
esophagus causing significant narrowing of esophageal lumen Alveolated lung parenchyma (black arrows) with alveolar simplification. Small
yellow arrow: from the microscope that is probably not relevant Normal alveolar septation Molecular testing for FLNA-related disorders in
our patient showed a new pathogenic variant of one copy of c.3153dupC in exon 21 in the FLNA gene. This variant has not been reported in
individuals with FLNA-related disorders but is expected to cause disease. In this case report, we describe another confirmatory mutation in
the gene encoding filamin A (FLNA) in a female child with lung disease. Our patient was a female child who was confirmed to have a
pathogenic variant of the FLNA gene c.3153dupC. This mutation has not been reported in individuals with FLNA-related disorders but is
expected to cause disease. Similar to other reported cases, our child also manifested clinical symptoms at an early age [10, 11]. She had
respiratory distress at birth and then had recurrent lower respiratory tract infections/bronchiolitis, bilateral lung emphysema with basal
atelectasis, bronchospasm, pulmonary artery hypertension, and long oxygen and mechanical ventilatory dependency after 2 months of age. A
lung biopsy showed alveolated lung parenchyma with alveolar simplification similar to the finding by Lord et al. . This child also
manifested associated clinical features reported with other filamin gene mutations including patent ductus arteriosis (PDA), hypotonia,
joint laxity, and developmental delay . These clinical and histological features are similar to cases reported with the pulmonary phenotype
of FLNA (Table 1). However, an unusual clinical manifestation in our case is severe reflux that caused recurrent aspiration symptoms and
dysphagia lusoria (secondary to aberrant right subclavian artery that caused significant esophageal compression). This abnormal angiogenesis
has been reported only in FLNA-null mice, which have vascular endothelial cells that show defective cell–cell contacts and adherens
junctions. The result is abnormal angiogenesis with disorganized blood vessels and aberrant branching [7, 12]. There are other possible
pulmonary phenotypes of FLNA gene mutation suggested due to its role in T cell activation, interleukin production , inflammatory signaling ,
and interaction with the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator . There has been no specific sensitivity to infections observed
in FLNA patients . However, our patient was noted to have severe prolonged courses of viral or bacterial infections. The pathogenic variant
of FLNA gene mutation in our reported case is not confirmed to have association with periventricular nodular heterotopias (PNH), and our
patient was too ill to complete brain MRI. The patient’s mother has epilepsy beginning in the third decade of life. The patient’s father has
Behcet’s disease, which is highly consistent with other reports of PNH [8, 16, 17].Table 1Features of reported cases of filamin A
mutationMasurel-Paulet et al. de Wit et al. Lord et al. This caseGenetic mutationMosaic nonsense filamin A mutation
(c.994delG.P.K331X)Missense filamin A mutation (c.220G>P.G74R )Truncating filamin A mutation (c.5683G>T,p.G1895*)Pathogenic variant
(c.3153dupC) in exon 21 filamin A geneSexMaleFemaleFemaleFemaleBirthTerm with uncomplicated perinatal courseTerm with uncomplicated
perinatal coursePremature at 30 weeks mild respiratory distress resolved after 48 hoursPremature at 36 weeks with respiratory distress,
needed ventilation for first 36 hoursAge at presentation1.5 months3 months24 days2 monthsPulmonary manifestation and pathologyTachypnea,
recurrent respiratory infections, asthma, prolonged oxygen dependence, lung atelectasis and lung cysts, tracheobronchomalacia, pulmonary
arterial hypertensionDyspnea, recurrent respiratory infections, prolonged oxygen dependence until 1 year and 7 months of age. Emphysema of
right middle lobe, bronchomalacia of right bronchial treeTachypnea with desaturations, pulmonary arterial hypertension, oxygen dependence
until 22 months of age bilateral pulmonary atelectasis and cysts. TracheobronchomalaciaRecurrent cyanotic events, respiratory distress,
episodes of choking and vomiting, with associated bronchospasm pulmonary arterial hypertension, prolonged oxygen and ventilator dependence
until death at 15 months of age, bilateral pulmonary emphysema and basal atelectasis tracheal stenosisChest X-rayBilateral subsegmental
atelectasis with hyperlucent areas in both mid zonesCystic pulmonary lesions alternating with heterogeneous areas of atelectasisMultiple
subsegmental atelectasis and areas of air trappingChest CTscanWidespread peribronchial thickening, subsegmental collapse, fluid within
oblique fissure, eventration of the left hemidiaphragmSevere lobar emphysema of right middle lobe with displacement of medistinal structures
to left and compression of left upper lobePatchy ground-glass appearance with area of hyperinflation and cystic pulmonary lesions
alternating with heterogeneous areas of atelectasis and thickening of interlobar septaBilateral lower lobe airspace diseases, hyperinflation
of both upper lobes, enlarged main pulmonary artery, right aberrant subclavian artery, compressing esophagus and tracheaSurgerySubtotal
upper lobectomy at age of8 months for lobar emphysema.Lobectomy of right middle lobe for lobar emphysemaLung histology resultsPanpulmonary
emphysema with global absence of bronchial cartilage and hypertensive pulmonary vascular diseaseLung emphysema without inflammationMild to
moderate chronic lung disease with associated alveolar simplification and pulmonary hypertensionAlveolated lung parenchyma with alveolar
simplificationThe associated nonpulmonary featuresPeriventricular nodular heterotopia with left cerebellar hemisphere hypoplasia and
cisterna magna, truncal hypotonia, PDA, aortic root dilatation, bifid right urinary drainage system supraumbilical hernia,
macrothrombocytesPeriventricular nodular heterotopia, with an enlarged retrocerebellar cyst, secundum atrial septal defect and coarctation
of the aorta, hypotonia, severe hyperlaxityPeriventricular nodular heterotopia, secundum atrial septal defect, mild axial hypotoniaSuspected
periventricular nodular heterotopia, PDA, angiogenesis causing dysphagia lusoria, hypotonia and joint laxityOutcomesFollow-up to 6
yearsFollow-up to 3 yearsFollow-up to 22 monthsDeath at 15 months CT computed tomography, PDA patent ductus arteriosus Features of reported
cases of filamin A mutation CT computed tomography, PDA patent ductus arteriosus In conclusion, we support the three previous reports in the
literature, stating that there is an association between FLNA gene mutation and lung disease. The lung disease is a lethal condition likely
manifested by early onset of pneumonia and recurrent bronchiolitis, subsequent asthma, pulmonary hypertension, and long-term oxygen
dependency with underlying lung emphysema or lung cysts. FLNA mutation is also associated with airway anomalies such as tracheal stenosis
(as in our patient) or tracheobronchomalacia. In addition, there are other diverse associated clinical manifestations. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. filamin A gastroesophageal reflux disease magnetic resonance
imaging patent ductus arteriosus periventricular nodular heterotopia Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions All authors were involved in the writing and editing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
