The pathogenesis of glioblastoma is complex, and the implicated molecular mechanisms are yet to be understood. There are scattered reports
describing a possible relationship between meningioma and glioblastoma and more rarely a relationship between infarction and glioblastoma.
We are reporting a 32-year-old male who developed left middle cerebral artery (MCA) infarction as a surgical complication for sphenoid
meningioma. He developed recurrent symptoms 4 months later due to development of a glioblastoma adjacent to both the territory of the prior
MCA infarct and the residual meningioma. This case adds further contribution to the literature of the possible pathological association
between glioblastoma and brain infarction on a background of meningioma. Several authors have reported the development of glioblastoma in
areas of reactive gliosis . Others have described both synchronously and, less commonly, asynchronously presenting meningioma and
glioblastoma . Studies on the relationship between glioma and traumatic brain injury have been conducted [5, 6]. Furthermore, there are very
few reports relating strokes to glioblastoma, and most of them describe infarctions secondary to glioblastoma [7, 8], while the development
of glioblastoma in the territories of previous cerebral infarctions has been rarely reported [1, 9]. Many hypotheses have been suggested to
explain these observations, yet they remain speculative in nature and the glioblastoma developmental process is still obscure and not
clearly understood . We discuss two possible theories of glioblastoma development in such cases: first is the pathogenic mechanism of
coexisted glioblastoma and meningioma and second is the development of glioblastoma secondary to the middle cerebral artery (MCA) infarct.
The uncovering of the mechanisms that led to the phenomena mentioned above could further our knowledge regarding the pathogenesis of
glioblastoma and subsequently their management. We are reporting a 32-year-old male who underwent surgical resection of a left sphenoid
meningioma that was complicated by an iatrogenic injury of the MCA with subsequent infarction. The patient had a remarkable recovery from
the stroke but deteriorated 6 months later; radiological and histopathological examination revealed that he developed a glioblastoma in the
territory of the previous infarction. The literature concerning glioblastoma developmental process is reviewed. A 32-year-old male first
presented in January 2010 with a progressive headache for a 4-month duration. He was investigated with computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scans that revealed large left sphenoid wing meningioma. He underwent left frontal craniotomy in a hospital at a
neighboring country, for resection of the sphenoid wing meningioma. Brain swelling complicated the attempt of tumor resection; as a result,
surgery was terminated after partial resection of the tumor. The patient had a complicated postoperative course with development of left
middle cerebral artery ischemia causing aphasia and right dense hemiplegia. He was transferred to King Abdulaziz University hospital 3 weeks
after surgery for further management. The pathology report from his referring hospital revealed that the tumor specimen of what has been
resected was consistent with WHO grade I meningioma. On admission, he was conscious and alert but with marked expressive aphasia, upper
motor right facial weakness, and power of grade 2 right-side hemiparesis. Routine laboratory investigation, including hematology,
electrolytes, and renal and coagulation profiles, were within normal limits. MRI scans of the brain revealed significant residual meningioma
of the left sphenoid wing meningioma (Fig. 1). There was a left cerebral infarction demonstrated on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) MRI scans (Fig. 2). The MCA was partially narrowed at the bifurcation; there was still significant tumor blood supply from the
middle meningeal artery (Fig. 3). The patient was evaluated by the neurology team who started him on antiplatelet medication (aspirin, 80 mg
daily) and advised delaying surgery 8–12 weeks to allow further recovery from stroke. He was transferred to the rehabilitation center where
he received an extensive speech and physical therapy for 3 months with subsequent significant neurological improvement. He remained with
only mild right-hand weakness of grade 3, and subtle word-finding difficulty, and an elective admission was planned for resection of the
residual meningioma.Fig. 1Post-contrast parasagittal (a), coronal (b), and axial (c, d) MRI scans performed 3 weeks after left frontal-
temporal craniotomy demonstrating significant residual enhancing left sphenoid wing meningioma and ischemic changes in the left MCA
territoryFig. 2The extent of the infarction was demonstrated by FLAIR MRI sequenceFig. 3MR angiographic scan reveled marked decreased flow
in the left MCA (arrow) and prominent tumor supply from the middle meningeal artery (arrowhead) Post-contrast parasagittal (a), coronal (b),
and axial (c, d) MRI scans performed 3 weeks after left frontal-temporal craniotomy demonstrating significant residual enhancing left
sphenoid wing meningioma and ischemic changes in the left MCA territory The extent of the infarction was demonstrated by FLAIR MRI sequence
MR angiographic scan reveled marked decreased flow in the left MCA (arrow) and prominent tumor supply from the middle meningeal artery
(arrowhead) His second presentation to the emergency department, 3 weeks prior his scheduled admission, was with progressive headache over
2 weeks. He was confused with worsened speech and right hemiparesis. Brain MRI scan revealed unchanged size of the residual meningioma and
the previous infarction, but there were new enhancing multi-focal and multi-centric deep frontotemporal lesions within and adjacent to the
infarcted region and adjacent to the residual meningioma (Fig. 4). The extent of the edema and the new tumor infiltration was demonstrated
by FLAIR MRI scan which involved the left hemisphere and extended to the right side as well (Fig. 5). The patient was admitted and started
on steroids and had a stereotactic biopsy of the enhancing part of the new frontal lobe lesions.Fig. 4MRI study performed 5 months from the
first surgery. Post-contrast parasagittal (a), coronal (b), and axial (c, d) MRI scans were performed demonstrating no change in the size of
the meningioma, but there are multiple ring enhancing lesions in the medial temporal lobe adjacent to the meningioma, and in the infarcted
tissue involving the corpus callosumFig. 5The extent of the new lesions in the left hemisphere (frontal, temporal, parietal region) was
demonstrated by FLAIR MRI sequence with subependymal infiltration crossing to the right hemisphere MRI study performed 5 months from the
first surgery. Post-contrast parasagittal (a), coronal (b), and axial (c, d) MRI scans were performed demonstrating no change in the size of
the meningioma, but there are multiple ring enhancing lesions in the medial temporal lobe adjacent to the meningioma, and in the infarcted
tissue involving the corpus callosum The extent of the new lesions in the left hemisphere (frontal, temporal, parietal region) was
demonstrated by FLAIR MRI sequence with subependymal infiltration crossing to the right hemisphere H & E stain revealed a highly cellular
malignant glial neoplasm with endothelial proliferation and geographical and pseudopalisading necrosis; findings are consistent with
glioblastoma (Fig. 6). There were marked mitotic figures which were apparent. The neoplastic cells are embedded in thickened fibrillary
stroma, the latter highlighted with glial acidic fibrillary protein (GFAP) (Fig. 7). Tumor cells are positive for P53 (Fig. 8) and
isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH-1) (Fig. 9) immunolabelings. Tumor cells were found to be negative for reticulin and epithelial membrane
antigen (EMA). The Ki-67 proliferative index is estimated to be 5–10 % in focal areas (Fig. 10).Fig. 6Microphotography of the biopsy
specimen revealed highly cellular malignant glial neoplasm, embedded in glial fibrillary background, with mitosis, endothelial
proliferation, and necrosis; findings are consistent with glioblastoma (hematoxylin-eosin stain, ×40 magnifications)Fig. 7Tumor cells are
highlighted with glial acidic fibrillary protein staining (×40)Fig. 8Immunohistochemical staining positive for P53 protein (×40)Fig.
9Immunohistochemical staining positive for isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (×40)Fig. 10Immunohistochemical staining with Ki-67 with “eye-ball
estimation” showing a proliferative index of 5–10 % in focal areas (×40) Microphotography of the biopsy specimen revealed highly cellular
malignant glial neoplasm, embedded in glial fibrillary background, with mitosis, endothelial proliferation, and necrosis; findings are
consistent with glioblastoma (hematoxylin-eosin stain, ×40 magnifications) Tumor cells are highlighted with glial acidic fibrillary protein
staining (×40) Immunohistochemical staining positive for P53 protein (×40) Immunohistochemical staining positive for isocitrate
dehydrogenase-1 (×40) Immunohistochemical staining with Ki-67 with “eye-ball estimation” showing a proliferative index of 5–10 % in focal
areas (×40) The patient had an uneventful postoperative course; he and his family declined any adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy and
received palliative care at a rehabilitation center. He died 10 weeks later due to progression of the disease. No postmortem autopsy has
been performed. The development of two or more distinct types of brain tumors is a rare phenomenon associated mostly with radiation exposure
or phakomatosis [10, 11]. However, there are scattered reports describing the co-occurrence of two or more histologically different tumors
in patients who were not exposed to radiation, nor had phakomatosis [2, 12, 13]. The most commonly reported association is the co-occurrence
of meningioma and glioblastoma . The majority of these reports describe a collision where the two tumors co-exist in a single primary lesion
or close proximity [2, 13], while cases where the two tumors are located in totally different sites are less frequently reported [14, 15].
Some authors have attributed this co-existence to mere chance [12, 14] giving that meningioma and glioblastoma together account for
approximately 51 % of all primary central nervous system tumors. The development of a glioblastoma following the total resection of a
meningioma has only been reported twice in the literature [3, 4]. Despite several authors having concluded that this phenomenon was most
likely a random statistical coincidence, their different proposed theories have been described in the literatures. Single transduction
pathway dysfunction may play an important role in the tumorigenesis of adjacent double tumor. It has been found that the expression of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) are
involved in this mechanism . Overexpression of EGFR (ErbB1) correlates with enhanced malignant potential of many human tumor types including
glioblastoma. The EGFR family of the tyrosine kinase receptor plays an important role in a wide variety of tumors . EGFR family consists of
four receptors: (ErbB1/HER), ErbB2 (HER2/neu), ErbB3 (HER3), and ErbB4 (HER4). When the EGFR family members are activated by other ligands,
intracellular signaling pathways are triggered which regulate cell division . EGFR family members (EGFR, ErbB2–4) have been evaluated
concomitantly in glioma and meningioma. EGFR expression has been reported in 20 % of benign meningioma . The protein expression of the
different EGFR family members was predominantly seen in tumor cells in both glioma and meningioma, except for ErbB2. This latter observation
could indicate that ErbB2 is involved in tumor angiogenesis of different brain tumors . Furthermore, the P53 pathway dysfunction is
generally regarded as keys cause of both glioblastoma and grade I meningioma. Both are found in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Coincidence as
mentioned above has been reported as a reasonable explanation [3, 12, 14]. Another hypothesis is that brain scar created during the
operation for the first lesion could have led to the development of glioblastoma . This process is found in areas where tissue repair
occurs. The analysis showed that PDGF receptor was overexpressed in both tumors, thereby indicating the oncogenic effects of activated
signaling of these receptors. The PDGF-mediated paracrine may induce one tumor from another . Patients with severe head injury were reported
to have increased the risk for developing glioma . The fact that the vast majority of head trauma patients do not develop glioma suggests
that there must be other predisposing factors involved . A few cases of acute ischemic infarction as the first presentation of glioblastoma
have been documented in the literature [7, 8]. In a case series done by Morgenstern et al., the authors have reported that 4.9 % of brain
tumor cases were initially misdiagnosed as strokes; over half of these, misdiagnosed cases were glioblastoma , while three similar cases to
ours where the glioblastoma developed in the territory of previous infarction has only been reported [1, 9, 20]. One report described a
patient who developed a glioblastoma 2 years following an MCA ischemic infarction . The second one reported an elderly patient who developed
a glioblastoma in the territory of a previous hemorrhagic infarction . López-González et al. reported a case where a patient developed a
glioblastoma 7 months following an ischemic stroke . The authors, in this case, have speculated that a subclinical glioblastoma has caused
the ischemic injury. This explanation is unlikely in the former two cases, especially when considering that untreated glioblastoma has a
median survival rate of 3 months [1, 9]. Our case presents a unique situation where the patient developed a glioblastoma on the background
of a residual meningioma and an ischemic infarction. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing such a case, and we postulate, as
Zhang et al. have hypothesized, that the development of meningioma and glioma collision tumor is a dynamic process, where one type occurs
after the other . Our case together with other reported cases where the two tumors have not appeared at the same time might add further
support to this hypothesis of dynamic development [2, 4]. Another factor that could have contributed to the occurrence of the glioblastoma
in our patient is the post-infarction tissue repair cascade (post-infarct tissue repair defect). Recent evidence has established parallels
between brain tissue repair mechanisms and tumorigenesis , in which we postulate that astrogliosis secondary to brain ischemia and genetic
mutations may have increased the chance of malignant transformation of glial cells into glioblastoma. We have presented a rare and first
case where glioblastoma has developed on the background of a residual meningioma and an ischemic infarction. The fact that the vast majority
of ischemic stroke patients and those diagnosed with meningioma do not develop glioblastoma makes it obvious that the underlying pathogenic
mechanisms are a lot more complex and multi-factorial than the stated malignant transformation theory. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. epidermal growth factor receptor epithelial membrane antigen glial acidic fibrillary protein isocitrate
dehydrogenase platelet-derived growth factor receptor vascular endothelial growth factor Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions WY and SSB attended the patient; MEK made the pathological diagnosis; SSB and WY
contributed to the conception, design, and preparation of the manuscript; MEK and SSB revised the manuscript and made important
contributions to the histopathological interpretation. All authors read and approved the paper. This research has not been supported by any
grant or fund.
