Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor is a rare tumor of a borderline malignancy. Although it is commonly seen in children, the number of
childhood cases in the current literature is limited. The lung is the most commonly affected location. However, cases that have been
documented in the mesentery-omentum have mostly been located in the mesentery of the small bowel and not in the antimesenteric edge as in
our patient. A 6-year-old Greek boy was referred to our hospital with acute abdominal pain mimicking appendicitis. Ultrasound and computed
tomography revealed a solid mass in the abdomen. The patient underwent laparoscopic resection of the tumor, and histopathology and
immunohistochemical analysis favored an omental-mesenteric myxoid hamartoma, which is a variant of an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he has been asymptomatic during follow-up. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of the
small intestine is a rare, benign neoplasm in children that should be considered as a possible cause of acute abdomen. A precise diagnosis
can be made on the basis of histologic findings. Surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors (IMTs)
are very rare lesions that most often affect children and young adults [1, 2]. The IMT is a member of a heterogeneous group of soft tissue
tumors. IMTs have various names, including inflammatory pseudotumor, plasma cell granuloma, fibrous histiocytoma, solitary mast cell tumor,
and fibroxanthoma . The clinical behavior of IMTs is similar to that of tumors of uncertain malignant potential, so IMTs are considered
tumors of borderline malignancy . Omental-mesenteric myxoid hamartoma (OMMH) shares many morphologic features with IMT and may represent a
variant of IMT, which is still under debate . The lung is the most commonly affected location, but lesions have been reported in a variety
of intraabdominal organs [3, 6, 7]. However, small bowel tumors are particularly rare, and even more rarely they are located in the
antimesenteric edge of the small bowel . We report this unusual variant of IMT with a rare location in the small intestine, mimicking acute
appendicitis. The literature is reviewed, and clinical and pathologic features of this entity are presented, with an emphasis on diagnosis
and treatment in children. A 6-year-old Greek boy was referred to our hospital with acute abdominal pain, fever, and vomiting that had
started 30 h earlier. On presentation, he was hemodynamically stable and well-hydrated. His abdominal examination revealed right lower
quadrant pain on palpation and a positive McBurney sign with signs of peritoneal irritation. His hemoglobin was 12.2 g/dl (normal range
12–15 g/dl), his hematocrit was 34.6 % (normal range 36–44 %), his mean corpuscular volume was 72.7 (normal range 77–89), his mean
corpuscular hemoglobin was 24.7 (normal range 25–31), his leukocyte count was 15,110/μl (normal range 5000–13,500/μl), his platelet count
was 279,000/μl (normal range 200,000–400,000/μl), and his C-reactive protein level was 3.81 mg/dl (normal range <0.51 mg/dl). His
electrolyte and coagulation profiles were within normal ranges. As the boy’s history and physical examination referred to acute
appendicitis, ultrasound was performed. Ultrasonography showed a well-defined, hypoechogenic solid mass measuring 6 × 2 cm in the right
iliac fossa (Figs. 1 and 2). Other abdominal structures, including the appendix, liver, and kidneys, were normal. Because of the complex
nature of the lesion, computed tomography was also performed. A computed tomographic scan showed a solid mass measuring 6 × 2.4 cm in the
right abdomen. The mass was in contact at one end with the ascending colon and at the other end with the small bowel (Fig. 3). Imaging
findings excluded the presence of acute appendicitis or Meckel’s diverticulum. Emergency laparoscopic exploration was performed using a
10-mm trocar placed in the umbilicus with two accessory trocars in the left and right lower quadrants (5 mm). A pediculated solid mass
attached to the antimesenteric edge of the ileum and 8 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve was found. It was covered by inflammatory omentum.
It appeared ischemic due to torsion at the level of the pediculated attachment to the ileum. The inflammatory part of the omentum covering
the mass was laparoscopically resected free, and the mass with the adjacent ileal loop was exteriorized through a circumbilical incision at
the site of the umbilical opening and easily separated from the ileal edge . The ileal wall was normal (Fig. 4).Fig. 1Ultrasound shows a
hypoechoic fusiform mass (arrow)Fig. 2The mass was not vascularized, and surrounding mesenteric fat was hyperechoic and hypervascularized on
a color Doppler ultrasound (asterisk)Fig. 3Computed tomographic scan shows a fusiform, nonenhancing solid mass situated between the right
hemiabdomen and the midline (arrow)Fig. 4Torsion of the pediculated mass covered by inflammatory omentum in contact with the antimesenteric
edge of the small bowel, exteriorized by the umbilical incision Ultrasound shows a hypoechoic fusiform mass (arrow) The mass was not
vascularized, and surrounding mesenteric fat was hyperechoic and hypervascularized on a color Doppler ultrasound (asterisk) Computed
tomographic scan shows a fusiform, nonenhancing solid mass situated between the right hemiabdomen and the midline (arrow) Torsion of the
pediculated mass covered by inflammatory omentum in contact with the antimesenteric edge of the small bowel, exteriorized by the umbilical
incision The histopathologic diagnosis was made by using hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides and immunohistochemistry. The histological
examination revealed a circumscribed mesenchymal myofibroblastic lesion with a focal mesothelial lining and a considerable vascular
component showing excessive hemorrhage and heterogeneous ischemic necrosis. The lesion was composed of clustered and dispersed fibroblastic
spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and a nucleus with fine chromatin without any considerable nuclear atypia or mitotic activity.
Characteristic features were the myxoid configuration of the lesion, the variable hyalinization, and the moderate inflammatory infiltrate
composed mainly of plasma cells and lymphocytes. Immunohistochemistry of the spindle cells showed focal expression of desmin (clone D33),
cytokeratins 8 and 18, and pan-keratin AE1/AE3, while there was no detection of smooth muscle actin (SMA), myogenin/Myf-4, CD34, S100,
c-kit/CD117, epithelial membrane antigen, β-catenin, Bcl-2 protein, melanosome-associated antigen/HMB45, or anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-1/p80. Although the described immunophenotype is not entirely diagnostic of a specific entity, it may be encountered in OMMH, which is
considered a variant of IMT, though this is a subject of debate. The patient’s laboratory values improved dramatically after surgery, and he
had an uneventful postoperative course. He was discharged from the hospital on the fourth postoperative day. No evidence of recurrence was
noted during 2 years of follow-up, and the patient remains under clinical surveillance. IMT was first described in 1937 as a lung tumor and
is more common in children and young adults [4, 6]. IMT is a rare lesion that belongs to the group of soft tissue tumors. The variety of
terms used to describe this entity include inflammatory pseudotumor, plasma cell granuloma, fibrous histiocytoma, solitary mast cell tumor,
and fibroxanthoma . OMMH shares many morphologic features with IMT, and it may represent a variant of IMT, which is still under debate . The
etiologic factors responsible for the development of IMT are not clearly established [1–3, 6]. IMT may represent an immunologic response to
an infectious or noninfectious agent, or it may be a true tumor. Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein-Barr virus, and Escherichia coli have been
associated with IMT. Also, trauma, steroid use, abdominal surgery, and genetic factors have been reported, but the pathogenesis of IMT
remains unclear . Presenting symptoms depend on the involved primary site by the tumor. The lung is the most commonly affected site, but
extrapulmonary IMT may include the mesentery-omentum, upper respiratory tract, genitourinary tract, retroperitoneum, pelvis, head, neck,
spleen, brain, pancreas, liver, and gastrointestinal tract [4, 6]. Documented IMT cases in the mesentery-omentum have been located mostly in
the mesentery of the small bowel and not in the antimesenteric edge, as was the case in our patient . Patients with intraabdominal tumors
most commonly present with intermittent abdominal pain due to the solid mass and the abdominal distention, as well as with weight loss,
malaise, anorexia, and vomiting [3, 7, 9, 10]. Rarely, the presentation may be complicated by an intestinal obstruction, intussusception, or
acute abdomen mimicking acute appendicitis, as was the case in our patient . Laboratory abnormalities are present in a minority of patients
and include hypochromic microcytic anemia, as in our patient; increased serum immunoglobulins; and elevated thrombocyte counts [2, 6, 7].
Leukocytosis, as in our patient, is a rare hematologic finding that should be included in the list of laboratory abnormalities [1, 2]. After
the tumor excision, all of our patient’s symptoms and laboratory values resolved. Microscopically, a variety of patterns can be seen in IMT.
Some lesions consist of a vascularized myxoid stroma with plump mesenchymal cells having vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Cellular
foci alternate with areas of collagenization. Some lesions are characterized by an admixture of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Other lesions
are composed of a compact proliferation of spindle-shaped cells arranged in a storiform or fascicular growth pattern. The mitotic rate is
low . Immunohistochemistry confirms the final diagnosis when mesenchymal cells are immunoreactive for vimentin, desmin, SMA, and S100
protein and do not express CD34 . Up to 71 % are positive for ALK-1; this immunophenotypic feature is more frequent in younger males and is
associated with a high recurrence rate [10, 11]. The differential diagnosis of IMT is difficult even at a microscopic level, and
immunohistochemical analysis helps to differentiate IMTs from other tumors, such as gastrointestinal stromal tumors, leiomyosarcomas, and
inflammatory malignant fibrous histiocytomas . IMTs generally have a benign course, and recurrence or distant metastasis is rare. The
incidence of local recurrence has been reported to be 15–37 % when an IMT is located in the mesentery or the retroperitoneum. Nevertheless,
to our knowledge, no precise recommendations exist in the literature on the necessity of any additional therapy [1, 2, 6]. Complete surgical
resection remains the treatment of choice for IMT [1, 2, 6, 9, 10]. IMT is a rare solid tumor that can at times present in a young child as
acute abdomen mimicking acute appendicitis. A precise diagnosis should be based on histological findings, and complete surgical resection is
necessary. Clinical and laboratory follow-up is mandatory because of an increased risk for local recurrence. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor omental-
mesenteric myxoid hamartoma smooth muscle actin Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions AO contributed to the writing of the manuscript and collecting the articles from the literature. AO is the pediatric surgeon
who first examined the patient in the emergency department. She also contributed to the conception and design of this article. YdV
contributed to the conception and design of this article. She is the pediatric surgeon who assisted in the laparoscopic resection of the
tumor. KK contributed to the conception and design of this article. She is the pediatric radiologist who performed ultrasound and magnetic
resonance imaging of our patient. KS contributed to the conception of this article. She is the pathologist who performed histopathology and
immunohistochemical analysis. KP contributed to the acquisition and interpretation of the data. She is the pathologist who performed
histopathology and immunohistochemical analysis. CS contributed to the conception and design of this article. He is the pediatric surgeon
who performed the laparoscopic resection of the tumor. He made all the necessary corrections to the manuscript. He also approved the study
to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
