Pneumococcal endocarditis is a rare entity, corresponding to 1 to 3% of native valve endocarditis cases. It has a typically adverse
prognosis, with high mortality. There is a reported predilection for the aortic valve; thus, a common presentation is acute left heart
failure. We present a case of a 60-year-old woman with a history of sinusitis, who was admitted with the diagnosis of pneumonia. She rapidly
deteriorated with signs of septic shock and was transferred to the critical care unit. The transesophageal echocardiogram revealed severe
aortic regurgitation due to valve vegetations. Blood cultures were positive for Streptococcus pneumoniae. She underwent cardiac surgery and
had multiple postoperative complications. Nonetheless, the patient made a slow and complete recovery. Infectious endocarditis should be
ruled out if any suspicion arises, and echocardiography should be performed in an early stage in patients with poor response to vasopressors
and inotropes. Patients with pneumococcal endocarditis benefit from an aggressive approach, with performance of early surgery. A endocardite
pneumocócica é uma entidade rara, cuja incidência se situa entre 1% e 3% dos casos de endocardite de válvula nativa. Esta patologia tem um
prognóstico naturalmente adverso, com elevada mortalidade. Relata-se predileção pela válvula aórtica, de forma que é frequente que se
apresente com insuficiência cardíaca. Apresentamos o caso de uma paciente do sexo feminino com 60 anos de idade e história pregressa de
sinusite, admitida com diagnóstico de pneumonia. Após rápida deterioração, com sinais de choque séptico, ela foi transferida para a unidade
de terapia intensiva. O ecocardiograma transesofágico revelou grave refluxo aórtico, devido à presença de vegetações valvares. As
hemoculturas foram positivas para Streptococcus pneumoniae. A paciente foi submetida à cirurgia cardíaca e apresentou múltiplas complicações
pós-operatórias. Apesar disso, apresentou lenta, porém completa recuperação. A endocardite infecciosa deve ser afastada em caso do
surgimento de qualquer suspeita, e a ecocardiografia deve ser realizada precocemente nos pacientes com resposta insuficiente aos
vasopressores e inotrópicos. Pacientes com endocardite pneumocócica se beneficiam de uma abordagem agressiva, com realização precoce da
intervenção cirúrgica. Pneumococcal endocarditis is a rare type of endocarditis, corresponding to only 1 to 3% of native valve endocarditis
cases.(1,2) It has a typically adverse prognosis, with a high mortality rate. The aortic valve is the most commonly affected site. We
present a patient who was initially admitted to our hospital with the diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia, but whose rapid
deterioration prompted us to perform echocardiography, revealing the true diagnosis. A 60-year-old woman with a history of chronic sinusitis
presented to the emergency department with a twelve-day history of postprandial vomiting and dyspnea, dry cough, epigastric pain, and
malaise for 1 day. She was febrile (38.5ºC), tachycardic (110bpm - sinus rhythm on the electrocardiogram), but her blood pressure was
normal. Thoracic auscultation revealed right lung base crackles and no heart murmurs. She had high inflammatory parameters and mild
hypoxemia, and the admission chest radiography showed right hilar congestion (Figure 1A). She was admitted to the Internal Medicine ward
with the diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia. Blood cultures were sampled, and she was empirically medicated with ceftriaxone and
azithromycin. Over the next 2 days, she deteriorated rapidly, with progressive worsening of clinical, analytical (Table 1), and radiological
(Figures 1A to 1C) parameters. She fulfilled the criteria for septic shock and acute respiratory distress syndrome, and she was transferred
to the critical care unit, where mechanical ventilation and vasopressor/inotropic support were started. Because there was no improvement,
transthoracic echocardiogram was performed the following day and despite bad image quality, showed an important aortic regurgitation (Figure
1D). The transesophageal echocardiogram confirmed severe aortic regurgitation and the presence of two aortic valve vegetations, adherent to
the right coronary and to the non-coronary cusps (Figure 1E). Empirical therapy with weight-adjusted vancomycin and gentamycin was then
started. Blood cultures were positive for Streptococcus pneumoniae, which is sensitive to both antibiotics; bronchial aspirate cultures were
negative. Despite 6 days of directed therapy, the patient remained febrile and dependent of inotropic support, and was therefore transferred
to a cardiac surgery center, where massive valve destruction was confirmed. The aortic valve was resected and replaced with a tissue
prosthetic valve, and the antibiotic was changed to intravenous penicillin. The postoperative period was complicated by cardiogenic shock
(with an initial cardiac index of 0.9L/min/m2 and an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction of 20% due to diffuse hypokinesis, with a
good response to inotropic support), atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response, acute kidney injury (with the need of continuous
venovenous hemodiafiltration), and ventilator-associated pneumonia (with Morganella morganii as the causative organism). Although the
patient's recovery was slow, it was complete, and she was discharged forty days after her initial admission. Her clinical and functional
status was excellent at the 3 month follow-up. Her most recent echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular systolic function and a
normally functioning prosthetic aortic valve. Pneumococcal vaccination was later administered. Figure 1 (A to C) - Radiologic evolution -
progressive worsening of pulmonary interstitial edema. (D) - Transthoracic echocardiography - severe aortic regurgitation measured by
continuous Doppler. (E) - Transesophageal echocardiography - aortic valve vegetations on the non-coronary and right coronary cusps. (A to C)
- Radiologic evolution - progressive worsening of pulmonary interstitial edema. (D) - Transthoracic echocardiography - severe aortic
regurgitation measured by continuous Doppler. (E) - Transesophageal echocardiography - aortic valve vegetations on the non-coronary and
right coronary cusps. Evolution of analytical parameters during hospitalization DO - day zero; WBC - white blood cell count; CRP -
C-reactive protein; PaCO2 - arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure; PaO2 - arterial oxygen partial pressure; PaO2/FiO2 - ratio of arterial
partial pressure to inspired oxygen fraction; SBE - standard base excess. Streptococcus pneumoniae is an unusual and rare causative organism
of endocarditis in the penicillin era. It has been associated with alcohol abuse, the elderly, and pre-existing valvular heart disease(1)
and might present with concomitant pneumonia and meningitis, as part of Austrian syndrome.(3) These conditions did not appear to contribute
to pneumococcal endocarditis in this case. Pneumococcal bacteremia is commonly a consequence of lung infection, but rarely, it may follow
otitis media and sinusitis (13.7%).(1) Due to its typical acute presentation, peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis are seldom
evident.(1) According to previous reviews, there is a predilection of pneumococcal endocarditis to affect the aortic valve (74.4%); thus, it
will commonly present as acute heart failure,(1,4) and be associated with higher mortality.(5) The pursuit of aggressive treatment options
is essential in these patients, and a combined medical and surgical approach seems to show improved outcomes.(5) In summary, this case
represents the successful treatment of a rare case of aggressive pneumococcal endocarditis, and it demonstrates how it can mimic other
diseases, such as pneumonia. High suspicion is essential to facilitate the performance of echocardiography at an early stage and to apply
the best treatment strategy. Patients with pneumococcal endocarditis benefit from an aggressive approach, with performance of early surgery.
Conflicts of interest: None. Responsible editor: Thiago Costa Lisboa
