Neuropathy, the dominant clinical feature of POEMS syndrome, is typically distal, symmetric, and slowly progressive with demyelinating
changes. After a gradual proximal spread, it usually results in severe muscle weakness and functional disabilities. Cases characterized by
acute onset polyneuropathy are rarely described. In the present report, we describe a 32-year-old male diagnosed as POEMS syndrome, but
presenting with a rapidly evolving polyneuropathy. Detailed clinical, electrophysiological, and genetic studies revealed a coexisting
underdiagnosed inherited axonal neuropathy, namely Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 2A2. The patient received lenalidomide-based chemotherapy and
consolidated by autologous stem cell transplantation for his POEMS syndrome, which improved the neurological disability. In most conditions,
only 1 cause is responsible for a patient's polyneuropathy. However, an insidious inherited neuropathy can be overlooked, when an acquired
condition is present. The case illustrated here, to the best of our knowledge, is the first one with coexistent axonal type Charcot-Marie-
Tooth disease and POEMS syndrome, suggesting that an unrecognized inherited neuropathy may change the disease course of a further acquired
neuropathy. Neuropathy is the most common initial symptom of patients with polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal
gammopathy, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome. Its prominent feature is a slowly progressive disease course with demyelinating
electrophysiological changes. Sensory symptoms always precede motor dysfunction, and neuropathic pain has been reported in 10% to 15% cases.
Following muscle weakness and atrophy undoubtedly result in functional disabilities that severely impair patients’ quality of life.1,2
However, cases with abrupt onset and rapidly evolving polyneuropathy are rarely described. And the underlying reasons remain largely
unknown.3 Herein, we report a POEMS patient with acute polyneuropathy and explore the causes. A 32-year-old male presented with paresthesia
and weakness in his distal extremities. Over time, he developed marked neuropathic pain in his fingers. Simultaneously, muscle weakness
spread, and was more predominant in his lower extremities. One month after the onset of these neurological symptoms, he could not dress
himself and became wheelchair-bound. No symptoms associated with cranial or autonomic nerves were noted at the time. Serial nerve conduction
studies were performed during the disease course, which revealed prolonged distal motor latencies, slowed nerve conduction velocities, and
decreased compound muscle action potential amplitudes in a progressive pattern (Table 1). Motor Conduction Studies Before and After
Treatment On referral to our hospital, there were prominent motor (overall neuropathy limitation scale : arm score, 4; leg score, 5) and
sensory deficits (neuropathy total symptom score-6 : aching pain score, 3.66). Physical examination showed hepatosplenomegaly, generalized
lymphadenopathy, sporadic hemangioma across his trunk and skin hyperpigmentation. Laboratory studies revealed: IgG-λ monoclonal protein
(detected by serum immunofixation, but not measurable on serum protein electrophoresis), thrombocytosis (371 × 109/L; reference range,
100–300 × 109/L), hypothyroidism (thyrotropin 6.6 μU/mL; reference range, 0.4–4.0 μU/mL), and hyperprolactinemia (22 ng/mL; reference range,
5–20 ng/mL). The cerebrospinal fluid study showed elevated protein (0.9 g/L, reference range, 0–0.4 g/L) and pleocytosis (8 × 106 cells/L,
reference range, 0–3 × 106 cells/L). Bone marrow aspirate revealed 0.5% plasma cells with normal morphology (reference range, 0–1.5%). No
signs of extravascular volume overload were noted. Osteosclerosis was not seen on x-ray. The clinical constellation suggested a diagnosis of
POEMS syndrome. However, the characteristic acute polyneuropathy was atypical, as the median duration from disease onset to inability to
walk in POEMS patients was 9 months.3 To reach a diagnosis, we measured the serum level of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which
was elevated dramatically (5483 pg/mL; reference range, <600 pg/mL). His past medical history was significant for mild weakness of the
distal lower limbs since puberty. Muscle atrophy developed gradually, and pes cavus was noted 20 years prior to our evaluation, although no
medical consultation was sought. Further inquiry revealed a similar clinical profile shared by several members of his family (Figure 1),
raising the suspicion of an inherited peripheral neuropathy, especially Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. (A) Pedigree of the Charcot-
Marie-Tooth disease 2A2 family with MFN2 c.314C>T mutation. The open symbols represent unaffected males (open squares) and unaffected
females (open circles), and filled symbols represent affected males (closed squares) and affected females (closed circles), confirmed by
genetic tests. The arrow indicates proband. (B) Serial changes of motor dysfunction (assessed by Overall Neuropathy Limitation Scale ) and
serum vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels at diagnosis and after treatment (induction therapy, and autologous stem cell
transplantation ). ASCT = autologous stem cell transplantation; ONLS = Overall Neuropathy Limitation Scale, VEGF = vascular endothelial
growth factor. Overall features of the current disorder were consistent with POEMS syndrome, which requires prompt management. Autologous
stem cell transplantation is the preferred treatment for POEMS patients, with universal and durable response.4 However, severe neurological
dysfunction and poor performance status made the patient too sick to undergo transplantation immediately. Moreover, organomegaly was
associated with peripheral blood stem cell mobilization failure.5 Therefore, we first gave him 3 courses of lenalidomide (10 mg daily, days
1–21 out of a 28-day cycle) and dexamethasone (40 mg weekly, day 1, 8, 15, 22 out of a 28-day cycle) as an induction therapy, which resulted
in an improved neurological function (ONLS: arm score 3; leg score 5) and remission of organomegaly. He then received high-dose melphalan
(200 mg/m2) with autologous stem cell transplantation as consolidation. Extensive assessments were performed 3 months later. Motor function
showed further recovery and the patient could dress part of himself and walk with aid (ONLS: arm score 3; leg score 4), although fine motor
skills (e.g., fastening small buttons, zipping up zippers) were still attenuated, which was consistent with the partially improved
electrophysiological findings (Table 1). Neuropathic pain was ameliorated (NTSS-6: aching pain score, 1). His IgG-λ monoclonal protein
disappeared and serum VEGF level was back to normal (300 pg/mL), as well as other laboratory abnormalities, including thyrotropin,
prolactin, and platelet count. In terms of his suspicious inherited neuropathy, the genetic test covering 27 genes associated with various
CMT subtypes, including AARS, DNM2, EGR2, FGD4, FIG4, GARS, GDAP1, GJB1, HSPB1, HSPB8, KIF1B, LITAF, LMNA, MED25, MFN2, MPZ, MTMR2, NDRG1,
NEFL, PMP22, PRPS1, PRX, RAB7A, SBF2, SH3TC2, TRPV4 and YARS, revealed a heterozygous missense mutation in mitofusin 2 (MFN2, c.314C>T),
which predicted a substitution of threonine by methionine. This genetic change, which has been described in patients with CMT2A2 with late
onset and mild disease, was also detected in other affected members in the pedigree (I-2, II-1, and II-3) and transmitted in an autosomal
dominant pattern.6 Further screening of monoclonal gammopathy and serum VEGF level did not reveal any abnormality in either neurologically
symptomatic or asymptomatic family members. Therefore, the diagnosis of a coexisting CMT2A2 was established. Orthopedic consultation for his
pes cavus deformity was obtained and daily stretching exercise was suggested. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case with
coexistent axonal type CMT and POEMS syndrome, which illustrates several noteworthy issues. In young patients with peripheral neuropathy,
even acquired etiologies are revealed, inherited component should also be kept in mind. CMT is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous
inherited peripheral neuropathy. Many patients have a long, slowly progressive history, and could be symptomatically mild, and remain
undiagnosed until the onset of an acquired disorder. Concerning the peripheral neuropathy in this patient, serial eletrophysiological
studies gave us a unique opportunity to depict its progression in the presence of both inherited and acquired disorders. Simultaneously
progressed demyelination and axonal degradation indicate a mixed neuropathy rather than ones that developed sequentially. Microvascular
hyperpermeability induced by VEGF, with blood–nerve barrier opening, is thought to underlie the demyelinating polyneuropathy of POEMS
syndrome. And, the chronic injury of nerve vasculature is consistent with a prolonged clinical course.7,8 In the present case, a pre-
existing axonal neuropathy (CMT2A2), although relatively silent that did not interfere the daily life of this patient, rendered the nerve
more susceptible to further injury. This might be responsible for an atypical peripheral neuropathy in POEMS, that is, acute worsening and
rapid exacerbation. In terms of treatment, initial disease control with lenalidomide, followed by autologous stem cell transplantation is
safe and effective for POEMS syndrome.9 Although no disease-modifying therapy is available for CMT, orthopedic foot surgery and daily
stretching exercise are helpful and could improve the quality of life, which is only made possible by providing a correct diagnosis.
Moreover, accumulating evidence indicate that a cryptic and superimposed inflammatory process exists in a subgroup of patients with CMT
disease, which may explain the considerable phenotypic heterogeneity. Clinical benefits were observed in sporadic cases treated with anti-
inflammatory agents.10 Therefore, it will be of great interest to see whether the peripheral neuropathy of this patient could be further
improved with our treatment in a long-term view. Abbreviations: CMT = Charcot-Marie-Tooth, NTSS-6 = Neuropathy Total Symptom Score-6, ONLS =
Overall Neuropathy Limitation Scale, POEMS = Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, Monoclonal gammopathy and Skin changes, VEGF =
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor. Disclosure: Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being included in the study. Funding: the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 81570195) and the Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (grant No. 7142130)
supported this study. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
