Arthroplasty is a proven treatment option for glenohumeral osteoarthritis. Common indications include primary or posttraumatic
osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis of the humeral head, rotator cuff tear arthropathy and rheumatoid osteoarthritis. Arthroplasty is rarely
performed among patients with glenohumeral dysmelia. An overuse of the upper limb in patients with thalidomide-induced phocomelia and people
with similar congenital deformities like dysmelia results in premature wear of the shoulder joint. This study aims to evaluate our
experience with cases of glenohumeral osteoarthritis caused by dysmelia and treated with arthroplasty. To date, few reports on the outcome
of shoulder arthroplasty exist on this particular patient group. We included four dysmelic patients (five shoulders) with substantial
glenoid dysplasia in a prospective database after approval by the local ethics committee. Once conservative treatment options had been
exhausted, the patients were treated with shoulder arthroplasty and assessed clinically and radiographically before and after surgery. The
mean patient age at the time of surgery was 50.4 years. The minimum follow-up time was 24 months (24–91 months). All patients experienced a
considerable improvement of range of motion (ROM) and a relief of pain. No intra- or postoperative complications appeared. Patients with
dysmelia have acceptable short and mid-term results with resurfacing hemiarthroplasty. It is an effective although somewhat complicated
method to relieve pain and improve movement. Long-term performance of arthroplasty in patients with dysmelia remains to be seen,
particularly with regard to the remaining problem of the altered and often deficient glenoid. The cases of people with thalidomide induced
phocomelia serve as an example as 2012 was the 50th anniversary of one of the most tragic occurrences in the history of modern medicine.
Today the victims of thalidomide have grown up and suffer from severe physical problems. Their average age now is between 52 and 57 years.
Gradually, restriction of mobility and increasing pain result in a diminished quality of life of the affected young people [1, 2]. The
combination of several factors promote the development of osteoarthritis, as life expectancy has increased in this population. Anatomical
anomaly of the upper limbs affects the bony anatomy of the proximal humerus as well as the glenoid as defined by dysplasia and the
glenohumeral articular surface. Furthermore, it affects the soft tissue by means of the glenohumeral ligaments and capsule, the muscles
themselves and their insertions. Overloading and overstressing lead to severe premature failure of the affected joints. Patients suffer from
a reduced functional ROM, limb contractures and increasing pain, which lead to limited mobility and a loss of function in activities of
daily routine. Patients develop alternative movements in order to remain independent of other people’s help and carry on tasks of daily
living. Limited mobility of adjacent joints leads to extreme stresses on the shoulder joint, which attempts to compensate this disability.
Despite intensive physical therapy, long-term sequelae have increased in our patients in recent years. The primary aim of this study was to
evaluate our experience with cases of glenohumeral osteoarthritis caused by dysmelia and treated with arthroplasty. Only a few articles
report on the development of osteoarthritis in patients with glenoid dysplasia . Our patient series showed similar signs of physical
impairment and psychological distress. When the patients initially visited our clinic, the primary symptoms were increasing shoulder pain
and a restricted ROM. Despite exploiting all conservative therapy options, joint function deteriorated, and pain increased over several
years, leading to severe impairment necessitating invasive therapeutic measures. Some 10.000–12.000 children in more than 46 countries all
over the world were estimated to have been born with severe physical disabilities until 1962, a result of the sleep-inducing drug
thalidomide, if it had been taken in the first trimester of pregnancy . Thalidomide-induced embryopathy results in malformation of various
degrees. The exact teratogenic mechanism of thalidomide causing limb malformations remains unclear [9, 10]. Children had abnormally short
limbs, to some extent they showed an absence of the proximal portion of limbs and the distal parts being attached to the trunk - a condition
which is known as phocomelia, which is more common in the upper extremities. Literature supports our clinical impression that there is a
growing need for information as the thalidomide victims are getting older and their problems in everyday life increase every day [2, 7]. The
Department of Gerontology at the University of Heidelberg has recently evaluated 900 questionnaires of 2380 contacted thalidomide victims.
It becomes apparent that one third of the respondents are already afflicted with recently diagnosed acquired osteoarthrosis of the shoulder,
58 % are afflicted with shoulder aches and about 40 % are suffering from a myasthenia or muscle hardening of the upper limbs. There is a
significant increase of all disorders compared to results obtained 5 years ago . This study investigates a consecutive series of four
dysmelia patients who underwent shoulder arthroplasty at the University of Heidelberg. All clinical and radiographic data from these
patients were evaluated retrospectively. Three patients suffered from thalidomide-induced phocomelia. In one patient dysmelia occurred
without a known cause. All patients suffered from increasing shoulder pain and a restricted ROM due to osteoarthritis and underwent
arthroplasty in our hospital. All conservative therapy options had been exhausted. An arthrodesis was not considered an acceptable solution.
Regular development of the shoulder and upper limbs was never observed. Additionally three patients showed pronounced ankylosis at the elbow
and wrist joints. Excessive wear of the glenohumeral joint was observed in all patients. The wear process led to significant pain and
impaired mobility, which even led to incapacity to work and provide for oneself and a diminished quality of life. Limitations extended over
several years and the usual conservative measures were taken to delay the progression of the disease. Patients reported having had a long
period of suffering. Humeral head resurfacing prostheses were used in all cases but one, in which a stemless prosthesis was used. All
patients agreed with the publication of their clinical course (Ethics committee vote: S-305/2007, Ethikkommission Medizinische Fakultät
Heidelberg). The subjects were assessed clinically before and after surgery quantifying their ROM and the pain on the visual analog scale
(VAS). ROM was quantified with a goniometer. Standard radiological diagnostics include conventional x-ray images: true anterior-posterior
(AP) view (Fig. 1a) and axial view (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1 a and b: Preoperative true AP and axial view of the left shoulder show the displacement
of the joint and hypoplasia of the glenoid. X-rays reveal a small, irregularly shaped bone (Case 3). Poor ROM prevents optimal visualization
of the bone stock and the glenoid surface a and b: Preoperative true AP and axial view of the left shoulder show the displacement of the
joint and hypoplasia of the glenoid. X-rays reveal a small, irregularly shaped bone (Case 3). Poor ROM prevents optimal visualization of the
bone stock and the glenoid surface The dysplastic glenoid cavity appeared irregularly shaped. The humeral heads were deformed and flattened
in this region. An assessment of regional anatomy was limited by severe defects of the shoulder joint and necessitated performing computed
tomography (CT) (Fig. 2a and b).Fig. 2 a and b: The cross-sectional pictures of the shoulder demonstrate the preoperative wear of all parts
of the glenohumeral joint with a hypoplastic glenoid (Case 3). A large inferior socket defect can be seen. (a - coronal plane. b - axial
plane) a and b: The cross-sectional pictures of the shoulder demonstrate the preoperative wear of all parts of the glenohumeral joint with a
hypoplastic glenoid (Case 3). A large inferior socket defect can be seen. (a - coronal plane. b - axial plane) The operation was performed
in beach chair position under general anaesthesia through the standard anterior deltopectoral approach using the technique described by Neer
. If the long biceps tendon was present, a tenotomy in addition to extensive capsular tissue release was performed. Of note, none of these
patients had a well-defined rotator cuff, but all had a substantial joint capsule constriction and adhesion to surrounding structures.
Peripheral osteophytes were removed from the humeral head in order to enable the necessary dislocation. The status of the rotator cuff, the
humeral head and the glenoid cavity were used to determine the final implant. Medialization of the glenohumeral joint and an Outerbridge
chondromalacia grade III to IV was noted in all patients . Only one patient showed an intact glenoid socket suitable for attachment of a
glenoid component (Aequalis Glenoid medium, Tornier Inc., Edina, MN, USA, Case 4, Fig. 5). A correct central placement was targeted. Reaming
was performed without opening the cancellous bone. An individualized glenoid component was not necessary. All other patients received hemi-
arthroplasty due to a combination of substantial bone stock defect and dysplastic development and misalignment of the glenoid, making
reconstruction impossible. Cup prostheses were used in all cases but one, in which an anatomic prosthesis (Simpliciti®, Tornier Inc., Edina,
MN, USA) was used (Case 3, Fig. 3). Aequalis® Resurfacing Head (Tornier Inc., Edina, MN, USA) was used twice (Cases 1 and 2). One case was
treated with an Epoca RH Cup (Argomedical®, Cham, Switzerland) and a glenoid component (Aequalis®, Tornier Inc., Edina, MN, USA; Case 4).
When using the resurfacing prosthesis, the humeral head was measured and a central guide pin was placed through the favoured axis before
preparing the head with hemispherical reamers. The cement-free prostheses were impacted in press-fit technique in a slight valgus position.
Before implanting the anatomic prosthesis an anatomical neck resection was performed. The centre of the head was located and a low profile
collar was inserted before the definitive head was implanted. After implantation, the anterior capsule and the presumed subscapularis tendon
were repaired using non-absorbable sutures.Fig. 3 a and b: Postoperative pictures as an example for a patient (Case 3) without glenoid
component of due to substantial bone stock defect (true AP and axial view of the left shoulder) a and b: Postoperative pictures as an
example for a patient (Case 3) without glenoid component of due to substantial bone stock defect (true AP and axial view of the left
shoulder) After surgery the arm was immediately placed in a splint (Tricodur® Gilchrist plus, BSN medical, Hamburg, Germany) for 2 weeks and
all patients underwent a standard protocol for physical therapy with a rehabilitation programme. Active and passive exercises were limited
to 90° as to abduction and flexion. External rotation was prohibited postoperatively for 4 weeks. After that time, free active and passive
movement was allowed without any limitation. The statistical analysis was done with SPSS 20.0 software (IBM SPSS Statistics, Munich,
Germany). Usually a non-parametric test like the Wilcoxon rank sum test should be used for a small number of cases. From other studies it is
well known that these parameters are normally distributed in the population, so we decided to use the t-test as it has better discriminatory
power. The paired t test was used to compare the preoperative and postoperative scores. Mean values and the standard deviations (SD) were
calculated. Values of p < 0.05 were considered significant. The findings of the preoperative and postoperative clinical examinations are
shown in the following graphs and Tables 1, 2 and 3.Table 1Individual preoperative findingsPatient Age at time of arthroplasty ROMVASFlexion
Abduction External rotation Internal rotation a 1 right4730300gluteal muscle8/101 left48909030sacrum7/102 left504060−10lateral thigh6/103
left512035−45lateral thigh8/104 left58209010lateral thigh8/10 aInternal rotation was graded according to the posterior spinal region that
could be reached by the thumbTable 2Individual postoperative findingsPatient Follow-up ROMVASFlexion Abduction External rotation Internal
rotation a 1 right6014012055L20/101 left4914012045L30/102 left3216013010L50/103 left241109015gluteal muscle3/104 left9117017025gluteal
muscle1/10 aInternal rotation was graded according to the posterior spinal region that could be reached by the thumbTable 3Preoperative and
postoperative findingsPreoperativea Postoperativea p value**Constant score (points)11.2 ± 5.3 (7 to 20)78.4 ± 13,8 (54 to 88).0006VAS
(points)7.4 ± 0.9 (6 to 8)0.8 ± 1.3 (0 to 3).0002Flexion (deg)40.0 ± 29.2 (20 to 90)144.0 ± 23.0 (110 to 170).0033Abduction (deg)61.0 ± 28.8
(30 to 90)126.0 ± 28.8 (90 to 170).0034External rotation (deg)−3.0 ± 27.7 (−45 to 30)30.0 ± 19.4 (10 to 55).0306Internal rotation
(deg)−53.0 ± 17.2 (−80 to −40)−76.0 ± 8.9 (−80 to −60).0402**Preoperative compared with postoperative. The level of significance was set at
p < 0.05 aThe values are given as the mean and the standard deviation, with the range in parentheses Individual preoperative findings
aInternal rotation was graded according to the posterior spinal region that could be reached by the thumb Individual postoperative findings
aInternal rotation was graded according to the posterior spinal region that could be reached by the thumb Preoperative and postoperative
findings **Preoperative compared with postoperative. The level of significance was set at p < 0.05 aThe values are given as the mean and the
standard deviation, with the range in parentheses All patients benefited from almost complete remission of pain and significant improvement
of ROM. Only Cases 3 and 4 reported occasional pain of the shoulder, particularly in terminal motions. None of the patients required
reoperation. No other intraoperative or postoperative complications like wound infection, hematoma or neurological deficiencies occurred
(Fig. 4).Fig. 4 a and b: Clinical examination shows excellent ROM despite ankylosis of the elbow at follow-up (Case 4 - left shoulder) a and
b: Clinical examination shows excellent ROM despite ankylosis of the elbow at follow-up (Case 4 - left shoulder) Furthermore, the Constant
score was calculated . The mean Constant score improved from 11.2 points (7 to 20 points) preoperatively to 78.4 points (54 to 88 points)
postoperatively. Flexion and abduction were significantly higher. Significant differences were also found in external and internal rotation.
Radiographical signs of implant loosening (radiolucent lines around the humeral implants or osteolysis) were not found in our group. Neither
radiolucent lines nor signs of loosening were found around the glenoid component in Case 4. Neither malposition nor humeral head dislocation
was noted. In our thalidomide patients, the humeral head was concentrically reduced in the deficient glenoid. No signs of emerging glenoid
erosion or wear were found in postoperative x-rays. No heterotopic ossification was found. No intra- or postoperative complications
appeared. None of the patients required reoperation (Fig. 5a and b)Fig. 5 a and b show total shoulder arthroplasty (Case 4) at follow-up
(true AP and axial view of the left shoulder). a and b show total shoulder arthroplasty (Case 4) at follow-up (true AP and axial view of the
left shoulder) Patients with glenohumeral joint dysplasia have limited treatment options. Smaller, altered anatomy and fibrosis of the
capsule and ligaments make surgery extraordinarily difficult. In addition, the treatment must adapt to the requirements of life and delay
the progression of the disease. Arthrodesis of the shoulder would reduce pain. However, in combination with coexistent ankylosis of the
elbow or wrist joint, it results in a total loss of functionality of the limb. Arthroplasty with stemmed or reverse shoulder prosthesis is
not an adequate procedure for patients with glenohumeral joint dysplasia. New concepts for anatomical reconstruction have been developed
over the years to restore anatomy without loss of the humeral bone stock . Humeral resurfacing arthroplasty can be an alternative to
conventional arthroplasty. Resurfacing arthroplasty entails less invasive surgery, shorter operation times, little to no risk of
periprosthetic stem fractures or loosening of the glenoid component and preservation of bone stock without loss of humerus length. This
allows for easier revision surgery, if necessary. Meanwhile, humeral head resurfacing prostheses have been used in many shoulder diseases
including primary and posttraumatic osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and cuff-tear arthropathy. These indications
have proven useful in younger patients [17, 18], but are not suitable for advanced necrosis or deformation of the humeral head . Due to
anatomic anomalies - most notably dysplasia of the glenoid and no well-defined rotator cuff - a total shoulder prosthesis could not be
implanted. Anchoring a glenoid component, either anatomical or reverse, was not feasible due to the lack of glenoid bone stock. In addition,
it was not possible to use bone-sparing glenoid components as suggested by Sears et al. or to reconstruct the socket of the glenoid in all
three thalidomide patients . Consequently, the patients received hemiarthroplasties. In order to expose the anatomic neck of the proximal
humerus and to excavate humeral head osteophytes, an improvement of external rotation using a sufficient soft tissue release was performed.
The decisive argument for resurfacing arthroplasty is the possibility of having the free choice of retroversion as well as inclination
angle. The lack of surgical landmarks requires substantial experience to avoid imprecise positioning of the prosthesis and improper soft
tissue balancing. The difficulty in achieving arthroplasty stability is to perform a balancing act in the management of the bone and soft
tissue in dysmelic patients. Arthroplasty among patients with glenohumeral dysmelia is a rarely performed surgery, and as a result no long-
term results are available. Only one source, Newman et al., reported a case of a 35-year-old woman with thalidomide-induced phocomelia. In
1999 he had predicted a rise of degenerative joint diseases in this population . Duralde et al. reported on two cases with Apert’s Syndrome
and Erb’s palsy treated with resurfacing prostheses . ROM did not change significantly at follow-up, but arthroplasty resulted in high
patient satisfaction and excellent pain relief. Mansat et al. treated 4 patients with not otherwise specified dysmelia using cup prostheses
without glenoid resurfacing, even in cases of eccentric glenoid wear. They reported, that the worst results were obtained for rheumatoid
arthritis and dysplasia (Constant 60 points; follow-up 33.7 months; mean age 62 years). A pain score of 11.8 points was reported according
to Constant criteria of 15 points . This correlates with our patient series, which reported a mean pain of 13 points according to Constant
criteria. Smith et al. reported on three cases of hemiarthroplasty with stemmed prostheses in a series of twelve patients with primary
glenoid dysplasia . The mean age at onset of symptoms was 50 years with mean pain ratings on the visual analogue score of 5 out of 10
postoperatively. The follow-up time was not described. Due to of the lack of glenoid bone stock, inserting a glenoid component would have
been difficult and the results were described as relatively disappointing compared with standard procedures. The premature development of
osteoarthritis in patients with primary dysplasia of the glenoid has been described in the literature [25, 26]. Allen et al. reported an
update to the series by Sperling et al. . They treated 22 shoulders with glenoid dysplasia and secondary osteoarthritis using eight
hemiarthroplasties. The authors recommended that glenoid deficiency and cartilage wear should be addressed at the time of shoulder
arthroplasty in patients with glenoid dysplasia and glenoid problems necessitating revision surgery were frequent. Our experience would
confirm this. We performed glenoid replacement in only one case in which a bone stock of the glenoid was suited to accept a glenoid
component. Both Smith et al. and Allen et al. reported on a specific disease limited to the glenoid, in contrast to our series where the
surrounding soft tissue was also involved [24, 27]. Sewell et al. described a series of 13 shoulders in 10 patients. Five unconstrained
TSAs, 4 linked (constrained) TSAs, and 4 HAs (2 stemmed and 2 resurfacing implants) were implanted. He was able to prove that arthroplasty
provides the ability to improve pain and function and concluded that shoulder arthroplasty is a viable treatment option in patients with
skeletal dysplasia. He explained that their high revision rate of 31 % was due to multiple pathologic joint processes compared to the
general population. A limitation of this study is the low incidence of disease, resulting in the small sample size, and making a randomized
controlled setup unfeasible. The particular and varied shoulder anatomy of the individual patients is the reason for the heterogeneity of
the prosthetic selection, which we feel is necessary to offer the patient the best treatment. This patient series indicates that shoulder
arthroplasty is a feasible treatment option for patients with dysmelia who develop osteoarthritis of the shoulder. Short to midterm results
support the procedure of humeral head resurfacing. Resurfacing and stemless shoulder arthroplasty seem to be a promising option to treat
non-anatomical conditions, especially if conservative measures have been exhausted and arthrodesis is not desired. A considerable
improvement of ROM and pain reduction was achieved in all patients. Prior to surgery the expectations of an operation and personal demand
must be clarified because arthroplasty cannot become a substitute for emerging impaired mobility, improper use or mechanical overstressing.
However, long-term performance of arthroplasty in patients with dysmelia remains to be seen. Written informed consent was obtained from all
the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor of this journal. All patients agreed with the publication of their clinical course (Ethics committee vote: S-305/2007).
anteroposterior computed tomography range of motion visual analog scale Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions TPM acquired and analysed data, drafted and wrote the manuscript. NB translated and revised the text
critically. TB set up statistics and interpreted data. FZ performed the surgery and supervised the study. All authors made substantive
intellectual contributions, performed research, read and approved the final manuscript.
