An 84-year-old man with hypertension and a history of deep venous thrombosis (on warfarin) was admitted with shortness of breath presumed to
be due to congestive heart failure. Echocardiogram performed the following day showed a low-normal ejection fraction with signs of elevated
right-sided pressures but was otherwise normal. He improved with diuretic therapy but after a few days was found to be hypotensive with a
concomitant rise in creatinine with decreased urine output. This was felt to be secondary to over-diuresis but he did not respond to small
boluses of intravenous fluids as his kidney function continued to worsen and hypotension persisted. He was transferred to the intermediate
care unit where a rapid, bedside ultrasound revealed a new, moderate-sized pericardial effusion with tamponade physiology.
Pericardiocentesis, with removal of 750 cc of frank blood, led to dramatic improvement in blood pressure, kidney function, and urine output.
Here, we demonstrate the utility of point-of-care ultrasound in a community hospital setting where urgent echocardiogram is not routinely
available. We also report acute kidney injury due to pericardial tamponade reversed with therapeutic pericardiocentesis. An 84-year-old man
with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, esophageal cancer (in remission), and deep venous thrombosis on warfarin presented to the
emergency department with shortness of breath. Transthoracic echocardiogram the day following admission revealed a low-normal ejection
fraction with left ventricular hypertrophy and signs of elevated right-sided pressures but was otherwise normal. The clinical diagnosis was
congestive diastolic heart failure. His initial laboratory studies included a normal creatinine and a therapeutic International normalized
ratio (INR) of 2.6. The patient was started on intravenous diuretic therapy with improvement in symptoms after several days of negative
fluid balance. On the fifth day of hospitalization, the patient was found to be hypotensive. Vital signs revealed an oral temperature of
97.9°F, a pulse of 99 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 77/55 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 24 with oxygen saturation of 95% on 2 liters of
oxygen by nasal cannula. He was found to be lethargic, having complained of generalized weakness earlier in the day. Jugular venous
distension was noted on neck examination with clear lungs and distant heart sounds. Other studies revealed an INR of 3.5 and fractional
excretion of sodium of 0.3%. Renal ultrasound was normal and the patient was not on any nephro-toxic medications. The assessment was that of
over-diuresis with pre-renal acute kidney injury but he did not respond to small boluses of intravenous fluids as his kidney function
continued to deteriorate and hypotension persisted. Due to worsening decompensation in the evening hours, he was then moved to the
intermediate care unit for further management where point-of-care ultrasonography by the internal medicine resident was performed revealing
a moderate pericardial effusion with right atrial collapse consistent with tamponade physiology (Fig. 1, Video clip 1 & 2). Pulsus paradoxus
was then found with a drop in systolic blood pressure of 20 mmHg with inspiration. Urgent pericardiocentesis was performed with removal of
750 cc of frank blood. Post-procedure, the patient's urine output and kidney function normalized with creatinine level of 0.8 mg/dl at
discharge after a peak of 3.6 mg/dl just prior to pericardial drainage (Fig. 2). Pericardial fluid was negative for infection and
malignancy. Given his history of esophageal carcinoma, a Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) was done which was
negative for any evidence of cancer. Warfarin was discontinued and a repeat echocardiogram 4 weeks after the procedure did not show any
pericardial effusion. Bedside point-of-care ultrasound. Subxiphoid view showing pericardial effusion with right atrial collapse.
PE=pericardial effusion, RA=right atrium, RV=right ventricle, LV=left ventricle. Serum creatinine (in mg/dl) and urine output (in liters),
pre and post pericardiocentesis (Day 5). Here we present a patient with cardiac tamponade leading to acute kidney injury due to spontaneous
hemopericardium in the setting of supratherapeutic anticoagulation. Factors which influence development of cardiac tamponade are the rate of
accumulation of pericardial fluid and pericardial membrane stiffness. Rapid accumulation of fluid causes maximum pericardial stretch before
compensatory mechanism can be activated thus leading to increased pericardial pressures and tamponade at much lower volumes. In slower
accumulation, the compensatory mechanisms have more time to be engaged; as such, much higher volumes are required to cause the tamponade
(1). In our case, hemopericardium was suspected upon discovery of his tamponade physiology as there was no other explanation for such a
rapid accumulation of pericardial fluid. Typical symptoms of cardiac tamponade are weakness and dyspnea related to decreased cardiac output
and hypoperfusion (1). Our patient had decreased urine output and pre-renal acute kidney injury. On physical examination, patients can have
tachycardia, jugular venous distension, and muffled heart sounds (2). Pulsus paradoxus can also be found, defined as a drop in systolic
blood pressure of more than 10 mm Hg during inspiration (3). In addition, phasic respiratory changes in pulse-oximetry waveform amplitude
can be helpful in identification of cardiac tamponade; this was present in our patient as well (4). Chest radiography with an enlarged
cardiac silhouette and EKG with low voltage (or electrical alternans) are useful diagnostic tools that were subsequently found in our
patient but may not be seen in all patients (Figs. 3 and 4) (5). Echocardiogram remains the mainstay in diagnosing pericardial effusions and
tamponade. Right atrial inversion during systole and, ultimately, right ventricle collapse during early diastole are typical findings (6).
12 Lead EKG with low voltage. (a) CXR at presentation and (b) CXR on Day 5 at time of tamponade diagnosis demonstrating acute expansion of
the cardiac silhouette. We reviewed cases of cardiac tamponade secondary to an elevated INR (7–10) and we also reviewed case reports of
cardiac tamponade with acute kidney injury (11). To our knowledge not many cases of hemopericardium due to a high INR leading to acute
kidney injury have been reported. Our case is unique for a number of reasons. First, the patient's initial echocardiogram just a few days
earlier did not show any pericardial effusion demonstrating that his significant pericardial accumulation had developed acutely during his
hospital stay. Second, there was early diagnostic closure as the patient was thought to be hypotensive and to have pre-renal acute kidney
injury related to over-diuresis; pericardial tamponade was not considered initially because he had no pericardial effusion just a few days
prior. Finally, in a community hospital setting that lacks 24-h intensivist staffing, critical care, or cardiology fellows, and where
echocardiography is not readily available in the evening/overnight hours, the use of bedside ultrasound was crucial in the early diagnosis
and timely treatment of our patient. Sub-Xiphoid view video. This case also highlights the heart–kidney relationship in an acute setting.
The patient went into acute oliguric pre-renal failure which resolved completely after pericardiocentesis. Typically cardio-renal syndrome
(CRS) type 1 is described as acute heart dysfunction leading to acute renal failure. This is commonly secondary to acute decompensated heart
failure due to cardiogenic shock. Cardiac tamponade is an unusual form of decompensated heart failure and, thus when it leads to acute renal
failure due to hypoperfusion, it can be described as an atypical or unusual form of type 1 CRS (12, 13). Apical 4 chamber view video. In
patients on therapeutic anticoagulation with evidence of hypoperfusion or acute kidney injury, cardiac tamponade should always be kept in
mind as a potential cause even if the absence of any such pericardial effusion was recently proven. Bedside, point-of-care ultrasound is a
very useful method for early diagnosis and management of cardiac tamponade particularly in a community hospital setting. My mother Gurpreet
Kaur for her love and support. The authors have not received any funding or benefits from industry or elsewhere to conduct this study.
