Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is a rare paraneoplastic disorder associated with
an underlying plasma cell dyscrasia and multiorgan failure. POEMS syndrome is potentially fatal and adversely affects quality of life.
Oedema is common with many patients affected by pleural effusions, ascites and lower limb oedema. Bioelectrical impedance vector analysis
(BIVA) is a non-invasive assessment tool, which enables rapid bedside assessments of nutrition and hydration. This paper describes the use
of sequential BIVA assessments to evaluate the response to diuretic therapy in a woman aged 52 years with POEMS syndrome. This case
illustrates the potential to use BIVA to conduct longitudinal assessments of hydration status. This provides opportunities for further
research using BIVA to monitor hydration and response to interventions. This may be useful in specific situations, for example at the end of
life. Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is a rare paraneoplastic disorder associated
with an underlying plasma cell dyscrasia and multiorgan failure.1 The pathogenesis of POEMS syndrome is likely caused by overproduction of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).2 POEMS syndrome is potentially fatal and adversely affects quality of life. Oedema is common with
many patients affected by pleural effusions and ascites.1 2 There is limited evidence to determine the association between hydration and
symptoms in advanced cancer.3 Physical examination has a low sensitivity and specificity for identifying fluid deficit and, biochemical
methods show little association with hydration status.3 4 There is no routine hydration assessment method for patients with advanced cancer.
The evidence for the efficacy of clinically assisted hydration (CAH) in advanced cancer is limited, conflicting and inconclusive. The
subject of hydration is extremely important to patients and caregivers; there is concern about the risk of harm to patients through the use
or non-use of CAH.3 Bioelectrical impedance vector analysis (BIVA) is a non-invasive, validated body composition assessment method, which
may be useful in the assessment of hydration.5 To date, there are no published reports about the utility of BIVA in POEMS syndrome. This
case describes the use of BIVA in a woman aged 52 years with POEMS syndrome. She had a history of two autologous stem cell transplants,
renal impairment and recurrent lower limb and abdominal oedema. Oedema was a cause of great discomfort and had adversely affected her
mobility. She was referred to the specialist palliative care team for symptom management and fluid assessment using BIVA. Following the
baseline assessment, she received 40 mg of oral furosemide daily in combination with advice about fluid restriction. Two further BIVA
assessments were conducted at weekly intervals following the commencement of diuretic therapy to assess the response to diuretic therapy. A
clinical evaluation of peripheral oedema (upper and lower limbs) was also conducted during these assessments. Bioimpedance analysis involves
a tetrapolar technique to deliver a single-frequency electrical current of 50 kHz. The technique works on the principle that fluid and
cellular structures will provide different levels of resistance to an electrical current as it passes through the human body. Bioimpedance
provides the following direct measurements: resistance (R) assessing cellular hydration, reactance (Xc) assessing tissue integrity and phase
angle (PA), which is reported to be a useful indicator of health and prognosis.5 Bioimpedance analysis was conducted using the EFG-3
ElectroFluidGraph Vector Impedance Analyser (Akern) in line with methods and recommendations described elsewhere.5 Regression equations of
the manufacturer (Akern BodyGram Pro 3.0) were used to calculate total body water (TBW), intracellular water (ICW) and extracellular water
(ECW).6 These validated equations were derived from previous research.7 BIVA enables interpretation of bioimpedance data, which is
independent of regression equations and body weight. To establish BIVA, the direct impedance measurements (R and Xc) were plotted as a point
(bivariate random vector) on a probability graph (RXc graph); this represented the sex-specific and race-specific tolerance intervals of a
non-cancer reference population used for the analysis (figure 1).8 Longitudinal change of hydration represented by the BIVA RXc graph. The
RXc graph method allows statistical analysis of bivariate distributions of successive impedance vectors of an individual relative to the
50%, 75% and 95% tolerance ellipses of a non-cancer reference population. The black dots represent the study assessments. The black arrow
demonstrates the linear trend of the assessments. BIVA, bioelectrical impedance vector analysis; R, resistance; Xc, reactance. At baseline,
BIVA demonstrated the participant's overall body composition was just outside the normal ellipse 50th centile and did not suggest fluid
overload (figure 1). Following diuretic therapy, the subsequent assessments demonstrated a reduction in hydration volume. This corresponded
with weight loss and a reduction in clinically detectable oedema. Throughout the assessments, TBW was low relative to body weight (table 1)
and ECW was high relative to TBW. Results of bioelectrical impedance analysis BMI, body mass index; ECW, extracellular water; ICW,
intracellular water; PA, phase angle; R, resistance; TBW, total body water; Xc, reactance. BIVA demonstrated a reduction in hydration volume
following the intervention (diuretic therapy and fluid restriction). This corresponded clinically with weight loss and a reduction in
clinically detectable oedema. To our knowledge, this is the first study to use BIVA to evaluate hydration in POEMS syndrome. Furthermore,
the evaluation of longitudinal change in hydration in POEMS syndrome using BIVA, following intervention with diuretics, is novel. The
advantage of BIVA is that it allows information to be obtained simultaneously about changes in tissue hydration or soft tissue mass,
independent of regression equations, or body weight. This allows for accurate interpretation of BIVA readings even if patients are at
extremes of weight or volume distribution. The correlations between hydration change, body weight and observable oedema are consistent with
non-cancer studies using BIVA to measure hydration.9 The participant commented on the simplicity of the BIVA method. Her experience is
consistent with the findings of our previous research using BIVA to evaluate hydration in advanced cancer, which adds to the evidence that
the BIVA method is not burdensome in palliative care.10 TBW was low relative to body weight; however, ECW was high compared with TBW. This
suggests an imbalance of ECW:ICW ratio, which may be the potential cause of the oedema. Although there was a clinical reduction in weight
and oedema, this was not reflected by change in the ECW volume. The reason for this is not clear; however, a potential explanation may be
that the bioimpedance regression equations lack the sensitivity to detect small changes in fluid volume. Bioimpedance regression equations
are limited in cancer owing to their reliance on physiological assumptions (which include requirements about body shape, the relationship
between trunk and leg lengths, soft tissue hydration level and fat fraction).5 Although the equations have been validated against reference
methods with good accuracy, they may lack accuracy in situations where basic assumptions of the bioimpedance method are not met (eg, in
cancer or at extremes of body mass and hydration).5 The limitations of regression equations are overcome by BIVA, which is independent of
the regression analysis and body weight. We acknowledge that we are unable to account for potential confounding factors, which may have
influenced hydration between assessments. Furthermore, the relative under-representation of the trunk by whole-body impedance limits our
ability to quantify or localise the oedema.5 Consequently, BIVA should be interpreted with acknowledgement of the clinical presentation of
the individual. The properties of BIVA (non-invasive, safe, accurate and painless) highlight its potential to assess hydration in palliative
care. BIVA could potentially be used to measure hydration in specific clinical scenarios (eg, bowel obstruction, vomiting and diarrhoea) or
to monitor the response to interventions (eg, CAH).9 In cancer, BIVA has advantages over regression equations; however, the results should
be interpreted carefully with knowledge of the clinical presentation of the patient. In research, BIVA can be used to monitor hydration in
studies that evaluate the efficacy of CAH. Furthermore, longitudinal hydration assessments could be conducted at specific phases of illness
(eg, to examine the relationship between symptomatic burden and clinical hydration states in the last hours and days of life). This case
report highlights the potential to use BIVA to monitor hydration states over time in response to interventions. BIVA overcomes the
limitations of bioimpedance regression equations. More research is needed to determine the potential of BIVA to improve the evaluation and
management of hydration states in advanced cancer. Twitter: Follow Amara Nwosu at @amaranwosu Contributors: ACN designed the study,
conducted the analysis, interpreted the results and wrote the paper. LM, CM, SM, AP and JE assisted with the data analysis and provided
critical review of the final manuscript. Competing interests: None declared. Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not
commissioned; externally peer reviewed. Data sharing statement: The results of this analysis will be available upon request.
