Tardive dyskinesia is one of the most significant side effects of antipsychotic medications. Antipsychotic treated schizophrenia patients
with diabetes mellitus are more likely to develop tardive dyskinesia than those without diabetes. Clozapine is probably best supported for
management of tardive dyskinesia. But clozapine has been strongly linked to hyperglycaemia and impaired glucose tolerance, so it is not
preferred in patients with diabetes mellitus. We present a case of 35-year-old male with a diagnosis of schizophrenia and type 2 diabetes
mellitus with tardive dyskinesia, who was successfully treated with quetiapine and clonazepam. Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is one of the most
significant side effects of antipsychotic medications. The average prevalence rate has been estimated to be around 30% for individuals
taking antipsychotic medications.1) Risk factors associated with TD include elderly patients, females, use of typical antipsychotics, higher
dose of antipsychotics for prolonged period, extrapyramidal symptoms, cognitive deficits, structural brain damage.2,3) Diabetes mellitus
(DM) has been reported to be a risk factor for development of TD.2,4,5) Although there remains some uncertainty about the causal mechanisms
of this link,6) studies have suggested an independent association between dyskinesia and diabetes.7) Mukherjee et al.8,9) suggested a
possible association between TD and impaired glucose metabolism. Other studies report a higher incidence of DM in relatives of patients with
TD, suggesting a genetic link between dopamine mechanisms and glucose regulation.10) Schultz et al.11) suggested that hyperinsulinemia and
hyperglycemia associated with insulin resistance contribute to TD pathogenesis. Currently there are no US Food and Drug Administration
approved drugs for treating TD. But the use of clozapine is probably best supported for management of TD.12) Quetiapine,13) another weak
striatal dopamine antagonist and olanzapine14) are also effective. But in patients of schizophrenia with TD with comorbid type 2 DM
clozapine and olanzapine are not preferred, as they have been strongly linked to hyperglycaemia and impaired glucose tolerance. We present a
case of 35-year-old male with a diagnosis of schizophrenia and type 2 DM with TD, who was successfully treated with quetiapine and
clonazepam. A 35-year-old male patient who was premorbidly well-adjusted and without past and family history of neurological and psychiatric
illness presented with complaints of suspiciousness, fearfulness, decreased sleep, irritability and muttering to self for last 5 years. He
also developed perioral tremors and irregular movements of tongue from last 1 year. The onset of illness was insidious and course was
fluctuating. From last 6 months his psychotic symptoms and perioral tremors increased in intensity. For his illness he received treatment
from a psychiatrist with various antipsychotics like olanzapine 20 mg per day, haloperidol 10 mg per day, trifluperazine 10 mg per day,
risperidone 6 mg per day in various combinations from last 3 years. He was compliant on medications, but his psychotic symptoms did not
improve significantly. He was also diagnosed with type 2 DM and receiving treatment (tablet glimepiride 1 mg+metformin 500 mg per day) from
last 2 years. His blood sugar levels were within normal limits from last 6 months. Informed consent has been taken from the patient and on
mental status examination, he has delusion of persecution, auditory hallucination of commenting type. On physical examination, he was having
perioral tremors with involuntary, repetitive, and irregular movements of tongue. Other than this no other abnormal finding was observed in
physical examination. On Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia15) and abnormal involuntary movement scale (AIMS)
for TD,16) the patient scored 102 and 16 respectively. Hematological and biochemical indices (including blood sugar level) were normal as
was computed tomography of the brain and electroencephalogram. No organic etiology could be found to explain the presence of TD. Risperidone
(6 mg/day), haloperidol (10 mg/day), trihexyphenidyl (4 mg/day) were tapered to half the previously prescribed dose and stopped completely
after a period of 10 days. He was started on tablet quetiapine 100 mg per day and increased to 300 mg per day. Along with this clonazepam 1
mg per day was started for adequate sleep and improvement of TD symptoms. With these medications his psychotic symptoms improved gradually
over next 8 weeks. But his abnormal movements of face persisted as such. He continued the same treatment and after 4 months the patient was
again reassessed. His abnormal movements of face and psychotic symptoms improved significantly. His blood sugar levels remained within
normal limits during this period of treatment. After 4 months of treatment, on PANSS for schizophrenia and AIMS for TD the patient scored 54
and 8, respectively. Though clozapine is best supported for management of TD in schizophrenia, but in our patient due to presence of type 2
DM it was not prescribed. So we considered quetiapine for his treatment. Diabetogenic potential of quetiapine is less than clozapine and
olanzapine.17) Due to its receptor profile, quetiapine is the atypical antipsychotic that is most similar to clozapine, which leads us to
consider it for the treatment of TD. Quetiapine’s low affinity and fast dissociation from post-synaptic dopamine D2 receptors should give
the least risk of producing the symptoms of TD.18–20) With the use of quetiapine our patient’s psychotic symptoms improved significantly
over the next 8 weeks. His dyskinetic movements of face improved after 4 months of treatment. His blood sugar levels were also remained
within normal limits. As there are evidences for the use of clonazepam in the treatment of TD21) and the sleep of our patient was decreased,
so clonazepam 1 mg per day was prescribed. TD is associated with more severe psychopathology and higher mortality.22) Antipsychotic treated
chronic schizophrenia patients with DM are more likely to develop abnormal movements than are patients with no DM. So we support the use of
quetiapine and clonazepam in the treatment of schizophrenia patients with DM and TD.
