Primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus (PMME) is a rare disease with an extremely poor prognosis. We experienced a 79-year-old man with
PMME who had unusual endoscopic findings. On endoscopy, an elongated lump was detected on 1 side of the vertical axis of the esophagus. The
mass extended progressively for 15 cm along the esophageal longitudinal axis and invaded half of the esophageal circumference. These
endoscopic findings were not characteristic of PMME, and the condition was confirmed with biopsy and immunohistochemical staining. Here, we
present this rare case and review the recent relevant literature regarding PMME. Doctors should be aware that PMME might present with
unusual endoscopic findings. Primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus (PMME) is an extremely rare but highly aggressive tumor that
accounts for 0.1% to 0.5% of all primary esophageal malignancies.1 The mean survival time from diagnosis is only 13.4 months, and the 5-year
survival rate is 4.2%.1,2 A definitive diagnosis may be obtained with pathological analysis and identification of positivity for S-100 and
human melanoma black (HMB)-45 on immunohistochemical examination. Surgical extirpation is the standard treatment for PMME. Here, we present
a case of PMME with unusual endoscopic findings in a Chinese male and review the relevant literature. A 79-year-old man was referred to our
department because of progressive dysphagia and weight loss for 1 month. Computed tomography performed at a local hospital identified an
esophageal tumor; thus, he was admitted to our hospital. He had hematemesis, melena, fever, cough, and yellow sputum. Blood analysis
indicated severe anemia and high leukocyte and neutrophil levels. Additionally, the albumin level was very low, and a sputum smear revealed
the presence of gram-positive cocci. On endoscopy, an elongated lump was detected on 1 side of the vertical axis of the esophagus
approximately 25 to 40 cm away from the incisors. The mass extended progressively for 15 cm along the esophageal longitudinal axis and
invaded half of the esophageal circumference. Additionally, the mass had extensive necrotic tissue, active hemorrhage spots, and no
pigmentation on the surface (Figure 1A–C). Biopsy was performed, and the tumor was identified as a malignant melanoma (Figure 2). On
immunohistochemical staining, the tumor was positive for S-100 and HMB-45 (Figure 3A and B) and negative for cytokeratin and
carcinoembryonic antigen markers. Computed tomography showed inflammation of the lungs and no evidence of distant metastasis. Additionally,
a physical examination revealed no pigmented lesions at the skin, eyes, rectum, or other locations. Surgery, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy
could not be performed owing to the advanced age of the patient and comorbid hypoproteinemia, infection, and severe anemia. Therefore, the
patient did not receive treatment and was discharged. After approximately 1 month, we were informed of his death. A–C presented the
endoscopic images of the primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus from different perspectives. Figure 1 A indicated that there was no
pigmentation on the surface. Figure 1 B and C presented that the mass extended progressively for 15 cm along the esophageal longitudinal
axis and invaded half of the esophageal circumference. Figure 1 C indicated that the mass had extensive necrotic tissue, active hemorrhage
spots and no pigmentation on the surface. Histopathological staining (hematoxylin and eosin staining) shows the presence of melanin
granules. Immunohistochemical staining shows the presence of human melanoma black (HMB)-45 (A) and S100 (B) in the tumor cells. HMB = human
melanoma black. PMME is generally considered to be a highly malignant tumor that is associated with a poor prognosis and a rapidly fatal
course. The mean patient age at onset is 60.5 years. The incidence of PMME has been reported to be higher in male patients than in female
patients, with a ratio of 2:1.1,2 The mean survival time from diagnosis has been reported to be 13.4 months.1,2 There are 6 reports of
patients surviving more than 7 years,3–8 and the longest survival time is 12 years.8 The tumor is sporadic, and the number of reported cases
is small, with only 337 reported cases up to 2011.9 In a recently published series of 910 esophageal biopsies in Japan, only 2 were found to
be melanoma (0.2%).10 The majority of PMME patients present with complaints of dysphagia, nonspecific retrosternal pain, and weight loss.
Hematemesis and melena are observed occasionally. A typical finding of PMME is a lobular or polypoid, well-circumscribed, and pigmented
tumor. In addition, more than 90% of PMME lesions are located in the distal 2/3 of the esophagus.11 The tumor is most often polypoid, and
the nonpolypoid form, identified in the present case, is extremely rare. Approximately 10% to 25% of PMME cases present various colors, such
as purple, brown, and white, depending on the melanin quantity.12,13 The tumor in the present case was 15 cm in length, invaded 1 side of
the esophagus, and had no melanin pigmentation on the surface. These findings are not characteristic of PMME. Although tissue pathology
identified the presence of melanin granules, the tumor did not have a typical black appearance. We performed immunohistological studies to
obtain an accurate diagnosis. On immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor was positive for HMB-45 and S-100. Therefore, we diagnosed the
tumor as a malignant melanoma. The diagnosis of PMME is based on the finding of melanin granules in the tumor cells on histological
examination, as the clinical and radiological features of PMME are similar to those of other esophageal malignancies. Histological diagnosis
can be challenging when the biopsy specimen lacks melanin granules, and the tumor might be incorrectly diagnosed as an epithelial carcinoma.
Therefore, when melanin granules cannot be identified in the initial biopsy, immunohistochemical analysis of the biopsy specimen for
melanocytic-specific markers, such as HMB-45, S-100, and melanoma-specific antigen (Melan-A), should be performed to obtain an accurate
pretreatment diagnosis. There is a lack of consensus on the treatment of PMME. Cheung et al14 found that complete surgical resection was the
only treatment strategy that significantly improved survival in PMME patients. Other therapies include chemotherapy, chemoradiotherapy,
endocrine therapy, and immunotherapy. However, the roles of these treatment strategies remain unclear. A previous study showed that they
might benefit in loco-regional disease control.15 Completely nonsurgical treatment strategies have been reported sporadically16; however,
most of the patients who successfully received these treatments also underwent surgery.4,16–19 Molecular analysis could identify targets for
additional specific therapy. Mutations in the BRAF and KIT genes in subsets of melanoma have been reported. Langer et al20 detected a
mutation of the c-KIT gene in 2 patients with PMME. BRAF inhibitors may be useful in the treatment of metastatic melanoma in patients with
BRAF mutations. However, in patients with PMME, its efficacy has not been proven.21 The prognosis of PMME is poor because the tumor has a
highly aggressive biological behavior and most patients are diagnosed late. Early diagnosis with complete surgical resection currently
offers the best chance of survival. We reported an extremely rare case of PMME with unusual endoscopic findings. The tumor was diagnosed
according to histological and immunohistochemical analyses. Doctors should be aware that PMME might present with unusual endoscopic
findings. Abbreviations: HMB = human melanoma black, Melan-A = melanoma-specific antigen, PMME = primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's family for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The authors
have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
