CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared. Renal biopsy of the allograft is important to evaluate renal dysfunction (1). Rare complications like
pseudoaneurysm (PA) can develop and could lead to life-threatening bleeding (2, 3). It can be safely and effectively managed by endovascular
embolization yielding good renal function in the long term follow-up (4, 5). We describe a PA of a kidney transplant (KTX) associated with
arteriovenous fistula (AVF) at the site of a core needle percutaneous biopsy (CNPB). A 39-year old woman with nephrosclerosis and in
hemodialysis for the last 3 years received a KTX from a deceased 20-year old male donor that had a cranio-cerebral trauma. The vascular
anastomoses were performed at the right iliac vessels in an end-to-side fashion after 23 hours of cold ischemia. A CNPB, guided by
ultrasonography, was indicated due to delayed graft function at postoperative day 10 which revealed acute tubular necrosis. Shortly after
the CNPB she experienced tachycardia, hypotension and decreased blood levels requiring 2 units of blood transfusion and remained stable and
developed mild hematuria. An allograft ultrasonography performed five days later revealed an AVF and a PA at the middle pole of the
allograft and a peri-renal hematoma around the upper pole with 200cc (Figure-1). A superselective catheterization was then performed, six
days after the CNPB with embolization of the PA with two coils. AVF was not observed (Figures 2 and 3). A control by ultrassound 5 days
after the procedure assured the closure of the pseudoaneurysm (Figure-4). The patient did well and gradually recovered renal function
(creatinine of 1.09mg/dL after two months). Figure 1A-Doppler ultrasound with reverse diastole in interlobular artery and lesion suggestive
of pseudoaneurysm at the middle pole of the kidney. Cystic formation which implies the renal parenchyma toward the collection, that measured
about 1.2cm. This structure has bidirectional blood flow, suggestive of a pseudoaneurysm. B–Pulsatile flow in the vein suggestive of AVF.
Figure 2Renal transplanted arteriography: (A)-Sacular formation in the arterial phase of the study, suggestive of pseudoaneurysm (Arrow),
(B)-a microcatheter (inferior arrow) has been advanced superselectively in the lesion arterial branch with Vortex coil (superior arrow).
Figure 3Superselective catheterization of the interlobular artery. Figure 4Doppler control demonstrating the closure of the PA.
