Roseomonas is a genus of pink-pigmented nonfermentative bacilli. These slow-growing, gram-negative cocobacilli form pink-colored colonies on
sheep blood agar. They differ from other pink-pigmented nonfermenters, including Methylobacterium, in morphology, biochemical
characteristics, and DNA sequence. Roseomonas strains are rarely isolated in clinical laboratories; therefore, we report two cases in order
to improve our ability to identify these pathogens. We isolated two strains of Roseomonas mucosa from the venous blood cultures of two
patients, an 84-yr-old woman with common bile duct obstruction and a 17-yr-old male with acute myeloid leukemia who had an indwelling
central-venous catheter for chemotherapy. The isolated strains were confirmed as R. mucosa by 16S rRNA sequencing. The genus Roseomonas was
initially identified as 42 strains of pink-pigmented gram-negative bacteria. From these strains, six genomospecies, all of which were
considered Roseomonas , were proposed. Roseomonas constituted three named genomospecies, i.e., Roseomonas gilardii, R. cervicalis, and R.
fauriae, and three unnamed genomospecies . From 1992 to 2002, 36 strains of Roseomonas were isolated from blood cultures at the MD Anderson
Cancer Center, and a new species, R. mucosa, was proposed on the basis of 16S rRNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis . Currently, the
genus Roseomonas constitutes 15 valid species, including R. aquatica, R. aerilata, R. cervicalis, R. gilardii, R. lacus, R. mucosa, R.
terrae, R. stagni, R. vinacea, R. fauriae, and other unnamed genomospecies. Roseomonas are slow-growing, gram-negative bacteria. The
colonies they form on sheep blood agar (SBA) are slightly fastidious, very mucoid, and almost runny. Microscopically, Roseomonas are
nonvacuolated, plump coccobacilli that form mostly pairs and short chains. Although Roseomonas show low human pathogenicity, they can cause
systemic infection in patients with underlying diseases or those who are immunocompromised . We isolated R. mucosa from the venous blood of
two patients. We present the findings of these two cases and review the literature of R. mucosa bacteremia. An 84-yr-old woman was admitted
with jaundice and abdominal pain for three days. She had a history of cholecystitis and cholangitis and underwent cholecystectomy and
percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage. At admission, the values of AST, ALT, total bilirubin, and direct bilirubin were 73 IU/L, 44
IU/L, 14.93 mg/dL, and 13.5 mg/dL, respectively. Three sets of blood cultures were obtained before administration of antibiotics. Common
bile duct obstruction was diagnosed by abdominal ultrasound and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. After three-day incubation
of blood culture bottles, positive signals were observed, and light pink-colored colonies formed on blood agar that was subcultured from one
of the bottles (Fig. 1A). The isolate was identified as R. gilardii by the Vitek2 system (bioMerieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). Matrix
assisted laser desorption ionization – time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) analysis by Vitek MS (bioMerieux) failed because of the
incomplete database, but 16S rRNA gene sequencing confirmed R. mucosa. After three days of cefotaxime and metronidazole combination therapy,
the patient showed no signs of infection, including fever and chilling sensation. She was eventually discharged with no complications. A
17-yr-old man was admitted to our hospital for consolidation chemotherapy. He had been diagnosed as having acute myeloid leukemia and
received induction chemotherapy with no complications. During the consolidation chemotherapy, the patient exhibited fever and elevated
C-reactive protein level with no focal infection. Ceftazidime and aminoglycoside combination as empirical antibiotics were initiated.
Despite antibiotic therapy, fever persisted, and the C-reactive protein level further increased. Central catheter-related infection was
suspected, and vancomycin was added to the antibiotic therapy after collection of two sets of central blood samples and three sets of venous
blood samples. We found an isolate that was later identified as R. gilardii by the Vitek2 system but R. mucosa by 16S rRNA sequencing.
Therefore, we reported this isolate as R. mucosa. Vancomycin and carbapenem combination therapy was continued, even though the patient did
not exhibit significant clinical signs. The patient was discharged with no complications caused by the infection. Roseomonas is found easily
in the environment, including the soil, water, and air. The mechanism of infection caused by Roseomonas and its clinical significance are
not well understood. Studies have proposed that Roseomonas can be found in turbid water from dirty or contaminated faucets . However,
although Roseomonas species have been isolated from specimens, only approximately 60% of isolates are clinically significant because of
their low pathogenicity . After their initial identification, several case reports have described clinically significant infections due to
Roseomonas spp. Because of its low pathogenicity, Roseomonas can cause infection in patients with underlying disease or immunosuppression.
Several cases have described catheter-related bacteremia with immunosuppression , bacteremia during chemotherapy for leukemia , and
peritonitis during continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis with end-stage renal disease . However, R. mucosa infection in immunocompetent
individuals has also been reported . In our cases, R. mucosa was isolated by using conventional, routine methods. We used BACTEC Plus
Aerobic/F and BACTEC Lytic/10 Anaerobic/F culture bottles and the BD Diagnostic System for blood culture. If a bottle showed a positive
signal, subcultures were placed on SBA and MacConkey agar plates, which were incubated at 35℃ in a 5% CO2 incubator. Finally, the colonies
were identified by using the Vitek2 system. Biochemical characterization of the isolated strains from our two patients showed positivity for
catalase and urease, negativity for methanol oxidation, and a lack of UV light absorption , as summarized in Table 1. In order to identify
prominent colonies of Rosemonas species, we attempted to subculture the isolates on potato cornmeal Tween 80 agar, which our institution
uses for fungal subculture ; we found noticeable pink-colored runny mucoid colonies (Fig. 1B). For molecular confirmation of the isolated
strains, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis. The 16S rRNA gene was amplified in order to obtain a complete sequence, and the
obtained sequence was then compared with the consensus sequence provided by GenBank (National Center for Biotechnology Information ). The
sequences were compared by using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool provided by NCBI, and the result showed that the 16S rRNA gene
sequence of R. mucosa with the highest similarity to the GenBank source matched with GenBank accession number NR_028857.1. The isolated
Roseomonas species were susceptible to aminoglycosides (e.g., amikacin), carbapenems (e.g., imipenem), and fluoroquinolones (e.g.,
ciprofloxacin). The isolates had intermediate susceptibility to cefotaxime but were resistant to ampicillin and ceftazidime. This overall
susceptibility pattern was consistent with the previous findings . In summary, we report two cases of bacteremia due to R. mucosa, which is
not exactly identified by conventional method of bacterial identification but confirmed by 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis. This work was
supported by the 2013 Yeungnam University Research Grant. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of
interest relevant to this article were reported. Abbreviations: MDA, MD Anderson Cancer Center; n/a, not available.
