Aortocaval fistula (ACF) after rupture of an abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm is a rare emergency situation, which has a high mortality.
However, the diagnosis is usually delayed, which increases the difficulties of treatment. We describe a case that successfully delayed use
of endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) for ACF resulting from rupture of abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm. We describe a special case of
a 70-year-old male with an abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm rupturing into inferior vena cava (IVC). On account of his atypical
presentation, the diagnosis had been delayed for half a year. Due to severe metabolic sequelaes of the ACF and preexisting conditions, the
traditional open repair was too risky. Minimally invasive EVAR was performed with a successful result. There were no endoleak or fistula at
the follow-up of 9th month. EVAR is the most suitable method in patients with ACF from rupture of abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm.
Further educational programs should be developed, which may give rise to earlier diagnosis and treatment with better outcomes. Aortocaval
fistula (ACF) mostly results from ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (RAAA), with a reported overall prevalence of 2% to 6% in patients with
RAAA.1,2 These patients are always under emergency situations, which have a high mortality, but their clinical presentations may be quite
variable.3 Because this disease has variable clinical manifestations, the diagnosis is usually delayed, which increases the difficulties in
treatment.1,4 Both conventional open repair (OR) and endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) have been used to treat this condition.4 However,
no patients with abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm rupturing into inferior vena cava (IVC) have been reported, and there is also no
standard therapy for this condition. Because morphologic and hemodynamic characteristics of dissection are different from abdominal aortic
aneurysm (AAA), EVAR may be a more valid alternative over OR in these patients. We present a patient with ACF from rupture of abdominal
aortic dissecting aneurysm, which had a chronic course of disease. EVAR was successfully performed for this patient, without endoleak and
fistula at the follow-up. Prior to referral to our institution, the 70-year-old man had recurrent cough, anhelation, and chest distress.
About half a year before he came to our hospital, he had temporary abdominal pain, which disappeared spontaneously and suddenly. Then the
patient gradually developed recurrent cough, anhelation, and chest distress. He was treated as pneumonia at the local hospital. However,
these symptoms aggravated gradually, so he was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. He had a history of tobacco abuse and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but no history of hypertension or heart disease. Physical examination revealed blood pressure of
126/63 mm Hg, heart rate of 85 beats/min, and slight pitting edema of both lower extremities below the knee. Moist crackles could be
documented on both lungs, and respiratory sounds were weakened at bilateral lower lobe of lung. He was unable to lay flat. No abdominal
tenderness or rebound tenderness was found, but a pulsating mass with continuous vascular bruit was recognized at the lower abdomen, without
abdominal thrill. Laboratory results showed no hepatic or kidney dysfunction, HGB of 124 g/L, WBC of 12.29 × 109/L, BNP of 2625 pg/mL,
Troponin-T of 40.6 ng/L. Chest computed tomography scans before admission showed severe pulmonary edema and inflammation (Figure 1A). A
later computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed an abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm with an associated aortocaval fistula, no
bleeding or hematoma in retroperitoneal space (Figure 1B). Echocardiography demonstrated that left ventricular ejection fraction was 45%,
without abnormality of heart structure. A, Chest CT scans before admission revealed bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltrations and patchy
shadow in both lungs, partial pulmonary atelectasis of both inferior lobes, together with a little pleural effusion. B, Preoperative
reconstructed CT scan showed dissecting aneurysm and early opacification of inferior vena cava (IVC), which indicated dissecting aneurysm
had ruptured to form an aortocaval fistula (arrow). CT = computed tomography. This elderly patient had a severe pulmonary disease and
chronic heart failure (CHF), thus traditional OR was extremely risky for him. However, because of the ruptured abdominal aortic dissecting
aneurysm and the persistent venous hypertension, this patient had a critical need for operation. Minimally invasive endovascular
intervention was performed immediately after the diagnosis was confirmed. Under general anesthesia, bilateral common femoral arteries were
punctured for arterial access. This patient's anatomy was suitable for EVAR according to CTA and intraoperative angiography (Figures 2 and
3A). Because the angle of neck was about 65° and this patient's rarely complex condition, we implanted Medtronic Endurant suprarenal aortic
devices. A bifurcated stent graft (ENBF2516C170EE), 2 contralateral iliac limbs (ENLW1613C120EE, ENLW1620C120EE), and an ipsilateral
extension (ENLW1616C95EE) were placed. After these stent grafts were placed, proximal type I endoleak and fistula could be seen from
angiography. To close the endoleak and fistula, balloon dilatation was performed immediately. Finally, the endoleak and aortocaval fistula
disappeared, which suggested EVAR was successful (Figure 3). Preoperative images of patient with aortocaval fistula and ruptured abdominal
aortic dissecting aneurysm. A, Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) revealed false lumen of Aorta (Ao) directly rupturing into inferior
vena cava (IVC) through a 6.9 mm fistula (arrow a), and the maximal diameters of this dissecting aneurysm was 89 mm. B, CTA showed the Aorta
divides into true and false lumen through a 27.4 mm tear (arrow b), which formed the abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm. C, CTA showed the
diameter of neck was 21.3 mm (arrow c). D, Reconstructed CT scan revealed the length of neck is about 20 mm (arrow d), and the angle of the
neck is about 65°. CT = computed tomography. Intraoperative view during endovascular repair. A, Angiography showed fistula (arrow a) between
false lumen of dissecting aneurysm and early opacification of inferior vena cava (IVC). B, After endografts were placed, angiography
revealed proximal type I endoleak (arrow b) and early opacification of IVC (arrow c). C, After balloon dilatation was performed, angiography
showed the endoleak and aortocaval fistula had disappeared. After operation, the patient was transferred to intensive care unit. He
experienced a lengthy postoperative course including 20 days in intensive care unit due to pulmonary edema and pneumonia. This patient was
given anti-infective and supportive treatment during postoperative period. He recovered and discharged about 45 days after operation. He was
initially maintained on Venous Thrombus Embolism (VTE) prophylaxis with heparin during operation and then switched to low molecular weight
heparin after operation. When he discharged, edema of both lower limbs had resolved, and not only the pulmonary edema but also pneumonia had
significantly relieved (Figure 4A). On the follow-up of 9th month, CTA showed successful endovascular exclusion without endoleak or
recurrent fistula. (Figure 4B and C). A, Chest CT scan before discharge showed pulmonary edema and inflammation had significantly relieved.
From (B) and (C), CTA at the follow-up of 9th month after operation revealed no endoleak or fistula. CT = computed tomography,
CTA = computed tomographic angiography. It is reported that the overall prevalence of ACF is quite low, about 2% to 6% in patients with
RAAA.1 The most common cause of ACF is aneurysm erosion, especially in patients with RAAA.1,5,6 On account of increased venous hypertension,
the ACF may result in some metabolic abnormalities. However, ACF usually results from RAAA, so its most frequent symptoms should be
abdominal pain and hemorrhagic shock. In our case, without bleeding in the retroperitoneal space, abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm
ruptured directly into IVC to form a fistula, which led to venous hypertension. Therefore, the hemodynamics and clinical presentations of
this patient were different from cases before. In addition, fistula between false lumen of dissecting aneurysm and IVC is small, and the
blood flow of false lumen in this case is much lower than that of true lumen. Therefore, the low blood flow of this fistula leads to CHF and
chronic pulmonary congestion, and the chronic pulmonary congestion may be the reason of repeated pneumonia for this patient. The dramatic
clinical presentation in this case is rare, which leads to delay of diagnosis. Another potential reason of delayed diagnosis may lie in the
local doctor's lack of associated knowledge. According to some reports, early diagnosis and intervention can double survival rates from 25%
to 50%.4 The diagnosis was not made until enhanced computed tomography was performed half a year after initial presentation, which was
unfortunate for the patient. The ruptured abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm was a life-threatening condition. And the venous hypertension
had leaded to a series of severe complications, such as pneumonia and heart failure. In addition, patients with ruptured aortic aneurysm
need emergency operation according to the guideline. Emergency treatment is therefore advised. It is unknown whether endovascular
intervention improves survival compared with traditional OR for this disease.7 With the risk related to CHF, massive intraoperative blood
loss, and pulmonary infection, the surgical mortality of open repair ranges from 16% to 66%.1,7 EVAR is valid in certain anatomical
configurations and may be the optimal selection in terms of stent graft available. And EVAR has potential benefits of less blood loss and no
need for aortic cross-clamping during operation. Several cases of EVAR for RAAA with ACF have been described, with about 30% mortality,
which had partially due to delays in diagnosis.4,8 Accompanied with CHF and chronic pulmonary congestion, the general condition of the
elderly patient in our case was poor, he was not suitable for OR. Meanwhile, the anatomical configurations of our patient were suitable for
EVAR. Furthermore, the morphologic and hemodynamic characteristics of dissecting aneurysm in our case are different from AAA or dissection
before. Therefore, EVAR was the best choice for this patient. In our case, EVAR alone appears to have successfully isolated abdominal aortic
dissecting aneurysm and closed the ACF without the need of a stent-graft in the IVC. Because of aortocaval fistulas and type II endoleak,
persistent communication between the aneurysm and the IVC may exist. In some literatures, early placement of stent graft in the IVC has been
advocated to avoid persistent type II endoleak.9,10 However, no evidence demonstrated stent graft of IVC should be placed at the time of
initial EVAR. Because the chance of persistent aortocaval fistula after EVAR is rather small, endoleak and fistula may disappear
spontaneously after EVAR. Some researchers suggested that EVAR can be performed alone without further intervention.8 If persistent
aortocaval fistula occurs, stent graft in IVC can be performed in the future. In our case, no fistula or endoleak were found at the follow-
up of the 9th month. In addition, because aneurysm sac debris may dislodge, prophylaxis of pulmonary embolism should be addressed. In our
case, VTE prophylaxis with anticoagulant therapy was maintained during the perioperative periods. It is reported that IVC filter should be
placed before operation.11 However, the chance of clinically significant pulmonary embolism is minute, and IVC filter placement may
complicate the possible further IVC stent-graft placement. Preoperative IVC filter placement does not appear to be necessary.8 We introduce
a case of ACF resulting from rupture of abdominal aortic dissecting aneurysm. Diagnosis of this patient was delayed, but he fortunately had
a successful operation and recovered finally. Despite his poor general status and the high mortality associated with this condition, his
complete recovery presents the potential for recovery with appropriate treatment. EVAR is the most suitable selection in this condition for
its minimal invasion. Further educational programs should be developed, which may give rise to earlier diagnosis and treatment with better
outcomes. Abbreviations: AAA = abdominal aortic aneurysm, ACF = aortocaval fistula, Ao = Aorta, CHF = chronic heart failure, COPD = chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, CTA = computed tomography angiography, EVAR = endovascular aneurysm repair, IVC = inferior vena cava, OR =
open repair, RAAA = ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, VTE = venous thrombus embolism. None of the authors has conflicts of interests to
report with regard to this manuscript. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of West China Hospital of Sichuan University.
Informed consent was given by the patient and his family. TW and BH contributed equally to this work. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
