Immunoglobulin G4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a recently recognized inflammatory condition with single- or multi-organ involvement. The
disease is characterized by tumefactive lesions with dense IgG4 plasmacytic infiltration (an elevated IgG4+/IgG+ cell ratio of > 40 %),
storiform fibrosis, and obliterative phlebitis, with or without elevated serum IgG4 levels. The diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD, proposed in
2011, were quite comprehensive and practical; however, it is important to remember that other diseases, such as hyper-interleukin (IL)-6
syndromes, may have common histopathological findings. Therefore, the histopathology of suspected IgG4-RD is occasionally not diagnostic.
Here, we report a case of IgG4-related primary localized cervical lymphadenopathy without any other organ involvement. To our knowledge,
there have been no previous reports of this. Additionally, the disease was associated with a 20-fold increase in IL-6 levels compared to
that of the normal range. We report the case of a 52-year-old Japanese man who presented with a painless, somewhat diffuse swelling in the
left submandibular region. Although the case fulfilled diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD, the diagnosis was not straightforward due to
abnormally high levels of serum IL-6. After systematic evaluation of the patient, a final diagnosis of IgG4-RD was established. Since then,
a specialist in connective tissue disorders has evaluated the patient on a regular basis. Two years after his initial visit, no disease
progress or systemic involvement has been noted. We present a case of an IgG4-related primary localized cervical lymphadenopathy mimicking
hyper-IL-6 syndrome. This case can serve as an excellent reminder that the definitive diagnosis of IgG4-RD should be established using a
systematic approach, in particular when it appears as an atypical manifestation. Swellings of the cervical area are often associated with
congenital or acquired conditions including cystic, inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic diseases. Thus, the differential diagnosis of
diseases involving cervical swelling is quite extensive. Immunoglobulin G4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a recently recognized inflammatory
condition that has single- or multi-organ involvement. The head and neck region is the second most common site for the development of
IgG4-RD. The disease is characterized by tumefactive lesions with dense IgG4 plasmacytic infiltration (an elevated IgG4+/IgG+ cell ratio
of > 40 %, and > 10 IgG4+ cells per high power field), storiform fibrosis, and obliterative phlebitis with or without elevated serum IgG4
levels . The presence of these three histopathological findings, as well as the increased number and ratio of IgG4+ plasma cells, is highly
suggestive of a diagnosis of IgG4-RD . Although lymphadenopathy is frequently associated with IgG4-RD, it usually lacks storiform fibrosis,
and its histopathological findings are further divided into five types. These include multicentric Castleman’s disease-like (type I),
reactive follicular hyperplasia-like (type II), interfollicular expansion and immunoblastosis (type III), progressively transformed germinal
center (PTGC) type (type IV), and inflammatory pseudotumor like (type V) IgG4-related lymphadenopathy . Increased numbers of IgG4+ plasma
cells might be associated with non-IgG4-RD, such as low-grade B-cell lymphomas and hyper-interleukin (IL)-6 syndromes, such as Castleman’s
disease and rheumatoid arthritis , all of which can result in cervical lymphadenopathy. Since histopathological findings of such diseases
are occasionally similar to that of IgG4-RD, Sato and Yoshino proposed that the combination of histological examination and laboratory
analyses are essential for the definitive diagnosis of the disease. Here, we report a case of IgG4-related primary localized cervical
lymphadenopathy without any other organ involvement. To our knowledge, there have been no previous reports of this. In addition, the disease
was associated with 20-fold higher IL-6 levels than those of the normal range. A 52-year-old Japanese male with no significant past medical
history visited our clinic in 2013 for evaluation of a swelling in the left submandibular region, which had increased in size over four
years. The patient had not experienced any symptomatic manifestations. Extraoral examination revealed a 40 × 20 mm mass in his left
submandibular region that was elastically hard, movable, painless, and covered with normal skin (Fig. 1). Intraoral examination revealed an
appropriate salivary flow, and therefore, the patient was not xerostomic. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 35 × 23 mm oval
swelling in the left submandibular region associated with enlarged submental lymph nodes and superior internal jugular area, in which
contrast medium was taken up homogenously (Fig. 2a). Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated enlarged
submandibular and submental lymph nodes and ipsilateral upper internal jugular vein (Fig. 2b). Additionally, in T2 weighted MRI, they
structures were hypointense. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in the left
submandibular and left upper internal jugular regions. The FDG-standardized uptake value (SUV) max values were 5.09–8.24 for the left
submandibular and 2.82–3.19 for the left upper internal jugular area. No clear abnormal accumulation was noted in any area other than the
neck region (Fig. 2c), and laboratory tests revealed no inflammation. Furthermore, IL-2R and LDH values were normal (Table 1). Based on
clinical, imaging, and laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with malignant lymphoma. However, the fine needle aspiration cytology
(FNAC) of the swollen lymph node failed to show signs of malignancy. Subsequent biopsy revealed lymphatic follicles with an enlarged and
hyperplastic germinal center. Histiocytes, lymphocytes, and plasma cells were scattered between the follicles. Histopathological specimens
also revealed a normal shape of the lymphocytic nucleus as well a normal nucleus-cytoplasmic ratio (Figs. 3a and b). The specimens were
immunoreactive against both CD3 and CD20 antibodies (Figs. 3c and d), and were negative for the neoplastic lesion. Although reactive
follicular hyperplasia is associated with pathological conditions, such as rheumatic disorders, systemic lupus erythematosus and bacterial
lymphadenitis were included as differential diagnoses, as rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-DNA antibody, and C-reactive protein (CRP) values
were all within the normal range (Table 2). However, increased serum IgG4 (Table 2) indicated the possibility of IgG4-related
lymphadenopathy. Immunohistochemical staining against IgG and IgG4 revealed a ratio of IgG4/IgG-positive plasma cells of approximately 50 %
and > 10 IgG4 cells per high power field, noted in the germinal center (Figs. 3e, f and 4). These findings fulfilled the diagnostic criteria
issued in 2011 for IgG4-related disease , although the serum level of IL-6 was 20-fold higher than the normal value.Fig. 1The first
extraoral photograph. Extraoral examination revealed a 40 × 20 mm mass (arrowhead) in the left submandibular region that was elastically
hard, movable, painless, and covered with normal skinFig. 2CT scan (a) and Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI (b) revealed an oval swelling
(Large arrowhead) in the left submandibular region associated with enlarged submental lymph nodes (Small arrowhead) and the superior
internal jugular area. A PET (b) revealed abnormal accumulation of FDG in the left submandibular (Large arrowhead) and left upper internal
jugular regions (Small arrowhead). No clear abnormal accumulation was noted in any area other than the neck regionTable 1Laboratory
testsGeneralBiochemicalSpecial method inspectionWBC 5900/μLAST 18 U/LIL2R 382 U/mLNeut 50.2 %ALT 25 U/LCEA 2.1 ng/mLEos 2.2 %LD 15 U/L 0SCC
1.0 ng/mLBas 0.5 %ALP195 U/LMon 7.3 %r-GTP 42 U/LLym 39.8 %TP 7.31 g/dLRBC 521 × 104 /μLAlb 4.42 g/dLHb 16.3 g/dLBUN 18.2 mg/dLHct 47.2 %Cre
0.76 mg/dLPLT 27 × 104 /μLFig. 3 a, b Histopathological specimens revealed lymphatic follicles (arrowhead) with an enlarged and hyperplastic
germinal center. c, d The specimens were immunoreactive against both CD3 and CD20. e, f Immunohistochemical staining of IgG and IgG4
revealed a ratio of IgG4/IgG-positive plasma cells (arrowhead) of approximately 50 % and large quantities of IgG4 were noted in the germinal
centerTable 2Laboratory testsIgA221 mg/dLRF <1 IU/mLIgM 157 mg/dLAnti SS-A/Ro antibody(-)IgG 1136 mg/dLAnti SS-B/La antibody (−)IgG4
153 mg/dL ↑Anti DNA antibody (−)CRP 0.11 mg/dLAnti RNP antibody (−)IL −6 83.5 pg/mL ↑MPO. ANCA <1.0PR3-ANCA <1.0Fig. 4The mean number of
IgG4+ plasma cells per high power field was 94 (original magnification 400 ×) The first extraoral photograph. Extraoral examination revealed
a 40 × 20 mm mass (arrowhead) in the left submandibular region that was elastically hard, movable, painless, and covered with normal skin CT
scan (a) and Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI (b) revealed an oval swelling (Large arrowhead) in the left submandibular region associated
with enlarged submental lymph nodes (Small arrowhead) and the superior internal jugular area. A PET (b) revealed abnormal accumulation of
FDG in the left submandibular (Large arrowhead) and left upper internal jugular regions (Small arrowhead). No clear abnormal accumulation
was noted in any area other than the neck region Laboratory tests a, b Histopathological specimens revealed lymphatic follicles (arrowhead)
with an enlarged and hyperplastic germinal center. c, d The specimens were immunoreactive against both CD3 and CD20. e, f
Immunohistochemical staining of IgG and IgG4 revealed a ratio of IgG4/IgG-positive plasma cells (arrowhead) of approximately 50 % and large
quantities of IgG4 were noted in the germinal center Laboratory tests The mean number of IgG4+ plasma cells per high power field was 94
(original magnification 400 ×) Based on the final diagnosis of IgG4-related cervical lymphadenopathy (type II reactive follicular
hyperplasia type), the patient was referred to the Department of Internal Medicine and Connective Tissue Disorders, Kurume University School
of Medicine, two months after his initial visit. The patient has been under regular follow-up, and no disease progress or systemic
involvement has been noted. IgG4-RD is a recently established immune-mediated, inflammatory condition that affects virtually every organ
system. Lymphadenopathy, often associated with extranodal lesions, is frequently observed in patients with IgG4-RD. Lymph node involvement
often occurs after or at the same time as the development of the extranodal lesion. The initial unifocal lymphadenopathy may progress to a
multifocal lesion and/or develop to have extranodal involvement . The present case is somewhat atypical as an IgG4-RD in two aspects: 1)
unifocal cervical lymphadenopathy, and 2) association of high serum IL-6. In the report by Sato et al. , IgG4-related lymphadenopathy
histologically was divided into I-V types. In many cases, in the type similar to Castleman’s disease and ALPIBP type, lymph node swelling
occurs throughout the body. However, with the reactive follicular hyperplasia type (the type similar to inflammatory pseudotumors and the
PTGC-like type), most cases appear to have localized swelling of the lymph nodes. The IgG4-positive cell permeation pattern is intra-
follicular in cases similar to Castleman’s disease, the reactive follicular hyperplasia type, the ALPIBP type, and the type similar to
inflammatory pseudotumors, while with the PTGC-like type, there is a greater incidence of germ center permeation. In this case, the patient
experienced localized swelling of the lymph nodes, and histopathological testing revealing that the IgG4-positive plasma cells had permeated
the germ center; therefore, it was initially believed to be the PTGC-like type. Despite this, the fact that the follicle structure of the
germ center had been preserved indicated that there was no progressive dysplasia, although hyperplastic deformation of the large and small
lymphatic follicles was noted. It was eventually determined that the condition was the reactive follicular hyperplasia type. The head and
neck region, including salivary, lacrimal, thyroid, and pituitary glands is the second most common site affected by IgG4-RD . IgG4-RD in the
head and neck region can be an extrapancreatic manifestation associated with autoimmune pancreatitis or can present as a solitary lesion.
Mikulicz disease and chronic sclerosing sialadenitis, often associated with lymphadenopathy, are the most common IgG4-RDs in the head and
neck area. However, the disease presented here was still localized to the cervical area with and no extranodal involvement has been noted
since the patient was initially diagnosed with IgG4-RD. The diagnostic dilemma in the present case was an extremely high level of serum IL-6
since hyper-IL-6 syndromes occasionally fulfill the histopathological diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD and have elevated serum IgG4 levels
[3, 4]. A few cases of IgG4-related systemic lymphadenopathy with elevated (~9-fold) IL-6 levels have been reported [2, 10]. However, the
present case was associated with a serum IL-6 level 20-fold higher than the normal range. This is the first case of IgG4-RD cervical
lymphadenopathy associated with such a high level of IL-6. IL-6 was originally cloned as T cell-derived B cell activating molecule in 1986 .
Currently, it is known as a pleiotropic cytokine playing a role in the regulation of immune system, osseous tissues, and inflammation. It
also has a role as a growth factor in malignancies, such as multiple myeloma (MM) . The variation of IL-6 levels in individuals and/or the
circadian rhythm of serum IL-6 may account for the elevated IL-6 level in the present case. It has been suggested that IL-6 values might
vary widely among healthy individuals . In the pathological situation, patients with MM reveal elevated, normal, or undetectable serum
levels of IL-6. Additionally, circadian variation of serum IL-6 has been reported in several diseases . Both IgG4-RD and hyper-IL-6 syndrome
share similar clinical and pathological manifestations and, therefore, it is quite difficult to differentiate them. As suggested by Sato et
al. , diagnosis of IgG4-RD must be established based on histopathological appearance as well as increased serum IgG4. However, occasional
increases in serum IL-6 and IgG4 in IgG4-RD and hyper-IL-6 syndrome, respectively, make the differentiation between IgG4-RD and hyper-IL-6
syndrome more difficult. Hyper-IL-6 syndromes are rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed connective
tissue disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, human herpes virus 8 (HHV8) infection, Kaposi’s sarcoma, plasma cell
dyscrasia, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and malignant lymphoma. In particular, the histological findings of multicentric Castleman’s disease (MCD)
and IgG4-related lymphadenopathy are often similar. MCD is a distinct type of lymphoproliferative disorder associated with inflammatory
symptoms and IL-6 dysregulation. In the context of HIV infection, MCD is associated with HHV8 infection [15, 16]. Anemia, hypoalbuminemia,
hypocholesterolemia, and thrombocytosis are peculiar to hyper-IL-6 syndrome, and were not found in the present case (Fig. 5) . Furthermore,
we could not detect HHV8 in the lymph nodes (Fig. 6), ruling out HHV8-associated MCD.Fig. 5Comprehensive diagnostic criteria for IgG4-
related disease (modified after Umehara et al. )Fig. 6Histopathological specimens were negative for HHV-8 immunohistochemical staining
(original magnification 100 ×) Comprehensive diagnostic criteria for IgG4- related disease (modified after Umehara et al. )
Histopathological specimens were negative for HHV-8 immunohistochemical staining (original magnification 100 ×) Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. We present a case of an IgG4-related primary localized cervical lymphadenopathy mimicking
hyper-IL-6 syndrome. This case can serve as an excellent reminder that the definitive diagnosis of IgG4-RD should be established using a
systematic approach, in particular when it appears as an atypical manifestation. C-reactive protein computed tomography fluorodeoxyglucose
fine needle aspiration cytology human herpes virus 8 human immunodeficiency virus Immunoglobulin G4-related disease multicentric Castleman’s
disease multiple myeloma magnetic resonance imaging positron emission tomography progressively transformed germinal center rheumatoid factor
standardized uptake value Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MN, OI, and
KT participated in the design of the study and histopathological evaluation, and drafted the manuscript. CT assisted in drafting the
manuscript and revised the manuscript. MN, OI, and CT made contributions in analyzing the histopathological characteristics. JK revised the
manuscript and gave final approval of the manuscript as professor of the Dental and Oral Medical Center, Kurume University School of
Medicine. All authors have given approval for the final version to be published.
