A 59-year old man being investigated for back pain was found to have aneurysmal dilatation of a right-sided aortic arch and descending
thoracic aorta together with an aberrant left subclavian artery. He underwent repair of this utilising the frozen elephant trunk technique,
which dealt with all three pathologies in one-stage. He made an unremarkable recovery and was discharged home on the 8th post-operative day.
This case report further demonstrates the flexibility and safety of the frozen elephant trunk in dealing with complex aortic pathology as a
single-stage procedure. A right-sided aortic arch is an uncommon congenital lesion occurring in 0.05–0.10 % of the population. It is often
associated with an aberrant left subclavian artery, and patients are particularly prone to developing aneurysm and dissection . The optimal
approach to this condition requires meticulous planning and depends on the extent of aneurysm formation. We report the successful single
stage repair of this vascular anomaly using the frozen elephant trunk technique. A 59-year old male was referred to our clinic with a six-
month history of back pain. His medical history included hypertension and a 60-pack year history of smoking. Physical examination including
assessment of peripheral pulses was unremarkable. Chest radiograph revealed a laterally displaced trachea and a right-sided aortic arch.
Computerized tomographic angiography (CTA) confirmed a right-sided aortic arch (4.1 cm) and an aneurysmal descending thoracic aorta (DTA,
6.8 cm at its largest point) located in the right hemi-thorax, which returned to normal size below the diaphragm. The root and ascending
aorta were not aneurysmal. An aberrant left subclavian artery (ALSA) arose from a Kommerell’s diverticulum (3.5 cm) at the junction between
the distal arch and the proximal DTA. The head and neck vessels arose individually from the arch in the following order: left common carotid
artery (LCCA), right common carotid artery (RCCA), right subclavian artery (RSA) and finally the ALSA as mentioned above (Fig. 1). Coronary
angiography, echocardiography and carotid doppler scan were unremarkable. After multi-disciplinary team discussion it was decided to proceed
with the frozen elephant trunk technique.Fig. 1Computer generated images of aorta Computer generated images of aorta After induction of
anaesthesia, arterial lines were placed in the left femoral and both radial arteries. A lumbar cerebrospinal fluid drain was placed in order
to manipulate cord perfusion pressure. A soft guidewire was placed in the right femoral artery (RFA) and advanced in to the arch. A median
sternotomy was performed with left supraclavicular extension in order to expose the distal LSA. The right axillary artery (RAA) was exposed
with an infraclavicular incision. After heparinization, a 8 mm graft was anastomosed to the RAA through this incision on the underside of
the artery. The other end of the graft was tunnelled through the right pleural space in to the pericardial cavity and the arterial line
(bifurcated) of the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) circuit was connected to this end. Examination of the aorta revealed no evidence of
dissection or rupture. After going on to CPB a right superior pulmonary vein vent was placed and the patient was cooled to 25 °C. During
cooling the head and neck vessels were dissected out, and upon fibrillation the ascending aorta was clamped and transected just above the
sinotubular junction. The heart was arrested using direct cold crystalloid cardioplegia. Subsequent shots were delivered retrogradely every
20 min. Once the target temperature was reached, CPB was arrested and the ascending aorta and part of the arch (up to 2 cm before the origin
of the RSA) were resected. The LCCA and RCCA were transected 1 cm distal to their origin and the RSA was ligated at its origin from the
aortic arch. Perfusion catheters were inserted in to the LCCA, the RCCA, and together with the RAA cannula already in place, continuous
bilateral selective antegrade cerebral perfusion (SACP) was started. At this point the soft guidewire in the RFA was exchanged for a stiff
one. A hybrid stent-graft (E-vita OPEN PLUS 40 × 160 mm, Jotec Inc., Hechingen, Germany) was advanced in to the DTA in an antegrade fashion.
The proximal landmark for stent deployment was just distal to the origin of the RSA. The incorporated polyester graft was cut back and
sutured to the transected distal arch with interrupted horizontal mattress sutures (3-0 Prolene, Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) reinforced with a
strip of Teflon. A sterilized bronchoscope enabled the distal part of the stent graft to be checked under direct vision. Attention was then
turned to the ascending aorta where a vascular prosthesis with four side branches (30 mm Tetrabranch, Jotec Inc.) was anastomosed distally
to the arch cuff (comprising the native aorta and the E-vita prosthesis/Teflon strip as described above) using a continuous suture (3-0
Prolene, Ethicon). Systemic perfusion was re-established by connecting the arterial line of the CPB circuit to the 4th side branch of the
vascular prosthesis. The 3rd side branch (8 mm) was passed under the innominate vein and was anastomosed end-to-end to the RCCA (after
removal of the perfusion catheter) with a continuous suture (5-0 Prolene, Ethicon). The proximal anastomosis of the main graft to the
sinotubular junction was then performed using a continuous suture (3-0 Prolene, Ethicon) with an external strip of Teflon. Rewarming was
commenced; a de-airing drill completed and the cross-clamp was removed. The 1st side branch (10 mm) was passed under the innominate vein and
anastomosed end-to-end to the LCCA (after removal of the perfusion catheter) with a continuous suture (5-0 Prolene, Ethicon). Arterial
inflow to the RAA graft, which had been tunnelled to sit in the pericardial cavity, was then stopped and this end of the graft was
anastomosed end-to-end to the 2nd side branch(8 mm) of the prosthesis using a continuous suture (5-0 Prolene, Ethicon). A separate 8 mm
spiral graft was then anastomosed end-to-side to the ALSA in the left supraclavicular area and connected proximally end-to-side to the 1st
branch of the main vascular prosthesis (Fig. 2). The ALSA was ligated proximal to the origin of the left vertebral artery.Fig.
2Intraoperative photo Intraoperative photo After complete rewarming the patient was separated from CPB uneventfully. The bypass times were
as follows: CPB (160 mins), SACP (90 mins) and, distal ischaemic time (50mins). Following haemostasis, the synthetic grafts were covered
with a strip of pericardium to exclude them from the sternal wound prior to routine closure. The patient was extubated 6 h following the
operation and discharged on the 8th post-operative day at which point he was mobile and neurologically intact. Twelve-month follow-up with
CTA confirmed satisfactory appearance of the reconstruction with absence of endoleak. Right-sided aortic arch with ALSA is a rare congenital
abnormality frequently associated with aneurysm and dissection. Whilst appropriate surgical indications are not yet clearly established,
intervention in the asymptomatic is usually recommended for aneurysms over 3 cm . Meticulous pre-operative imaging and planning are
essential. Current treatment options are tailored to the anatomical features (e.g., type I or II right-sided arch and the degree of aneurysm
formation) of each case and include: right (or left) thoracotomy with replacement of the descending thoracic aorta and/or reconstruction of
the ALSA, sternotomy and debranching of the arch vessels with subsequent thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (TEVAR), sternotomy and total
arch replacement with insertion of elephant trunk and subsequent TEVAR, total arch replacement with subsequent thoracotomy for DTA
replacement, arch replacement and DTA replacement through the clamshell approach, and left carotid to left subclavian artery bypass with
ligation or coiling at the origin of the ALSA . In this case we utilised the frozen elephant trunk technique in one-stage to deal with three
pathologies: arch and descending aortic aneurysm together with an ALSA originating in a Kommerell’s diverticulum. To our knowledge, this is
only the third such report in the literature [2, 3]. We consider it to be a safe and effective technique given the excellent outcome this
patient achieved, especially as some of the above techniques are associated with very significant morbidity. There are now a number of other
devices on the market (e.g., Thoraflex Hybrid), which would allow a similar or more advanced outcome to be achieved. Whilst it could be
suggested that TEVAR(after debranching) is a less invasive option, this was not considered due to the acute angle between the distal arch
and the DTA, which may have led to difficulty in securing a good proximal landing. Proceeding with TEVAR in such a situation may have led to
incomplete treatment of the arch aneurysm and perhaps unwanted complications such as endoleak. A further disadvantage of this approach is
that of embolic related complications in patients with extensive atheroma of the distal aorta. In retrospect, we could have simplified our
operation further by establishing CPB via arch cannulation and reanastomosing the RSA to the new arch graft directly via the median
sternotomy. This case report demonstrates the flexibility and safety of the frozen elephant trunk in dealing with right-sided aortic arch
aneurysms as a single-stage procedure. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JK, PT, KV and TA
performed the operation. TA and JK conceived the report. OJ and LH wrote the first draft with input from all authors. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. None.
