Acute abdominal pain is one of the most frequent complaints evaluated at emergency departments. Approximately 25 % of abdominal pain
patients discharged from emergency departments are diagnosed with undifferentiated abdominal pain. One possible reason for acute abdominal
pain is renal infarction. Diagnosis is difficult and often late. A white, 33-year-old, previously healthy Finnish man came to our emergency
department because of acute abdominal pain. After evaluation and follow-up he was discharged the next day with a diagnosis of
undifferentiated abdominal pain. He returned a day later and was diagnosed with renal infarction. Appropriate therapy was initiated in the
nephrology ward. Further tests confirmed a diagnosis of renal infarction as a result of fibromuscular dysplasia. He recovered well and was
discharged on the tenth day of hospitalization. His renal function was normal. Renal infarction is rare and should be considered if a
patient with intense flank pain has no sign of urolithiasis or pyelonephritis. Contrast-enhanced computer tomography and assay of lactate
dehydrogenase are recommended. The optimal treatment is still uncertain. Every patient discharged with undifferentiated abdominal pain
should be given clear instructions as to when it is necessary to return to the emergency department. Acute abdominal pain is one of the most
frequent presenting complaints evaluated at emergency departments (EDs) and it represents 5–10 % of ED visits [1, 2]. Despite advanced
diagnostic modalities, approximately 25 % of abdominal pain patients discharged from EDs are diagnosed with undifferentiated abdominal pain
. Diagnosis can sometimes be difficult, and thus diagnostic laparotomy is commonly carried out. Vascular emergencies might arise as one of
the most difficult diagnostic problems . The annual incidence of acute renal infarction in patients referred to EDs has been reported to be
0.007 % in retrospective studies [4, 5]. Presenting symptoms of renal infarction are not unique and the time gap between the onset of
symptoms to diagnosis is often nearly 2 days [6, 7]. Helical computed tomography (CT) scanning without contrast is the gold standard for the
more common kidney and ureteral stones, thus being often the first imaging test as regards flank pain. If there are no signs of
urolithiasis, a contrast-enhanced CT scan should be carried out to assess the possible occurrence of renal infarction. The classic finding
in a case of renal infarction is a wedge-shaped perfusion defect. A white, 33-year-old, previously healthy Finnish man came to the ED of our
hospital in Finland because of intense abdominal pain. He was a nonsmoker and had no history of alcohol abuse. Our patient had had no
previous medication and he denied any acute drug usage. He had undergone appendectomy 15 years previously. He had no history of traffic
accident-related or other abdominal trauma. The acute pain was located on the left side of his abdomen, running down to the left inguinal
area. He rated the pain as maximal, numerically 10 on a 1–10 scale. On clinical examination his abdomen was soft on palpation with no
abdominal guarding, but our patient was struggling with pain. Peripheral pulses were palpable and there was no tenderness on palpation of
the kidneys. The symptoms supported a diagnosis of urolithiasis. Our patient was treated with intravenous oxycodone and his pain was
relieved. A helical CT scan showed no sign of urolithiasis and his kidneys were normal (Fig. 1). Laboratory analysis showed an elevated
white blood cell (WBC) count of 13.4 × 109/L. However, his serum concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) was normal, as were other
laboratory test results (Table 1). Next morning, our patient was feeling well and had no abdominal pain. His WBC count had decreased to
10.0 × 109/L. Otherwise the results were still normal. Our patient was discharged and advised to return should the pain reoccur. He returned
to the ED the next evening because of rapid-onset intense abdominal pain located in the lower left quadrant of his abdomen, radiating to the
left testicle. A urologist was consulted because of the possibility of testicular torsion, but our patient's clinical findings did not
support this. The provisional diagnosis was still urolithiasis. Owing to the intense pain, explorative surgery was planned in order to
assess the testicles and kidneys. Before any definite decision, contrast-enhanced abdominal CT was carried out. This revealed renal
infarction of the left kidney (Fig. 2). The renal artery was open. After consultation, our patient was admitted to the nephrology ward.Fig.
1A helical computed tomography scan performed during the first emergency department visit showing no sign of urolithiasis. The kidneys are
normalTable 1Laboratory results at the first emergency department visitDay 1Day 2Reference rangeParameterBlood hemoglobin
(g/L)133121134–167Blood hematocrit (%)403639–50Blood white cell count (x 109/L)13.410.03.4–8.2Plasma sodium (mmol/L)138140135–146Plasma
potassium (mmol/L)3.503.503.3–3.5Plasma creatinine (μmol/L)617960–100Plasma C-reactive protein (mg/L)<1<10–10Plasma alanine aminotransferase
(U/L)N/A1710–70Plasma aspartate aminotransferase (U/L)N/A2615–45Plasma alkaline phosphatase (U/L)N/A5035–105Plasma amylase
(U/L)N/A3625–120Urine glucoseNegativeN/ANegativeUrine ketonesNegativeN/ANegativeUrine bloodNegativeN/ANegativeUrine
albuminNegativeN/ANegativeUrine nitriteNegativeN/ANegativeUrine white cell screenNegativeN/ANegativeFig. 2A contrast-enhanced abdominal
computed tomography scan performed a day after the first visit reveals a renal infarction of the left kidney A helical computed tomography
scan performed during the first emergency department visit showing no sign of urolithiasis. The kidneys are normal Laboratory results at the
first emergency department visit A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography scan performed a day after the first visit reveals a
renal infarction of the left kidney Our patient was started on enoxaparin, 100 mg twice daily, and examined for the possible source of
emboli or a thrombophilic state. An electrocardiogram (ECG), transthoracic echocardiography and 48-hour continuous ECG monitoring did not
indicate cardiac disease, arrhythmia or any other reason for suspected emboli. The results of laboratory tests for anticardiolipin
antibodies and other markers of thrombophilic states including antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, lupus anticoagulant, beta 2
glycoprotein 1 antibodies, factor V Leiden, and factor II prothrombin were negative. There were no systemic clinical symptoms in our
patient’s medical history such as fatigue, weight loss, arthralgia, hemoptysis, epistaxis, or persistent nasal crusting that would have
suggested possible vasculitis. No palpable purpura or other skin manifestations were found either. Neither were there any abnormalities in
the usual laboratory tests for identifying vasculitis such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies against either protease 3 or myeloperoxidase, serum complement levels C3 and C4, and antiglomerular basement membrane
antibodies. A biopsy examination of the involved tissue was not feasible. There was a typical increase of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). His
intense abdominal pain was treated with intravenous oxycodone delivered via a patient-controlled analgesia pump, and epidural bupivacaine
anesthesia. Anti-factor Xa levels were measured to adjust the enoxaparin dosage and enoxaparin was paused during removal of the epidural
catheter. On the seventh day of hospitalization, our patient had a fever of 38.4 °C, an elevated WBC count and his CRP level had increased
to 301 mg/L (Table 2). There appeared to be no focus of infection, but intravenous ceftriaxone was started because of possible secondary
infection of the affected tissue. Invasive angiography of the left renal artery was performed on the fifth day of hospitalization. At first,
the performing radiologist interpreted the finding as 10-mm-long stenosis of a segmental branch of the inferior renal artery, followed by
20 mm of poststenotic dilatation and obvious thrombosis (Fig. 3). The diameter of the stenotic part was approximately 1.7 mm. Our patient’s
kidney function remained stable and normal, so invasive evaluation of a potential pressure gradient (which might have been difficult) was
not found necessary at that time. Another theory arose when the findings were reevaluated at the next radiology meeting: the segmental
branch of the inferior renal artery was evaluated as being aneurysmatic, and it was thought to have been a possible source of emboli.Table
2Selected laboratory data during the 10-day hospitalization period and follow-up visit 26 months after the patient was dischargedAt
presentationPeakDischargedLatest follow-upReference rangeParameterBlood white cell count (x 109/L)11.719.711.26.83.4–8.2Plasma creatinine
(μmol/L)6688888860–100Plasma C-reactive protein (mg/L)330180<10–10Plasma lactate dehydrogenase (U/L)N/A659343194105–205Fig. 3An invasive
angiography of the left renal artery performed on the fifth day of hospitalization. The stenotic part is marked with an asterisk, followed
by a dilated aneurysmatic part marked with an arrow Selected laboratory data during the 10-day hospitalization period and follow-up visit
26 months after the patient was discharged An invasive angiography of the left renal artery performed on the fifth day of hospitalization.
The stenotic part is marked with an asterisk, followed by a dilated aneurysmatic part marked with an arrow Our patient was discharged on the
tenth day of hospitalization. He was feeling well and the fever had subsided. Serum levels of CRP had decreased to 80 mg/L. Oral antibiotics
(cephalexin), proton pump inhibitor, and 100 mg of enoxaparin once a day were prescribed for 1 week. Diuresis was normal. There was a slight
rise in creatinine levels but his glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was normal (100 mL/min/1.73 m2). His clinical status was normal, with
blood pressure (BP) of 136/80 mmHg. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was carried out 15 months after the infarction to check for
possible progression of changes in the left renal artery. There were slight changes of caliber in the arteries of his left kidney. Similar
changes were also noticeable in the common hepatic artery and superior mesenteric artery. The arteries of his right kidney were normal. The
findings were evaluated as being a consequence of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) and our patient was started on acetylsalicylic acid (ASA),
100 mg once a day. A carotid ultrasound was performed and there were slight irregularities in the wall of his right common carotid artery, a
finding which was suggestive of FMD. Doppler findings were normal and the carotid arteries were otherwise normal. A follow-up visit took
place a year after the MRA examination. His BP measured by a nurse was 149/79 and his GFR was still normal. Our patient was instructed to
perform home blood pressure monitoring and he later reported that his BP was 130–140/70–80. There appeared to be no problems during follow-
up and our patient continued in his normal work. Renal infarction is a rare condition with four identifiable groups: renal infarction with
thromboemboli originating from the heart or aorta, renal infarction associated with renal artery injury (including renal artery dissection,
FMD and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with thrombotic aneurysms of the renal artery), renal infarction associated with hypercoagulability
disorders, and idiopathic renal infarction. In the largest published series (94 patients with acute renal infarction), the idiopathic group
represented 29 % . Less common causes of renal infarction include renal artery occlusion following endovascular intervention and cocaine use
. The symptoms of renal infarction are similar to those of many other causes of abdominal pain. An increased level of LDH is a typical
finding as a common marker of cell necrosis [5, 11]. In differential diagnosis renal colic and acute pyelonephritis must be excluded.
Neither of these conditions is associated with elevated LDH levels and in pyelonephritis the urine sample typically reveals pyuria, which is
not typical in cases of renal infarction. Our patient was first diagnosed with abdominal pain of an undetermined nature. Renal infarction
was found later when he returned to the ED. Our patient had typical symptoms – an increased LDH level and a classic CT finding. The
possibility of arterial disease as the primary reason for renal infarction was also proposed after the first radiologist interpreted the
angiography finding as stenosis of the renal artery followed by a poststenotic dilatation and obvious thrombosis. In that case, rupture of
the atherosclerotic plaque could be followed by the formation of local thrombosis and infarction, as in myocardial infarction (local
thrombosis in a coronary artery) or cerebral infarction (thromboembolism from the carotid artery, for example, or local thrombosis) . Unlike
our case, atherosclerotic renal disease is known to be more common in patients aged 45 years or more . Another theory was that renal
infarction might have been a consequence of FMD, which is typically a finding among patients aged less than 50. FMD of renal arteries
presents usually with hypertension, but cases of renal infarction have been reported . Sometimes it progresses quickly and may lead to renal
infarction because of thrombosis of the poststenotic dilatation of the renal artery. It has been stated that “FMD can easily be
differentiated from atherosclerosis, in that it occurs in the middle or distal portions of the artery in younger patients without
significant cardiovascular risk, whereas atherosclerosis occurs at the origin or proximal portion of the artery in older patients with
cardiovascular risk factors” . The young age of our patient was typical of FMD, but the stenosis was in a proximal part of a branch of the
renal artery, not a distal part. Statin therapy and ASA were not initiated for our patient at discharge, since atherosclerosis was not
supported by the age of our patient or the type of findings. Magnetic resonance angiography confirmed the finding to be a consequence of FMD
and the renal infarction was classified as infarction associated with renal artery injury. The second most common site of involvement in FMD
is carotid artery. In a recent registry study 73.3 % of adult patients in the United States Registry for FMD had extracranial carotid vessel
involvement . There are no comparative studies as regards the treatment of renal infarction. Reported approaches include anticoagulation,
endovascular therapy, and open surgery. Only patients diagnosed very early may benefit from local low-dose thrombolysis . Primary surgical
therapy is not encouraged, with the possible exception of a trauma patient with other indications for surgery. Since the diagnosis is often
delayed there is usually not much to be done about the infarction. The main focus is on preventing future ischemic events and treating the
possible secondary problems related to the infarction. It is typical to treat patients with anticoagulation therapy, since many of them have
a clear indication for it, for example, atrial fibrillation [4, 5, 8, 11]. There is no consensus of opinion on the duration of
anticoagulation for patients with renal infarction and there are no reports comparing outcomes with those among untreated patients.
Abdominal pain is a challenging problem in EDs. Every patient discharged with undifferentiated abdominal pain should be given clear
instructions as to when it is necessary to return to the ED. If urolithiasis is excluded by means of a helical CT scan for a typical patient
with flank pain, it is recommended that a contrast-enhanced CT scan be performed. Assay of LDH is useful when renal infarction is suspected.
The optimal treatment of renal infarction is still uncertain, and the diagnosis is often late. The main focus is on preventing further
damage to the patient. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review from the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. acetylsalicylic acid blood pressure
C-reactive protein computed tomography electrocardiogram emergency department fibromuscular dysplasia glomerular filtration rate lactate
dehydrogenase magnetic resonance angiography white blood cell Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions HS and AP drafted and finalized the manuscript. Both authors have read and approved the final manuscript. This report
represents part of an evaluation of the emergency department of Kanta-Häme Central Hospital. The authors gratefully acknowledge the
professional technical aid of Nick Bolton and Seppo Kortelainen, MD, and the cooperation of the medical and nursing staff of the hospital
working in the emergency department and the internal medicine ward.
