The work was conducted at the Royal Veterinary College. alkaline phosphatase alanine transferase fast field echo fluid‐attenuated inversion
recovery magnetic resonance imaging rostral interstitial nuclei of the medial longitudinal fasciculus reference interval T1 weighted T2
weighted echo time repetition time thyroid‐stimulating hormone Convergence‐retraction nystagmus is an irregular, jerky nystagmus in which
both eyeballs rhythmically converge and retract into the orbit, particularly on attempting an upward gaze.1 In humans it is seen as part of
Parinaud's syndrome, also known as dorsal midbrain syndrome, in which a lesion of dorsally located midbrain structures (the ventral
pretectum, the periaqueductal area, and the medial longitudinal fasciculus in the dorsal tegmentum) prevents upward or downward movement of
the eyes.2, 3, 4 It has been hypothesized that convergence‐retraction nystagmus is caused by damage (ischemia, neoplasia, compression, or
demyelination) to supranuclear fibers that have an inhibitory effect on the convergence neurons or divergence neurons in the midbrain,
resulting in a sustained discharge of medial rectus and other extraocular muscle neurons.2, 3 The rostral interstitial nuclei of the medial
longitudinal fasciculus (RINMLF) of the midbrain, located dorsal to the oculomotor nuclei, contain the final relays producing all vertical
saccades, and hence it has been suggested that Parinaud's syndrome may result from damage to their neuronal cell bodies, as well as their
afferent and efferent pathways.2, 4 Convergence‐retraction nystagmus is a highly localizing clinical sign that to the best of our knowledge
has not yet been described in the dog. Here, we report 3 large breed dogs that were presented with convergence‐retraction nystagmus and in
which magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) identified focal lesions within the dorsal midbrain. Case 1: An 11‐year, 5‐month‐old male neutered
Staffordshire Bull Terrier was presented with a 14‐day history of acute onset, nonprogressive vestibular ataxia with lethargy and
disorientation. General physical examination was normal. On neurological examination, the dog was found to be mildly obtunded with a mild
right‐sided head tilt and circling to the right. Convergence‐retraction nystagmus was noted (Video S1), with decreased vestibulo‐ocular
reflex bilaterally. The remainder of the neurological examination was normal and the findings were considered consistent with a right
brainstem neurolocalization. The CBC results were within reference intervals (RIs). Serum biochemistry results included a mildly increased
alkaline phosphatase (ALKP) activity (313 U/L; RI, 19–285 U/L), alanine transferase (ALT) activity (171 U/L; RI, 13–88 U/L), and calcium
concentration (2.73 mmol/L; RI, 2.13–2.7 mmol/L). Serum thyroxine and thyroid‐stimulating hormone (TSH) concentrations were within normal
limits. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were within normal limits. Noninvasive blood pressure assessment
identified a pressure of 170–175 mmHg. Urine‐specific gravity was 1.043, and urine chemistry dipstrip analysis and sediment examination were
normal. A Baermann test for Angiostrongylus was negative. The dog underwent general anesthesia. A combination of acepromazine maleate (0.01
mg/kg IV) and methadone (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) was used for premedication, followed by induction with propofol (4–6 mg/kg IV) and maintenance of
anesthesia with isoflurane in oxygen. A MRI examination was performeda and included T2‐weighted (T2W) (repetition time, , echo time ,
3333/110) sagittal and transverse images, T2W fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (TR/TE, 3612/80, inversion time 2000) transverse
images, and T2*W fast field echo (FFE) transverse images. Sagittal and transverse, T1‐weighted (T1W) (TR/TE, 515/15) images were acquired
before and after IV administration of gadolinium contrast (0.1 mmol/kg, gadobutrolb). Slice thickness was 1.75 mm in the sagittal and 2 mm
in the transverse planes with an interslice gap of 0.9 mm in all planes. A rounded, 5 mm diameter, poorly demarcated lesion was identified
within the right dorsal midbrain, adjacent to the midline and extending rostrally to the caudal margin of the interthalamic adhesion (Fig
1). The lesion was iso‐ to hypointense‐to‐normal‐gray‐matter on T1W images, hyperintense on T2W and FLAIR sequences, with a central signal
void on FFE sequences. The lesion did not show enhancement after gadolinium contrast administration, and there was evidence of a mild mass
effect. These findings were most consistent with a cerebrovascular accident, potentially with a central hemorrhagic component given the
signal void on FFE sequences, with other differential diagnoses including inflammatory and neoplastic disease. Computed tomography was
performed with a 16‐slice scannerc to evaluate for evidence of a predisposing cause for cerebrovascular disease. This examination of the
head, thorax, and abdomen identified mild bilateral rhinitis and several small, round nodules within the spleen. Analysis of cerebrospinal
fluid was not performed. Case 1 T2‐weighted sagittal image of the brain (A) and T2W (B), T1W (C) transverse images at the level of the
rostral midbrain revealed a round lesion adjacent to the midline. The lesion (indicated by the arrows) is hyperintense‐to‐normal gray matter
on T2W sequences, iso‐ to hypointense on T1W sequences. FFE image at the level of the thalamus (D) shows a signal void in the rostral aspect
of the lesion. The dog was discharged from the hospital 36 hours after admission and made a full recovery within 12 days, with no recurrence
of the neurological deficits. This patient was euthanized 34 months later because of severe degenerative joint disease and weight loss. Case
2: A 10‐year, 8‐month‐old male neutered Rottweiler was presented for sudden onset abnormal mentation with vacant episodes. The dog had been
diagnosed with diabetes mellitus 8 months previously, and was well controlled with 54 IU of porcine lente insulin administered SC q12h.
General physical examination identified bilateral elbow crepitus with decreased range of flexion, but was otherwise unremarkable. On
neurological examination, the dog was found to be quiet, but alert and responsive. The head was held elevated with dorsal extension of the
neck and very mild right‐sided head tilt. The sclera of both eyes could be seen above the iris, with the distance between the superior
eyelid and iris being increased with an upward gaze (Fig 2). Intermittent convergence‐retraction nystagmus was noted, and was found to be
most apparent when the head was held elevated (Video S2). The remainder of the neurological examination was unremarkable, and a
neurolocalization of right brainstem was determined. Case 2 demonstrated elevation of the head with extension of the neck and very mild
right‐sided head tilt. The sclera of both eyes could be seen dorsal to the iris, with the distance between the superior eyelid and iris
being further increased with an upward gaze. The CBC was within RIs. Serum biochemistry results included increased serum potassium
concentration (5.8 mEq/L; RI, 3.9–5.5 mEq/L), inorganic phosphorus concentration (2.62 mmol/L; RI; 0.8–2 mmol/L), urea concentration (12.6
mmol/L; RI, 3–9.1 mmol/L), creatinine concentration (146 μmol/L; RI, 59–138 μmol/L), cholesterol concentration (16.8 mmol/L; RI, 3.3–8.9
mmol/L), and creatine kinase activity (421 U/L; RI, 61–394 U/L), with a mildly decreased serum albumin concentration (26.6 g/L; RI, 28–39
g/L). All other variables were within normal limits. Serum thyroxine and TSH concentrations were within normal limits. Noninvasive blood
pressure assessment identified a mean pressure of 170 mmHg. Urine‐specific gravity was 1.012, urine chemistry dipstrip analysis identified
2+ blood, but was otherwise unremarkable, as was sediment examination. Urine bacteriological culture was negative. The dog underwent general
anesthesia and MRI of the brain as described above and a small, focal, right‐sided, well‐demarcated T2W, FFE and FLAIR
hyperintense‐to‐normal‐gray matter lesion was indentified within the right dorsal midbrain (Fig 3). The lesion was approximately 2 mm in
diameter, adjacent the midline (right sided) and ventrolateral to the mesencephalic aqueduct. No contrast enhancement was detected, nor was
there evidence of mass effect. These imaging findings were consistent with a cerebrovascular accident, with other differential diagnoses
including inflammatory and neoplastic disease. Case 2 T2‐weighted sagittal image of the brain (A) and T2W (B), T1W (C), and FFE (D)
transverse images at the level of the rostral midbrain revealed a small round lesion adjacent to the midline (right sided) and ventrolateral
to the rostral part of the mesencephalic aqueduct. The lesion (indicated by the arrows) is hyperintense‐to‐normal‐gray matter on T2W and FFE
sequences, and is iso‐ to hypointense on T1W sequences. Analysis of a cerebrospinal fluid sample obtained from the cisterna
cerebellomedullaris had a total nucleated cell count of 1/μL (RI, 0–5/μL), red blood cell count of 3/μL, and a total protein concentration
of 0.28 g/L (RI, 0–0.25 g/L). Cytological evaluation disclosed low cellularity, consisting primarily of monocytes. Thoracic and abdominal CT
detected mild elbow osteoarthritis and degenerative intervertebral disk disease, but was otherwise unremarkable. The dog showed steady
improvement in mentation and demeanor over the subsequent 48 hours, at which time it was discharged from the hospital. On telephone
discussion with the owner 6 months after hospital discharge, the dog was reported to have made a full recovery with no apparent residual
neurological deficits. Case 3: A 7‐year, 6‐month‐old male neutered English Bull Terrier was presented for further investigation of a 24‐hour
history of acute onset, right‐sided head tilt. Physical examination findings were unremarkable. Neurological examination identified a mild
right‐sided head tilt, decreased menace response in both eyes with normal vision and convergence‐retraction nystagmus (Video S3). The
remainder of the neurological examination was normal, and a neurolocalization of right brainstem was determined. A CBC disclosed a mild
increase in the packed cell volume (59%; RI, 37–55%) and hemoglobin (20.1 g/dL; RI, 12–18 g/dL). Serum biochemistry results included a mild
decrease in sodium concentration (137 mEq/L; RI, 142–153 mEq/L) and a mild increase in ALT activity (106 U/L; RI, 13–88 U/L). Serum
thyroxine and TSH concentrations were within normal limits. The dog underwent general anesthesia and MRI of the brain as described above,
which identified a small, focal, left‐sided, well‐demarcated T2W, FFE, and FLAIR hyperintense‐to‐normal‐gray matter lesion within the dorsal
and rostral midbrain (Fig 4). The lesion was approximately 3 mm in diameter, adjacent to the midline (left‐sided), and ventrolateral to the
mesencephalic aqueduct. No contrast enhancement was detected, nor was there evidence of mass effect. These imaging findings were consistent
with a cerebrovascular accident, but other differential diagnoses included inflammatory and neoplastic disease. Computed tomography of the
thorax and abdomen identified a mild lumbosacral intervertebral disk protrusion and a very mild jejunal lymphadenopathy, but was otherwise
unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid collection was attempted from the cerebellomedullary cistern, but was unsuccessful. Case 3 T2‐weighted
sagittal image of the brain (A) and T2W (B), T1W (C), and FFE (D) transverse images at the level of the rostral midbrain revealed a round,
well‐demarcated lesion adjacent to the midline (left sided) and ventrolateral to the rostral part of the mesencephalic aqueduct. The lesion
(indicated by the arrows) is hyperintense‐to‐normal‐gray matter on T2W and FFE sequences, and is iso‐ to hypointense on T1W sequences. The
dog made an uneventful recovery and on telephone discussion with the owner 10 months after hospital discharge, the dog was reported to have
made a full recovery with no apparent residual neurological deficits. Physiological nystagmus (the vestibulo‐ocular reflex) is an
involuntary, rhythmic ocular movement, the purpose of which is to keep the retina fixed on a visual target as the head rotates.5, 6 Head
rotation stimulates hair cell receptors in the cristae ampullares of the semicircular canals of the inner ear. This afferent input is
transmitted via cranial nerve VIII (vestibulocochlear nerve) to the vestibular nuclei in the medulla oblongata, and then through the medial
longitudinal fasciculus to the brainstem nuclei of cranial nerves III (oculomotor nerve), IV (trochlear nerve), and VI (abducent nerve) to
elicit movement of the eyeball.7 Physiological nystagmus occurs in response to head rotation, with the rapid phase of eyeball movement in
the direction of rotation. Pathological nystagmus occurs spontaneously (spontaneous nystagmus) or when an abnormal head posture is induced
(positional nystagmus) as a result of vestibular system dysfunction.5, 6 Pathological nystagmus is categorized as horizontal, vertical, or
rotary depending on the direction of eyeball movement. Furthermore, it can be described as conjugate, when the eyeballs are each moving in
the same direction, or dysconjugate, in which each eyeball is moving in a different direction.8 In this report, we describe 3 dogs that were
presented with convergence‐retraction nystagmus; an irregular, jerky movement of the eyeballs, which rhythmically converge and retract into
the orbit, particularly on attempting an upward gaze.1 This nystagmus differs from horizontal, vertical, or rotary nystagmus, in which an
oscillation is seen with both eyes moving in the same direction and with no eyeball retraction. It results from simultaneous contraction of
all of the extraocular muscles in response to efforts to change the direction of gaze. This rhythmic contraction is thought to result from a
sustained discharge of axons in the medial longitudinal fasciculus.2, 3 The RINMLF of the midbrain (Fig 5), located dorsal to the oculomotor
nuclei, contain the final relays producing all vertical eye movements and hence compromise of the neuronal cell bodies, their afferent and
efferent pathways or both are thought to generate convergence and retraction of the eyeballs.4 Given the lack of apparent direct vestibular
system involvement, it can be debated as to whether or not these convergent and retraction movements should be referred to as a nystagmus.
T2‐weighted transverse image of the brain at the level of the rostral midbrain (A) and schematic depiction (B) to show the location of the
rostral interstitial nuclei of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (RINMLF), highlighted as green ovals. In humans, convergence‐retraction
nystagmus typically is accompanied by upward or downward gaze paralysis or both, paresis of the pupils, and eyelid retraction.2, 4 Lesions
affecting the dorsal midbrain can lead to functional disruption of the rostral or caudal colliculi or both, oculomotor nuclei and
Edinger‐Westphal nuclei (parasympathetic oculomotor), causing motor dysfunction of the eye. The dog in case 2 presented with an abnormal
posture, typically sitting with the head markedly elevated and the neck extended (Fig 2). This posture was presumed to represent active
compensation for inability to elevate the gaze. In addition, the distance between the superior eyelid and iris would increase on attempts to
gaze upward. In humans this finding is called “Collier's sign”, and results from a combination of eyelid retraction and vertical gaze palsy
caused by dorsal midbrain lesions. Detailed neuro‐ophthalmic examination therefore is recommended in any patient presenting with
convergence‐retraction nystagmus to identify subtle deficits of ocular movement. All dogs had signs of vestibular dysfunction, albeit mild,
on presentation. Thalamic lesions are known to generate signs of vestibular dysfunction (e.g., head tilt, tendency to circle) in dogs.9 All
dogs described here presented with a right‐sided head tilt: in dogs 1 and 2 the head tilt was ipsilateral to the lesion, and in dog 3 it was
contralateral. Head tilts associated with ventrolateral thalamic infarcts are reported to be ipsilateral, and head tilts associated with
paramedian infarcts are contralateral to the side of the lesion.9 Presumably, the lesions in dogs 1 and 2 reported here interrupted the
pathway between the right ventrolateral thalamus and midbrain, whereas the lesion in dog 3 interrupted the pathway between the left
paramedian thalamus and midbrain. The mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus, affected in paramedian infarcts, has direct connections with the
cerebellum10 and several brainstem structures including the interstitial nucleus of Cajal.9, 11 The medial longitudinal fasciculus also lies
in close proximity to vestibulo‐thalamic pathways, which when lesioned induce vestibulo‐perceptive dysfunction.12 The imaging
characteristics of the lesions in the 3 cases reported here were consistent with a cerebrovascular accident.9, 13 However, only a tentative
diagnosis can be made in the absence of histopathological confirmation. The term “cerebrovascular accident” is defined as any abnormality of
the brain resulting from a pathological compromise of its blood supply. Such pathological compromise may be the result of a thrombus or
embolus occluding the blood vessel lumen, rupture of the blood vessel wall, altered blood vessel wall permeability, or altered viscosity of
the blood.14 These events may represent idiopathic vasculopathies, or may arise secondary to inflammatory, infectious, systemic, or
neoplastic disease. In humans, dorsal midbrain syndrome has been reported as a consequence of numerous diseases in addition to
cerebrovascular accidents, including pineal gland neoplasia, angiomas, multiple sclerosis, acute hydrocephalus, generalized seizures, and
infectious disease (eg, toxoplasmosis).2 Similar conditions also should be considered as differential diagnoses in dogs presented with
convergence‐retraction nystagmus. Convergence‐retraction nystagmus appears to be a highly specific neurological sign localizing to the
dorsal midbrain (tectum and dorsal aspect of the tegmentum). The presence of convergence‐retraction nystagmus would help discriminate
between central and peripheral lesions in animals presented with vestibular dysfunction. If it is the predominant neurological sign, as in
the dogs described here, convergence‐retraction nystagmus likely suggests a focal lesion, which in combination with patient signalment and
history, may be more suggestive of certain etiologies (e.g., vascular, inflammatory, neoplastic) than others. A clearly defined problem and
list of differential diagnoses allows for a rational and targeted diagnostic plan. Convergence‐retraction nystagmus therefore should be
added to the categories of nystagmus described in the dog, and recognized as a consequence of a central nervous system lesion, specifically
of the dorsal midbrain. Video S1. Convergence‐retraction nystagmus in case 1. Click here for additional data file. Video S2.
Convergence‐retraction nystagmus in case 2. Click here for additional data file. Video S3. Convergence‐retraction nystagmus in case 3. Click
here for additional data file. The authors thank Ioannis Plessas and Ine Cornelis for assistance in clinical management of the described
cases. Conflict of Interest Declaration: Authors declare no conflict of interest. Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: Authors declare no
off‐label use of antimicrobials. Intera 1.5T, Philips Medical Systems, Best, the Netherlands Gadovist, Bayer, Bayer House, Strawberry Hill,
UK Philips Mx8000 IDT, Philips
