The Glenn operation involving anastomosis of the superior vena cava to the pulmonary artery has been performed for palliative operations of
many cyanotic congenital heart diseases in addition to the single ventricle since the 1960s. The classic procedure is done via median
sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass. The benefits of this procedure without the use of cardiopulmonary bypass remain mixed within reported
series. Cases using this approach and off-pump technique together in Latin-America have not yet been reported in the scientific literature.
A operação de Glenn envolvendo anastomose da veia cava superior à artéria pulmonar foi realizada como procedimento paliativo de muitas
doenças cardíacas congênitas cianóticas, além do ventrículo único desde os anos 1960. O procedimento clássico é feito por esternotomia
mediana e circulação extracorpórea. Os benefícios deste procedimento sem o uso de circulação extracorpórea permanecem incertos dentro da
série relatada. Casos utilizando conjuntamente esta abordagem e a técnica sem circulação extracorpórea na América Latina ainda não foram
relatados na literatura científica. The Glenn operation involving anastomosis of the superior vena cava to the pulmonary artery has been
performed for palliative operations of many cyanotic congenital heart diseases in addition to the single ventricle since the 1960s. The
classic procedure is done via median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass the benefits of this procedure without the use of cardiopulmonary
bypass remain mixed within reported series because there are still controversial conclusions. Cases using this approach and off-pump
technique together in Latin-America have not yet been reported in the scientific literature. A twenty-monthold male patient, body weighing 7
kg, diagnosed with pulmonary atresia (PA) ventricular septal defect (VSD) + pulmonary hypoplasia clinically presented with severe cyanosis,
oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 35%, and history of generalized tonic-clonic seizure in several occasions, was referred to our service for a
bidirectional Glenn procedure in order to improve his clinical condition; the Blalock-Taussing (BT) shunt was also considered, but our
preference was the first procedure. The Ethics Commettee aproval was granted either for the use of whole medical history contents and the
scientific use of the data. The patient's relatives also signed an informed consent for the surgery and the use of both pictures and content
for scientific purpose. Before surgery the patient had an angiogram with right heart catheterization to measure pulmonary artery pressure
and also to determine whether the procedure was feasible. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. The intraoperative
management included monitoring electrocardiogram (ECG), SaO2, end-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2). Arterial blood gas (ABG) was analyzed at the
baseline after intubation and during the procedure. In addition pressure monitoring line was placed in the superior vena cava (SVC), an
invasive arterial pressure line was placed in the femoral artery and central venous access was obtained using a trilumen catheter into the
right femoral vein, the corporal temperature was monitorized by rectal probe and controlled at 36ºC with the use of a thermic mattress as
well as the operation room's temperature, all this as part of our usual surgical protocol. A right anterior thoracotomy was performed in the
4thintercostal space; after the pleural cavity was opened the right lung was partially retracted with the use of lap sponges, checking the
oxygen saturation and hemodynamic stability (Figure 1). Approach - The picture presents first exposure of the superior vena cava and the
right atrium. Circumferential control was gained around the entire length of the SVC, exposing this vessel completly by dissecting from the
adjacent tissues. The azygous vein was ligated at this stage, this was to ensure non steal phenomenon from the SVC to inferior vena cava
through this vein. The right pulmonary artery was exposed, and circumferential control was gained around the right main pulmonary artery as
well as the hilar branches. Intraoperative pressure of the right pulmonary artery (RPA) was measured for the feasibility of the procedure.
Two purse-string-sutures with 5-0 polipropilene were performed, one at the proximal side of the SVC and the other at the right atrial
appendage. The patient was systemic heparinized with 300 units/kg to maintain activated coagulation time (ACT) above 250. A 12F right-angle
cannula was placed high on the SVC and a 12F straight cannula was placed in the right atrium. These cannulas were de-aired and hooked
together to create a venoatrial shunt and allow drainage of the upper body while the proximal SVC was occluded (Figure 2). SVC-RA shunt - In
this picture the SVC-RA shunt is already set in position and working while the SVC-RPA anastomosis is performed. SVC-RA=superior vena cava
and the right atrium; SVC-RPA=superior vena cava and right pulmonary artery The pulmonary artery was temporarily occluded using a partial
clamp, to ensure acceptable oxygen saturations (maintained between 50-60%) and hemodynamic stability (Figure 3). The SVC was clamped and
sectioned distally; the stump was oversewed using two layers of 6-0 polipropilene (Figure 4A). SVC clamp - The picture presents the SVC
clamped before the SVC-RPA anastomosis. SVC=superior vena cava; SVC-RPA=superior vena cava and right pulmonary artery Final result - It is
shown the SVC-RPA anastomosis and the RA stump in this picture. SVC-RPA=superior vena cava and right pulmonary artery; RA=right atrium The
SVC was anastomosed to the RPA using continuous 6-0 polipropilene suture; the clamps were removed and hemostasis achieved (Figure 4B). The
shunt between the SVC and the right atrium was removed and the heparin reverted with protamine, finally the surgical incision was closed
conventionally, the right pleura was drained using a single Blake system chest drain, connected to a conventional vacuum system. The patient
was extubated in the operation room and the O2 saturation raised to 90%, the patient was then transferred to intensive care unit in stable
general and hemodynamic conditions. The patient had a satisfactory recovery and was discharged on the 4th postoperative day in good general
conditions. The bidirectional Glenn procedure (BGP) can be performed via median sternotomy or anterior right thoracotomy, furthermore the
use of cardiopulmonary bypass or a temporary shunt between SVC and the right atrium can also be considered. The decision about the approach
and strategy is mainly based on the surgical team experience, patient's condition and the perioperative risk. Many published studies have
shown good results when the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is avoided; furthermore the original surgical technique described by Glenn in 1958
was performed through a thoracotomy and without CPB. One of the concerns of using the veno-atrial shunt instead of CPB is the risk of
inadequate brain protection, due to its flow capacity and the clamping time of the SCV. One of the measures to improve the brain protection
is clamping the SCV underneath the insertion of the azygos vein, as well as the use of a dopamine infusion and a good general circulation
volume, all this to achieve a high transcraneal pressure gradient. The use of Fowler position in the operation table is also beneficial.
Some authors have excluded patients with O2 saturation under 65%, because they considered it increases the risk for operative mortality. The
case we are presenting had an O2 saturation of 35% which according with the literature would be considered as a very high risk patient for
this procedure. However, the postoperative course confirmed the feasibility of the technique. Avoiding the use of cardiopulmonary bypass has
multiples advantages, especially in low weight patients, decreasing the deleterious effects produced on the rest of the organs and vital
systems. The right anterior thoracotomy approach represents a good choice for selected patients, leaving the median sternotomy available for
future interventions. In this case the postoperative course was highly satisfactory and after ten months after surgery the patient remains
in excellent clinical conditions, maintaining O2 saturation in ambient air above 85%. This case report showed a really good evolution
combining the off-pump bidirectional Glenn procedure with a right anterior thoracotomy approach. A larger series of patients is needed to
evaluate the proper indications and results of this technique. In our service now we are selecting patients not previously operated, without
adherences and without a BT shunt sutured in the right pulmonary artery, meanwhile the learning curve would overpassed. We consider this
proposed technique as a good and safe option in a favorable patients avoiding median sternotomy and extracorporeal circulation with all of
the related problems when possible achieving excellent results. This study was carried out at Fundacardio Foundation, Valencia, Venezuela.
No financial support.
