A 7 years and 10 months old male child, 25 kg, born and raised in São José do Rio Preto, SP, referred for heart murmur and fatigue
investigation. Dyspneic for three months and progressive worsening associated to sporadic dorsal region pain upon moderate exertion. Three
days earlier he presented postprandial vomiting, loss of appetite and worsening of general condition. Upon physical examination the patient
was in regular state: pale, hydrated, eupneic and afebrile. Regular heart rhythm with systolic murmur 4 + / 6 + and tachycardia. Clear lung
sounds. Distended and painful abdomen upon palpation, along with hepatomegaly (liver palpable at 2.36 inches from the right costal margin).
Blood pressure and heart rate were normal in all four limbs and without edema. Sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 122 beats/min, QRS axis +
30º and PR interval of 0.12 s. Overload in both atria without ventricular overload. Ventricular repolarization unchanged. Visceral situs
solitus in levocardia. Increased cardiac area with a cardiothoracic index of 0.65 and pulmonary vasculature within normal limits. Situs
solitus in levocardia, all connections were concordant. Significant dilation of both atria with moderate mitral valve regurgitation and
important tricuspid valve regurgitation. Moderate pericardial effusion. Presence of large pediculated, lobed and homogeneous mass
originating from the atrial septum occupying both right and left atria and projecting into the biventricular inlet tract during diastole,
causing blood flow obstruction. Normal ejection fraction (Figures 1A and 1B). A. Two-dimensional echocardiogram preoperatively showing the
masses within the atria. The largest mass is located in the right atrium and occupies all of its cavity. It measures 2.75 x 1.57 inches in
its greatest diameter. The mass in the left atrium measuring 1.77 x 1.18 inches; B. Invagination of the masses to the ventricles interior
during diastole. Myxomas represent around half of all heart tumors and may be associated with dominant family autosomal syndromes. The
majority of them affects the left atrium, but can be present in other sites. The main differential diagnosis is rhabdomyoma. The suggestive
clinical status of low cardiac output, altered cardiac auscultation and the presence of two intracardiac tumor mass on echocardiography were
fundamental for the diagnosis and surgical resection indication. The radiological exam used for this diagnosis was the echocardiogram
because it is a non-invasive exam and has an excellent sensitive. The histologic diagnosis was confirmed by pathological examination after
operation, as it is shown in Figure 2. Microscopically round, polygonal, or stellate cells are seen surrounded by abundant loose stroma rich
in acid mucopolysaccharides. Myxoid stroma with recent and late hemorrhagic areas with hemosiderin pigments. Median sternotomy found a
greatly increased right atrium. Heparinization at 4mg/kg and careful aorta and vena cava cannulation were performed to avoid embolization.
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was initiated, antegrade blood cardioplegia, hypothermic at 39ºF and intermittent every 20 minutes. Right
atrium was opened and large gelatinous mass was found, darkened and ocher colored. It was pulled gently releasing the entire right
ventricular inlet and noting that there was no adhesion of the mass to the right atrial or ventricular walls, just fixed to the atrial
septum. It was opted for resection of the atrial septum since the additional tests showed presence of mass also occluding the left side.
After opening the atrial septum it was observed that the tumor obstructing both sides originated from the same site. The atrial septum was
completely resected along with the tumor, which also showed no adhesions in the left cavities, subsequently reconstructed with bovine Braile
Biomédica® pericardial patch in a conventional way (Figures 3A, 3B and 3C). A. Pediculated tumor in the atrial septum (arrow) removed from
right atrium and right ventricular inlet. Note that there was no adhesion to the cavities; B. Atrial septum resected with the pediculated
tumor and obstructing the left atrium and the left ventricle inlet. The arrow indicates the remnants of the tumor to the right of the atrial
septum featuring both cavities affected by the same mass; C. Resected tumor diameters to the left (a) and to the right (b). In the atrial
septal remnant (arrow) can be observed the presence of the tumor witch occupied the right and left atria. The CPB time was of 50 minutes and
myocardial ischemia of 34 minutes at 93ºF. The postoperative period was uneventful with hospital discharge after six days of
hospitalization. Watch the video acessing the link below: http://www.rbccv.org.br/video/2423/Pediculated-myxoma-from-atrial-septum-invading-
atria-and-biventricular-inlets This study was carried out at Serviço de Cardiologia e Cirurgia Cardiovascular Pediátrica de São José do Rio
Preto - Hospital da Criança e Maternidade de São José do Rio Preto - Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP), São José do
Rio Preto, SP, Brazil. No financial support. To our Nurse Educator Bruna Cury from Hospital da Criança e Maternidade de São José do Rio
Preto, SP for her collaboration in elaborating this text into the English language.
