Transient global amnesia is now considered a very rare complication of cerebral angiography. Various etiological mechanisms have been
suggested to account for this complication, but no consensus has been reached yet. This case report documents one of the few reported cases
of cerebral angiography-related transient global amnesia associated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evidence of unilateral hippocampal
ischemia, most probably as a consequence of a transient reduction in regional hippocampal blood flow. However, the possibility of a direct
neurotoxic effect of the nonionic contrast media Iomeprol on the Cornu ammonis – field 1 neurons cannot be firmly ruled out. We describe the
case of a 54-year-old woman admitted to our department for left upper limb weakness with acute onset 8 days before. The brain computed
tomography (CT) scan performed at admission revealed subacute ischemic lesions in the right watershed superficial territories and a right
thalamic lacunar infarct. Diagnostic digital subtraction cerebral angiography was performed 4 days after admission with the nonionic
contrast media Iomeprol. A few minutes after completion of the procedure, the patient developed symptoms suggestive for transient global
amnesia. The brain MRI performed 22 hours after the onset of symptoms demonstrated increased signal within the lateral part of the right
hippocampus on the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequences, associated with a corresponding reduction in the apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) and increased signal on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences, consistent with acute hippocampal
ischemia and several T2/FLAIR hyperintensities in the right watershed superficial territories and in the right thalamus, corresponding to
the lesions already identified on the CT scan performed at admission. A follow-up MRI, performed 2 months later, demonstrated the
disappearance of the increased signal within the right hippocampus on the DWI, T2/FLAIR, and ADC sequences. The precise mechanism of
transient global amnesia related to cerebral angiography is still unclear, and further studies aimed to determine the definite
pathophysiology of this syndrome and consequently to establish specific preventive measures are needed. Although the condition itself is
considered to be self-limited, the long-term prognosis and the risk of recurrence in the cases where subsequent angiographic procedures are
performed are not established yet. Cerebral angiography was used for the first time for diagnostic purposes in 1927 by the Portuguese
neurologist António de Egas Moniz.1 In the next 40 years, the technique of catheter angiography for imaging cerebral arteries gradually
improved, and its use became widespread in the late 1970s. Despite the continuous development of the technical procedure over the following
decades and the use of nonionic contrast media, which significantly improved the safety and comfort of this imaging technique, certain
associated neurologic complications, most commonly ischemic events, are still reported. Very rare complications of the technique include
transient global amnesia (TGA) and cortical dysfunction.2 We describe the case of a patient experiencing TGA after cerebral digital
subtraction angiography performed with the nonionic contrast media Iomeprol. A 54-year-old right-handed woman was admitted in our department
for left upper limb weakness with acute onset 8 days before. She had a past medical history of hypertension and dyslipidemia, and was
currently treated with a statin and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. Neurological examination revealed moderate weakness of the
left upper limb, numbness and impairment of light touch on the left upper limb, and Babinski sign on the left side. She was alert and fully
oriented. Serial-seven recitation, calculations, naming, reading, and writing abilities were normal. Verbal memory recall was normal, both
immediately and after 5 minutes. The brain computed tomography (CT) scan performed at admission (Figure 1) revealed a subacute ischemic
stroke in the right middle cerebral artery (MCA)—posterior cerebral artery (PCA) watershed territory, 2 hypodense lesions in the right
anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory suggestive for subacute ischemic strokes and a right thalamic lacunar infarct. Doppler ultrasound
of the cervical and cerebral arteries showed 90% stenosis of the right internal carotid artery and stenosis of the right ACA. Brain CT scan
revealing subacute ischemic strokes in the right MCA–PCA watershed territory and ACA territory, and a right thalamic lacunar infarct.
ACA = anterior cerebral artery, CT = computed tomography, MCA = middle cerebral artery, PCA = posterior cerebral artery. Four days after
admission, the patient underwent diagnostic digital subtraction cerebral angiography via a right femoral approach, performed under local
anesthesia (Figure 2). The total duration of the procedure was 20 minutes. The contrast media used was 100 mL Iomeprol (Iomeron 300, Bracco
Imaging SpA, Milan, Italy). Contrast media injection in the brachiocephalic trunk revealed 85% right internal carotid artery stenosis
without intracerebral filling of the ACA. Study of the left common carotid artery showed normal aspect of the left internal carotid artery
with normal intracerebral filling of the ipsilateral arteries and of the right ACA. Both vertebral arteries had normal angiographic
appearance. Digital subtraction cerebral angiography showing (A) 85% right internal carotid artery stenosis, (B) normal aspect of the left
internal carotid artery, and (C) intracerebral filling of the right anterior cerebral artery after contrast media injection in the left
internal carotid artery. A few minutes after completion of the procedure, we observed that the patient was unable to remember anything from
the time of her admission to hospital and asked repeated questions. A detailed neurological examination revealed that the patient was not
oriented in location and time, but oriented in personal data. She did not know the reason of hospitalization or how or when she had been
transported to the hospital. She was unable to acquire and retain new memories, and repeated the same questions regarding her location and
her illness over and over again. She could state her address and the names of the family members, but could not recall her activity during
the past week. The remaining neurological examination was otherwise similar to the one performed at admission. Over the next hours, the
anterograde amnesia gradually improved till complete remission. Twenty-four hours after the angiography, she still had mild retrograde
amnesia and she could not remember the events of the preceding day, including the time passed in the angiography room. During the following
days, the retrograde memory disturbance gradually improved and neurological examination performed 7 days after the angiography revealed a
memory gap of the day when the angiography was performed without other significant memory problems. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
was performed 22 hours after the cerebral angiography (Figure 3), demonstrating increased signal within the lateral part of the right
hippocampus on the diffusion-weighted sequences associated with a corresponding reduction in the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and
increased signal on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences, consistent with acute hippocampal ischemia. It also revealed
several T2/FLAIR hyperintensities with decreased ADC in the right watershed superficial territories and in the right thalamus, corresponding
to the lesions already identified on the brain CT scan performed at admission. Brain MRI performed 22 hours after the cerebral angiography
demonstrating (A) increased signal within the lateral part of the right hippocampus on the DWI sequences and (B) corresponding reduction in
the ADC and (C) increased signal on the FLAIR sequences, consistent with acute hippocampal ischemia, (D, E) increased DWI signal with (F, G)
decreased ADC in the right watershed superficial territories and in the right thalamus (confirming the acute ischemic lesions identified on
brain CT at admission). ADC = apparent diffusion coefficient, CT = computed tomography, DWI = diffusion-weighted imaging, FLAIR = fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. Repeated brain MRI 7 days after the angiography showed a decrease of the
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) signal intensity within the right hippocampus, with persistence of the increased signal on the FLAIR and T2
sequences, and the same aspect of the other previously described lesions (Figure 4). Brain MRI performed 7 days after the angiography
showing (A) a decrease of the DWI signal intensity within the right hippocampus with (B) persistence of the increased signal on the FLAIR
sequences. DWI = diffusion-weighted imaging, FLAIR = fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. At follow-up, 2
months after the angiography, the memory gap of the angiography day persisted, without other significant memory disturbances. The MRI
performed 2 months after the angiography (Figure 5) demonstrated the disappearance of the increased signal within the right hippocampus on
the diffusion-weighted, T2/FLAIR, and ADC sequences. Brain MRI performed 2 months after the angiography demonstrating disappearance of the
increased signal within the right hippocampus on the (A) DWI and (B) FLAIR sequences. DWI = diffusion-weighted imaging, FLAIR = fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. Cerebral angiography is an invasive procedure associated with relatively
low but potentially severe complication rates. Neurologic events are reported to occur in approximately 1.3% to 2.6% of the examinations.
Factors associated with an increased risk of neurological complications include the indication for angiography of subarachnoid hemorrhage,
atherosclerotic cerebrovascular disease and arteriovenous malformations, history of cardiovascular disease, fluoroscopic time longer than 10
minutes, and advanced patient age.3,4 In a retrospective analysis of 19,826 angiographic procedures, transient ischemic attacks accounted
for 2.09% of the neurologic complications, reversible ischemic neurologic deficits for 0.36%, and established stroke for 0.14%.3 Several
causes and mechanisms have been proposed to account for the neurological complications arising after cerebral angiography. These include
mechanical detachment of arterial wall plaques by the catheter with distal embolization, arterial dissections, clot formation around the
catheter and the guide wire, platelet activation, changes in red cell morphology, and blood viscosity and direct neurotoxic effect of
contrast material.5 Transient global amnesia is now considered a very rare complication of cerebral angiography occurring in approximately
0.2% of the examinations performed with nonionic contrast media.4 The first case of TGA after cerebral angiography was reported in 1981 by
Wales and Nov.6 During the following years, isolated cases and a number of series have been reported.7–10 With the herald of nonionic
contrast media, the rate of complications associated with cerebral angiography diminished and accordingly the number of reported cases of
angiography related TGA decreased. The first case of TGA after the use of nonionic contrast media has been reported in 1989 by Giang and
Kido,11 and since then other 17 cases have been reported.12–20 More than 50 years after its initial description by Fisher and Adams,21 TGA
remains one of the most surprising syndromes in clinical neurology. According to the diagnostic criteria proposed by Caplan22 and later
reviewed by Hodges and Warlaw,23,24 TGA is a clinical syndrome characterized by sudden onset of anterograde amnesia, accompanied by
repetitive questioning, with or without retrograde amnesia, lasting up to 24 hours, without compromise of other neurologic functions.25
Although the core amnestic syndrome usually lasts less than 24 hours, mild neuropsychological deficits can last for days after the
episode.26,27 Our patient fulfilled the criteria for TGA, with complete resolution of the anterograde memory dysfunction during the first
24 hours, but the impairment of retrograde memory lasted longer and gradually improved over 1 week. Several cases reported in the literature
show the same pattern of memory recovery and even longer retrograde memory deficits,28,29 so we consider this clinical picture suggestive
for transient global amnesia. Various etiological and pathophysiological mechanisms have been suggested to be associated with
nonangiographic-related TGA, including migraine-related mechanisms, hypoxic-ischaemic events, venous flow abnormalities, epileptic
phenomena, and psychological disturbances, but yet, no consensus about the cause of this syndrome has emerged from any of these theories.30
For a long time, the leading hypothesis was that TGA was caused by abnormal cerebral venous drainage from the temporal lobes, due to
internal jugular vein valve incompetence, with subsequent venous congestion and ischemia of the mesiotemporal region.31 However, studies
combining ultrasonography and magnetic resonance venography in patients with TGA failed to show a direct association between jugular flow
and this amnestic syndrome.32 Recent neuropsychological and MRI studies of the brain suggest a transient functional and structural
dysfunction of the Cornu ammonis – field 1 (CA-1) sector of the hippocampal cornu ammonis in TGA patients.26 The neurons located in this
area show a selective vulnerability to cellular metabolic stress (such as during hypoxemia and ischemia) that leads to glutamate and
calcium-induced and apoptosis-mediated “delayed neuronal death” of the affected neurons during the first 72 hours after hypoxic insult.26
Several theories have been proposed to explain the susceptibility of hippocampal CA-1 neurons to metabolic stress and delayed neuronal
death, such as glutamate excitotoxicity, prolonged inhibition of protein synthesis, disturbed heat-shock protein expression, alteration of
the lipid metabolism and generation of free radicals, dysfunction of the energy metabolism and regional blood flow, and induced apoptosis.33
Abe et al33 summarized these theories and proposed the mitochondrial hypothesis. According to this concept, a quantitative lack in adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) in the hippocampal CA-1 neurons would lead to intracellular motor protein dysfunction, alteration of the mitochondrial
shuttle system, and progressive energy failure of the cell resulting in ischemic delayed neuronal cell death.33 In which way could cerebral
angiography promote any of these alterations in the CA-1 neurons still remains a matter of debate. In patients with TGA related to cerebral
angiography, postulated mechanisms for this syndrome include ischemia (from atherosclerotic plaque, catheter tip, contrast particulate
embolus, or vasospasm) or direct neurotoxic effects of the contrast media.13,15 The particular anatomical arrangement of the hippocampal
arteries may predispose the Sommer sector to ischemia during cerebral angiography. The blood supply of the hippocampus is provided by
multiple collateral branches of the PCA and anterior choroidal artery. These branches form a network of superficial hippocampal arteries
that in turn give rise to the deep intrahippocampal arteries located intraparenchymally. Two arcades of deep hippocampal arteries form a
watershed zone at the level of CA-1 subfield.34,35 It can be hypothesized that the high metabolic activity of hippocampal CA-1 neurons,33
coupled with a reduction in regional cerebral blood flow during cerebral angiography, may promote the appearance of transient global amnesia
as a complication of this procedure. Several authors have favored a direct neurotoxic effect of the contrast media as the causative factor
leading to transient global amnesia after cerebral angiography.9,11,12 This complication has been observed with both ionic and nonionic
contrast agents, being reported 3 times as prevalent using the former.20 Due to their hyperosmolality, contrast agents are considered to
have neurotoxic effects by temporarily disrupting the blood–brain barrier with subsequent parenchymal penetration.36 It is hypothesized that
hypertonic solutions draw water out of the endothelial cells of brain vessels, causing shrinkage of these cells, which leads to separation
of the tight junctions.37 However, neurotoxicity of contrast agents cannot be attributed only to their osmolality, but also to their
viscosity, chemical features, and ionic characteristics.38,39 The risk of neurotoxic effects after intra-arterial administration of the
contrast media is exacerbated when the blood–brain barrier is already damaged.38 Our patient suffered an ischemic stroke several days before
the cerebral angiography was performed, so a pre-existing disruption of the blood–brain barrier could be a reasonable possibility. Even if
Iomeprol is a nonionic, monomeric iodinated contrast medium with lower osmolality and viscosity, and higher water solubility as compared
with other nonionic contrast agents,40 being currently considered one of the contrast agents with the lowest risk of neurotoxicity,38 we
cannot rule out a direct toxic effect of the contrast agent on the hippocampal CA-1 neurons leading to transient global amnesia in our
patient. Some authors have advocated that arterial spasm is the most likely mechanism of individual cases of transient global amnesia after
cerebral angiography.13,16 In our case, the MRI performed 22 hours after the angiography demonstrated acute hippocampal ischemia of the
right hippocampus. We consider that the occurrence of arterial vasospasm affecting only the branches of the PCA or of the anterior choroidal
artery that vascularize the hippocampus is unlikely. Structural MRI imaging supports the central role of the hippocampal CA-1 neurons in the
pathophysiology of TGA. Recent studies that used high-resolution MRI have shown that focal hyperintense lesions correlating to restricted
diffusion within the CA-1 sector of the hippocampal cornu ammonis can be reliably detected in patients with TGA.26 The identification of
hippocampal lesions is dependent on the time of imaging. The maximum level of detection by the use of DWI occurs within 48 to 72 hours after
onset of symptoms, and lesions can be detected for up to 7 to 10 days after the onset of TGA.41,42 Correspondingly, ADC values have minimum
values between 24 and 72 hours, and normalize after 10 days.41 This temporal profile could be explained by the DWI findings in reversible
cerebral ischemia studies that follow a biphasic pattern, with high detectability during the acute ischemic period, low detectability in the
12 hours after the ischemic period, and a second raise in detectability to a maximum between 3 and 7 days after the reversible ischemic
insult. Why this pattern exists remains unclear, but it is appealing to ascribe it to delayed neuronal death, due to energy failure induced
by mitochondrial damage.43 In a study on 41 patients with TGA, follow-up MRI performed at 4 to 6 months after the onset of the index episode
of transient global amnesia did not show transition of the DWI/T2 lesion into residual cavities or signal changes corresponding to evolving
gliosis.26 The MRI performed in our patient 22 hours after the cerebral angiography showed increased signal within the lateral part of the
right hippocampus on the diffusion-weighted and FLAIR sequences associated with a corresponding reduction in the ADC. The 2 follow-up MRI
examinations, performed 7 days and 2 months later, showed a decrease of the DWI signal intensity within the right hippocampus, with
persistence of the increased signal on the T2/FLAIR sequences and, respectively, complete disappearance of the increased signal within the
right hippocampus on the diffusion-weighted and T2/FLAIR and ADC sequences. This temporal profile of the signal changes on MRI imaging of
our patient is consistent with the findings of the studies mentioned above. The precise mechanism of TGA related to cerebral angiography is
still unclear and further studies aimed to determine the definite pathophysiology of this syndrome and consequently to establish specific
preventive measures are needed. Although TGA is a very rare complication of this procedure, clinicians and radiologists should be aware of
its possible occurrence and carefully monitor the patients with symptoms suggestive of TGA by neurological examination and brain MRI.
Although the condition itself is considered to be self-limited, the long-term prognosis and the risk of recurrence in the cases where
subsequent angiographic procedures are performed are not established yet. To our knowledge, the case described is one of the few reported
cases of cerebral angiography-related TGA associated with MRI evidence of unilateral hippocampal ischemia, most probably as a consequence of
a transient reduction in regional hippocampal blood flow. However, we cannot firmly rule out the possibility of a direct neurotoxic effect
of the nonionic contrast media Iomeprol on the hippocampal CA-1 neurons. Abbreviations: ACA = anterior cerebral artery, ADC = apparent
diffusion coefficient, ATP = adenosine triphosphate, CA-1 = cornu ammonis – field 1, CT = computed tomography, DWI = diffusion-weighted
imaging, FLAIR = fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, MCA = middle cerebral artery, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PCA = posterior
cerebral artery, TGA = transient global amnesia. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
