Conjunctival myxomas are rare, benign, connective tissue tumours that classically present as slow-growing, painless, well-circumscribed
masses (Arch Ophthalmol 124:735-8, 2006; Case Rep Ophthalmol 3:145-50, 2012). There have been 29 cases reported in the literature (Arch
Ophthalmol 124:735-8, 2006; Malays J Med Sci 20(1):92-4, 2013; Case Rep Ophthalmol 3:145-50, 2012; Middle East Afr J Ophthalmol 19(3):353-3,
2012). We present a case with atypical features, and emphasize the importance of excisional biopsies for diagnosing indeterminate
conjunctival lesions. A 32 year old Korean woman presented with a 5 mm × 7 mm × 3 mm pedunculated firm cystic lesion on the inferior
palpebral conjunctiva of her right lower eyelid. The lesion had rapidly enlarged over the course of a week. She gave a history of
uncomplicated bilateral epiblepharon correction performed in Korea three months prior. There were no systemic features, or family history of
genetic conditions. The lesion was excised under local anaesthesia and reported to be a conjunctival myxoma. The clinical and
histopathological features of this lesion were consistent with previous reports on conjunctival myxoma (Arch Ophthalmol 124:735-8, 2006;
Arch Ophthalmol 101:1416-20, 1983; Case Rep Ophthalmol 3:145-50, 2012; Am J Ophthalmol 102(1):80-84, 1986). The unusual features of this
case were, the rapid growth of the lesion - with the previously documented mean time before presentation being 34 months (range 3 months -
24 years) (Arch Ophthalmol 124:735-8, 2006; Case Rep Ophthalmol 3:145-50, 2012); the location of the lesion in the inferior palpebral
conjunctiva - 93 % of previously reported cases had occurred in the bulbar conjunctiva (Arch Ophthalmol 124:735-8, 2006; Case Rep Ophthalmol
3:145-50, 2012); and its occurrence in association with recent eyelid surgery - which has never been reported. This case of conjunctival
myxoma adds to the small number of documented cases, by demonstrating an atypical presentation. Conjunctival myxomas can occur in
association with the Carney Complex, which is an autosomal dominant syndrome associated with benign tumours, spotty mucocutaneous
pigmentation, and endocrine overactivity (Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging 39(6):514-6, 2008). Ophthalmic manifestations of the Carney Complex
have been found to precede vascular embolic events secondary to cardiac myxoma, thus early diagnosis of conjunctival myxoma can prevent
potentially devastating consequences (Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging 39(6):514-6, 2008). The different presentations of this rare tumour
emphasise the importance of excisional biopsies in diagnosing indeterminate conjunctival lesions; and its association with cardiac myxoma,
highlights the need for cardiac investigations in all patients who present with conjunctival myxoma (J Ophthalmol (1);1-5, 2014; Ophthalmic
Surg Lasers Imaging 39(6):514-6, 2008). Myxomas are benign connective tissue tumours of mesenchymal origin, and can manifest in the heart,
skin, bone, skeletal muscle, nasal sinuses, and the gastrointestinal and genitourinary systems . Myxomas have been documented in the ocular
adnexa, cornea, and conjunctiva . Conjunctival myxomas are a rare occurrence with only 29 previously reported cases in the literature [4,
5]. They are classically described as slow-growing, painless, well circumscribed, yellow-pink, cyst-like masses, with fibrous, vascular,
soft tissue trunks . We report a case of conjunctival myxoma with atypical features not previously described in the literature. A 32 year
old Korean woman presented with a one week history of right ocular surface discomfort, and the sudden appearance of a firm cystic lesion
fixed to the palpebral conjunctiva of her right lower eyelid by a central trunk (Fig. 1a). The lesion was non-tender, had never ulcerated or
haemorrhaged, and was increasing in size daily. At presentation, its dimensions were 5 mm × 7 mm × 3 mm. A history of bilateral epiblepharon
correction performed in Korea three months prior was given. The patient was systemically well, and had no other significant ocular or
medical history. Her uncorrected visual acuity was 6/5 bilaterally. Extraocular movements were full and painless. Bilateral anterior segment
and dilated fundus examinations were unremarkable. The lesion was completely excised at the trunk under local anaesthesia with minimal
bleeding. Chloramphenicol ointment QID OD was commenced post-operatively for one week. There were no signs of recurrence one week post-
excision. Histopathology demonstrated a central zone of myxoid change (containing spindle-cells, stellate-cells, sparse blood vessels, and
patchy inflammation), surrounded by a zone of fibrous connective tissue (Fig. 1b and c). Alcian blue staining was positive for connective
tissue mucin (Fig. 1d). Digested Periodic-acid-Schiff (PAS) staining was negative for epithelial mucin. Complete systemic evaluation
excluded any further myxomas (including cardiac), unusual areas of pigmentation, and endocrine abnormalities.Fig. 1Clinical and
histopathological images of conjunctival myxoma. a 5 mm × 7 mm × 3 mm inferior palpebral conjunctival myxoma OD. b Entire lesion at low
magnification showing myxoid appearance of the stroma (H&E). c Higher magnification showing relatively paucicellular nature of lesion (H&E).
d Alcian blue stain demonstrating positive reaction for connective tissue mucin in the stroma Clinical and histopathological images of
conjunctival myxoma. a 5 mm × 7 mm × 3 mm inferior palpebral conjunctival myxoma OD. b Entire lesion at low magnification showing myxoid
appearance of the stroma (H&E). c Higher magnification showing relatively paucicellular nature of lesion (H&E). d Alcian blue stain
demonstrating positive reaction for connective tissue mucin in the stroma Conjunctival myxomas are rare. Grossniklaus et al. (1987) noted
four cases of conjunctival myxoma in a review of 2455 conjunctival specimens [4, 6]. Similarly, Shields et al. (2004) reported one case of
conjunctival myxoma in a clinical review of 1643 conjunctival lesions [4, 6]. Including this case, the mean age at presentation is 45 years
(Table 1) . A review of 58 patients with myxomas in other soft tissues found the mean age to be 55 years . No significant trends in gender
or racial predisposition have been noted to date, however the number of reported cases remains small (Table 1) [5, 6].Table 1Clinical
findings of the 29 published cases, and this case, of Conjunctival MyxomaCategoryNo. of cases (n = 30)Age (mean = 45 years olda)0–20421–407a
41–601261–807>810GenderMale15Female15a RaceCaucasian5Asian4a African1Unrecorded20Clinical presentationConjunctival Mass18Conjunctival Cyst9a
Pain & Redness2Disruption to Motility1Conjunctival locationBulbar – Temporal14Bulbar – Nasal7Bulbar – Superior4Bulbar – Not
specified2Palpebral – Inferior2a Palpebral – Superior1Maximum dimension (mean = 10 mma)0–10 mm9a 10–20 mm3>20 mm0Unrecorded18Time before
presentation (mean = 32 monthsa)<1 month1a 1 month – 6 months57 months – 12 months613 months – 24 months1>24 months10Unrecorded7Systemic
diseasesCarney Complex1Zollinger-Ellison1Nil associated28a aIndicates/includes this caseNot all articles were available online and findings
were obtained from previous literature reviews - Demirci (2006) , Chen (2012) Clinical findings of the 29 published cases, and this case, of
Conjunctival Myxoma aIndicates/includes this case Not all articles were available online and findings were obtained from previous literature
reviews - Demirci (2006) , Chen (2012) Conjunctival myxomas typically present as slow-growing, painless, well circumscribed, yellow-pink,
cyst-like masses, with fibrous, vascular, soft tissue trunks . Not including this case, the mean timeframe before patients presented for
ophthalmic review of their conjunctival myxoma was 34 months (Table 1). This patient’s conjunctival myxoma developed rapidly over one week
to a 5 mm × 7 mm × 3mm lesion. Lesions have been reported to range between 4 mm and 20 mm in diameter (Table 1). This lesion reached almost
half the recorded maximum size within one week. The majority of cases are painless –although there have been two reported cases of
conjunctival myxoma with ocular pain . Ninety percent of reported conjunctival myxomas occurred in the bulbar conjunctiva - with the
majority being temporal (Table 1). This is the second case to be documented as arising from the inferior palpebral conjunctiva . There have
been no previous reports of conjunctival myxoma developing within close proximity to trauma or ophthalmic surgery [2, 4, 5, 9]. This patient
presented with her myxoma within 3 months of having bilateral uncomplicated surgical correction of her congenital epiblepharon - a common
occurrence in Asians . We could not determine any connection between her bilateral congenital epiblepharon and conjunctival myxoma. The
conjunctival myxoma in this case had a typical clinical appearance. It was atypical because of its rapid growth rate, its unusual location
on the inferior palpebral conjunctiva, and its occurrence in association with recent eyelid surgery. Histologically, myxomas resemble
Wharton’s jelly, the loose mucoid tissue found within the umbilical cord [3, 11]. The characteristic histopathological features of
conjunctival myxoma are, sparsely scattered stellate- and spindle-shaped cells distributed throughout a mucinous matrix, with delicate
reticulin fibres, minimal blood vessels, and mature collagen fibres [2, 4, 6, 12, 13]. The mucinous matrix is predominantly composed of
hyaluronic acid, with a lesser amount of chondroitin sulphate, and has been reported to react to vimentin, Alcian blue, and alpha-smooth-
muscle actin staining, suggesting a fibroblastic cell phenotype [4, 6, 7]. It is non-reactive to S-100 protein, desmin, myoglobulin, and
digested Periodic-acid-Schiff (PAS) staining [4, 6]. The differential diagnosis of conjunctival myxomas includes, amelanotic naevus,
amelanotic melanoma, fibrous histiocytoma, conjunctival cyst, lymphangioma, myxoid neurofibroma, spindle-cell lipoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and
liposarcoma . Histologically, an absence of pigmentation, the presence of sparse vascular structures, characteristic cellular morphology,
and mucin staining, help differentiate conjunctival myxomas from these lesions . To date all cases of conjunctival myxoma have been treated
with excisional biopsy [5, 8]. There have been no previous reports of malignant transformation in a mean follow-up time of 30 months (range
5–132 months) [2, 5, 6]. There has only been one reported case of recurrence, which occurred 12 months after the original excision in a
patient with the Carney Complex . In general, the recurrence rate of all myxomas is documented as being relatively low. A review of 58
patients with soft tissue myxomas found a 3 % incidence of recurrence 8–10 months post-excision . Conjunctival myxoma has been associated
with both the Carney Complex and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome [5, 6, 14]. The Carney Complex is an autosomal dominant syndrome that requires
at least two of the following criteria for diagnosis: the presence of myxomas; spotty mucocutaneous pigmentation (face, trunk, lips, eyelid,
conjunctiva); endocrine overactivity (Cushing’s syndrome, pituitary adenoma, and/or sexual precocity); or psammomatous melanotic schwannomas
[6, 14, 15]. Ophthalmic manifestations of the Carney Complex include eyelid lentigines, conjunctival or caruncle spotty pigmentation, and
eyelid or conjunctival myxomas [6, 15]. The one case of conjunctival myxoma associated with the Carney Complex exhibited palpebral
conjunctival, eyelid, coetaneous, and left ventricular myxomas . Carney reported that greater than 50 % of patients with the Carney Complex
suffered a significant embolic event in their lifetime related to cardiac myxomas . Ophthalmic manifestations of the Carney Complex, not
limited to myxoma, have been shown to precede embolic events [14, 15]. Early identification of ocular myxomas and subsequent screening and
monitoring for cardiac myxoma is recommended. Conjunctival myxoma has been associated with a case of pancreatic gastrinoma in Zollinger-
Ellison syndrome . Zollinger-Ellison syndrome may be a manifestation of the Carney Complex, given the neural crest origins of myxomas,
schwannomas (seen in the Carney Complex), and gastrinomas . Conjunctival myxomas have not been reported with other systemic diseases
associated with myxomas, such as Mazabraud syndrome (intramuscular myxoma) and McCune-Albright syndrome (intramuscular and coetaneous) [4,
5]. Conjunctival myxomas are benign tumours, however, they can mimic more sinister lesions, such as amelanotic melanomas. The clinical
appearance and histopathological features in this case are consistent with the literature. However, its location and rapid development in
close proximity to lower eyelid surgery, initially suggested an inflammatory or infective aetiology. The different presentations of this
rare tumour emphasise the importance of excisional biopsy in identifying the pathology of indeterminate conjunctival lesions. Their
association with systemic syndromes can lead to the detection of previously undiagnosed cardiac myxomas, which if left undetected, may
result in vascular embolic events [14, 15]. We would recommend cardiac screening in all patients diagnosed with a conjunctival myxoma. Not
applicable. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images,
providing no identifying features are released. All data supporting our findings will be shared upon request, although the majority is
contained within the manuscript. periodic-acid-Schiff (lines 87, 126) Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions NS was responsible for obtaining consent, the acquisition of data, conducting the literature review,
drafting the manuscript, and submitting the manuscript. She gives approval for the final version to be published and agrees to be
accountable for all aspects of the work. SO’H was responsible for critically revising the manuscript for intellectual content. He gives
approval for the final version to be published and agrees to be accountable for all aspects of the work. GP was consulted for assistance
with captioning the histology photographs and was also responsible for critically revising the manuscript for intellectual content. She
gives approval for the final version to be published and agrees to be accountable for all aspects of the work. All authors read and approved
the final manucript. Authors’ information NS is an unaccredited Ophthalmology registrar who was working at Cairns Hospital, Queensland,
Australia at the time of the drafting of this manuscript. SO’H is a general Ophthalmology Consultant at Cairns Hospital, Queensland,
Australia. GP is an Anatomical Pathologist with Pathology Queensland and is based at the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. The authors would like to thank the histology staff at the Pathology Queensland with their assistance in processing
the specimen. No funding was received for this study.
