Anti‐programmed cell death‐1 (PD‐1) antibodies are regarded as a risk factor for insulin‐dependent diabetes mellitus as a side‐effect. While
a small number of cases have been reported, evidence remains limited. This is the first report of an Asian patient developing
insulin‐dependent diabetes during anti‐PD‐1 therapy. A 55‐year‐old euglycemic woman receiving nivolumab for malignant melanoma showed abrupt
onset of ketonuria, and elevated levels of plasma glucose (580 mg/dL) and hemoglobin A1c (7.0%). Over the next 2 weeks, serum C‐peptide
levels fell below the limit of detection. Islet autoantibodies were negative, and the patient showed a human leukocyte antigen haplotype
associated with type 1 diabetes. Anti‐PD‐1 therapy can cause rapid onset of insulin‐dependent diabetes, possibly because of inappropriate
activation of T cells. Human leukocyte antigen haplotypes might be related to the onset of this disease. Physicians should be aware of this
serious adverse event and carry out routine blood glucose testing during anti‐PD‐1 therapy. J Diabetes Investig 2016; 7: 915–918 Programmed
cell death‐1 (PD‐1) is expressed on T cells, B cells and macrophages, and negatively regulates immune responses by binding to PD‐1 ligands
(PD‐L1 or PD‐L2). Most cancers escape from the host immune system as a result of the presence of those ligands. Nivolumab is a monoclonal
antibody against the PD‐1 receptor, achieving disinhibition of tumor‐specific immune responses1. Although such immune checkpoint inhibitors
have been shown to be highly useful against several types of cancer, descriptions of endocrinological adverse events have been accumulating.
Some reports have described new‐onset diabetes after anti‐PD‐1 pharmacotherapy2, 3, 4, 5, but the evidence remains limited. We describe
herein the case of a woman who developed fulminant type 1 diabetes during anti‐PD‐1 therapy, with some important findings that should
contribute to elucidation of the pathogenesis. A 55‐year‐old Japanese woman receiving nivolumab (2 mg/kg, once every 3 weeks) for malignant
melanoma was referred to the Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Rheumatology and Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University
Hospital, Oita, Japan, as a result of hyperglycemia. She had no history of diabetes and no evidence of pancreatic metastases. She had been
receiving nivolumab without combination with anti‐T lymphocyte‐associated antigen 4 antibody for 12 months at the time of referral, after
1 year of chemotherapy with dacarbazine, nimustine, cisplatin and tamoxifen. Blood glucose levels had been normal until the last blood
examination, which was carried out 3 weeks before her referral. Although marked hyperglycemia (580 mg/dL) and ketonuria had been noted at
the first visit to our department, hemoglobin A1c level was relatively low (7.0%), suggesting rapid onset. The short period from onset to
ketosis, extreme hyperglycemia and relatively low hemoglobin A1c level suggested fulminant type 1 diabetes6. Findings at onset, such as
serum C‐peptide level (1.0 ng/mL) and urinary C‐peptide excretion (12.6 μg/day), did not meet the diagnostic criteria for fulminant type 1
diabetes, but serum C‐peptide levels dropped to below the limit of detection over the next 2 weeks, and glucagon tolerance testing showed
complete depletion of insulin. As treatment for fulminant type 1 diabetes, multiple daily injections of insulin were started. Negative
results were obtained for all islet autoantibodies (glutamic acid decarboxylase, insulinoma‐associated antigen‐2, insulin autoantibodies and
zinc transporter 8), and further investigation revealed the DRB1*04:05‐DQB1*04:01 human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotype, which is strongly
associated with autoimmune type 1 diabetes in Japan7. No blood examination findings or symptoms suggested acute viral infection before
onset, and pancreatic enzyme levels at onset were not elevated (Table 1). Computed tomography showed mild atrophy of the pancreas, and
endoscopic ultrasonography showed several findings generally seen in early chronic pancreatitis, namely hyperechoic foci and strands,
lobularity, and cysts. Although those findings are often seen among individuals with heavy intake of alcohol, the patient had no history of
drinking. Nivolumab treatment was resumed 1 month after the patient's referral, and no further side‐effects have been observed to date.
Islet autoantibodies have remained negative, and insulin secretion has remained depleted as of 3 months after onset. Treatment with multiple
insulin injections is ongoing. Laboratory results of the patient Normal ranges given in parentheses where appropriate. CPR, C‐peptide. The
present report described a case of new‐onset diabetes with anti‐PD‐1 therapy that showed a rapid fall into insulin‐dependence. Onset was
considered to be associated with the pharmacotherapy, as no other potential factors or causes (e.g., family history, irregular lifestyle,
viral infection, pancreatic metastasis of the cancer or drugs other than nivolumab) could be identified. Our search of the literature found
four reports (8 cases) of onset or worsening of diabetes in association with anti‐PD‐1 therapies (not limited to nivolumab), and all except
one of those cases presented with diabetic ketoacidosis or ketonuria followed shortly thereafter by insulin‐dependence2, 3, 4, 5.
Considering the rapid onset, severity and potential mortality of those situations, routine measurement of both hemoglobin A1c and blood
glucose levels is warranted after starting administration of anti‐PD‐1 antibodies. In the present case, we might have observed the very
early stage of fulminant type 1 diabetes, considering that the patient was not completely insulin‐dependent for the first few days after
onset. In the present case, all results for islet autoantibodies were negative. Half of the previously reported patients who developed
insulin‐dependent diabetes after anti‐PD‐1 therapy likewise showed no detectable autoantibodies (Table 2). The pathogenesis in these
patients thus seems to differ at least partly from that of conventional autoimmune type 1 diabetes involving islet autoantibodies. Ansari
et al.8 found no correlation between insulin autoantibody levels and development of diabetes with blockade of the PD‐1–PD‐L1 pathway in
mice, and some mice developed diabetes despite the apparent absence of autoantibodies. Summary of previous reports Ab, antibodies; CPR,
C‐peptide; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; F, female; GAD, glutamic acid decarboxylase; HbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; HLA, human leukocyte antigen;
IA‐2, insulinoma‐associated antigen‐2; IAA, insulin autoantibody; ICA, islet cell antibody; M, male; PD‐1, programmed cell death‐1; PD‐L1,
programmed cell death ligand‐1; ZnT8, zinc transporter 8. In contrast, reduced activity of PD‐1 is apparently common to both conventional
autoimmune type 1 diabetes and anti‐PD‐1 therapy‐related diabetes. Fujisawa et al.9 recently showed a reduction in PD‐1 expression on
T cells in type 1 diabetes compared with other types of diabetes. Perri et al.10 also suggested that lower expression of PD‐1 on T cells
causes inappropriate activation of those cells in insulin‐dependent diabetes. Anti‐PD‐1 drugs could produce a similar situation, and PD‐1
reduction might cause inappropriate activation of T cells resulting in autoimmune responses against pancreatic β‐cells. Human leukocyte
antigen typing in this case showed haplotype DRB1*04:05‐DQB1*04:01, which is the haplotype most closely associated with autoimmune or
fulminant type 1 diabetes in Japan7. Reported cases to date have also shown high‐risk HLA genotypes for autoimmune diabetes (Table 2).
Considering these findings, HLA could be involved in the onset of insulin‐dependent diabetes with anti‐PD‐1 therapy. Autoimmune diabetes
might develop when anti‐PD‐1 drugs are given to at‐risk patients, through imbalanced activation and inhibition of T cells, although the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Biomarkers predictive of anti‐PD‐1 therapy‐related diabetes have yet to be clarified, but HLA
haplotypes could be one such biomarker. Further accumulation of cases and evidence is required. Anti‐PD‐1 therapy can cause
insulin‐dependent diabetes that develops and progresses rapidly in a manner differing from conventional autoimmune diabetes, possibly
through inappropriate activation of T cells. These cases might not present with autoantibodies to islet cells. HLA haplotypes might be
related to disease onset. Physicians should be aware of this serious adverse event, and carry out routine blood testing during anti‐PD‐1
therapy. Further studies are required to elucidate the pathogenesis and background factors for this form of diabetes. The authors declare no
conflict of interest.
