The incidence of cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) is low, and in particular, isolated cortical vein thrombosis (ICVT) is very rare. The
diagnosis of ICVT is difficult by using conventional computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, with
appropriate treatment, ICVT has a good prognosis. Herein, we present a rare case of a 40-year-old woman with ICVT and type II protein S (PS)
deficiency, who experienced a stroke. She initially presented with generalized convulsions. A CT scan showed intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH)
in the left temporoparietal region. However, her condition rapidly deteriorated and she went into a coma approximately 20 h after admission.
A second CT scan revealed significant ICH expansion and transfalcine herniation. Decompressive hemicraniectomy with duraplasty was
performed, and ICVT was confirmed owing to abnormal vascular tone and black appearance of the cortical vein. She underwent anticoagulation
therapy and rehabilitation, and gradually recovered. We experienced an extremely rare case of isolated cortical vein thrombosis related with
type II PS deficiency. CT-digital subtraction angiography is a useful supportive technique in the diagnosis of ICVT. Decompressive
hemicraniectomy is effective for hemorrhage extension cases, and ICVT with hemorrhage might require early anticoagulation therapy. Cerebral
venous thrombosis (CVT) is a relatively rare cause of stroke, and it has been reported to cause 0.5–1.0 % of all strokes [1, 2]. The
International Study on Cerebral Venous and Dural Sinuses Thrombosis (ISCVT) reported that approximately 17 % of stroke cases involved
cortical vein occlusions . CVT without occlusion of the major dural venous sinuses or deep cerebral veins is termed isolated cortical vein
thrombosis (ICVT) . Headache is less common in ICVT (71 %) than in major sinus thrombosis (89 %) . Papilledema has not been reported
previously. Parenchymal brain lesions have been found to be more common in ICVT cases than in sinus thrombosis cases (81 % vs. 63 %) . For
diagnosis, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most frequently used method. However, in some cases, it is difficult to detect a lesion
on conventional MRI, and in these cases, angiography is necessary. Anticoagulation therapy appears to be the standard therapy in patients
with ICVT without hemorrhage. However, it is controversial whether anticoagulation therapy should be used in ICVT cases with intracerebral
hemorrhage (ICH). When ICH extends and impending herniation occurs very infrequently, decompressive cranioctomy should be performed;
however, this is not the standard therapy . If CVT without ICH is diagnosed in the early stage and appropriate therapy is administered, the
prognosis is excellent, and this applies to ICVT. Here, we present an extremely rare case of a patient with ICVT and type II Protein S (PS)
deficiency, who experienced exacerbation without anticoagulation therapy. A 40-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of
generalized convulsions. She delivered her first child 3 weeks ago and was asymptomatic until the seizure onset. She had no medical history,
including eclampsia, and no family history of hypercoagulable states. Her seizures were the generalized type and stopped spontaneously after
2 minutes. She denied experiencing headache, and no papilledema was noted. On admission, her blood pressure (BP), heart rate, and body
temperature were 138/88 mmHg, 126 beats/min, and 37 °C, respectively. Neurological deficits were not identified. A CT scan revealed ICH in
the left temporoparietal lobe (Fig. 1a). Considering the age of the patient and absence of a hypertension history, CT-digital subtraction
angiography (CT-DSA) was performed to rule out conditions such as an aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation (AVM), and sinus thrombosis, and
no such conditions were noted. The coagulation profile was assessed, and blood examinations were performed to check for connective tissue
diseases. No abnormal data was found, except that the PS activity was low at 37 % (Table 1). This low level was thought to have resulted
from her recent pregnancy state. Her ICH was treated with conservative medical therapy in order to maintain her BP below 120 mmHg. MRI and
cerebral angiography were planned on another day to identify the definite etiology. However, 20 hours after admission, her response to
stimuli suddenly decreased, and she presented with right hemi-paralysis. She did not experience seizures or headache at that time. Her
conscious level was Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) E2V3M5. A CT scan showed ICH expansion and brain midline shift (Fig. 1b). Therefore, emergent
external decompression with duraplasty was performed. Intraoperatively, the cortical vein appeared black and stiff, and the cerebral surface
with the occlusive vein was congested (Fig. 2), indicating possible thrombosis of the cortical vein. After the operation, her intracranial
pressure (ICP) was controlled using glycerols and deep sedation with propofol. An ICP monitor was not used. For the ICVT, systemic
heparinization was started. MRI/MRA after the operation showed no right white matter edema or narrow major vessels, which lowered the
possibility of a differential diagnosis of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). The PS amount and PS activity were assessed
again 10 weeks after delivery. The PS amount was found to be normal; however, the PS activity was still below normal (Table 1). Therefore,
she was diagnosed with type II PS deficiency. On the 35th postoperative day (POD), her brain swelling reduced, and cranioplasty was
performed. Indocyanine green (ICG) angiography indicated occlusion of the cortical vein (Fig. 3). She underwent rehabilitation and was
discharged from the hospital on the 58th POD. On discharge, her GCS was E4V5M6 and modified Rankin scale score was 3.Fig. 1 a Computed
tomography images showing intracerebral hemorrhage in the left temporoparietal lobe, without brain midline shift before exacerbation. b
Computed tomography images showing intracerebral hemorrhage expansion in the temporoparietal lobe and brain midline shift after
exacerbationTable 1Protein S (PS) and protein C (PC) values in our patientAfter laborNormal range3 weeks6 weeks10 weeksPC activity
(%)5910011470–150PS activity (%)37354660–127PS amount (%)N/A779765–135Free PS amount (%)N/A548660–150 N/A not applicableFig. 2An
intraoperative image showing a black and stiff cortical vein and congestion of the cerebral surface with the occlusive veinFig. 3 a An
intraoperative image showing a thin and shrunken cortical vein. b An indocyanine green (ICG) angiography image showing absence of blood flow
in the cortical vein a Computed tomography images showing intracerebral hemorrhage in the left temporoparietal lobe, without brain midline
shift before exacerbation. b Computed tomography images showing intracerebral hemorrhage expansion in the temporoparietal lobe and brain
midline shift after exacerbation Protein S (PS) and protein C (PC) values in our patient N/A not applicable An intraoperative image showing
a black and stiff cortical vein and congestion of the cerebral surface with the occlusive vein a An intraoperative image showing a thin and
shrunken cortical vein. b An indocyanine green (ICG) angiography image showing absence of blood flow in the cortical vein CVT is a
relatively rare cause of stroke and has been reported to cause 0.5–1.0 % of all strokes [1, 2]. The incidence of ICVT is much lower than
that of CVT. There are no specific symptoms for CVT. The diagnosis is very difficult owing to the rarity of the condition and obscurity of
symptoms. In the meantime, it is helpful to note a patient’s background and history. The risk factors that can be easily identified by
history taking include pregnancy, puerperium, known connective tissue disease, known malignancy, contraceptive use, and infections, such as
sinusitis, otitis, and mastoiditis [7, 8]. Young individuals, especially young women are very vulnerable to this disease. The ISCVT reported
that 78 % of all CVT cases were aged <50 years and that the incidence of CVT was 3 times greater in women than in men . If a young
individual, particularly a pregnant or puerperal woman, presents with new onset stroke-like symptoms such as headache and seizure, it is
important to check for the presence of the above-mentioned risk factors for CVT. If CVT is suspected, CT venography (CTV) or MR venography
(MRV) should be performed. However, ICVT is hard to detect using these conventional modalities because of its small size. A recent report
showed that the T2*/susceptibility-weighted image (SWI) MR sequence is very effective to detect lesions . In our case, because we suspected
CVT but not ICVT, only CTV was checked and all major sinuses appeared patent. If we had checked the SWI, the lesion might have been detected
and early intervention could have been performed. If the initial CT-DSA is retrospectively checked thoroughly, suspecting any cortical vein
lesion, contrast material in the culprit cortical vein can be identified (Fig. 4). This showed that only a CT-DSA image would be sufficient
for the diagnosis of IVCT, and that MRI (SWI) or angiography may not be imperative in some cases.Fig. 4A time delay computed tomography-
digital subtraction angiography image obtained at admission showing the culprit cortical vein. This vein coincided with the occluded
cortical vein shown in the intraoperative image (Fig. 2) A time delay computed tomography-digital subtraction angiography image obtained at
admission showing the culprit cortical vein. This vein coincided with the occluded cortical vein shown in the intraoperative image (Fig. 2)
Anticoagulation for CVT prevents expansion of the thrombus and allows for recanalization of the occlusion site. This therapy is supported by
the guidelines of the European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS). However, in case of hemorrhage presentations, appropriate
therapy is very controversial. It has been reported that 39–41 % of CVT patients presented with ICH, hemorrhagic venous infarcts, or
isolated subarachnoid hemorrhage . Anticoagulation therapy might worsen the condition, and its use is therefore controversial. Some reports
suggest that the prognosis of ICVT is favorable without anticoagulants [11, 12]. However, without anticoagulation therapy, our patient’s
condition worsened within 24 h even though the lesion was only an isolated CVT. This event possibly suggests the importance of immediate
anticoagulation therapy for not only major sinus occlusions but also ICVT, which is also asymptomatic or incidental. Additionally, if the
ICH expands despite the use of these therapies and contributes to impaired consciousness, decompressive hemicranioctomy appears to be
appropriate to control ICP, as in our case . PS is a vitamin K-dependent anticoagulant and its deficiency is thought to be major risk factor
for CVT. According to the classification system proposed in Munchen in 1992, PS deficiency is classified as type I (low total and free
antigen, reduced activity), type II (normal total and free antigen, reduced activity), and type III (normal total antigen, reduced free
antigen and activity). Our patient was diagnosed with type II PS deficiency, which is an extremely rare disease. Although the prevalence of
PS deficiency in Japan is estimated to be more than that in European countries, PS deficiency has been estimated at less than 0.5 % in the
general European population . Type I and type III PS deficiencies have been reported to account for almost all cases of PS deficiency .
Therefore, type II PS deficiency is considered very rare. When PS is suspected as a risk factor of CVT in pregnant or puerperal women, the
time at which PS is measured after labor is important. A previous study reported that the free PS levels decreased significantly from the
first trimester to the second trimester . Another study reported that the PS activity in the third trimester reduced to 16–42 % . The time
when PS activity returns to normal in the postpartum period is unclear. However, it is believed that the PS activity normalizes at
approximately 1 month after delivery. Therefore, as in our case, it is important to check PS at least 6 weeks after delivery. PS deficiency
can be misdiagnosed as conditions, such as vitamin K deficiency, liver disease, nephritic syndrome, and disseminated intravascular syndrome.
Therefore, these conditions should also be excluded. We experienced an extremely rare case of type II PS deficiency, which contributed to
the occurrence of ICVT. Here, we presented an extremely rare case of a patient with ICVT and type II PS deficiency, who experienced a
stroke. The patient was successfully treated with external decompression and anticoagulants. Venous thrombosis and CVT should be considered
in pregnant or puerperal women who experience stroke. For early diagnosis, it is vital to suspect CVT, including ICVT, considering the
patient’s background. In such a case, CT-DSA should be performed and the images should be thoroughly checked. A hematoma associated with
ICVT caused by a cortical vein might expand without early anticoagulation therapy, as was noted in our case. Therefore, early
anticoagulation therapy might be essential, even in isolated cases involving ICH. This case report involves a patient. The case report
complies with the Helsinki Declaration, and approval was obtained from the ethics committee of Hiratsuka City Hospital. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are included within the article
and its additional files. arteriovenous malformation blood pressure computed tomography CT-digital subtraction angiography CT venography
cerebral vein thrombosis European Federation of Neurological Societies Glasgow Coma Scale Indocyanine green intracerebral intracranial
pressure isolated cortical vein thrombosis International Study on Cerebral Venous and Dural Sinuses Thrombosis magnetic resonance imaging MR
venography protein S susceptibility weighted image Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions AN wrote the manuscript. TM and AN treated the patient. NA and MH conducted the extensive aetiological work up. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for English language editing. No funding was
obtained.
