Vascular inflammation is present in a subset of patients with cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) and has a major influence in determining the
disease manifestations. Radiological characterization of this subset is particularly important to achieve early recognition and treatment.
We conducted this study to investigate the role of imaging in differentiating CAA with and without inflammation. We reviewed neuroimaging
findings for 54 patients seen at Mayo Clinic over 25 years with pathological evidence of CAA and with available neuroimaging at the time of
diagnosis. Clinical data were also recorded. Patients were grouped into CAA alone (no vascular inflammation), Aβ-related angiitis or ABRA
(angiodestructive inflammation), and CAA-related inflammation or CAA-RI (perivascular inflammation). Imaging findings at presentation were
compared among patient subgroups. Radiological features supporting a diagnosis of ABRA or CAA-RI were identified. Radiologic findings at
diagnosis were available in 27 patients with CAA without inflammation, 22 with ABRA, and 5 with CAA-RI. On MRI, leptomeningeal disease alone
or with infiltrative white matter was significantly more frequent at presentation in patients with ABRA or CAA-RI compared with those with
CAA (29.6% vs. 3.7%, P = 0.02; and 40.7% vs. 3.7%, P = 0.002, respectively), whereas lobar hemorrhage was more frequent in patients with CAA
(62.3% vs. 7.4%, P = 0.0001). Overall, leptomeningeal involvement at presentation was present in 70.4% of patients with ABRA or CAA-RI and
in only 7.4% of patients with CAA (P = 0.0001). The sensitivity and specificity of leptomeningeal enhancement to identify patients with ABRA
or CAA-RI were 70.4% and 92.6%, respectively, whereas the positive likelihood ratio (LR) was 9.5. The sensitivity and specificity of
intracerebral hemorrhage to identify patients with CAA were 62.9% and 92.6%, respectively, whereas the positive LR was 8.5. Microbleeds were
found in 70.4% of patients with inflammatory CAA at presentation. In conclusion, leptomeningeal enhancement and lobar hemorrhage at
presentation may enable differentiation between CAA with and without inflammation. The identification at initial MRI of diffuse cortical-
subcortical microbleeds in elderly patients presenting with infiltrative white matter process or prominent leptomeningeal enhancement is
highly suggestive of vascular inflammatory CAA. Cerebrovascular deposition of amyloid (sporadic cerebral amyloid angiopathy or CAA) is
characterized by deposition of amyloid-β in the media and adventitia of cortical and leptomeningeal vessels.1–4 Vascular inflammation may
also be present in amyloid-affected vessels. Two types of inflammatory response have been reported.1,6–8 Aβ-related angiitis or ABRA is an
angiodestructive process characterized by a vasculitic transmural, often granulomatous, inflammatory infiltration. CAA-related inflammation
(CAA-RI) is characterized by an inflammatory reaction that surrounds amyloid-laden vessels, without angiodestructive features. Prevalence of
CAA increases with increasing age, but often remains clinically occult. When clinically evident, CAA most commonly presents as a lobar
intracerebral hemorrhage in an elderly normotensive patient.2,3 In patients with associated vascular inflammation, intracranial hemorrhage
is less frequent and such patients often present with findings of subacute cognitive decline, seizures, and headaches and respond to
immunosuppressive therapy.1,6–8 CAA, CAA-RI, and ABRA all have varied neuroradiographic appearances including intraparenchymal lobar
hemorrhage, microhemorrhages centered at the gray white junction, white matter infiltrative nonenhancing T2 hyperintense mass-like lesions,
leptomeningeal disease, or a combination of any of the above. Few series have focused on the radiological-pathology correlative findings,
which may guide the clinical and surgical decision-making process.9–14 Radiological characterization of CAA patients with vascular
inflammation is particularly important to achieve early recognition and treatment, avoid nondiagnostic biopsies, improve outcomes, and
minimize the risk of unnecessary treatment with glucocorticoids and/or cyclophosphamide. The purposes of this study were to review our
experience with imaging findings at presentation of pathology-proven CAA and to identify radiological features supporting a diagnosis of
ABRA or CAA-RI. In this study, we included all patients seen at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, MN, between January 1987 and December 2011
diagnosed on pathology specimen with CAA and had available neuroimaging at presentation.1 All pathological specimens were reviewed by one
neuropathologist (CG) to exclude other vascular pathologies, to evaluate the presence of concomitant neurodegenerative changes of Alzheimer
type, and to evaluate the presence and distribution of inflammation associated with amyloid-β. A detailed description of the pathologic and
classification procedures including imaging categorization was reported in previous studies.1,6,15–18 Patients were grouped into 3 groups:
CAA alone (no vascular inflammation), ABRA (angiodestructive inflammation), and CAA-RI (perivascular inflammation without angiodestructive
process).1 The review of all available neuroimaging findings was performed by an experienced CAQ neuroroadiologist (JMM), who had no access
to the clinical data or knowledge of the pathology report. Imaging modalities reviewed included computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), CT-angiography (CTA), MR-angiography (MRA), and catheter angiography. All these imaging modalities were performed and
interpreted by defined clinical protocols used by the Division of Neuroradiology at the Mayo Clinic. Neuroimaging was reviewed for the
location and presence of the following findings: lobar hemorrhages, microhemorrhages at the gray white junction on gradient-echo (GRE) or
susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI), associated vasogenic edema in the underlying white matter, leptomeningeal or pachymeningeal
involvement, enhancing mass-like lesions, cerebral infarcts, attenuation of these changes on CT, postgadolinium enhancement characteristics,
or any combination of above. Medical history and clinical and laboratory findings at presentation and during the follow-up as well as
response to treatment, relapse occurrence, follow-up functional status, and cause of death were recorded. The Mayo Institutional Review
Board approved this study. The IRB number was 11–003530. Numeric parameters were compared by using a 2-sided 2-sample t test or a Wilcoxon
rank-sum test when the distributions were skewed. Comparisons of categorical variables were performed using the χ2 or Fischer exact test
when cell counts were <5. We determined sensitivities (% of patients with a disease who have a positive test), specificities (% of patients
without the condition who have a negative test), predictive values (positive predictive value = number of true positives/number of true
positives + number of false positives, negative predictive value = number of true negatives/number of true negatives + number of false
negatives), and likelihood ratios (LRs) (LR+ = sensitivity/1-specificity, LR− = 1−sensitivity/specificity) with 95% confidence intervals
(CIs).19 Significance was defined at P < 0.05. The statistical analysis was performed using SAS version 8 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
Seventy-eight consecutive patients with cerebral vascular Aβ deposition were identified.1 Neuroimaging findings at presentation were
available for review in 54 cases (27 CAA, 22 ABRA, and 5 CAA-RI), who represent the study population. Ten cases were evaluated with CT alone
(ABRA = 1, CAA = 9), 16 cases were evaluated with MRI alone (ABRA = 11, CAA-RI = 3, CAA = 2), and 28 cases were evaluated with CT and MRI
(ABRA = 10, CAA-RI = 2, CAA = 16). CTA, MRA, and conventional angiography were additionally performed in 21 cases (ABRA = 6, CAA-RI = 3,
CAA = 12). No angiographic evidence of vasculitis (smooth-wall segmental narrowing, dilatation, or occlusion affecting multiple cerebral
arteries)15 was observed in the 3 groups of patients. Twenty-nine cases had either a GRE or SWI sequence performed. In 18 cases, imaging
abnormalities involved 1 lobe (ABRA = 3, CAA = 15). One case of CAA involved a cerebellar hemisphere. In 35 cases, abnormalities were
multilobar (ABRA = 19, CAA-RI = 5, CAA = 11). Twenty-five cases were bilateral (ABRA = 14, CAA-RI = 3, CAA = 8). Patients with ABRA and CAA-
RI had a significantly higher frequency of multilobar abnormalities compared to those with CAA (62.9% vs. 29.6%, P = 0.028). The frontal
lobe was the most frequently involved (ABRA = 22, CAA-RI = 3, CAA = 16). Twenty-three cases demonstrated some form of postcontrast
enhancement. Twenty-one cases had leptomeningeal enhancement (ABRA = 15, CAA-RI = 4, CAA = 2), and 2 cases of CAA had mass-like enhancement.
Thirty-nine cases showed evidence of vasogenic edema (ABRA = 16, CAA-RI = 4, CAA = 23). The mass effect from lobar hemorrhage resulted in
hydrocephalus or herniation respectively in 5 and 6 cases of CAA. Evidence of previous microhemorrhage (foci of hemosiderin) was seen in 29
cases by utilization of GRE and/or SWI sequences (ABRA = 15, CAA-RI = 4, CAA = 10). Table 1 shows these radiological findings at
presentation. Radiological (MRI and/or CT) Findings at Presentation Lobar hemorrhage was the most frequent presentation, occurring in 17 of
27 (63%) of those with CAA. A single lobar hemorrhage was present in 15, whereas 2 other patients had multiple intraparenchymal hemorrhages
of different ages. A leptomeningeal process was the only MRI finding in 1 patient (3.7%). Another had a leptomeningeal process with
associated vasogenic edema underlying this region (3.7%). An infiltrative white matter process mimicking a low-grade glioma was present in 4
others (14.8%) (Figure 1). Four patients had other findings at presentation: 2 had a mass-like lesion, 1 subarachnoid hemorrhage, and 1
multiple cortical infarctions and intraparenchymal hemorrhages of different ages. Three patients had multiple modalities of presentation.
Follow-up images were available in 3 patients with CAA. All 3 patients had 1 relapse. Two relapses were characterized by the presence of a
leptomeningeal process with infiltrative white matter, occurring 9 months and 8 years, respectively, after the initial diagnosis. The third
patient had a lobar hemorrhage 2 years after the first episode characterized by a multilobar infiltrative white matter process mimicking
low-grade glioma. Magnetic resonance imaging of a patient with CAA showing an infiltrative white matter process mimicking low grade
infiltrating glioma. A, Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) MRI images show a T2 hyperintense infiltrative white matter process in
the left temporal/parietal lobes with associated mass effect; mild contralateral infiltrative T2 hyperintensity is also present. There was
no associated enhancement. B, Axial susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) shows multiple bilateral microhemorrhages centered at the grey
white junction in both cerebral hemispheres, particularly evident in the area of mass-like T2 hyperintensity. A 62-year-old woman presented
with recurrent multifocal bilateral paraesthesias. Brain MRI showed a leptomeningeal process and infiltrative white matter abnormalities in
right parietal lobe. Cerebral biopsy showed CAA with involvement of leptomeningeal and superficial cortical vessels. The patient was not
treated and 4 months later at MRI, there was an almost complete resolution of the lesions. Five months later, she developed aphasia with MRI
evidence of a recurrent leptomeningeal process with infiltrative white matter abnormalites in the left temporal lobe. She was treated with
only three 1 g/pulses of methylprednisolone (oral glucocorticoids did not follow pulse therapy) with significant improvement of the language
(80% of normal) in the following 10 days. Seven months later, brain MRI had markedly improved showing only few tiny foci of hemosiderin on
GRE and language was normal. A 61-year-old woman presented with a right frontal lobar hemorrhage. Medical history was negative. Brain biopsy
performed during hematoma evacuation showed CAA. Eight years later, she developed seizures and brain MRI showed infiltrative T2 signal in
the white matter with leptomeningeal enhancement in the right temporal lobe which spontaneously resolved. Three years later,
microhemorrhages were observed on follow-up brain MRI. A 47-year-old man developed progressive cognitive decline, personality change,
confusion, spells, and right hemiparesis. Brain MRI showed an infiltrative white matter process mimicking low-grade glioma in the parietal
lobe bilaterally and in the right frontal lobe; in addition, there were multiple intraparenchymal hemorrhages of different ages. A brain
biopsy showed CAA. His neurological condition and brain MRI gradually improved without therapy. Two years later, his neurologic status
suddenly deteriorated and brain MRI showed a new right frontal lobe hemorrhage. Leptomeningeal disease only (Figure 2) and with infiltrative
white matter abnormalities (Figure 3) were the 2 most frequent radiological findings at presentation and were observed in 6 (27.3%) and 9
(40.9%) of the 22 patients respectively, followed by an infiltrative white matter process mimicking low-grade glioma alone in 4 patients
(18.2%) (Table 1). Multiple cortical infarcts were present in 3 patients (14%). In 1 patient, infarcts were the only finding at
presentation, whereas in the other 2, additional lesions developed. Multiple old lobar infarcts were observed in another patient associated
with an infiltrative white matter process mimicking low-grade glioma. Lobar hemorrhage was observed in only 2 patients. Magnetic resonance
imaging of a patient with ABRA showing a strictly leptomeningeal process. A, Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) sequence shows non
nulling of the subarachnoid signal involving the left temporal lobe consistent with a leptomeningeal process. No underlying white matter
abnormalities. B, Post Gadolinium T1-weighted images shows avid leptomeningeal enhancement. C, Axial susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI)
shows multiple bilateral cortical-subcortical microhemorrhages throughout cerebral hemispheres. Magnetic resonance imaging of a patient with
ABRA showing a leptomeningeal process with infiltrative white matter abnormalities as well. Without GRE or SWI imaging, this can be mistaken
for an infiltrative low grade glioma. A, Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR)-weighted MRI images show multilobar infiltrative
subcortical white matter T2 hyperintensities, with associated mass effect. B, Post Gadolinium T1-weighted MRI images show avid
leptomeningeal enhancement without parenchymal enhancement. Follow-up images were available in 4 patients with ABRA. Three of the 4 had
clinical relapses. One patient had 3 relapses, one had 2, and 1 had 1 relapse. A new lobar hemorrhage was observed in all 3 relapses. Lobar
hemorrhage was associated with subdural and subarachnoid hemorrhage in 1, recurrence of leptomenigeal enhancement in 1, and leptomeningeal
process with infiltrative white matter process in 1. A 69-year-old woman presented with a 3-week history of spells of numbness moving up her
left arm and in her left leg to the knee. The episodes lasted about 15 minutes, and as a second area became affected, the previous area
improved. Brain MRI showed leptomeningeal enhancement in frontal and parietal lobes. Two months later, her neurological status deteriorated
and a follow-up MRI showed a right frontal lobar hemorrhage. Brain biopsy showed necrotizing vasculitis and CAA. Prednisone 60 mg daily was
started and she improved. Two months later, MRI showed improvement of leptomeningeal enhancement, but also revealed a new small hemorrhage
in the left posterior temporal lobe. Mycophenolate mofetil was started and she improved further. Eight months later, the follow-up MRI
showed a complete resolution of leptomeningeal enhancement. Medications were then discontinued. However, during subsequent follow-up, the
patient had 3 clinical recurrences, 12 months, 29 months, and 35 months later. In the first, recurrence MRI showed a new left temporal lobe
lobar hemorrhage, in the second, recurrence of leptomeningeal enhancement, and in the third, a right frontal lobar hemorrhage with subdural
and subarachnoid hemorrhage. A 65-year-old man developed a right frontal hemorrhage that was evacuated. One month later, he noted headache,
confusion, seizures, aphasia, and rapid cognitive decline. Brain MRI showed leptomeningeal enhancement involving the right frontal and
temporal lobes and multiple infarcts in the overlying cortex. Cerebral biopsy showed ABRA. The patients were treated with methylprednisolone
pulse therapy (1 g/day for 3 days) followed by oral prednisone 60 mg/daily. The patient radiographically and clinically improved, and 18
months later, he was able to stop prednisone without recurrence. A 67-year-old woman developed confusion, aphasia, and spells, lasting 5 to
10 minutes, with numbness in her arm and trunk. On several occasions, her face was drooped on the left and her speech was slurred. MRI
showed leptomeningeal enhancement with T2 signal hyperintensity involving cortex and adjacent white matter in the right frontal lobe and
left parietal and frontal lobes. Brain biopsy showed ABRA. The patient was not treated and there was a progressive resolution of
neurological manifestations and MRI findings. Seven months later, the patient was asymptomatic and follow-up MRI demonstrated minimal
persisting leptomeningeal enhancement in the left parietal area and a marked reduction in the amount of T2 signal changes. Five years later,
the patient had a recurrence characterized by spells of aphasia and MRI evidence of leptomeningeal enhancement and T2 signal hyperintensity
in subcortical white matter with extension to the cortex in the right occipital and temporal lobes. The neurological symptoms resolved in
the following month without therapy and a control MRI, 5 months later, showed resolution of leptomeningeal enhancement and marked reduction
of white matter T2 abnormalities. SWIs showed a few punctate areas of hemosiderin deposition in the same regions where there were T2
abnormalities. Three years later, the patient was asymptomatic and brain MRI unchanged. A 62-year-old woman presented with a 2-month history
of episodes of paresthesias marching up the left arm from the fingers to the left side of the neck and face. MRI showed right temporal and
bilateral frontal leptomeningeal enhancement and an old right frontal hemorrhage. The patient was not treated and the spells and MRI
leptomeningeal enhancement improved spontaneously. Five months later, she complained of headache and MRI showed a new left posterior frontal
hemorrhage and 2 months later, brain MRI showed a new left anterior frontal hemorrhage. Brain biopsy was performed with evidence of ABRA.
Only 5 patients were in this group. Isolated leptomeningeal enhancement or a leptomeningeal process with infiltrative white matter was
observed in 4 of 5 patients (80%). No patients had a lobar hemorrhage. One patient presented with multiple acute hemorrhages alone. One
patient with leptomeningeal disease alone also had evidence of an old frontal infarct. Thus, the group appeared to resemble ABRA more than
CAA. Leptomeningeal disease alone or with an infiltrative underlying white matter process was significantly more frequent in patients with
ABRA and CAA-RI compared with those with CAA (8/27, 29.6% vs. 1/27, 3.7%, P = 0.02; and 11/27, 40.7% vs. 1/27, 3.7%, P = 0.002,
respectively), whereas lobar hemorrhage was more frequent in patients with CAA (17/27, 62.3% vs. 2/27, 7.4%, P = 0.0001) (Table 1). Overall,
leptomeningeal involvement at presentation was present in 70.4% (19/27) of patients with ABRA or CAA-RI and in only 7.4% (2/27) of patients
with CAA (P = 0.0001). Table 2 shows the sensitivities, specificities, and LRs (with 95% CIs) of imaging findings that help differentiate
patients with CAA from those with ABRA + CAA-RI. The sensitivity and specificity of leptomeningeal enhancement to identify patients with
ABRA + CAA-RI were 70.4% and 92.6%, respectively, whereas the positive LR was 9.5. The positive predictive value was 90.4%. The sensitivity
and specificity of intracerebral hemorrhage to identify patients with CAA were 62.9% and 92.6%, respectively, whereas the positive LR was
8.5. The positive predictive value was 89.4%. Imaging Findings for the Diagnosis of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy With and Without
Inflammation The primary objective of this study was to assess imaging findings at diagnosis in a population of 54 patients with ABRA and
CAA-RI or CAA. We found that leptomeningeal disease by itself or accompanied by infiltrative white matter process was significantly more
frequent in patients with ABRA and CAA-RI than those with CAA, whereas lobar hemorrhage was more frequent in patients with CAA. Overall,
leptomeningeal involvement at presentation was observed in 70% of the patients with vascular inflammation, but in only 7% with CAA. In
addition to the sensitivity of 70%, MRI evidence of leptomeningeal enhancement had a specificity of 93% for the presence of vascular
inflammation. The positive LR for this MRI finding was 9.5, indicating that leptomeningeal enhancement is almost 10 times more likely to be
present in a patient with ABRA or CAA-RI inflammation than in a patient with CAA. We also observed that patients with intracerebral
hemorrhage on imaging have an increased likelihood of CAA without inflammation (LR, 8.5). However, the absence of intracerebral hemorrhage
decreased the probability of CAA without vascular inflammation. The negative LR for intracerebral hemorrhage was 0.4. The specificity of
intracranial hemorrhage for CAA without inflammation was high (93%), whereas the sensitivity was relatively low (63%). Therefore, the
presence of leptomeningeal enhancement in the absence of intracerebral hemorrhage increases the probability that a patient with CAA will
have vascular inflammation. We observed that ABRA and CAA-RI were more closely related to primary CNS vasculitis than to CAA without
inflammatory infiltrates and that vascular inflammation in ABRA and CAA-RI more than Aβ deposition alone has a major influence in
determining disease manifestations.1,5,6 In particular, the neurological manifestations of CAA with inflammatory vascular or perivascular
infiltration respond to immunosuppressive treatment. Therefore, when neurologic and neuroradiologic findings are consistent with ABRA or
CAA-RI, the physician should consider starting an appropriate immunosuppressive treatment also in absence of pathologic confirmation. If a
biopsy is requested, the surgeon should direct the biopsy to the leptomeningeal and gray white junction. Given the varied radiological
presentations of these patients, GRE and/or SWI are essential in narrowing the differential diagnosis triaging the patients toward
appropriate therapy.9–12 CAA inflammatory variants may present as an infiltrative, poorly marginated, diffuse lobar or multilobar
T2-hyperintense process with associated mass effect and variable leptomeningeal enhancement mimicking CNS neoplasm or as strictly
leptomeningeal process in the absence of lobar hemorrhage. Standard MRI sequences are not sensitive for detecting the microhemorrhages,
which are also associated with these inflammatory CAA forms. In cases who present with a nonenhancing infiltrative white matter process and
in which SWI or GRE imaging is not done, it is not uncommon that only the white matter is targeted in the biopsy resulting in a
nondiagnostic biopsy and delayed treatment.11 The presence of multiple, cortical-subcortical microbleeds detected by GRE or by more
sensitive sequences such as SWI is a suggestive radiological sign of vascular amyloid.9–11 We found microbleeds, using GRE and/or SWI
sequences, in 19 of 27 (70.4%) patients with inflammatory CAA at presentation. The identification at initial MRI of diffuse cortical and
subcortical microhemorrhages in a distribution typical of CAA in elderly patients presenting with infiltrative white matter process or
prominent leptomeningeal enhancement is highly suggestive of vascular inflammatory CAA. These findings suggest that in the proper setting,
ABRA and CAA-RI might be neuroradiologically diagnosed potentially avoiding therapeutic delays also in the absence of cerebral biopsy.
Amyloid imaging with amyloid-binding positron emission tomography ligands, such as Pittsburgh Compound B, may also be useful in detecting
CAA, although they cannot discriminate vascular from parenchymal amyloid deposits.20 Follow-up data provided some additional information on
the course of CAA, in particular on the inflammatory lesions. Patients with CAA may have different clinical or neuroradiologic
manifestations at different times. The presenting manifestation may suggest a non-inflammatory event such as lobar hemorrhage, but years
later, an inflammatory appearance may develop (CAA case 2). In other patients, the presenting manifestation suggests inflammation and the
relapse are similar (ABRA case 3) or noninflammatory (ABRA case 4). However, recurrent inflammatory lesions in a patient tended to occur in
different cerebral lobes with a migratory pattern. In some, the clinical and radiologic alterations had a self-limited course. This
migratory and reversible course with resolution without immunosuppressive therapy was previously described in some case reports.12,14,21 In
these cases, as in some of our patients (particularly ABRA cases 3 and 4), the clinical symptoms and MRI findings recovered spontaneously in
few months. These observations raise questions about whether some cases of ABRA can be observed without treatment. Strengths of our study
include the following: the relative large number of consecutive patients with CAA defined by uniform pathology criteria with cerebral
imaging available at diagnosis, radiologic images that were performed by a defined clinical protocol, and reviewed for this study by a
single experienced neuroradiologist. Limitations include the relative small number of patients with follow-up images available. Limitations
also include the retrospective nature of the study, possible referral bias of cases, and sampling error of the biopsy specimens because of
the patchy nature of the inflammatory response. In conclusion, the clinician should be aware of the varied imaging appearance of ABRA, CAA-
RI, and CAA. Diffuse lobar vasogenic edema or mass-like nonenhancing white matter T2 hyperdensities may mimic low-grade infiltrative glioma
or gliomatosis cerebri. In these cases, SWI or GRE image aids in determining the correct diagnosis, also in absence of cerebral biopsy. If
biopsy is obtained, it should be targeted at the leptomeningeal or gray white junction and not only the white matter. Abbreviations: ABRA =
Aβ-related angiitis, CAA = cerebral amyloid angiopathy, CAA-RI = CAA-related inflammation, CIs = confidence intervals, CT = computed
tomography, CTA = CT-angiography, GRE = gradient-echo, LRs = likelihood ratios, MRA = MR-angiography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, NPV
= negative predictive value, PPV = positive predictive value, SWI = susceptibility-weighted imaging. JMM and CS contributed equally to the
project. CS is the visiting clinician at the Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. There was no financial support for this
work or other financial interests. The authors report no potential conflicts of interest.
