Mutations in proteins involved in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthesis and remodeling pathway are associated with autosomal
recessive forms of intellectual disability. Recently mutations in the PGAP1 gene that codes for PGAP1, a protein localized in the
endoplasmic reticulum responsible for the first step of the remodeling of glycosylphosphatidylinositol was linked to a disorder
characterized by psychomotor retardation and facial dysmorphism. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in siblings with severely
delayed myelination and psychomotor retardation. Mutations in PGAP1 were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and RNA analysis. A literature
search was performed to describe the emerging phenotype of PGAP1 related disease. WES resulted in the detection of two novel compound
heterozygous mutations in PGAP1, one base pair insertion leading to a frame shift c.334_335InsA (p.A112fs) and a splice site mutation
leading to exon skipping c.G1173C (p.L391L). A symptom not described in PGAP1 related disorder before but prominent in the siblings were
recurrent apnea especially during sleep that persisted at least until age 2 years. Sequential cerebral MRI at age one and two year(s)
respectively revealed frontal accentuated brain atrophy and significantly delayed myelination. We report siblings with two novel mutations
in PGAP1. Other that the common symptoms related to PGAP1 mutations including non-progressive psychomotor retardation, neonatal feeding
problems, microcephaly and brain atrophy these patients displayed severely delayed myelination and recurrent apneas thereby widing the
clinical spectrum associated with such mutations. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0602-7) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users. Genetic defects that affect the proper synthesis and remodeling of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors of cell surface proteins are a new group of autosomal recessive disorders leading to intellectual
disability. Of the 26 genes that are involved in this process, mutations in 13 have been described . Other than intellectual disability,
congenital malformations affecting the central nervous system (CNS) and other organs have been described . PGAP1 codes for PGAP1 (post-GPI
attachment to proteins 1) that is responsible for the first step of the remodeling of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchors after they
have been transferred to the proteins by the GPI transaminase. PGAP1 is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated GPI inositol-deacylase,
which cleaves the acyl chain from the inositol . In 2014 the first mutations, homozygous deletions c.589_591delCTT (p.Leu197del), in PGAP1
were described in siblings from Syria, floppy infants with developmental delay and severe intellectual disability. Murakami et al.
demonstrated that the defect of PGAP1 did not lead to a decreased expression level of GPI-anchored proteins on B lymphoblastoid cells
derived from one of the subjects, but to GPI-anchors with an abnormal structure and altered biochemical properties . Since this original
description 4 more families with mutations in this gene have been described, all of them a result of whole-exome sequencing (WES). Novarino
et al. used WES to identify the genetic base of the disease in 55 families with hereditary spastic paraplegias . They discovered a
homozygous splice site mutation (c.1952 + 1G > T) in PGAP1 in two male first degree cousins with global developmental delay, abnormal hand
movements and increased deep tendon reflexes suggesting a motor neuron disease. More recently three further families have been described.
Firstly a 3 year old boy from the United States with developmental delay and cortical visual impairment who was found to be compound
heterozygous for two nonsense variants, c.1572 T > A (p.Tyr524*) and c.1396C > T (p.Gln466*) in PGAP1 . Secondly an 8 years old boy from
unrelated parents with muscular hypotonia, feeding difficulties and developmental delay who was shown to carry compound heterozygous
c.274_276del (p.Pro92del) and c.921_925del (p.Lys308Asnfs*25) mutations in the PGAP1 gene . Thirdly siblings of a consanguineous couple from
North Turkey who are 1st cousins, with muscular hypotonia, severe developmental delay, microcephaly and retinal dystrophy carrying a
homozygote splice site mutation c.1090-2A > G . In this article we show the clinical symptoms and MRI findings of two further patients with
mutations in PGAP1 thereby confirming and extending the phenotype of PGAP1 related disease. Patients II-1 and II-2, dizygotic male twins and
first children of non-consanguineous Caucasian parents with an unremarkable family history were born in the 30th week of gestation due to
maternal HELLP syndrome (Fig. 1). Birth measures were normal for gestational age (II-1: weight 1555 g, length 43 cm; II-2: weight 1410 g,
length 41 cm) and no congenital anomalies were present. Both children developed respiratory distress syndrome and were treated with
surfactant. At age 3 months recurrent prolonged apnea occurred necessitating stimulation mainly during sleep. Multiple EEGs did not show
epileptic activity during these episodes that persisted until age 2 years when they were last seen, despite anticonvulsive therapy.
Psychomotor development was severely delayed in both children. At a corrected age of 12 months they showed pendular eye movements with
rotation nystagmus, no fixation or tracking. Generalized muscular hypotonia was present with poor head control and paucity of spontaneous
movements. Increased tendon reflexes with positive Babinski sign were noted as well as frequent myoclonus and tremor. At age 25 months II-1
was able to roll over and momentarily sit unsupported. He was very alert and friendly, fixated and played with objects. He could babble but
did not speak. He showed frequent myoclonus and a pronounced hyperexcitability. Patient II-2 developed epilepsy during the 2nd year of life
with atone seizures, desaturation, gaze deviation and smacking movements that were successfully treated with topiramate. At age 25 months he
showed less developmental progress than his brother. He was able to roll on the side and grasp objects but did not interact with the
caretakers. Like his brother he showed myoclonus and was hyperexcitable. At age 2 years both children presented with normal height and
length. Head circumference was on the 3rd centile in patient II-1 and below the 3rd centile in patient II-2.Fig. 1Pedigree of reported
family. Pedigree chart designer by CeGaT GmbH Pedigree of reported family. Pedigree chart designer by CeGaT GmbH Investigations for
metabolic disorders including serum levels for alkaline phosphatase, calcium, parathyroid hormone and vitamin D, that have been found
abnormal in patients with other defects in the synthesis of GPI-anchors, were repeatedly normal . Nerve conduction velocity as well as
acoustic and visual evoked potentials measured in patient II-2 were within the normal range. Cerebral MRI at age one year showed frontal
accentuated brain atrophy and significantly delayed myelination in T2-weighted images. On follow-up MRI at age two years the amount of
myelin was increased, however the magnetization transfer (MT) saturation maps still revealed a striking reduction of signal arising from
myelin compared to age matched controls. Brain atrophy was also less pronounced in the follow up MRI (Fig. 2). MR spectroscopy at age two
years demonstrated a significant reduction (>2 SD of mean control values ) of creatine and choline concentration in both patients which may
point to a decreased amount of choline containing myelin proteins and cell density a finding that has been described in hypomyelinating
conditions (Fig. 3).Fig. 2Structural and quantitative MRI of patients and a healthy age matched control. a;b;e;f;i: T2-weighted images at
the corrected age of 12 months (a, e) and 2 years (b, f, i) of patients II-1 (a, b) and patient II-2 (e, f) and control (i) showing brain
atrophy and significant delayed myelination in the patients. c;d;g;h;j;k: T1-weighted images and overlay of color coded MT saturation maps
onto the corresponding T1-weighted images of both patients (c, d, g, h) and an age matched control (j, k) at age 2 years. Yellow represents
high signal intensity considered to arise from properly myelinated WM. Both patients show widespread marked reductions of the
myelinsensitive parameter MT saturation when compared to the age matched control thereby emphasizing the delayed myelination. For detailed
information about MT saturation maps see Additional file 1 Fig. 3Structural MRI and MR-Spectroscopy. MR-Spectroscopy of parieto-occipital WM
from both patients. Placements of volume of interest are illustrated in T1- weighted images (left). Significant decreases (>2 SD of mean
control value) of metabolite concentrations are indicated by black arrows. The black asterix indicates marginally low concentration. (tNAA:
sum of N-acetylaspartate and N-acetylaspartylglutamate, tCr: sum of creatine and phosphocreatine, Cho: Choline, Ins: Inositol). For detailed
information about MR-Spectroscopy see Additional file 1 Structural and quantitative MRI of patients and a healthy age matched control.
a;b;e;f;i: T2-weighted images at the corrected age of 12 months (a, e) and 2 years (b, f, i) of patients II-1 (a, b) and patient II-2 (e, f)
and control (i) showing brain atrophy and significant delayed myelination in the patients. c;d;g;h;j;k: T1-weighted images and overlay of
color coded MT saturation maps onto the corresponding T1-weighted images of both patients (c, d, g, h) and an age matched control (j, k) at
age 2 years. Yellow represents high signal intensity considered to arise from properly myelinated WM. Both patients show widespread marked
reductions of the myelinsensitive parameter MT saturation when compared to the age matched control thereby emphasizing the delayed
myelination. For detailed information about MT saturation maps see Additional file 1 Structural MRI and MR-Spectroscopy. MR-Spectroscopy of
parieto-occipital WM from both patients. Placements of volume of interest are illustrated in T1- weighted images (left). Significant
decreases (>2 SD of mean control value) of metabolite concentrations are indicated by black arrows. The black asterix indicates marginally
low concentration. (tNAA: sum of N-acetylaspartate and N-acetylaspartylglutamate, tCr: sum of creatine and phosphocreatine, Cho: Choline,
Ins: Inositol). For detailed information about MR-Spectroscopy see Additional file 1 The exome analyses yielded 65.96 million confidently
mapped reads with a mean coverage of X69. Following alignment to the reference genome, 21,931 on-target variants were noted. We removed
variants which were called less than X8, were off-target, synonymous (>4 bp from exon/intron junction), MAF > 0.1 % at dbSNP138 and
MAF > 1 % in the Hadassah in-house dbSNP. 98 variants survived this filtering process but only a single couple resided in the same gene,
PGAP1. These were chr2: 197781284InsT, NM_024989:c.334_335insA:p.A112fs and Chr2: 197755552 C > G, NM_024989:c.G1173C:p.L391L, affecting the
donor splice site of exon 10. Sanger sequencing showed that both patients were compound heterozygous for the insertion, c.334_335InsA
(p.A112fs) which was shown to be inherited from the mother, leading to a frame shift and the splice site mutation, c.G1173C (p.L391L), in
the PGAP1 gene which was shown to be inherited from the father. cDNA analysis from whole blood of patients and a healthy control revealed on
the one hand a transcript variant without exon 9 in patients as well as in healthy control. Additionally the splice site mutation c.G1173C
(p.L391L) leads to skipping of exon 10 (Fig. 4). Thereby it is to suppose that the skipping of the exon 10 leads to a truncated protein.Fig.
4Sanger sequencing and cDNA analysis. a: Sanger sequencing of the PGAP1 gene in patient II-1 (upper row) and a control (lower row). The
arrows indicated the compound heterozygous mutations. b: Agarose gel electrophoresis of cDNA from blood of Patient II-1 on the right and
healthy control on the left. The red rectangles indicate the eluted bands using for subsequently sequencing. Letter a, b and c refer to the
corresponding sequences on the right Sanger sequencing and cDNA analysis. a: Sanger sequencing of the PGAP1 gene in patient II-1 (upper row)
and a control (lower row). The arrows indicated the compound heterozygous mutations. b: Agarose gel electrophoresis of cDNA from blood of
Patient II-1 on the right and healthy control on the left. The red rectangles indicate the eluted bands using for subsequently sequencing.
Letter a, b and c refer to the corresponding sequences on the right For detailed information about WES and Sanger sequencing see Additional
file 1. Including the two patients reported on in this article 10 patients from 6 different families carrying mutations in the PGAP1 gene
have been described so far [2, 4–7]. A summary of the clinical and genetic findings is given in Table 1. In none of the patients the
disorder had a progressive course instead the patients showed a varying degree of development. 8 patients were reported to have had muscular
hypotonia in the neonatal period leading to feeding problems in 6. Tremor was observed in 3 patients, dyskinetic movements in 6. Only two
patients have been reported to walk independently, however the majority of the patients were still young. Intellectual disability seems to
be a constant feature but with varying severity. Only one patient has been reported to be able to speak. This patient was also the only
normocephalic patient while the others were microcephalic indicating that he might be less severely affected. Epilepsy was present in three
out of ten patients and one additional patient showed generalized slowing in the EEG without clear epileptiform changes. Recurred apneas
especially during sleep, which were a very prominent symptom in the patients described in this article, have not been described in the other
patients. Dysmorphic features described in the patients include large ears, a flattened nasal root , prominent forehead, large mouth,
abnormal teeth, high arched eyebrows, a short neck , upward slanting palpebral fissures, deep-set eyes, large ear lobes and prominent
helices and antihelices, extra mamelons of teeth and diminished enamel . In addition to the face malformations Williams et al. described
abnormal hand morphology in his patient. Metabolic analysis in the PGAP1 patients has overall yielded unremarkable results.
Hyperphosphatasia that was described in other GPI-APs related disease (PIGV, PIGO and PGAP2) due to recognition of mannose residue in
immature GPI and the consecutive cleavage of the hydrophobic signal peptide from the proproteins by GPI transamidase resulting in secretion
of soluble alkaline phosphatase . But serum levels of alkaline phosphatase were normal in our patients and in the Pgap1 mouse model as well,
suggesting elevated alkaline phosphatase is not part of PGAP1 disease. Imaging of the brain was performed in 9 out of 10 patients (1 CT, 8
MRIs). Cerebral imaging revealed global brain atrophy in 5/9 patients, defective myelination in 4/9, abnormalities of the sylvian fissure in
2/9 and callosum agenesis and vermis hypoplasia in one. One patient, the only patient that was able to speak, was reported to have a normal
MRI at the age of 5 years again supporting the milder course of the disease in this patient. The MRIs of the siblings from North Turkey were
also described to be normal, but information of the patients’ age at investigation was not provided. Sequential MRIs, available in the
patient described by Williams et al. and the two patients reported on in this article, demonstrate that the amount of myelin detected on MRI
is increasing indicating delayed myelination rather than defective myelination. However, the analysis of the MT saturation maps shows that
the amount of myelin is still decreased when compared to age matched controls at the age of 2 years. Single voxel proton MR spectroscopy
also indicated a defect in the myelin.Table 1Clinical and genetic findings of PGAP1-diseaseThis StudyMurakami et al.Bosch et al.Williams et
al.Novarino et al.Granzow et al.II-1II-2III-2III-3IV-3IV-4I-1I-2Family historyDizygotic Caucasian twins of non-consanguineous parentsSibling
of consanguine Syrian relationshipnon-consanguineousnon-consanguineousconsanguineos/1° cousinsconsanguineos/1° cousinsGenotypec.334_335InsA
(p.Arg112fs)homozygous c.589_591del (p.Leu197del)c.274_276del (p.Pro92del)c.1572 T > A (p.Tyr524*)homozygous splice site mutation
c.1952 + 1G > Thomozygous splice site mutation c.1090-2A > GANDANDANDsplice site mutation c.1173G > C (p.Leu391Leu)c.921_925del
(p.Lys308Asnfs*25)c.1396C > T p.(Gln466*)GenderMMFMMMMMMFAgea 224 5/122 9/127 10/1236 6/129/1284Pregnancy/Birth30th weeks, maternal HELLP
syndromeunremarkableplanned CS, 38 weeks39 weeksNANAunremarkableFacial dysmorphisms(+)(+)++++----Microcephaly++++-+NANA++Intellectual
disability++IQ < 35IQ < 35IQ 49++-++SpeechBabbleBabbleBabbleNA2 6/12delayedNANA--Motor developmental delay+++++++-++Walking independently
(years)--4 5/12-2 6/12-NANANA-Hypotonia++++++NANA++Neuropathy/Spasticity--NANA--++-+Stereotypic/dyskinetic
movements--++-++++-Eating/FeedingMilk bottlesMilk bottlesMilk bottlesMilk bottles-G-tube feedingNANA-Failure to thriveRespirationRecurrent
apneasRecurrent apneas----NANA+-Ophthalmological findings----CVICVI--Retinal dystrophy (ERG)Seizures/EEG
abnormalities−/−+/++/NA-/NA-/NA−/+NANA−/−−/−ImagingFrontal accentuated brain atrophy and significant delayed myelination (MRI)Brain atrophy
(CT)NANormal (MRI)Thinning of thecorpus collosum, diminished white matter, prominence of the right posterior Sylvian fissure (MRI)Prominent
cortical sulci and widened sylvian fissures (MRI)Corpus callosum agnesis, vermis hypoplasia, defective myelination (MRI)Normal (MRI)Normal
(MRI) CS caesarian section, CT computer tomography, CVI cortical visual impairment, EEG electroencephalogram, ERG electroretinogram, F
female, IQ intelligence quotient, M male, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NA not available a Age at investigation Clinical and genetic
findings of PGAP1-disease CS caesarian section, CT computer tomography, CVI cortical visual impairment, EEG electroencephalogram, ERG
electroretinogram, F female, IQ intelligence quotient, M male, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NA not available a Age at investigation A
knock-out mouse model of PGAP1 was described in 2007 with three different phenotypes that varied in severity. Some mice showed a severe
developmental defect of the brain, similar to human otocephaly and others only minor abnormalities like growth retardation or male
infertility. The mouse model therefore seems to resemble some of the features of PGAP1 related human disease including the wide phenotypic
variability. The emerging clinical phenotype of PGAP1 related disease is rather unspecific. It includes non-progressive severe psychomotor
retardation and infrequent mild facial dysmorphism. The probably most specific finding for PGAP1 related disease, at least in our patients,
was severely delayed myelination. The fact that within only one year since the original description 8 more patients with genetic defects of
PGAP1 have been described might indicate that such defects are a more common cause of intellectual disability and that the PGAP1 gene should
be included in gene panels for the analysis of severe psychomotor retardation and delayed myelination. Ethics approval is not applicable.
Informed consent to all diagnostic procedures was given by the caregivers. Written informed consent for publication of their clinical
details and MRI images was obtained from the parents of the patients. A copy of the consent form is available for review by the Editor of
this journal. A detailed description of all use methods is given in Additional file 1. Additional file 1: Methods – Description of
Quantitative magnetization transfer (MT) imaging, proton MR-spectroscopy, Whole exome analysis, RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis. (DOCX 19
kb) Methods – Description of Quantitative magnetization transfer (MT) imaging, proton MR-spectroscopy, Whole exome analysis, RNA isolation
and cDNA synthesis. (DOCX 19 kb) complementary DNA central nervous system deoxyribonucleic acid electroencephalography endoplasmic reticulum
glycosylphosphatidylinositol glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein acronym for a syndrome with Hemolysis Elevated Liver enzymes and
Low Platelet count minor allele frequency magnetic resonance magnetic resonance imaging magnetization transfer creatine and phosphocreatine
N-acetylaspartylglutamate whole-exome sequencing white matter Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interest.
Authors’ contributions MK and PH performed the study, were responsible for acquisition of data, data analysis and drafting the manuscript.
OE carried out the molecular genetic studies and data analysis of the WES and participated in drafting the manuscript. EW performed the RNA
and cDNA analysis and participated in drafting the manuscript. SDK performed the MRI and MR spectroscopy including the data analysis and
participated in drafting the manuscript. MH and JG have been involved data analysis and in writing and revising the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information SDK was supported by the Dorothea Schloezer-Program of the Georg-August-
University Göttingen. Not applicable. Not applicable.
