Academic Editor: Enzo Emanuele Background. Epilepsy is a chronic neurological disorder that can lead to complex psychosocial consequences.
Epilepsy can change the social status of persons with epilepsy (PWE) and has an effect on their social inclusion as well as their perception
of social inclusion. This study aims to explore subjective experiences with social inclusion of PWE in Slovenia. Methods. This study takes a
qualitative approach. Eleven semistructured interviews were conducted with eleven participants. Interviews were analysed using thematic
analysis. Results. Epilepsy has physical, emotional, and social consequences. Physical consequences of epilepsy are mainly tiredness and
exhaustion following an epileptic episode, frequently accompanied by headaches. Emotional consequences are different forms of fear. The main
social consequence identified is a negative effect on PWE's social network, which leads to (self-)isolation and social distrust. Conclusion.
PWE experience of social inclusion depends on various psychosocial factors and differs from person to person. The consequences of epilepsy
are shown in PWE social contacts and their sense of social inclusion and autonomy. Epilepsy is a complex disorder. There are several types
of epilepsy, which have different causes and symptoms and require different treatments. This study considers all types of epilepsy and does
not distinguish between its specific types. Epilepsy results in neurological consequences, physical consequences, and psychosocial
consequences. One of psychosocial consequences of epilepsy is a change in social inclusion of persons with epilepsy (PWE) . Social inclusion
has several connotations. It can mean participation, capacity development, and societal welfare increase , as well as capacity to be
actively included in society and contribute to society in economic, social, psychological, and political sense . Social inclusion can help
explain the consequences of social stratification, principles of societal order, and placement of persons in the centre of society or its
margins . Various definitions of social inclusion stem from the ideal of inclusive society. In an inclusive society everyone feels valued,
differences are respected, needs are met, and living with dignity is the norm . This study defines social inclusion as PWE's active
inclusion in society. Epileptic episodes are sudden and frequently dangerous and carry increased risk of injury, hospitalisation, and death.
Insufficient knowledge of epilepsy and inappropriate first aid can result in inappropriate treatment, physical disability, and social
exclusion . PWE are at a high risk of developing mental disorders, such as anxiety and depression. They frequently experience social issues
and have trouble finding a partner. PWE can have lower levels of education and higher unemployment rates and are less likely to participate
in social activities [8, 9]. Social inclusion is an important element of quality of life for PWE. Recent research has shown that stigma
experienced by PWE contributes to increased levels of psychopathology, decrease in social contact and social capital, and lower quality of
life . Concealing and disclosing epilepsy have an important role in managing stigma experienced by PWE. As a strategy of stigma control,
concealing epilepsy has its weaknesses. Failure in hiding epilepsy can lead to increased stigmatisation. This process leads into a cycle of
secrecy, societal detachment and isolation, and antisocial behavior . Morgan and colleagues have found strong correlation between prevalence
of epilepsy and social deprivation . Past research has focused on individual aspects of epilepsy, namely, on its influence on the quality of
life of PWE in relation to stigmatisation, discrimination, employment opportunities, psychiatric epilepsy occurrence, style of living,
burden of epilepsy, and pregnancy . These factors have a significant effect on PWE quality of life, which is lower in comparison to the
general population . These factors are important aspects of PWE care . As far as we are aware, no studies aiming to explore subjective
aspects of PWE social inclusion and effects of subjective experiences of epilepsy on social inclusion have been conducted. Discrimination
and stigmatisation of PWE are social determinants of health with poor social prognosis [19, 20]. Both affect PWE more than epileptic
episodes . It is important to explore and understand PWE experience with social inclusion. Objective indicators of social inclusion, such as
social network size, level of education, employment status and subjective experiences of inclusion/exclusion, social contacts, and
relationships, need to be explored . Qualitative approach to research was chosen based on our research aims and objectives. Qualitative
research encompasses research methods describing and explaining participant experiences, behavior, relationships, and social environment
[22, 23], such as how PWE experience epilepsy and the effect of PWE experience of social inclusion. The aim of this study is to explore
subjective experience of PWE social inclusion in Slovenia. The research objectives of this study were to determine how PWE experience
epilepsy and the effect of PWE experience of social inclusion. We used qualitative methods to explore how selected aspects of epilepsy
affect the life of PWE and how PWE participate in a society and contribute to it. The National Medical Ethics Committee of the Republic of
Slovenia approved the protocol for this study in February 2012 (doc. number 109/01/12). We have chosen phenomenology as the theoretical
framework for this study. Phenomenology takes into consideration experience and how people understand experience as a primary source of
realisation. Phenomenology explores the structure of conscious subjective experience from the first-person point of view . We have chosen
phenomenology because it is an appropriate framework for exploring social dimension of health or specific disorders, such as epilepsy. The
objective of phenomenology is to answer “how is it to have a particular experience” . Phenomenology as a theoretical framework is intended
to precisely describe, analyse, and interpret experience from an individual point of view and is expressed as a personal story [26, 27]. Its
aim is to uncover the meaning of intensity of being, to develop a deeper understanding and a detailed identification of personal experience.
This is a qualitative study. We used semistructured interviews to collect stories about epilepsy. Interview questions were developed with
the intention to motivate participant to tell stories about their experience of epilepsy: they were used to steer participants towards the
main theme of the study. Inclusion criteria weresubjectively expressed epilepsy diagnosis,age of majority,legal capacity,willingness to tell
a story regarding experience with epilepsy.We included only voluntary participants. Participants were recruited using snowball sampling
technique. We sent e-mail invitations containing relevant information on the study and provisional questions on story structure to various
addresses collected by the research team. Addressees were asked to forward the invitation to PWE or other persons who might know PWE. When
PWE contacted us themselves, we invited them for an interview. subjectively expressed epilepsy diagnosis, age of majority, legal capacity,
willingness to tell a story regarding experience with epilepsy. Eleven participants participated in semistructured interviews. At the time
of the interview, all participants were taking medication for epilepsy. Participants signed a written consent form on voluntary
participation in this study. Their consent could be revoked at any time during the study. Participant anonymity was achieved through coding
of their personal details. The interviews took place between November 2011 and March 2012 at various locations in Slovenia. Participants
determined where the interview would take place. Five interviews took place at PWE's homes, three interviews in a public space (i.e., café),
and three interviews at the League Against Epilepsy Society headquarters. Basic demographic data was collected from participants (see Table
1). During the interviews, participants were encouraged to spontaneously talk about epilepsy. Participants were permitted to emphasise
events of personal importance. Interviews were administered by one person (SM) and taped. The shortest interview took 35 minutes and the
longest interview took 130 minutes. Interviews were transcribed word-for-word into Microsoft Word documents. The transcripts were sent to
participants for authorisation. After receiving authorisation, transcripts were analysed and interpreted using content analysis. Content
analysis aims to achieve exhaustive and broad description of a certain phenomenon. Additionally, content analysis is used when studying
sensitive phenomena. It also enables reduction of large parts of text into smaller content categories . We used inductive method for content
analysis . Transcripts were coded. We considered codes words or phrases that are directly extracted from text and may represent textual
interpretation. Initially, we postulated a unit of analysis as a single interview and a coding unit as a smaller category of content (e.g.,
a paragraph describing a specific experience or an event). Two individuals (SM and DP) coded the text independently of each other and
reached an agreement on the content of the codes. We piloted three interviews to determine the initial codes. We collected codes (with
interview citations) in Microsoft Excel and used them to determine categories and subcategories. We merged similar codes in superior and
subordinate categories, which we then used to form a coding frame. This represented the final phase of data analysis. During the
interpretation phase, we initially transferred one coding unit to analysis unit. Each interview text was examined to determine the context
in which the code appears. The code was then substantiated by the original citation. Contextual and interpretative analyses were the last
phase of the analysis. Study findings in relation to preliminary research and established concepts were debated among all the members of the
research group. The PWE sample in this study consisted of 8 women and 3 men aged between 27 and 64 years (average 43.8 years). Average
participant age at the time of their first epileptic episode was 16.8 years. Participants reported the elapsed time since last episode. The
shortest amount of time was 2 days. The longest amount of time was 12 years. One of the participants was unable to recall the time of the
last epileptic episode. At the time of the study, three participants were married, one had a partner, and seven were single. Three
participants lived alone, one lived with a partner, and seven participants lived with family. Educational levels among the participants were
relatively low. Four participants reported finishing primary school, six participants finished secondary school, and one was educated at the
university level. Only two participants were unemployed at the time of the study. Three participants were receiving disability pension and
one participant was receiving a monthly allowance. Five participants were employed. Three out of eleven participants were members of the
League Against Epilepsy Society. Epilepsy experience encompasses various dimensions of life. We have focused on four particular areas. These
areas were chosen as coding frames due to the significant effect apportioned to them by the participants in their stories. The decision on
the coding frame was based on Flick and Elo and Kyngäs' work describing coding frames as “concept driven” (literature review) and “data-
driven” (research data): coding frames are frequently based on both literature and data [29, 30]. Therefore, when we construct the coding
frame, we took into considerationresearch aims and objectives,review of the literature,data gathered from the first three interviews.This
approach to constructing coding frames is additionally supported by theoretical guidelines for qualitative studies . research aims and
objectives, review of the literature, data gathered from the first three interviews. We used research data to develop abstract concepts
(categories and subcategories, not to be mistaken for themes in the context of thematic analysis). Themes were used because based on their
impact on understanding PWE social inclusion and include aspect of physical environment, PWE interaction among themselves and their
relations, PWE feelings, and span of the disease. Categories that could contribute to our research question were translated to abstract
concept-category forms (e.g., social network and social position), while subcategories encompassed thematically narrower concepts. Two
coding frames were prepared for analysis purpose. The first coding frame refers to the “characteristics and consequences of epilepsy” (see
supplementary Appendix 1, in Supplementary Material available online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/2018509), while the second coding
frame refers to the “social contacts and relationships” PWE (see supplementary Appendix 2). “The characteristics and consequences of
epilepsy” frame encompasses two categories: concealing and disclosing the epilepsy and disease consequence. “The PWE social contacts and
relationships” frame encompasses epilepsy PWE experience and social network (see Table 2). Epilepsy is a complex disease. Consequences of
epilepsy are not only physical, but also emotional and social. We discuss all three aspects in this chapter. Participants described the
physical draining effect of an epileptic episode. Some of them are able to recognize the beginning of an episode, while some of them are
not. After an episode, they feel tired and drained, frequently suffer from headaches, and are in need of rest.You feel completely without
strength [after an attack] and just want to hug someone. Even I find it difficult to understand, even now I don't understand, how is it
possible, after an attack, to feel so powerless. (SP)During an epileptic episode, six participants suffered minor physical injuries, such as
bumps and cuts. One participant sustained major physical injury, which resulted in finger amputation. Four participants did not mention any
injuries related to an epileptic episode. You feel completely without strength [after an attack] and just want to hug someone. Even I find
it difficult to understand, even now I don't understand, how is it possible, after an attack, to feel so powerless. (SP) All participants
emphasised the importance of recognizing physical response in various circumstances. They all developed ways of recognizing physical signs
that could lead to an epileptic episode. Participants explained that they consider the ability to recognize these signs a mean of
controlling their epilepsy. Participants reported that they do not participate in actions or avoid circumstances that could lead to an
episode and deterioration of their health.It was difficult, giving up sport. You can't lie in life and it's similar with this disease. If I
said, that I'm taking medication and drink at the same time it wouldn't be possible to expect the treatment to get better. (KS)Participants
are aware of their physical and psychological limitations. This awareness enables them to better control epilepsy. It was difficult, giving
up sport. You can't lie in life and it's similar with this disease. If I said, that I'm taking medication and drink at the same time it
wouldn't be possible to expect the treatment to get better. (KS) Fear was a common consequence of epilepsy emphasised by the participants.
They mentioned different forms of fear: fear related to reaction of their friends and family and others, fear that the epilepsy is going to
get worse, fear of motherhood, fear of epilepsy heredity, and fear of epilepsy unpredictability. Fear is the main reason for uncertainty.
Participants see a correlation between unpredictability of epilepsy and uncertain future. They reported intense feelings of distress upon
familiarising themselves with epilepsy, as well as fear of future episodes. They emphasised distress escalation upon familiarising with
epilepsy and fear of the next episode.I'm afraid because I don't know when the next episode is going to happen and I worry that the disease
is going to get worse, sometimes I fear going down the street alone. (SP)Participants listed self-confinement and gradual social isolation
as consequences of epilepsy. All participants explained that when they experienced an epileptic episode, people who were present did not
recognize physical symptoms of epilepsy; the epileptic episode scared them and they reacted in panic. I'm afraid because I don't know when
the next episode is going to happen and I worry that the disease is going to get worse, sometimes I fear going down the street alone. (SP)
One of the participants explained that epilepsy disclosure affected her social network and made it weaker. Participants perceive social
isolation as a worst-case scenario.My youngest daughter got mad at me, asked me what was wrong, since I don't socialise with people anymore.
She doesn't know what to do with me, I don't know how to laugh anymore. She knows that I always liked company, we used to laugh a lot, I had
a lot of friends, but not anymore. Now, I withdraw into myself. Somehow, I don't feel like going out. I don't know why. (ZVS) This caused me
to lose a lot of my friends. As I've already told you, they think you are crazy or not completely there. They didn't take it as a disease.
They took it as something scary, a taboo. (DJ) Two participants reported having a strong social network and a wide circle of friends,
despite epilepsy. Nine participants listed epilepsy as a reason for a weak social network and feelings of loneliness. People who find out
about epilepsy are sometimes unable to accept it. Consequently, participants experience rejection of contact. Only immediate family members
accept epilepsy. Although the majority of participants found support within their families, one participant described the negative impact of
her mother not accepting the fact that he has epilepsy. Another participant described an authoritarian relationship with her partner that
also affects their children. You feel hurt. Lonely. You feel like you're alone in this world. People don't understand, you can't be there,
because if you're there and tell them something, they drive you away. I know now, after my friends have distanced themselves, that my family
is all there is. (KJ)According to participants, limited ability to work and trouble finding employment are reasons for inadequate social
inclusion. Eight participants reported epilepsy as the main reason for not being employed. Three participants did not experience any
difficulties in finding employment. One participant emphasised that social conventions regarding job performance are high and that that
makes epilepsy a difficult factor to control. Participants also emphasised that, during a job interview, they frequently felt that a
potential employer was afraid to employ them due to potential liability. One participant felt discriminated against by her colleagues at
work and felt that this contributed to her epilepsy. When you are whole, you can do anything. You can go to work, drive a car, all doors in
life are open to you. There's nothing written about your disease or limitations. When epilepsy is on your record, all doors close.
(KJ)Epilepsy also has consequences for family or friends living with PWE. All participants explained that knowing that their immediate
relatives have to adapt to their disability causes them a lot of worry and represents a significant burden.I can't go anywhere alone and
this is why I can't relax. I'm constantly under pressure. I think of what I'm doing so they [family members] will be okay. I'm very
troubled, that I'm to blame for everything that they [family members] have to give up and accommodate me. (ZVŠ) Participants explained that
epilepsy has a negative effect on finding a partner. They emphasised that partners fear epilepsy heredity. Seven participants do not have a
partner. Five of these participants have previous experience with partnerships breaking down due to epilepsy. Participants believe that
epilepsy represents an obstacle to finding a partner and starting a family.I find it difficult to tell them that I have epilepsy, because I
was afraid that they will reject me. I understand that if you don't know enough, you can't respond. But, some girls, when I told them that
I'm fine, understood, while some others told me that they don't want a patient for a boyfriend immediately. (SL)I had a lot of girlfriends,
but always, when I told them that I have epilepsy, it ended. They thought it was hereditary. (IZ)One participant emphasised that epilepsy
influences self-perception and opens up opportunities for empathy towards other PWE. This participant expressed a wish for a partner with
health concerns, because he believes that they could understand each other better. My youngest daughter got mad at me, asked me what was
wrong, since I don't socialise with people anymore. She doesn't know what to do with me, I don't know how to laugh anymore. She knows that I
always liked company, we used to laugh a lot, I had a lot of friends, but not anymore. Now, I withdraw into myself. Somehow, I don't feel
like going out. I don't know why. (ZVS) This caused me to lose a lot of my friends. As I've already told you, they think you are crazy or
not completely there. They didn't take it as a disease. They took it as something scary, a taboo. (DJ) You feel hurt. Lonely. You feel like
you're alone in this world. People don't understand, you can't be there, because if you're there and tell them something, they drive you
away. I know now, after my friends have distanced themselves, that my family is all there is. (KJ) When you are whole, you can do anything.
You can go to work, drive a car, all doors in life are open to you. There's nothing written about your disease or limitations. When epilepsy
is on your record, all doors close. (KJ) I can't go anywhere alone and this is why I can't relax. I'm constantly under pressure. I think of
what I'm doing so they [family members] will be okay. I'm very troubled, that I'm to blame for everything that they [family members] have to
give up and accommodate me. (ZVŠ) I find it difficult to tell them that I have epilepsy, because I was afraid that they will reject me. I
understand that if you don't know enough, you can't respond. But, some girls, when I told them that I'm fine, understood, while some others
told me that they don't want a patient for a boyfriend immediately. (SL) I had a lot of girlfriends, but always, when I told them that I
have epilepsy, it ended. They thought it was hereditary. (IZ) In this chapter, we listed codes related to participant control of epilepsy
disclosure, epilepsy information dissemination, management of information, participant epilepsy experience, and participant experience
related to their actions, emotions, well-being, and autonomy. PWE have little control over epilepsy disclosure due to the unpredictable
nature of epileptic episodes. Control over epilepsy disclosure can be very important, namely, because of fear of rejection. All participants
emphasised the fact that the term epilepsy and sudden disclosure (i.e., epileptic episode) prompt fear among the general population.
Although participants cannot fully control epilepsy disclosure, they try to hide it whenever possible. One of the participants developed a
way of hiding an episode when it occurs in public.When I had company and felt that I will have an episode, I started rummaging through my
bag, and by being active I hid the tremors. In my case, except for my family and perhaps a small circle of friends, nobody knew that I have
epilepsy. (MR)Participants believe that people fear epilepsy because they are not familiar with it and do not recognize its symptoms.
Participants would like to have control over epilepsy disclosure. Five participants explained that they do not have control over information
circulation, since epilepsy can only be kept private until a public episode occurs. Two participants explained that they can control
disclosure, while others did not attach particular importance to it. When I had company and felt that I will have an episode, I started
rummaging through my bag, and by being active I hid the tremors. In my case, except for my family and perhaps a small circle of friends,
nobody knew that I have epilepsy. (MR) Participants explained that they are in control of disclosure (with the exception of unplanned public
episode). They emphasised two main causes for disclosure: (i) longer and close relationship with a partner or a friend that leads to
disclosure and (ii) disclosure to enable appropriate help. All participants explained that they prefer to personally explain the
characteristics of epilepsy in person. This is because they believe that they will contribute to managing stigma associated with
epilepsy.Because those that know what epilepsy is, just take a step back… I would rather explain in person. Even when I explain in person, I
can say that some girls, that I would like to be with and are very nice, just go away because of my disease. (SL)All participants emphasised
the distress and fear of epilepsy disclosure, especially to potential future partners. They also mentioned fear of consequences of
nondisclosure. I told a friend who was afraid of it . She asked me whether it is contagious and if she can get ill. Afterwards I didn't see
her for a while, because she was somewhat afraid of me. (PF)The more honest and spontaneous you are, less people resent you and step towards
you. (MP)Participants reported the dilemma associated with disclosing a diagnosis of epilepsy to a potential employer. Six participants have
disclosed having epilepsy during a job interview. Five of those had a negative experience. They are convinced that epilepsy is the reason
why they did not get employment. Three participants concealed epilepsy. Two participants have never been employed. I decided to find a job.
I was sending job applications around. I didn't mention the fact that I have epilepsy. I went for an interview and didn't mention epilepsy.
I know, however, that we had to fill out a questionnaire somewhere and we had to write about this epilepsy and I wrote it, but didn't get a
job, although I had a chance to get it. (SL)Participants had different experiences regarding epilepsy disclosure when it was controlled (own
decision to disclose) or when it was not (public episode). Seven participants regretted disclosing the epilepsy irrespective of the manner
of disclosure. Four participants were positively surprised that they received support and felt relieved that they did not need to conceal
the epilepsy anymore. Because those that know what epilepsy is, just take a step back… I would rather explain in person. Even when I explain
in person, I can say that some girls, that I would like to be with and are very nice, just go away because of my disease. (SL) I told a
friend who was afraid of it . She asked me whether it is contagious and if she can get ill. Afterwards I didn't see her for a while, because
she was somewhat afraid of me. (PF) The more honest and spontaneous you are, less people resent you and step towards you. (MP) I decided to
find a job. I was sending job applications around. I didn't mention the fact that I have epilepsy. I went for an interview and didn't
mention epilepsy. I know, however, that we had to fill out a questionnaire somewhere and we had to write about this epilepsy and I wrote it,
but didn't get a job, although I had a chance to get it. (SL) Participants adapt to the epilepsy in different manners. A low feeling of
self-worth was identified as one of the main factors in the participants' having trouble trusting others. All participants, except one, have
experienced others fearing their epilepsy. Participants believe that fear is a result of epilepsy manifestation—epileptic seizure. Epilepsy
symptoms are not always recognizable or are manifested in a frightening manner. Participants emphasised their feelings of hurt resulting
from other people's response to epilepsy. I had it [epileptic episode] in a discotheque. People almost treaded on me until someone carried
me out and laid me down on cold, wet pavement in the middle of November. My sister told people who were outside to call an ambulance. They
told her that they won't call an ambulance for someone on drugs. It was terrible, and I felt terrible afterwards. (KJ)All participants
emphasised the distress they have been experiencing because of epilepsy. They expressed feelings of powerlessness, desperation and
insecurity, distress over other people's reaction, loneliness, self-confinement, disassociation, fear of epilepsy deterioration, dependence
on others, need for help, anxiety, distress due to unfulfilled expectations, shame, and feeling different and inferior.My boyfriend and I
broke up six weeks ago, but I took it really well. In the end, I thought it was a miracle that there are people out there who would even
look at people like us. (MP)Participants feel guilty because they have to rely on others. Their guilt is accompanied by despair and feeling
burdened. Their immediate relatives share these feelings. Feelings of powerlessness are also present, because epilepsy cannot yet be cured.
All participants have explained that their life has changed completely when they got epilepsy. They had to change their daily activities and
plans for the future. If we talked like this from the beginning, I would have said things differently, but now I have twenty, twenty five
years of life with epilepsy behind be, so I find it difficult to say what the main leap was… Somehow you make it a part of your life… The
only thing I want to say is that crises appear as a result of your life-style, that you don't walk the path that is expected of you.
(MP)Participants are aware of their dependence on the help of others. This correlates with the loss of autonomy in everyday life. Four
participants that are married or have a partner have mentioned that their partner or other family members take a paternalistic approach to
their relationship. Partner or family member dominance is expressed as concealing information regarding the epilepsy, exceeding concern for
PWE or loss of self-determination. Seven participants explained that epilepsy led to a loss of autonomy. Participants believe that the loss
of autonomy is related to their need for help after an episode and feeling dependent on others. I had it [epileptic episode] in a
discotheque. People almost treaded on me until someone carried me out and laid me down on cold, wet pavement in the middle of November. My
sister told people who were outside to call an ambulance. They told her that they won't call an ambulance for someone on drugs. It was
terrible, and I felt terrible afterwards. (KJ) My boyfriend and I broke up six weeks ago, but I took it really well. In the end, I thought
it was a miracle that there are people out there who would even look at people like us. (MP) If we talked like this from the beginning, I
would have said things differently, but now I have twenty, twenty five years of life with epilepsy behind be, so I find it difficult to say
what the main leap was… Somehow you make it a part of your life… The only thing I want to say is that crises appear as a result of your
life-style, that you don't walk the path that is expected of you. (MP) Managing epilepsy and its burden are related to knowing one's body
and its responses. We were surprised at how detailed participant's descriptions of physical responses in different circumstances were.
Participants are highly aware of, and recognize, potential episode triggers. However, episodes still come as a surprise causing insecurity
and resulting in distress. Based on our interviews, the burden of epilepsy can be divided into three groups: physical burden, social burden,
and emotional burden. Participants who have not had an episode in a while have less negative emotions, while those who have episodes more
frequently relate their physical distress with their epilepsy. Chaplin and colleagues confirm this by linking psychosocial effects of
epilepsy with epileptic episode frequency . Recognizing physical signs that precede an episode and potential episode triggers are two main
conditions for at least partial and/or temporary management of social environment. Epilepsy is accompanied by prejudice and stigma. This is
why PWE attach high significance to managing epilepsy information. Because they expected a negative reaction from their surroundings, our
study participants have, whenever possible, tried to conceal epilepsy. Alternatively, they tried to decide to whom and when they will
disclose epilepsy. Participants are aware of the unpredictability of epilepsy. Because episodes cannot be predicted, PWE are constantly
faced with anxiety. Even those, who have not had an episode in years, experience anxiety. The burden of unpredictability of epilepsy lies in
the knowledge that epilepsy cannot be fully controlled. A small change in lifestyle or a spontaneous reaction to an external stimulus can
trigger an epileptic episode. Thus, it is not surprising that the experience of an episode plays a central part in participant's stories.
Participants are aware that an epileptic episode triggers fear in others. Typical epileptic episode stereotypes, such as cramps, foaming at
the mouth, and jerking, accompanied by various sounds, do not contribute to appropriate reactions of those present at the time of an
episode. Participants reported that people reacted to the episode inappropriately (putting different object into PWE's mouth) or did not
offer help at all. These experiences negatively affect PWE expectations and lowered their trust. Participants began avoiding those who have
shown that they do not accept their condition. Our findings correspond to Baker's research on psychosocial burden of epilepsy. Baker found
that isolation and withdrawal are common among PWE. Both withdrawal and isolation are consequences of anxiety due to adverse reactions to
public epileptic episodes . The strategy of avoiding unpleasant social consequences employed by participants of our study does not decrease
distress. This is due to limited control over epilepsy. Interestingly, participants reported that epilepsy disclosure frequently brought
them relief. Tröster explains that PWE decide to disclose epilepsy, when they fear that their social counterpart will notice their condition
by himself or will be told of it by others . Based on our findings, we can infer that controlling information on epilepsy, concealing or
disclosing epilepsy, and epilepsy consequences are closely connected with the feeling of social inclusion. PWE social security depends on
successful social inclusion (e.g., employment). Jennum and colleagues have found that epilepsy has a significant socioeconomic influence .
Employment is one of the main social security factors. PWE often have lower level of education, are employed on less paid positions, or are
unemployed. According to our research participants, disclosing epilepsy to an employer is one of the most significant social relationship
dilemmas. The reason for this dilemma is not stigmatisation, but rather fear of liability on the part of the employer. Jacoby and colleagues
have found that the main obstacle to PWE employment is the fear of employing PWE. They also note that PWE fear that they will be
discriminated and stigmatised against in relation to employment . Those participants who were employed at the time of our study perceive
epilepsy as a factor that influences their job performance. However, they are used to epilepsy and have successfully incorporated it into
their work. Trust between PWE and their social environment can be established, provided that it is based on mutual acceptance and epilepsy
awareness. Trust can be hard to establish if PWE experience other people's rejection. Epilepsy affects formation of intimate relationships
and their quality. Participants feel that epilepsy results in troubles finding a partner or they blame epilepsy for their “single status.”
When forming intimate relationships, participants fear a negative response when disclosing epilepsy. Participants are convinced that no one
wants a partner who represents a burden. Espínola-Nadurille and colleagues have found similar responses when PWE experienced an end of a
relationship with a partner or immediate relatives due to epilepsy or when partner or relatives were present during an episode . Our study
shows that the expectation that a disclosure in person might be better for a relationship is not always fulfilled. Those participants that
have disclosed epilepsy in person have experienced rejection. Immediate relatives have mostly expressed their rejection indirectly, for
example, as a doubt that they will not be able to appropriately respond to an episode. Participants underlined another significant effect of
epilepsy: unwanted loss of autonomy and dependence on others. Both loss of autonomy and dependence are psychosocial burdens. Loss of
autonomy can represent a burden for two reasons: PWE understand that the epilepsy is a burden for their immediate relatives and they are not
completely independent in everyday tasks. PWE frequently rely on help from others, especially during an episode. Dependence means that PWE
involuntarily lose their autonomy. If dependence results in a paternalistic and rigid attitude of others, this leads to permanent loss of
autonomy. Excessive care or concern of those close to PWE can be damaging, since they effectively take away PWE's independence. For those
PWE who have frequent episodes, independence is an unachievable goal. This is mainly because they are physically unable to take care of
themselves after an attack. Feelings of guilt related to their dependence on others are always accompanied by a feeling of powerlessness:
PWE feel unable to change their situation. Our study showed that even affection and understanding of other people did not change these
feelings. When researching stories of patients with chronic disease, Öhman and colleagues showed similar findings. Chronic patients felt
that loss of autonomy influences their daily lives. When trying to meet their basic needs, they were obliged to ask for help . Our study
confirms the supposition that epilepsy influences social inclusion of PWE. Epilepsy consequences are reflected in social contacts and
relationships that PWE form and in their feelings of social acceptance and autonomy. Epilepsy affects not only PWE but also their families
and their whole community. De Boer and colleagues have also reached the same conclusion. This is why the effect of epilepsy on social
contacts and relationships is also its key burden. The burden of epilepsy is represented by social exclusion of PWE, which is a result of
negative responses of others. Epilepsy is accompanied by stigma . Stigmatisation is a social obstacle for PWE. They face stigmatisation in
all aspects of life (education, employment, partnership and forming a family, motherhood, social contact, etc.). The role of parents,
siblings, and other close relatives that PWE live or socialise with is of immense importance in the context of social inclusion, especially
for establishing relationships based on trust. PWE mostly participate in activities within their family circle. We have found that feelings
of acceptance result in strengthening participant endeavours to incorporate epilepsy into their life. Participants who feel accepted by
their environment are more involved in it, participate in more pastime activities, and spend more time with a broader circle of people
outside of their family and they believe that living with epilepsy does not represent greater difficulties. One of the strategies employed
by our participants to actively influence the attitude of their social environment towards epilepsy is their endeavour to explain to others
what type of epilepsy they have, how epilepsy expresses itself, and the feelings they have towards it. Controlling information regarding
epilepsy is not limited to concealing epilepsy and avoiding potentially uncomfortable social situations. More importance is attached to
actively deal with prejudice, fear, and lack of knowledge. Participants are aware that they can actively combat prejudices accompanying
epilepsy and affect the opinion their social counterparts will form of epilepsy and PWE. Hopkins states that PWE have to be their own public
relationship officer, who decides what and how much to say and what to conceal . PWE have the ability to positively affect prejudice and
associated stigma on a broader social level. Bagič and colleagues have done a study in Croatia where PWE used social marketing to combat
prejudice and epilepsy stigmatisation. The results of a follow-up study have shown a high level of tolerance towards PWE and a positive
attitude towards children with epilepsy. Based on these results, researchers have concluded that social marketing can be beneficial to
positively affecting public attitude towards PWE . However, it is important to note that these findings are not generalizable in regard to
positive behavioral attitude towards PWE. We can conclude that PWE are subject to discrimination and stigmatisation. This study has several
limitations. We included participants irrespective of their exact diagnosis that is form of epilepsy. Some forms of epilepsy are more
difficult to manage, have severe consequences, and carry a different burden. This is why our findings are not generalizable to the entire
population of PWE in Slovenia. We also included a relatively small number of participants. We encouraged PWE to describe their experiences
independently. However, this was not always possible due to cognitive impairments or additional health issues (besides epilepsy). We might
have introduced interviewer bias into analysed stories. Another limitation is the choice of the location of the interview (cafés), which was
left to each individual participant due to potential privacy issues related to interview questions. While we did not ask PWE why they chose
cafés as meeting places, they often explained that they felt they could not discuss private matters at home in the presence of their
relatives. The different length of the interviews might also be considered a limitation since it functions as a subjective factor. However,
the nature of semistructured interviews enables participants to discuss a specific question in their own time as freely as possible. The
criterion we used to ensure homogeneity was that all participants had to answer all interview questions. Through history, epilepsy has
attracted prejudice, stereotype, and stigma, factors that go beyond the medical frame of epilepsy. These factors function as barriers
towards establishing social contacts and relationships, weaken PWE social networks, and force PWE to control personal information. These
factors lead to social isolation, the most radical effect of social exclusion. Changing prejudice, stereotypes, and stigma is a process
which involves all of society and takes a lot of time. Social inclusion aims to achieve inclusive society, which is in turn necessary for
social inclusion. Inclusive society does not “come to be” by itself but rather forms by means of societal participation. PWE's experience of
social inclusion depends on various psychosocial factors and personal perspective. Awareness of epilepsy needs to be raised. Firstly, PWE
need to be informed, so they will be able to address the consequences of epilepsy. Secondly, PWE's family and friends have to be informed of
epilepsy to be able to share in the life of PWE, understand them, and react appropriately when or if epilepsy deteriorates. Last but not
least, broader society needs to be aware of epilepsy, since their attitude influences how PWE experience epilepsy and its consequences.
Media campaigns and other campaigns that aim to raise awareness of epilepsy have proven to be relatively effective, even more so if they
included PWE. In Slovenia, targeted campaigns aiming to raise awareness regarding PWE social inclusion are few. There is a lack of research
on PWE social inclusion and PWE subjective evaluation of social inclusion. We call for more research in this area, namely, qualitative
studies that could explore these themes in depth and recommend PWE involvement in campaigns for epilepsy awareness raising. Appendix 1
indicates the placement of categories “Concealing/disclosing epilepsy” and “Epilepsy consequences (disease burden)” within the broader
coding frame. Appendix 2 indicates the placement of categories “PWE experience and social network” within the broader coding frame. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PWE sociodemographic data. Themes and codes.
