Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a rare developmental anomaly of the diaphragm
that mainly presents mainly in newborns. Even less common is late-onset CDH associated with hypersplenism. We report a 10-year-old male who
presented with coughing, blood-stained sputum, and fever. He was diagnosed with CDH complicating hypersplenism after computed tomography was
done. The patient was treated by CDH repair and splenectomy, and remained asymptomatic at 6-month follow-up. Computed tomography can be an
important diagnostic option in this rare combination of CDH and hypersplenism, and surgical intervention is strongly recommended. Congenital
diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is an uncommon birth defect of the diaphragm that allows abdominal viscera to herniate into the chest. Most
recent estimates of the incidence of CDH from Europe are 1 in 4000 to 5000 births.1 Patients with CDH manifest mainly with respiratory
failure in the first few hours or days of life because of pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension, which results in a high
prevalence of mortality.2 Infrequently, CDH presents after the neonatal period, or even in adulthood. Manifestations of late-presenting CDH
can vary (e.g., bowel malrotation, gastric volvulus, gastrointestinal obstruction, or mild respiratory symptoms), making clinical diagnosis
challenging.3–5 Because of volvulus or incarceration, herniated abdominal organs can suffer from hemodynamic disorders such as hypersplenism
or even avascular necrosis.6 Here, we describe a 10-year-old male patient who presented with asymptomatic CDH along with hypersplenism. All
descriptions and discussions of this case did not involve human subjects research, thus no ethical approval was required. A 10-year-old
Mongolian boy was referred to our hospital because of repeated episodes of coughing, blood-stained sputum (≈0.5 mL of blood at a time) and
fever (maximal, 39.0°C) of 1-month duration. He did not report jaundice, chest pain, dyspnea, abdominal pain, or melena. The patient was the
eldest child, born at full term with a birth weight of 4.0 kg. However, he suffered asphyxia at birth and was given cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, and stayed asymptomatic until the age of 10 years. The patient denied any significant history of surgery, trauma, or drug
allergies. Previous radiography of the chest and laboratory tests in a community hospital had suggested pulmonary edema with unexplained
thrombocytopenia (platelet count 42,000/mm3). Upon physical examination, the patient was afebrile. His heart rate was 100 beats/min, blood
pressure was 90/60 mm Hg, and respiratory rate was 24 per minute. His conjunctiva and nail beds were assessed and showed a slight pallor.
Sporadic bleeding spots were found in both lower extremities. Chest examination showed decreased air entry in the left hemithorax.
Subcutaneous veins of the abdominal wall did not show varicosity. On abdominal palpation, the liver edge was felt at ≈2 cm below the right
costal margin. The splenic edge was felt at ≈6 cm below the left costal margin extending across the midline by 3 cm. Other examinations were
unremarkable except for slightly enlarged tonsils without exudation. Laboratory results of Mycoplasma pneumoniae IgM antibody, T-SPOT. TB,
liver function, blood smear, and bone-marrow aspiration were negative, helping us to exclude atypical pneumonia, liver diseases, and
hematologic diseases. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed left posterolateral Bochdalek CDH (Figure 1). Contrast-enhanced CT of the
portal vein system revealed abnormal arrangement of the splenic artery and splenic vein, and structural disorder in the portal vein with
tortuosity of dilated gastric veins and mesenteric veins (Figure 2). CT of the chest showing left posterolateral Bochdalek CDH.
CDH = congenital diaphragmatic hernia, CT = computed tomography. Contrast-enhanced CT of the portal vein system revealing an abnormal
arrangement of the splenic artery and splenic vein (B) as well as structural disorder of the portal vein with tortuosity of dilated gastric
veins and mesenteric veins (A). CT = computed tomography. Upon the advice of a hematology consultant in our hospital, pneumococcal vaccine,
vaccines against Haemophilus influenzae virus, and Japanese encephalitis virus vaccine were administered preoperatively. Considering the
increased bleeding risk of laparoscopy with limited space due to severe splenomegaly in this patient, we chose to carry out laparotomy by a
left subcostal incision. The defect was of size 10 × 10 cm in the left posterolateral diaphragm (Figure 3). The small intestine and colon
had herniated into the left thoracic cavity through this defect. An adjuvant splenectomy was done intraoperatively. After pulling down
herniated bowels, a malrotation of intestine without compression was found. Given the well-developed diaphragm muscle around the defect, we
repaired the defect with 2-0 interrupted nonabsorbable sutures. Intraoperative image showing a defect in the diaphragm. The patient suffered
postoperative pneumothorax that was managed by closed drainage. Transient thrombocytosis was observed, so dipyridamole was prescribed.
Postoperatively, antibiotic prophylaxis (ceftriaxone (1.5 g/day, i.v.) for 3 days, sulperazone (2 g, i.v.) every 8 hours for 7 days, then
discharged home with cefdinir (100 mg, p.o., t.d.s.) followed by prophylaxis up to 16 years of age) was prescribed. He was discharged on
postoperative day-10 (Figure 4). He was symptom-free at 6-month follow-up. Postoperative radiograph of the chest demonstrating reduction of
abdominal viscera and lung collapse. Based on the anatomical position of the defect, CDH can be classified into posterolateral (Bochdalek
hernia), anterior (Morgagni hernia), and central defects. The Bochdalek hernia occurs in 70% to 75% of the CDH cases and it occurs more
commonly on the left side.2 Classical CDH presents in the neonatal period. However, several late-presenting CDH cases with a wide spectrum
of anatomical variants and clinical pictures have been described.7–9 Prevalence of late-presenting CDH has been reported to be 5% to 25% of
all CDH cases.10 These patients can present with acute or chronic gastrointestinal symptoms or, less frequently, respiratory symptoms. A
small subset of patients show other unexplained symptoms or stay asymptomatic. Our patient's presenting symptoms were coughing, blood-
stained sputum, and fever. However, whether the blood-stained sputum and fever were related to CDH was not known because the patient had
slightly enlarged tonsils when he was referred to our surgical team. Chest radiography is usually diagnostic but misdiagnoses can occur (our
patient was initially stated to have pulmonary edema upon chest radiography) (Figure 5). Also, CT may be helpful to confirm CDH.
Preoperative radiograph of the chest misinterpreted as pulmonary edema. In our patient, a preoperative barium meal did not reveal signs of
portal hypertensive gastropathy (Figure 6). The most probable mechanism of hypersplenism was bowel distortion within the thoracic cavity led
to hemodynamic disorders in his splenic vein, which resulted in splenomegaly with hypersplenism. Splenectomy can be the most effective
method to treat hypersplenism, but is associated with a significant thrombosis of the portal vein, and the benefits (other than correcting
cytopenia) are not clear.11 A similar clinical scenario whereby a patient underwent splenectomy to decompress sinistral portal hypertension
has been reported.6 Splenectomy provided sufficient space to suture the defect in the diaphragm, but we could have attempted splenopexy
because hypersplenism might be relieved after CDH repair. Clinical evidence on splenectomy for hypersplenism in such a complicated situation
is lacking. Daily antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for asplenic children to prevent fulminant infection. The “ideal” duration of
prophylaxis is not clear, but lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis is suggested for high-risk pediatric patients (age <16 years) according to UK
guidelines.12 Prophylaxis for a longer duration could have been prescribed for our patient. Preoperative barium meal shows no signs of
fundal varices. Contrast-stained bowel loops are visible within the left hemithorax. Delayed presentation of CDH is uncommon but can have a
favorable outcome. Hypersplenism associated with late-presenting CDH is a rare combination, and CT is the first-line investigation to make
the diagnosis. Surgical intervention is strongly recommended and splenectomy can be considered. Written informed consent was obtained from
the parents of this child for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. We are grateful to Dr Shiwen Yuan and Dr Rui Zhao for providing necessary facilities, polishing the language, and constant
encouragement throughout this work. Meanwhile, we thank our patient's parents for their consent for presenting this case. Abbreviations: CDH
= congenital diaphragmatic hernia, CT = computed tomography. This case study received financial support from National Key Clinical Specialty
Construction Programs of China (2014–2016), Shanghai “Non key-in-key discipline” Clinical medical centers (2014–2016), Shanghai Hospital
Development Center (SHDC12014106), for literature review, clinical imaging data retrieving and analysis. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
