Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 50 Final Diagnosis: Recurrent hepatitis C Symptoms: — Medication: — Clinical
Procedure: Anti hepatitis C therapy Specialty: Gastroenterology and Hepatology Unusual clinical course The treatment of hepatitis C virus
(HCV) infection is evolving rapidly. Many studies have been completed during the last 2 years, with more studies still in progress. The
management of recurring HCV infection following liver organ transplantation remains very challenging, especially for HCV genotype 4 (GT-4).
More research is needed in this area. We report on a patient with a recurring HCV infection and fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis following
liver retransplantation, who was successfully treated with a combination therapy of simeprevir and sofosbuvir without interferon/ribavirin.
As far as we know, this is the first reported case of this kind. This information may be of importance and inform future management of
patients with recurrent HCV infections following liver transplantation. End-stage liver disease associated with HCV infection is a common
indication for liver transplantation and accounts for up to 40% of all liver transplantations . An uncommon and challenging difficulty
associated with recurrent HCV infection following liver transplantation is fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis (FCH), which can cause earlier
graft loss, death, or both . There are several HCV genotypes with subtypes and treatment strategies tend to differ depending on the genotype
. HCV GT-4 is very common in Africa and the Middle Eastern region, where it is responsible for more than 80% of all HCV infections. It is
the cause of approximately 35 million cases of chronic HCV infections worldwide A recent meta-analyses found sustained virological response
(SVR) rates in HCV GT-4 infected patients range from 28% to 71%, however, most studies were small and had dissimilar study designs . As
mentioned by Riad et al., “HCV GT-4 demonstrated little treatment response rates and differences when compared to other genotypes. However,
the reasons’ underlying these discrepancies remains uncertain due to the limited number of studies on HCV GT-4” . We describe a patient with
a history of HCV GT-4 infection with liver cirrhosis and FCH. The 47-year-old man was a null responder to two initial treatments with
ribavirin and peg-interferon-α-2a. After careful evaluation for a liver transplant, he received a living donor transplant of his younger
brother’s right liver lobe. Two years after the initial transplantation, the patient met the criteria for liver retransplantation, as the
patient had a recurrence of HCV infection and FCH, reducing his health-related quality of life. The multidisciplinary transplantation board
decided to list him again as a potential recipient for a whole graft transplant. The retransplantation was uneventful; and tacrolimus was
administrated at a low daily dose. Four years after retransplantation, a recurrent HCV infection was diagnosed. The patient’s liver enzymes
were elevated with GGT concentrations reaching a peak at 1500 U/ml. Histological examination showed inflammation grade 2 and fibrosis stage
2. We decided to use a dual therapy for three months, combining simeprevir and sofosbuvir and excluding interferon and ribavirin. After one
month of treatment, a rapid virological response was achieved, meaning that at week 4 of treatment HCV RNA was undetectable in the patient’s
serum. An end-of-treatment viral response was observed after 12 weeks of treatment, with SVR maintained one year after treatment. There have
been several studies highlighting the safety and the efficacy of anti-HCV therapies that are interferon-free, though not for cases of HCV
GT-4. Tanaka et al. reported the safe administration of 24-week antiviral therapy using daclatasvir and asunaprevir in a case with HCV
recurrence after liver transplantation and an additional HIV infection . Similarly, Leroy et al. concluded that therapy with sofosbuvir
combined with ribavirin or daclatasvir helps improve the clinical condition of patients with recurring HCV infection and FCH after liver
transplantation, and often leads to a SVR at 12 weeks . Good viral responses with little effect on blood levels of immunosuppressant therapy
were demonstrated in the cases reported by Kawaoka et al., who used therapy with daclatasvir and asunaprevir for recurrent HCV infection
after liver transplantation . The phase II COSMOS study used a combination of simeprevir and sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin in both
previously treated and untreated patients with chronic HCV GT-1 infections. The SVR within 12 weeks was 96% and 93% in the prior null
responder groups treated with ribavirin or without ribavirin, respectively. It is important to note that this study involved HCV genotype 1
versus genotype 4. Moreno et al. published a study of HCV GT-4 patients titled “Efficacy and safety of simeprevir with PegIFN/ribavirin in
naïve or experienced patients infected with chronic HCV genotype 4” . This phase III open-label, single-arm study reported an evaluated
efficacy and safety of simeprevir with peginterferon-α-2a/ribavirin in patients with chronic HCV GT-4 infection. This study confirmed the
safety and efficacy of simeprevir with ribavirin/peginterferon-α-2a in treatment-naïve or previously treated patients with chronic HCV GT-4
infection was comparable with previous reports of treatment of HCV GT-1 infection. Molina et al. indicated that sofosbuvir and ribavirin
provided high rates of SVR after three months of treatment in previously treated and untreated patients co-infected with HIV and HCV GT-1,
-2, -3 and -4. Thus suggesting that interferon-free combination regimens make sofosbuvir plus ribavirin a useful treatment option for this
patient population . Ruane et al. suggested that the use of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin over 24 weeks is an efficacious and well-tolerated
treatment in HCV GT-4 infected patients . Razek et al. posit that interferon-free HCV therapy combinations administered for 12 weeks or less
will soon become the optimal therapy, with the potential for cure . Antiviral therapy after liver transplantation is a complex matter
because of possible side effects and inferior efficacy in patients that are liver transplant recipients as well as due to drug interactions
with immunosuppression. Indeed, fibrosis progression will accelerate under immunosuppression therapy . FCH is a rare and challenging post
liver transplantation complication due to HCV relapse. HIV infected patients with FCH have an inferior prognosis. Borentain et al. reported
the successful treatment of patients infected with HCV GT-4 and HIV using ribavirin and sofosbuvir. Four weeks after treatment, they
observed HCV relapse related symptoms, normalization of liver biochemistry, and substantial decline in HCV load . These studies suggest that
HCV infection can be treated without interferon, and these new regimens are safe, have excellent efficacy, and minimal adverse events. In
summary, we present a case report of a patient with recurring HCV GT-4 infection after liver retransplantation, who showed a rapid SVR and a
normalization of liver enzymes after having been efficaciously treated with a combined dual therapy of simeprevir and sofosbuvir without the
use of ribavirin or peg-interferon-α-2a. Interferon/ribavirin free dual therapy with sofosbuvir and simeprevir might be a useful and safe
approach for the therapy of HCV GT-4 infections in general and potentially for recurrent HCV GT-4 infections after liver transplantation.
Statement The authors declare no conflict of Interest. The authors certify that they have no financial support. hepatitis C; genotype 4;
fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis; sustained viral response
