Susac syndrome (retinocochleocerebral vasculopathy) is an autoimmune endotheliopathy affecting the precapillary arterioles of the brain,
retina, and inner ear. It presents with encephalopathy, branch retinal artery occlusions, and hearing loss. The condition is often under
recognized because the clinical symptoms may present at different times and physicians may be unfamiliar with the syndrome. Peripheral
findings would be helpful in early diagnosis. There are numerous treatment regimens proposed with varying effectiveness. We report the case
of a 22-year-old Caucasian man in whom there were prominent skin findings, including livedo reticularis and a micropapular eruption which
responded promptly to treatment suggesting that skin involvement may facilitate earlier diagnosis. Rituximab has occasionally been used in
more refractory disease. We observed a prompt response to the combination of intravenous immunoglobulin, corticosteroids, and rituximab
instituted immediately after diagnosis. A careful search for dermatological manifestations may help with earlier diagnosis. Skin findings
may be another marker of endothelial cell involvement. Early use of rituximab as part of the therapeutic regimen may be warranted. Susac
syndrome (SuS) (retinocochleocerebral vasculopathy) is an autoimmune endotheliopathy affecting the precapillary arterioles of the brain,
retina, and inner ear. The major manifestations are the clinical triad of encephalopathy, branch retinal artery occlusions (BRAOs), and
hearing loss. First described by neurologist JO Susac in 1979, more than 300 cases have been described to date [1, 2]. The condition is
often under recognized because clinical symptoms associated with the triad may present independently at different times and physicians may
be unfamiliar with the syndrome. Of note, case reports have described associated dermatological manifestations that might help facilitate
earlier diagnosis . Different therapeutic regimens have been described with varying results. More than 10 regimens are listed as options by
experts at Cleveland Clinic . While all include intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and steroid therapy, other medications suggested are
mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, and azathioprine as well as plasmapheresis. The use of rituximab has occasionally been reported in
more refractory disease unresponsive to initial therapy [5, 6]. We report a case of SuS, in which there was a prompt response to the
combination of IVIG, corticosteroids, and rituximab for the cerebral, ophthalmologic, and otolaryngological manifestations. We further
document prominent skin findings including livedo reticularis and a micropapular eruption that responded promptly to treatment, confirming
that skin involvement may occasionally be a manifestation of the syndrome and may help with early diagnosis. A 22-year-old Caucasian man
with a past medical history of depression was admitted to our hospital with a 2-week history of headache, progressive confusion, and
behavioral changes, including hallucination. One week prior to his symptoms, our patient developed a livedo-like reticular skin lesion
involving both upper extremities and a diffuse pink rash on his chest. A review of his other medical systems was unremarkable. In
particular, he had no visual or hearing difficulties and no neck stiffness. There was no infectious exposure and no seizure activity. His
medications included sertraline and buspirone. Pertinent findings on examination included a confused young man who was only oriented to
person. A dermatological examination revealed skin lesions compatible with livedo reticularis on his upper extremities (Fig. 1) and a
diffuse micropapular faint pink eruption with a “sandpaper” quality on his chest and abdomen. There was no prior history of rash. There were
no active or effused joints. A neurological examination revealed mild dysmetria with finger-nose-finger testing and limb ataxia. His Mini
Mental Status Examination (MMSE) score was 16/30.Fig. 1Livedo reticularis-like skin manifestation occurring on both arms, but nowhere else,
1 week before presentation and resolving with treatment Livedo reticularis-like skin manifestation occurring on both arms, but nowhere else,
1 week before presentation and resolving with treatment Results of a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and urine analysis were
unremarkable. His results were negative for ANCA. Tests for anti-dsDNA, Sm, Ro, La, centromere, Scl-70, and RNP antibodies were negative, as
were all tests for antiphospholipid antibodies and myositis-specific antibodies. Brain MRI with intravenous contrast revealed restricted
diffusion involving the splenium of the corpus callosum (red arrowhead) and punctate lesions within the subcortical white matter (black
arrows) (Fig. 2). There was enhancement of the leptomeninges as well as the subcortical lesions (not shown). Neither an MRA of his head/neck
nor a conventional cerebral angiogram showed any vasculopathy. A lumbar puncture revealed a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein concentration
of 278 mg/dl with a normal glucose concentration and cell count. All CSF infectious studies were negative. An EEG showed diffuse slowing
consistent with diffuse encephalopathy.Fig. 2Axial brain magnetic resonance imaging sequences with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) revealed
multifocal subacute punctate supratentorial white matter lesions (black arrows) with the most prominent lesion affecting the posterior
corpus callosum (red arrowhead). The study also showed T2/fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities involving the deep
gray nuclei as well as leptomeningeal enhancement (not shown) Axial brain magnetic resonance imaging sequences with diffusion-weighted
imaging (DWI) revealed multifocal subacute punctate supratentorial white matter lesions (black arrows) with the most prominent lesion
affecting the posterior corpus callosum (red arrowhead). The study also showed T2/fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)
hyperintensities involving the deep gray nuclei as well as leptomeningeal enhancement (not shown) Fundoscopic examination demonstrated
fluffy white patches along the inferotemporal arcade (Fig. 3). Fluorescein angiography confirmed 14 BRAOs and arterial wall
hyperfluorescence with leakage of dye.Fig. 3Fundoscopic examination revealed fluffy white patches along the inferotemporal arcade
Fundoscopic examination revealed fluffy white patches along the inferotemporal arcade An audiogram was initially normal and speech
recognition thresholds were normal bilaterally. The livedo lesion was biopsied and examination of the specimen revealed congestion of dermal
vessels without inflammation of the vessel walls. The micropapular eruption revealed superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltration.
Based on the cerebral and eye findings, a diagnosis of likely SuS was made. Our patient was started on methylprednisolone 1 g daily × 5 days
given intravenously. On day 1 of the diagnosis he also received IVIG 500 mg/kg. On day 2 he received 1000 mg of rituximab, followed by IVIG
500 mg/kg on day 3 and day 4. He was started on Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia prophylaxis and a proton-pump inhibitor. On day 6, his
steroid was changed to prednisone 1 mg/kg/day given orally. Within a week his confusion and neurological symptoms improved and by the second
week his repeat MMSE score was 30/30. A Repeatable Battery for Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) showed cognitive performances ranging from
average to superior. The livedo lesions and the micropapular rash resolved within 10 days of treatment. After 1 week he developed sudden
hearing loss. An audiogram showed severe left-sided sensorineural hearing loss. Speech reception thresholds were obtained at 15 decibels
hearing level (dBHL) on his right and 50 dBHL on his left. Word recognition was 100 % at 55 dBHL on his right and 8 % at 90 dBHL on his
left. An intratympanic steroid injection was performed in his left middle ear and repeated three times over a 2-week period with moderate
improvement in his word recognition score. Repeat fluorescein angiography after 2 weeks and on subsequent testing showed stable filling
defects but no new retinal vascular lesions. His left ear word recognition improved over the next month to 52 %. His treatment regimen over
the next 6 months included a gradual taper and discontinuation of steroids, addition of azathioprine as a long-term immunosuppressive agent
(mycophenolate mofetil was not tolerated), low-dose aspirin, and IVIG every 2 weeks. Repeat brain MRI showed no progression of his disease
and improvement compared with previous studies. After the first month of treatment, he was able to resume all his daily activities without
difficulty or recurrence. SuS (retinocochleocerebral vasculopathy) is an autoimmune endotheliopathy associated with the clinical triad of
CNS dysfunction, BRAOs, and sensorineural hearing loss [2, 7]. Most cases present in patients between 16 and 40 years of age. While CNS
symptoms are the most common manifestation, the characteristic clinical triad occurs at disease onset in only a minority of patients.
Because of this, the diagnosis may be delayed; in fact, diagnosing SuS solely on the basis of the presence of the complete triad may not be
appropriate. CNS symptoms include headaches, often resembling migraine-like headaches, confusion, cognitive impairment, ataxia, and vertigo.
Ophthalmological involvement includes many types of disturbances including blurring and flashing. Hearing loss is the major otological
manifestation. Other manifestations include myalgia and arthralgia. A few patients have been described to have skin lesions [2, 3].
Involvement of the corpus callosum with evidence of “snowball” lesions is a characteristic MRI finding . Supratentorial white matter and
gray matter lesions as well as infratentorial lesions and leptomeningeal enhancement are all found. Fundoscopic examination followed by
fluorescein angiography reveals BRAO and arterial wall hyperfluorescence. Audiometry reveals sensorineural hearing loss, which is often
bilateral. In patients with suspected SuS, MRI of the brain, fluorescein angiography, and audiometry must be routinely performed even in the
absence of clinical manifestations. No specific serological antibody studies have been identified with this syndrome. Cerebrospinal fluid
analysis often reveals an elevation of protein, sometimes in combination with a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis. Cerebral angiography is
usually normal. A brain biopsy can show microinfarcts and a microangiopathic process with arteriolar wall thickening and lymphocytic
infiltration . The differential diagnosis of SuS includes various neurological, psychiatric, and ophthalmologic disorders including multiple
sclerosis, vasculitis, infection, neuromyelitis optica, and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis [2, 10]. While the etiology remains
unclear, it has been suggested that the microvascular occlusions are mediated by an autoimmune response causing microvascular injury. Anti-
endothelial cell antibodies have been detected in some patients. The finding of antiphospholipid antibodies in one case of SuS raised the
possibility of an autoimmune endotheliopathy/coagulopathy [1, 11]. Controlled trials of treatment are not available. Expert recommendations
suggest treatment regimens similar to those successful with juvenile dermatomyositis, which has some characteristics in common with SuS .
More than 10 therapeutic regimens are listed as options by the experts (Robert Rennebohm, MD) at Cleveland Clinic . All include IVIG and
steroid therapy. Other medications include mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, and azathioprine. Cyclophosphamide for the acute phase
of treatment followed by maintenance therapy with methotrexate or long-term therapy with mycophenolate mofetil and methotrexate have been
reported to be successful in case reports [13, 14]. The use of rituximab has occasionally been reported in more refractory disease [5, 6].
The ideal regimen has yet to be determined. The choice of therapies and their mechanism of action are based on the similarities between SuS
and juvenile dermatomyositis. The histopathology and electron microscopic findings in the microvasculature of the brain and muscle of
patients with SuS are reminiscent of the microvascular abnormalities seen in the muscle and skin of children with dermatomyositis, including
endothelial cell swelling, endothelial cell degeneration and necrosis, capillary network destruction, and perivascular lymphocytic
infiltration. Because both may represent microvascular endotheliopathies, immunosuppressive medication used in juvenile dermatomyositis may
be helpful in SuS . Our patient had remarkable improvement of his CNS function (MMSE score 30/30) and no further eye lesions 2 weeks after
the prompt initiation of high-dose corticosteroids, IVIG, and rituximab. One week into the course he developed hearing loss, which was
treated with the addition of intratympanic steroids with moderate improvement. The use of intratympanic steroids has been reported on
occasion [15, 16]. Although it appears to have been moderately successful in our patient, it remains unclear whether the improvement was
related to this local treatment, systemic therapy, or both. Our experience with this patient demonstrates that the majority of patients need
immediate, aggressive immunotherapy even before confirmation of the clinical triad of symptoms and that they can respond well, particularly
if symptoms have not been present for a long time. Steroids, IVIG, and rituximab may be a useful induction therapy. Steroids have been
tapered successfully in our patient and he is being maintained on IVIG infusions and azathioprine. In this case, livedo reticularis was a
prominent manifestation prior to presentation and resolved within 1–2 weeks of treatment. Similarly, the micropapular rash with the
nonspecific findings of perivascular lymphocytic infiltration resolved with the treatment rapidly. Dorr et al. found 13 reported cases of
dermatological findings (mainly livedo reticularis) in SuS. Livedo reticularis results from an impairment of blood flow in the dermal
arteries, which is due to many causes including spasm, inflammation, and vascular obstruction. Its appearance at the onset of the disease
and resolution with treatment of the underlying disease suggests that the underlying etiological processes responsible for the other
manifestations contributed to the livedo reticularis lesions. Turc et al. reported a case of SuS preceded by a 2-week history of livedo
racemosa. Skin biopsies revealed several occluded dermal arterioles, endothelial cell swelling, and a mild perivascular lymphocytic
infiltrate. The pathology in our case was somewhat similar although the dermal arterioles were not as involved. His rashes responded quickly
to therapy. Subtle skin lesions may thus be an early and visible manifestation of the syndrome, which otherwise centers around the brain,
retina, and inner ear. SuS can be a challenging disorder to recognize initially. The characteristic clinical features with appropriate
testing can help make the diagnosis. This case report supports an aggressive therapeutic approach involving the combination of steroids,
IVIG, and rituximab administered early in the disease process and highlights the associated dermatological manifestations, which may further
serve as a marker of endothelial cell involvement. ᅟ EG and MR analyzed and interpreted patient data. EG and MR wrote the article and both
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
