Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Source of support: Department of Pediatrics at the University of California, San Diego
Patient: Male, 23 weeks’ gestational age newborn Final Diagnosis: 23 weeks’ extreme prematurity • intraventricular hemorrhage • anemia •
respiratory distress syndrome Symptoms: Hypotension • metabolic acidosis • tachycardia Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Transfusion of
packed red blood cells Specialty: Pediatrics and Neonatology Rare disease Infants born at 23 weeks’ gestation have a poor prognosis and
require intensive care, including blood transfusions, to survive. Generally speaking, the decision to forgo life support is acceptable.
Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that life is sacred and want lifesaving interventions except for blood transfusions. Therefore, an ethical
dilemma exists when a baby is born on the edge of viability to parents that are Jehovah’s Witnesses. In this case, if parents and healthcare
professionals disagree on the best interests of the child, the medical team should obtain a court order from the state to intervene. We
present the case of an infant born at 23 weeks’ gestation to parents who are Jehovah’s Witnesses. The parents wanted full life-support,
except for blood transfusions, to be given. The clinical team obtained a court order to transfuse the infant. The infant unfortunately died
despite all efforts. Currently, it is nearly impossible to honor the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses to provide lifesaving treatments without
blood transfusions for infants born at the border of viability. If the goal is to prolong life, the standard of care for a premature infant
is for a doctor to obtain a court order to override the beliefs and wishes of Jehovah’s Witness parents and transfuse blood products as
medically indicated. Although bloodless techniques for high-risk surgeries are under development, care for premature infants at 23 weeks’
gestation necessitates red cell transfusions. We report the case of an infant born prematurely at 23 weeks’ gestation to parents who are
Jehovah’s Witnesses. At this gestational age, prognosis is poor and blood transfusions are required for survival. For infants born at 22–24
weeks’ gestation, there is wide variation between institutions and practitioners in obstetric and neonatal practice, including whether to
begin resuscitation for the infants . Using the Neonatal Research Network Extremely Preterm Birth Outcome Data, outcomes for a 23 weeks’
gestational age 580-gram male infant with antenatal steroid exposure were 37% overall survival and 22% survival without profound
neurodevelopmental impairment . Profound neurodevelopmental impairment was defined as having the lowest possible score, which is 2 standard
deviations from the mean, on the standard screening tool for developmental delay (Bayley Scales of Infant Development II) or the inability
to sit, stand, or walk independently (Level 5 Gross Motor Function Classification System) . The parents, despite the poor prognosis, stated
that they wanted full life-support given except for blood transfusions. This raised an ethical dilemma for the clinical team, in that life
support is futile without blood transfusions. A primiparous pregnant woman presented to a community hospital at 21 2/7 weeks’ gestation with
rupture of membranes. At 23 weeks’ gestation the woman was transferred to the regional hospital and given antenatal steroids because she
wanted full intervention for her now viable fetus. The woman and her husband are both Jehovah’s Witnesses. We discussed prior to delivery
the likely poor prognosis and the certain need for blood transfusions for a 23 weeks’ gestational age baby. The parents said they wanted
full intensive care given when their baby was born, but they would not consent to any blood transfusions. On hospital day 2, the mother
developed abdominal pain and tachycardia. She was diagnosed with chorioamnionitis and the decision was made to induce labor. The baby was
born at 23 2/7 weeks’ gestational age with a birthweight of 580 grams. The infant required intubation and surfactant at delivery and needed
mechanical ventilation on admission to the neonatal intensive care unit. The initial hemoglobin was 8 g/dL, with a hematocrit of 24%. A
conference was held with the parents to discuss the need for blood transfusions and that staff would obtain a court order to transfuse
blood. A court order was obtained and erythropoietin was started on the first day of life. The medical team agreed to minimize blood draws
and tried to postpone giving a blood transfusion because the infant had reasonable stability. In the middle of the night on the third day of
life, however, the baby became tachycardic and hypotensive, requiring a dopamine drip, with worsening metabolic acidosis. His hemoglobin was
checked and dropped to 6.6 g/dL. The decision was made to give a packed red blood cell transfusion. In response, the parents stated they
would rather stop intensive care than allow the transfusion. The father asked what would happen, “if I unhooked the baby from life-support
myself?” The team told the parents discontinuing intensive care instead of providing packed red cells was not an option. Over the course of
the next 10 days, the baby received a total of 5 packed red blood cell transfusions: 1 fresh frozen plasma transfusion and 1 platelet
transfusion. The baby subsequently developed a left grade IV intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and a right grade III IVH complicated by
post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus. An ethics consult was obtained and the hospital Ethics Committee determined that it was permissible to
withdraw life-sustaining treatment because of the infant’s grave prognosis. The infant was compassionately extubated and died within
minutes. If the parents in this case had not been Jehovah’s Witnesses, the 2 decision points would have been: whether to resuscitate at 23
weeks’ gestation, and whether to continue intensive care if the infant’s prognosis worsened. The standard of care in our institution is to
recommend comfort care and discourage resuscitation below 23 weeks’ gestation and to encourage resuscitation above 24 weeks’ gestation. At
23–24 weeks’ gestation, we educate parents about the possible neonatal outcomes and work with parents to decide whether to resuscitate or
allow natural death at the time of birth. Our institution’s survival statistics between 2007 and 2011 for 23 weeks’ gestation and 500–600
grams were 50% and 56%, respectively. After initiating intensive care, if we diagnose a significant IVH (parenchymal hemorrhage) , our
standard of care is to educate parents and support their wishes for comfort care if desired. Severe IVH increases the risk for a poor
neurodevelopmental outcome . Furthermore, parenchymal hemorrhage requiring intraventricular shunt placement and development of
posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus significantly decreases scores on the Bayley Scales of Infant Development . When significant IVH occurs, it is
common practice to offer comfort care if life-sustaining treatment is no longer wanted. Prematurity, intubation after birth, need for
mechanical ventilation, and acidosis are all risk factors to leading to IVH . The profound anemia in this case likely played a role in the
infant’s worsening metabolic acidosis. However, because the baby had other risk factors for IVH, it is unclear how much his anemia
contributed to his severe IVH. Our institution’s standard in the first week of life is to transfuse packed red blood cells if a very low
birth weight infant’s hemoglobin drops below 12 g/dL. Multiple studies have tried to determine transfusion thresholds for premature infants
to minimize blood product exposure as well as neonatal morbidity and mortality . A Cochrane review of these studies concluded that
“restrictive practice does not appear to have a significant impact on death or major morbidities at first hospital discharge or at follow-
up. However, given the uncertainties of these conclusions, it would be prudent to avoid haemoglobin levels below the lower limits tested
here [i.e., hemoglobin 11 g/dL] .” Below these studied threshold limits, there is potential risk of worsening blood pressure, oxygenation,
metabolic acidosis, intracranial hemorrhage, and death . In our case, the infant’s hemoglobin of 6.6 g/dL clearly met criteria for blood
transfusion. In fact, he met criteria for blood transfusion immediately after birth, with a hemoglobin of 8 g/dL. We believe that the level
of parental distress may have influenced the medical team’s ability to decide to transfuse this infant initially until it became clear that
he needed blood. Unfortunately, there are few alternatives to red blood cell transfusion for premature infants. Several studies associate
delayed cord clamping with reduced need for blood transfusion and decreased incidence of intracranial hemorrhage in preterm infants . When
the infant in our case was born, we did not have a policy of delayed cord clamping or umbilical cord milking in place. Based on the infant’s
initial hemoglobin level, we suspect there may have been placental abruption in addition to immediate cord clamping. Erythropoietin is
generally restricted to prevent late anemia of hemolytic disease of Jehovah’s Witness newborns and families because of the limited benefits
and possible increased risk of retinopathy of prematurity . Routine use of erythropoietin is currently not recommended. Studies using
artificial blood are ongoing in adults, but a recent meta-analysis of 16 trials involving 5 different artificial blood products and 3711
adult patients found a statistically significant increase in the risk of death and myocardial infarction . We obtained a court order
granting custody to the probation service, who gave consent for a transfusion. Compared to adults, who have the right to make decisions
regarding their medical care , minors do not have the same autonomy. In routine cases, parental consent is generally required for medical
treatment of minor children . However, a dilemma arises if the parents are making a decision that is incongruent with the best interest of
the child. The United States Supreme Court in the case of Prince vs. Commonwealth of Massachusetts 1944 ruled that there exists “an interest
of society to protect the welfare of children” and that “parents may be free to make martyrs of themselves” but they are not free to make
martyrs of their children . Therefore, the health professional should seek consent from the state except in the case of an emergency when
time is of the essence . The exact age at which children can make decisions for themselves is determined in individual cases. Their legal
competence is determined by their ability to understand the pros and cons of a treatment, the other options and their implications, and
their ability to weigh the choices . There are nearly one million Jehovah’s Witnesses in the United States and more than five million
worldwide . Founded in 1870, the group took the name ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses’ in 1931. The Watchtower Bible and Tract Society (WBTS) in 1945,
the overseeing body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, determined that accepting blood and blood products for medical purposes directly violated the
teachings of the Bible. This determination focuses primarily on 3 Bible passages (Genesis 9: 3–4; Leviticus 17: 10–14; and Acts 15: 21–29),
which forbid the ingestion of blood because it would compromise a believer’s chances for everlasting life . Since 1961, the Watchtower Bible
and Tract Society has published a policy whereby Jehovah’s Witnesses must shun fellow believers who consciously accepted a blood transfusion
. Several case reports describe decision-making dilemmas for minors with Jehovah’s Witness parents . In all cases, the minors were younger
than 17 years old and the courts ruled in favor of giving a blood transfusion when medically necessary. A few cases of premature Jehovah’s
Witness infants have been published . In one, the medical team obtained a court order for a 24 weeks’ gestational age premature infant who
required 8 transfusions with a lowest hemoglobin level of 11 g/dL . In another, a 31 weeks’ gestational age premature infant born with a
hemoglobin of 15.2 g/dL and treated with erythropoietin never required a blood transfusion, with a lowest hemoglobin level of 8.3 g/dL . The
Jehovah’s Witness population has encouraged development of techniques with a goal of bloodless surgery for neonates undergoing
cardiopulmonary bypass surgery. In term Jehovah’s Witness neonates and small children, case reports of transfusion-free surgeries with
cardiopulmonary bypass have been reported, including a 3.55-kg neonate with correction of tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve
and aneurysm of the left pulmonary artery (lowest hemoglobin 8.5 g/dL) and a 3.5-kg infant who received an arterial switch operation for
dextro-transposition of the great arteries (lowest hemoglobin 7.2 g/dL) . But in most retrospective studies of bloodless surgeries with
cardiopulmonary bypass, infants less than 5–6 kg received blood or blood products during their hospitalization or were excluded from the
protocols . Authors report that lower weight, younger age, and higher risk-adjusted in-hospital mortality scores independently correlate
with increased morbidity and mortality regardless of the incidence of blood product transfusion . This suggests that accepting a lower
hemoglobin level as a transfusion threshold may be possible but needs further investigation. Our case may have been different if the parents
wanted to forgo all life-sustaining therapy, including blood transfusions. They could have chosen comfort care at birth or when the baby’s
condition began to deteriorate after initiation of intensive care, because of the overall prognosis at 23 weeks’ gestational age. The
difference is that because of their religion, the family wanted life-sustaining intensive care except for blood transfusions . The problem
our healthcare team faced was that initiating intensive life-support for a 23 weeks’ gestational age infant without the ability to give
blood transfusions was likely to be futile. Given the parents’ goals of care to prolong life, and lack of alternative therapies for anemia
in prematurity, the medical team needed to ask the court to appoint a guardian with the authority to consent to a transfusion over the
parents’ objections. As we look at this case retrospectively, we wonder whether transfusing the infant immediately at birth would have
changed the outcome. Given the current state of premature infant care, it is nearly impossible to honor the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses
to provide lifesaving treatments without blood transfusions for infants born at the border of viability. Parental and health care provider
distress may be inevitable but could be minimized with early, clear, and consistent communication. Conflict of interest The authors declare
no conflict of interest.
