IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a newly recognized disorder, characterized by massive IgG4+ lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration,
storiform fibrosis, causing enlargement, nodules or thickening of the various organs, simultaneously or metachronously. Involvement of the
gastrointestinal tract is very rare and can be presented as a diffuse wall thickening or polyp or mass-like lesion. Up to now, there have
been reported only a few cases of isolated gastric IgG4-RD. We present an unusual case of IgG4-RD of the stomach with involvement of the
regional lymph nodes, clinically manifested as a gastric cancer with related pyloric stenosis. The patient underwent distal gastrectomy,
omentectomy and lymph node dissection. The postoperative serum IgG4 level was increased. The diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemical
study. In the most of the reported cases there was not sufficient data about the regional lymph nodal status, although the majority of the
patients had been operated with presumptive diagnosis of gastric neoplasm. Our case is rare and valuable because it presents a gastric
IgG4-related lesion larger than all previously reported in literature, and IgG4-related lymphadenopathy, confirmed histologically, which
contributes to better knowledge of the disease. IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a newly recognized disorder, characterized by massive
IgG4+ lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration, storiform fibrosis, causing enlargement, nodules or thickening of the various organs,
simultaneously or metachronously . Other typical features are obliterative phlebitis, increased IgG4-expressing plasma cells, and often, but
not always elevated serum IgG4 level [2, 3]. IgG4-RD frequently might be misinterpreted clinically and radiologically as a neoplasm,
resulting in overtreatment . The disease usually affects the pancreas, bile ducts, gallbladder, liver, lacrimal glands, salivary glands,
retroperitoneum and lymph nodes . Involvement of the gastrointestinal tract is very rare and can be presented as a diffuse wall thickening
or polyp or mass-like lesion [3, 4]. Up to date, there have been reported only a few cases of isolated gastric IgG4-RD . We described the
case of suspected gastric IgG4-RD and regional lymphadenopathy, misdiagnosed as a gastric cancer. A 62-year-old female presented with
symptoms of severe weakness and fatigue. Laboratory tests revealed anemia (hemoglobin 58 g/L). Because of these the patient had been
admitted to another hospital where a gastric tumor and related pyloric stenosis were found with gastroscopy and several blood transfusions
were performed. The biopsy showed a chronic ulcerative lesion with suspected atypical cells in the bottom. Computer tomography (CT) revealed
prepyloric irregular thickening of the gastric wall up to 15 mm which involved its entire circumference. The patient’s co-morbidities
included Henoch-Schonlein purpura, allergy to analgesics, arterial hypertension and depressive disorder. Several years ago, the patient had
undergone cholecystectomy and plastic of hiatal hernia. The physical examination of the abdomen did not reveal any pathological findings.
Given the presumptive diagnosis of gastric cancer, the patient was hospitalized in our department for surgical treatment. A distal
gastrectomy, omentectomy and lymph node dissection were performed. The diagnosis was confirmed with histological and immunohistochemical
study. Grossly, there was an ulcer-infiltrative tumor formation, 8/3 cm in size, involving gastric lesser curvature, the front and posterior
wall of the stomach. The tumor infiltrated the lesser omentum and penetration into the serosa was probable. The surrounding mucosa was
scattered with petechial hemorrhages (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Macroscopic view of the gastric specimen – transected stomach with presence of an ulcer-
infiltrative tumor formation, marked with a circle Macroscopic view of the gastric specimen – transected stomach with presence of an ulcer-
infiltrative tumor formation, marked with a circle Microscopic examination of the gastric formation showed tumor-like proliferation with
mixed cellular composition: predominantly CD79a + mature B-cells, organized in follicular structures and located diffusely; abundance of
mature CD 138+ plasma cells and significant presence of eosinophils (Fig. 2 a, b and c). There was marked fibrosis in lamina propria, often
in a storiform pattern of growth, induced by the lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration. Proliferation of vessels, the same cellular
infiltration and obliterative phlebitis were found, too. Sixteen lymph nodes were isolated. Histologically, they were characterized by
preserved capsule thickness, presence of lymph follicles in the entire area of the node with activation changes, expressed in different
degrees, and predominantly regressive changes of the germinal centers - depletion of the normal composition, vascularization, compact FDC-
nets, dominated by CD 23+ cells (Fig. 2d). There were groups and bundles of mature CD 138+ plasma cells in the interfollicular areas
(Fig. 2e). Immunohistochemical study was performed and abundance of positive IgG4 plasma cells was proved (Fig. 2f). In the gastric lesion
there were more than 50 IgG4-positive lymphoplasmacytic cells per high-powerfield.Fig. 2Histologic findings in the stomach and regional
lymph nodes: a The gastric muscle layer with inflammatory infiltration from lymphocytes and plasma cells (marked with an arrow) and
concomitant stroma dividing the muscle structures (an asterisk), H&E x4; b Detailed cellular composition, H&E x40; c abundance of CD 138+
plasma cells in area of the gastric lesion (shown with arrows); d Microscopic changes in lymph nodes, H&E x4; e Lymph node with
interfollicular CD 138+ plasma cells, marked with an arrow; f Presence of IgG4-positive plasma cells Histologic findings in the stomach and
regional lymph nodes: a The gastric muscle layer with inflammatory infiltration from lymphocytes and plasma cells (marked with an arrow) and
concomitant stroma dividing the muscle structures (an asterisk), H&E x4; b Detailed cellular composition, H&E x40; c abundance of CD 138+
plasma cells in area of the gastric lesion (shown with arrows); d Microscopic changes in lymph nodes, H&E x4; e Lymph node with
interfollicular CD 138+ plasma cells, marked with an arrow; f Presence of IgG4-positive plasma cells The postoperative period was
uneventful. Serum IgG4 level measured postoperatively was 193.1 mg/dL (reference values 23–111 mg/dL). IgG4-RD was firstly described in
patients with sclerosing cholangitis, called autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) type I, and later observed in other organs . The comprehensive
diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD include: 1/diffuse or partial enlargement, swelling, nodules, or thickening lesion on single or multiple
organs, 2/a serum IgG4 concentration more than 135 mg/dL, 3/histological changes a/massive lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltration and
sclerosis, b/increased number of IgG4+ plasma cells; and IgG4+/IgG+ plasma cell ratio >40 % and > 10 cells per high-powered field. Patients
fulfilling all three criteria can be diagnosed definitively with IgG4-RD, those who fulfill criteria 1 and 3 have a probable diagnosis, and
in those who fulfill criteria 1 and 2 the diagnosis is possible [1, 5]. However, these criteria do not include gastric localization of the
disease. So a recent study established that infiltration of IgG4+ plasma cells in the stomach mucosa only cannot be diagnosed as
gastrointestinal lesion of IgG4-RD . This diagnosis can be made if there is diffuse wall thickening or polyp or mass-like lesion with
relevant histological changes . According to this, we found several cases of gastric IgG4-RD, reported in literature [3, 6–13]. A summary of
them is described in Table 1.Table 1Summary of the cases with gastric IgG4-RD, reported in the literature and our caseCase № [Ref.
№]Age/GenderLocation in stomachEndoscopic findingSize (mm)Serum IgG4Treat-mentAssociated diseases1 58/MFundus and
bodyNodule14NormalSteroidAIP, IgG4-related sialadenitis2 74/MBodyMultiple polypsIncreasedNAAIP3 75/FBodyPolyp56NormalWRNone4
45/FFundusNodule15NormalWRRaynoud’s disease5 60/MAntrumMultiple nodulesUp to 22NADGAutoimmune polyendocrinopathy6 56/MBodyNodule8NAESRType 2
diabetes7 59/FMidbodyMass33NAWRNone8 54/FNAMass21NormalWRNone9 48/FMidbodyMass36NAWRNone10 55/FBodyNodule20NormalESRHashimoto’s thyroiditis,
possible primary biliary cirrhosis11 68/MAntrumWall thickening40IncreasedDGIgG4-RD in lungs, skin and lymph nodes12 [present
case]62/FAntrumMass80/30IncreasedDGHenoch-Schonlein purpura, IgG4-RD in lymph nodes M male, F female, NA not available, WR wedge resection,
DG distal gastrectomy, ESR endoscopic submucosal resection, AIP autoimmune pancreatitis Summary of the cases with gastric IgG4-RD, reported
in the literature and our case M male, F female, NA not available, WR wedge resection, DG distal gastrectomy, ESR endoscopic submucosal
resection, AIP autoimmune pancreatitis The most gastric IgG4-RD was detected in middle- aged patients (45 to 75 years) with predominance of
women, although the total number of patients is too small to reveal any meaningful data. The body of the stomach was affected mainly. The
size was variable (8–56 mm in cases reported in literature) and tumor in our case was considerably larger than the other gastric lesions of
IgG4-RD. In most of the cases the gastric lesion was solitary. The two patients with multiple polyps in the stomach also had AIP and
autoimmune endocrinopathy, respectively. In 7 of all reported cases, there were associated autoimmune diseases. In four of these patients
there was multi-organ involvement of IgG4-RD – one patient with concomitant AIP, one case – with AIP and IgG4-related sialadenitis, one
patient with localization of the disease in stomach, lungs, skin and lymph nodes and our patient had lymphonodal involvement, too. The
IgG4-related lymphadenopathy, as in our case, can be confirmed only by histological examination. According to criteria, classified by Sato
et al. histological changes include: 1/Castleman’s disease-like morphology; 2/reactive follicular hyperplasia, 3/interfollicular
plasmacytosis and immunoblastosis, 4/progressive transformation of germinal center-like, and 5/inflammatory pseudotumor-like morphology [1,
14]. In most of the reported cases of gastric IgG4-RD there was not sufficient data about the lymph nodal status, although they were treated
surgically with presumptive diagnosis of gastric neoplasm. In our case the accurate lymph nodal dissection was performed and IgG4-related
lymphadenopathy was confirmed immunohistochemically. No enlarged lymph nodes had been detected on CT and the dissection was carried out only
because we had suspected oncological disease. So if we had not done it, we would have missed the involvement of lymph nodes of IgG4-RD. The
first therapeutic choice for management of IgG4-RD is the steroid treatment [1, 3]. However, most patients with gastric IgG4-RD were treated
surgically, except one patient with concomitant AIP who underwent steroid therapy. This is probably because IgG4-RD frequently might be
misinterpreted clinically and radiologically as a neoplasm . In our case the surgery was necessary not only because of the suspected gastric
cancer, but for the relevant pyloric stenosis. Most gastric IgG4-RD lesions are difficult to diagnose because of their rarity and it is of
utmost importance to exclude neoplasm. Unnecessary surgery can be avoided if the IgG4-RD of the stomach is considered in the differential
diagnosis. Our case is rare and valuable because it presents a gastric IgG4-related lesion larger than all previously reported in
literature, and IgG4-related lymphadenopathy, confirmed histologically, which contributes to the better knowledge of the disease. AIP,
autoimmune pancreatitis; CT, Computer tomography; DG, distal gastrectomy; ESR, endoscopic submucosal resection; F, female; H&E, Hematoxylin
and Eosin; IgG4-RD, IgG4-related disease; M, male; NA, not available; WR, wedge resection The authors appreciate the patient’s approval to
present this case and acknowledge all the medical and surgical staff that took care of the patient. None. The data sets supporting the
conclusions of this article are included within the article. Elena Arabadzhieva wrote the paper and collected the literature for the review
in the report. Sasho Bonev analysed the review. Atanas Yonkov and Dimitar Bulanov performed the operation of the patient described in this
report. Tihomir Dikov and Diana Kyoseva performed the histological examination and the immunohistochemical study and confirmed the
diagnosis. Violeta Dimitrova revised the manuscript for important intellectual content and technical details. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The patient’s approval has been given for
publication of this case report.
