Although HPV infections are common, intravesical HPV is a rare condition, with only 20 reported cases (1). Objectives: The aim of this video
is to present a case treated with transurethral resection (TR). A 38-year-old woman, with a history of urinary tract infections. She denied
other diseases and complained of painful urination. The genital examination, cervical cytology and colposcopy were normal. Urinalysis showed
leukocytosis, but a negative culture. The ultrasound was normal. A cystoscopy was performed, showing polypoid growth on the bladder mucosa
followed of the TR. Histopathologic analysis (HA) confirmed IHPV (in situ hybridization positive for 6, 18, 31 subtypes), associated a
Bladder Squamous Metaplasia (BSM). The patient recurrence-free was for 5 years when a cystoscopy demonstrated BSM, which was resected. The
patient had not any other sites (urethral, genital or anal) of recurrence during the period of follow-up. The condyloma, caused by types 6
and 11, is more frequent in the genital mucosa and anal area (1, 2). IHPV presents with a polypoid pattern, often related to warts in the
urethra. The clinical presentation includes hematuria, dysuria, fever and pelvic pain (1, 2). HA evaluation shows hyperproliferation of
metaplasic squamous cells, the transition to the normal epithelium is sudden, with no submucosal invasion. This pattern excludes squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC). A standard treatment was not established. TR has also been successfully used (1), and radical cystectomy was indicated
when the lesion was associated with SCC (3). Since the cytotoxic immune responses against malignant and virally transformed cells appear to
be similar, local application of BCG might also be effective in the adjuvant treatment of recurrent condylomata (4). TR may be a safe option
for definitive IHPV treatment. However, the patients must be followed as in cases of the superficial carcinoma of transitional epithelium.
Available at: ARTICLE INFO Available at: http://http://www.intbrazjurol.com.br/video-section/almeida_395_396/ Int Braz J Urol. 2016; 42
(Video #3): 395-6 This interesting video by Almieda and colleagues highlights a rare occurrence of HPV infection within the bladder mucosa
diagnosed after transurethral resection. It further characterizes the diffuse nature of HPV-associated manifestations, which can cause
cancer at multiple anatomic sites in men and women, including cervical, oropharyngeal, anal, vuluvar, vaginal, and penile malignancies. In
this particularly case, the patient remained recurrence-free for 5 years, which reinforces the heterogeneity of HPV-associated disease and
its malignant potential based on the anatomic site of infection (1). We applaud the authors for their novel work, which adds to the body of
literature regarding potential sites of HPV-related disease and its differing natural history based on the site of infection.
