Boerhaave syndrome describes a transmural oesophageal rupture that develops following a spontaneous, sudden intraluminal pressure increase
(i.e. vomiting, cough). It has a high rate of mortality and morbidity because of its proximity to the mediastinum and pleura. Perforation
localisation and treatment initiation time affect the morbidity and mortality. In this article, we aim to present our successful
laparoscopic-endoscopic cooperative surgery in a 59-year-old female who was referred to our clinic with a diagnosis of spontaneous lower
oesophageal perforation. Laparoscopy and a simultaneous oesophageal stent application may be assumed as an effective alternative to
conventional surgical approaches in cases of spontaneous lower oesophageal perforation. A spontaneous oesophageal rupture is the corruption
of the transmural integrity of the oesophagus, following a sudden increase in intraluminal pressure and the lack of relaxation in the
cricopharyngeus muscle as a result of severe vomiting, without any underlying oesophageal pathology. Perforation is usually located in the
distal oesophagus, and due to its proximity to the mediastinum and pleura, a rapid mediastinitis may develop which may cause a mortality
rate of up to between 14% and 40%. The duration of time between perforation and treatment determines the morbidity and mortality. Cases
diagnosed in the first 24 h are described as ‘early’, and those diagnosed between 24 and 48 h are described as ‘delayed perforation’. While
surgical repair and drainage are adequate in cases with an early diagnosis, discussion about the treatment options in the presence of
delayed perforation continues. In our article, we aimed to present simultaneous laparoscopic drainage and a covered self-expandable stent
treatment modality that we implemented at an early stage in our case of a spontaneous lower oesophageal perforation. A 59-year-old female
was referred to our centre with the pre-diagnosis of spontaneous oesophageal perforation following her admission to an external centre due
to postprandial severe vomiting and chest pain complaints. The vital signs of the patient on admission (9 h after perforation) were as
follows: Blood pressure, 90/50 mmHg; pulse rate, 120 beats/min; respiratory tachypnoea and oxygen saturation, 90%; leucocyte number, 10.1
10≥/µL and sub-febrile fever of 37.8°C. There was no obvious abdominal finding during the physical examination. No gross pathology was found
in the lung X-ray of the patient who was administered aggressive fluid replacement and broad spectrum antibiotics. In the triphasic
contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and thorax, free air was determined. It started from the supraclavicular area
level and extended towards the para-aortic and peri-hepatic area in the inferior, and it was in the neighbourhood of the oesophagus trace in
the mediastinum; a bilateral pleural effusion reaching 3 cm was also observed [Figure 1]. In the upper gastrointestinal system endoscopy, a
left-sided transmural rupture of approximately 2–3 cm from the Z-line in the oesophagus distal to the 35–37 cm level was observed; level
food wastes in this field were also observed. We planned an operation and a simultaneous self-expandable stent implementation. Computed
tomography image after perforation Twenty hours after the perforation, the patient was put in the Lloyd Davis position under general
anaesthesia, and a 10-mm camera port was placed in the upper left portion of the hub. Two 10-mm ports were also placed on the right and left
of the mid-clavicular line, and a 5-mm port was placed on the right anterior axillary line for the liver retractor. There were no findings
in the abdomen during exploration. By putting out the left and right crura, the oesophagus was suspended. The left crus was separated, and
we entered the mediastinal area. An inflamed perforation area of approximately 3–4 cm in size with solid food waste was observed in the
distal oesophagus, which is in the upper part of the gastro-oesophageal combination on the left side [Figure 2]. Food particles in the
operation area were collected in a tissue bag (Endobag™, Covidien), and the contents were washed with 0.9% saline. No additional process was
performed on the ruptured area due of tissue friability and oedema. A simultaneous upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed on the
patient, and a silicon coated self-expandable stent (Hanaro Stent, MI Tech, Seoul, South Korea) was installed to cover the perforation area
[Figure 3]. Following a test with an orogastric tube that looked for leaks using methylene blue, the operation was completed by placing two
silicon drains in the ruptured intra-abdominal area. Perforation area determined during laparoscopy Closure of the perforated area with a
coated oesophageal stent The patient on whom no extravasation was detected by contrast radiography 3 days post-operative was initiated with
clear liquid. In the clinical follow-up, bilateral effusion developed in the patient. As a consequence, drainage was made with bilateral
pleural catheterisation (Pleurocan, 8-10F, B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany). Due to the regression of the effusion, the catheters were
withdrawn on the post-operative 7th day. A 50 cc/day sero-purulent content was discharged from the intra-abdominal drain. There was no
drainage during the follow-up period or following triphasic contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and thorax on the post-operative 15th day.
Consequently, the drains were withdrawn, and the patient was discharged. At the end of the post-operative period of 8 weeks, the stent was
removed [Figure 4]. Image of the removed oesophageal stent Treatment of a spontaneous oesophageal transmural rupture that develops after a
sudden increase in intraluminal pressure still has challenges. Factors such as perforation area, degree of contamination, time after
perforation and presence of comorbidity have prognostic values in these patients whose morbidity and mortality is high. Symptoms may be
atypical in terms of the localisation of the oesophagus perforation, or they may imitate other diseases (including myocardial infarction,
spontaneous pneumothorax or aortic dissection); furthermore, there may be a delay in diagnosis. It has been shown that misdiagnosis or
delayed diagnosis rate may be >50%. Dysphagia, sub-cutaneous emphysema, tachycardia and tachypnoea may be frequently detected in the
patient. The Mackler triad of severe vomiting history, sub-xiphoid chest pain and sub-cutaneous emphysema may not be observed routinely in
every patient. Oesophageal contrast serial radiography, endoscopy and CT may be used in the diagnosis, but tomography is quite effective in
the evaluation of the perforation localisation and the surrounding tissues. The diagnosis of our patient was made using CT of the ruptured
area, and the food waste inside the patient was observed via an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The aim of the treatment of oesophageal
perforation is the prevention of the development of infection, re-establishment of gastrointestinal integrity and provision of sufficient
nutrition to the patient. In the presence of a perforation, attempts to repair it with abdominal or thoracic surgical approaches according
to the localisation should be made. Prevention of the possible development of mediastinitis via drainage of the area around the rupture
should be considered. Currently, surgical repair and drainage seem to be the most effective treatment modality. Conventional surgical
treatments usually involve a thoracotomy or laparotomy. However, it should not be omitted that a thoracotomy may increase the morbidity and
mortality in critical and old patients with serious comorbidities. Conservative approaches are suggested for patients without micro-
perforations or a significant leakage. As in the other surgical fields, minimally invasive methods (laparoscopy or thoracoscopy) have begun
to be used in the treatment of oesophageal perforation. Depending on the perforation area, laparoscopy may be used effectively in the distal
oesophagus, and thoracoscopy can be effectively utilised in other localisations. While feeding, the jejunostomy may be opened via
laparoscopic gastrostomy, but repair and drainage on a larger field in the oesophagus may be performed via thoracoscopy. Tissues such as the
intercostal muscles, pleura, omentum and pericardium pedicle flaps may be used to strengthen the repair line in the perforated area, but
discussions about their efficacy remain. The sternothyroid and sternocleidomastoid muscles may also be used in cervical oesophagus
perforation. It has been suggested that primary suture and sufficient drainage be made in both early and late oesophageal perforation.
However, only using primary suture in an oedematous and weak area may not achieve satisfactory success, especially in delayed events.
Studies have reported that primary oesophagus repair and drainage applied in the first 24 h after the perforation are more successful than
in events longer than 24 h. While the mortality rate in events treated within the first 24 h is between 10% and 25%, after 24 h, this rate
may increase to 66%. In parallel with the development of mediastinitis, the septic table develops rapidly and mortality increases. Although
our event had an early perforation, the tissue friability and inflammation inhibited primary repair. In our treatment, there was no need for
a thoracotomy because we simultaneously performed laparoscopic drainage and self-expandable stent localisation; moreover, the ruptured area
was successfully closed. Because surgery may increase morbidity and mortality, a treatment alternative has been created by first using
metallic and then plastic stents. The perforation area is closed rapidly with the covered self-expandable stents localised in an early
phase, which results in a decrease in contamination and morbidity. In a study of three patients, a metallic stent was used with the
laparoscopic approach, and it was reported that this approach may be preferred in critical patients. Favourable results were achieved with
covered stents in benign perforations and anastomotic leakages. For the choice of treatment, patient-specific planning should be made with a
multidisciplinary approach. With our laparoscopic-endoscopic cooperative surgery approach, the case utilised a minimal invasive stent and
surgical drainage and was protected against the need for laparotomy and thoracotomy. Any consequent morbidity that may occur would depend on
these two procedures. As a result, in events with spontaneous perforation localised to the lower oesophagus, intra-abdominal organs may be
evaluated by laparoscopy, without a need for thoracotomy. The mediastinum and pleura may be viewed by opening the crus, and food particles
in the ruptured area may be cleaned, and sufficient drainage may be provided. Furthermore, extra-luminal leakage may be prevented by the
localisation of an intraluminal silicon-coated self-expandable stent in the oesophagus via an endoscopy during the operation. The
sufficiency of the process may be assessed with contrast agents accompanied with methylene blue or fluoroscopy given through the oesophagus
during laparoscopy. Simultaneous laparoscopy and stent application in events with spontaneous lower oesophageal perforation should be
considered as an effective treatment choice alternative to conventional treatment methods. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
