Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Although previous studies have reported the use of total thoracoscopic hepatectomy
(TH) for malignant liver tumors, it is technically impossible to perform intraoperative ultrasonography (IUSO) to exclude intrahepatic
metastasis for the whole liver via a thoracic approach. Therefore, total TH may be inappropriate for these patients. We here report the
first case of modified TH for a malignant liver tumor in China. The patient was a 26-year-old man with a 10-year HBV infection. Preoperative
CT showed a 1.2 cm × 0.9 cm mass located in segment VIII. His alpha-fetal protein level was 444 ng/mL. Child–Pugh was Grade (A, 6), whereas
an ICG-15 test yielded 2.7%. HCC was diagnosed preoperatively. The indications for TH were difficult tumor location, HCC, and a young
patient with good resilience. The modified TH included 2 steps: (1) the patient was placed in a supine position. IUSO was used to locate the
tumor in segment VIII and determine that intrahepatic metastasis had not occurred. The hepatoduodenal ligament was hanged over using a
Pringle maneuver; (2) patient was then placed in the left-lateral position with single-lung ventilation. Three trocars were placed into the
right thoracic cavity. The intra-thoracic space was observed using a regular 10-mm rigid scope. The diaphragm was transected and retracted.
IUSO was used again to confirm the tumor location. Under the Pringle maneuver (once every 10 min), the superficial portion of the liver was
transected by ultrasonic shears, whereas the deeper tissue was transected by LigaSure. Bipolar was used for hemostasis. The specimen was put
into a retrieval bag and removed from the abdominal trocar. The diaphragm was repaired by running suturing. The operation time was
260 minutes and estimated blood loss was 30 mL. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5 with normal liver function. No
complications arose. Total TH may be inappropriate for malignant liver tumors due to the limitation of IUSO for the whole liver. The 2-step
modified TH is technically feasible and suitable for malignant liver tumors located in segments VII or VIII. Video abstract:. Although
laparoscopic hepatectomy (LH) has proved a safe and effective approach for most patients with liver tumors,1 for tumors located in segments
VII or VIII, it may not be always feasible. Due to the difficulty of locating and manipulating tumors in these segments, the risks of
intraoperative bleeding and conversion are high when performing LH for segments VII or VIII.2 Previous studies3,4 have reported
thoracoscopic hepatectomy (TH) for malignant liver tumors, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and metastatic liver tumors, but it is
technically difficult to perform intraoperative ultrasonography (IUSO) for the whole liver via a thoracic approach. IUSO is commonly
considered a necessary step to exclude intrahepatic metastasis or satellite lesions. As a result, total TH may be inappropriate for
malignant liver tumor resection. We here report the first case of modified TH in China. A 26-year-old man was admitted to the Liver Surgery
Department of West China Hospital with a 10-year hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection history and a suspicious liver mass found by upper
abdominal ultrasonography. Preoperative CT evaluation revealed a 1.2 cm × 0.9 cm mass located in segment VIII, beneath the diaphragm, along
with liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension (Figure 1Aand B). Laboratory tests showed that AFP was 444 ng/mL and HBV-DNA levels were
normal. The preoperative Child-Pugh Grade was (A, 6), whereas an ICG-15 test yielded 2.7%. Preoperative diagnoses were HBV-related liver
cirrhosis and HCC. The indications for TH were: (1) difficult tumor location; (2) a young patient with good resilience; and (3) HCC. Results
of the preoperative evaluation were presented to the ethics committee of West China Hospital, Sichuan University. The surgical team stated
that TH had not previously been performed in our medical center. The feasibility and advantages of TH, as well as the risks and possibility
of conversion to laparotomy, had been explained to the patient and his family. Informed consents were obtained from the patient himself and
his parents after a full explanation of the potential risks of TH. The West China Hospital administration and the ethics committee
authorized the surgery. Preoperative CT: (A) arterial phase; (B) portal venous phase. CT = computed tomography. We modified TH into 2 steps:
Step one: laparoscopy was performed under CO2 pneumoperitoneum. The insufflation pressure was set at 13 mmHg. The patient was placed in a
supine position. The surgeon stood at the patient's right side and the scopist stood at the patient's left side. Two 12-mm trocars (Ethicon
Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) were used (Figure 2A). IUSO was used to precisely locate the tumor and exclude intrahepatic metastasis and
satellite lesions (Figure 3A and C). The tumor was marked by cautery (Figure 3B), and the hepatoduodenal ligament was hanged over using the
Pringle maneuver (Figure 3D). Port positions: (A) supine position; (B) left-lateral position. Step 1: (A) IUSO for right lobe; (B) marking
by cautery; (C) IUSO for left lobe; (D) Pringle maneuver. IUSO = intraoperative ultrasonography. Step two: the CO2 pneumoperitoneum was
stopped. The patient was then placed in the left-lateral position under general anesthesia with single-lung ventilation. Three 12-mm
(Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) trocars were inserted into the right chest (Figure 2B). The trocars’ positions were as follows: (A)
for the scopist, the posterior axillary line, 7th intercostal space (ICS); (B) for manipulating, the middle axillary line, 8th ICS; (C) for
manipulating, the anterior axillary line, 6th ICS. The intrathoracic space was observed using a regular 10-mm rigid scope (Olympus, Tokyo,
Japan) (Figure 4A). The diaphragm was transected by ultrasonic shears (Ethicon Endo Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) (Figure 4B and C) and retracted
to expose the liver segment. IUSO (Hitachi Aloka, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used on the liver surface again to confirm the tumor position
(Figure 4D). Transthoracic manipulation: (A) thoracic view of diaphragm; (B–C) transection of diaphragm by ultrasonic shears; (D)
transthoracic IUSO for right lobe. IUSO = intraoperative ultrasonography. For the resection, with the Pringle maneuver (once every 10
minutes), the superficial portion of the liver was transected by ultrasonic shears(Harmonic scalpel, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cornelia,
GA) (Figure 5A), whereas the deeper tissue and vessels were transected by laparoscopic LigaSure (LigaSure 5-mm BluntTip™, Covidien, Boulder,
CO) (Figure 5B). Bipolar (Erbe Elektromedizin, Germany) was used for hemostasis (Figure 5C). The specimen was put into a retrieval bag and
removed from the abdominal cavity using a 12-mm trocar. The diaphragm was repaired by running suturing (Figure 5D). A closed thoracic
drainage was placed into the right chest, and the repaired diaphragm was checked again by laparoscopy. Finally, the modified TH for segment
VIII was completed without abdominal drainage being placed. Hepatectomy (A) the superficial layer of the liver was transected by ultrasonic
shears; (B) the deeper tissue and vessels were transected by laparoscopic LigaSure; (C) hemostasis was performed with bipolar probes; (D)
the diaphragm was repaired by running suturing. The operation time was 260 minutes, and estimated blood loss was 30 mL. The patient resumed
eating on postoperative day 2. A chest x-ray on postoperative day 4 showed a normal right thoracic cavity, and the thoracic drainage was
removed. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5 with normal liver function. No complications were encountered. Postoperative
pathological testing revealed a poorly differentiated HCC without microvascular invasion. At the 6-month follow-up, there was no sign of
recurrence or metastasis. LH has proved to be a safe and technically feasible approach for liver tumor resection.1 By 2008, laparoscopic
left lateral segmentectomy was already considered the gold standard approach for lesions on segments II and III.1 But for tumors located in
segments VII or VIII, especially those fully covered by the costal cage, LH may not be the best option due to high risks of intraoperative
bleeding and conversion. Previous studies have reported cases of TH for malignant liver tumors.3–6 Compared to the traditional laparoscopic
view, a good exposure of segments VII and VIII can be achieved from the diaphragmatic surface after the diaphragm has been transected. Also,
there is no need for mobilization of the entire right hemiliver to rotate it for exposure. And the blood supply from the right triangular
and coronary ligaments can be preserved to the utmost extent to maintain postoperative liver function, especially for those with severe
liver cirrhosis. Although preoperative radiological examinations can detect and define most liver tumors, IUSO is still commonly considered
a necessary step to exclude intrahepatic metastasis or satellite lesions, especially very small ones. Due to the presence of the mediastinal
and falciform ligaments, the left liver lobe cannot be directly reached by IUSO. As a result, it is impossible to perform IUSO for the whole
liver by a total thoracosopic approach. For hepatic benign tumors such as hepatic hemangioma, focal nodular hyperplasia and adenoma, total
TH is theoretically applicable. But for malignant liver tumors, there may be a risk of missing tiny intrahepatic metastases when performing
total TH. Therefore, performing IUSO laparoscopically before TH is essential. During LH, hemorrhaging is always the primary concern for
surgeons.7 The Pringle maneuver is the easiest and most common method for controlling intraoperative bleeding from the Glissons’ vessels.8
Using a total thoracoscopic approach, it is impossible to hang over the hepatoduodenal ligament. Although most previous TH cases involved
small, solitary HCC lesions located in the superficial parenchyma of the liver and it seemed that there was no need to perform the Pringle
maneuver for these carefully selected patients, it should not be neglected during TH.8 In China, HCC is almost always accompanied by HBV-
related liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension. Massive intraoperative bleeding often occurs in these patients if hepatic inflow occlusion
is not performed. Therefore, a Pringle maneuver performed laparoscopically before TH is recommended. As for those patients with a history of
previous upper abdominal surgery or numerous previous abdominal interventions,4,6 there is a high possibility of severe adhesion around the
liver and it is difficult to perform IUSO or the Pringle maneuver laparoscopically with a single trocar. Transthoracic-assisted LH might be
more appropriate. As a result, for malignant liver tumors, we modified total TH into 2 steps: (1) laparoscopic IUSO to detect the tumor and
exclude intrahepatic metastasis, followed by a laparoscopic Pringle maneuver; and (2) thoracoscopic liver resection. This is the first case
of modified TH in China. For select patients, the 2-step modified TH is technically feasible and suitable for malignant liver tumors located
in segments VII or VIII. The authors thank Shawna Williams for her editing assistance in the preparation of this manuscript. Abbreviations:
AFP = alpha-fetal protein, CT = computed tomography, HBV = hepatitis B virus, HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma, ICG = indocyanine green, IUSO
= intraoperative ultrasonography, LH = laparoscopic hepatectomy, TH = thoracoscopic hepatectomy. Funding: HL, YW, BL, and BP have not
received and will not receive benefits in any form from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article.
