CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared. The vast majority of urothelial carcinomas infiltrating the bladder are consistent with high-grade
tumors that can be easily recognized as malignant in needle prostatic biopsies. In contrast, the histological changes of low-grade
urothelial carcinomas in this kind of biopsy have not been studied. We describe the clinicopathologic features of two patients with low-
grade bladder carcinomas infiltrating the prostate. They reported dysuria and hematuria. Both had a slight elevation of the prostate
specific antigen and induration of the prostatic lobes. Needle biopsies were performed. At endoscopy bladder tumors were found in both
cases. Both biopsies showed nests of basophilic cells and cells with perinuclear clearing and slight atypia infiltrating acini and small
prostatic ducts. The stroma exhibited extensive desmoplasia and chronic inflammation. The original diagnosis was basal cell hyperplasia and
transitional metaplasia. The bladder tumors also showed low-grade urothelial carcinoma. In one case, the neoplasm infiltrated the lamina
propria, and in another, the muscle layer. In both, a transurethral resection was performed for obstructive urinary symptoms. The neoplasms
were positive for high molecular weight keratin (34BetaE12) and thrombomodulin. No metastases were found in either of the patients, and one
of them has survived for five years. The diagnosis of low-grade urothelial carcinoma in prostate needle biopsies is difficult and may
simulate benign prostate lesions including basal cell hyperplasia and urothelial metaplasia. It is crucial to recognize low-grade urothelial
carcinoma in needle biopsies because only an early diagnosis and aggressive treatment can improve the prognosis for these patients. Most
studies on bladder urothelial carcinomas infiltrating the prostate have been done on samples of cystoprostatectomy. The frequency of
infiltration varies between 12 and 55% depending on the series (1–5). In most cases the infiltrating urothelial tumors are high grade and
are associated with a poor prognosis, even when detected in early stages (3–5). In contrast, information on urothelial cell carcinomas
invading the prostate in needle biopsies is scarce. In most cases the urothelial carcinomas show nuclear pleomorphism, variably prominent
nucleoli, increased mitoses, and necrosis, so they can be easily recognized as malignant (1, 2). We have recently observed two cases of low
grade urothelial carcinomas of the bladder infiltrating into the prostate which showed scant atypia and were originally interpreted as basal
cell hyperplasia (BCH) and urothelial cell metaplasia. It is important to recognize these malignant neoplasms in order to avoid an
underdiagnosis of malignancy. Case 1-A 55 year old man presented one year before admission a reduction in the width and pressure of the
urinary stream and a sensation of incomplete emptying of the bladder. Five months later he reported dysuria and postcoital hematuria. The
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 5.2ng/mL and the digital rectal exam found induration of the right lobe. A needle biopsy was performed
obtaining ten tissue core fragments. The original diagnosis (reviewed in three different hospitals) was nodular prostatic hyperplasia and
basal cell hyperplasia. At our institution the prostate biopsy was originally interpreted as basal cell hyperplasia associated with stromal
sclerosis. One month later, a transurethral resection of the prostate was made and the study found a neoplasm with a fungal aspect in the
trigon measuring three cm. The neoplasm was resected and additional biopsies were obtained from the bladder mucosa. The transurethral
prostate resection also showed infiltration by the neoplasm. The patient rejected cystoprostatectomy and was treated with chemotherapy and
radiation. Five years later the patient is alive and asymptomatic without clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence or metastasis.
Case 2-A 66-year-old man presented a PSA level of 6.7ng/mL, obstructive urinary symptoms, dysuria, and microscopic hematuria. His physical
exam was normal and the digital rectal examination revealed an enlarged prostate and induration of the left lobe. A needle biopsy was done
obtaining 12 tissue core biopsies. The original diagnosis was prostatic nodular hyperplasia, basal cell hyperplasia and urothelial
metaplasia. Laboratory data, chest X-ray, bone scan, and abdominal CT scan were normal. One week later, a transurethral resection of the
prostate was performed, finding a bladder neoplasm with exophytic features measuring 2.5cm in the posterior wall of the bladder. The patient
did not return to the hospital and his subsequent course is unknown. The histological findings of low-grade urothelial carcinoma in needle
biopsies are summarized in Table-1. The neoplasm affected two out of ten core biopsies in case 1 (Figures 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B), and one out of
twelve in case 2 (Figures 3A, 3B). The morphology in both cases was similar, however in the second case the neoplasm was seen only in
isolated histological fields (Figure-3A). Both needle biopsies showed chronic inflammation and extensive sclerosis of the prostatic stroma
producing an irregular distribution of the ducts and acini (Figures 1A, 1B, 3A). Acini and prostatic ducts were found infiltrated by neo-
plastic cells producing complete obstruction of the lumen (Figures 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B). The cells were small, basophilic and showed mild
atypia or no atypia simulating basal cells (Figures 2A, 3A), while others showed perinuclear clearing, mimicking urothelial metaplasia
(Figure-3B). In case 2, in addition to in situ carcinoma, small atypical nests were observed, consistent with acinar versus focal stromal
infiltration (Figure-3A). Definitive diagnosis in case 1 was low-grade urothelial carcinoma in situ. Case 2 corresponded to an in situ
carcinoma with probable stromal infiltration. Low-grade urothelial carcinoma was also seen in the bladder tumors and samples of
transurethral resections. In both cases the tumor showed nests similar to those observed in the needle biopsies as well as cords of
neoplastic cells with a clear infiltrative pattern that was not evident in the needle biopsies (Figure-4). Bladder tumors showed papillary
growth pattern and mild atypia. In both cases there were urothelial dysplasia and in situ urothelial carcinoma. Areas with high-grade
urothelial carcinoma were not found. In case one, the neoplasm infiltrated the lamina propria, and in case two the muscular layer.
Immunohistochemical studies were performed on the needle biopsies and the transurethral resections. The PSA (1:50, ER-PR8, Dako) was
negative in the neoplastic cells, while high molecular weight keratin (1:50, 34BetaE12, Dako) and thrombomodulin (1:25, 141C01, Thermo
Scientific) were intensely positive (Figure-2B). Information on the diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma infiltrating the prostate in needle
biopsies is scarce. A study that included 21 patients found that most urothelial carcinomas infiltrating the prostate are high grade
neoplasms, show marked atypia, and are easily recognized as malignant (1). Recently, Gordetsky and Epstein (2) reported seven cases of high-
grade prostate carcinoma with pseudopapillary features mimicking urothelial carcinoma, three of them were diagnosed initially as urothelial
carcinomas. All cases were diagnosed after transurethral resections. In five cases the tumor infiltrated the prostatic urethra and bladder
in six. The cases here described widen the morphological spectrum of urothelial carcinomas in needle prostatic biopsies. Both showed mild or
non atypia and simulated basal cell hyperplasia and/or urothelial cell metaplasia (6–14). Although most basal cell hyperplasia are easily
recognizable as benign, some cases may show a pseudoinfiltrative pattern and display apparent nucleoli (atypical basal cell hyperplasia of
the prostate) (11). In addition, there are unusual variants of basal cell hyperplasia that may be difficult to diagnose (6–14). Case one was
interpreted as the subtype of BCH associated with stromal sclerosis according with Devaraj and Bostwick (8). Low-grade urothelial carcinoma
can also mimic urothelial metaplasia, as they are similar cytologically and both may be present within prostatic ducts in the more
peripheral regions of the prostate, which might be sampled in a needle biopsy. Urothelial metaplasia generally affects isolated glands,
although it can also present florid hyperplasia (6). In contrast with low-grade urothelial carcinoma, the arrangement of acini and ducts in
basal cell hyperplasia and urothelial cell metaplasia is regular and the hyper-plastic nests show well defined borders (6). Although
initially the diagnosis of low grade urothelial carcinoma infiltrating the prostate was difficult to establish in needle biopsies, the
immunohistochemical study and the presence of urothelial carcinoma in the bladder facilitated the interpretation in both cases. Thus,
prostate biopsies showing histological changes as described herein must be studied with various antibodies, and an endoscopic examination of
the bladder should also be considered in order to rule out a malignant urothelial neoplasm. The immunohistochemical study in our cases was
consistent with a diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma when it turned out negative to PSA and positive to high molecular weight keratin
(34BetaE12) and thrombomodulin (1, 15). High molecular grade cytokeratin is positive in more than 90% of urothelial carcinomas (1). Other
antibodies useful in the interpretation of urothelial carcinoma include CK7+, CK20+, PSA–, PAP–, and CD57– (15). According to Chuang et al.
(16), PSA should be used as the first screening marker for differentiating both neoplasms. Additionally, they consider that high–molecular
weight cytokeratin and P63 are more sensitive for the diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma compared with thrombomodulin and S100P. Amin et al.,
and the members of the ISUP Immunohistochemistry in Diagnostic Urologic Pathology Group (17) have found that on the basis of the
differential diagnostic consideration, positivity for GATA3, CK20, p63, and either high–molecular weight cytokeratin or cytokeratin 5/6 are
quite useful to support urothelial differentiation in the appropriate clinicopathologic context. All these antibodies are suitable in
distinguishing high grade urothelial carcinomas versus poorly differentiated prostatic carcinomas because the histological and clinical
distinction is frequently difficult to establish (1, 15–18). The clinical course of patients with high-grade urothelial carcinoma diagnosed
in needle biopsies is very aggressive. More than half of patients died within a few months or a few years with metastatic disease including
those who showed in situ carcinoma in needle prostate biopsies (1, 15, 18). In contrast, in the two cases here studied, there was no
evidence of metastasis at initial study and one of them had a five-year survival. The other patient did not return to hospital. Low-grade
urothelial carcinoma infiltrating the prostate may be difficult to recognize in needle prostate biopsies. This neoplasm may be confused with
benign lesions due to the absence of significant atypia. It is important to know the benign proliferations that resemble low grade
urothelial carcinoma because only an early diagnosis and aggressive treatment can improve the prognosis for these patients (1, 15, 18).
