CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared. An 83-year-old man presented to hospital with gross hematuria. His medical history was remarkable for
remote open left pyelolithotomy, chronic inflammatory demyelinating peripheral neuropathy, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and cerebrovascular
accident for which he took aspirin-dipyridamole. Urine cytology was negative for malignant cells. Renal ultrasound showed a lobulated,
hypoechoic lesion centered in an echogenic hilum of the upper pole of the left kidney. Preoperative CT urogram showed a large, round,
heterogeneously-enhancing soft tissue filling defect, measuring 3.6cmx4.0cmx3.3cm, casting the major calyx of the upper pole of the left
kidney (Figure-1). It showed definitive heterogeneous enhancement after contrast administration. On the delayed urographic phase, contrast
was noted outlining the filling defect. The findings were typical for urothelial carcinoma, with invasion of the subjacent parenchyma of the
upper pole of the left kidney. In addition, an irregular, exophytic 1.4cmx1.4cm nodule was found arising from the posterolateral cortex of
the left kidney, in the vicinity of the renal parenchymal invasion by the urothelial carcinoma. The nodule was homogeneously hyper-enhancing
and appeared contiguous with the less enhancing urothelial carcinoma (Figures 2A and B). The nodule was thought to be either urothelial
carcinoma invasion or a synchronous renal cell carcinoma. There was no local regional lymphadenopathy. He underwent laparoscopic
nephroureterectomy without complication. Pathologic examination confirmed urothelial carcinoma invading the renal parenchyma to the
corticomedullary junction and an adjacent chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with a pushing border into perinephric fat (Figures 3A-D).
Urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis accounts for 12% of all renal tumors, while renal cell carcinoma accounts for 85% (1). The
synchronous occurrence of urothelial carcinoma and renal cell carcinoma in the same kidney is exceedingly rare (2). Reported patients are
usually men who present with hematuria at a mean age of 65 years (3). In this case, it is likely that the invasive urothelial carcinoma was
the cause of the patient's hematuria, while the renal cell carcinoma was an incidental lesion. Preoperative radiologic delineation of
urothelial carcinoma and renal cell carcinoma in the same kidney is usually straightforward when they are geographically distinct. However,
they may be found in very close proximity (4). For accurate preoperative interpretation, the urologist should be aware that the
juxtaposition of urothelial carcinoma that has invaded the renal cortex with a cortically-limited chromophobe renal cell carcinoma may
present as an apparently single lesion on CT urography. In this case, the difference in contrast enhancement in the early phase supported
the presence of two distinct lesions, despite apparent contiguity given their same attenuation on the delayed phase. The prognosis for
patients with two malignancies is likely most influenced by the malignancy with the highest stage.
