Serous carcinoma arising in adenomyosis and adenomyotic cyst is very rare. Only 3 serous carcinomas and 5 serous endometrial intraepithelial
carcinomas (EIC) have been reported to date. We reviewed the clinicopathological features of 2 serous carcinoma in uterine adenomyosis and 1
serous EIC in adenomyotic cyst of the cervical stump. Case 1 had an endometrial serous carcinoma in the uterine myometrium and the left
ovary. A minor component of benign endometrial glands with minimal endometrial stroma was found in the uterine mass and the surrounding
myometrium. Case 2 showed 3 small foci of serous carcinoma, serous EIC and endometrial glandular dysplasia (EmGD) in the adenomyosis. Scanty
serous carcinoma was present in the endometrium without evidence of myometrial invasion. The eutopic endometrium in both case 1 and 2 had no
evidence of neoplastic changes after complete examination. Case 3 had 3 microscopic serous EICs in the adenomyotic cysts of the cervical
stump. One EIC lesion coexisted with EmGD. No cancer was found in the endocervical tube although the preoperative endocervical biopsy showed
a poorly differentiated endometrioid carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that serous carcinoma in case 1 and EIC in all 3 cases
showed a characteristic pattern of p53 and p16 over expression, high Ki67 index, and lack of WT1, ER and PR staining. EmGD in case 1 and 3
had a similar staining pattern except a lower Ki67 index and the presence of ER expression. We believe that this case series may expand our
recognition on serous carcinoma arising in uterine adenomyosis/adenomyotic cyst including extra-uterine spread and the potential synchronous
growth of carcinomas in eutopic endometrium. Carcinomatous changes from the ectopic endometrial glands in endometriosis have been reported
in many studies . Most cases occur in patients with ovarian endometriosis. Malignant transformation from uterine adenomyosis is very
unusual. Less than 50 cases have been reported currently although the first case was reported in 1897. The predominant histotypes of these
cases are endometrioid carcinoma and clear cell carcinoma . Serous carcinoma arising in uterine adenomyosis is extremely rare. Only 3
reports containing 3 serous carcinomas and 5 serous endometrial intraepithelial carcinomas (EIC) have been reported to date . In this study,
we present 2 serous carcinomas in uterine adenomyosis and 1 serous EIC in adenomyotic cyst of the cervical stump. The 3 cases reported here
were retrieved from the archives of the Department of Surgical Pathology, the Affiliated Women’s Hospital School of Medicine Zhejiang
University, China, in the last 5 years. Patients 1 and 2 were recent cases. We obtained clinical details and follow-up data from hospital
medical records. This study was approved by the Institutional Research Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Women’s Hospital School of
Medicine Zhejiang University, China. The patients were well informed and consent with this study. Archival routine hematoxylin and eosin
stained slides were assessed by the authors. Additional 4 μm sections were cut for immunohistochemistry. The sources and dilutions of a
group of antibodies are detailed in Table 1. A two-step En Vision immunostaining procedure (DAKO, Carpentaria, CA, USA) was performed
according to the manufacturer’s protocols. The percentage of positive cells was scored as follows: − for no immunoreactivity; focally + for
1 % to 5 %; + for 6 % to 25 %; ++ for 26 % to 50 %; +++ for 51 % to 75 %; ++++ for 76 % to 100 %. Over expression of p16 and p53 were
defined at least “+++”.Table 1Antibody clones, sources, and dilutionsAntibodyClonesDilutionsSourcesER1D51:300ThermoPR1A61:500ThermoCK7OV-
TL1:100ThermoCK20KS20.81:100LeicaPAX8ZR11:50InvitrogenWT16 F-H21:150ZetaCA125EPR1020(2)1:50Zetap53DO-71:600ThermoCD1056C61:100LeicaD2-40D2-401:400Thermop1616P04/JC21:100ZetaPTEN17A1:50Zymedβ-
cateninE2471:400ZymedHNF1βC-201:200Santa CruzKi67MIB-11:400DAKO Antibody clones, sources, and dilutions Table 2 summarizes the major
clinical features of all 3 cases.Table 2Clinical findings of the lesionsCase 1Case 2Case 3Age (yr)645555History of
pregnancyG2P2G1P1G2P1History of cancerNNNFamilial history of cancerNNHer father died of lung cancer.Clinical presentationLeft low abdominal
painPostmenopausal vagina bleedingVaginal bleedingSerum tumor biomarkersNormal CA125, CA199 & CA153CA199: 89.8 IU/mL; Normal CA125NDImaging
findingsEndometrium 0.2 cm; A mass in the left parametrium; A cyst in the left adnexusEndometrium 0.22 cm; Uterine leiomyomasA mass in the
cervical stump and a cyst in the left ovaryTreatmentTAHBSO + complete staging surgeryTAHBSO + complete staging surgeryRadical resection of
the cervical stump + BSO + complete staging surgeryPostoperative chemotherapyYYNStatus of follow-up (time)Recent caseRecent caseAlive with
no evidence of cancer (44 months) Abbreviations: N no, Y yes, ND not done, BSO bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy, TAHBSO total abdominal
hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy Clinical findings of the lesions Abbreviations: N no, Y yes, ND not done, BSO bilateral
salpingo-oophorectmy, TAHBSO total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy A 64-year-old Chinese woman, gravida 2, para 2,
complained of left low abdominal pain for about 6 months. Her last menses was more than 10 years ago. She denied history of hormone
replacement therapy. She had a history of diabetes mellitus with the treatment of Diamicron and Metformin Hydrochloride for more than
10 years. She denied familial history of cancer. Pelvic examination revealed a slightly enlarged and symmetrical uterus. A pelvic sonogram
showed that the endometrium strip measured 0.2 mm. An irregular mass of 2.5 × 2.6 × 2.6 cm was present in the left parametrium. A cystic
lesion of 4.0 × 2.1 × 3.2 cm was found in the left adnexus. It was adjacent to the mass in the left parametirum. The serum levels of CA125,
CA 199 and CA153 were normal. The clinical impression of this case was “adenomyosis and possible left fallopian tube-ovarian cyst”. Total
abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy (TAHBSO) was initially performed. A 4.0-cm cystic lesion was found in the left
adnexus. The cystic lesion enveloped the left ovary and fallopian tube, and adhered with the uterus and intestine. However, the left ovary
and fallopian tube was not clearly seen. The uterus and the right fallopian tube looked normal anatomically. After a diagnosis of
“adenocarcinoma in the left adnexus” was rendered on frozen sections, a complete staging surgery including retroperitoneal lymph node
dissection and omentectomy was subsequently carried out. A small focus of endometriosis from the rectal adventitia was also biopsied. The
patient was given one course of TP (Taxol + Carboplatin) chemotherapy and was unremarkable for one month after surgery at present. A
55-year-old Chinese woman gravida 1, para 1, complained of postmenopausal vagina bleeding for 8 months. Uterine adenomyosis and multiple
leiomyomas were found 19 years ago. She was regularly followed-up thereafter. Her serum CA199 was slightly elevated (89.8 IU/mL) 4 months
ago. Serum CA125 was normal. Recent pelvic sonogram indicated that the enlarged uterus had a size similar to that of 2 weeks of gestation
and the endometrium strip measured 0.22 cm. There were multiple leiomyomas in the uterus. The largest one measured 5.6 × 5.5 × 5.2 cm.
Pelvic CT scan and MRI had similar findings to that of sonogram. Her medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus, primary
hypertension, asthma, appendectomy and caesarean. The diagnosis of preoperative endometrial curetting was serous carcinoma. TAHBSO and
complete staging surgery was performed 4 weeks after the diagnosis. One course of adjuvant chemotherapy (TP) was given postoperatively by
now. A 55-year-old Chinese woman, gravida 2, para 1, complained of vaginal bleeding for 22 days. She had undergone a subtotal hysterectomy
for uterine adenomyosis 16 years ago. Sonogram revealed a 4.4 × 4.4 × 3.0 cm mass in the cervical stump and a 3.3 × 3.5 × 2.8 cm cyst in the
left ovary. Pelvic CT scan showed an enlarged cervical stump with a 2.5 × 1.7 × 1.5 cm mass and a 2.8 × 2.4 × 3 cm cyst in the left ovary.
The pathological diagnosis of her endocervical curetting was poorly differentiated endometrioid carcinoma. Her familial history was
unremarkable except that her father died of lung cancer. Radical resection of the cervical stump, bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy (BSO) and
complete staging surgery were performed two weeks later. The rectum was partially removed due to the presence of endometriosis resulting in
its dense adhesion with the cervix stump. She was alive with no evidence of cancer for at least 44 months. The main pathological and
immunohistochmical findings of these cases are given in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively.Table 3Pathological results of the lesionsCase
1Case 2Case 3FIGO StageIIIaIaIaGross uterine mass---Pathological findings in the endometrium-SCEC (G2-3)Myometrium invasionNA--
Lymphovascular tumor emboli++-Findings in the adenomyosis/ endometriotic cystSCMinimal SC; serous EIC; EmGDSerous EIC; EmGDOther
findingsSpread to the left ovarian; Uterine leiomyoma; Endometriosis in the rectum.Uterine leiomyomaGlandular cyst in the cervix stump; Left
ovarian endometriotic cyst; Endometriosis in the rectum. Abbreviations: SC serous carcinoma, EIC serous endometrial intraepithelial
carcinoma, EmGD endometrial glandular dysplasia, EC endometrioid carcinoma, NA not applicableTable 4Immunostaining results of the lesionsa
AntibodiesCase 1Case 2Case 3AdenomyosisLeft OvaryCurettingAdenomyosisCurettingAdenomyosisER------PR------CK7++++++NDNDNDNDCK20--
NDNDNDNDPAX8++++++++++++++++++WT1------CA125++++NDNDNDNDp53++++++++++++++++++CD10a --NDNDNDNDD2-40a ----NDNDPTEN++++++++NDNDβ-
cateninMem+Mem+Mem+Mem+NDNDp16++++++++++++++++++HNF1βNDND----Ki67>80 %>80 %>70 %>70 %>80 %>80 % Abbreviations: ND not done, Mem membrane
staining aCD10 and D2-40 was used to highlight the presence of endometrial stroma and lymphovascular invasion in the adenomyosis,
respectively Pathological results of the lesions Abbreviations: SC serous carcinoma, EIC serous endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma, EmGD
endometrial glandular dysplasia, EC endometrioid carcinoma, NA not applicable Immunostaining results of the lesionsa Abbreviations: ND not
done, Mem membrane staining aCD10 and D2-40 was used to highlight the presence of endometrial stroma and lymphovascular invasion in the
adenomyosis, respectively The uterus measured 6.5 × 3 × 3 cm. A 2.2 × 2.3 × 2.0-cm mass was found in the outer two third of the uterine
myometrium. It extended from the left side of the corpus to the isthmus. The mass had a white and coarsely trabeculated cutting surface. The
texture was similar to that of the surrounding myometrium. The boundary of the mass was not very clear. The myometrium surrounding the mass
had foci of hemorrhage. A leiomyoma with a diameter of 0.5 cm was found in the isthmus. The endometrium was atrophic and about 0.1 cm thick.
The uterine cervix was unremarkable. The specimens from the left adnexa (n = 4), the right fallopian tube (n = 2), the uterine mass, the
endometrium (n = 9) and the cervix (n = 8) were all extensively sectioned for histopathological examination. The broken specimens from the
left adnexus measured 4 × 3 × 2 cm. The fallopian fimbriae and ovary was grossly unrecognizable, but the fallopian tube was partially
recognizable with a diameter of 1.0 cm. The tubal wall measured 0.3-0.4 cm. Some cystic wall-like tissue had a thickness of 0.1-0.2 cm. Two
pieces of grey-to-white, tender solid tissues, measured 1.5 × 1.0 × 0.8 cm and 0.8 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm, separately, were present in the broken
tissues. The right fallopian tube and ovary, and omentum were grossly normal. Microscopically, the uterine mass showed neoplastic glands
splitting smooth muscle fibers (Fig. 1a). It displayed an expansive growth pattern towards the surrounding myometrium. The neoplastic glands
were lined by markedly atypical, cuboidal to columnar cells with hyperchromasia, conspicuous nucleoli, and irregular nuclear membrane and
numerous mitotic figures (>12/10HPFs) (Fig. 1b). The luminal borders were smooth, and some had epithelial tufts. Small clusters of atypical
cells surrounded by a clear space were commonly seen. However, desmoplastic stroma was inconspicuous. A small amount of benign endometrial
glands with minimal endometrial stroma were present in the adjacent normal myometrium surrounding the tumor and within the tumor,
implicating the presence of adenomyosis (Fig. 1a, c). Tumor emboli within the lymphovascular vessels were occasionally found within the
myometrium. The atrophic endometrium showed resting changes without neoplastic evidence including cancer precursor alterations. The small
nodule in the isthmus was a leiomyoma.Fig. 1Serous carcinoma in uterine adenomyosis (case 1). The uterine mass showed neoplastic glands with
marked atypia splitting smooth muscle fibers a, b. A small amount of benign endometrial glands with minimal endometrial stroma were found at
the periphery of the tumor and within the tumor, implicating the presence of adenomyosis a, c: arrows. The identical morphological changes
were seen in the left adnexus d. Both uterine and ovarian tumors showed an identical immunohistochemical profile including p53 over
expression e, high Ki67 index f, and WT1 -ve g. CD10 staining highlights the presence of endometrial stroma surrounding the benign glands in
the uterine tumor h. (Original magnifications: A*25; B*400; C-G*200) Serous carcinoma in uterine adenomyosis (case 1). The uterine mass
showed neoplastic glands with marked atypia splitting smooth muscle fibers a, b. A small amount of benign endometrial glands with minimal
endometrial stroma were found at the periphery of the tumor and within the tumor, implicating the presence of adenomyosis a, c: arrows. The
identical morphological changes were seen in the left adnexus d. Both uterine and ovarian tumors showed an identical immunohistochemical
profile including p53 over expression e, high Ki67 index f, and WT1 -ve g. CD10 staining highlights the presence of endometrial stroma
surrounding the benign glands in the uterine tumor h. (Original magnifications: A*25; B*400; C-G*200) The solid tissues in the left adnexus
showed the same morphological changes as in the uterine mass in general (Fig. 1d). However, they showed a vaguely multi-nodular growth
pattern with a prominent desmoplastic reaction. There were no benign-looking endometrioid glands in the tumor. Ovarian stroma was
discernable at the periphery of the lesion. The left fallopian tube and the cystic wall were in keeping with hydrosalpinx and showed no
evidence of serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) or serous carcinoma. Biopsy from the rectal adventitia was diagnosed as
endometriosis. Tumors from the uterine and ovarian mass showed an identical immunohistochemical profile (Table 4; Fig. 1e-g). Notably, CD10
clearly demonstrated the presence of endometrial stroma surrounding the benign glands in the uterine tumor (Fig. 1h). The uterus measured
13 × 9 × 6.5 cm. There were multiple leiomyomas in the myometrium. The largest one had a diameter of 5.0 cm. Adenomyosis was diffusely found
in the myometrium. It was characterized by the trabeculated cut surface and small foci of hemorrhage. No gross tumor was identified in the
uterine cavity. The endometrium measured 0.1 cm and looked unremarkable. The uterus including endometrium and myometroum (n = 17) were
completely examined. The fallopian fimbriae (n = 2 for each side) were also extensively investigated. The preoperative endometrial curetting
consisted of a small amount of specimen (measured 0.3 × 0.3 × 0.2 cm) with artifact crush. It showed a typical pattern of serous carcinoma
including the papillary structure with a slender fibrous core and the highly atypical lining epithelial cells. In the resected uterus, only
a small amount of serous carcinoma was found in 3 foci (each with a diameter of <0.5 mm) from 17 slides from the whole endometrium with
partial myometrium. They were all located within the endometrium, and did not show evidence of myometrial invasion. Serous EIC and
Endometrial glandular dysplasia (EmGD) was not found in the eutopic endometrium. Three small foci of serous neoplasia (2 mm-3 mm in
diameters) were found from 2 of 12 slides from the region of adenomyosis. They were clearly separated from the basalis of the endometrium.
Two lesions showed a minimal serous carcinoma and a serous EIC (Fig. 2a, 2g). The neoplastic cells showed significant atypia including
nuclear pleomorphism and prominent nucleoli (Fig. 2b). The third lesion contained a predominant component of EmGD (Fig. 2c) and a minor
serous EIC. All these lesions were surrounded by stromal cells. Lymphovascular invasion was occasionally found in the myometrium.
Immunohistochemistry showed that both SC in the endometrial curetting and SC/serous EIC in the adenomyosis had the same immunostaining
pattern (Table 4). The neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for p53 and Ki67, and negative for ER, PR and WT1 (Fig. 2h). The cells in
EmGD showed an identical staining pattern except for a moderate ER expression and a relatively lower Ki67 index (approximately 40 %)
(Fig. 2d-f).Fig. 2Serous EIC in uterine adenomyosis (case 2). A small focus of serous carcinoma and serous EIC (arrows) was present in the
adenomyosis a. The neoplastic cells showed significant atypia b. The pattern of endometrial glandular dysplasia (EmGD) was shown in another
field c. Higher magnification (original magnification *400) showed the presence of nuclear atypia in EmGD (inserted in the left lower corner
of c). The cells in EmGD showed p53 over expression d, a relatively lower Ki67 index (approximately 40 %) e, and a moderate ER expression
(++) f. The neoplastic cells in serous carcinoma and EIC (arrows) were diffusely positive for p53 g. (Original magnifications: A*50;
B-G*200) Serous EIC in uterine adenomyosis (case 2). A small focus of serous carcinoma and serous EIC (arrows) was present in the
adenomyosis a. The neoplastic cells showed significant atypia b. The pattern of endometrial glandular dysplasia (EmGD) was shown in another
field c. Higher magnification (original magnification *400) showed the presence of nuclear atypia in EmGD (inserted in the left lower corner
of c). The cells in EmGD showed p53 over expression d, a relatively lower Ki67 index (approximately 40 %) e, and a moderate ER expression
(++) f. The neoplastic cells in serous carcinoma and EIC (arrows) were diffusely positive for p53 g. (Original magnifications: A*50;
B-G*200) The cervical stump measured 5 × 5 × 4.5 cm. The mucosa looked a little bit rough, but no tumor was grossly seen in the cervical
canal. A 3 × 1.5 × 1.5-cm mass was recognizable in the myometrium. The mass had 3 small cysts containing brownish, viscous fluid. The
diameters of these cysts varied between 0.5-1.0 cm. These cysts were at least 7 mm from the endocervical surface. The left ovarian cyst
showed the similar gross features and had a size of 4 × 3.5 × 3 cm. The resected rectum measured 5.5 cm long. The intestinal wall was partly
sclerosing and hemorrhagic. The lumen became narrow, but had no macroscopic tumors or polyps. The cervical stump (n = 15) was extensively
examined for microscopic assessment. The preoperative endocervical biopsy showed a predominantly solid pattern and a minor component of
glandular structures in keeping with a poorly differentiated endometrioid carcinoma (grade 2–3). However, no residual tumors were found in
the removed cervical stump. A 0.4-cm lesion of hemorrhage with abundant hemosiderin-containing macrophages was noted at the surface of the
cervical mucosa. Three microscopic foci of serous EIC (each 1 mm in diameter) were noted in 2 of 3 adenomyotic cysts in the cervical stump.
They had a slightly papillary contour with fibrous cores and the cells displayed hobnail cellular morphology and significant atypia
(Fig. 3a, b). A focus of EmGD was seen in the adjacent area of one serous EIC lesion (Fig. 3e, f). Endometriosis was present in 4 slides
from the surrounding cervical myometrium and parametrium. The left ovarian lesion was an endometriotic cyst. The rectal serosa and
muscularis propria were significant for endometriosis. The immunostaining results of carcinoma in the endocervical biopsy and serous EIC in
the adenomyotic cyst was shown in Table 4 (Fig. 3g, h). The EmGD lesion had an expression pattern identical to serous EIC except the lower
Ki67 index (30 %) and patchy p16 staining (Fig. 3e, f).Fig. 3Serous EIC in adenomyotic cyst of the cervical stump (case 3). Serous EIC was
present in the adenomyotic cysts by showing a slightly papillary contour with fibrous cores and the cells displayed hobnail cellular
morphology and significant atypia a, b. The serous EIC showed p53 over expression c and a high Ki67 index d. A focus of EmGD and serous EIC
(arrow) was seen in the adjacent area of one serous EIC lesion e, f. The EmGD lesion showed p53 over expression g and a relatively lower
Ki67 index h. (Original magnifications: A, E*50; C, D*100; B, F-H*200) Serous EIC in adenomyotic cyst of the cervical stump (case 3). Serous
EIC was present in the adenomyotic cysts by showing a slightly papillary contour with fibrous cores and the cells displayed hobnail cellular
morphology and significant atypia a, b. The serous EIC showed p53 over expression c and a high Ki67 index d. A focus of EmGD and serous EIC
(arrow) was seen in the adjacent area of one serous EIC lesion e, f. The EmGD lesion showed p53 over expression g and a relatively lower
Ki67 index h. (Original magnifications: A, E*50; C, D*100; B, F-H*200) Carcinoma arising from adenomyosis was initially reported more than
one century ago. Sampson or Colman’s criteria for the diagnosis of carcinoma arising from adenomyosis were proposed early in 1950s [11, 12].
These includes: “1) the carcinoma must not be present in the normally situated endometrium or elsewhere in the pelvis; b) the carcinoma must
be seen to arise from the epithelium within the adenomyosis rather than invasion from another source; and c) endometrial (adenomyotic)
stromal cells must be seen to support a diagnosis of adenomyosis”. In fact, these criteria appear to be too stringent. In previous reports,
3 of 5 serous EICs and 1 of 4 carcinomas could not be classified as true tumors arising in adenomyosis if all 3 criteria should fully be
satisfied [8, 9]. However, the authors provided compelling evidence to support that their cases should be considered as originating from
adenomyosis. In this study, we also understand that our cases do not meet the Sampson or Colman’s criteria completely, but we think that
they are most likely from adenomyosis as we discuss below. The point most contradictory to the criteria in case 1 is the coexistence of
uterine and ovarian carcinoma with the identical morphological and immunostaining features. The question arises that both carcinomas are
primary or one is metastatic from the other. However, we believe that the ovarian lesion is unlikely to be primary according to the
following findings. First, the ovarian carcinoma was grossly unapparent while the uterine carcinoma was obvious. The uterine tumor was
deeply located in the myometrium. It had a relatively clear boundary and grossly looked like an adenomyoma (adenomyosis). Moreover, there
was no tumor in the pelvis beyond the left ovary and uterus. In particular, serous carcinoma and its precursor lesions were not seen in the
endometrium and cervix even after an extensive microscopic inspection on these sites. Second, the ovarian carcinoma was characterized by
overwhelmingly glandular structures with severe cytological atypia, but no papillary formation was seen. The great disagreement of structure
(G1) and nuclear grading (G3) is a classical diagnostic clue for endometrial serous carcinoma . A diffuse glandular pattern is not a common
feature for ovarian serous carcinoma. Moreover, no STIC and ovarian endometriosis was found in both fallopian tubes and ovaries. The
frequency of STICs was 61 % in pelvic high grade serous carcinoma . Endometriotic cyst can be an uncommon source of ovarian or pelvic serous
carcinoma [2, 15, 16]. In contrast, the uterine carcinoma showed a pattern of neoplastic glands intermingled with smooth muscles,
architecturally resembling an adenomyoma. Endometriosis was found in the tumor and the surrounding myometrium. Third, both uterine and
ovarian cancers were totally negative for WT1 and ER, and had p53 over expression and a high Ki67 index. It was well documented that WT1 and
ER expression was commonly present in ovarian serous carcinomas with a frequency of approximately 90 %, and very unusual in endometrial
serous carcinoma . Therefore, the WT1-ve and ER -ve pattern in both tumors of this case indicated that serous carcinoma in the uterine
myometrium was most likely primary from adenomyosis, which had largely been replaced by tumor overgrowth. Accordingly, the ovarian carcinoma
was secondary from the direct extension or lymphovascular spread of carcinoma in the uterine adenomyosis. The presence of carcinoma in the
endometrial cavity (case 2) and endocervical tube (case 3) may throw doubt on the origin of the endometriotic carcinoma from adenomyosis. We
think that these cases can be explained by synchronous growth of endometrial and endometriotic carcinomas as reported previously . In case
2, adenomyosis was diffuse and mostly was uninvolved by the serous cancer cells. The 3 involved foci of adenomyosis were separated clearly
from the basalis of the endometrium while the small endometrial carcinoma was completely limited within the endometrium. In case 3, there
was no residue tumor at the surface of the endocervix in the surgical specimens. The histotypes were different between the original
endocervical biopsy and the lesions in the cervical adenomyosis. These lesions in the adenomyotic cyst were at least 7 mm from the
endocervical surface. Moreover, all these microscopic lesions in the myometrium from case 2 and case 3 were clearly surrounded by benign
stromal cells. They had foci of EmGD and serous EIC. Serous EIC is the established precursor lesion of endometrial serous carcinoma while
EmGD is an emerging early lesion preceding EIC . Kumar et al. also emphasized that the presence of either a transition or continuity between
the benign adenomyotic endometrial glands and the carcinomatous glands was essential to prove the adenomyotic origin of the carcinoma and to
exclude the possibility of metastasis or invasion from elsewhere. The coexistence of EmGD and EIC in our cases indicates the
interrelationships between the ectopic endometrium and serous carcinoma, thus makes metastasis from the eutopic endometrium most unlikely.
Two additional points in our cases deserved further discussion. Lymphovascular invasion is uncommon in EIC although EIC can spread in the
peritoneum . However, the distinction of extensive EIC and early invasive serous carcinoma has not been well established. According to the
criteria suggested by Dr Wheeler DT, et al. , serous carcinoma in the endometrium and adenomyosis from case 2 may both represent for a
minimally invasive serous carcinoma and can cause lymphovascular invasion. However, we think that the lymphovascular invasion is most likely
associated with serous carcinoma from adenomyosis because it is present in the myometrium. Moreover, the endometrial serous carcinoma did
not show evidence of myometrial invasion. In case 3, the presence of hobnail cell changes in EIC showed overlapping features with minute
clear cell carcinoma or clear cell carcinoma in situ. However, such hobnail cellular changes can also be present in EIC . HNF1β and Napsin A
are typically expressed by clear cell carcinoma [27, 28], but they are completely negative in this case (data not shown). Taken the presence
of EmGD together, our case is regarded as EIC most likely. Two broad categories, type I and II, endometrial carcinomas have been well
documented . On the basis of these two categories, a “dualistic model” of endometrial carcinogenesis has been developed recently with the
accumulative clinical, morphological and molecular evidence . The prototype of type I carcinoma is endometrial carcinoma, which is
associated with unopposed estrogen stimulus, and favorable prognosis. Serous carcinoma is the prototype of type II carcinoma. It is
unrelated to the effect of unopposed estrogen. It invariably harbors p53 mutation and has poor prognosis. The type I carcinoma is much more
common than type II carcinoma in the uterine endometrium. Carcinoma from ectopic endometrium is not very uncommon, and most in ovarian
endometriosis. The ovarian carcinoma associated with endometriosis predominantly represents for endometrioid and clear cell types . In the
less than 50 well documented carcinomas arising from adenomyosis, only three were serous carcinoma or serous papillary carcinoma . These
data suggest that carcinomas arising from the ectopic endometrium including adenomyosis are predominantly type I over type II. Our report
not only adds new cases to this rare carcinoma arising from adenomyosis, but also provides a characteristic immunostaining profile (PTEN+,
ER-, membranous β-catenin+, p53 and p16 over expression, high Ki67 index) to uncover the distinct molecular alterations in type II
carcinoma. Abushahin et al. proved the presence of p53 mutation in 1 of 5 serous EICs arising in adenomyosis. That study also inferred that
EmGD and serous EIC, arising in adenomyosis may be underdiagnosed because of their small foci in adenomyosis. In favor of their opinion, we
observed that serous carcinomas in adenomyosis may also be under-recognized particularly when carcinoma occurred simultaneously in the
endometrium or outside the uterus. Carcinomas of the cervical stump after subtotal hysterectomy are not uncommon with an incidence of
0.1-3 %. Among these carcinomas, approximately 88 % were squamous cell carcinoma and the remaining were adenocarcinoma [31, 32]. However, we
could not find any reports on adenocarcinoma or serous EIC arising in endometriosis (adenomyotic cyst) of the cervical stump in English
literature to date. Case 3 demonstrated the presence of serous EIC in adenomyotic cyst in the cervical stump following the subtotal
hysterectomy for adenomyosis. Gynecologists might take this rare complication into account in addition to the preservation of possible
physiologic and sexual functions of the cervix when they decided to perform a proper surgery for women with diffuse uterine adenomyosis. In
summary, our cases present a rare phenomenon that serous carcinoma and EIC can arise from ectopic endometrium including uterine adenomyosis
and adenomyotic cyst in the cervical stump. Their small size as well as their inconspicuous histological features under scanning
magnification may cause these lesions to be overlooked. Such cases may potentially become the unrecognizable source of extra-uterine or
pelvic spread. These cases highlight the necessity of regular clinical follow up in patients with untreated uterine adenomyosis or subtotal
hysterectomy for adenomyosis, and more meticulous pathological inspection on the resected uterine specimens. However, more studies are
necessary to investigate the epidemiology and pathogenesis in serous carcinoma and EIC arising from ectopic endometrium, and to develop
reliable approaches to delineate these cases from benign lesions preoperatively. EIC, endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma; EmGD,
endometrial glandular dysplasia; TAHBSO, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy We especially thank Mrs. Caiyun
Zhou and Ying Shao for their technical support in this manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the National Natural Science
Foundations of China (81372790). B.L.-manuscript preparation, case collection and pathological examination. Q.C.-pathological examination.
X.Z.-pathological examination. L.C.-clinical data collection. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from each patient for publication of their Case Report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. This study was approved
by the Institutional Research Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Women’s Hospital School of Medicine Zhejiang University, China.
