Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common congenital infection, and chorioretinitis is the most common ophthalmic manifestation of congenital
CMV infection. We experienced a unique case of CMV retinopathy showing unusual retinal vessels. An infant boy weighing 1860 g was born at
36 weeks. He was diagnosed with severe symptomatic congenital CMV infection, which was confirmed by positive CMV-DNA in urine and whole
blood, and he was referred to our ophthalmology department on his first day of life. Ophthalmoscopic examination and fluorescein angiography
revealed no chorioretinitis but major retinal vascular occlusions and arterio-venous anastomosis associated with CMV detection in the
aqueous humor. These findings regressed within a week after treatment with systemic gancyclovir administration. To our knowledge, there are
no reports of these ocular issues associated with congenital CMV infection. These findings may be useful for the early and rapid diagnosis
of congenital CMV infection. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common cause of congenital infection throughout the world. The reported
prevalence of congenital CMV infection ranges from approximately 0.6 % to 6.1 % of all live births . Of those born with a congenital CMV
infection, 10 % are symptomatic at birth, and most commonly present with petechiae, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly and thrombocytopenia, and
90 % of these cases will show significant neurologic sequelae . Chorioretinitis is the most common ophthalmic manifestation of congenital
CMV infection, and the incidence of CMV chorioretinitis has been reported to be as high as 25 % of infants with symptomatic congenital CMV
infection and ~1 % of asymptomatic infants . Although no ocular abnormalities other than chorioretinitis have been reported to be associated
with congenital CMV infection, we present here a case exhibiting major retinal vascular occlusions and arterio-venous anastomosis associated
with CMV infection. These findings regressed dramatically after treatment with systemic gancyclovir administration. A Japanese infant boy
weighing 1860 g was delivered by cesarean section at 36 weeks and three days because of fetal growth restriction (FGR) and an abnormal
biophysical examination. The mother was HIV-negative but had reported a fever at four weeks of gestation, and the results of blood
examination for the mother suggested a primary CMV infection because she had positive CMV-IgG and CMV-IgM titers. During the pregnancy,
hepatosplenomegaly, intravertebral calcification and microcephaly were detected by ultrasonography and fetal magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). As a result, the infant was diagnosed with severe symptomatic congenital CMV infection. The presentation of the symptoms at birth was
consistent with congenital CMV infection, which was confirmed by positive CMV-DNA in urine and whole blood, and he was referred to our
department on his first day of life. On initial consultation, a slit-lamp examination revealed no abnormalities in the cornea, iris or
anterior chamber in either eye. Ophthalmoscopic examinations revealed posterior vessel dilation and a demarcation line at the temporal
peripheral zone in both eyes, and an arteriovenous anastomosis in the right eye. There were no signs of chorioretinitis (Fig. 1a). On the
fourth day of life, we performed fluorescein angiography (FA) for a closer examination. The results of the FA revealed a filling delay and
an arterio-venous anastomosis, but no leakage from the retinal vessels was detected. On the other hand, a small avascular zone was found at
the most peripheral retina (Fig. 1b). Since the findings were atypical of CMV retinitis, a sample of the aqueous humor was obtained with
written informed consent, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed by SRL Inc. (Tokyo, Japan) to detect CMV-DNA in the eye. The
sense and anti-sense primer sequences were TTAGTGAACCGTCAGATCGC and GCATGCATAAGAAGCCAAGG, respectively. CMV-DNA was positive in the aqueous
humor (Fig. 2c). The results established an accurate diagnosis of ocular CMV infection, and the boy received systemic antiviral therapy with
oral valgancyclovir (six weeks to complete treatment). Six days after the initiation of antiviral therapy with oral valgancyclovir, the
vessel dilation regressed completely, and the arterio-venous anastomosis improved remarkably (Fig. 1c, d). At three months of age, we re-
examined the patient using FA. The results showed that the arterio-venous anastomosis had almost completely regressed. However,
chorioretinal atrophy was found at the macula and around the optic disc (Fig. 2a, b).Fig. 1Fundus photographs and fluorescein angiography
(FA) of the right eye. Ophthalmoscopic examinations revealed posterior vessel dilation in both eyes, and an arterio-venous anastomosis
(arrow) in the middle of the retina in the right eye (a). FA revealed a filling delay and peripheral arterio-venous anastomosis (arrows). No
dye leakage was found in these vessels (b). Typical chorioretinitis was not seen. Six days after antiviral therapy with oral valgancyclovir,
the retinal vessel dilation regressed completely, and the arterio-venous anastomosis was remarkably improved (arrows) (c, d). a Fundus
photograph on the first day of life. b FA of the same eye on the first day of life. c Fundus photograph at 11 days old (6 days of antiviral
therapy). d FA of the same eye at 11 days old (6 days of antiviral therapy)Fig. 2Fundus photograph and fluorescein angiography (FA) in the
right eye at three months of age, and the results of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the detection of CMV-DNA in the aqueous humor.
The arterio-venous anastomosis initially presented in the middle of the retina had regressed (arrow); however, chorioretinal atrophy was
found at the macula and around the optic disc (a, b). Result of PCR revealed intraocular CMV infection (c). a Fundus photograph at three
months of age. b FA of the same eye at three months of age. c Results of the PCR for the detection of CMV-DNA (white arrow: patient sample;
green dotted arrow: positive control; yellow dotted arrow: negative control; red arrow: endogenous control) Fundus photographs and
fluorescein angiography (FA) of the right eye. Ophthalmoscopic examinations revealed posterior vessel dilation in both eyes, and an arterio-
venous anastomosis (arrow) in the middle of the retina in the right eye (a). FA revealed a filling delay and peripheral arterio-venous
anastomosis (arrows). No dye leakage was found in these vessels (b). Typical chorioretinitis was not seen. Six days after antiviral therapy
with oral valgancyclovir, the retinal vessel dilation regressed completely, and the arterio-venous anastomosis was remarkably improved
(arrows) (c, d). a Fundus photograph on the first day of life. b FA of the same eye on the first day of life. c Fundus photograph at 11 days
old (6 days of antiviral therapy). d FA of the same eye at 11 days old (6 days of antiviral therapy) Fundus photograph and fluorescein
angiography (FA) in the right eye at three months of age, and the results of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the detection of CMV-
DNA in the aqueous humor. The arterio-venous anastomosis initially presented in the middle of the retina had regressed (arrow); however,
chorioretinal atrophy was found at the macula and around the optic disc (a, b). Result of PCR revealed intraocular CMV infection (c). a
Fundus photograph at three months of age. b FA of the same eye at three months of age. c Results of the PCR for the detection of CMV-DNA
(white arrow: patient sample; green dotted arrow: positive control; yellow dotted arrow: negative control; red arrow: endogenous control)
CMV is the most common congenital and perinatal viral infection and the fetus may become infected as a consequence of primary and recurrent
maternal infections . Five percent of all congenitally infected children have severe disease, another 5 % have mild involvement, and 90 %
are born with subclinical but chronic CMV infections . Long-term sequelae occur in 40–58 % of symptomatic children and in 13.5 % of
asymptomatic children at birth . The most characteristic neurological problems include a mild increase in cerebrospinal fluid protein,
sensorineural hearing loss and chorioretinitis. Active CMV infection is confirmed by virus isolation from the urine, saliva, washings,
breast milk, cervical secretions and tissues obtained by biopsy using PCR for the detection of CMV-DNA. CMV retinitis is known to occur in
immunosuppressed individuals, and its incidence has increased over the last few years as a result of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) . However, congenital CMV infection-associated retinitis may occur in patients with no systemic immune dysfunction . The present
patient was referred to us at 1 day of age, and he showed remarkable dilation of the retinal vessels and arterio-venous anastomoses in both
eyes associated with congenital symptomatic CMV infection. Although the extent of immunosuppression was not determined, the diagnosis was
made by clinical findings and cultures of blood and urine, from which the virus was isolated. These findings strongly suggested an active,
systemic CMV infection. However, retinal arterio-venous anastomosis has not been previously described in conjunction with congenital CMV
infection except for one German article that reported aplasia of retinal vessels in a patient with congenital CMV infection . As a
differential diagnosis, we considered ROP due to FGR. However, it is unlikely that retinal vessel abnormalities due to ROP would promptly
regress in a few days with only oral valgancyclovir. The present case showed retinal vessel abnormalities at 1 day of age after 36 weeks’
gestation. A previous report demonstrated severe retinitis and optic neuritis at 1 day of age in an infant born at 35 weeks’ gestation
weighing 1180 g . Interestingly, rapid and dramatic improvement of retinitis and optic neuritis was observed three days after an
intravitreal injection of ganciclovir in that case; a similar rapid improvement was found in the present case. Therefore, we speculated that
the fundus manifestations might be affected by the underlying state (including duration) of the ocular CMV infection although the details
remain unclear. However, it is possible that our case also had mild retinitis and optic neuritis since chorioretinal atrophy at the macula
and around the optic disc was subsequently found at three months of age. The mechanism describing how CMV influences retinal vascular
structure is largely unknown, but previous studies showed that CMV induces proinflammatory and angiogenic cytokines in retinal pericytes
[10, 11] and induces an anti-migratory and anti-angiogenic endothelial cell phenotype. These two changes could have a detrimental effect on
vasculature development. We presented here the first ocular findings of congenital CMV infection. These findings might be retinal
manifestations of congenital CMV infection. AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CMV, cytomegalovirus; FA, fluorescein angiography;
FGR, fetal growth restriction; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; ROP, retinopathy of prematurity. There is no
financial support regarding this manuscript. No funding was obtained for this study. MT: Ophthalmic data collection, writing the article.
SH: Ophthalmic data collection, writing the article. IM: Systemic data collection about the infant, critical revision of the article. KI:
Critical revision of the article. HY: Data collection about the mother, critical revision of the article. MN: Critical revision of the
article. All authors have given final approval of the version to be published and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work by
ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Clinical data collection and the use of human materials were approved by the Ethical
Committee of Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine (no. 1214), and written informed consent was obtained from the parents to publish
this report. Not applicable.
