Postoperative optic opacification of hydrophilic acrylic intraocular lenses (IOLs) is an uncommon complication leading to IOL explantation.
In the past decade, several studies reported that the granular deposits responsible for the opacification were probably calcium and
phosphate salts; however, the exact mechanism causing calcification of IOLs is unknown. The aim of this study is to describe clinical and
laboratory findings of a case of late postoperative opacification of an aspheric hydrophilic acrylic IOL (Akreos Adapt AO) after vitrectomy.
A 60-year-old woman diagnosed with cataract and severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) underwent uneventful phacoemulsification
and hydrophilic acrylic IOL (Akreos Adapt AO, Bausch & Lomb) implantation in both eyes. Seven months later, the woman came back with a
complaint of blurry vision in the left eye. Fundus examination revealed vitreous hemorrhage in the left eye veiling the retinal detail. A
23-gauge vitrectomy with endolaser treatment was performed in the left eye. Ten months after the vitrectomy, the patient complained of
decreased visual acuity in the left eye again. On slit-lamp examination, we observed a well circumscribed centrally and paracentrally
located opacification within the pupillary area localized to the anterior surface of the IOL. The IOL was explanted from the left eye
together with the capsular bag, and an iris-claw lens (Artisan Aphakia OPHTEC) was implanted. The explanted IOL was examined under
pathological evaluation (alizarin red method). IOL opacification is a rare event. We described a case of postoperative opacification of the
Akreos Adapt AO IOL after vitrectomy in a patient with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and found the deposits on the anterior surface of
the IOL consisted of calcium aggregates. Given the higher frequency of postoperative opacification observed in diabetic patients,
hydrophilic acrylic IOLs should be used with caution in patients with diabetes. Postoperative optic opacification of hydrophilic acrylic
intraocular lenses (IOLs) is an uncommon complication leading to IOL explantation. In the past decade, several studies reported that the
granular deposits responsible for the opacification were probably calcium and phosphate salts ; however, the exact mechanism causing
calcification of IOLs is unknown. The aim of this study is to describe clinical and laboratory findings of a case of late postoperative
opacification of an aspheric hydrophilic acrylic IOL (Akreos Adapt AO) after vitrectomy. In February 2014, a 60-year-old woman with type 2
diabetes was referred to our hospital. She was diagnosed with cataract and severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) in both eyes.
On examination she had best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) 0.02 in the right eye and 0.01 in the left eye. She underwent uneventful
phacoemulsification and hydrophilic acrylic IOL (Akreos Adapt AO, Bausch & Lomb) implantation in both eyes. Two weeks after cataract surgery
the BCVA in the left eye improved to 0.4. Then she had fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and received panretinal photocoagulation in both
eyes. In September 2014, the woman came back with complaint of blurry vision in the left eye. Fundus examination revealed vitreous
hemorrhage in the left eye veiling the retinal detail. We performed a 23-gauge vitrectomy with endolaser treatment in the left eye. Ten
months after the vitrectomy (July 2015), the patient complained of decreased visual acuity in the left eye again (the BCVA was 0.1). On
slit-lamp examination, we observed a well circumscribed centrally and paracentrally located opacification within the pupillary axis
localized to the anterior surface of the IOL (Fig. 1). Scheimpflug pictures taken by Pentacam (Oculus) showed increased light scatter on the
IOL’s anterior surface (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Slit-lamp photographs taken before IOL explantationFig. 2Light scatter was high at the anterior
surface of the explanted IOL under Scheimpflug photography, within the area corresponding to the granular deposits Slit-lamp photographs
taken before IOL explantation Light scatter was high at the anterior surface of the explanted IOL under Scheimpflug photography, within the
area corresponding to the granular deposits The IOL was explanted from the left eye together with the capsular bag, and an iris-claw lens
(Artisan Aphakia OPHTEC) was implanted (Fig. 3). Three days after the operation, the BCVA improved to 0.2.Fig. 3Surgical exchange of the
opacified Akreos Adapt AO IOL. Opacified IOL explantation together with the capsular bag. An iris-claw lens was implanted Surgical exchange
of the opacified Akreos Adapt AO IOL. Opacified IOL explantation together with the capsular bag. An iris-claw lens was implanted The
explanted IOL was sent to research center of Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences. The unstained IOL was evaluated and photographed under a
light microscope (Olympus Optical Co.,Ltd.). Then the IOL was rinsed in distilled water, immersed in 1.0 % alizarin red solution (a special
stain for calcium) for 10 min, rinsed again in distilled water, and reexamined under the light microscope. Light microscopy showed the
presence of granular deposits distributed in an overall round pattern on the anterior surface of the IOL. The granules were stained positive
for calcium (alizarin red method) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Light photomicrographs of the explanted IOL. Unstained photomicrographs showing the
deposits on the anterior surface of the explanted IOL (a, original magnification × 20; b, ×100; c, ×200). The deposits stained positive with
alizarin red. (d, original magnification × 20; e, ×100; f, ×200) Light photomicrographs of the explanted IOL. Unstained photomicrographs
showing the deposits on the anterior surface of the explanted IOL (a, original magnification × 20; b, ×100; c, ×200). The deposits stained
positive with alizarin red. (d, original magnification × 20; e, ×100; f, ×200) To date, postoperative opacification of modern hydrophilic
acrylic IOLs has been reported in many cases. The five major hydrophilic acrylic IOLs include Hydroview (Bausch & Lomb), the SC60B-OUV
(Medical Developmental Research, Inc.), ACRL-60 (Ophthalmed Inc.), MemoryLens (Ciba Vision) and AquaSense (Ophthalmic Innovations
International, Inc.) . Histopathological analysis and molecular surface analysis have been performed on the explanted opacified IOLs, and
calcium and phosphate precipitations were found on the surface/subsurface and/or within the IOLs. Akreos adapt AO is a modern aberration-
free aspheric hydrophilic acrylic lens. Only sporadic cases of optic opacification involving the Akreos adapt AO IOL have been described
(Table 1). In 2008, Shiu Ting Mak et al. reported the first case of opacification of the Akreos Adapt AO IOL. The explanted IOL in their
case was examined under scanning electron microscopy, and foci of calcium and phosphorous were seen in the IOL material. Liliana Werner et
al. described another two cases of localized opacification of Akreos adapt AO IOL after procedures using intracameral injection of air or
gas. It was theorized that a metabolic change in the anterior chamber due to the presence of exogenous gas in the eye, or an exacerbated
inflammatory reaction after multiple surgical procedures might cause the calcification of IOL. Later Mattro Forlini et al. and Chong Eun Lee
et al. each outlined a single case developing optic opacification after glaucoma surgeries using Akreos adapt AO IOL separately; however,
pathologic analysis were unavailable in those two cases.Table 1Six cases of opacifiaction of Akreos Adapt AO IOL reported so
farReporterAssociated ocular conditionsOther historyOther ocular surgeries/proceduresShiu Ting Mak et al.a history of anterior
uveitisischemic heart disease, hypertension, and goutLiliana Werner et al.Fuchs dystrophyDescemet-stripping automated endothelial
keratoplasty (DSAEK)Liliana Werner et al.Fuchs dystrophydiabetesrepeated DSAEK with complete gas fillMattro Forlini et al.glaucomadiabetes
and hypertensionEx-press device implantationChong Eun Lee et al.neovascular glaucomadiabetesAhmed valve implantationcurrent
studyPDRdiabetes23-gauge vitrectomy Six cases of opacifiaction of Akreos Adapt AO IOL reported so far In the present study, the deposits on
the explanted IOL stained positive with alizarin red (a special stain for calcium). The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes for more
than five years. She received phacoemulsification and was implanted with Akreos adapt AO IOLs in both eyes; however, only the left eye which
presented with vitreous hemorrhage and received vitrectomy developed calcification of the IOL. We presume that preexisting diabetic
retinopathy, inflammatory reaction after vitrectomy or a breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier (BAB) may be responsible for the
opacification. We noticed a higher rate of diabetes in patients with opacification of Akreos Adapt AO IOLs (four out of six patients having
concomitant diabetes). Previous studies also supported that IOL opacification was most common in patients with systemic diseases such as
diabetes [9, 10]. First of all, in cases of diabetic retinopathy (DR), where many pathological conditions such as ischemia/hypoxia, shear
stress and inflammation play a role, intravitreal levels of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) are significantly increased as compared with those
in non-diabetic controls . Therefore, increased calcium influx is evoked by intravitreal ATP. Secondly, in the eyes of DR a higher
concentration of intravitreal protein is identified. This is involved in the production of angiotensin I and elevates the concentration of
serum calcium. A combination of the two hypotheses may lead to the higher incidence of IOL calcification in diabetic patients. However, we
are unable to establish a correlation between these complications and diabetes. Further study is warranted to continue monitoring cases of
hydrophilic acrylic IOL calcification to verify the percentage of cases associated with diabetes or DR. IOL opacification is a rare event.
We described a case of postoperative opacification of Akreos Adapt AO IOL after vitrectomy in a patient with proliferative diabetic
retinopathy and found the deposits on the anterior surface of the IOL consisted of calcium aggregates. Given the higher frequency of
postoperative opacification observed in diabetic patients, hydrophilic acrylic IOLs should be used with caution in patients with diabetes.
ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; BCVA, Best corrected visual acuity; DR, Diabetic retinopathy; DSAEK, Descemet-stripping automated endothelial
keratoplasty; FFA, fundus fluorescein angiography; IOL, Intraocular lens The authors thank the patient and her daughter who generously
agreed to participate in this medical report. National Natural Science Foundation of China (Number: 81500737) DC drafted the manuscript,
participated in the histopathologic procedures, collected the data, and reviewed the literature. HZ and CY were involved in the design of
the study, interpretation of the data, drafting of the manuscript. LZ was the retinal specialist who performed the vitrectomy and IOL
exchange for this patient. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. This study has been performed in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Guangdong General Hospital (registration number: gdrec2015160A).
