Osteopoikilosis is a benign but rare condition characterized by bone islands throughout the osseous tissue, which could be easily confused
with bone metastasis. We present a case of a 37-year-old man presented to orthopedic outpatient clinic with right hip pain for 2 weeks.
There were multiple, small punctate lesions scattered throughout the skeleton on radiograph. Subsequent Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate (MDP)
bone scan with pelvic single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/computed tomography (CT) showed multiple enostoses without abnormal
focal MDP uptake. Therefore, clinical diagnosis was compatible with osteopoikilosis while bone metastasis was unlikely. The symptoms then
improved by conservative treatments. Osteopoikilosis is usually an incidental finding on radiograph or CT, and a normal MDP confirmed the
diagnosis by excluding bone metastasis. It is important for clinicians to recognize the specific image features to prevent further
unnecessary interventions. In addition, bone SPECT/CT could also make the diagnosis in one step. Osteopoikilosis is a rare benign bone
dysplasia usually incidentally found on radiographs or computed tomography (CT) scans. Is it usually asymptomatic and characterized by
multiple enostoses throughout the skeleton, but rarely there might be mild pain. Radionuclide bone scan plays a critical role in
distinguishing from osteoblastic bone metastasis. It is important for clinicians to recognize the image patterns to avoid further
unnecessary interventions. A 37-year-old man without major medical history presented to orthopedic outpatient clinic with multiple joint
pain especially at right hip for 2 weeks. Physical examination showed no limited range of motion nor focal inflammation sign. Pelvic X-ray
film (Fig. 1) showed multiple discrete round radio-densities, known as bone islands, scattered throughout the pelvic bone, sacrum, lumbar
spines, and bilateral proximal femur. To exclude osteoblastic bone metastases, whole-body Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate bone scintigraphy
with pelvis single-photon emission tomography (SPECT)/CT regional scan was arranged. There was significant abnormal uptake (Fig. 2, panel A)
on bone scintigraphy. Pelvic SPECT/CT (Fig. 2, panel B–G) of coronal and transverse views clearly revealed clusters of multiple, discrete,
small punctuate, and hyperdense lesions without focal Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate-avid uptake throughout the pelvic bones and bilateral
proximal femurs. Therefore, diagnosis of osteopoikilosis was made. The right hip discomfort then gradually subsided after supportive therapy
including rest and oral nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Radiograph of pelvis showed multiple bone islands symmetrically distributed at
the skeleton, primarily on pelvic bone, sacrum, and bilateral proximal femur. There was no obvious increased uptake on (A) whole body bone
scan; however, (B–D) coronal and (E–F) transverse views of pelvis SPECT/CT showed numerous sclerosing lesions devoid of significant Tc-99m
MDP avid uptake. CT ,computed tomography; MDP, methylene diphosphonate; SPECT, single-photon emission computerized tomography. First
described in 1915 by Albers-Schonberg, osteopoikilosis is a benign bone condition with numerous sclerosing bone islands throughout the
skeleton. It is a rare condition with incidence estimated around 1 in 50,000, and usually without age or gender differences. It is usually
autosomal dominant in inheritance, but sporadic forms are also reported. The patients are usually asymptomatic and incidentally found with
clusters of multiple enostoses predominantly on spongy cancellous bone on radiographs or CT scans, but up to 20% might complained of
articular pain. Current literatures suggest loss-of-function mutations of LEM domain containing 3 (LEMD3) gene located on 12q might be the
cause, and the mutation could also affect soft tissue and skin, resulting in melorheostosis and Buschke–Ollendorff syndrome. A normal
radionuclide bone scan excludes the possibility of osteoblastic bone metastasis. However, sometimes an abnormal bone scan, usually mild,
could be seen, which reflects active osseous remodeling. Hybrid SPECT/CT images could be a good choice for differential diagnosis in
unexplained bone pain in one step. Furthermore, it is important for clinicians to recognize the image presentations to avoid unnecessary
examinations and treatments. The study was approved by the institutional review board of Far Eastern Memorial Hospital. The patient written
informed consent was waived due to the retrospective nature, and the patient information was anonymized and deidentified. Abbreviations: CT
= computed tomography, SPECT = single-photon emission computerized tomography. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to
disclose.
