Glycopyrronium bromide has recently been approved as a once daily maintenance inhalation therapy for moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Efficacy and safety trial data have found rare cases of significant QT prolongation. To our knowledge, we describe
the first case report of QT prolongation >600 ms with initiation of glycopyrronium bromide in a real world setting. A 78-year-old female
with moderate COPD recently started on glycopyrronium bromide, presented to Emergency Department (ED) with syncope. Her past medical history
was significant for a left total mastectomy and she had been on Tamoxifen for 9 months. One day prior to her presentation, she had visited a
naturopathic clinic for a vitamin infusion resulting in emesis. The following day she continued to feel dizzy and had a witnessed syncopal
episode without any reported cardiac or neurological symptoms preceding the event or after regaining consciousness. In the emergency
department, she reported dizziness and was found to be hypotensive. Her symptoms completely resolved with intravenous fluids. Lab work was
normal however her electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated a QTc interval of 603 and 631 ms (Friderica and Bazett’s respectively) with a normal
QT interval on her baseline ECG prior to initiating Tamoxifen. She was admitted to the Cardiology service for further work-up of QT
prolongation. Her syncope was felt to be due to orthostatic hypotension and the QT prolongation secondary to medications, which were both
discontinued during her admission. After 2 days, her QT interval normalized consistent with the half-life of Glycopyrronium bromide
(13–57 h) compared to Tamoxifen (8–14 days). Glycopyrronium bromide is guideline recommended as first line therapy for prevention of
exacerbation in moderate to severe COPD however safety data had been limited to select populations. This case report highlights the need for
future studies to identify high-risk populations at potential risk of life-threatening arrhythmias who may benefit from periodic ECG
surveillance. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common condition, comprising of a spectrum of emphysema, bronchitis and
bronchiolitis that involves parenchymal destruction and infiltration . Pharmacologic maintenance therapy for COPD involves bronchodilation
via β-2 adrenergic agonist, corticosteroids, anticholinergics and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) . Glycopyrronium bromide (GB) is
a recently approved synthetic competitive muscarinic antagonist that acts at the bronchial smooth muscle and inhibits acetylcholine-mediated
bronchoconstriction. GB is recommended as first line therapy for preventing exacerbations in moderate to severe COPD . Efficacy and safety
trial data in selected populations have found variable results regarding QT prolonging effects with GB therapy and rare cases of QT
prolongation >500 ms . A small, randomized controlled study found no repolarization abnormalities with a single supra-therapeutic dosing of
GB in young, healthy adults . After extensive investigation and consideration of other possible offending medication, we report here the
first case of severe and transient QT prolongation consistent with pharmacokinetics of GB in the real-world setting. A 78-year-old female
with a past medical history significant for breast cancer and moderate COPD presented to Emergency Department with syncope. Nine months
prior to admission, she underwent left total mastectomy for invasive ductal carcinoma and was started on Tamoxifen 20 mg daily. Home
medications included GB 50 mcg once daily, Salbutamol, calcium and a multi-vitamin. GB was started 3 months prior to her presentation for
syncope. The day prior to admission, she received an IV vitamin infusion consisting of a mixture of thiamine, folic acid, multivitamin and
magnesium sulfate at a naturopath clinic. Shortly after completion of the IV infusion, she developed emesis and took 2 tablets of
dimenhydrinate. The following day, she reported dizziness as she walked across the kitchen and passed out after sitting in a chair. The
patient reported no palpitations, chest discomfort, nausea, warm sensation or diaphoresis prior to the syncope event. She was not witnessed
to have any seizure like activity and when she regained consciousness, reported immediate awareness of surroundings with no neurological
deficits, no tongue biting, bowel or urinary incontinence. There was no previous history of syncope and no family history of sudden cardiac
death. Her initial blood pressure in the ambulance was 70/50 mm Hg. Hemodynamics normalized after administration of intravenous fluid and
her symptoms resolved. Oxygen saturation was above 97 % and telemetry revealed normal sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 77. Precordial
examination was unremarkable with regular normal heart sounds and no murmurs. In the Emergency Department, blood tests including complete
blood count (CBC), serum electrolytes (potassium, calcium, magnesium), glucose, creatinine and thyroid stimulating hormone were normal.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a corrected QT interval using Fridericia (QTcF) and Bazett’s formula (QTcB) of 603 and 631 ms respectively
(Fig. 1) and she was admitted to the cardiology service for further investigation of the etiology for her QT
prolongation.Fig. 1Electrocardiogram at hospital presentation demonstrating prolonged corrected QT intervals of 603 ms using Fridericia’s
equation and 631 ms using Bazett’s formula Electrocardiogram at hospital presentation demonstrating prolonged corrected QT intervals of
603 ms using Fridericia’s equation and 631 ms using Bazett’s formula Prior to starting Tamoxifen her QTcF and QTcB were 439 and 440 ms
respectively (Fig. 2), however no ECG was obtained after initiation of Tamoxifen and prior to starting GB. Her last dose of Tamoxifen and GB
were the day of admission with both medications discontinued at presentation.Fig. 2Electrocardiogram prior to starting Tamoxifen with
corrected QT intervals of 439 ms using Fridericia’s equation and 440 ms using Bazett’s formula Electrocardiogram prior to starting Tamoxifen
with corrected QT intervals of 439 ms using Fridericia’s equation and 440 ms using Bazett’s formula An echocardiogram revealed that her left
ventricular ejection fraction was >60 % with no valvular or regional wall motion abnormalities. Serial electrocardiograms demonstrated
corrected QTcF and QTcB respectively of 603 and 631 ms day 0, 496 and 514 ms day 1, and 446 and 455 ms on day 2 and 442 and 460 ms on day 3
(Fig. 3). There were no arrhythmias seen on telemetry. Syncope was felt to be secondary to orthostatic changes and she was discharged on day
3 after admission.Fig. 3Electrocardiogram 72 h after stopping glycopyrronium with corrected QT intervals of 442 ms using Fridericia’s
equation and 460 ms using Bazett’s formula Electrocardiogram 72 h after stopping glycopyrronium with corrected QT intervals of 442 ms using
Fridericia’s equation and 460 ms using Bazett’s formula The QT interval represents the time interval between the onset of the QRS complex
and the end of the T wave including ventricular depolarization and repolarization. There are many factors that can induce QT prolongation
including left ventricular hypertrophy, heart failure, myocardial ischemia, hypertension, diabetes, thyroid dysfunction, bradycardia and
electrolyte abnormalities including hypokalemia and hypomagnesaemia. Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is due to direct mutations in
specific genes such as the cardiac delayed rectifier potassium channel (KCNQ1 and KCNH2) or the cardiac sodium channel (SCN5A). In
congenital LQTS, exercise, emotional or physical stress is presumed to be an underlying trigger for long QT events. Aside from congenital
LQTS, there is a 30 % heritability of the QT interval in the general population . Medications represent one of the largest causes of
prolonged QT . The primary mechanism of drug induced QT prolongation is blockade of the rapid component of the delayed rectifier potassium
channel leading to prolonged action potential duration . Drugs that inhibit the human ether-à-go-go-related gene (hERG) K+ channel have the
highest risk of QT prolongation. HERG inhibition increasing susceptibility to early after depolarization that can result in torsades de
pointes (TdP) and a risk of sudden cardiac death [11, 12, 14]. In our case, the possible offending drugs responsible for QT prolongation
were GB and Tamoxifen. The pharmacokinetics of the two drugs differs considerably; the half-life of GB is 13–57 h while that of Tamoxifen is
4–9 days with a single dose. Clinical studies of QT prolongation associated with Tamoxifen reported normalization of the QT interval within
8–14 days after drug cessation [15, 16]. There are no known drug interactions between the anticholinergic properties of GB and estrogen
receptor properties of Tamoxifen and both have different excretion pathways . The mechanism of action for GB is via Muscarinic M1 and M3
receptor blockade, which prevents parasympathetic mediated bronchoconstriction . GB has less selectivity toward the M2 receptor present in
the heart, pacemaker cells and conduction system . In experimental studies, the effects on the hERG K+ channel blockade channels have
previously been examined during product safety development. In-vitro patch clamp experiments reported a progressive dose dependent
inhibition of hERG current . Inhibition of the hERG current was 0.6 % for the vehicle and 13.2, 18.3 and 30.6 % for 3.2, 31.8 and 95.5 μg/mL
of GB respectively. Novartis product normogram mentions an IC50 value of >300μM, which is greater than 500,000 times of the maximal
recommended concentration Cmax [19, 20]. Electrophysiological rabbit studies reported no proarrhythmic activity at supertherapeutic dosing.
Furthermore, telelmetry studies on beagle dogs with supertherapeutic IV GB (12 > Cmax in humans) reporting a transient QTc shortening of up
to 30 s observed for up to 2 h . In clinical studies, the safety and efficacy of GB have been studied in six randomized controlled studies
(GLycopyrronium bromide in COPD airWays—GLOW) . The safety profile testing for GB in the GLOW trials excluded patients with a QTc greater
than 450 ms in males and 470 ms in females. Other exclusion criteria included moderate or severe renal dysfunction, prior lung cancer,
active infection, urinary retention or history of alpha 1 anti-trypsin. A history of breast cancer was not specifically reported as an
exclusion criterion. Three of these trials reported slightly variable results ranging from no significant incidence to low incidence of QT
prolongation in GB compared to placebo or active comparator, and rare reports of QT prolongation >500 ms (Table 1) . In the GLOW trials no
significant QT prolongation was noted between GB versus placebo. The variable QT results in the GLOW trials prompted a randomized, partially
blind, placebo and positive (moxifloxacin) control, 3 way cross-over study among 73 healthy adults . Compared to placebo, no significant QT
prolonging effect was observed after inhalation of a single supra-therapeutic (400 μg) dose of GB.Table 1Summary Table of the glycopyrronium
QTCF effects in the GLOW 1–6 trials (the GB in COPD airWays studies)Aim of study; study size (N)Patient populationStudy interventionStudy
comparatorQT prolongationGLOW-1Aim Efficacy, safety and tolerability of GB in moderate/severe COPDStudy type Randomized controlled trial
double blindSize n = 822 Inclusion criteria GOLD criteria—moderate to severe ≥40 years of age Smoking history of ≥10 pack-years Exclusion
criteriaPost-bronchodilator FEV1 of <80 and ≥30 % of predicted FEV1/FVC ratio of <0.70 Lower respiratory tract infection (RTI) within
6 weeks; concomitant pulmonary disease history of asthma or lung cancer Long QT syndrome: QTc >450 ms (males) or >470 (females) Symptomatic
prostatic hyperplasia Bladder-neck obstruction Moderate/severe renal impairment Urinary retention Narrow—angle glaucoma History of alpha-1
antitrypsin Intervention GB n = 552, completed 26 week trial n = 450 Comparator Placebo n = 270, completed 26 week trial n = 212
QTcF >500 ms GB: n = 0 (0 %)Placebo: n = 0 (0 %) Increase of 30–60 ms GB: n = 59 (10.7 %)Placebo n = 21 (7.9 %) Increase of >60 ms GB: n = 6
(1.1 %) Placebo: n = 1 (0.4 %)GLOW-2Aim Efficacy, safety and tolerability of GB in moderate/severe COPD vs placebo vs tiotropiumStudy
type Randomized controlled trial (double blind)Size n = 1066 Inclusion criteria Males and females ≥40 years of age Smoking history of ≥10
pack-years GOLD moderate-to-severe COPD Post-bronchodilator FEV1 ≥30 and <80 % of the predicted Post-broncho-dilator FEV1/FVC <0.70
Exclusion criteria Lower RTI 6 weeks prior Concomitant pulmonary disease Intervention GB n = 529, completed 52 week trial n = 411 Comparator
Placebo n = 269, completed 52 week trial n = 193 Tiotropium n = 268 completed 52 week trial n = 206 QTcF >500 ms GB: n = 2 (0.4 %) Placebo:
n = 2 (0.7 %) Tiotropium: n = 0 (0 %) Increase of 30–60 ms: GB: n = 83 (15.8 %) Placebo: n = 39 (14.6 %) Tiotropium: n = 43 (16.2 %)
Increase of >60 ms GB: n = 1 (0.2 %) Placebo: n = 1 (0.4 %) Tiotropium: n = 0 (0 %) Pulmonary tuberculosis Bronchiectasis History of asthma
Malignancy of any system Long QT syndrome or QTc >450 ms (males) or >470 (females) Symptomatic prostatic hyperplasia Bladder-neck
obstruction Moderate/severe renal impairment Urinary retention Narrow-angle glaucoma History of a1-antitrypsin deficiency Active in
pulmonary rehabilitation Contraindications for tiotropium or ipratropium or history of adverse reactions to inhaled
anticholinergicsGLOW-3AimExercise tolerance with once daily GBStudy type Randomized Controlled Trial (Double blind)Size n = 108 Inclusion
criteria GOLD moderate to severe COPD Aged ≥ 40 years Smoking history ≥10 pack-years Post-bronchodilator FEV1 <80 % ≥40 % of predicted
normal Post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC of <70 %. Exclusion criteria Lower RTI prior 6 weeks Oxygen for chronic hypoxemia Concomitant pulmonary
disease Intervention GB n = 55 Comparator Placebo n = 53QTcF—not measured Pulmonary tuberculosis Bronchiectasis History of asthma Malignancy
of any system Long QT syndrome QTc >450 ms for males or >470 ms for females, Symptomatic prostatic hyperplasia Bladder-neck
obstruction Moderate/severe renal impairment Urinary retention Narrow-angle glaucoma Alpha-1 anti- trypsin deficiency Adverse reactions to
inhaled anticholinergic agents, long- and short-acting alpha-agonists or Sympathomimetic amines Active pulmonary
rehabilitationGLOW-4AimEfficacy, safety and tolerability of GB in moderate/severe COPD vs tiotropium in the Japanese PopulationStudy
type Randomized controlled trial (Double blind)Size n = 163 Inclusion criteria GOLD moderate-to-severe COPD Males and females ≥40 years of
age Smoking history of ≥10 pack-years GOLD moderate-to-severe COPD Post-bronchodilator FEV1 ≥30 and <80 % of the predicted Post-broncho-
dilator FEV1/FVC <0.70 Exclusion criteria Lower RTI prior 6 weeks Oxygen for chronic hypoxemia Concomitant pulmonary disease Intervention GB
n = 123 Comparator Placebo n = 40QTcF—not measured Pulmonary tuberculosis Bronchiectasis History of asthma Malignancy of any system Long QT
syndrome QTc >450 ms for males or >470 ms for females, Symptomatic prostatic hyperplasia Bladder-neck obstruction Moderate/severe renal
impairment Urinary retention Narrow-angle glaucoma Alpha-1 anti- trypsin deficiency Adverse reactions to inhaled anticholinergic agents,
long- and short-acting alpha-agonists or sympathomimetic amines Active pulmonary rehabilitationGLOW-5AimEfficacy, safety and tolerability of
GB in moderate/severe COPD vs once daily tiotropiumStudy type Randomized controlled trial (double blind)Size n = 657 Inclusion criteria GOLD
moderate-to-severe COPD Males and females ≥40 yrs of age Smoking history of ≥10 pack-yrs GOLD moderate-to-severe COPD Post-bronchodilator
FEV1 ≥30 % and <80 % of the predicted Post-broncho-dilator FEV1/FVC <0.70 Exclusion criteria Lower RTI prior 6 weeks Oxygen for chronic
hypoxemia Concomitant pulmonary disease Intervention GB n = 327, completed 12 week trial n = 314 Comparator Tiotropium n = 320, completed
12 week trial n = 316 QTcF >480 ms GB: n = 2 (0.64) % Tiotropium: n = 0 (0 %) QTcF increase 30–60 ms: GB: n = 11 (3.4 %) Tiotropium: n = 10
(3 %) Pulmonary tuberculosis Bronchiectasis History of asthma Malignancy of any system Long QT syndrome QTc > 450 ms for males or > 470 ms
for females, Symptomatic prostatic hyperplasia Bladder-neck obstruction Moderate/severe renal impairment Urinary retention Narrow-angle
glaucoma Alpha-1 anti- trypsin deficiency Adverse reactions to inhaled anticholinergic agents, long- and short-acting alpha-agonists or
sympathomimetic amines Active pulmonary rehabilitationGLOW-6AimEfficacy, safety and tolerability of GB and indacaterol vs indacaterol alone
in moderate/severe COPDStudy type Randomized controlled trial (double blind)Size n = 449 Inclusion criteria GOLD moderate-to-severe
COPD Males and females ≥ 40 yrs of age Smoking history of ≥ 10 pack-yrs GOLD moderate-to-severe COPD Post-bronchodilator FEV1 ≥ 30 %
and < 80 % of the predicted Post-broncho-dilator FEV1/FVC < 0.70 Exclusion criteria Lower RTI prior 6 weeks Oxygen for chronic
hypoxemia Concomitant pulmonary disease Intervention GB + Indacaterol n = 226Completed 12 week trial n = 212 Comparator Indacaterol n = 223
completed 12 week trial n = 210 QTcF >500 ms: GB +Ind: n = 0 (0 %) Ind: n = 0 (0 %) QTcF increase 30–60 ms: GB + Ind: n = 14 (6.5 %) Ind:
n = 9 (4.2 %) Pulmonary tuberculosis Bronchiectasis History of asthma Malignancy of any system Long QT syndrome QTc > 450 ms for males
or > 470 ms for females, Symptomatic prostatic hyperplasia Bladder-neck obstruction Moderate/severe renal impairment Urinary
retention Narrow-angle glaucoma Alpha-1 anti- trypsin deficiency Adverse reactions to inhaled anticholinergic agents, long- and short-acting
alpha-agonists or sympathomimetic amines Active pulmonary rehabilitation Atrial fibrillation NYHA III or IV symptoms FEV 1 forced expiratory
volume in 1 second, FVC forced vital capacity, RTI respiratory tract infection Summary Table of the glycopyrronium QTCF effects in the GLOW
1–6 trials (the GB in COPD airWays studies) FEV 1 forced expiratory volume in 1 second, FVC forced vital capacity, RTI respiratory tract
infection Glycopyrronium bromide is guideline recommended as first line therapy for prevention of exacerbation in moderate to severe COPD
however safety data particularly in regards to QT prolongation has been limited to select populations. In our case, we demonstrate severe QT
prolongation associated with Glycopyrronium bromide, emphasizing the need for further studies in a real-world setting to identify high-risk
patients that may benefit from ECG surveillance. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Emergency Department electrocardiogram long acting
muscarinic antagonists glycopyrronium bromide complete blood count corrected QT interval using Fridericia corrected QT interval using
Bazett’s formula long QT syndrome torsades de pointes gLycopyrronium bromide in COPD airways All authors (MHC, NSA, RS, DP, RKS) were
directly involved in care of the patient. MHC, NSA and RKS contributed to writing of the manuscript and all authors reviewed the manuscript
(MHC, NSA, RS, DP, RKS). All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None. This case has not been previously presented. All
available is included in the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying electrocardiograms. Not applicable. The authors report no funding
sources for this case report.
