The purpose of this report is to present a case of myeloid sarcoma of the gingiva with myelodysplastic syndrome. A 52-year-old male
diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome with skin lesions presented with gingival swelling and gingival redness involving the maxillary left
second premolar and the maxillary left first molar. The patient was referred from the Department of Hematology for a biopsy of the lesion.
Full-thickness flaps were elevated and inflamed, and neoplastic soft tissue was removed from a lesion and the samples sent for
histopathologic analysis. Histopathologic results showed leukemic cell infiltration beneath the oral epithelium, and the specimen was
positive for the leukocyte marker. The diagnosis was myeloid sarcoma. Uneventful healing was observed at 2-week follow-up, but relapse of
the lesions with the hyperplastic and neoplastic tissue was noted at 4-week follow-up. Further follow-up or treatment could not be performed
because the patient did not visit at the next follow-up. In conclusion, myeloid sarcoma should be a diagnosis option for gingival growth
because it can involve intraoral lesion. In this report, a biopsy was performed due to referral considering the patient's medical history.
Although myeloid sarcoma in the oral cavity is extremely rare, a small biopsy and consultation with a hematologist may be beneficial for
patients and may provide a differential diagnosis. Myeloid sarcoma (previously known as granulocytic sarcoma or chloroma) is an uncommon
extramedullary tumor composed of dense aggregates of immature myeloid precursor cells. Infiltrations of any site of the body by myeloid
precursor cells in leukemic patients are not classified as myeloid sarcoma unless they present tumor masses in which the tissue architecture
effaced. Myeloid sarcoma was reported in only 3% to 9% of patients with myeloid leukemia, and 60% of patients with myeloid sarcoma are <15
years of age. Although myeloid sarcoma can affect almost every site of the body, it has been reported more often in the skin, bone, and
lymph node. The involvement of multiple myeloid sarcoma sites is found in <10% of cases. Myeloid sarcoma may develop de novo or concurrently
with acute myeloid leukemia, myeloproliferative neoplasm, or myelodysplastic syndrome. The purpose of this report is to present a case of
myeloid sarcoma of the gingiva with myelodysplastic syndrome. Intraoral occurrence of myeloid sarcoma is extremely rare. Although several
myeoloid sarcoma of the oral cavity were reported previously, 2-site involvement, including gingiva and skin, may be a rare case. This study
was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, Republic of Korea (KC14ZISE0338). The 52-year-old male patient was previously diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome at another
hospital. A hematologic test showed that the patient was suspected of conversion to acute myeloid leukemia. Closer examination showed that
the patient was suspected of refractory anemia with excess blasts-1 or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Multiple skin-colored or bluish
masses were presented on the trunk for 10 days. Skin biopsy and histologic sections showed perivascular and diffuse infiltration of atypical
mononuclear cells in the mid and deep dermis (Fig. 1A and B). On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were positive for CD68 (Fig.
1C) and myeloperoxidase (Fig. 1D). Histopathological findings were compatible with leukemia cutis. The patient was referred from the
Department of Hematology to the Department of Periodontics for the biopsy of the lesion to evaluate the leukemic infiltration after visiting
the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. The patient's chief complaint was swelling of the maxillary left gingiva. Oral examination
revealed gingival swelling with gingival redness involving the maxillary left second premolar and the maxillary left first molar (Fig. 2A).
The deepest probing depth was 12 mm at the maxillary left second premolar and the maxillary left first molar interdental area. In periapical
radiograph, the widening of periodontal ligament space was observed at the maxillary left second premolar (Fig. 2B). There was consultation
with the Department of Hematology for the possibilities and considerations of the flap operation and an extraction was made. Full-thickness
flaps were elevated and inflamed and neoplastic soft tissues were removed from lesion (Fig. 2C and D). The samples were sent to the
Department of Pathology for histopathologic analysis. Hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections revealed mass formation with atypical mononuclear
cells beneath the oral epithelium (Fig. 3A and B). The tumor cells were positive for leukocyte common antigen CD45RB (Fig. 3C) and
myeloperoxidase (Fig. 3D). In addition, some scattered cells were positive for CD34 and CD117 (Fig. 3E and F). The histopathological
findings were compatible with myeloid leukemic infiltration of myeloid sarcoma. Uneventful healing was observed at 2-week follow-up (Fig. 4A
and B). At the 4-week follow-up, relapse of the lesions with the hyperplastic and neoplastic tissue was noted (Fig. 4C). Periapical
radiograph showed bone loss at the interdental area between the maxillary left second premolar and the maxillary left first molar (Fig. 4D).
Extraction of the maxillary left second premolar was planned, but the patient did not visit at the next follow-up. Histopathology and
immunohistochemical staining of biopsy from the skin leukemia cutis. (A) Leukemic cell infiltration beneath the epidermis (hematoxylin and
eosin stain; original magnification ×40). (B) Magnified view of the leukemic cell infiltration (hematoxylin and eosin stain; original
magnification ×400). (C) CD68-positive cells (CD68 staining; original magnification ×400). (D) Myeloperoxidase-positive (MPO) cells (MPO
staining; original magnification ×400). MPO cells = myeloperoxidase-positive cells. Clinical view and radiograph at the first visit. (A)
Clinical view indicating gingival swelling with gingival redness involving the maxillary left second premolar and the maxillary left first
molar. (B) Periapical radiograph indicating the widening of periodontal ligament space at the maxillary left second premolar. (C) Buccal
view showing the removal of inflamed or neoplastic soft tissues. (D) Occlusal view after removal of the tissues. Histopathology and
immunohistochemical staining of biopsy from the gingiva. (A) Leukemic cell infiltration beneath the oral epithelium (hematoxylin and eosin
stain; original magnification ×40). (B) Magnified view showing the leukemic cell infiltration (hematoxylin and eosin stain; original
magnification ×400). (C) Leukocyte marker (CD45RB)-positive (CD45RB staining; original magnification ×400). (D) MPO-positive cells (MPO
staining; original magnification ×400). (E) Some cells were positive for CD34 (CD 34 staining; original magnification ×400). (F) Number of
cells were CD117 positive (CD117 staining; original magnification ×400). MPO cells, myeloperoxidase-positive cells. (A) Clinical photograph
at 2 weeks after surgery showing uneventful healing. (B) Occlusal view at 2 weeks after surgery. (C) Relapse of the lesions in the
hyperplastic and neoplastic tissue was noted 4 weeks after the surgery. (D) Periapical radiograph showed bone loss between the maxillary
left second premolar and the maxillary left first molar. Myeloid sarcoma may occur under 3 clinical settings: (1) it may precede or coincide
with acute myeloid leukemia; (2) it may occur in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes or myeloproliferative neoplasm; (3) it may have
initial manifestation of relapse of acute myeloid leukemia. Myelodysplastic syndrome is the group of clonal hematopoietic stem cell diseases
characterized by cytopenia, dysplasia in 1 or more of the major myeloid cell lines, ineffective hematopoiesis, and increased risk of
development of acute myeloid leukemia. In this report, therefore, the patient had the possibility of acute myeloid leukemia because of the
myeloid sarcoma at 2 sites and increased risk of secondary acute myeloid leukemia in myelodysplastic syndrome patients. A previous study
reported that acute myeloid leukemia occurs after 1 to 25 months in most cases of myeloid sarcoma. In this report, rapid growth of tumor
mass was observed 4 weeks after surgery. Several factors can be considered as the cause of relapse. Myeloid sarcoma has an invasive and
aggressive character and the myeloid sarcoma-derived cell line has the type IV collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-2 Type IV collagenase
has been reported to be related to poor prognosis for cancer. Furthermore, myeloid sarcoma cells are the only cell line among several
leukemic cell lines to bind both bone marrow stromal layers and dermal fibroblast. The patient was under schedule for intensive chemotherapy
and radiotherapy after the confirmation of the biopsy. The biopsy results in the Department of Dermatology and the Department of
Periodontology may provide the rationale for a further treatment regimen for myeloid sarcoma, but open flap debridement performed for the
biopsy may have increased the tumor growth. Although there is no consensus about the treatment of myeloid sarcoma, the current recommended
treatment regimen in patients presenting with isolated myeloid sarcoma or myeloid sarcoma presenting concomitantly with acute myeloid
leukemia is conventional acute myeloid leukemia-type chemotherapy. In conclusion, myeloid sarcoma should be a diagnosis option for gingival
growth because it can involve intraoral lesion. In this report, a biopsy was performed due to referral considering the patient's medical
history. Although myeloid sarcoma in the oral cavity is extremely rare, a small biopsy and consultation with a hematologist may be
beneficial for a patient and may provide a differential diagnosis. Abbreviation: MMP-2 = matrix metalloproteinase-2. Funding: this research
was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science,
ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2014R1A1A1003106). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
